 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28249
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
GLOBALMART, INC., dba LAND MARK DEVELOPMENT CO.,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
POSEC HAWAII, INC., Defendant-Appellee
AND
 
JOHN DOES 1-50, JANE DOES 1-50, DOE
PARTNERSHIPS 1-50, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50,
DOE ENTITIES 1-50; AND DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-1687)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
This dispute revolves around Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Globalmart, Inc., doing business as Land Mark Development Co.'s
 
("Land Mark") attempted purchase of eight condominium units in a
 then yet-to-be-built Honolulu high-rise project at 909 Kapiolani
 Boulevard (the "Project") from Defendant-Appellee Posec Hawaii,
 Inc. ("Posec") for $
3,345,000.00. The central issues in the case
 
are the enforceability of a June 2004 Memorandum of Understanding
 ("MOU") entered into between the parties and whether Posec
 fraudulently induced Land Mark to surrender any rights it had
 under the MOU by its subsequent execution of the Deposit Receipt
 and Sales Contract ("DRSC").
 
Land Mark appeals from the March 3, 2006 Order Granting
 
Defendant Posec Hawaii, Inc.'s Motion For Summary Judgment, Filed
 December 23, 2005 ("Order Granting MSJ"); the September 15, 2006
 Order Granting Defendant Posec Hawaii, Inc.'s Motion For
 Attorneys' Fees And Costs, Filed March 2, 2006 ("Order Granting
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.1
2Fees and Costs"); and the October 6, 2006 Final Judgment, which
were entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ("Circuit
Court").1
Land Mark argues that the Circuit Court erroneously
granted Posec's motion for summary judgment because (A) the MOU
is enforceable; (B) if the DRSC(s) superseded the MOU, Posec is
liable for fraudulent inducement; and (C) Land Mark should have
been permitted additional time to conduct discovery pursuant to
Hawai#i Rules of Civil Procedure ("HRCP") Rule 56(f).  Land Mark
also (D) challenges the award to Posec of attorneys' fees and
costs. 
We vacate the Order Granting Fees and Costs and
Paragraph 2 of the Final Judgment.  We affirm in all other
respects and remand the case for proceedings consistent with our
opinion.
I.BACKGROUND
A.Pertinent Facts
Young K. Shin ("Shin"), a native of Korea, is the
president/chief executive officer of Land Mark, a California
corporation.  Shin has difficulty reading and speaking English. 
In June 2004, Shin participated in negotiations with Ki
Young Chu ("Chu"), the vice president of a corporation with an
interest in Posec, for the purchase by Land Mark of eight
condominium units at the Project.  The negotiations were
conducted in Korean.  Throughout the process, Chu frequently
telephoned Wonjae Jun ("Jun"), Posec's chief executive officer,
to keep him informed about the progress of the negotiations.  
According to Shin, Jun insisted that Land Mark's $167,250.00
deposit for the eight condominium units be non-refundable.  In
turn, Shin insisted on a binding sales price to facilitate Land
Mark's resale plans.  When the negotiations concluded, a
bilingual attorney recorded the parties' agreement in the MOU. 
The MOU was "made and entered into" on June 14, 2004, although
Shin's signature was dated June 28, 2004, and Jun's signature wasNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3undated.
The MOU explicitly states that it is partially binding
and partially hortatory.  Specifically, the MOU provides in part:
[The] purpose of this Memorandum is to set forth [Land
Mark]'s intention in entering into a purchase agreement with
[Posec] to purchase the property described encompassing all
eight condominium units on the 18th floor (the "Property")
of the building to be constructed at the common address of
909 Kapiolani, Honolulu, Hawaii (the "Building"), in
accordance with the general terms set forth below . . . . 
[Land Mark] and [Posec] agree to use their best efforts to
attempt to negotiate the terms and conditions of a
definitive Purchase Agreement promptly after the full
execution of this Memorandum . . . .  [It] is anticipated to
be the form of agreement ("Standard Form Agreements") used
by [Posec] to sell other newly constructed condominium units
in the Building in the same selling phase, and will reflect,
among other items, the following:
. . . . 
2.Purchase Price.  The Purchase Agreement shall
provide that total purchase price for the eight individual
condominium[s] comprising the Property will be three million
three hundred forty [sic] thousand Dollars ($3,345,000) (the
"Purchase Price") with each unit being priced [as] follows
in accordance with the unit numbers reflected in the plan:
Unit A1 $455,000 Unit C1 $325,000
Unit A2 $455,000 Unit C2 $325,000
Unit B1 $525,000 Unit C3 $325,000
Unit B2 $575,000 Unit C4 $360,00 0
The Purchase Price will be paid as follows:
  a.Within five business days of the full and
complete execution of this Memorandum by [Land Mark] and
[Posec], and in consideration of paragraph 5 herein and
notwithstanding any contrary provision in the Purchase
Building, [Land Mark] will pay a non-refundable deposit of
One Hundred sixty seven thousand two hundred fifty Dollars
($167,250) (the "Deposit") representing five percent (5%) of
the Purchase Price . . . .
  b.The balance of the purchase price . . . shall be
payable at closing of the sale of the Property to [Land
Mark], its nominee [or] assignee.  Notwithstanding anything
to the contrary, the property need not be sold as one single
transaction, but may be sold by [Posec] to [Land Mark] or
its nominee or assignee as eight separate transactions which
may close on different dates.
. . . .
5.    Exclusive Right to Enter into Purchase
Agreement.  [Land Mark] shall have the exclusive right to
negotiate and enter into the Purchase Agreement for purchase
of the Property from [Posec].  [Posec] hereby agrees not to
offer for the sale or negotiate the sale of the property or
other conveyance to any third party.
6.    Standard Form Agreement.  [Posec] agrees to
provide [Land Mark] with a complete set of Standard Form  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Agreements for the purchase of each of the eight condominium
units comprising the Property after the date of this
Memorandum. 
7. Assignment. [Land Mark] will have the right to
assign its rights and delegate its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement to third party assignees.
 
This Memorandum is intended to indicate the present [intent]
 
of the parties with respect to the Property and, except for
 agreements contained in Paragraphs 2, 5, 6 and 7 above,
 shall not be construed to constitute a binding agreement
 with respect thereto. Except for the obligations created in
 Paragraphs 2, 5, 6 and 7, neither party may claim any legal
 rights against the other by reason of the signing of this
 Memorandum. Neither party may rely on any act, omission,
communication, circumstance or fact [that] may be
inconsistent with this paragraph.
 
Upon the full execution of the Memorandum, [Posec] will
immediately prepare and forward to [Land Mark] the Standard
Form Agreement for each of the eight condominium units
comprising the Property in accordance with the terms of this
Memorandum.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
On July 1, 2004, Hong Lee ("Lee"), Posec's coordinator
 
on the Project, telephoned Shin and told him that he would fax
 
Standard Form Agreements for Shin to sign. According to Shin, he
 received only three pages of a DRSC from Lee. Shin said that Lee
 "expressed great urgency in getting [Shin] to sign the DRSC and
 send the cashier's check." Lee allegedly told Shin "not to worry
 because [Shin] had a binding MOU signed by Posec's CEO." 
On July 1, 2004, Shin signed and, on July 2, 2004,
 
faxed back a single DRSC signature page to Lee. Jun's
 countersignature is dated July 8, 2004. Lee contends that,
 pursuant to Shin's authorization, he attached the single
 signature page to eight separate DRSCs. Shin disputes that he
 authorized Posec to use the same signature page for eight
 different contracts. Each DRSC pertains to one of the eight
 condominium units and provides a purchase price identical to
 those found in the MOU. 
Above Shin's signature, the DRSC states: 
By signing this page, Buyer acknowledges having read this
Contract, including the attached Addendum "A", in full and
is aware of and accepts the terms, conditions, limitations
and disclaimer of warranties described herein, and
acknowledges that if Seller accepts this offer, this
Contract is the entire agreement between the parties.
 
According to Shin, despite his affirmation in the DRSC, he was
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not presented with and did not see Addendum "A" before he signed
 
the DRSC. Lee agrees, stating that he did not fax the Addendum
 "A" along with the DRSC to Shin "because it's too thick, and he
 told me he is going to, going to pick up here in Hawaii." Shin
 does not deny that he thereafter received the Addendum "A", but
 does not say when he received it.
 
Addendum "A" reiterates that the DRSC and the Addendum 
"A" (collectively, the "Contract") "is the entire Contract between Seller and Buyer." In addition, it adds that "Anything which [sic] Seller and Buyer have talked about in any negotiations, any promise, and any past understanding or agreement (whether in writing or not) is cancelled if not contained within this Contract." Addendum "A" explains that the Contract is a non-binding reservation and can be terminated at any time by either party, with or without cause, until the effective date for a contingent final public report or the issuance of a final public report by the Hawai' i Real Estate 
Commission. 
Shin express mailed a cashiers check for $167,250.00 to
 
Lee, who said, according to Shin, that he would place the money
 in escrow accounts for the eight condominium units. To finance
 the deposit, Shin contends that he took out a second mortgage on
 his home and borrowed money from a friend. In addition, Shin
 claims to have spent more than $50,000.00 for advertising the
 availability of the units for sale and other sales costs. By
 April 29, 2005, Land Mark had entered into sales contracts for
 five of the units in reliance upon the MOU's purchase-price
 terms. 
On April 29, 2005, Posec's attorney sent Shin a letter
 
("April 29, 2005 Letter") notifying him that Posec was
 terminating the DRSC(s) on the grounds that (1) the DRSC
 cancelled the MOU, (2) Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 514A-62
 prohibits a condominium developer from entering into a contract
 that is binding on the purchaser until the Real Estate Commission
 issues an effective date for a contingent final public report or
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
a public report,  and (3) Addendum "A" states that the DRSCs are
non-binding reservations that can be terminated at any time, with
 or without cause. 
By copy of the letter, the parties' escrow
 
agent was instructed to return to Land Mark all of its deposits. 
According to Posec, upon termination of the DRSCs, Posec offered
 replacement sales contracts "at a reduced concession price to
 partially compensate for the increase[d] construction costs."
 Posec's attorney sent an August 25, 2005 letter to Land Mark's
 attorney in which Posec offered to re-sell the units to Land Mark
 for $3,993,500.
 
B. Subsequent Litigation
 Land Mark filed the Complaint in this case on
 
September 21, 2005, seeking specific performance of the MOU and
 stating claims for breach of contract and fraudulent inducement. 
In October and November 2005, the parties participated in
 mediation. During mediation, no discovery took place. 
Posec
 
filed a motion for summary judgment on December 23, 2005. 
Land Mark contends that its opposition memorandum on
 
summary judgment was hampered by discovery problems. Land Mark's
 attorney filed a Declaration of Counsel, notifying the Circuit
 Court that Posec had produced some documents the day before Land
 Mark's opposition memorandum was due and that Posec's answers to
 interrogatories were largely unresponsive. The Declaration of
 Counsel argued that Land Mark "should be permitted time to compel
 evidence withheld by Defendant in its discovery responses
 concerning the amount and urgency of presales for Defendant,
 imposed by its lenders, or other parties." 
At the February 22, 2006 hearing on Posec’s motion for
 
summary judgment, the Circuit Court ruled in favor of Posec:
 
The Court does still maintain its conclusion that the
 
agreement, the [DRSC], did create rights and did supersede
the –– and cancel the Memorandum of Understanding to the
extent that either party after the execution of the DRSC ––
or whatever that acronym is –– the Purchase agreement, let
me call it that –– that the Purchase Agreement did create
the right of either the Buyer or the Seller to terminate the
 
2
 The April 29, 2005 Letter states that, as of that date, only a
preliminary public report had been issued and Posec had "yet to even file a
contingent final public report with the Real Estate Commission."
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
contract. The Purchase Agreement also created the effect of
cancelling the Memorandum of Understanding. There’s no
 evidence that the terms of the Purchase Agreement varied
from what is standard in the community regarding
reservations of a project that is about to be constructed or
in the process of being constructed. And this Court
 believes that the public policies behind affording parties
to such reservation agreements –– the right to terminate or
cancel agreements prior to the effective date of the Public
Reports –– is one that is a positive consumer protection
device, particularly given the often common, unforeseen
problems with construction project[s] of this magnitude. So
 the Court maintains its inclination and will respectfully
grant the Motion for Summary Judgment. 
The Order Granting MSJ was entered on March 3, 2006. The Circuit
 
Court awarded Posec $42,800.00 in attorneys' fees and $910.41 in
 costs on September 15, 2006. Pursuant to the Order Granting MSJ
 and Order Granting Fees and Costs, the Final Judgment was entered
 on October 6, 2006.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Summary Judgment
 
"This court reviews a trial court's grant of summary
 
judgment de novo." Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel,
 
117 Hawai' i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, [this court] must view all
of the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the
 light most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Id. (brackets in original) (quoting Price v. AIG Hawai' i Ins. 
Co., 107 Hawai' i 106, 110, 111 P.3d 1, 5 (2005)). 
Contract Interpretation
 
"When reviewing the court's interpretation of a
 
contract, the construction and legal effect to be given a
 
contract is a question of law freely reviewable by an appellate
 court." Laeroc Waikiki Parkside, LLC v. K.S.K. (Oahu) Ltd.
 
P'ship, 115 Hawai' i 201, 213, 166 P.3d 961 973 (2007) (quoting 
Mikelson v. United Servs. Auto. Ass'n, 107 Hawai' i 192, 197, 111 
P.3d 601, 606 (2005)) (internal quotation marks omitted).
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Denial of a Continuance Pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(f)
 
"The circuit court's decision to deny a request for a 
continuance pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(f) shall not be reversed 
absent an abuse of discretion." Assocs. Fin. Servs. Co. of Haw., 
Inc. v. Richardson, 99 Hawai' i 446, 454, 56 P.3d 748, 756 (App. 
2002). 
Attorneys' Fees and Costs
 
"The trial court's grant or denial of attorney's fees 
and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. of the State of Haw., 120 Hawai' i 
181, 197, 202 P.3d 1226, 1242 (2009) (brackets omitted) (quoting Kamaka, 117 Hawai' i at 105, 176 P.3d at 104). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Enforceability of the MOU
 In its first point of error, Land Mark contends that
 
the MOU is enforceable and that this court should therefore order
 Posec to sell the Property to Land Mark in accord with the MOU's
 terms. The MOU, however, is unenforceable because it lacks
 critical terms and conditions and because it affirmatively
 indicates the parties' intention to further negotiate those terms
 and conditions.
 
1. The MOU is unenforceable
 
Setting aside initially the effect of the DRSC(s) and
 
Addendum "A", the MOU states that Paragraphs 2, 5, 6, and 7 of
 the MOU, and only those paragraphs, were intended to be binding
 and create certain obligations. The MOU explicitly states that
 it:
 
is intended to indicate the present [intent] of the parties
with respect to the Property and, except for agreements
contained in Paragraphs 2, 5, 6 and 7 above, shall not be
construed to constitute a binding agreement with respect
thereto. Except for the obligations created in Paragraphs
2, 5, 6 and 7, neither party may claim any legal rights
against the other by reason of the signing of [the MOU].
 
The MOU's binding terms clearly do not constitute an
 
enforceable agreement for the sale of the eight condominium
 
units. "It is a fundamental principle of law that there must be
 mutual assent or a meeting of the minds on all essential elements
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or terms in order to form a binding contract." Carson v. Saito,
 
53 Haw. 178, 182, 489 P.2d 636, 638 (1971) (quoting Honolulu
 
Rapid Transit v. Paschoal, 51 Haw. 19, 26-27, 449 P.2d 123,127
 (1968)) (internal quotation marks omitted). In agreements for
 the sale of land, the essential terms are "the identification of
 the parties, a description of the property sold, the price, the
 time and manner of payment and any other terms in the agreement
 which are essential to the agreement." In re Application of Sing
 
Chong Co., 1 Haw. App. 236, 239, 617 P.2d 578, 581 (1980). 
However, "if the contract . . . or the negotiations of the
 parties affirmatively disclose or indicate that further
 negotiations, terms and conditions are contemplated, the proposed
 [contract] is considered incomplete and incapable of being
 specifically enforced." Francone v. McClay, 41 Haw. 72, 78 (Haw.
 
Terr. 1955); Sing Chong, 1 Haw. App. at 239, 617 P.2d at 581 (an
 agreement of sale of land that contains the essential terms is
 enforceable "if the facts indicate that the parties at the time
 it was entered into had no expectation of further provisions to
 be negotiated later").
 
Here, a description of the property to be sold is not
 
found in any of the MOU's binding provisions. Because a
 description of the property is an essential term, the MOU is not
 enforceable. Furthermore, the terms of the MOU plainly and
 unmistakably contemplate additional terms and further
 negotiations before the sale of the units. For example, the MOU
 gives Land Mark "the exclusive right to negotiate and enter into
 the Purchase Agreement for purchase of the Property from [Posec]"
 and states that the "general terms" of the MOU "are provided only
 to form a general basis and guideline for entering into a full
 and final [P]urchase Agreement[.]" The non-binding paragraphs of
 the MOU state that the yet-to-be-negotiated Purchase Agreement: 
will provide the terms under which Land Mark or its nominee
will purchase the Property, including but not limited to:(1)
title matters;(2) condominium compliance matters;(4) [sic]
due diligence;(5) a time frame for commencement of
construction of the building which will contain the building
which will contain the Property; and (6) the closing date.
 
Therefore, Land Mark is not entitled to the specific performance
 
it seeks — namely, an order obligating Posec "to sell the
 
9
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Property to [Land Mark] pursuant to the [MOU.]" 
In this context, the designation of certain terms as
 
"binding," at most, constitutes an agreement to agree to a
 
subsequent Purchase Agreement incorporating those terms. An
 agreement to agree, however, is an "unenforceable agreement that
 purports to bind two parties to negotiate and enter into a
 contract." B
LACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 78 (9th ed. 2009); see also
 
Keystone Land & Dev. Co. v. Xerox Corp., 94 P.3d 945, 948 (Wash.
 2004) (An agreement to agree is "an agreement to do something
 which requires a further meeting of the minds of the parties and
 without which it would not be complete."). Consequently,
 agreements to agree are unenforceable. See Carson, 53 Haw. at
 
180–82, 489 P.2d at 637–38; see also Autry v. Republic Prods.,
 180 P.2d 888, 893 (Cal. 1947) ("There is no dispute that neither
 law nor equity provides a remedy for breach of an agreement to
 agree in the future."); Joseph Martin, Jr., Delicatessen, Inc. v.
 Schumacher, 417 N.E.2d 541, 543 (N.Y. 1981) ("a mere agreement to
 agree, in which a material term is left for future negotiations,
 is unenforceable").
 
The "binding" paragraphs of the MOU, among other
 
things, give Land Mark the "exclusive right to negotiate and
 enter into the Purchase Agreement" and mandate that Posec provide
 Land Mark with a "complete set of Standard Form Agreements for
 the purchase of each of the eight condominium units . . . ." The
 remaining "binding paragraphs" merely purport to define specific
 terms to be found in the final Purchase Agreement. Thus, the
 "binding" terms of the MOU constitute nothing more than an
 agreement to negotiate and enter into a contract in the future. 
Therefore, the MOU is unenforceable.
 
2. Whether the DRSC superseded the MOU is moot
 
Land Mark presents several theories in support of its
 
position that the DRSC did not supersede the MOU and that the
 MOU, therefore, remains in effect. The argument is moot,
 however, because the MOU is unenforceable. In re Application of
 
Thomas, 73 Haw. 223, 226, 832 P.2d 253, 254 (1992) ("A case is
 moot where the question to be determined is abstract and does not
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rest on existing facts or rights."). Thus, we will not consider
 
it. See Wong v. Bd. of Regents, Univ. of Haw., 62 Haw. 391, 395,
 
616 P.2d 201, 204 (1980) (citing Territory v. Aldridge, 35 Haw.
 565, 567-68 (Haw. Terr. 1940)) ("Courts will not consume time
 deciding abstract propositions of law or moot cases, and have no
 jurisdiction to do so.").
 
B. Land Mark's fraudulent-inducement claim
 Land Mark contends that the Circuit Court erred in 
granting Posec summary judgment on Land Mark's fraudulent-inducement claim, which, Land Mark argues, arises if the DRSC(s) supersede the MOU. The argument is not moot, irrespective of our conclusion above with regard to the unenforceability of the MOU, because Land Mark contends that it expended more than $50,000 in advertising and sales expenses as a result. Since a party has the option to sue for damages on a fraudulently-induced contract, Matsuura v. E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., 102 Hawai' i 149, 174, 
73 P.3d 687, 712 (2003), we consider the claim independent of the unenforceability of the MOU. 
"To constitute fraudulent inducement sufficient to 
invalidate the terms of a contract, there must be (1) a representation of a material fact, (2) made for the purpose of inducing the other party to act, (3) known to be false but reasonably believed true by the other party, and (4) upon which the other party relies and acts to [his or her] damage." Pancakes of Haw., Inc. v. Pomare Props. Corp., 85 Hawai' i 300, 
312, 944 P.2d 97, 109 (App. 1997) (brackets in original) (quoting Honolulu Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. Murphy, 7 Haw. App. 196, 201, 753 P.2d. 807, 811 (1988) (internal quotation marks omitted). Because we view the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, we assume for purposes of our analysis that Posec did not provide Addendum "A" to Land Mark until after Shin executed the DRSC.
3 Nevertheless, the Circuit Court did not err 
3
 Land Mark's argument with respect to Posec's alleged failure to
deliver Addendum "A" along with the DRSC appears limited to whether the terms
of Addendum "A" differed from Lee's representations concerning consistency
between the DRSC and the MOU and the binding nature of the MOU. In addition,
(continued...)
 
11
     
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in granting Posec summary judgment on the fraudulent-inducement
 
claim because Land Mark failed to identify any actionable
 representations of material fact. 
Land Mark contends that Lee told Shin to sign the DRSC,
 
assuring him that he "should not worry because Posec was
 following the terms of the MOU," and because Land Mark "had a
 binding MOU signed by Posec's CEO." However, "it is the well-
settled general rule that fraud cannot be predicated upon
 misrepresentations of law or misrepresentation as to matters of
 law." Kyles v. Lantis, 39 Haw. 440, 444 (Haw. Terr. 1952).
4
 
Lee's statements rest on a legal foundation: his interpretation
 of the MOU and understanding of its legal effect. That is, one
 cannot determine whether the statements are true or false without
 applying the law of contracts and principles of contractual
 interpretation. Thus, Land Mark had no right to rely on Lee's
 statements.
5 See id.
 
Land Mark also claims that Lee failed to tell Shin that
 
the DRSC was only a reservation or that Posec could not accept a
 nonrefundable deposit. Even if we were to treat these as
 omissions of material fact, however, omissions of material fact
 are treated differently than affirmative representations. 2 D
AN
 
3(...continued)
Land Mark contends that a material question of fact existed as to whether
Posec deliberately concealed Addendum "A" in order to deceive Land Mark into
thinking that the MOU was binding. 
What is clear, however, is that Land Mark
does not contend that it never received Addendum "A", and that it did not
thereafter object to its terms or any inconsistency between its terms and
Lee's representations until Posec terminated the DRSC.
 
4 In its reply brief, Land Mark notes that the Federal District
Court for the District of Hawai' i in Elliot Megdal & Assocs. v. Hawaii Planing 
Mill, Ltd., 814 F. Supp. 898, 903–04 (D. Haw. 1993) questioned whether the
Hawai'i Supreme Court might abandon Kyles in light of the fact that the
Restatement (Second) of Torts no longer makes any distinction between factual
and legal misrepresentations. Until our Supreme Court rules otherwise,
however, Kyles stands as good law in Hawai' i. In any event, Land Mark failed
to brief the issue; it merely identified it. 
5
 Although an instrument "may be avoided where its execution is
obtained by misrepresentation of its contents," Cummins v. Cummins, 24 Haw.
116, 121 (Haw. Terr. 1917), Land Mark does not identify any misrepresentation
as to the terms of Addendum "A" which are not themselves legal conclusions.
See 2 D
AN B. DOBBS, THE LAW OF TORTS § 475, at 1363 (2001) ("When the defendant
has fraudulently induced the plaintiff to execute the contract by materially
misrepresenting the written terms . . . courts have often permitted plaintiffs
. . . to pursue actions for reformation or rescission or for tort damages."
(footnotes omitted)). Thus, Kyles, and not Cummins, applies. 
12
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. DOBBS, THE LAW OF TORTS § 481, at 1375 (2001) ("the bargainer is
 
not ordinarily obliged to make affirmative revelations of known
 
material facts"). 
One who fails to disclose to another a fact that he knows
 
may justifiably induce the other to act or refrain from
acting in a business transaction is subject to the same
liability to the other as though he had represented the
nonexistence of the matter that he has failed to disclose,
if, but only if, he is under a duty to the other to exercise
 
reasonable care to disclose the matter in question.
 
RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 551(1) (1977) (emphasis added) (cited
 
in Miyashiro v. Roehrig, 122 Hawai' i 461, 483 n.24, 228 P.3d 341, 
363 n.24 (App. 2010)); cf. Ellis v. Crockett, 51 Haw. 45, 54, 451
 
P.2d 814, 821 (1969) (complaint alleging fraudulent failure to
 disclose certain facts is insufficient without an allegation of a
 duty to disclose). 
Here, Land Mark argues that Posec's alleged failure to
 
disclose that the DRSC was only a "reservation," or that Posec
 could not accept a nonrefundable deposit, fraudulently induced
 Land Mark into executing the DRSC. Although Land Mark cites a
 Texas case stating that "[s]ilence is equivalent to a false
 representation where circumstances impose a duty to speak[,]"
 Amouri v. Southwest Toyota, Inc., 20 S.W.3d 165, 170 (Tex. Ct.
 App. 2000), it has not argued how or why Posec was under a duty
 to disclose something that it did not.
6 Land Mark's argument
 
6 For example, Restatement (Second) of Torts § 551(2) (1977)
provides as follows:
 
(2) One party to a business transaction is under a
duty to exercise reasonable care to disclose to the other
before the transaction is consummated,
 
(a) matters known to him that the other is
entitled to know because of a fiduciary or other
similar relation of trust and confidence between them;
and
 
(b) matters known to him that he knows to be
necessary to prevent his partial or ambiguous
statement of the facts from being misleading; and
 
(c) subsequently acquired information that he
knows will make untrue or misleading a previous
representation that when made was true or believed to
be so; and
 
(d) the falsity of a representation not made
with the expectation that it would be acted upon, if
(continued...)
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
merely presupposes that Posec's conduct was fraudulent. Thus,
 
Posec's alleged omissions cannot support Land Mark's fraudulent-
inducement claim. Therefore, the Circuit Court did not err in
 granting Posec's motion for summary judgment.
7
 
C. Land Mark's HRCP Rule 56(f) request for a continuance.
 
In its third point of error, Land Mark contends that
 
summary judgment was inappropriate because the Circuit Court
 improperly denied it the opportunity for additional discovery
 under HRCP Rule 56(f).
8 Land Mark points to the Declaration of
 
Counsel filed with its memorandum in opposition to summary
 
9
judgment, which stated that the further postponement  of a ruling
on summary judgment would allow Land Mark to discover material
 facts relating to: (1) "[Jun's] intent and understanding as to
 the terms of the DRSC at the time of the signing"; (2) "what
 
6(...continued)
he subsequently learns that the other is about to act
in reliance upon it in a transaction with him; and
 
(e) facts basic to the transaction, if he knows
that the other is about to enter into it under a
 mistake as to them, and that the other, because of the
relationship between them, the customs of the trade or
other objective circumstances, would reasonably expect
a disclosure of those facts.
 
7
 Land Mark identifies several issues of fact that it claims
 
preclude summary judgment on its claims. As to those factual disputes that
relate to the MOU, they are immaterial in light of the MOU's unenforceability
and, as a result, do not create a genuine issue as to any material fact so as
to defeat summary judgment. As to those other alleged issues of material fact
that touch upon the fraudulent-inducement claim, they either relate to
omissions where a duty has not been alleged or to legal conclusions where
reliance was unwarranted.
 
8 HRCP Rule 56(f) states
 
When affidavits are unavailable. Should it appear from
the affidavits of a party opposing the motion that the party
cannot for reasons stated present by affidavit facts
essential to justify the party's opposition, the court may
refuse the application for judgment or may order a
continuance to permit affidavits to be obtained or
depositions to be taken or discovery to be had or may make
such other order as is just.
 
Haw. R. Civ. P. 56(f).
 
9
 The hearing on the motion for summary judgment was continued twice
previously. There were no discovery requests pending when the motion for
summary judgment was heard.
 
14
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Jun] instructed [Lee] to do regarding the signing of the DRSCs,
 
including any instructions concerning explanation of the intended
 impact of the DRSC"; (3) "Posec's understanding of and agreement
 as to the MOU prices binding the parties"; (4) "reasons that
 Posec needed to make additional presales at the time of entering
 into the MOU with Land Mark"; and (5) "reasons the DRSC changed
 the terms of the MOU, the time frame of such change, [and] the
 participants in such change." 
Land Mark, however, failed to show how additional 
discovery would have uncovered new material facts sufficient to defeat summary judgment. HRCP Rule 56(f) "allows a party to request a delay in granting summary judgment if the party can make a good faith showing that postponement of the ruling would enable it to discover additional evidence which might rebut the movant's showing of the absence of a genuine issue of material fact." Exotics Haw.-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., 
116 Hawai' i 277, 308, 172 P.3d 1021, 1052 (2007) (emphasis 
removed) (quoting McCabe v. Macaulay, 450 F. Supp. 2d 928, 933 (N.D. Iowa 2006)). "The party is required to show what specific
 facts further discovery might unveil." Id.
 
Here, Land Mark's specific-performance and breach-of­
contract claims, which could have only stood if the MOU was enforceable, are defeated by the plain language of the MOU as a matter of law. Furthermore, considering Shin's full participation in this case on behalf of Land Mark, Land Mark failed to show how additional discovery or depositions would allow it to uncover any misrepresentations of material fact inducing Shin to sign the DRSC on behalf of Land Mark beyond what Shin already presented sufficient to satisfy the first element of its fraudulent-inducement claim. Thus, Land Mark failed to "demonstrate how postponement of a ruling on the motion would enable [it], by discovery or other means, to rebut [Posec's] showing of absence of a genuine issue of fact." See Acoba v. 
Gen. Tire, Inc., 92 Hawai' i 1, 12, 986 P.2d 288, 299 (1999); see 
also Young v. Van Buren, No. 28543, 2010 WL 4278321, at *5 (Haw. Ct. App. Oct. 29, 2010) (SDO). Therefore, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion by refusing to grant Land Mark a further 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
continuance to conduct additional discovery.
 
D. Order Granting Fees and Costs.
 
Posec filed a motion for attorneys' fees and costs,
 
seeking $64,759.30 in fees pursuant to HRS § 607-1410 and
 
$1,787.77 in costs pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(d) and HRS § 607-9. 
Land Mark opposed the motion, arguing that, among other things,
 Posec was not entitled to attorneys' fees pursuant to HRS § 607­14 because Land Mark's action, or at least some of its claims,
 against Posec were not in the nature of assumpsit. Without
 providing any explanation for how it reached its decision, the
 Circuit Court granted Posec's motion and awarded Posec $42,800.00
 in attorneys' fees and $910.41 in costs. In its final point of
 error, Land Mark argues that the Circuit Court erred in granting
 Posec attorneys' fees and costs. 
Trial courts are required "to specify the grounds for
 
awards of attorneys' fees and the amounts awarded with respect to
 each ground. Without such an explanation, we must vacate and
 remand awards for redetermination and/or clarification." Price
 
v. AIG Hawai' i Ins. Co., 107 Hawai' i 106, 113, 111 P.3d 1, 8 
(2005). In Price, the defendant, AIG, requested attorneys' fees pursuant to HRS § 607-14, arguing that all of the claims asserted by Price were in the nature of assumpsit. Id. Price argued in 
opposition that the action "sounded in tort and not in contract." Id. The circuit court awarded $20,000.00 in fees rather than 
$21,386.00 as requested, but did not provide any explanation for 
10 HRS § 607-14 states in pertinent part:
 
In all the courts, in all actions in the nature of assumpsit
. . . , there shall be taxed as attorneys' fees, to be paid
by the losing party and to be included in the sum for which
execution may issue, a fee that the court determines to be
reasonable; provided that the attorney representing the
prevailing party shall submit to the court an affidavit
stating the amount of time the attorney spent on the action
and the amount of time the attorney is likely to spend to
obtain a final written judgment, or, if the fee is not based
on an hourly rate, the amount of the agreed upon fee. The
 court shall then tax attorneys' fees, which the court
determines to be reasonable, to be paid by the losing party;
provided that this amount shall not exceed twenty-five per
cent of the judgment.
 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 607-14 (Supp. 2011).
 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
its decision.
 
The Supreme Court noted that, due to the nature of
 
Price's argument in opposition, "the issue of apportionment
 
between assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims was clearly before the
 circuit court." Id. The Court stated:
 
although the record on appeal indicates that AIG was awarded
only a portion, albeit a substantial portion, of its
requested fees, it does not reflect whether the court
apportioned fees between assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims.
As such, we cannot effectively review whether the circuit
court abused its discretion in awarding attorneys' fees as
it did.
 
Id. Therefore, the Supreme Court vacated the circuit court's
 
award of attorneys' fees and remanded for redetermination of the
 
issue. Id.
 
The facts in Price are similar to those presented here. 
In its motion for fees and costs, Posec argued that it was
 entitled to recover $64,759.30 in attorneys' fees pursuant to HRS
 § 607-14. Before both this court and the Circuit Court below,
 Land Mark opposed an award of fees under HRS § 607-14 because the
 action was not in the nature of assumpsit. The Circuit Court,
 without explaining the bases for its decision, awarded Posec at
 total of $43,710.41, less than what Posec requested. Because of
 the Circuit Court's failure to explain the grounds for its award
 
11of attorneys' fees and costs,  we vacate the Order Granting Fees

and Costs and Paragraph 2 of the Final Judgment and remand for
 reconsideration of the issues.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The Order Granting Fees and Costs and Paragraph 2 of
 
the Final Judgment are vacated. 
The Final Judgment is, in all
 
other respects, affirmed. The case is remanded for proceedings 
11
 The Circuit Court's failure to provide a basis for its award of
costs also merits remand for clarification. See Mist v. Westin Hotels, Inc.,
69 Haw. 192, 201, 738 P.2d 85, 92 (1987) (remand necessary when "the record
does not reveal whether the trial court applied the test of reasonableness in
determining which deposition costs should be allowed or disallowed").
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
on the issues of attorneys' fees and costs not inconsistent with
 
this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 10, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 J. Stephen Street
(Rush Moore LLP)
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Diane D. Hastert and
 
Mark M. Murakami
 (Damon Key Leong Kupchak Hastert)
for Defendant-Appellee. 
18
 