 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29331
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
MOMILANI FERNANDEZ, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
MARK DEVELOPMENT, INC., the DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME
LANDS, the HAWAIIAN HOMES COMMISSION, MICAH KANE, in his
official capacity as Chairperson of the Hawaiian Homes
Commission and VILLAGE 6 RTO, LP, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0776)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Momilani Fernandez (Fernandez)
 
appeals from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (Circuit
 
Court) August 11, 2008 Judgment and challenges the Circuit
 
Court's June 19, 2008 Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 
Defendants Mark Development, Inc. (Mark Development), Department
 
of Hawaiian Home Lands (DHHL), Hawaiian Homes Commission (HHC), 
1
Alapaki Nahale-a,  and Village 6 RTO, LP's Motion for Summary
Judgment as to all Claims.2
 
Fernandez sought declaratory and injunctive relief, as
 
well as damages, stemming from alleged violations of Hawaii
 
1
 Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule
43(b), Alapaki Nahale-a is substituted for former HHC Chairperson Micah Kane,
who was sued in his official capacity. 
2
 The Honorable Victoria S. Marks presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 480-2 (2002) for unfair, deceptive, or
 
unconscionable acts or practices by Defendant-Appellees Mark
 
Development, DHHL, HHC, Alapaki Nahale-a, and Village 6 RTO, LP
 
(collectively, Defendants-Appellees). Pertinent to this appeal,
 
Fernandez also alleged a breach of the Hawaiian Homes Commission
 
Act.
 
On appeal, Fernandez contends that the Circuit Court
 
erred in granting summary judgment against her and in favor of
 
Defendants-Appellees on Counts 1-5, the HRS Chapter 480 claims,
 
and Count 6, the claim alleging that DHHL and HHC breached their
 
trust obligations to Fernandez.3
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve
 
Fernandez's contentions as follows:
 
(1) Fernandez contends that she is a consumer for the
 
purposes of HRS Chapter 480. Fernandez's HRS Chapter 480 claims
 
arise out of her landlord-tenant relationship with Mark
 
Development. As stated in the opening brief, Fernandez alleges:
 
Since moving in, Ms. Fernandez has faced a landlord
that has created an oppressive and intimidating living
atmosphere. Mark Development has required residents to
accept all changes to lease terms under the threat of
eviction. Even though there are only seventy houses in the
development, Mark Development has sent 1,206 termination
notices to tenants. That is an average of more than 17
eviction notices per household in less than seven years!
Tenants face a landlord who barrages them with eviction
notices, creating a hostile atmosphere.
 
Mark Development is constantly pestering Ms. Fernandez
to fill out paperwork, demanding entry into her home and
spying on her. . . . Mark Development is quick to cite and
accuse residents when there is no basis for doing so.
 
Mark Development has: refused to make repairs;
intimidated tenants into thinking that if Mark Development
makes the repairs, tenants will be charged an outrageous
 
3
 Count 7, relating to invasion of privacy, and Count 8, relating to
the obligation to plant grant, were dismissed with prejudice by stipulation
and order.
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
amount of money; or unilaterally charged tenants for repairs
that are not tenant responsibility [sic].
 
(Record citations omitted.)
 
HRS § 480-1 defines a "consumer" as "a natural person
 
who, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes,
 
purchases, attempts to purchase, or is solicited to purchase
 
goods or services or who commits money, property, or services in
 
a personal investment." Under this statute, "purchase" includes,
 
inter alia, "contract to buy", "lease", and "contract to lease." 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has held that real estate 
transactions are not "goods" for the purposes of HRS chapter 480 
because "the reference to real estate or residences are 
conspicuously absent from Hawai' i's version of [the Uniform 
Commercial Code provision defining "Goods"]". Cieri v. Leticia 
Query Realty, Inc., 80 Hawai' i 54, 66, 905 P.2d 29, 41 (1995); 
see also Smith v. Pink, No. 28690 (Haw. Ct. App. Apr. 15, 2010) (concluding that a real property lease is not a good, service, or 
personal investment for the purposes of HRS chapter 480). 
The rental of real property "involve[s] the transfer of
 
a possessory interest in the real property for a period of time,
 
in exchange for payment." Smith at 2; see also Black's Law
 
Dictionary 970 (9th ed. 2009) (defining a "lease" as "[a]
 contract by which the rightful possessor of real property conveys
 
the right to use and occupy the property in exchange for
 
consideration . . ."). Fernandez's rental agreement is a
 
transfer of real property for a specified term, and not a
 
"service" under HRS § 480-1.
 
Nor can Fernandez's rental of the unit be considered a 
"personal investment" under HRS § 480-1. The supreme court in 
Cieri, while holding that the purchase of a home is a personal 
investment, noted that the term "investment," as it related to 
HRS § 480-1, means "to put (money) to use, by purchase or 
expenditure, in something offering profitable returns, esp. 
interest or income." 80 Hawai' i at 67, 905 P.2d at 42 (citation 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
omitted). Fernandez presented no evidence that her rental
 
payments were "put to use . . . in something offering profitable
 
returns." Fernandez argues that she made a personal investment
 
because there is an option to purchase referenced in her
 
contract, and set forth in a separate agreement with Hawaii
 
Assisted Housing, Inc., that may be exercisable at a future date. 
However, neither the rental agreement nor the option agreement
 
state that her rental payments were to be applied towards an
 
eventual option to purchase her unit. There is no evidence that
 
she has, or even could have at this time, exercised an option to
 
purchase the unit. And, there is no evidence that Fernandez has
 
committed any money, property, or services toward such a
 
purchase. Instead, her rental agreement clearly references her
 
monthly payment as "rent." Fernandez did not make a "personal
 
investment" under HRS § 480-1. Accordingly, Fernandez is not a
 
"consumer" for the purpose of making a claim under HRS § 480-1. 
The Circuit Court did not err in granting summary judgment
 
against her on the claims made pursuant to HRS chapter 480.
 
(2) It is undisputed that HHC and DHHL have a
 
fiduciary duty to manage and dispose of Hawaiian homelands on
 
behalf of eligible native Hawaiians, including Fernandez. See
 
Ahuna v. Dep't of Hawaiian Home Lands, 64 Haw. 327, 338, 640 P.2d
 1161, 1168 (1982). In support of her breach of fiduciary duty
 
claim, Fernandez obliquely references the actions of Mark
 
Development, as HHC and DHHL's agent, and HHC and DHHL's direct
 
"condoning" of Mark Development's actions and "neglecting" how
 
their beneficiaries were treated by Mark Development. Fernandez
 
cites no legal authority for her claim that such actions
 
constitute breaches of HHC and DHHL's fiduciary duty. On the
 
contrary, it appears that the enforcement policies implemented by
 
Mark Development were made pursuant to requirements imposed by
 
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and pursuant
 
to a Low Income Housing Tax Credit program used to fund the
 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
operations of the development in which Fernandez's unit is
 
located.4 Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court
 
erred in granting summary judgment against Fernandez and in favor
 of Defendants-Appellees on Count 6.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's August 11, 2008
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 25, 2011 
On the briefs: 
David Kimo Frankel 
Anthony F. Quan, Jr.(Native Hawaiian Legal
Corporation)
for Plaintiff-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge 
Sidney K. Ayabe
J. Thomas Weber Gary S. Miyamoto(Ayabe Chong Nishimoto
Sia & Nakamura)
for Defendants-Appellees Associate Judge 
4
 Fernandez argues that the Circuit Court erred by relying on
various evidence presented that allegedly lacked foundation, were improper
legal opinions, and were hearsay. Fernandez, however, failed to identify any
evidentiary errors in her points of error as required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(4),
which requires, inter alia, "[a] concise statement of the points of error set
forth in separately numbered paragraphs." Therefore, any such error is deemed
waived. Id. ("Points not presented in accordance with this section will be
disregarded. . .").
 
5 