 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
---o0o-- 
 
STATE OF HAWAI» I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
vs.
 
KYLE F.K. CORREA, Defendant-Appellee
 
NO. 29817 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR NO. 08-1-1900)
 
AUGUST 27, 2010
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, FUJISE, and GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Defendant-Appellee Kyle F.K. Correa (Correa) was
 
charged by complaint with abuse of a family or household member,
 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709-906 (Supp.
 2009).
1 The alleged victim and the complainant (Complainant) was
 
Correa's wife. 
At a calender call held on the day scheduled for trial,
 
the Family Court of the First Circuit (family court)2 denied
 
Correa's motion for a trial continuance. The Deputy Prosecuting
 Attorney (DPA) advised the family court that Plaintiff-Appellant
 
1
 HRS § 709-906 provides in relevant part:
 
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person . . . to physically
abuse a family or household member . . . .
 
For the purposes of this section, "family or household
member" means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former spouses
or reciprocal beneficiaries, persons who have a child in common,
parents, children, persons related by consanguinity, and persons
jointly residing or formerly residing in the same dwelling unit.
 
2
 The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided over the proceedings relevant
to this appeal.
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
State of Hawai» i (State) was ready to proceed with trial. At a 
bench conference, the family court asked the DPA if he had 
personally spoken with the Complainant. The DPA acknowledged that he had not. After the bench conference, the DPA again represented that the State was ready to proceed with trial, and he advised the family court that he had "right now" talked to the Complainant. The family court ruled that because the DPA in preparation for trial had not spoken "in detail" with the Complainant, "the State cannot be heard to say that it's ready for trial." Based on this ruling, the family court dismissed the abuse charge against Correa with prejudice. 
The State appeals from the family court's "Order of
 
Dismissal with Prejudice (Dismissal Order), which was filed on
 
April 13, 2009. We hold that the family court abused its
 discretion in dismissing the abuse charge against Correa. 
Accordingly, we vacate the family court's Dismissal Order and
 remand the case for further proceedings.
 
BACKGROUND FACTS
 
On August 28, 2008, Correa was charged with abusing 
the Complainant, who was a family or household member. On
 October 1, 2008, the State filed a "Notice of Intent to Use
 Evidence" (Notice of Intent), which notified Correa of the
 State's intent to use evidence of a prior incident in which he
 allegedly abused the Complainant as well as two incidents of
 alleged burglary committed by Correa involving other complaining
 witnesses. With respect to the prior incident of alleged abuse,
 the State attached a police report that contained a written
 
statement, signed by the Complainant, which stated that Correa
 had slammed the Complainant's head against the passenger window
 of a truck, pulled her hair, hit her head against the truck's
 middle console, choked her, and dragged her out of the truck. 
The State asserted that it intended to use the evidence proffered
 
in its Notice of Intent "to explain the possible recantation" of
 
the Complainant at trial or "to rebut [Correa's] first aggressor
 
self-defense . . . ." 
2
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On December 4, 2008, Correa filed a notice that the
 
Office of Public Defender was withdrawing as his counsel and that
 
new counsel was being substituted and was appearing for Correa. 
Trial was continued to January 20, 2009, and then to February 17,
 2009. At a calendar call held on February 17, 2009, Correa
 orally moved for a continuance to enable the defense to determine
 the outcome of another matter for which Correa had been placed in
 custody. The family court continued the trial to April 13, 2009,
 but advised the parties that this would be the "[l]ast
 continuance for everyone" absent something "extraordinary." 
On April 3, 2009, Correa filed a motion to continue the
 
trial. In support of the motion, Correa's counsel asserted that:
 1) on February 6, 2009, Correa was arrested for, and was
 
subsequently charged with, first degree methamphetamine
 
trafficking; 2) Correa had been accepted into a residential
 substance abuse program scheduled to begin on April 14, 2009; and
 3) Correa was asking for a continuance of at least ninety days to
 permit him to enter and complete the substance abuse program.
 
On April 13, 2009, the scheduled date for trial, a
 
hearing on a calendar call and on Correa's motion for a
 continuance was held. At the outset of the hearing, the family
 court asked both parties if they were ready for trial, and then
 it proceeded to consider and deny Correa's motion for a
 
continuance of trial:
 
THE COURT: Okay. State's ready?
 
[DPA]: Uh, Your Honor, for this case State is ready
to proceed.
 
THE COURT: Defense?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, defense is asking for
a continuance. Uh, we did file a motion to continue. Mr.
 
Correa is set to enter into a treatment program tomorrow.
That is a residential program that he cannot leave for a
period of -­
THE COURT: Okay. Would you join me up here.
 
(Bench conference begun.)
 THE COURT: When, uh -- when did he get admitted to
that program?
 
3
 --FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: March 30th.
 
THE COURT: Because I designated it as a final
continuance in February. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I remember you saying that. 
THE COURT: Yeah. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: But, uh, I think (inaudible), Your
Honor. He has two things going on. One, he has the drug
treatment. Two, he has a Circuit Court methamphetamine
trafficking case that's set for the end of the month.
 
THE COURT: Okay. We're not -- I've -- I've said -­
because we're trying to go with the rule of reason that we
give some leeway. But this case has gone on -- let me see
this one. Um, it's -- the first calendar call was last
October which means that just from calendar calls that
period is six months old. So the motion to continue is
 denied. 
After denying Correa's motion to continue the trial,
 
the family court advised defense counsel that Correa would be
 
required to appear at the "calendar call tomorrow at . . . 8:30." 
The family court then questioned the DPA about whether he had
 
personally spoken to the Complainant. The family court
 repeatedly expressed the view that the DPA could not be ready for
 trial unless the DPA had personally spoken to the Complainant. 
The following colloquy ensued:
 
THE COURT: . . . . Now my question for the State is
this. Have you personally spoken with the complainant?
 
[DPA]: No, Your Honor. Uh, I can ask my -- one of my
 
THE COURT: No. No. If you're talking about victim-
witness advocates, they're not paralegals. They're not
licensed to practice law. They've had no legal training.
And you, as the attorney, are a steward of the justice
process and an officer of the court. If you're telling me
that you haven't spoken with the witness personally, then
you're not ready.
 
[DPA]: If that's the case then, Your Honor, we'll
stipulate to the continuance.
 
THE COURT: I said it was a final continuance.
 
. . . . 
THE COURT: Let me just -- let me just explain
something. Have you talked with the complainant? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Have I?
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Yes[.]
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: This morning, yes.
 
THE COURT: Have you talked to the complainant before
that?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Uh, I believe so. At the last
 
trial call I spoke with her.
 
THE COURT: Okay. So, in other words, these
complainants are approachable. You cannot sit here and with
 
one voice say I haven't talked to the key witness in my case
and then turn around and say I'm ready for trial. That's a
 non -- that's a non sequitur. It is part and parcel. You
 are telling me to summon a jury of 40 people to be here and
try this case. You cannot tell me that you're ready for
trial if -- if since October you've had this case and you
still haven't talked to the complainant. You're not ready.
 
[DPA]: Your Honor, based on the information I have -­
THE COURT: Mr. -- you're calling a witness to trial
that's the centerpiece of your case. You cannot sit there
 
and tell me that -- that you haven't talked to the witness
but you're ready for trial. You will not be heard to say
that. I will not risk 40 jurors on an unprepared case. And
 
you've had six months to do it.
 
This case first came here in October. He hasn't once
 
talked to the complainant. I know the complainant is
approachable because the defense lawyer talked to him -­talked to her. That's it.
 
Let me just be crystal clear with you. Do not come
 
into this court and tell me that you're ready for trial when
you haven't talked to the complainant. That somebody else
talked to the complainant and is feeding you information is
inadequate. You can't do that. You're the lawyer. You're
 the officer of the court. And you're the one -- you are
instructing me to summon 40 jurors into this court, and you
cannot be heard to say that when you haven't even talked to
the complainant in six months.
 
[DPA]: Well, Your Honor, with all due candor to the
court, I haven't had to file for (inaudible) in six months.
 
THE COURT: I don't think it makes any difference.
 
[DPA]: But -­
THE COURT: It doesn't make any difference. If you
haven't talked to that witness after all the preparation
time that you've had, then that's it, you're not ready.
 
(Bench conference concluded.)
 
(Emphases added.)
 
After the bench conference concluded, the family court
 
entertained motions from the parties. The DPA again advised the
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
family court that he was ready to proceed with trial. The DPA
 
also advised the family court that he had just spoken with the
 Complainant. The family court ruled that this was insufficient
 and granted Correa's motion to dismiss the case "with prejudice"
 on the ground that the State was not ready for trial:
 
THE COURT: I'll hear whatever motions you have.
 
[DPA]: And, Your Honor, again I mean State's willing
to stipulate to a continuance. But if the court's not
 
willing to grant any continuance, then State's ready to
proceed with trial.
 
THE COURT: Okay. You haven't spoken with the
complainant?
 
[DPA]: 
I just briefly -­
THE COURT: Is that -­
[DPA]: -- talked with her right now.
 
THE COURT: Is that -- is that a correct statement? 
You haven't spoken with the complainant?
 
[DPA]: 
I just spoke with her right now.
 
THE COURT: You have not spoken with the complainant?
 
[DPA]: Prior to today, no. But I just spoke with her
right now.
 
THE COURT: Yeah, just in the moment since I -- since
 
I released you from the bench you've now spoken with her; is
that right?
 
[DPA]: Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: Okay. State -- and defense?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, I believe the State is
not ready. They had just spoken briefly with the
complaining witness. I move to dismiss the case.
 
THE COURT: Well, I do this with extreme reluctance,
but this case first came on for calendar call on October
 
13th and the, uh -- it is insufficient. The State cannot be
 
heard to say that it's ready for trial if it hasn't spoken
in detail and in preparation with its complainant. The
 motion is granted. The dismissal is with prejudice.
 
[DPA]: 
And, Your Honor, State would ask the court to
reconsider and ask for a dismissal without prejudice.
 
THE COURT: I'm not going to do that.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Thank you.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
The State argues that the family court abused its
 
discretion in dismissing the abuse charge against Correa with
 
prejudice. The family court dismissed the charge with prejudice
 solely on the ground that the DPA had not personally spoken "in
 detail" to the Complainant before the calendar call on the date
 scheduled for trial. 
We review a trial court's decision to dismiss a
 
criminal charge for abuse of discretion. State v. Mendonca , 68
 
Haw. 280, 283, 711 P.2d 731, 734 (1985). We conclude that under
 the circumstances of this case, the family court abused its
 discretion in dismissing the charge against Correa.
 
Citing State v. Moriwake , 65 Haw. 47, 647 P.2d 705 
(1982), Correa argues that the family court "properly exercised 
its 'inherent power' to dismiss this case where the State was not prepared to proceed to trial." We conclude that the Hawai» i 
Supreme Court's subsequent decision in State v. Alvey, 67 Haw. 49, 678 P.2d 5 (1984), and not Moriwake, is the applicable 
precedent for this case. Under Alvey , the family court abused 
its discretion in dismissing the charge against Correa. 
I.
 
In Moriwake , the trial court dismissed with prejudice a 
manslaughter charge against Moriwake after Moriwake had undergone two trials which both ended in mistrials due to deadlocked juries. Moriwake, 65 Haw. at 48-50, 647 P.2d 708-09. The Hawai» i Supreme Court concluded that a trial court has the 
inherent power to dismiss "an indictment with prejudice following 
the declaration of one or more mistrials because of genuinely deadlocked juries," even though a retrial would not violate the defendant's constitutional rights. Id.  at 55, 647 P.2d at 712. 
The court stated that it was "cognizant of the deference to be accorded the prosecuting attorney with regard to criminal 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
proceedings, but [that] such deference is not without bounds." 
Id. at 56, 647 P.2d 712. The court noted:
 
Society has a strong interest in punishing criminal conduct.
But society also has an interest in protecting the integrity
of the judicial process and in ensuring fairness to
defendants in judicial proceedings. Where those fundamental
 
interests are threatened, the 'discretion' of the prosecutor
must be subject to the power and responsibility of the
court. 
Id. (quoting State v. Braunsdorf, 297 N.W.2d 808, 817 (Wis. 1980)
 
(Day, J., dissenting)).
 
The court described the trial court's exercise of its
 
inherent power to dismiss a charge as "a matter of balancing the
 
interest of the state against fundamental fairness to a defendant
 with the added ingredient of the orderly functioning of the court
 system." Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The court concluded that, in view of the two deadlocked juries
 after two full, nearly identical trials and the absence of any
 indication that a third trial would proceed differently, the
 trial court had not abused its discretion in employing its
 inherent power to dismiss the charge against Moriwake. Id. at
 
57, 647 P.2d at 713. 
II.
 
In Alvey, 67 Haw. at 58, 678 P.2d at 11, the supreme
 
court reached the opposite conclusion and held that the trial
 court had abused its discretion in using its inherent power to
 dismiss the charge. Alvey was criminally charged with promoting
 prison contraband. Id. at 52, 678 P.2d at 7. A prison
 
disciplinary committee had previously determined that there was
 insufficient evidence to support an administrative prison
 infraction that was based on the same incident as the criminal
 charge. Id. at 51-52, 678 P.2d at 6-7. The trial court
 dismissed the criminal charge with prejudice on the grounds that: 
1) dismissal of the administrative prison infraction collaterally
 estopped the criminal charge; and 2) dismissal of the criminal
 charge was within its inherent power. Id. at 52-53, 678 P.2d at
 
8. With respect to the use of its inherent power, the trial
 
8
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court reasoned that it "should not meddle in prison affairs by
 
retrying an inmate who had already been absolved by prison
 officials under a lesser burden of proof" and that "judicial
 economy supported giving the prison hearing res judicata effect." 
Id. at 53, 678 P.2d at 8. 
After concluding that the trial court erred in
 
dismissing the charge on collateral estoppel grounds, the supreme
 court turned to address whether the trial court had properly
 exercised its inherent power. The supreme court held that the
 trial court had abused its discretion in dismissing the charge
 based on its inherent power. Id. at 58, 678 P.2d at 11. In
 support of this holding, the supreme court observed:
 
Alvey has not cited a single authority for the
proposition that a trial judge has the inherent power to
dismiss an otherwise valid indictment prior to the
defendant's first trial. Nor could we, for a judge's
inherent power to dismiss an indictment is not so broad.
 
Id. at 57, 678 P.2d at 10. The supreme court noted that although
 
a federal court is empowered to dismiss an indictment based on
 
governmental or prosecutorial misconduct, such supervisory power
 will only be used "when the misconduct represents 'a serious
 threat to the integrity of the judicial process.'" Id.
 
(citation, internal quotation marks, and block quote format
 omitted). The supreme court also cited state court decisions
 requiring "a 'clear denial of due process,' evidence some
 constitutional right has been violated, arbitrary action, or
 governmental misconduct" to justify the dismissal of a charge. 
Id. at 57-58, 678 P.2d at 10 (citations omitted).
 
With respect to the trial court's reliance on judicial
 
economy to support the exercise of its inherent power, the
 
supreme court stated, "Judicial economy is . . . not a legitimate
 reason to dismiss an indictment prior to a defendant's first
 trial. Except where Moriwake -type considerations apply,
 
dismissing an indictment just to ease a crowded docket is an
 abuse of discretion." Id. at 58, 678 P.2d at 11. 
9
  
________________________ 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The supreme court explained why Alvey's case was
 
distinguishable from Moriwake:
 
In bringing criminal charges against Alvey the State's
interest is to prosecute prison crime. It is a strong
interest. In Moriwake the judicial interest in preventing a
third trial at which no new evidence would be presented,
combined with fairness to the defendant, outweighed the
State's interest in prosecution. Here, a trial will not
waste judicial resources nor deny Alvey fair treatment.
6/
 
We therefore hold that the trial judge abused his discretion
in using his inherent power to dismiss the indictment.
 
6/ While there are serious questions about Alvey's
criminal intent, they are for the trier of fact to decide.
21 Am.Jur.2d, Criminal Law § 129 (1981).
 
Id.
 
III.
 
Correa was charged with abuse of a family or household 
member. The State has a strong interest in prosecuting crimes 
involving domestic abuse. See Alvey, 67 Haw. at 58, 678 P.2d at 
11; Coyle v. Compton, 85 Hawai» i 197, 208, 940 P.2d 404, 415 
(App. 1997) (noting the Hawai» i Legislature's identification of 
"a state interest in preventing domestic abuse and in protecting family and household members against physical harm"). Correa was not previously tried on the abuse charge. There was no allegation that the DPA had engaged in conduct that infringed upon Correa's right to a fair trial. Thus, the family court's dismissal of the abuse charge was not necessary to protect the integrity of the judicial process or to ensure fairness to Correa in judicial proceedings. See Moriwake, 65 Haw. at 56, 647 P.2d 
712. The following observation of the supreme court in Alvey
 
applies to Correa's case:
 
[The defendant] has not cited a single authority
for the proposition that a trial judge has the
inherent power to dismiss an otherwise valid
indictment prior to the defendant's first trial. Nor
 
could we, for a judge's inherent power to dismiss an
indictment is not so broad.
 
Alvey, 67 Haw. at 57, 678 P.2d at 10. We conclude that the
 
family court exceeded the permissible bounds of its inherent
 
power in dismissing the charge against Correa. 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The sole basis for the family court's decision to
 
dismiss the abuse charge with prejudice was that the DPA had not
 
personally spoken in detail with the Complainant before the
 calendar call. The family court was unwilling to accept any
 substitute for the DPA personally speaking in detail to the
 Complainant, and it specifically told the DPA, "[t]hat somebody
 else talked to the complainant and is feeding you information is
 inadequate." There is no indication that the DPA had advance
 notice before the calendar call of the family court's
 requirement. 
In rendering its decision, the family court did not ask
 
the DPA whether anyone on the prosecution's team besides the DPA
 had interviewed the Complainant. The family court did not ask
 the DPA whether the DPA had reviewed materials, such as police
 
reports or interview statements, that would document the
 Complainant's anticipated testimony. Nor did the family court
 ask the DPA what the Complainant had told the DPA during their
 brief conversation; what evidence the State had to prove its
 case; or whether the State had evidence, such as a signed
 statement by the Complainant, that would permit the State to
 prove its case even if the Complainant recanted her allegations
 of abuse. 
In addition, the reasoning underlying the family
 
court's decision was flawed. It may not be necessary in all
 abuse cases for the DPA to personally speak in detail with the
 Complainant before the calendar call for the State to be ready
 for trial. The DPA may become prepared by having other members
 
of the prosecution team interview the Complainant or by reviewing
 police reports or interview statements. Moreover, the family
 court assumed that the Complainant must have been available for a
 detailed personal interview with the DPA because the Complainant
 had previously spoken with defense counsel. However, complaining
 witnesses in domestic abuse cases do not always make themselves
 equally available to both parties before trial. 
11
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The prosecuting attorney is to be accorded deference in
 
how to discharge the duties of his or her office, see Moriwake,
 
65 Haw. at 56, 647 P.2d at 712, which we conclude includes
 deference in how the prosecuting attorney prepares a case for
 trial. See United States v. Welch, 572 F.2d 1359, 1360 (9th Cir.
 
1978) (stating that the appellate court "will not interfere with
 the Attorney General's prosecutorial discretion unless it is
 abused to such an extent as to be arbitrary and capricious and
 violative of due process"); cf. Alvey, 67 Haw. at 57-58, 678 P.2d
 
at 10-11. In this case, the family court imposed a blanket
 requirement that the only way the State could be ready for trial
 and avoid a dismissal with prejudice in a domestic abuse case is
 for the DPA to personally speak in detail with the Complainant
 before the calendar call. We conclude that in imposing and
 
applying this inflexible rule in this case, the family court,
 without sufficient justification, encroached upon the prosecuting
 attorney's prerogative to decide how to prepare his or her case
 for trial. 
As in Alvey , judicial economy was one of the family
 
court's key concerns in and motivations for using its inherent
 power to dismiss the charge against Correa. The family court
 indicated that it did not want to call in jurors to try the case
 when the family court did not believe the State was ready. 
However, as the Alvey  court made clear, "[j]udicial economy is 
. . . not a legitimate reason to dismiss an indictment prior to a
 defendant's first trial." Alvey, 67 Haw. at 58, 678 P.2d at 11.
 
In addition, Moriwake -type considerations do not apply because
 
Correa's case is clearly distinguishable from Moriwake . Correa
 
did not undergo two prior trials where the juries deadlocked with
 
no prospect for a different result in a third trial. Indeed,
 Correa was not subject to any previous trial, and requiring
 Correa to proceed to trial for the first time would not deny him
 fair treatment or have an adverse effect on the integrity of the
 judicial process. In the absence of Moriwake -type
 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
considerations, "dismissing [a charge] just to ease a crowded
 
docket is an abuse of discretion." Id. at 58, 678 P.2d at 11. 
We recognize that to promote the orderly functioning of 
the court system, a trial court has an interest in ensuring the preparedness of counsel and in appropriate circumstances may sanction counsel for being unprepared. See, e.g., Hawai» i Rules 
of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 53(b) (2000) ("An attorney who . . . unjustifiably fails to prepare for a presentation to the court necessitating a continuance may be subject to sanctions as the court deems appropriate.") However, even when the State violates the discovery requirements of HRPP Rule 16 (2007), the trial court abuses its discretion in dismissing the case if it fails to "consider whether less severe measures would rectify prejudice caused to the defendant by the violation." State v. 
Dowsett, 10 Haw. App. 491, 495, 878 P.2d 739, 742 (1994). 
Here, there is no claim that the DPA had engaged in
 
conduct that caused prejudice to Correa. There is no indication
 
that the DPA had advance notice of the family court's view that
 the State could not be ready for trial unless the DPA personally
 spoke in detail with the Complainant before the calendar call. 
The family court did not ask the DPA why he had not previously
 spoken in detail with the Complainant or what other steps the DPA
 had taken to prepare for trial. There is also no indication that
 the family court considered any less severe measures before
 dismissing the abuse charge, such as sanctioning the DPA if that
 turned out to be appropriate.
 
The State was entitled to have a trial on the merits of
 
the abuse charge against Correa. See Alvey, 67 Haw. at 58 n.6,
 
678 P.2d at 11 n.6. Under the circumstances of this case, we
 
hold that the family court abused its discretion in using its
 inherent power to dismiss the charge against Correa. 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the April 13, 2009, Dismissal Order filed by
 
the family court, and we remand the case for further proceedings
 
consistent with this opinion. 
On the briefs:
 
James M. Anderson
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City & County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Jeffrey A. Hawk
(Hawk Sing & Ignacio)
for Defendant-Appellee
 
14
 