 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29892
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JAMES M. SMITH and ROBERT H. LEE, Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0192)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants James M. Smith and Robert H. Lee
 
(collectively, Employees) appeal from the Final Judgment in Favor
 
of Plaintiff City and County of Honolulu (Judgment) filed on
 May 27, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
 court).
1 The circuit court entered judgment in favor of
 
Plaintiff-Appellee City and County of Honolulu (the City) and
 against Employees. The Judgment incorporated by reference the
 circuit court's "Order Regarding Joint Submission of Cross-
Motions for Summary Judgment Filed July 28, 2008" (Order Granting
 City's MPSJ/Denying Employees' MPSJ), filed on September 22,
 2008.
 
1
 The Honorable Victoria A Marks presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Employees contend the circuit court erred in 
granting the City's "Motion for Partial Summary Judgment as to 
the Subsidized Vehicles Claim" and concluding that in light of the subsidized vehicle allowance set forth in the collective bargaining agreement between the City and the State of Hawai
'i 
Organization of Police Officers, the City was not required under the Fair Labor Standards Act (the FLSA) to compensate Employees 
2
for personally servicing, cleaning, and maintaining  their City-
subsidized vehicles (alternatively, subsidized vehicles or the
 vehicles) when they are off duty. Employees maintain that the
 circuit court erred in concluding that no disputed issues existed
 as to whether the Employees were expected or required to work on
 subsidized vehicles on an uncompensated, off-duty basis.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 Employees' appeal is without merit.
 Reviewing the circuit court's award of summary 
judgment de novo, Bitney v. Honolulu Police Dep't, 96 Hawai
'i 
243, 250, 30 P.3d 257, 264 (2001), we hold the circuit court did not err in concluding that the City was not required under the FLSA to compensate Employees for their off-duty work on the vehicles. The circuit court concluded in relevant part: 
Motorized officers (officers with subsidized vehicles)
are not expected to nor required to spend any of their
personal time [working on] their subsidized vehicles. An
 officer who chooses to personally [work on] his or her
subsidized vehicle does so for the personal benefit of being
able to keep the money that would otherwise be used to pay
for the services they are electing to perform on their own.
 
2
 In the proceedings below and on appeal, work performed on the
vehicles by Employees is referred to as, e.g., "servicing, cleaning, and
maintaining"; "cleaning and maintaining"; and "repairing, maintaining or
cleaning." For the sake of simplicity, throughout this opinion, we refer to
the work performed on the vehicles as "work" or "the work."
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
No court has ever held that police officers who
received subsidized vehicle allowances are entitled to
 
receive additional compensation if they elect to personally
spend their free time [working on] their vehicles rather
than using the cash allowance to purchase cleaning,
maintenance or repair services.
 
Finally, Hellmers v. Town of Vestal, 969 F. Supp. 837
(N.D.N.Y. 1997), involved an analogous situation where
officers sought compensation for time spent cleaning and
maintaining their uniforms even though the officers received
a stipend for either dry cleaning or purchasing new
uniforms. There, the court concluded that the officers were
not entitled to compensation for the time they elected to
spend cleaning and maintaining their uniforms. 
Similarly, when officers have bargained for and
received a subsidy to reimburse officers for the use,
maintenance, cleaning and repair costs associated with the
subsidized vehicles, the officers are not entitled to be
compensated for the time they elect to spend [working on]
their subsidized vehicles.
 
Employees have cited to no authority to support the
 
notion that an employer is required to compensate its employees
 
for off-duty work under the FLSA where, as here, the employees
 already receive an allowance to reimburse the employees for costs
 associated with the task, and we find none. On the other hand,
 as the circuit court noted in its Order Granting City's
 MPSJ/Denying Employees' MPSJ, the United States District Court
 for the Northern District of New York in Hellmers v. Town of
 Vestal, N.Y., 969 F. Supp. 837, 844 (N.D.N.Y. 1997), held that
 Hellmers was not entitled to overtime compensation under the FLSA
 for time spent cleaning and maintaining his police uniform
 because although uniform cleaning was a type of activity
 generally compensable under the FLSA, the Town of Vestal Police
 Department, pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement between
 the Town of Vestal and its police officers, "specifically
 provides its officers with a stipend for 'either dry cleaning or
 purchasing new uniforms.'"
 
Therefore, 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Final Judgment in Favor
 
of Plaintiff City and County of Honolulu filed on May 27, 2009 in
 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 23, 2010. 
On the briefs:

 
Vladimir Devens
 
(Meheula & Devens, LLP)
for Defendants-Appellants.
 
Steven M. Nakashima, 
Melanie Mito May,
William N. Ota
 (Marr Jones & Wang, LLLP) and
Duane W.H. Pang,
Deputy Corporation Counsel,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Chief Judge

Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge

 
4
 