 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29520
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
PETER NEWAL MAHARAJ, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(Honolulu Division)
(HPD Traffic No. 1DTA-08-03393)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Peter Newal Maharaj (Maharaj)
 
appeals from the Judgment entered on November 18, 2008, in the
 
District Court of the First Circuit (District Court).1 Maharaj
 
was convicted of operating a vehicle under the influence of an
 intoxicant (OVUII). On appeal, Maharaj argues that: (1) he
 received ineffective assistance of counsel because his trial
 counsel failed to introduce Maharaj's medical records into
 evidence; (2) there was insufficient evidence to support
 Maharaj's conviction; and (3) the District Court erred in denying
 Maharaj's motion to suppress evidence.
2 We affirm.
 
1
 The Honorable William A. Cardwell presided.
 
2
 Maharaj's Opening Brief fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellant Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28 (2008) in several significant respects,
including: (1) the subject index is incomplete; (2) the statement of the casedoes not contain any record references; (3) a copy of the judgment is not
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
Preliminarily, we note that there appears to have been
 
a hearing on a motion to suppress evidence on September 29, 2008,
 
and the testimony from that hearing appears to have been
 incorporated into the trial by agreement. In addition, the trial
 
appears to have been commenced on September 29, 2008, and
 
testimony given for the trial. The transcript for the 
September 29, 2008, hearing on the motion to suppress evidence
 and the beginning of trial was not made part of the record on
 appeal. Therefore, our review is limited to the documents in 
the record on appeal and the transcript of proceedings of
 November 18, 2008.
 
The appellant has the burden of providing the appellate 
court with a sufficient record on appeal to address the issues raised. Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i 225, 230-231, 909 
P.2d 553, 558-559 (1995). 
When an appellant desires to raise any point on appeal
that requires the consideration of the oral proceedings
before the court appealed from, the appellant bears the
burden to show error by reference to matters in the record,
and he or she has the responsibility of providing the
relevant transcript. 
State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai' i 333, 334, 3 P.3d 499, 500 (2000). 
Without the transcript of proceedings for September 29, 2008, the 
record is not sufficient for us to decide the issues relating to the sufficiency of evidence and the motion to suppress evidence. See id. at 336, 3 P.3d at 502 (concluding that "[w]ithout the relevant transcript, there is insufficient evidence to review the alleged error"). Accordingly, Maharaj has failed to demonstrate that he is entitled to relief on those issues. 
2(...continued)
attached; (4) the points of error do not identify where in the record the
alleged errors occurred and were objected to or brought to the attention of
the District Court; (5) the argument regarding the sufficiency of evidence and
the motion to suppress evidence does not cite to any authority; and (6) there
is no showing of service of the brief on the attorney alleged to have provided
ineffective assistance of counsel. Counsel for Maharaj is warned that future
noncompliance with the HRAP may result in sanctions against counsel.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
The remaining issue of ineffective assistance of
 
counsel is based upon trial counsel's failure to seek the
 
admission of the medical records of Maharaj. On appeal, Maharaj
 contends that the medical records would have corroborated his
 testimony regarding his medical condition, including that he
 suffered from diabetes, had problems with his feet and back, and
 was feeling sick from vog and related asthma. Maharaj argues
 that his medical condition, in turn, provided an innocent
 explanation for the deficiencies in his performance on the field
 sobriety tests. 
The defendant has the burden of establishing 
ineffective assistance of counsel, and must demonstrate: "1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998) (block 
quote format and citation omitted). 
Maharaj testified as to his medical condition at trial. 
It appears from comments made by Maharaj's trial counsel that
 counsel had Maharaj's medical records, but made a conscious
 decision not to seek their admission in evidence. The record on
 appeal does not include the medical records that Maharaj contends
 should have been moved into evidence. Moreover, it would appear
 that expert testimony would be required to explain how Maharaj's
 medical condition affected his ability to perform the field
 sobriety tests. 
"The decision whether to call witnesses in a criminal
 
trial is normally a matter within the judgment of counsel and,
 accordingly, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial
 hindsight." State v. Onishi, 64 Haw. 62, 64, 636 P.2d 742, 744
 
(1981). In addition, "[i]neffective assistance of counsel claims
 based on the failure to obtain witnesses must be supported by
 affidavits or sworn statements describing the testimony of the 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
proffered witnesses." Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 39, 960 P.2d at 
1247. There are no such affidavits or sworn statements in this 
case. We conclude that based on the existing record, Maharaj has failed to satisfy his burden of establishing his claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel. 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Judgment of
 
the District Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 25, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Leslie C. Maharaj, Esq.
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 