NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. 28948 and 29105
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
No. 28948
 
PACIFIC LIGHTNET, INC., Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee v.
TIME WARNER TELECOM, INC., and TIME WARNER TELECOM OF HAWAII
L.P., Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants.
(Civil No. 03-1-2557)
 
PACIFIC LIGHTNET, INC., Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee, v.
TIME WARNER TELECOM OF HAWAII L.P. a Delaware limited
 
partnership, Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
and
 
ALVEN KAMP, JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS
1-10, OR OTHER ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants-Appellees.
(Civil No. 05-1-0428)
 
and
 
No. 29105
 
PACIFIC LIGHTNET, INC., Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
v. TIME WARNER TELECOM, INC., and TIME WARNER TELECOM
OF HAWAII L.P., Defendants-Appellants/Cross-Appellees.
(Civil No. 03-1-2557)
 
PACIFIC LIGHTNET, INC., Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant v.
TIME WARNER TELECOM OF HAWAII L.P. a Delaware limited
 
partnership, Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and
 
ALVEN KAMP, JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS
1-10, OR OTHER ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants-Appellees.
(Civil No. 05-1-0428)
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
This appeal involves multiple claims and issues between 
two telecommunications carriers. This court consolidated 
appellate case Nos. 28948 and 29105, which arise from two civil actions that were consolidated by stipulation and order before the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).
1 In 
Civil No. 03-1-2557, Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Pacific Lightnet, Inc. (PLNI) brought claims against Defendants­Appellees/Cross-Appellants Time Warner Telecom, Inc. (TWT Inc.) and its Hawai' i subsidiary, Time Warner Telecom of Hawaii, L.P. 
(TWT Hawaii) (collectively, TWTC). In Civil No. 05-1-0428, PLNI brought claims against TWT Hawaii and Alven Kamp (Kamp). 
In the consolidated cases before the circuit court, a
 
Final Judgment was entered in favor of TWTC and against PLNI as
 to all claims asserted in PLNI's complaints in both actions,
 notwithstanding a jury verdict in favor of PLNI as to certain
 claims. Thereafter, TWTC filed post-judgment motions, including
 a motion for attorneys' fees and costs, which the circuit court
 granted in part and denied in part.
 
This consolidated appeal addresses appeals by PLNI and
 
TWTC.
2 PLNI challenges certain interlocutory rulings by the
 
circuit court and the circuit court's grant of attorneys' fees
 and costs to TWTC. TWTC challenges certain aspects of the trial
 held below and the circuit court's ruling on its motion for
 attorneys' fees and costs. For the reasons set forth below, we
 affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand for further
 proceedings.
 
1
 The Honorable Elizabeth E. Hifo presided.
 
2
 "An appeal from a final judgment 'brings up for review all
interlocutory orders not appealable directly as of right which deal with
issues in the case.'" Ueoka v. Szymanski, 107 Hawai' i 386, 396, 114 P.3d 892,
902 (2005) (citation omitted). Furthermore, "[t]he notice of appeal shall bedeemed to appeal the disposition of all post-judgment motions that are timelyfiled after entry of the judgment or order." Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4(a)(3). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
I. Points of Error on Appeal
 
PLNI raises the following points of error in its
 
appeals:
 
(1) the circuit court erred in dismissing the Feature
 
3
Group D claims  based on its determination that the Public
Utilities Commission (PUC) had primary jurisdiction, even though
 the circuit court had concurrent jurisdiction and the jury had
 already rendered a verdict in favor of PLNI on these claims; 
(2) the circuit court erred and violated PLNI's
 
constitutional right to a jury trial when it dismissed the
 Feature Group D claims and stayed enforcement of the jury verdict
 in favor of PLNI;
 
(3) the circuit court erred in dismissing, rather than
 
staying, the Feature Group D claims, where the impact of the
 dismissal would result in time-barring the claims due to the
 statute of limitations;
 
(4) the circuit court erred in granting partial summary
 
judgment in favor of TWTC because genuine issues of material fact
 exist as to whether PLNI is a third-party beneficiary to an asset
 purchase agreement between TWT Inc. and another party, and the
 circuit court improperly denied further discovery;
 
(5) the circuit court erred in granting attorneys' fees
 
and costs to TWTC related to preliminary injunction proceedings
 and the Hawaii Island Fiber Network (HIFN) claims;
 
(6) the circuit court erred in not reducing, limiting,
 
or segregating by specific claim the amount of attorneys' fees
 and costs awarded to TWTC.
 
In TWTC's cross-appeal, it raises the following points
 
of error:
 
(1) the jury verdict must be vacated because: (a) it is
 
contrary to the established law of tariffs which requires
 mandatory payment for validly received services, precludes
 
3
 The Feature Group D claims involve billing disputes between the
parties related to telephone service charges for call termination services. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI �I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
billing disputes that are not filed within 120 days, and
 
precludes liability for billing and transmission problems beyond
 TWTC's control; and (b) it is contrary to the law of assignments
 under which PLNI did not acquire any rights to the GST credit;
 
(2) the circuit court erred in refusing testimony and 
evidence regarding relevant settlement discussions to negative a claim of undue delay, pursuant to Hawai� i Rules of Evidence (HRE) 
Rule 408; 
(3) the circuit court did not properly instruct the
 
jury or provide the jury with a complete special verdict form, in
 that:
 
(a) the circuit court improperly omitted
instructions on TWTC's affirmative defenses;
 
(b) jury instructions and the special verdict
form improperly allowed the jury to infer a
contractual relationship, as opposed to
making sure each element of a contract under
the tariff was present; and
 
(c) based on the foregoing, the circuit court
improperly excluded numerous jury
instructions;
 
(4) the circuit court erred in denying in part TWTC's
 
motion for attorneys' fees and costs for the Feature Group D
 
claims based on lack of jurisdiction.
 
(5) the circuit court erred by failing to render a
 
written decision within ninety days following TWTC's motion for
 attorneys' fees and costs.
II. Case Background
A. Summary of Issues On Appeal
 
PLNI and TWTC are telecommunications carriers that 
operate in Hawai� i, and both acquired interests or rights 
previously owned by GST Telecommunications, Inc. and its 
affiliates (collectively, GST) after GST filed for bankruptcy. Although various claims were asserted in Civil No. 03-1-2557 and Civil No. 05-1-0428, the issues relevant on appeal are limited to three areas. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
First, in what is referred to as the Feature Group D
 
claims, PLNI claims that via its acquisition of rights previously
 
owned by GST Telecommunications Hawaii, Inc. (GST Hawaii), TWTC
 owes PLNI credits for telephone service billing credits that TWTC
 owed to GST Hawaii; and, in ongoing billing disputes, TWTC's
 pending charges to PLNI should be reduced. The Feature Group D
 claims went to jury trial and a verdict in favor of PLNI was
 returned. After the jury verdict, however, the Feature Group D
 claims were dismissed by the circuit court upon its
 determination, pursuant to the primary jurisdiction doctrine,
 that these claims should have been resolved by the Public
 Utilities Commission (PUC). On appeal, PLNI challenges the
 circuit court's post-verdict dismissal of the Feature Group D
 claims. In turn, TWTC, in its appeal, contends that although the
 circuit court dismissed the Feature Group D claims, the court
 merely stayed the jury verdict, whereas the verdict should have
 been vacated altogether.
 
Second, PLNI and TWTC acquired different parts of an
 
undersea cable network referred to as the HIFN cable system. 
PLNI claims that TWT Inc.'s asset purchase agreement with GST
 (TWT-GST APA) required TWT Inc. to undertake certain actions
 related to the maintenance and repair of the HIFN system,
 including the portion owned by PLNI (cable maintenance claims). 
In an order issued on June 15, 2007, prior to trial, the circuit
 court granted TWTC's partial summary judgment motion, ruling that
 PLNI, "as a non-party to the [TWT-GST APA], does not have
 standing as an intended third party beneficiary to enforce the
 provisions of the [TWT-GST APA.]" On appeal, PLNI asserts this
 ruling was in error.
 
Third, pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 54(d) and Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 607-14 (Supp. 2012), a minute order and a subsequent written order were issued related to TWTC's motion for attorneys' fees and costs (Motion for Fees/Costs). These orders reflect awards of $188,428.04 in attorneys' fees and $9,090.94 in costs to TWTC 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
from PLNI. PLNI contends on appeal that the circuit court 
improperly granted attorneys' fees and costs to TWTC related to preliminary injunction proceedings and related to the cable maintenance claims. In turn, TWTC claims in its appeal that it should have been awarded additional fees and costs related to the Feature Group D claims. Regarding TWTC's Motion for Fees/Costs, there is also a dispute whether the motion was automatically deemed denied pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
(HRAP) Rule 4(a)(3) because the circuit court did not timely act on the motion. 
B. Relevant Circuit Court Proceedings
 
On December 30, 2003, PLNI initiated Civil No. 03-1­
2557 by filing a Verified Complaint for Declaratory Judgment and
 
Injunctive Relief (2003 Complaint). PLNI's 2003 Complaint
 asserted a variety of claims, including that TWTC wrongfully
 damaged, disrupted, and diminished the value and life expectancy
 of PLNI's undersea cable network, and that TWTC mis-billed PLNI
 for services TWTC never provided. PLNI asserted, inter alia,
 that it was entitled to damages or an offset from TWTC.
 
On March 11, 2005, PLNI initiated Civil No. 05-1-0428
 
by filing a Verified Complaint for Injunctive Relief and Damages
 against TWT Hawaii and Kamp (2005 Complaint). PLNI's complaint
 in this action asserted various claims, including that Time
 Warner entities had failed to negotiate a joint agreement with
 PLNI for the repair and maintenance of the shared undersea fiber
 optic cable.
4
 
On April 15, 2005, Civil No. 03-1-2557 and Civil No.
 
05-1-0428 were consolidated by stipulation of the parties.
 
With regard to PLNI's cable maintenance claims, the
 
parties filed motions for partial summary judgment. On June 15,
 
4
 The 2005 Complaint also asserted claims, inter alia , that Kamp had
breached a non-compete agreement and TWT Hawaii had obtained PLNI's
confidential information when Kamp resigned from PLNI and began working at TWT
Hawaii. These claims were dismissed below and are not at issue in this appeal. 
6  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2007, the circuit court entered orders granting TWTC's motion for
 
partial summary judgment and denying PLNI's motion for partial
 summary judgment on these claims. A key issue was whether PLNI,
 as a non-party to the September 2000 TWT-GST APA, could enforce
 the obligations under the TWT-GST APA. The circuit court ruled
 that, applying Delaware law as required by the TWT-GST APA, PLNI
 did not have standing as an intended third-party beneficiary to
 enforce the provisions of the TWT-GST APA. 
Other claims by PLNI remained pending and TWTC
 
thereafter filed its Answer to the 2003 Complaint on August 30,
 2007, asserting thirty defenses. On August 31, 2007, PLNI filed
 a motion to strike TWTC's Answer, alleging that TWTC's "grossly
 tardy" filing prejudiced PLNI. The circuit court granted PLNI's
 motion in part, striking all of TWTC's affirmative defenses
 except the defense of subject matter jurisdiction. 
The case proceeded to jury trial only as to the Feature
 
Group D claims. Trial commenced on September 4, 2007, and
 continued until September 13, 2007, when the jury rendered its
 verdict as follows: 
Question No. 1: Did Plaintiff [PLNI], prove breach of
contract by [TWTC] regarding the billing dispute submitted
on September 18th, 2001?
 
Answer: Yes. 
Question No. 2: What are the damages for this breach
of contract?
 
[Answer:] $327,714.03. 
Question No. 3: Did [PLNI], prove breach of contract
by [TWTC] regarding Feature Group D billings for any period
from October 11th, 2001, through the present? 
Answer: Yes
 
Question No. 4: What are the damages of this breach of
contract? 
Answer: $1. 
Question No. 5: If you awarded $1 in Question No. 4,
state whether Plaintiff [PLNI], proved that the pending bill
should be reduced, and if so, in what amount. 
Answer: Yes. [$]118,109.58. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On September 5, 2007, one day after the start of trial,
 
TWTC had filed a "Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Subject Matter
 
Jurisdiction Based on the Primary Jurisdiction of the Public
 Utilities Commission[.]" Rather than delaying the trial to
 consider the motion, the circuit court heard the motion on
 September 20, 2007, after trial had been completed and the
 verdict had been rendered. At that time, the circuit court
 granted the motion to dismiss. In its written order issued on
 October 23, 2007, the circuit court dismissed the Feature Group D
 claims on the basis that the PUC had primary jurisdiction over
 the claims. At the same time, the circuit court ordered that
 "due to the dismissal of the Feature Group D Claims, the
 enforcement of the verdict of the jury entered in this matter on
 September 13, 2007 is STAYED until further order of the Court."
 
On December 12, 2007, the circuit court entered the
 
Final Judgment, which stated among other things that "[d]ue to
 the dismissal of all of the Feature Group D Claims, the Court
 stayed enforcement of the jury verdict in favor of PLNI on the
 Feature Group D claims entered on September 13, 2007 until
 further order of the Court." However, the Final Judgment
 concluded by entering judgment in favor of TWTC and against PLNI
 "as to all claims asserted in and arising from" the 2003 and 2005
 complaints.
 
On December 20, 2007, TWTC filed its Motion for
 
Fees/Costs. TWTC sought $411,077.58 in attorneys' fees and
 $18,951.83 in costs, pursuant to HRS § 607-14 and HRCP Rule
 54(d), respectively.
 
On January 11, 2008, PLNI filed a notice of appeal,
 
appealing from the Final Judgment and various interlocutory
 orders of the circuit court. This appeal was docketed as
 appellate case No. 28948.
 
On March 14, 2008, the court clerk issued a minute
 
order regarding TWTC's Motion for Fees/Costs. The ninetieth day
 after TWTC filed its Motion for Fees/Costs was March 19, 2008. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
By this date, the circuit court did not issue an order disposing
 
of TWTC's Motion for Fees/Costs.
 
On April 1, 2008, the circuit court issued an Order
 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part TWTC's Motion for Attorneys'
 Fees and Costs, awarding TWTC $50,822.72 in fees and costs for
 preliminary injunction proceedings based on or arising out of an
 alleged breach of contract, and $146,696.26 for fees and costs
 regarding the HIFN System. The circuit court denied the motion
 in all other respects. 
On April 14, 2008, TWTC filed a notice of appeal,
 
seeking to appeal from numerous orders of the circuit court
 including the April 1, 2008 order granting in part TWTC's Motion
 for Fees/Costs. This appeal was docketed as appellate case No.
 29105. 
On April 25, 2008, PLNI filed another notice of appeal,
 
seeking to appeal from the April 1, 2008 order granting in part
 TWTC's Motion for Fees/Costs. This appeal was docketed as part
 of appellate case No. 29105.
III. Feature Group D Claims
 
PLNI claims that the circuit court erred in dismissing
 
the Feature Group D claims based on the circuit court's
 
conclusion that the PUC had primary jurisdiction, where the
 circuit court possessed concurrent jurisdiction over those claims
 and the jury had already rendered a verdict in favor of PLNI on
 these claims.
 
In turn, TWTC contends that the jury's verdict on the
 
Feature Group D claims must be vacated because it violates the
 law of the applicable tariffs and, furthermore, the circuit court
 committed various errors related to the evidence, jury
 instructions, and the verdict form.
 
A. Standard of Review
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has treated primary 
jurisdiction as similar to the question of subject matter 
jurisdiction. Chun v. Emps.' Ret. Sys. of the State of Hawaii, 
73 Haw. 9, 14, 828 P.2d 260, 263 (1992) (citation omitted). In 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Chun, the supreme court stated that, similar to the issue of 
subject matter jurisdiction, "[t]he stay of proceedings pending administrative review involves a jurisdictional issue which can never be waived by any party at any time." Id. (citation 
omitted). Therefore, because questions involving subject matter jurisdiction are reviewed de novo, Lingle v. Hawai' i Gov't Emps. 
Ass'n, AFSCME, Local 152, AFL-CIO, 107 Hawai' i 178, 182, 111 P.3d 
587, 591 (2005), we will review de novo whether the circuit court properly determined that the PUC had primary jurisdiction. 
However, if it is determined that primary jurisdiction 
applies such that PLNI's claims should first be addressed in the PUC, we will review for abuse of discretion the circuit court's decision to dismiss those claims rather than staying the circuit court proceedings on those claims. See Fratinardo v. Emps.' Ret. 
Sys. of the State of Hawai' i, 121 Hawai' i 462, 469, 220 P.3d 1043, 
1050 (App. 2009).
5 
B. Primary Jurisdiction and the Filed-Rate Doctrine
 
This case requires us to consider and apply primary
 
jurisdiction analysis along with principles under the filed-rate
 
doctrine. First, regarding primary jurisdiction, the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court has stated:
 
"'Primary jurisdiction' . . . applies where a claim is
originally cognizable in the courts, and comes into play
whenever enforcement of the claim requires the resolution of
issues which, under a regulatory scheme, have been placed
within the special competence of an administrative body[.]"
United States v. Western Pac. R.R., 352 U.S. 59, 63-64, 77
S.Ct. 161, 164-65, 1 L.Ed.2d 126 (1956). When this happens,
 
5 The primary jurisdiction doctrine is "basically a federal concept[.]"
Wiginton v. Pac. Credit Corp., 2 Haw. App. 435, 441-42 n.11, 634 P.2d 111, 117
n.11 (1981) (citations omitted). Among the federal courts, different
standards of review are applied in reviewing the question of primary
jurisdiction. Some federal courts have articulated an abuse of discretion
 standard in reviewing questions of primary jurisdiction. See Baykeeper v. NL
Indus., Inc., 660 F.3d 686, 690 (3d Cir. 2011); TON Servs., Inc. v. Qwest
Corp., 493 F.3d 1225, 1239 (10th Cir. 2007). Other federal courts have
 
articulated a de novo standard of review. See U.S. v. Rice, 605 F.3d 473, 475
(8th Cir. 2010); U.S. v. Henderson, 416 F.3d 686, 691 (8th Cir. 2005). The
 
Ninth Circuit appears to have adopted a hybrid standard of review whereby it
reviews "the ultimate decision to decline to exercise jurisdiction for abuse
of discretion," but "conduct[s] de novo review of the court's application of
the primary jurisdiction doctrine[.]" N. Cnty. Commc'ns Corp. v. California
Catalog & Tech., 594 F.3d 1149, 1154 (9th Cir. 2010) (citation omitted).
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"the judicial process is suspended pending referral of such
issues to the administrative body for its views." Id. at
 
64, 77 S.Ct. at 165 (citation omitted). In effect, "[t]he
courts are divested of whatever original jurisdiction they
would otherwise possess[.]" B. Schwartz, supra, § 8.24, at
488 (emphasis omitted). And "even a seemingly contrary
statutory provision will yield to the overriding policy
promoted by the doctrine." Id.
 
Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Group By and Through Serrano v. Lyman,
 
69 Haw. 81, 93, 734 P.2d 161, 168-69 (1987) (emphasis added).6 As
 
further explained in Kona Old, it is
 
now firmly established, that in cases raising issues of fact
not within the conventional experience of judges or cases
requiring the exercise of administrative discretion,
agencies created by [the legislature] for regulating the
subject matter should not be passed over. This is so even
though the facts after they have been appraised by
specialized competence serve as a premise for legal
consequences to be judicially defined. Uniformity and
consistency in the regulation of business entrusted to a
particular agency are secured, and the limited functions of
review by the judiciary are more rationally exercised, by
preliminary resort for ascertaining and interpreting the
circumstances underlying legal issues to agencies that are
better equipped than courts by specialization, by insight
gained through experience, and by more flexible procedure.
 
Id. at 94, 734 P.2d at 169 (emphasis added) (quoting Far E.
 
Conference v. United States, 342 U.S. 570, 574-75, 72 S.Ct. 492,
 494, 96 L.Ed. 576 (1952)). "The doctrine does not apply where a
 pure question of law is at issue and technical matters calling
 for the special competence of the administrative expert are not
 involved." Aged Hawaiians v. Hawaiian Homes Comm'n, 78 Hawai' i 
192, 202, 891 P.2d 279, 289 (1995) (citation omitted).
 
Second, we must consider the filed-rate doctrine
 
because it shapes the issues of fact that must be resolved in
 adjudicating PLNI's Feature Group D claims. That is, PLNI argues
 
6 There is no dispute that the Feature Group D claims were "originally
cognizable" in the circuit court. That is, these claims were based on alleged
breaches of contract and the circuit court had original jurisdiction over theclaims. See HRS § 603-21.5(a)(3) (Supp 2012); State v. Kotis, 91 Hawai' i 319,
984 P.2d 78 (1999). Further, HRS § 269-15 (2007 Repl.) recognizes theconcurrent jurisdiction of the PUC and the courts, stating that the PUC mayinstitute proceedings as specified therein "notwithstanding that the same maybe within the jurisdiction of any court . . . provided that this section shallnot be construed as in any manner limiting or otherwise affecting thejurisdiction of any such court[.]" The disputed question in this case,
however, is whether the PUC had primary jurisdiction over the Feature Group D
claims. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the Feature Group D claims are simple billing disputes that
 
do not require the special competence of the PUC for resolution. 
TWTC, on the other hand, points to the requirements in the
 tariffs to argue that resolution of the Feature Group D claims
 involve much more technical issues.
 
The Feature Group D claims concern whether PLNI and its 
predecessor GST were over-billed by TWTC for call termination services by TWTC. The filed-rate doctrine, also referred to as the filed-tariff doctrine, prohibits a regulated entity from charging rates for its services that differ from the rates filed with the appropriate regulatory agency. Balthazar v. Verizon 
Hawaii, Inc., 109 Hawai' i 69, 72, 123 P.3d 194, 197 (2005). The 
filed-rate doctrine applies to a regulated entity, such as a public utility, subject to the authority of a regulatory agency. Id. at 72, 77, 123 P.3d at 197, 202. Of particular relevance to this case, the filed-rate doctrine bars claims for money damages that "would compromise the rate structure that was set forth in the tariff filed with the [PUC]." Id. at 80, 123 P.3d at 205. 
Even when a plaintiff's claim does not directly challenge the established rates, an award of damages would violate the filed-rate doctrine if it has "the effect of imposing [a] rate other than that reflected in the filed tariff." Id. (quoting 
Dreamscape Design, Inc. v. Affinity Network, Inc., 414 F.3d 665 (7th Cir. 2005)). Pursuant to the filed-rate doctrine, "filed tariffs govern a utility's relationship with its customers and have the force and effect of law until suspended or set aside." In re Waikoloa Sanitary Sewer Co., 109 Hawai' i 263, 271, 125 P.3d 
484, 492 (2005) (citations omitted). 
With regard to whether PLNI and its predecessor GST
 
were properly billed by TWTC, the tariffs applicable in this case
 establish that GST and PLNI were responsible for payment of
 charges for the services that were furnished to them by TWTC. 
Thus, in order to comply with the filed-rate doctrine, as
 recognized in Balthazar, any amounts awarded to PLNI and/or
 reduced from PLNI's pending bills due to the Feature Group D
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
claims must be based on a determination that PLNI and GST did not
 
receive services for which they were billed by TWTC.
 
Stated differently, given the filed-rate doctrine, a
 
crucial issue of fact that must be resolved for purposes of the
 Feature Group D claims is whether PLNI and GST received the call
 termination services for which they were billed. As TWTC points
 out, even the witnesses for PLNI testified that the only way to
 determine whether PLNI and GST received the services that were
 billed would be to evaluate and review call detail records
 (CDRs). Moreover, TWTC asserts that calls for which PLNI and GST
 received bills were misrouted, and the parties disagree as to who
 was responsible for the misrouting (PLNI, TWTC, or a third party)
 and whether the tariffs place responsibility on TWTC for the
 misrouting of calls. In other words, the issues that must be
 resolved to determine the proper billing under the tariffs are
 not simple billing or accounting disputes, but must be resolved
 by a review of the CDRs and other technical evidence related to
 whether calls were placed that resulted in TWTC providing call
 termination services, and this includes reviewing how calls were
 routed and whether they were properly billed based on the
 routing.
 
Under the regulatory scheme set forth in HRS Chapter
 
269 and the applicable rules pertaining to the PUC, the issues
 involved in resolving the Feature Group D claims have been placed
 within the special competence of the PUC. Pursuant to HRS § 269­6(a) (Supp. 2012), the general powers and duties of the PUC
 include:
 
The public utilities commission shall have the general
supervision hereinafter set forth over all public utilities,
and shall perform the duties and exercise the powers imposed
or conferred upon it by this chapter. Included among the
general powers of the commission is the authority to adopt
rules pursuant to chapter 91 necessary for the purposes of
this chapter.
 
The PUC has broad authority under HRS § 269-15 (2007 Repl.) to
 
institute proceedings regarding any public utility and "may
 examine into any of the matters referred to in section 269-7[.]" 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
HRS § 269-7 (2007 Repl.), in turn, authorizes the PUC to examine
 
into the condition of a public utility, including "all its
 financial transactions, its business relations with other
 persons, companies or corporations, its compliance with all
 applicable state and federal laws . . . and all matters of every
 nature affecting the relations and transactions between it and
 the public or persons or corporations."
 
Further, HRS § 269-37 (2007 Repl.) provides that "[t]he
 
commission shall ensure that telecommunications carriers are
 compensated on a fair basis for termination of telecommunications
 services on each other's networks, taking into account, among
 other things, reasonable and necessary costs to each
 telecommunications carrier of providing the services in
 question."
7
 
In turn and significantly, Hawaii Administrative Rules
 
(HAR) § 6-80-102, a rule authorized under HRS Chapter 269,
 specifically provides that billing disputes may be submitted to
 the PUC.
 
§ 6-80-102 Billing disputes.  (a) When a dispute arises
between a customer and a telecommunications carrier
 
regarding any bill, the carrier may require the customer to
pay the undisputed portion of the bill. The carrier shall
 conduct an appropriate investigation of the disputed charge
or charges and shall provide a report of the investigation
to the customer. Where the dispute is not reconciled, the
carrier shall advise the customer that the customer has the
 right to file a complaint with the commission regarding the
dispute
.
 
7 HAR § 6-80-51 similarly provides:
 
§ 6-80-51 Network termination. Telecommunications carriers
 
shall reciprocally compensate each other for the costs
associated with transporting and terminating
telecommunications traffic on their respective networks.
The carriers shall negotiate in good faith and use their
best efforts to reach agreement on the prices, terms, and
conditions for terminating traffic on their respective
networks. . . .
 
Although in this case the parties do not dispute that the tariffs set forth
the applicable rates for the call termination services involved in the Feature
Group D claims, HAR § 6-80-51 further underscores that fair compensation for
such services is of concern to the PUC. Thus, an issue especially suited for
the PUC to determine is how to resolve proper compensation if calls have been
misrouted or if it cannot be established how calls were routed. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
HAR § 6-80-102(a) (emphasis added).8 The process for the filing
 
of complaints with the PUC is spelled out in HAR §6-61-66 and §6­
61-67.
 
PLNI argues that it was improper for the circuit court
 
to invoke primary jurisdiction, especially after the jury had
 rendered a verdict in favor of PLNI. As noted earlier, TWTC's
 motion to dismiss the Feature Group D claims under the primary
 jurisdiction doctrine was filed at the beginning of trial, but
 the court heard and decided the motion after the jury verdict was
 rendered. PLNI properly recognizes that the issue of primary
 jurisdiction cannot be waived and may be raised at any time. 
Chun, 73 Haw. at 14, 828 P.2d at 263 ("The stay of proceedings
 pending administrative review involves a jurisdictional issue
 which can never be waived by any party at any time.") (citation
 omitted). PLNI argues, however, that the circuit court had
 discretion whether to defer to the PUC and in exercising that
 discretion should have taken into account when the primary
 jurisdiction doctrine was raised in the course of the litigation. 
Given the analysis in Chun, we must disagree.
 
In Chun, the Hawai' i Supreme Court analyzed the primary 
jurisdiction doctrine and its prior opinion in Kona Old, stating: 
[In Kona Old,] [t]he court reasoned that under the principle
of primary jurisdiction, "[u]niformity and consistency in
the regulation of business entrusted to a particular agency
are secured, and the limited functions of review by the
judiciary are more rationally exercised, by preliminary
resort for ascertaining and interpreting the circumstances
underlying legal issues to agencies that are better equipped
than courts by specialization, by insight gained through
experience, and by more flexible procedure." Id. at 94, 734
 
P.2d at 169.
 
These very same considerations, uniformity and
consistency in a specialized agency's administration of the
Employees' Retirement System, mandate suspension of the
 
8
 We note further that HAR § 6-80-102(a) requires a carrier to "conduct
an appropriate investigation of the disputed charge" and to "provide a report
of the investigation to the customer." In addressing the Feature Group D
claims, the parties dispute whether TWTC properly investigated the claims
about the over-billing and whether TWTC should have provided PLNI more
detailed records to assess the propriety of the billing. In light of HAR § 6­80-102(a), this issue is likewise contemplated to be addressed by the PUC.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
judicial process pending an initial review of the issues by
the administrative body.
 
73 Haw. at 12-13, 828 P.2d at 262 (emphasis added). Under Chun, 
if an agency is determined to have primary jurisdiction over claims, suspension of the judicial process for those claims is mandated. Fratinardo, 121 Hawai' i at 466, 220 P.3d at 1047. 
PLNI also argues that the circuit court's stay of the 
jury verdict violated PLNI's right to a jury trial. Given the analysis in Chun as set forth above, and the analysis therein treating primary jurisdiction as similar to subject matter jurisdiction, 73 Haw. at 14, 828 P.2d at 263, we disagree. That is, because the circuit court properly recognized the primary jurisdiction of the PUC, the circuit court was mandated to suspend the judicial proceedings as to the Feature Group D claims. As previously recognized by the Hawai' i Supreme Court, 
when primary jurisdiction applies, "the judicial process is suspended pending referral of such issues to the administrative body for its views. In effect, the courts are divested of whatever original jurisdiction they would otherwise possess." Kona Old, 68 Haw. at 93, 734 P.2d at 168-69 (internal quotation marks, brackets and citations omitted).
9 
We therefore conclude that the circuit court did not
 
err in determining that the PUC had primary jurisdiction to
 address the Feature Group D claims.
 
9 We also reject PLNI's assertion that deferring jurisdiction to the
PUC was improper because the PUC has indicated it will decline jurisdiction
over contract disputes between telecommunications carriers. PLNI cites to
 Petition of W. Wireless Corp., PUC Decision & Order No. 16171, Docket No. 96­0352 (Jan. 1998). Our reading of this order differs from PLNI. There, the
PUC did not state or imply that it would not exercise jurisdiction over
contract disputes between telecommunications carriers. Rather, the PUC noted
that the matter was essentially a contract dispute and that the petitioner
"should first seek relief through the alternative dispute resolution process
agreed to by the parties" as set forth in the applicable agreement. Petition
 
of W. Wireless Corp., at 4 (emphasis added).
 
We also reject PLNI's argument that ceding jurisdiction to the PUC was
improper because the PUC lacks authority to award damages. Here, all of the
Feature Group D claims are based on the assertion that PLNI or GST were
overbilled by TWTC. As set forth above, HAR § 6-80-102(a) specifically
provides that billing disputes may be submitted to the PUC.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C. The Jury Verdict Must Be Vacated
 
Before considering whether the circuit court adopted
 
the proper remedy in applying the primary jurisdiction doctrine,
 
we first determine whether the jury's verdict may stand. As set
 out above, TWTC's appeal raises numerous points of error
 challenging the validity of the jury verdict. We conclude that
 the jury verdict violates the filed-rate doctrine and therefore
 must be vacated. 
The tariffs require, inter alia, that objections to
 
billed charges must be reported to TWTC within 120 days of
 receipt of the billing. Any claims not filed within the 120 day
 period are deemed waived under the tariffs. Under the terms of
 the tariffs, therefore, another issue that must be resolved for
 purposes of the Feature Group D claims is whether objections to
 the billed charges were reported to TWTC within 120 days of
 receipt of the billing. At trial, however, the circuit court
 precluded this defense because of TWTC's late filing of its
 Answer.
 
Under the filed-rate doctrine, "filed tariffs govern a 
utility's relationship with its customers and have the force and effect of law until suspended or set aside." In re Waikoloa 
Sanitary Sewer Co., 109 Hawai' i at 271, 125 P.3d at 492 (citation 
omitted). Moreover, knowledge of the tariff terms is imputed to customers. Balthazar, 109 Hawai' i at 78, 123 P.3d at 203. Thus, 
PLNI was on notice throughout the dispute over the Feature Group D claims that the 120-day limit applied, regardless of whether TWTC formally asserted the 120-day limit as a defense. Given the principles under the filed-rate doctrine, TWTC's late filing of its Answer could not be a basis to preclude application of the 120-day limit set forth in the tariff. 
Notably, the filed-rate doctrine establishes that
 
tariff provisions, including the time period in which a customer
 must submit a billing dispute with a carrier, cannot be waived by
 the carrier. MCI Telecomm. Corp. v. The Best Tel. Co., 898 F.
 
Supp. 868 (S.D. Fla. 1994) (granting summary judgment in favor of
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
plaintiff seeking to recover unpaid charges for communication
 
services provided to defendant where, inter alia, the defendant
 did not put plaintiff on written notice of disputed charges
 within six months of receipt of invoice bearing disputed charges,
 as required by a tariff provision, and holding that defendant's
 affirmative defenses, including waiver, are precluded as a matter
 of law); Qwest Corp. v. AT&T Corp., 371 F. Supp. 2d 1250, 1251
 (D. Colo. 2005) ("[T]he filed tariff doctrine prevents parties
 from contractually modifying tariffs. This prohibition includes
 not only modification of tariffs' rates and terms, but also
 modification of a party's potential liability under tariffs, such
 as in the form of a release or waiver."); Powers Law Offices, PC
 v. Cable & Wireless USA, 326 F. Supp. 2d 190, 192 (D. Mass. 2004)
 (strictly enforcing a notice provision in tariff that requires
 customers to bring billing disputes to the carrier's attention
 within 45 days of the date on the bill, noting that the tariff
 governs "not only the nature and extent of [the provider's]
 liability, but also the nature and extent of the [customer's]
 right of recovery.") (citation omitted); Clancy v. Consol.
 Freightways, 186 Cal. Rptr. 257, 259 (Cal. App. 1982) ("The
 provisions found in a carrier's tariffs, including those which
 limit the time in which to commence an action against the
 carrier, cannot be waived by the carrier since to permit waiver
 would be to enable the carrier to discriminate among shippers and
 this is prohibited by the Interstate Commerce Act[.]") (citation
 omitted).
 
Given the above, TWTC was entitled to assert under the
 
tariffs that certain portions of the Feature Group D claims were
 barred under the 120-day requirement. Because TWTC was precluded
 from having the jury consider the 120-day limit, the jury verdict
 violates the filed-rate doctrine and it must be vacated. We need
 not reach TWTC's other challenges to the jury verdict.
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
D.	 The Remedy for Applying the Primary Jurisdiction
Doctrine
 
The circuit court had discretion in fashioning the 
appropriate remedy in applying the primary jurisdiction doctrine. 
Fratinardo, 121 Hawai' i at 468, 220 P.3d at 1049. In its Final 
Judgment, the circuit court "dismissed all of the Feature Group D Claims on the basis of the primary jurisdiction doctrine." Further, due to the dismissal of the Feature Group D Claims, the circuit court "stayed enforcement of the jury verdict in favor of PLNI on the Feature Group D claims . . . until further order of the Court." 
In light of our determination above that the jury
 
verdict must be vacated, the circuit court's stay of enforcement
 of the jury verdict is likewise vacated.
 
We must now consider whether the circuit court abused 
its discretion in dismissing the Feature Group D claims. "[W]hen the doctrine of primary jurisdiction applies to a case, the court 'has discretion either to retain jurisdiction or, if the parties would not be unfairly disadvantaged, to dismiss the case without prejudice.'" Fratinardo, 121 Hawai' i at 467, 220 P.3d at 1048 
(quoting Reiter v. Cooper, 507 U.S. 258, 268-69 (1993)); see also Jou v. Nat'l Interstate Ins. Co. of Hawaii, 114 Hawai' i 122, 129, 
157 P.3d 561, 568 (App. 2007). The primary jurisdiction doctrine "is a 'prudential' one, under which a court determines that an otherwise cognizable claim implicates technical and policy questions that should be addressed in the first instance by the agency with regulatory authority over the relevant industry rather than by the judicial branch." Fratinardo at 468, 220 P.3d 
at 1049 (quoting Clark v. Time Warner Cable, 523 F.3d 1110, 1114 (9th Cir. 2008)). 
In this case, PLNI asserts that the circuit court
 
abused its discretion in dismissing, rather than staying, the
 Feature Group D claims because the six year statute of
 limitations under HRS § 657-1 (1993 Repl.) would otherwise bar
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the re-filing of these claims in court.10 Under the circumstances
 
of this case, we do not agree that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion.
 
While before the circuit court, PLNI represented to the
 
court that it would not file the Feature Group D claims with the
 PUC because it believed that the PUC would not want to adjudicate
 such claims. As we noted above, PLNI's reliance on Petition of
 Western Wireless Corp., PUC Decision & Order No. 16171, Docket
 No. 96-0352 (Jan. 1998) for this point is misplaced. We do not
 read that decision as indicating that the PUC will not address
 billing disputes between telecommunications carriers.
 
Moreover, the PUC is required to perform the duties
 
conferred upon it by HRS Chapter 269. HRS § 269-6(a) (The PUC
 "shall have the general supervision hereinafter set forth over
 all public utilities, and shall perform the duties and exercise
 the powers imposed or conferred upon it by this chapter."). 
Under HRS § 269-37, the PUC "shall ensure that telecommunications
 carriers are compensated on a fair basis for termination of
 telecommunications services on each other's networks[.]"
 Additionally, under HAR § 6-80-102(a), the rules pertaining to
 the PUC specifically recognize that when a billing dispute cannot
 be reconciled, a customer has the right to file a complaint with
 the PUC regarding the dispute.
 
Given this circumstance, where PLNI stated to the
 
circuit court that it would not take the claims to the PUC, the
 circuit court did not abuse its discretion in dismissing the
 claims. A party cannot undermine the primary jurisdiction
 doctrine by simply choosing not to take the claims to the
 appropriate agency for review. Moreover, staying the claims in
 the circuit court in this circumstance would mean the Feature
 Group D claims would remain in limbo indefinitely.
 
10 PLNI does not contend or cite to any authority indicating that it
would be time barred from bringing its Feature Group D claims before the PUC.
 
20
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court's dismissal of PLNI's Feature Group D
 
claims may mean those claims are time-barred under HRS § 657-1 in
 
the form of a cause of action for breach of contract. However,
 this will not preclude PLNI from having the Feature Group D
 claims later reviewed by a court after the PUC reviews the claims
 (should PLNI choose to take the claims to the PUC). HRS § 269­15.5 provides that:
 
§269-15.5 Appeals.  An appeal from an order of the
public utilities commission under this chapter shall lie,
subject to chapter 602, in the manner provided for civil
appeals from the circuit courts. Only a person aggrieved in
a contested case proceeding provided for in this chapter may
appeal from the order, if the order is final, or if
preliminary, is of the nature defined by section 91-14(a).
 
The administrative rules adopted pursuant to HRS Chapter 269 set
 
out the procedure for the filing of a formal complaint against a
 public utility and provide that, after the filing of a
 respondent's answer, "the commission shall set a hearing on the
 complaint." HAR §§ 6-61-67, 6-61-68, 6-61-70. Under the
 applicable statutes and rules, therefore, PLNI will have a
 contested case hearing on its Feature Group D claims before the
 PUC and can thereafter appeal the PUC's order for review by a
 court. Decisions by federal courts have upheld dismissal of
 claims under the primary jurisdiction doctrine where an appeal
 will lie from the agency decision. See Far E. Conference v.
 
U.S., 342 U.S. 570, 576-77 (1952); Access Telecomm. v. Sw. Bell
 Tel. Co., 137 F.3d 605, 609 (8th Cir. 1998) (district court did
 not abuse its discretion by dismissing suit pursuant to primary
 jurisdiction doctrine where complaining party could petition the
 Federal Communications Commission (FCC), FCC was statutorily
 obligated to investigate party's complaint, and either party
 could then seek judicial review of the FCC's order); Himmelman v.
 MCI Commc'ns Corp., 104 F. Supp. 2d 1, 9 (D.D.C. 2000).
 
Under the circumstances of this case, therefore, we
 
conclude that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 dismissing the Feature Group D claims. Further, although
 implicit in the circuit court's ruling and judgment, we clarify
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the dismissal is without prejudice to PLNI asserting the
 
Feature Group D claims in the PUC.
IV. Cable Maintenance Claims
 
Regarding the cable maintenance claims, the issue
 
before us is whether the circuit court erred in ruling, on cross-
motions for partial summary judgment, that PLNI was not an
 intended third-party beneficiary under the TWT-GST APA and thus
 had no standing to enforce alleged rights under that agreement. 
On appeal, PLNI challenges this ruling and contends that it is
 entitled to summary judgment on the issue of whether it was a
 third-party beneficiary under the TWT-GST APA. We conclude that
 the circuit court erred in granting partial summary judgment for
 TWTC, but that PLNI also is not entitled to partial summary
 judgment on this issue given the state of the record.
 
The cable maintenance claims involve disputes between 
the parties as a result of their respective ownership of separate parts of the HIFN system, which was previously owned by GST. In the TWT-GST APA entered in September 2000, TWT Inc. purchased certain assets of the GST bankruptcy estate, including the outer sheath of the HIFN and 12 of the 24 fibers therein. Subsequently, in March 2001, TM Communications Hawaii, LLC (TM) purchased the rest of the GST assets in Hawai' i, including the 
remaining 12 fiber strands in the HIFN, via an asset purchase agreement with GST (TM-GST Agreement). In October 2001, TM assigned its rights in the TM-GST Agreement to PLNI, its subsidiary. Thus, based on the undisputed evidence, TWT Inc. owns the outer sheath and 12 of the 24 fibers in the HIFN, and PLNI owns the remaining 12 fibers in the HIFN. 
In PLNI's 2005 Complaint, the cable maintenance claims
 
are part of PLNI's cause of action for unfair competition and
 unfair or deceptive acts or practices in violation of HRS § 480-2
 (2008 Repl.), with PLNI seeking an order requiring TWTC to
 execute a joint maintenance agreement and to pay its share of
 costs allegedly owing for maintenance and repair of the undersea
 fiber optic cable. The basis for these claims is PLNI's
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
contention that it has enforceable rights pursuant to Section 6.8
 
of the TWT-GST APA, the agreement under which TWT Inc. purchased
 GST assets.
 
The circuit court issued related orders on the parties'
 
cross-motions for partial summary judgment on the cable
 maintenance claims. The circuit court held that there were no
 genuine issues of material fact and as a matter of law, applying
 Delaware law as required by Section 11.4 of the TWT-GST APA, PLNI
 does not have standing as an intended third-party beneficiary to
 enforce the provisions of the TWT-GST APA.
A. Standard of Review
 
We review de novo the circuit court's ruling on the
 
motions for partial summary judgment. Querubin v. Thronas, 107
 
Hawai'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005). 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
 fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai' i 286, 
295, 141 P.3d 459, 468 (2006) (citation omitted). 
Interpreting and construing a contract is a question of 
law subject to de novo review. Tri-S Corp. v. W. World Ins. Co., 
110 Hawai' i 473, 489, 135 P.3d 82, 98 (2006); Brown v. KFC Nat'l 
Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai' i 226, 239, 921 P.2d 146, 159 (1996).
B. Delaware Law and the TWT-GST APA
 
With regard to the governing substantive law, the
 
parties are in agreement that, pursuant to Section 11.4 of the
 
TWT-GST APA, PLNI's rights under the TWT-GST APA are governed and
 construed according to the laws of the State of Delaware. 
Moreover, the parties agree that in order for PLNI to enforce
 alleged rights under the TWT-GST APA, PLNI must have been an
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
intended third-party beneficiary of that agreement. Both PLNI
 
and TWTC cite to Delmar News, Inc. v. Jacobs Oil Co., 584 A.2d
 531, 534 (Del. Super. Ct. 1990) which states:
 
It is settled law in Delaware that a third-party may
recover on a contract made for his benefit. Ins. Co. of
 
North America v. Waterhouse, Del.Super., 424 A.2d 675 (1980)
citing Royal Indemnity Co. v. Alexander Industries, Inc.,
Del.Sup[e]r., 211 A.2d 919 (1965). However, in order for
there to be a third-party beneficiary, the contracting
parties must intend to confer a benefit. Oliver B. Cannon &
 
Sons, Inc. v. Dorr-Oliver, Inc., Del.Super., 312 A.2d 322
(1973). Where it is the intention of the promisee to secure
a performance for the benefit of another, either as a gift
or in satisfaction of an obligation to that person, and the
promisee makes a contract to do so, then such a third person
has the right to enforce the contract against the promisor.
See generally Restatement of Contracts (Second) § 302
(1979). If, however, the parties to the contract did not
intend to benefit the third-party but the third-party
happens to benefit from the performance of the contract
either indirectly or coincidentally, such third person has
no rights under the contract. Insituform of North America
 
v. Chandler, Del.Ch., 534 A.2d 257 (1987).
 
(emphasis added).
 
The parties dispute, however, whether PLNI is an
 
intended third-party beneficiary under the TWT-GST APA, each
 
pointing to different provisions in the agreement. PLNI contends
 it is an intended third-party beneficiary based on Section 6.8 of
 the TWT-GST APA, which states:
 
Section 6.8 Maintenance of Cable Sheath. Purchaser
 
will assume GST's maintenance contract with Tyco (or enter
into a new contract with Tyco or other qualified party) for
maintenance of the cables included in the cable sheath
 described in Section 1.1(p). The Purchaser's obligation to
provide such maintenance for cables it does not own is
subject to Sellers (and each of successors or assigns of the
cables included in such sheath that constitute Excluded
 Assets, referred to herein as "Hawaii Owners") sharing the
cost of such maintenance contract with Purchaser on a per-
fiber basis. 
(Bold emphasis added). 
TWTC, on the other hand, contends that the TWT-GST APA
 
clearly states that third-party rights are not intended under the
 
agreement. TWTC relies on Section 11.10 of the TWT-GST APA,
 which states in relevant part: "Nothing in this Agreement,
express or implied, is intended to confer upon any person not a
party to this Agreement any rights or remedies of any nature
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
whatsoever under or by reason of this Agreement." (Emphasis
 
added.) 
For purposes of construing a contract, Delaware law
 
provides:
 
The Court first reviews the language of the contract to
determine if the intent of the parties can be ascertained
from the express words chosen by the parties or whether the
terms of the contract are ambiguous. Unless the contract
 language is ambiguous, extrinsic evidence may not be used to
interpret the intent of the parties, to vary the terms of
the contract or to create an ambiguity. The Court, however,
cannot conclude that a contract is ambiguous unless it is
reasonably or fairly susceptible of different
interpretations or may have two or more different meanings.
Once the Court determines that the language is ambiguous,
then all objective extrinsic evidence is considered: the
overt statements and acts of the parties, the business
context, prior dealings between the parties, and other
business customs and usage in the industry. The Court, of
course, must construe the contract . . . as a whole to
reconcile, if possible, all of its provisions.
 
In re Explorer Pipeline Co., 781 A.2d 705, 713-14 (Del. Ch. 2001)
 
(footnotes and internal quotation marks omitted); see also Rhone-
Poulenc Basic Chems. Co. v. Am. Motorists Ins. Co., 616 A.2d
 1192, 1196 (Del. 1992).
 
PLNI argues that Section 11.10 of the TWT-GST APA is a
 
general boilerplate provision, and that the more specific
 language in Section 6.8 that benefits GST's successors or assigns
 prevails over the boilerplate provision. PLNI cites DCV
 Holdings, Inc. v. ConAgra, Inc., 889 A.2d 954, 961 (Del. 2005),
 which states: "Well-settled rules of contract construction
 require that a contract be construed as a whole, giving effect to
 the parties' intentions. Specific language in a contract
 controls over general language, and where specific and general
 provisions conflict, the specific provision ordinarily qualifies
 the meaning of the general one." (Footnotes omitted.)
 
TWTC counters in two main parts. First, relying on
 
Kronenberg v. Katz, 872 A.2d 568, 604 (Del. Ch. 2004), TWTC
 asserts that where parties utilize language disclaiming any third
 party rights, no intended third party rights are created. The
 circuit court had relied on Kronenberg in rendering its decision. 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Second, TWTC contends that, in addition to requiring the intent
 
of the contracting parties to benefit a third party, Delaware law
 requires that conferring the benefit was a material part of the
 contract. See Guardian Constr. Co. v. Tetra Tech Richardson,
 
Inc., 583 A.2d 1378, 1386 (Del. Super. Ct. 1990) ("In order for
 third-party beneficiary rights to be created, not only is it
 necessary that performance of the contract confer a benefit upon
 a third person that was intended, but the conferring of the
 beneficial effect on such third-party, whether it be creditor or
 donee, should be a material part of the contract's purpose.")
 (citation omitted).
 
On the narrow question before us of whether the circuit
 
court erred in concluding that PLNI was not an intended third-
party beneficiary of the TWT-GST APA, we are unconvinced by any
 of the above arguments, or the evidence presented below, that
 summary judgment is appropriate for either side. As to PLNI's
 argument, the language in Section 6.8 is certainly more specific
 to maintenance of the cables and appears to require TWT Inc. to
 provide maintenance for cables it does not own, subject to GST or
 GST's successors or assigns sharing the cost of the referenced
 maintenance contract on a per-fiber basis. However, given the
 indirect manner in which Section 6.8 is constructed, it does not
 necessarily, in and of itself, specifically evidence an intent to
 confer a benefit on GST's successors or assigns.
 
As to TWTC's arguments, Kronenberg is distinguishable
 
because, although the agreement in that case contained a
 provision excluding third-party rights, the agreement did not
 contain an arguably conflicting provision, like Section 6.8 in
 this case. Further, with regard to TWTC's reliance on Guardian
 Const. Co. and whether conferring of a benefit on third parties
 was a material part of the TWT-GST APA, from our reading of the
 agreement this is not an issue that can be resolved by looking
 solely at the language of the TWT-GST APA.
 
We thus conclude that it cannot be ascertained from the
 
express language of the TWT-GST APA whether TWT Inc. and GST
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
intended to confer a benefit on GST's successors or assigns
 
related to cable maintenance. Likewise, looking solely to the
 agreement, it is unclear whether conferring a benefit on GST's
 successor or assigns was a material part of the agreement. The
 TWT-GST APA is ambiguous given the apparently conflicting
 provisions of Section 6.8 and Section 11.10.
 
Looking to the extrinsic evidence in the record, there
 
is uncontested evidence that Section 6.8 was intended to obligate
 TWT Inc. related to GST's successors or assigns. The declaration
 of Tina Davis, a Senior Vice President and Deputy General Counsel
 of TWT Inc. who participated in negotiating and drafting the TWT­GST APA, states with regard to Section 6.8:
 
It was never the parties' intent that TWTC would be
obligated to execute a separate maintenance agreement for
the 12 fibers that TWTC was not purchasing. The intent was
 
that TWTC would only be obligated with respect to
maintenance of the 12 fibers it was not purchasing if GST,
its successors or assigns, agreed to share the cost of the
assumed maintenance contract (i.e., the HIFN System
Contract) on a per-fiber basis.
 
(Emphasis added.) Thus, TWTC's own evidence establishes that
 
there is no genuine issue of material fact that the contracting
 parties intended to confer a benefit on GST's successors or
 assigns for the cables.
11 It is also uncontested in the record
 
that PLNI obtained ownership of the remaining 12 fibers that were
 once owned by GST, and PLNI is thus a successor to GST.
 
On the question of whether conferring a benefit on
 
GST's successors or assigns was a material part of the agreement,
 there is no evidence directly on this point in the record. There
 is evidence that at the time the TWT-GST APA was entered into in
 September 2000, GST was in bankruptcy and still owned the other
 12 fibers/cables. In these circumstances, it is reasonable to
 infer that GST would want to benefit its successors and assigns
 under Section 6.8 in order to assist GST in selling the remaining
 fibers/cables. However, there is nothing in the record
 
11 The scope of the intended benefit is not an issue on appeal and we
do not address it.
 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
addressing whether conferring this benefit was a material part of
 
the contract.
 
We thus conclude that the circuit court erred in
 
granting partial summary judgment to TWTC on the cable
 maintenance claims based on PLNI's lack of standing under the
 TWT-GST APA. Based on our de novo review, there is no genuine
 issue of material fact that PLNI is a successor of GST regarding
 ownership of 12 cables in the HIFN and there was an intent by the
 parties to the TWT-GST APA to benefit such a successor. There
 still remain, however, genuine issues of material fact as to
 whether the conferring of a benefit on GST's successor under
 Section 6.8 was a material part of the TWT-GST APA. Thus, PLNI
 also is not entitled to summary judgment on the standing issue.
V. Attorneys' Fees and Costs
 
We review a trial court's grant or denial of attorneys' 
fees and/or costs under the abuse of discretion standard. TSA 
Int'l v. Shimizu Corp., 92 Hawai' i 243, 253, 990 P.2d 713, 723 
(1999); Pulawa v. GTE Hawaiian Tel., 112 Hawai' i 3, 10-11, 143 
P.3d 1205, 1212-13 (2006). 
In this case, the Final Judgment was entered on
 
December 12, 2007. On December 20, 2007, TWTC timely filed,
 
inter alia its Motion for Fees/Costs. On January 11, 2008, PLNI
 filed a Notice of Appeal from the Final Judgment while the Motion
 for Fees/Costs was pending.
 
On March 14, 2008, a minute order was issued by the
 
court clerk with respect to TWTC's Motion for Fees/Costs
 indicating, inter alia, that fees and costs were granted in the
 total amount of $197,518.98.
 
Subsequently, the ninetieth day after the filing of
 
TWTC's Motion for Fees/Costs passed, on March 19, 2008, without
 the circuit court filing a written order disposing of the motion.
 
Thereafter, on April 1, 2008, the circuit court issued
 
a written order granting in part and denying in part TWTC's
 Motion for Fees/Costs. Fees and costs were granted for
 "Preliminary Injunction Proceedings Based on or Arising Out of
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Alleged Breach of Contract" in the amount of $48,992.18 for fees
 
and $1,830.54 for costs (for a subtotal of $50,822.72). Fees and
 
costs were also granted "Regarding the HIFN System" in the amount
 of $139,435.86 for fees and $7,260.40 for costs (for a subtotal
 of $146,696.26). The total amount awarded was thus $197,518.98.
 HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) provides in relevant part that:
 
If any party files a timely motion for . . . attorney's fees
or costs, the time for filing the notice of appeal is
extended until 30 days after entry of an order disposing of
the motion; provided, that the failure to dispose of any
motion by order entered upon the record within 90 days after
the date the motion was filed shall constitute a denial of
 the motion.
 
The notice of appeal shall be deemed to appeal the
disposition of all post-judgment motions that are timely
filed after entry of the judgment or order.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Here, TWTC timely filed its Motion for Fees/Costs on 
December 20, 2007. See HRCP 54(d). The court clerk issued a 
minute order on March 14, 2008, which is part of the record on 
appeal. See HRAP 10(a); Rule 2.20 and Rule 4 of the Hawai' i Court 
Records Rules. However, HRAP Rule 4(a)(5) provides that an order "is entered when it is filed in the office of the clerk of the court." The March 14, 2008 minute order was not filed in the office of the clerk of the circuit court, as it does not have any file-stamp affixed thereto. More importantly, "[t]hough the substance of the court's decision is captured in the minutes of court proceedings kept by the clerk who attended the hearing, they do not substitute for the requisite written document; they are merely 'prepared for [the court's] own use.'" State v. 
English, 68 Haw. 46, 52, 705 P.2d 12, 16 (1985) (quoting Rule 27 of the Rules of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai' i); 
Glover v. Grace Pac. Corp., 86 Hawai' i 154, 162, 948 P.2d 575, 583 
(App. 1997). Therefore, the minute order was not an order entered for purposes of disposing of the Motion for Fees/Costs. 
The circuit court thus did not enter an order on the
 
record disposing of the Motion for Fees/Costs by March 19, 2008,
 ninety days after the filing of the motion, and the motion was
 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
deemed denied by operation of HRAP Rule 4(a)(3). See Cnty. of 
Haw. v. C&J Coupe Family Ltd. P'ship, 119 Hawai' i 352, 367, 198 
P.3d 615, 630 (2008). Thereafter, on April 1, 2008, the circuit 
court entered its order purporting to grant in part and deny in part TWTC's Motion for Fees/Costs. By operation of HRAP Rule 4(a)(3), however, the April 1, 2008 order is a nullity. 
With respect to the disposition of the Motion for
 
Fees/Costs, both PLNI and TWTC focus the bulk of their arguments
 on appeal on the substance of the circuit court's null April 1,
 2008 order. In the alternative, TWTC contends that the circuit
 court erred in failing to issue a written order within the
 ninety-day period and this error should be corrected by this
 court by awarding TWTC its full attorneys' fees and costs.
 
Because the April 1, 2008 order is a nullity, we will 
not address the parties' points of error related to that document. Moreover, because the circuit court did not issue an order disposing of the Motion for Fees/Costs within ninety days, the motion is deemed denied by operation of HRAP 4(a)(3). In analogous circumstances, the Hawai' i Supreme Court in C&J Coupe 
Family Ltd. P'ship ruled that, because the circuit court had not issued an order, the basis for the deemed denial of the motion in that case was "indeterminable" and no record existed as to the circuit court's assessment of the motion. 119 Hawai' i at 367, 198 
P.3d at 630. The supreme court remanded the issue back to the circuit court. Id. at 368, 198 P.3d at 631. 
In this case, we conclude likewise that there is no
 
record of the circuit court's assessment of TWTC's Motion for
 Fees/Costs and that remanding those issues is appropriate. We
 note moreover that, given our rulings in this appeal (i.e., the
 ruling on the cable maintenance claims), TWTC's claims for
 attorneys' fees and costs may have been substantively affected. 
Therefore, although TWTC's previously filed Motion for Fees/Costs
 is deemed denied, on remand the parties may assert or re-assert
 their claims for attorneys' fees and costs without prejudice from
 the deemed denial of TWTC's prior motion.
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
VI. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the circuit court's Final
 
Judgment entered on December 12, 2007 is affirmed in part and
 
vacated in part as follows:
 
(1) We affirm the circuit court's dismissal of the
 
Feature Group D claims based on the primary jurisdiction
 doctrine;
 
(2) We vacate the jury verdict on the Feature Group D
 
claims and likewise vacate the circuit court's stay of the jury
 verdict on the Feature Group D claims; and
 
(3) We vacate the circuit court's entry of judgment in
 
favor of TWTC and against PLNI related to the cable maintenance
 claims which was based on the circuit court's orders dated
 June 15, 2007, granting TWTC's motion for partial summary
 judgment and denying PLNI's motion for partial summary judgment.
 
Further, we remand to the circuit court the issues 
related to TWTC's claims for attorneys' fees and costs. 
This case is remanded to the circuit court for further 
proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 25, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
J. Douglas Ing
Brian A. Kang
Emi L. M. Kaimuloa (Watanabe Ing LLP)
for Defendants-Appellees/
Cross-Appellants
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Margery S. Bronster
Rex Y. Fujichaku
(Bronster Hoshibata)
for Plaintiff-Appellant/
Cross-Appellee 
31
 