NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 28501
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
RICHARD MARVIN, III and AMY MARVIN, individually
and as Next Friend of IVY MAE MARVIN, SADIE MARVIN,
SAVANNAH MARVIN, and ANABELLE MARVIN, minors; WYLIE HURD;
NICHOLAS FRED MARVIN, individually and as Next Friend
of ALANA MARVIN; AARON MARVIN; BARBARA NELSON;
JEFFREY McBRIDE; MARETA ZIMMERMAN, individually and
as Next Friend of TEVA DEXTER and LIKO McBRIDE, minors,
Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
JAMES PFLUEGER, individually and in his
representative capacity; PFLUEGER PROPERTIES;
PILA'A 400, LLC; and DOES 1 through 10,
Defendants-Appellants
 
AND
 
JAMES PFLUEGER; PFLUEGER PROPERTIES; and PILA 'A 400, LLC,
Counterclaimants-Appellants,
v.
 
RICHARD MARVIN, III; AMY MARVIN; NICHOLAS FRED
MARVIN; and JEFFREY McBRIDE,
Counterclaim Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(Civil No. 02-1-0068)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Circuit Judges McKenna
and Lee in place of Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and
Leonard, JJ., all recused)
 
Defendants/Counterclaim Plaintiffs-Appellants James
 
Pflueger (Pflueger), Pflueger Properties, and Pila 'a 400, LLC 
(Pila'a 400) (collectively, Defendants) appeal from the Final 
Judgment entered on March 20, 2007 in the Circuit Court of the
 
1
Fifth Circuit  (circuit court).  The circuit court entered
 
judgment in favor of
 
(1) Plaintiffs Richard Marvin, III (R. Marvin) and Amy
 
Marvin (A. Marvin), individually and as Next Friend of Ivy Mae
 
Marvin, Sadie Marvin, Savannah Marvin, and Anabelle Marvin,
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
minors; Wylie Hurd; Nicholas Fred Marvin (N. Marvin),
 
individually and as Next Friend of Alana Marvin; Aaron Marvin; 
Barbara C. Nelson (Nelson), Trustee of the Barbara C. Nelson
 Family Trust dated 12/15/91 (Nelson Trust) (collectively, the
 
2
; and Jeffrey McBride (McBride) and Mareta Zimmerman,
 Marvins)  
individually and as Next friend of Teva Dexter and Liko McBride,
 minors (collectively, the McBrides) (the Marvins and McBrides are
 collectively referred to as Plaintiffs) and against Defendants as
 to Count VIII (Injunctive Relief) of Plaintiffs' Third Amended
 Complaint (Third Complaint), consistent with the circuit court's
 January 4, 2007 "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law; Order"
 (FOF/COL/Order); and
 
(2) the Nelson Trust, R. Marvin, and N. Marvin and
 
against Defendants as to Count VII (Kuleana3
 Rights) of the Third
Amended Complaint and as to Count 1 (Declaratory Relief as to
 Access) of Defendants' Third Amended Counterclaim (Third
 Counterclaim), consistent with the FOF/COL/Order. 
The circuit court dismissed as a matter of law Count VI
 
(Prescriptive Easement) of the Third Complaint and Defendants'
 claim for trespass as to Plaintiffs' water line and catchment
 system, as alleged in Count 4 (Trespass) of the Third
 Counterclaim. 
The circuit court, pursuant to a settlement by the
 
parties and the Stipulation for Partial Dismissal with Prejudice
 of Plaintiffs' Claims and Defendants' Counterclaims and Order,
 entered on January 29, 2007, dismissed with prejudice (a) Counts
 I, II, III, IV, and V of the Third Complaint; (b) Counts 2, 3, 5,
 6, 7, 8, and 9 of the Third Counterclaim; and (c) Defendants'
 counterclaim for damages for past trespasses as alleged in Count
 4 of the Third Counterclaim. The circuit court further dismissed
 
2
 The Third Complaint states that R. Marvin and A. Marvin brought the
action individually and on behalf of their minor children, Ivy Mae Marvin,
Sadie Marvin, Savannah Marvin, and Anabelle Marvin. At one time, Nelson was
known as Barbara Marvin. The Third Complaint does not indicate what
connection Wylie Hurd has to the Marvin family; however, because he is listed
among the Marvins, we include him as one of the Marvins.
3
 A kuleana is a "small piece of property, as within an ahupua' a. Mary
Kawena Pukui & Samuel H. Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary 179 (1986). An ahupua' a 
is a "land division usually extending from the uplands to the sea." Id. at 9. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
all other claims and causes of action alleged in the Third
 
Complaint and Third Counterclaim.
 
The Final Judgment incorporated by reference the
 
FOF/COL/Order, in which the circuit court 
(1) granted Plaintiffs' Motion For Partial Summary
 
Judgment Re: Easement By Necessity and/or Order Issuing
 Preliminary Injunction (MPSJ Re Easement) and ordered that
 Defendants were enjoined and restrained from interfering with,
 blocking, or otherwise making Plaintiffs' access unreasonable or
 unsafe;
 
(2) granted Plaintiffs' Motion for Ex Parte Temporary
 
Restraining Order (TRO Motion Re Water) and ordered that
 Defendants were enjoined and restrained from interfering with,
 dismantling, damaging and/or destroying Plaintiffs' water system
 that brings water from the western stream and spring to
 Plaintiffs' kuleana; and
 
(3) ordered that Plaintiffs shall present to Pila
'a 
400, and Pila 'a 400 shall execute, a recordable Non Exclusive 
Grant of Easement in favor of Plaintiffs. 
On appeal, Defendants contend the circuit court erred
 
in
 
(A) granting the MPSJ Re Easement because (1) there
 
are "non-parties4
 whose interests in their adjacent real property
(the other part of a partitioned kuleana) could be affected by
 the resulting order," (2) the Marvins' "property is not
 landlocked and is not a kuleana," (3) the Marvins' "property
 rights were determined in a prior real property partition
 action," (4) there is an "absence of evidence establishing
 ancient and historic use," and (5) the Marvins' deeds "expressly
 note a 'lack of an easement for access to Kuhio Highway (a public
 road)'";
 
4
 By non-parties, Defendants mean "the Huddys." The circuit court and
 
both parties refer to "the Huddys" and the "Huddy family." However, the sole
owner of the Huddy parcel is Heidi K. Huddy-Yamamoto, as Trustee of the Heidi
K. Huddy-Yamamoto Self-trusteed Revocable Trust (Huddy-Yamamoto Trust). For
 the sake of simplicity, when we summarize the court's findings and the
parties' arguments, we will refer to Huddy-Yamamoto rather than "the Huddys"
or the "Huddy family." 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(B) "requiring [Defendants] to execute a recordable
 
Non Exclusive Grant of Easement in favor of [the Marvins] where
 
no such recorded easement is required under HRS [§] 7-1" (2009
 Repl.);
 
(C) "granting [the Marvins'] motion for summary
 
judgment on [the Marvins'] claim for entitlement to water
 rights";
 
(D) "dismissing [Defendants'] claim for trespass
 
against [the Marvins]"; and
 
(E) "granting [the Marvins'] motion for summary
 
judgment over [Defendants'] argument that the claims were barred
 by laches."
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
The Marvins' land (Marvin parcel or Lot 1-B) comprises 
two-thirds of the Haena kuleana, which is located within the Pila
'a ahupua 'a. The other one-third portion of the Haena kuleana 
is owned by the Huddy-Yamamoto Trust (Huddy parcel or Lot 1-A).5 
The Haena kuleana is landlocked. 
The Marvin parcel is abutted on its western and 
northern boundaries by Pila 'a 400's property (Defendants' 
6
property ), which is also part of the Pila 'a ahupua 'a; on its 
southern boundary by the Huddy parcel; and on its eastern boundary by the beach and ocean. 
At the time of the original Land Commission Award to
 
Haena, the Haena kuleana was a single parcel. 
In 1965, the Haena
 
kuleana was partitioned and Lot 1-A was "alloted in fee simple to
 
5 During the Great Mahele of 1848, Kamehameha III divided communal land
in Hawai' i into three roughly equal parts and distributed one part each to
himself, his chiefs (land given to the chiefs was called ahupua' a), and the
government. As part of the Kuleana Act of 1850, people living on and
cultivating the land could make a claim for that land. The plot they wereawarded was called a "kuleana." Pila' a is an ahupua' a. Within Pila' a are 
various kuleana including, but not limited to, the Haena kuleana, of which theMarvin parcel and the Huddy parcel are the only parts. The kuleana is referred to as the Haena kuleana because it was originally awarded to Haena byKamehameha IV, in fee simple, in a Land Commission Award on December 7, 1857.
6
 Defendants' property was originally owned by the Mary N. Lucas Trust.
In 1997, the Mary N. Lucas Trust conveyed the property to Pflueger Propertiesvia a Limited Waranty Deed. In 2001, Pflueger Properties conveyed theproperty to Pila' a 400 via a warranty deed. According to Plaintiffs' Third
Complaint, Pflueger was the Trustee of the James Pflueger Trust, which was thegeneral partner of Pflueger Properties. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7
William L.F. Huddy [(William Huddy)] and Elisabeth  S. Huddy
[(Elisabeth Huddy)], as tenants by the entirety" and Lot 1-B was
 
"alloted in fee simple to Helen Louise Huntley [(Huntley)] and
 Jahne K. Hupy [(Hupy)], as joint tenants."
 
Huntley and Hupy sold (in 1965) and deeded (in 1988)
 
Lot 1-B to Richard Marvin, Jr. (Marvin, Jr.) and Nelson. 
The
 
deed conveying Lot 1-B to Marvin, Jr. and Nelson provides: 
"Note: Lack of an easement for access to Kuhio Highway (a public
 road)." In 1996, Marvin, Jr. conveyed his 50% interest to his
 sons, R. Marvin and N. Marvin. The deed from Marvin, Jr. to his
 sons provides: "SUBJECT, HOWEVER, to the following: . . . (2)
 Lack of an easement for access to Kuhio Highway (a public road)." 
In 1996, Nelson transferred her 50% interest via quitclaim deed
 to the Nelson Trust. That quitclaim deed provides: "Note: Lack
 of an easement for access to Kuhio Highway (a public road)."
 
In 1995, title to the Huddy parcel was transferred to
 
the William L.F. Huddy Revocable Living Trust and the Elisabeth
 S. Huddy Revocable Living Trust via a quitclaim deed. In 2004,
 Elisabeth Huddy, as the surviving spouse of William Huddy,
 conveyed her 100% interest in the Huddy parcel to Huddy-Yamamoto
 via a quitclaim deed.
 
To access Lots 1-A and 1-B from Kuhio Highway, the
 
public road, the owners and tenants of the kuleana must cross
 through Defendants' property. Historically, various routes have
 been used for this purpose.
A. Underlying Complaints
 
8
On April 12, 2002, Plaintiffs  filed a Complaint for
Damages and Injunctive Relief (original Complaint) against
 Pflueger and Pflueger Properties. Plaintiffs asserted the
 following, in relevant part:
 
7
 In the FOF/COL/Order, the circuit court refers alternatively to
"Elisabeth Huddy" and "Elizabeth Huddy." In the "Order Confirming Report of
Commissioner and Ordering Partition Accordingly" to which the court refers in
FOF 23, her name is spelled "Elizabeth." In the Quitclaim Deed conveying the
Huddy parcel to William and Elisabeth's trusts, her name is spelled
"Elisabeth." For the sake of simplicity, we refer to her as "Elisabeth."
8
 The original and amended complaints were filed on behalf of all
Plaintiffs.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(1) The Marvin property "is a kuleana adjacent to the
 
[Defendants'9 
] property and is located on the beach at Pila 'a, 
below the [Defendants'] property. The [Defendants'] property is 
located on a bluff above the beach at Pila 'a." 
(2) R. Marvin and N. Marvin resided with their 
families in Pila 'a, and R. Marvin, N. Marvin, and Nelson had an 
interest in [Defendants'] property because "the only access road to and from their real property at Pila
'a Bay is through 
[Defendants'] property." 
(3) "Several months after [Defendants' property] was 
granted preliminary subdivision approval, [Pflueger] . . . blocked the [Marvins'] access road to and from their Pila
'a 
residence." 
(4) Pflueger represented that he "needed to 're-route'
 
the [Marvins'] access road so that it would not run through his
 subdivision."
 
(5) In the summer of 2001, Pflueger proceeded to re-
reroute the Marvin access route by various means.
 
(6) The re-routed access road was inadequate for the
 
purposes of ingress and egress.
 
(7) The Marvins asked Defendants to remedy the
 
problems with the access road, but Defendants failed and/or
 refused to make the new road safe or restore the former access
 road.
 
The original Complaint alleged negligence, loss of
 
quiet enjoyment, intentional infliction of emotional distress,
 trespass, and nuisance. 
Plaintiffs sought general, special, and
 
punitive damages; preliminary and permanent injunctive relief;
 and reasonable attorney's fees, costs, and interest. In addition
 to requesting preliminary and permanent injunctions with regard
 to the access road and other matters, Plaintiffs requested an
 
9
 Plaintiffs added Pila' a 400 as a defendant in their First Amended 
Complaint. For the sake of simplicity, we include Pila' a 400 in the category
of "Defendants" in our summary of the original complaint. The First Amended 
Complaint is otherwise similar in all relevant respects to the originalComplaint. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
injunction preventing Pflueger from "diverting or in any way
 
interfering with [Plaintiffs'] water."
 
On May 7, 2002, Defendants filed their answer, in which
 
they generally denied the allegations made in the complaint.
 
On September 17, 2002, Plaintiffs filed their First
 
Amended Complaint, in which they added Pila 'a 400 as an 
additional defendant.
 
On January 9, 2003, Plaintiffs filed their Second
 
Amended Complaint, in which Plaintiffs asserted all of the
 allegations contained in the original Complaint and, for the
 first time, punitive damages (Count VI), quiet title to
 prescriptive easement (Count VII), and violation of kuleana
 rights (Count VIII). Count VIII provides:
 
COUNT VIII
 
VIOLATION OF KULEANA RIGHTS
 
. . . . 
90. As owners of a kuleana parcel under Land Court
Award No. 6527, Plaintiffs Marvin are entitled to all
benefits and protections of Hawaii law regarding kuleana[].
Such rights include reasonable and convenient access for the
normal use of their property.
 
91. Plaintiffs' kuleana is taro land which has
 
historically enjoyed abundant water from the stream located
to the west of the kuleana. Plaintiffs are entitled to
 water rights in and to and across Defendants' property based
upon ancient use, prescriptive rights, and necessity,
pursuant to HRS 7-1.
 
92. Plaintiffs desire to have their kuleana rights
affirmed, specifically located and quantified, and rendered
a matter of public record.
 
93. Plaintiffs and their predecessors have made
consistent use of multiple alternate access routes over the
past century. On information and belief, these routes have
passed over the land of Defendants and third party kuleana
owners.
 
94. The uses by Plaintiffs of access over Defendants'
lands have been consistent throughout the terms of ownership
by Plaintiffs and their predecessors for generations.
 
95. As a result of Plaintiffs' ownership of a
kuleana, they claim ownership of easement(s) over
Defendants' property, as an interest in Defendants'
property.
 
On March 3, 2003, Defendants filed their answer to the
 
Second Amended Complaint. As their "Eighteenth Defense,"
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Defendants asserted that "Plaintiffs have failed to name
 
indispensable parties to this action."
 
On May 8, 2006, Plaintiffs filed their Third Complaint. 
In Count III (intentional infliction of emotional distress),
 Plaintiffs alleged that Defendants had engaged in a course of
 conduct intended to harass, annoy, and inflict emotional distress
 upon the Marvins by, among other things, "threatening to cut off
 the MARVIN's water access."
 
B. Plaintiffs' Motions
 
1. TRO Motion Re Water
 
On May 30, 2006, Plaintiffs filed their TRO Motion Re
 
Water,
10 in which they moved ex parte 
for a Temporary Restraining Order [(TRO)] restraining and
enjoining the Defendants, their employees, agents, assigns,
lessees, sublesses [sic] and any person(s) who claim an
interest in [Defendants' property] . . . from damaging,
dismantling, destroying or otherwise interfering with
Plaintiffs' water line and holding tank that are Plaintiffs'
sole source of water to their kuleana at Pila'a . . . until
 a hearing can be held on the merits of Plaintiffs' claims
herein.
 
Plaintiffs argued the following. When the Marvin family
 
purchased their parcel over 40 years prior, an irrigation ditch
 brought water from a stream on Defendants' property, across the
 western boundary between Defendants' property and the Marvin
 parcel, and onto the Marvin parcel. The stream was and
 traditionally had been the only source of fresh water for the
 Haena kuleana. In 1970, when R. Marvin started living on the
 Marvin parcel, the irrigation ditch was filled with sediment, so
 R. Marvin installed PVC pipes in the ditch to carry the water from the stream to the Marvin parcel. At the time the TRO Motion Re Water was filed, the stream water running through the PVC pipe was Plaintiffs' only source of fresh water for use at the Marvin parcel, and without the water, the Marvin family could no longer continue residing there. Plaintiffs reasserted that the Marvin parcel was entitled to water under Hawai
'i law. 
Plaintiffs also asserted that their attorney had
 
received a letter from an attorney purporting to represent
 
10
 The TRO Re Water was filed on behalf of all Plaintiffs.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Pflueger employees, demanding that the Marvins remove their
 
holding tank and water pipe from the stream or risk removal of
 such by said Pflueger employees. Plaintiffs argued that they
 would suffer irreparable injury unless the circuit court granted
 their TRO Motion Re Water.
 
On June 5, 2006, Defendants filed a memorandum in 
opposition. Defendants argued that Plaintiffs had not established a prima facie water rights claim; the Marvins' claim to water rights did not give the Marvins a legal basis to install and maintain an artificial stream diversion system on Defendants' property; and the Marvins could not install and maintain an artificial stream diversion system without a permit from the State of Hawai
'i Commission on Water Resource Management. 
Defendants did not argue that Plaintiffs had failed to join a necessary or indispensable party to the action. 
On June 7, 2006, Plaintiffs filed a reply memorandum.
 On May 30, 2006, the circuit court filed an order
 
granting the TRO Motion Re Water.
2. MPSJ Re Easement
 
On June 6, 2006, Plaintiffs filed the MPSJ Motion Re
 
Easement,11 in which they requested summary judgment on their
 
claim to an easement by necessity. Plaintiffs asserted that
 "[a]s owners of an ancient kuleana that is landlocked,
 Plaintiffs' entitlement to an easement by necessity is derived
 not only from an expressed reservation contained in the
 Defendant's [sic] grant, but also from case law and statutory law
 governing landlords' title subject to tenants' or kuleana owners'
 use." Plaintiffs additionally asked the circuit court "to enter
 a preliminary injunction against the Defendants to prevent them
 from interfering with Plaintiffs' access."
 
On June 19, 2006, Defendants filed a memorandum in
 
opposition. Defendants argued that based on the existence of
 material issues of fact, Plaintiffs were not entitled to summary
 judgment on their easement by necessity claim; an easement by
 
11 The MPSJ Re Easement was filed on behalf of only R. Marvin, N.
Marvin, and Nelson. For the sake of simplicity, we state that it was filed by
Plaintiffs.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
necessity is limited to ingress and egress and must not impose an
 
unreasonable burden on the servient landowner; an owner of an
 easement by necessity is responsible for maintenance and repair
 of the access road; and based on the existing court order,
 Plaintiffs were not entitled to injunctive relief. Defendants
 did not assert that Plaintiffs had failed to join a necessary or
 indispensable party to the action.
 
On June 23, 2006, Plaintiffs filed a reply memorandum.
 On August 9, 2006, a four-day evidentiary hearing
 
commenced on the MPSJ Re Easement and TRO Motion Re Water
 (evidentiary hearing). Numerous witnesses testified regarding,
 among other things, a kuleana's entitlement to an access road and
 water; a prior lawsuit over access through Defendants' property
 to various kuleana, in which William Huddy and R. Marvin had
 participated as plaintiffs (R. Marvin was named without his
 authorization) and Pflueger had been named as a defendant;
 traditional access and other access routes to the Marvin parcel; 
the prospect of re-routing the access road the Marvins currently
 used; and Defendants' blocking of Marvins' access to Marvins'
 parcel.
 
Although she did not participate in the action as a
 
party, Huddy-Yamamoto testified at the evidentiary hearing on
 behalf of Defendants. As Trustee of the Huddy-Yamamoto Trust,
 she is the sole owner of the Huddy parcel. At the hearing,
 Huddy-Yamamoto and Defendants' counsel engaged in the following
 exchange:
 
[Huddy-Yamamoto] I had been told by my father that we
were caretakers of the land and that I was to always make it
available to my family and friends . . . .
 
[Defendants' counsel]. Is that what you believe your
responsibility is?
 
A. Absolutely, it's my responsibility.
 
Q. Do you and your mother want vehicular access to
your property, lot 1A?
 
A. Yes, we do want vehicular access.
 
Q. You understand you're not a party to this current
court proceeding?
 
A. Yes.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q. Do you understand that this court proceeding is
involving access to lots 1A and 1B?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Do you want to participate in this process as a
party?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Do you want this Court to decide these issues of
access to lots 1A and 1B without your involvement as a
party?
 
A. I want to be involved.
 
. . . . 
Q. . . . [D]o you have access to an attorney?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And is it your understanding that, and I
understand you're not a party to this, that one of the
issues that we're dealing with in this evidentiary hearing
involves access to the original kuleana, which would be lots
1A and 1B?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Have you been told that the -– another issue
involved in this dispute is water access?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. For lot 1B?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And do you want water access for -– drinking water
for lot 1A?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Do you have it now?
 
A. No.
 
On cross-examination, Huddy-Yamamoto testified that
 
Plaintiffs' counsel had asked if she wanted to participate in
 
this case before the filing of the original Complaint. Huddy-
Yamamoto told Plaintiffs' counsel that she did not want to
 participate and she would "work things out" with Pflueger
 regarding access to the Huddy parcel, but instead of contacting
 Pflueger, she went to the planning commission to discuss the
 matter. Huddy-Yamamoto testified at the evidentiary hearing that
 the Huddy parcel was being sporadically provided with irrigation
 
water and she preferred to have fresh spring water running to the
 parcel.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Following the evidentiary hearing and a site
 
inspection, the circuit court issued its FOF/COL/Order on
 
January 4, 2007 and its Final Judgment on March 20, 2007.
 
On April 17, 2007, Defendants timely filed their notice
 
of appeal.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Summary Judgment
 
"We review the circuit court's grant or denial of
 
summary judgment de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai 'i 48, 
56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (quoting Durette v. Aloha Plastic
 Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai
'i 490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 71 (2004)). 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has often articulated that 
summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
 fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Querubin, 107 Hawai 'i at 56, 109 P.3d at 697 (quoting Durette, 
105 Hawai 'i at 501, 100 P.3d at 71).
 Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(e) 
provides in relevant part:
 
Rule 56. Summary judgment.
. . . .
 
(e) Form of affidavits; further testimony; defense
 
required. . . . When a motion for summary judgment is made
. . . , an adverse party may not rest upon the mere
allegations or denials of the adverse party's pleading, but
the adverse party's response, by affidavits or as otherwise
provided in this rule, must set forth specific facts showing
that there is a genuine issue for trial. If the adverse
 party does not so respond, summary judgment, if appropriate,
shall be entered against the adverse party.
 
Thus, "[a] party opposing a motion for summary judgment cannot
 
discharge his or her burden by alleging conclusions, 'nor is [the
 party] entitled to a trial on the basis of a hope that [the
 party] can produce some evidence at that time.'" Henderson v.
 
Prof'l Coatings Corp., 72 Haw. 387, 401, 819 P.2d 84, 92 (1991)
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(quoting 10A Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Mary Kay
 
Kane, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil 2d § 2727 (1983)).
B. Injunctive Relief
 
Generally, the granting or denying of injunctive
relief rests with the sound discretion of the trial court
 
and the trial court's decision will be sustained absent a
 showing of a manifest abuse of discretion. Abuse of
discretion may be found where the trial court lacked
jurisdiction to grant the relief, or where the trial court
based its decision on an unsound proposition of law. 
Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp., 120 Hawai 'i 181, 197, 202 P.3d 
1226, 1242, reconsideration denied, 2009 WL 1567327 (2009) 
(quoting Hawai 'i Pub. Employment Relations Bd. v. United Pub. 
Workers, Local 646, AFSCME, AFL-CIO, 66 Haw. 461, 467, 667 P.2d 783, 788 (1983)).
C. Equitable Relief
 
"The relief granted by a court in equity is 
discretionary and will not be overturned on review unless the circuit court abused its discretion by issuing a decision that clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of the appellant." Aickin v. Ocean View Invs. Co., Inc., 84 Hawai
'i 
447, 453, 935 P.2d 992, 998 (1997) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted).
D. Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 
"In this jurisdiction, a trial court's FOFs [Findings 
of Fact] are subject to the clearly erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction in reviewing the entire evidence that a mistake has been committed." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the Employees' Ret. Sys. 
of the State of Hawai
'i, 106 Hawai 'i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 
(2005) (internal quotation marks, citations, and ellipses omitted) (quoting Allstate Ins. Co. v. Ponce, 105 Hawai
'i 445, 
453, 99 P.3d 96, 104 (2004)). "An FOF is also clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding. We have defined "substantial evidence" as credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 91 Hawai 'i 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 
1225 (1999) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted) 
(quoting State v. Kotis, 91 Hawai 'i 319, 328, 984 P.2d 78, 87 
(1999)). 
A COL [Conclusion of Law] is not binding upon an
appellate court and is freely reviewable for its
correctness. This court ordinarily reviews COLs under the
right/wrong standard. Thus, a COL that is supported by the
trial court's FOFs and that reflects an application of the
correct rule of law will not be overturned. However, a COL
that presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed
under the clearly erroneous standard because the court's
conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances
of each individual case.
 
Chun, 106 Hawai 'i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353 (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets in original omitted) (quoting
 
Ponce, 105 Hawai 'i at 453, 99 P.3d at 104).
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 Whether the circuit court should have joined
Huddy-Yamamoto
 
1.	 Applicable FOFs and COL
 
The FOF/COL/Order provides the following in relevant
 
part:
 
90. [Huddy-Yamamoto] testified that she was asked by
Plaintiffs' attorney to participate in the instant lawsuit
against the Defendants, but she refused.
. . . . 
92. In 1988, William Huddy participated in a lawsuit
against [Pflueger], among other defendants, in a Complaint
for Damages and Other Relief in a dispute over road accessthrough Defendants' Pila' a property to various kuleana. 
93. The lawsuit alleges, among other allegations,
that the Defendants, including [Pflueger], "failed to
provide any access to the Plaintiff Kuleana Owners parcels"
and "that the Defendants acted willfully, intentionally and
maliciously in destroying roadways providing access to the
Plaintiff Kuleana Owners' properties."
 
94. The lawsuit further alleges that despite [TROs]
preventing Defendants from destroying the access roads to
Plaintiffs' kuleana, Defendants destroyed or blocked access
to the existing access roads to the Plaintiffs' kuleana.
 
95. The lawsuit also alleges that Defendants
installed fence posts and wire fences throughout their
property with the intention of fencing livestock upon
Defendants' property in order to block access to existing
roads to the Plaintiffs' kuleana, including such fences that
unnecessarily and unreasonably narrow access to the
Plaintiffs' kuleana property and unnecessarily impeded
access to their kuleana, in contempt of the [TROs].
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
96. [R. Marvin] was named as a plaintiff in the 1988
Complaint; however, he had not authorized Plaintiffs'
attorneys to include him in the lawsuit.
 
97. Furthermore, [Pflueger] called [R. Marvin] after
the lawsuit was filed and told him that if he would withdraw
 from the suit, the Marvin family would always be able to get
to their property.
 
98. [R. Marvin] relied on [Pflueger's] representation
that the Marvin kuleana would always have access, and
withdrew from the lawsuit.
 
99. There is nothing in the record to suggest the
outcome of the Huddy claim for access in the 1988 lawsuit. 
100. Access to their kuleana was never in contention
 
between the Marvin family and William Huddy because the
Huddy family always had a trail to their house. 
101. Neither Elisabeth Huddy or [Huddy-Yamamoto]
reside at the Pila' a kuleana. 
102. There are no facts in the record to suggest that
[Huddy-Yamamoto] will be prejudiced by not participating in
the instant lawsuit. Indeed, [she] were asked to
participate, and refused. The access [she] currently
enjoy[s] is "now improved, and easier access than before." 
103. Based on Defendants' witness Bruce Graham's 
testimony that the Marvin side of the kuleana was the "HouseLot" side that the Huddy side of the kuleana was the "lo' i,"
[Huddy-Yamamoto] is entitled to irrigation water. [Huddy-Yamamoto] testified that she has irrigation water to herkuleana from [Pflueger]. 
104. There are no facts in the record to suggest that
[Huddy-Yamamoto] will be prejudiced by the Plaintiffs' claim
to irrigation and drinking water in the instant case.
 
105. [Huddy-Yamamoto] enjoys access and water to
their kuleana and specifically refused to participate in
this case.
 
. . . . 
142. Defendants, who now argue that [Huddy-Yamamoto]
is an indispensable party with respect to road access,
failed to bring [Huddy-Yamamoto] into the instant case when
filing their Motion to Establish Temporary Roadway Access in
2003.
 
(Record references omitted.)
 
COL 12 provides, "The Court finds that [Huddy-Yamamoto]
 
is not an indispensable party as [she is] not prejudiced by the
 
instant proceeding, and [she] refused to participate in the
 instant lawsuit."
 
2. Parties' arguments on appeal
 
Defendants contend the circuit court erred in granting
 
the MPSJ Re Easement where the Marvins failed to join Huddy­
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Yamamoto, who is an "indispensable" party to this action pursuant
 
to HRCP Rule 19(a) and the court erred as a matter of law in
 concluding otherwise. Defendants argue that without Huddy-
Yamamoto as a party to this action, 
[Defendants] could conceivably be forced to grant an
easement to [Huddy-Yamamoto], or [her] successors in
interest, in a separate suit, wrongfully burdening
[Defendants' property] with two separate rights of access.
 
Conversely, a court could determine (and rightfully
so) that the Haena kuleana is, pursuant to HRS section 7-1,
entitled to only one access and, in the event an easement is
recorded in favor of the Marvin [parcel], [Huddy-Yamamoto]
would be deprived of even indirect access to [her] parcel,
particularly in view of the fact that [R. Marvin] stated
unequivocally that he is not willing to grant the Huddy
parcel a right of access over the Marvin [parcel].
 
Plaintiffs first respond that because Defendants did
 
not contest FOF 102 in their opening brief, FOF 102 is binding on
 
this court. Furthermore, Plaintiffs argue that Defendants "filed
 no motion to dismiss, omitted this argument from [their]
 opposition papers and Answer to Third Amended Complaint and
 dumped the issue on the Marvins literally on the day of [the
 evidentiary hearing], which foreclosed them from even filing a
 written response." Second, Plaintiffs cite to numerous FOFs
 supporting the circuit court's conclusion that Huddy-Yamamoto was
 not an indispensable party.
12 Third, Plaintiffs assert that
 
granting the Marvins access by the specified route did not
 adjudicate or affect Huddy-Yamamoto's rights under HRS § 7-1. 
Fourth, Plaintiffs argue that Huddy-Yamamoto was asked to join
 Plaintiffs as a party, but refused to do so, and furthermore,
 
12 Plaintiffs' answering brief states that
 
the court properly found that 1) [Huddy-Yamamoto] was asked to
participate in the lawsuit and refused (FOF Nos. 90, 102, 105), 2)
[Huddy-Yamamoto] appeared and testified at these hearings about
access and water (FOF No. 89), 3) [Huddy-Yamamoto's] father
[William] Huddy sued Pflueger for access in 1988 and the outcome
of that claim is unknown (FOF Nos. 92-99), 4) the Marvins and
Huddy-Yamamoto have never disputed each others' access or water
rights (FOF No. 100), 5) Huddy-Yamamoto's access was actually
improved after the 2001 mudslide and is easier now than ever
before (FOF No. 102), 5) [sic] Huddy-Yamamoto does not reside on
her kuleana (FOF No. 101), 6) Huddy-Yamamoto has access to
Pflueger's irrigation water (FOF No. 103), 7) no facts in the
record suggest that Huddy-Yamamoto will be prejudiced by the
Marvins' claims to access or water in this case (FOF No. 104), and
8) no facts in the record suggest that Huddy-Yamamoto will be
prejudiced by not intervening in this case (FOF No. 102).
 
16  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Huddy-Yamamoto could have filed a motion to intervene. Fifth, 
Plaintiffs assert that "neither Pflueger nor [Huddy-Yamamoto] made any attempt to bring [Huddy-Yamamoto] into this case, and the court found three separate times that [Huddy-Yamamoto] declined to participate." Additionally, the circuit court granted the Marvins a "non-exclusive easement" that "numerous kuleana owners at Pila
'a have used and continue to use." Sixth, 
Plaintiffs argue that "any benefit realizable by [Defendants] from [Huddy-Yamamoto's] joinder was obtained by [Huddy­Yamamoto's] testimony on [Pflueger's] behalf, without the need to make her a party." Seventh, Plaintiffs contend that if Pflueger was concerned about the prejudice to him by Huddy-Yamamoto's absence, he could have brought a third-party complaint against her, but Pflueger did not do so. Eighth, Plaintiffs state that the only case cited by Defendants in their opening brief does not concern HRCP Rule 19. 
3.	 Defendants' failure to quote FOFs on appeal
 
Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 
28(b)(4)(C) states "when the point [on appeal] involves a finding or conclusion of the court or agency, [the points of error shall include] either a quotation of the finding or conclusion urged as error or reference to appended findings and conclusions[.]" HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) also states, however, that "the appellate court, at its option, may notice a plain error not presented." Plaintiffs are correct that Defendants did not quote or refer to an appendix of specific FOFs in their points of error; nevertheless, we review Defendants' arguments for plain error.
4.	 Timing of Defendants' assertion of
indispensability
 
Plaintiffs argue that the Marvins "dumped" the issue of
 
Huddy-Yamamoto's absence from this case as a party "literally on
 
the day of [the evidentiary hearing]." In a position statement
 filed five days prior to the commencement of the evidentiary
 hearing, Defendants argued that access rights could not be
 determined in the absence of Huddy-Yamamoto, who was a "necessary
 and indispensable" party pursuant to HRCP Rule 19(a). However,
 that was not the first time Defendants argued that Huddy-Yamamoto
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
should have been joined. In their answer to Plaintiffs' Second
 
Amended Complaint, Defendants maintained in their "Eighteenth
 Defense" that "Plaintiffs have failed to name indispensable
 parties to this action." Defendants had no reason to raise this
 defense earlier because Plaintiffs had not asserted claims based
 on kuleana rights until Plaintiffs filed the Second Amended
 Complaint.
5.	 Defendants' failure to join Huddy-Yamamoto; Huddy­
Yamamoto's failure to intervene 
Plaintiffs contend the circuit court did not err by
 
failing to join Huddy-Yamamoto because Huddy-Yamamoto failed to
 
file a motion to intervene, Pflueger did not attempt to bring 
Huddy-Yamamoto into this case, and Pflueger failed to bring a
 third-party complaint against Huddy-Yamamoto. Regardless of the
 foregoing, the circuit court still could have ordered Huddy-
Yamamoto to be joined. See HRCP Rule 19(a) ("If the person
 
should join as a plaintiff but refuses to do so, the person may
 be made a defendant, or, in a proper case, an involuntary
 plaintiff"); Lau v. Bautista, 61 Haw. 144, 154, 598 P.2d 161, 168
 (1979) ("Under Rule 19(a), if such a person has not been joined,
 'the court shall order that he be made a party.'").
6.	 Applicable law regarding joinder
 
HRCP Rule 19 provides in relevant part: 
Rule 19. JOINDER OF PERSONS NEEDED FOR JUST ADJUDICATION.
 
(a) Persons to be joined if feasible.  A person who is
subject to service of process shall be joined as a party in
the action if (1) in the person's absence complete relief
cannot be accorded among those already parties, or (2) the
person claims an interest relating to the subject of the
action and is so situated that the disposition of the action
in the person's absence may (A) as a practical matter impair
or impede the person's ability to protect that interest or
(B) leave any of the persons already parties subject to a
substantial risk of incurring double, multiple, or otherwise
inconsistent obligations by reason of the claimed interest.
If the person has not been so joined, the court shall order
that the person be made a party. If the person should join
as a plaintiff but refuses to do so, the person may be made
a defendant, or, in a proper case, an involuntary plaintiff.
 
(b) Determination by court whenever joinder not
feasible. If a person as described in subdivision (a)(1)­
(2) hereof cannot be made a party, the court shall determine
whether in equity and good conscience the action should
proceed among the parties before it, or should be dismissed,
the absent person being thus regarded as indispensable. The
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
factors to be considered by the court include: first, to
what extent a judgment rendered in the person's absence
might be prejudicial to the person or those already parties;
second, the extent to which, by protective provisions in the
judgment, by the shaping of relief, or other measures, the
prejudice can be lessened or avoided; third, whether a
judgment rendered in the person's absence will be adequate;
fourth, whether the plaintiff will have an adequate remedy
if the action is dismissed for nonjoinder.
 
This court has explained:
 
Pursuant to [HRCP] Rule 19(a)(1), a party must be
joined if feasible if relief cannot be afforded among those
already parties. Rule 19(a)(2)(A) provides that a person
must be joined if feasible if the person has an interest in
the subject matter of the action and disposition of the case
in his or her absence may impair his or her ability to
protect that interest or, under Rule 19(a)(2)(B), leave any
of the persons already parties subject to the risk of
multiple or inconsistent obligations because of the
interest.
 
Int'l Savings & Loan Ass'n v. Carbonel, 93 Hawai 'i 464, 470, 5 
P.3d 454, 460 (App. 2000). 
"Where joinder [of a "party to be joined" (necessary
 
13
party ) under HRCP Rule 19(a)] is feasible, the court need not
proceed under Rule 19(b) to determine whether to proceed or
 dismiss for lack of an indispensable party." Lau, 61 Haw. at
 
154, 598 P.2d at 168. It follows that if it is infeasible to
 join a necessary party, the court should proceed to Rule 19(b)
 and apply the factors set forth therein to determine whether that
 party is indispensable. 
This court has explained that in examining the 19(b)
 
factors,
 
a court should consider all of the factors and employ a
functional balancing approach. Because of the flexibility
of the "equity and good conscience" test and the general
nature of the factors listed in HRPP [sic] Rule 19(b),
whether a particular nonparty described in Rule 19(a) will
be regarded as indispensable depends to a considerable
degree on the circumstances of each case.
 
Carbonel, 93 Hawai 'i at 470, 5 P.3d at 460 (quoting GGS Co. v. 
Masuda, 82 Hawai 'i 96, 105, 919 P.2d 1008, 1017 (App. 1996)). 
13 In UFJ Bank Ltd. v. Ieda, 109 Hawai' i 137, 143, 123 P.3d 1232, 1238
(2005), the Hawai' i Supreme Court refers to a "party to be joined if feasible"
under Rule 19(a) as a "necessary" party. 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
7. Analysis under HRCP Rule 19(a)
 
Preliminarily, we note that in the proceedings below
 
and on appeal Defendants argue that the Huddy-Yamamoto is an
 
"indispensable" party to this action, yet Defendants base their
 argument on HRCP Rule 19(a). As we have discussed, the
 determination of whether a party is "indispensable" is made
 according to 19(b), not 19(a), and if the circuit court
 determines it is feasible to join a necessary party pursuant to
 19(a), the court need not proceed to an "indispensability"
 analysis under 19(b). See supra Part III.A.6.
 
In the FOF/COL/Order, the circuit court does not 
indicate whether it based its finding that Huddy-Yamamoto was not an indispensable party on HRCP Rule 19(a) or 19(b). The circuit court merely states that Huddy-Yamamoto was not "indispensable." Given the circuit court's repeated use of the term "indispensable," we are left to infer that the court found that Huddy-Yamamoto was not necessary a party under 19(a) and the court then proceeded to analyze the facts according to 19(b). See UFJ Bank Ltd. v. Ieda, 109 Hawai
'i 137, 143, 123 P.3d 1232, 
1238 (2005) (brackets in original omitted) (holding that "[a]lthough the circuit court did not expressly make the initial determination that KKLW is a necessary party under HRCP Rule 19(a), we believe that such determination can be logically inferred from its ultimate ruling that 'KKLW is an indispensable party without which the court cannot in equity and good conscience proceed based on the factors outlined in said HRCP Rule 19(b).'"). 
a. Necessary party
 
Huddy-Yamamoto was a necessary party in this action,
 
pursuant to HRCP Rule 19(a)(2). According to Rule 19(a)(2), a
 person should be joined in an action if (1) a person "is subject
 to service of process" and 
(2) the person claims an interest relating to the subject of
the action and is so situated that the disposition of the
action in the person's absence may (A) as a practical matter
impair or impede the person's ability to protect that
interest or (B) leave any of the persons already parties
subject to a substantial risk of incurring double, multiple,
or otherwise inconsistent obligations by reason of the
claimed interest.
 
20
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
i.	 Kuleana's entitlement to easement and
 
water
 
Preliminarily, we note that the parties presented
 
arguments below and on appeal regarding the Marvins' rights to a
 
right of way by necessity and to water. However, the issue is
 whether the kuleana, not any particular part-owner of the
 kuleana, enjoys those rights. 
With regard to rights of way, HRS § 7-1 provides in 
relevant part that "[t]he people shall . . . have a right to . . . the right of way." 
In Henry v. Ahlo, 9 Haw. 490, 490-91 
(Haw. Rep. 1894), Ahlo appealed from the decision of the Commissioner of Private ways for the District of Koolaupoko, Island of O
'ahu (Commissioner). Henry was prevented from 
entering or exiting his land from a government road because Ahlo had blocked access to the road with a gate. Id. at 491. The 
Commissioner decided that Henry was entitled to have a road running from the government road between two kuleana and continuing on to Henry's land. Id. The Supreme Court of the 
Republic of Hawai
'i affirmed the Commissioner's decision, holding 
the owner of a kuleana has a right of way by necessity from the kuleana to the nearest government road. Id. The supreme court 
stated, however, that "the plaintiff could not have a number of roads; he is only entitled to one." Id. In this case, it is 
undisputed that the Huddy parcel and the Marvin parcel are parts of one kuleana. Pursuant to Henry, the kuleana is entitled to one right of way by necessity through Defendants' property.
14 
14 Defendants allege in their Amended Opening Brief that the Marvin
parcel is not landlocked because it is "bounded by navigable waters." We
 
disagree. Black's Law Dictionary 894 (8th ed. 2004) defines "landlocked" as
"[s]urrounded by land, with no way to get in or out except by crossing the
land of another." One definition of the term "surround" is "to extend around
 the margin or edge of." Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 1183 (10th
ed. 2000). 
While there is some case law stating that land bordering the sea is not
landlocked, see e.g. Murch v. Nash, 861 A.2d 645, 652 (Me. 2004) ("Land
abutting navigable water is generally not entitled to an easement by necessity
over neighboring land."), secondary authority has noted that 
[t]here is a trend in some courts toward a more liberal attitude
in allowing easements by necessity despite access by water. It
 has been said that now that travel even for short distances is
 
(continued...)
 
21 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
With regard to water rights, the Supreme Court of the
 
Territory of Hawaii stated: 
Whenever it has appeared that a kuleana or perhaps other
piece of land was, immediately prior to the grant of an
award by the land commission, enjoying the use of water for
the cultivation of taro or for garden purposes or for
domestic purposes, that land has been held to have had
appurtenant to it the right to use the quantity of water
which it had been customarily using at the time named. In
 some instances a mere reference to the land in the award or
 in the records of the land commission as "taro land" ("aina
kalo" or "loi kalo") or as "cultivated land" ("aina mahi")
has sufficed to lead to and to support an adjudication that
that land was entitled to use water for agricultural
purposes. Sometimes the testimony of witnesses who appeared
before the land commission in the hearings leading up to the
award that the land was taro land or cultivated land, or
other statements substantially to that effect, have sufficed
to support a similar adjudication.
 
Territory v. Gay, 31 Haw. 376, 383 (Haw. Terr. 1921). The
 
supreme court further stated that 
[i]f any of the lands were entitled to water by immemorial
usage, this right was included in the conveyance as an
appurtenance. An easement appurtenant to land will pass by
a grant of the land, without mention being made of the
easement or the appurtenances. But if lands had no such
 rights, and no additional grant of water rights was made, it
certainly could take nothing by having been a portion of the
ahupuaa.
 
Id. at 386; see also Carter v. Territory, 24 Haw. 47, 54 (Terr.
 
Haw. 1917) (upholding the finding of the Commissioner of Water
 that kuleana and other lands had appurtenant to them the right to
 water for irrigation), overruled on other grounds by McBryde
 Sugar Co. v. Robinson, 54 Haw. 174, 504 P.2d 1330 (1973). 
Moreover,
 
[e]very portion of land, large or small, ahupuaa, or ili or
kuleana, upon which people dwelt was, under the ancient
Hawaiian system whose retention should, in my opinion,
continue unqualifiedly, entitled to drinking water for its
human occupants and for their animals and was entitled to
 
14(...continued)
almost always by motor vehicle, it is not reasonable to require a
landlocked owner and those wishing to visit the owner to make the
trip by boat.
 
25 Am. Jur. 2d 
Easements and Licenses § 38 (2d ed. 2004).
 
Although not specifically addressed by any court in this jurisdiction,
it appears that Hawai' i has adopted the more liberal attitude in allowing
easement by necessity where land is bordered by water. In Rogers v. Pedro, 3
Haw. App. 136, 138-39, 642 P.2d 549, 551-52 (1982), this court upheld an
easement by necessity for a parcel which bordered the sea and did not question
whether the property was landlocked.
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
water for other domestic purposes. At no time in Hawaii's
 
judicial history has this been denied. Whenever it is
 
proven that people dwelt, at the time of the award of the
land commission, upon a piece of land awarded, it will be
easily found and adjudicated that piece of land was and is
entitled to water for all domestic purposes.
 
Gay, 31 Haw. at 395 (emphasis added). 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has stated that 
[t]he trial court's task, sitting as Commissioner of Private
Ways and Water Rights, was to determine as precisely as
possible the amount of water that was actually being used
for taro cultivation at the time of the Land Commission
 Awards. The burden of proof was on the person asserting the
right. 
McBryde Sugar, 54 Haw. at 188-89, 504 P.2d at 1340 (footnote
 
omitted); but see also Carter, 24 Haw. at 59 ("It is very
 difficult at this late day to show what quantity of water was
 used upon a particular parcel of land by ancient custom when it
 first became the subject of private ownership. Where the use of
 water upon land by ancient custom is shown by satisfactory
 evidence the right is not to be denied merely because the
 quantity has not been measured and cannot be proven.") 
In the instant case, it is undisputed that the Huddy
 
parcel and Marvin parcel are parts of one kuleana, which may have
 appurtenant to it a right to water for certain purposes, in a
 limited amount.
 
ii.	 Huddy-Yamamoto's "interest relating to
the subject of the action"
 
HRCP Rule 19(a)(2) provides in part that "[a] person
 
who is subject to service of process shall be joined as a party
 in the action if . . . the person claims an interest relating to
 the subject of the action." At the evidentiary hearing, Huddy-
Yamamoto testified that she wanted to participate in this
 proceeding as a party because she did not want the circuit court
 to determine the issues of access to the Huddy parcel and the
 Marvin parcel without her involvement.
 
As part owner of the kuleana, along with the Marvins,
 
Huddy-Yamamoto has an interest relating to the kuleana's
 easement. Pursuant to Henry, the kuleana is entitled to only one
 right of way by necessity. 9 Haw. at 491. Because the Marvins
 and Huddy-Yamamoto are part owners of the same kuleana, Huddy­
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Yamamoto's ability to access her parcel is closely intertwined
 
with the Marvins' claim to an easement to their parcel. Huddy-
Yamamoto has an interest in the easements' location and other
 characteristics because depending on where the easement runs,
 Huddy-Yamamoto's ability to access her parcel could be impacted. 
As Defendants argue in their opening brief, Huddy-Yamamoto could
 "be deprived of even indirect access" to her parcel. At the
 evidentiary hearing, Huddy-Yamamoto testified that she wanted
 vehicular access to the Huddy parcel.
 
Huddy-Yamamoto's ability to access water is also
 
closely intertwined with the Marvins' claim to water rights. 
Huddy-Yamamoto has an interest in continued access to water. The
 court's determination regarding the kuleana's historical
 entitlement to water, if any, including the location of the water
 source and direction in which the water flows, could greatly
 impact this interest. Huddy-Yamamoto also has an interest in
 accessing an adequate amount of water. Because the Marvins and
 Huddy-Yamamoto share the kuleana, the amount of water being
 accessed by their respective parcels must be, as precisely as
 possible, similar to "the amount of water that was actually being
 used for taro cultivation at the time of the Land Commission
 Awards." McBryde, 54 Haw. at 188-89, 504 P.2d at 1340. At the
 
evidentiary hearing, Huddy-Yamamoto testified that she wanted the
 Huddy parcel to have access to drinking water, preferably fresh
 spring water, rather than the water the parcel was receiving from
 Pflueger's irrigation lines.
iii. Huddy-Yamamotos' ability to protect her
interest
 
HRCP Rule 19(a)(2)(A) provides in part that "[a] person
 
who is subject to service of process shall be joined as a party
 in the action if . . . the person . . . is so situated that the
 disposition of the action in the person's absence may . . . as a
 practical matter impair or impede the person's ability to protect
 that interest." In this case, Huddy-Yamamoto is "so situated
 that the disposition of the action" in her absence may "as a
 practical matter impair or impede" her ability to protect her
 interests. As of the time of the evidentiary hearing, Huddy­
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Yamamoto was traveling to her parcel along an "eastern route"
 
right of way through Defendants' property and obtaining water
 from Defendants' irrigation lines, both with Defendants'
 permission only. There is no evidence in the record on appeal
 that Defendants are legally bound to continue providing Huddy-
Yamamoto with the right of way or water. If the circuit court
 were to determine that (a) Defendants are not required to
 continue providing Huddy-Yamamoto with a right of way and water
 and (b) the right of way and water to which the kuleana is
 entitled are in locations that do not reach the Huddy parcel or
 the kuleana is not entitled to more water than what flows to the
 Marvins' parcel, it may "impair or impede" Huddy-Yamamoto's
 ability protect her interest in accessing her parcel and
 obtaining an adequate amount of water there.
iv.	 Additional obligations to parties
already joined
 
HRCP Rule 19(a)(2)(B) provides that "[a] person who is
 
subject to service of process shall be joined as a party in the
 action if . . . the person . . . is so situated that the
 disposition of the action in the person's absence may . . . leave
 any of the persons already parties subject to a substantial risk
 of incurring double, multiple, or otherwise inconsistent
 obligations by reason of the claimed interest." Huddy-Yamamoto's
 non-joinder in this litigation may leave Defendants "subject to a
 substantial risk of incurring double, multiple, or otherwise
 inconsistent obligations by reason of the claimed interest." For
 instance, if Huddy-Yamamoto were to remain uninvolved in this
 case, she could later make claims for, among other things, any
 one or a combination of the following: the easement should be
 located elsewhere, the kuleana's water source should be located
 elsewhere, the kuleana's water should flow along a different
 path, and/or the kuleana is entitled to a different amount of
 water. In that case, another judgment might subject Defendants
 to "double, multiple, or otherwise inconsistent obligations,"
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
especially considering the kuleana is entitled to only one
 
easement and a limited amount of water.15
 
b. "Feasibility"
 
The circuit court found that Huddy-Yamamoto refused to
 
participate in the action:
 
90. [Huddy-Yamamoto] testified that she was asked by
Plaintiffs' attorney to participate in the instant lawsuit
against the Defendants, but she refused.
. . . .
 
102. There are no facts in the record to suggest that
[Huddy-Yamamoto] will be prejudiced by not participating in
the instant lawsuit. Indeed, [she was] asked to
participate, and refused. The access [she] currently
enjoy[s] is "now improved, and easier access than before."
. . . . 
105. [Huddy-Yamamoto] enjoys access and water to
[the] kuleana and specifically refused to participate in
this case.
 
Likewise, COL 12 provides:
 
12. The Court finds [Huddy-Yamamoto] is not an
indispensible party as [she is] not prejudiced by the
instant proceeding, and [she] refused to participate in the
instant lawsuit.
 
However, the circuit court did not make any specific findings
 
regarding the "feasibility" of joining Huddy-Yamamoto in the
 action. See HRCP Rule 19(a) (entitled, "Persons to be joined if
 
feasible"); Lau, 61 Haw. at 154, 598 P.2d at 168 (holding that
 where joinder of a necessary party is feasible, the court need
 not proceed under Rule 19(b) to determine whether to proceed or
 dismiss for lack of an indispensable party). We do not see how
 it would have been infeasible to join Huddy-Yamamoto. There is
 
15 The decision the circuit court arrived at in Huddy-Yamamoto's
absence underscores this danger. The court found both that (1) Huddy-Yamamoto
was not an indispensible party in this case based in part on its finding that
"the access [Huddy-Yamamoto] currently enjoy is now improved, and easier
access than before" and (2) the Marvins were entitled to an easement by
necessity that would allow them "vehicular and pedestrian access along the
current route." If the circuit court meant that the kuleana was entitled to
 only one access road across Defendants' property, the court's failure to join
Huddy-Yamamoto impaired or impeded her ability to protect her interest because
she may have lost her ability to utilize her current route and may have no
alternate route available to her. Alternatively, if the circuit court meant
that both Huddy-Yamamoto and the Marvins were entitled to access their
respective properties along two separate routes, then Defendants would have
been "subject to a substantial risk of incurring double, multiple or
inconsistent obligations by reason of the claimed interest" because the
finding obligated Defendants to provide two rights of way to one kuleana,
contrary to the holding in Henry that a kuleana owner is entitled to only one
right of way by necessity. 9 Haw. at 491.
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
no evidence in the record on appeal that she was not subject to
 
service of process. See HRCP Rule 19(a) ("A person who is
 
subject to service of process shall be joined as a party in the
 action . . . ."). Even if she refused to participate in the
 action, Rule 19(a) provides that "[i]f the person should join as
 a plaintiff but refuses to do so, the person may be made a
 defendant, or, in a proper case, an involuntary plaintiff."
 
c. Sufficiency of Huddy-Yamamoto's testimony
 
Plaintiffs argue that "any benefit realizable by
 
[Defendants] from [Huddy-Yamamoto's] joinder was obtained by
 [Huddy-Yamamoto's] testimony on [Pflueger's] behalf, without the
 need to make her a party." However, we refuse to speculate as to
 what evidence Huddy-Yamamoto might put forth on remand and how
 the circuit court might weigh it compared to her testimony at the
 evidentiary hearing.
d. Result
 FOFs 102 and 104 are clearly erroneous, and the
 
portion of COL 12 stating that Huddy-Yamamoto was not prejudiced
 by the proceeding is wrong. If it was feasible to join Huddy-
Yamamoto in this case, the circuit court plainly erred by not
 ordering her to be joined.
8. Analysis under HRCP Rule 19(b)
 
If the circuit court were to find that it is infeasible
 
to join Huddy-Yamamoto in this action, she would be an
 "indispensible" party pursuant to HRCP Rule 19(b). Rule 19(b)
 requires the court to consider several factors in determining
 whether a party is indispensable, including whether the absentee
 party or an existing party may be prejudiced by a decision,
 whether relief may be formed so as to lessen or avoid prejudice,
 and whether a judgment rendered without the absent party will be
 adequate. 
For the reasons we cite in Part III.A.7.a.iii-iv supra
 
of this discussion, Huddy-Yamamoto and Defendants would be
 prejudiced by the circuit court's decision in this case. With
 regard to the second and third Rule 19(b) factors, if Huddy-
Yamamoto is not joined in this action, the circuit court can
 offer no relief that would serve to avoid or lessen the prejudice
 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to Huddy-Yamamoto or Defendants and the judgment would not be
 
adequate without Huddy-Yamamoto's presentation of evidence in
 support of an easement to the Huddy parcel and the parcel's
 access to water. 
B. Remaining arguments
 
Defendants' remaining arguments are based on the
 
FOF/COL/Order.
16 Given our holding that the circuit court
 
plainly erred by failing to join Huddy-Yamamoto in this action,
 we need not address these points because the circuit court's
 
16 Defendants also argue the following:
 
(1) "The circuit court erred in finding that the Marvin [parcel] was
entitled to an easement pursuant to HRS [§] 7-1, because such access is based
on ancient and historic use, and the Marvin[s] . . . base their claim on
decidedly modern use of [Defendants' property]."
 
(2) The Haena kuleana's historical access right is to Lot 1-A (the
Huddy Parcel). The subsequent partition and/or subdivision of a kuleana
parcel does not multiply kuleana access rights, thereby creating responding
burdens to the servient estate. The landlocked condition of Lot 1-A that is
 alleged to create the "necessity" for an easement arose long after the time of
the kuleana parcel's severance from the servient estate (Defendants' property)
and Lot 1-A is bounded by navigable waters.
 
(3) Because the deeds conveying Lot 1-B from Huntley and Hupy
explicitly note the lack of an easement, the Marvins waived their claim for
one. The absence in the deeds of an express right to an easement shows that
the parties to the deed "intended to deprive the property of those rights of
access to the public road."
 
(4) The circuit court erred because HRS § 7-1 "does not require the
servient estate to execute a recordable easement," and any right of way
automatically runs with the land.
 
(5) The circuit court erred in granting Plaintiffs' TRO Motion Re
Water and entering a TRO enjoining and restraining Defendants from interfering
with, dismantling, and/or destroying Plaintiffs' water system that brings
water from the western stream and spring to their kuleana because (a) the
Marvin parcel has no riparian water rights because under HRS § 7-1, riparian
rights to water benefit only land adjoining a natural watercourse, (b)
Plaintiffs did not demonstrate that their water rights and use preexisted the
Great Mahele, and (c) Plaintiffs did not establish that they are entitled to
unlimited amounts of water to supply all three houses (the two Marvin houses
and the Huddy-Yamamoto house) on kuleana land.
 
(6) Plaintiffs' claim for an easement by necessity pursuant to HRS
§ 7-1 is barred by laches because "[b]ased on the express language of the
three deeds conveying the property to the [Marvins], they and/or their
predecessors in interest have been aware for more than forty years that they
have no easement across [Defendants' property]."
 
(7) The circuit court erred in summarily dismissing Defendants claim
of trespass because even if the Marvins have rights to access water in the
stream and spring pursuant to HRS § 7-1, "that right was not accompanied by
the right to construct water diversion systems on another's property."
 
28  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
findings and conclusions would inevitably be revised on remand by
 
Huddy-Yamamoto's presence as a party in this case.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The Final Judgment filed on March 20, 2007 in the
 
Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit is vacated, and this case is
 remanded for further proceedings in accordance with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June , 2010. 
William C. McCorriston
 
(David J. Minkin and
Becky T. Chestnut (McCorriston
Miller Mukai & McKinnon) with
him on the briefs) for
Defendants/Counterclaimants- Presiding Judge
Appellants.
 
Peter Van Name Esser
 
(Teresa Tico with him on the
brief) for Plaintiffs/
Counterclaim Defendants- Acting Associate Judge
Appellees.
 
Acting Associate Judge
 
29
 