NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29669
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DANIEL A. REEVES, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 08-1-0181(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Daniel A. Reeves ("Reeves") appeals
 
from the Judgment; Conviction and Probation Sentence; Notice of
 
Entry, filed on January 29, 2009, in the Circuit Court of the
 Second Circuit ("Circuit Court").
1 A jury convicted Reeves of
 
Unauthorized Entry into Motor Vehicle in the First Degree ("UEMV­1"), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 708-836.5,
 and Criminal Property Damage in the Fourth Degree, in violation
 of HRS § 708-823.
 
On appeal, Reeves alleges that (1) there was
 
insufficient evidence to support his conviction for UEMV-1, (2)
 the Circuit Court erred by admitting evidence of subsequent bad
 acts, (3) the Circuit Court erred by failing to instruct the jury
 regarding a lesser included offense, and (4) the prosecution
 committed prejudicial misconduct in its closing statement. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Reeves's points of error as follows:
 
(1) The State concedes that the evidence was
 
1/
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
insufficient to convict Reeves for UEMV-1, but contends that, on
 
remand, this court should direct the Circuit Court to enter
 judgment against Reeves for the lesser included offense of
 Unauthorized Entry into Motor Vehicle in the Second Degree
 ("UEMV-2"), in violation of HRS § 708-836.6.
2 For the reasons
 
discussed below, we agree that there was insufficient evidence to
 convict Reeves of UEMV-1. Furthermore, there is no appropriate
 basis to remand for judgment against Reeves of UEMV-2. 
I. Background
 
At trial, there was undisputed evidence that Reeves,
 
Jacob Ross ("Ross"), Christian Craig ("Craig"), and Brandon Helt
 
("Helt") together damaged the unattended car belonging to Brett
 Reece ("Reece") on October 19, 2007. Ross testified that earlier
 that evening, Reece had appeared at his house where several of
 the companions, as well as Reece's then-girlfriend, Christina
 Fournier ("Fournier"), were located, and that Reece had caused a
 scene and upset Fournier and the others. Fournier and Reeves had
 previously dated, and the two were spending time together that
 evening, along with Ross, Craig, and Helt. Most, if not all, had
 
3
been consuming alcohol,  and some were highly intoxicated.  The
 
five of them eventually headed on foot towards the nearby beach;
 en route, they passed Reece's parked car. The group stopped
 while Ross and Craig let the air out of two of Reece's tires.
 After continuing on and spending some time at the beach, they
 returned, again passing Reece's car. This is when the four men
 proceeded to further vandalize it. 
Combined, they let the air out of the remaining tires,
 
smashed windows, removed items from the trunk and glove box,
 poured oil and soda inside the car, wrote on the car, and
 urinated in the gas tank. 
There was no evidence that Reeves's
 
participation extended beyond that to which he admitted at
 
2/
 The sole difference between the two offenses is that UEMV-1
 
requires that the unlawful entry proscribed by UEMV-2 be committed "with the
intent to commit a crime against a person or against property rights."
Compare HAW. REV. STAT. § 708-836.5 (Supp. 2012), with § 708-836.6. 
3/
 There is conflicting evidence as to whether Reeves consumed much,
if any, alcohol that night.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial—that he used his skateboard to smash three of the windows
 
and wrote profanity on the outside of the car. Reeves
 acknowledged that he did these acts out of anger towards Reece. 
Testimony suggests that the participants' acts were
 
spontaneous. Regarding his participation, Ross stated: "For me,
 it was kind of an in-the-moment thing. . . . It just kind of
 happened." Regarding the sequencing of each person's acts, Craig
 testified: "[I]t's hard to say exactly who did what at any given
 time. Everybody was kind of doing their own thing." Reeves
 testified that "the damage to the car was spur of the moment."
 There was no testimony that Reeves or any of his companions said
 anything prior to or during this incident regarding any intent or
 plan to damage Reece's car. 
At the close of evidence, in a colloquy with the court,
 
the State asserted that it was pursuing only accomplice liability
 on the UEMV-1 charge. The jury was instructed accordingly. In
 its closing argument, the State argued that Reeves's act of
 smashing windows evinced his intent to aid his companions'
 unlawful entry into the car.
4 The jury convicted Reeves of UEMV­
1 and Criminal Property Damage in the Fourth Degree.
 
II. UEMV-1
 
The State concedes error on this point. Nevertheless, 
"appellate courts have an independent duty 'first to ascertain 
that the confession of error is supported by the record and well-founded in law and second to determine that such error is properly preserved and prejudicial.'" State v. Veikoso, 102 
Hawai'i 219, 221-22, 74 P.3d 575, 577–78 (2003) (quoting State v. 
Hoang, 93 Hawai' i 333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000)). In other 
words, the State's concession of error "is not binding upon an appellate court[.]" Hoang, 93 Hawai' i at 336, 3 P.3d at 502 
(quoting Territory v. Kogami, 37 Haw. 174, 175 (Haw. Terr. 1945)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
4/
 HRS § 702-222 provides that "[a] person is an accomplice of another
person in the commission of an offense if . . . [w]ith the intention of promoting
or facilitating the commission of the offense, the person . . . [a]ids or agrees
or attempts to aid the other person in planning or committing it[.]" H
AW. REV.
 
STAT. § 702-222(1)(b) (1993). 
3
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State had the burden of proving that it was Reeves' 
intent to promote or facilitate his companions' entry into the 
car. See HAW. REV. STAT. §§ 702-222, 708-836.5. For us to 
affirm, the State must have produced such proof of Reeves' intent as might "enable a person of reasonable caution to . . . conclu[de]" that Reeves was guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998). 
This it failed to do. 
The State's case hinged on circumstantial evidence of 
Reeves's intent. In such cases, "proof by circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences arising from circumstances surrounding the defendant's conduct is sufficient." State v. 
Gomes, 117 Hawai' i 218, 227, 177 P.3d 928, 937 (2008) (quoting 
State v. Bui, 104 Hawai' i 462, 467, 92 P.3d 471, 476 (2004)) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). Relatedly, inferences drawn from circumstantial evidence must be justifiable. See State v. 
Grace, 107 Hawai' i 133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 34 (App. 2005) (quoting 
State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai' i 409, 422, 23 P.3d 744, 757 (App. 
2001)); see also Curley v. United States, 160 F.2d 229, 232 (D.C. Cir. 1947) ("The functions of the jury include . . . the drawing of justifiable inferences of fact from proven facts. . . . The jury may not be permitted to conjecture merely, or to conclude upon pure speculation . . . ."). 
Here, as the State acknowledges, "there was no evidence
 
to show that Reeves intended to aid or agree or attempt to aid
 the others at the time he broke the windows. The evidence
 indicates that there was spontaneous activity at the time
 [Reece's] vehicle was discovered and Reeves started hitting the
 vehicle." On balance, what evidence exists is entirely
 equivocal. Reeves was angry. The others had been agitated by
 Reece's earlier appearance. They were also intoxicated, some
 heavily. Undisputed testimony establishes that they acted
 spontaneously, in-the-moment, and that they were each "doing
 their own thing." On these facts, the jury cannot have
 reasonably or justifiably inferred that by smashing the car's
 windows, Reeves intended that his companions would thereby gain
 access to the car, any more than we might infer that he did so
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
purely as a destructive exercise of anger. See Curley, 160 F.2d
 
at 234 ("[I]f, upon the whole of the evidence, a reasonable mind
 
must be in balance as between guilt and innocence, a verdict of
 guilty cannot be sustained."). Evidence that leads to a finding
 of guilt only by way of an inference untethered to reason cannot
 "enable a person of reasonable caution" to conclude guilt beyond
 a reasonable doubt. We therefore hold that the State's
 concession of error is well taken and there was insufficient
 evidence to convict Reeves of UEMV-1.
5
 
II. UEMV-2
 
The State contends that Reeves concedes on appeal that
 
there was sufficient evidence to warrant remanding for judgment
 against him of the lesser included offense of UEMV-2. The State
 appears to allude to a statement in Reeves' opening brief, in
 which he argues that the Circuit Court erred by not giving a
 lesser included offense instruction for UEMV-2: "It is submitted
 that the evidence does support the lesser included [jury]
 instruction and it should have been given." However, surmising
 that a rational basis exists for "a verdict acquitting [Reeves]
 of the offense charged and convicting [him] of the [lesser]
 included offense," see H
AW. REV. STAT. § 701-109 (1993), does not
 
necessarily imply that there is substantial evidence upon which a
 conviction may rest.
 
Moreover, the same defect in the State's case for UEMV­
1 precludes us from finding sufficient evidence to remand for a
 conviction on UEMV-2. The State pursued an accomplice liability
 theory and the jury was instructed accordingly. Supra, at 3. In
 
order to convict Reeves of UEMV-2 under an accomplice liability
 theory, there must have been substantial evidence that he had the
 intent to promote or facilitate unlawful entry by others into
 Reece's car. But, as the State conceded with respect to the
 
5/
 We remain cautious about disturbing a jury's verdict for want of
sufficient evidence, and, accordingly, are aware that distinguishing between
speculation and legitimate inference can be a delicate task. See Curley, 160
F.2d at 233. Here, however, we are also mindful that, in light of the State's
closing argument, the jury may well have misapprehended its essential task.
Because we hold that there was insufficient evidence to convict Reeves, we need
not, and do not, reach the question of whether the State's argument amounted to
prosecutorial misconduct. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
UEMV-1 conviction, there was no substantial evidence
 
demonstrating that intent. See supra.
 
III. Remaining Points of Error
 
Because we find the lack of sufficient evidence to
 
sustain Reeves's conviction for UEMV-1 dispositive of this
 appeal, we need not reach his remaining points of error.
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Reeves's conviction for
 
Unauthorized Entry into Motor Vehicle in the First Degree is
 reversed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 28, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Matthew S. Kohm 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Richard K. Minatoya,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 