NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29519
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
TIMOTHY A. KAKALIA, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent-Appellee
 
(S.P. NO. 08-1-0233
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(Cr. Nos. 56128, 93-1006, & 94-2234))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Timothy S. Kakalia (Kakalia)
 
appeals from the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order
 
Denying Petition for Writ of Error Coram Nobis" (FOF/COL/Order)
 
filed on December 4, 2008 in the Circuit Court of the First
 
1
 as amended by the September 1, 2009
 Circuit (circuit court),
"Amended Order Granting Motion to Amend Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petition for Writ of Error
 
Coram Nobis." 
On June 10, 2008, Kakalia filed the Verified Petition
 
for Writ of Error Coram Nobis (Petition). 
He contended:
 
1. The judgments of conviction entered in Cr. Nos.
 
56128, 93-1006, and 94-2334 were invalid because of fraud,
 
1
 The Honorable Michael D. Wilson presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
negligence, or mistake, which adversely affected the judgments' 
validity and the regularity of the criminal proceedings 
instituted by the State of Hawai' i (State) against him. 
2. The trial courts in Cr. Nos. 56128, 93-1006, and
 
94-2334 were deprived of personal jurisdiction over him because
 
at the time of his arrests, indictments, convictions, and
 
imprisonments, he was mentally incapacitated and under the
 
jurisdiction of the director of health by virtue of his
 
commitment pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 704-411.
 
3. His right to a fair trial was irreparably violated
 
when he was prosecuted, convicted, and imprisoned while mentally
 
incapacitated and his Sixth Amendment right to effective
 
assistance of counsel was violated because his assigned attorneys
 
failed to recognize and assert a meritorious defense of
 
continuing insanity.
 
4. His confession for the robbery offenses in Cr.
 
No. 56128 cannot be used against him because it was made by a
 
person who had been judicially adjudged mentally incapacitated
 
and whose status had not been formally terminated by the court.
 
5. The State withheld exculpatory evidence at the
 
grand jury hearing in Cr. No. 56107 that would have negated his
 
guilt and failed to disclose evidence to the grand jury in Cr.
 
No. 56128 that would have prevented an indictment against him.
 
6. His due process rights were violated when (a) the
 
sanity panel appointed to examine him omitted certain factual
 
information that was pertinent and crucial to his penal
 
responsibility in Cr. No. 56128 and (b) the court denied his
 
motion to retain an independent expert's services to examine him
 
pursuant to HRS ยง 704-409.
 
7. His plea bargain in Cr. No. 56128, wherein his
 
attorney advised him to plead guilty to Cr. No. 56128 in exchange
 
for a nolle prosequi of Cr. No. 56107, and the acceptance of his
 
guilty plea were invalid because of fraud or mistake that
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
adversely affected the validity of the plea and the regularity of 
the Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 11 proceedings. 
8. He suffered and/or continues to suffer adverse
 
collateral consequences and/or legal disability apart from his
 
judgments of conviction in Cr. Nos. 56128, 93-1006, and 94-2234.
 
9. The State knew or should have known that he had
 
been previously adjudicated mentally incapacitated, but
 
nevertheless the State, through fraud, negligence, or mistake,
 
instituted criminal actions against him while he was mentally
 
incapacitated, a fact that was never addressed or put at issue
 
throughout all stages of his criminal prosecutions.
 
The circuit court found that the Petition was patently
 
frivolous and without a trace of support and Kakalia's arguments
 
had been previously considered and ruled upon. The circuit court
 
denied the Petition without a hearing.
 
2
 Kakalia contends the circuit court erred in
 On appeal,
finding that he had waived the matters set forth in the Petition
 
3
 are wrong.
 and that Conclusions of Law (COLs) 3 and 4
2
 Kakalia's opening brief fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(3) in failing to include in the
statement of the case, "record references supporting each statement of fact ormention of court . . . proceedings." (Emphasis added.) Also, this courtshould not have to look through pages 1-155 of the record on appeal to findthe exact page to which Kakalia is referring. Kakalia's brief does not complywith HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) in that each point of error does not state "(ii) wherein the record the alleged error occurred; and (iii) where in the record thealleged error was objected to or the manner in which the alleged error wasbrought to the attention of the court or agency." Kakalia's counsel is warned that, pursuant to HRAP Rule 51, future non-compliance with HRAP 28(b)(3) and(4) may result in sanctions against him.
3
 The circuit court filed the FOF/COL/Order, and Kakalia appealed. The
 
State filed a motion to remand to amend the FOF/COL/Order, and this court
granted the motion. On remand, the State filed its motion and attached a
"'Suggested Amendment' Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order"
(Suggested Amendment). The circuit court filed an order and an amended order
 granting the State's motion, but the court never filed an amended
FOF/COL/Order nor did the court specifically adopt the Suggested Amendment.
Kakalia states in his opening brief that he contests COLS 2 and 3, which
appear to be from the Suggested Amendment; however, nowhere in his brief does
he quote the exact COLs that he is contesting. The contested COLs 2 and 3 are
 expanded versions of COLs 3 and 4 found in the FOF/COL/Order. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
conclude the circuit court did not err by denying the Petition
 
because the issues raised therein were either previously ruled
 
upon or waived. HRPP Rule 40(a)(3). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petition for Writ of Error
 Coram Nobis" filed on December 4, 2008 in the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 14, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Richard D. Gronna
 
for Petitioner-Appellant.
 
Jeffrey M. Albert,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, 
Chief Judge
City and County of Honolulu,
for Respondent-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 