  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29863
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RICHARD PETTIGREW, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
LIHUE DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 5P108-01645)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Richard Pettigrew (Pettigrew or
 
Defendant) appeals from the Judgment filed on May 26, 2009 in the
 
1
District Court of the Fifth Circuit, Lihue Division  (district
court). On February 5, 2009, after a jury-waived trial, the
 
district court found Pettigrew guilty of Sexual Assault in the
 
Third Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
ยง 707-733(1)(a) (1993).2
 
1
 The Honorable Trudy K. Senda presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 707-733(1)(a) provides:
 
ยง707-733 Sexual assault in the fourth degree.  (1) A
 
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the fourth degree
if:
 
(a)	 The person knowingly subjects another person to sexual
contact by compulsion or causes another person to have
sexual contact with the actor by compulsion[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Pettigrew contends:
 
(1) The district court exhibited bias and deprived him
 
of a fair trial when it predetermined his guilt and conformed its
 factual findings to support the predetermined outcome.
 
(2) The Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (Prosecutor)
 
committed misconduct when he argued the facts of the instant case
 
in a post-trial memorandum requested by the district court to
 
address only a question of law.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve
 
Pettigrew's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Pettigrew contends the district court exhibited
 
bias and deprived him of a fair trial. He argues that the 
district court found that sexual contact had been made with a
 
tongue because to find otherwise would have resulted in acquittal
 
since the complaint specifically charged him with "sexual contact
 
by compulsion by licking [Complainant's] breast."
 
"[R]eversal on the grounds of judicial bias or 
misconduct is warranted only upon a showing that the trial was 
unfair. Unfairness, in turn, requires a clear and precise 
demonstration of prejudice." Aga v. Hundahl, 78 Hawai' i 230, 
242, 891 P.2d 1022, 1034 (1995) (citations omitted). Pettigrew does not point to any evidence in the record that demonstrates 
judicial bias or misconduct. There is nothing in the record that 
shows the district court's actions constituted misconduct or the 
court harbored any bias or prejudice towards Pettigrew. 
Pettigrew's first point of error is without merit. 
(2) Pettigrew contends the Prosecutor disregarded the
 
district court's request not to include factual arguments in a
 
post-trial memorandum of law meant to address a specific question
 
of law. Pettigrew argues that the Prosecutor's actions were
 
egregious and resulted in a denial of procedural fairness.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed
under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which
requires an examination of the record and a determination of
whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error
complained of might have contributed to the conviction.
Where a defendant fails to object to a prosecutor's
statement during closing argument, appellate review is
limited to a determination of whether the prosecutor's
alleged misconduct amounted to plain error.
 
Misconduct of a prosecutor may provide grounds for a
new trial if the prosecutor's actions denied the defendant a
fair trial.
 
State v. Iuli, 101 Hawai' i 196, 204, 65 P.3d 143, 151 (2003) 
(citations omitted). When a defendant does not object to the
 
prosecutor's alleged misconduct at trial, the appellate court
 
must, 
as a threshold matter, determine whether the alleged
misconduct constituted plain error that affected [the
defendant's] substantial rights. In so doing, this court
considers the nature of the alleged misconduct, the
promptness or lack of a curative instruction, and the
strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant.
 
Id. at 208, 65 P.3d at 155 (internal quotation marks and
 
citations omitted).
 
Pettigrew argues that there is a "reasonable
 
possibility that the State's unanswered and unauthorized factual
 
arguments regarding evidence might have contributed to [his]
 
conviction[.]" However, before announcing its verdict, the
 
district court stated that it had "spent a lot of time pondering
 
and weighing the evidence that was presented," which is a clear
 
indication that the district court considered the evidence
 
presented by both parties. Assuming arguendo that the
 
Prosecutor's actions constituted misconduct, no curative
 
instruction was needed as it was a bench trial. Additionally,
 
the evidence against Pettigrew was significant. The district
 
court specifically stated that (1) it found Complainant's
 
testimony to be more credible than Pettigrew's and (2) the
 
Prosecutor had proven beyond a reasonable doubt all the elements
 
required for a conviction of Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree.
 
We conclude that the Prosecutor's memorandum of law did not
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
constitute plain error that affected Pettigrew's substantial
 
rights.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment filed on May 26,
 
2009 in the District Court of the Fifth Circuit, Lihue Division,
 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 26, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Daniel G. Hempey
(Hempey & Meyers LLP)
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Tracy Murakami,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Kauai,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 