NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29374
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
RICHARD DAMIAN SERRANO, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAII, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 03-1-0001 (Cr. No. 95-0-0321))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Richard Damian Serrano aka Damian 
Serrano (Serrano) appeals from the "Order Denying Petitioner's 
Amended Petition for Post-Conviction Relief to Release Prisoner 
From Custody; Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law" (Order) 
filed on September 16, 2008 in the Circuit Court of the Third 
Circuit (circuit court).1 Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40, Serrano filed a Petition for Post-Conviction Relief to Release Prisoner from Custody and an Amended 
Petition for Post-Conviction Relief to Release Prisoner from 
Custody (collectively, Rule 40 Petition). 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Serrano contends his counsel, Harry Eliason
 
(Eliason), made the following errors that demonstrated
 
ineffective assistance of counsel: (1) Eliason knew that Serrano
 
felt coerced when the police took Serrano in for questioning in
 
Santa Cruz, California, but failed to call Serrano to testify at
 
the January 12, 2000 hearing on Serrano's Motion to Suppress
 
(Motion hearing); (2) Eliason had numerous reports that
 
identified Serrano as a suspect and drawings of Serrano as a
 
suspect, but did not introduce them into evidence at the Motion
 
hearing or question any witness about them; (3) Eliason failed to
 
confront Santa Cruz Detective Watson (Det. Watson) at the Motion
 
hearing with Det. Watson's September 1993 police report (Watson's
 
police report) that indicated his intent was "to proceed to the
 
residence on 9/18/93 and hopefully arrest and detain Serrano";
 
(4) when Det. Watson testified at the Motion hearing that he was
 
not sure if the warrant he had for Serrano was valid, Eliason
 
failed to confront him with Watson's police report, in which Det.
 
Watson stated that he verified he had a valid warrant for
 
Serrano's arrest; (5) Eliason did not raise the fact at the
 
Motion hearing that Det. Watson used questions sent to him by the
 
family of the victim, Sequoya Vargas (Vargas), in his
 
interrogation of Serrano; (6) at the hearing on the Rule 40
 
Petition (Rule 40 hearing), Eliason failed to make use of a
 
letter from Serrano's mother, Diane DiMaria (DiMaria), dated
 
November 22, 1999, informing Eliason that the police drew their
 
guns and handcuffed and arrested Serrano when they came to
 
question Serrano in Santa Cruz; (7) Eliason failed to adequately
 
cross-examine witness Maureen McCubbins (McCubbins) during her
 
preservation deposition; and (8) Eliason failed to designate
 
relevant portions of McCubbins' deposition testimony for use at
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2
trial. Serrano challenges Findings of Fact 12 and 13  and
3
Conclusion of Law 2  (under the Impeachment subheading). 
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel, [the appellate court] looks at whether defense
counsel's assistance was within the range of competence
demanded of attorneys in criminal cases. The defendant has
 the burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel
and must meet the following two-part test: 1) that there
were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack
of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. To satisfy
this second prong, the defendant needs to show a possible
impairment, rather than a probable impairment, of a
potentially meritorious defense. A defendant need not prove
actual prejudice. 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 
(2003) (internal quotation marks, citations, and footnote 
omitted). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Serrano's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) Serrano did not demonstrate that Eliason's failure
 
to call Serrano to testify at the Motion hearing resulted in the
 
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
 
2
 Findings of Fact 12 and 13 provide:
 
12. It is probable that [Eliason], as an experienced trial
attorney, would have presented testimony regarding the issues of a
firearm being drawn, the threat of arrest or [Serrano] being
handcuffed if he were made aware that such evidence existed,
therefore, the assumption is that he was never told of the
availability of such testimony.
 
13. [Eliason] testified on January 17, 2008 that if
Maureen McCubbins' testimony at trial was inconsistent with her
prior statements, then this could be pointed out without reference
to her use of prescribed medication and if her testimony at trial
was consistent with prior statements, then little would be gained
by referring to her use of prescribed medication.
3
 Conclusion of Law 2 provides:
 
2. [Eliason's] choice not to use certain impeachment
material available to him did not result in the waiver or
 substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defense. During the Rule 40 hearing, both Serrano and DiMaria
 
testified that guns were either drawn or displayed, and Serrano
 
testified that he was handcuffed. DiMaria testified that Serrano
 
told her he was being arrested.
 
There was no evidence in the record, at trial, or at 
the Rule 40 hearing that Serrano had been formally placed under 
arrest. During the Rule 40 hearing, Eliason denied that either 
Serrano or DiMaria told him before the Motion hearing that 
officers had their guns drawn when they entered Serrano's home. 
Eliason stated that if he had been told that guns had been drawn, 
he would have "enhanced upon it and argued it" and had Serrano 
testify to that fact. He testified that because the evidence 
showed that a uniformed officer and a plain clothes officer were 
assumed to be carrying weapons, the issue was not whether there 
were guns present. Eliason stated that Serrano did not tell him 
weapons were actually drawn. Eliason also specifically recalled 
that Serrano told him he had not been handcuffed. Eliason stated 
that he did not call Serrano to testify because the "testimony of 
the detective was consistent with what my client had told me." 
The circuit court found Eliason's testimony at the Rule 40 
hearing to be credible. "It is well-settled that an appellate 
court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of 
witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of 
the trier of fact." State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai' i 255, 259, 978 
P.2d 693, 697 (1999) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai' i 85, 90, 
976 P.2d 399, 404 (1999)). Finding of Fact 12 was not wrong. 
(2) Reports or drawings indicating that Serrano was a
 
suspect in the disappearance of Vargas and whether Det. Watson
 suspected that Serrano had committed a crime does not aid
 
Serrano's claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. "[T]he
 
requirement of Miranda warnings is triggered by two criteria: 
(1) the defendant must be under interrogation; and (2) the 
defendant must be in custody." State v. Ah Loo, 94 Hawai' i 207, 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
210, 10 P.3d 728, 731 (2000) (internal quotation marks and
 
citation omitted). "'[I]nterrogation,' as used in a Miranda
 
context, [means] 'express questioning or its functional
 
equivalent.'" State v. Melemai, 64 Haw. 479, 481 n.3 643 P.2d
 
541, 544 n.3 (1982) (quoting Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291,
 300-01, 100 S. Ct. 1682, 1689 (1980)).
 
Even if Det. Watson had interrogated Serrano because he 
thought Serrano was a suspect, Serrano had to have been in 
custody to trigger the requirement that he be given Miranda 
warnings. The Hawai' i Supreme Court ruled in Serrano's direct 
appeal that he had not been subject to a custodial interrogation. State v. Serrano, 97 Hawai' i 269, 36 P.3d 813, No. 23591 
(Nov. 28, 2001) (SDO). Therefore, if Eliason erred by failing to cross-examine witnesses with reports or drawings that indicated 
Serrano was a suspect, it was harmless because Serrano cannot 
prove the error resulted in the loss of Miranda warnings. 
(3) Serrano's reliance upon Det. Watson's report that 
he hoped to detain and arrest Serrano is misplaced. During the 
Motion hearing, Eliason had no need to impeach Det. Watson 
regarding the validity of a warrant and his intent to use it 
because Det. Watson admitted that "if necessary" he was actually 
able to take Serrano into custody at that point because he had 
done a warrant search. However, Det. Watson also stated that if 
Serrano had not voluntarily agreed to go to the police station, 
he would have contacted Detective Araujo at the Hawai' i Police 
Department and asked what he should do with Serrano. Therefore, Eliason did question Det. Watson regarding his intent to arrest 
Serrano during the encounter. Even if Det. Watson intended to 
detain and arrest Serrano, he did not do either. Eliason argued 
at the Motion hearing that Watson used an arrest warrant to 
coerce Serrano and obtain Serrano's cooperation and statement. 
Serrano cannot point to the withdrawal or substantial impairment 
of any potentially meritorious defense for Eliason's failure to 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
further question Watson regarding his intent to arrest Serrano. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i at 514, 78 P.3d at 327. 
(4) Eliason got Det. Watson to admit that he had a
 
valid arrest warrant for Serrano and could have arrested Serrano
 
if Serrano had not voluntarily gone with Det. Watson to the
 
police station. Further impeachment of Det. Watson with the
 
prior inconsistent statement that he was not sure whether the
 
arrest warrant was for the same person was not necessary because
 
Eliason's argument hinged on the fact that there was a warrant to
 
arrest Serrano that Det. Watson could have used to coerce Serrano
 
into making a statement. Confronting Det. Watson with an
 
inconsistent statement that he thought the warrant was invalid
 
does not advance Serrano's claim of coercion.
 
(5) Serrano's Opening Brief states: "Nor did Eliason
 
make any use of the pointed questions drafted by the Vargas
 
family and sent to Detective Watson, which questions were used in
 
interrogating [Serrano], and which certainly underscored
 
potential foul play since the questions centered on leniency,
 
sexual assault, and the location of Ms. Vargas." Serrano makes
 
no other argument in his Opening Brief regarding Eliason's
 
failure to raise the content and source of the questions posed to
 
Serrano by Det. Watson.
 
In his Reply Brief, Serrano again states that Eliason
 
made a specific error when he "failed to elicit the nature of
 
questions asked of [Serrano] once in police custody, such as
 
whether [Serrano] had sex with the victim and whether [Serrano]
 
would tell where the victim was in exchange for leniency." 
Serrano argues that the questions indicated he was a suspect in a
 
crime and the target of an investigation and then mentions
 
Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 86 S. Ct. 1602 (1966), and Ah
 
Loo, but does not make any specific argument regarding their
 
applicability to the use of the questions sent to Watson.
 
On appeal, Serrano failed to include any argument in
 
his Opening Brief with respect to Eliason's failure to elicit the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nature of questions asked of Serrano. Therefore, the point of
 
error is waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). 
Even if the point of error was not waived, Eliason
 
alerted the circuit court during the Motion hearing in 2000 to
 
the content of the questions and argued that Serrano had been
 
interrogated and coerced by the police. During closing arguments
 
at the Motion hearing, Eliason stated:
 
Your Honor, we would just ask the Court to consider just
the, uh, the, uh, transcript of that statement and the
written questions, Your Honor. 
Irrespective of when they may have officially declared
this to go from a missing person to a homicide, it's clear
by the questions that were in fact sent to Mr. Watson by the
Hawaii County Police Department that already was a murder
investigation. The questions they were asking were in fact
homicide questions, sex assault questions. 
The focus had gone to the individuals already, and I
think that the statements are, uh, of the officer saying
that he was pursuing a missing person are actually proved to
be incorrect by the nature of the questions that he asked
and the statement itself. 
Eliason did not fail to raise the issue during the Motion
 
hearing. Even if Eliason did not expressly review the questions
 
with Det. Watson during the hearing, the issue was timely raised
 
and considered by the trial court and the court had a copy of the
 
questions as an exhibit.
 
Furthermore, Eliason again raised the issue in the
 
opening brief in Serrano's direct appeal. Eliason quoted the
 
written question and answer, specifically: "Will you tell us
 
where she is in exchange for leniency? Answer: If I knew, would
 
tell them." In its SDO, the supreme court stated that "the
 
motions court did not err when it denied [Serrano's] motion to
 
suppress his statements made to a police officer on September 18,
 
1993 because the interrogation was not custodial." Therefore,
 
the issue has been ruled upon and relief is not available
 
pursuant to HRPP Rule 40. HRPP Rule 40(a)(3). 
(6) The letter dated November 22, 1999 by DiMaria does
 
not, by itself, establish that Eliason was ineffective. Serrano
 
points to part of the letter in which DiMaria asks Eliason to
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"note how the Santa Cruz statement by my son came about. This is
 
very important. It is all outlined in the investigative
 
materials that Lisa Sobalvarro collected in Hawaii. This needs
 
to be part of your motion . . . to quash the statement from the
 
record." Serrano argues that if Eliason had heeded DiMaria's
 
plea, Eliason would have known that the officers used weapons,
 
handcuffed Serrano, and arrested him.
 
During the Rule 40 hearing, Eliason stated that he did 
not recall receiving a letter dated November 22, 1999 from 
DiMaria or the investigative reports to which it referred. 
Eliason stated that if he had received the documents, they would 
have been in his files, which he turned over to Serrano's Rule 40 
counsel. Serrano's Rule 40 counsel stated that the letter dated 
November 22, 1999 was from Eliason's file. However, in his 
Opening Brief, Serrano admits: "Unfortunately, the investigative 
'materials that Lisa Sobalvarro collected in Hawaii' have gone 
missing." The record from the Rule 40 Petition does not contain 
any exhibits from Lisa Sobalvarro. Thus, the claim boils down to 
DiMaria's testimony at the Rule 40 hearing, in which she stated 
that the materials given to Eliason prior to the Motion hearing 
contained information that the officers "came with guns and took 
[Serrano] away" and that Eliason had been informed of this prior 
to the Motion hearing. In its Order, the circuit court found 
only Eliason's testimony credible. "It is well-settled that an 
appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is 
the province of the trier of fact." Mattiello, 90 Hawai' i at 
259, 978 P.2d at 697. 
(7) Serrano's claim that Eliason was ineffective for
 
failing to adequately cross-examine McCubbins is without merit. 
Serrano argues that Eliason should have questioned McCubbins
 
about her mental state at the time she gave her preservation
 
deposition on April 14, 2000 because in a letter to the
 
Prosecutor dated April 4, 2000, McCubbins stated she took
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
narcotics for pain, resulting in short-term memory loss. Serrano
 
also claims Eliason failed to impeach McCubbins regarding her
 
inconsistent statement as to whether her son, Jason (Jason), told
 
her what happened on the night that Vargas was murdered. Serrano
 
claims on appeal:
 
The testimony of [McCubbins] was particularly
devastating for [Serrano] because she was the only non-
defendant to tie [Serrano] to [Vargas]. She testified to
 [Serrano] threatening Co-Defendant Gibbs by stating "what
fucker. You want some of that too?" . . . [McCubbins]
testified that [Serrano] was wearing brown surf shorts with
the crotch ripped out and shredded and that [Serrano] was
wet including his hair. . . . Since the co-defendants charge
that it was [Serrano] who took the still living Vargas down
a cliffside and caused her death close to the ocean, this
testimony strongly supported the claim that [Serrano] was in
fact the murderer.
 
In addition, Serrano points out that Eliason was
 
ineffective because he did not designate portions of McCubbin's
 
deposition regarding her cleaning of the maroon Subaru trunk due
 
to rotted lobsters, the fact that she had engaged in plea
 
negotiations with the Prosecutor's Office to not be charged as an
 
accessory after the fact, and the fact that she knew that Jason
 
had not yet been sentenced. Serrano argues that these subjects
 
were relevant to show bias, interest, and motive to testify.
 
At the Rule 40 hearing, Eliason stated that he made a
 
strategic decision not to impeach McCubbins based on her use of
 
narcotic painkillers because he did not know what her trial
 
testimony would be. If her statements were inconsistent with
 
other witnesses, he would have provided the State with ample
 
grounds to discount her testimony due to the fact that she had
 
trouble with her short term memory from the narcotic painkillers. 
Eliason also reasoned that if McCubbins' testimony was consistent
 
with other witnesses, attacking her memory based on the fact that
 
she was on narcotic painkillers would not be helpful because it
 
was consistent testimony and would presumably demonstrate that
 
the painkillers had no effect on her memory. "[M]atters
 
presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy,
 
will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." State v.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 39-40, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247-48 (1998) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted; emphasis in 
original). Finding of Fact 13 was not erroneous. 
Nowhere in the Rule 40 Petition did Serrano claim that
 
McCubbins' deposition testimony that Serrano stated "what fucker. 
You want some too?" or the fact that Serrano was wet had any
 
significance to the trial or that Eliason's failure to question
 
McCubbins about it constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Serrano did not question Eliason about those statements during
 
the Rule 40 hearing. Serrano has not pointed to where in the
 
record of the Rule 40 proceeding the error occurred or where the
 
alleged error was brought to the attention of the circuit court. 
Therefore, those points of error on appeal will be disregarded. 
HRAP Rule 28(b)(4).
 
(8) Serrano's claims that Eliason did not designate,
 
withdrew, or failed to object to the inclusion of specific
 
portions of McCubbins' deposition for trial is not the same claim
 
as a failure to cross-examine a witness during a preservation
 
deposition. 
Even if this court reviews Serrano's claims of
 
ineffective assistance of counsel on the basis that Eliason
 
failed to make proper deposition designations or failed to object
 
to deposition designations, Serrano does not challenge FOFs 14
 
and 15, which state:
 
14.	 [Serrano] also contended that [Eliason] should have
designated portion[s] of [McCubbins'] deposition
regarding (1) her testimony that she cleaned out the
trunk of the car in which the victim was transported
in [sic] because there were lobsters rotting in there
even though the lobsters were delivered sometime after
she cleaned out the trunk, (2) testimony relating to
her plea agreement, (3) testimony relating to her
knowledge of the penalty for a murder conviction, and
(4) testimony that her son [Jason] had not yet been
sentenced.
 
15.	 These matters were not inquired into by [Serrano's]
counsel during the hearing on the Petition on
January 17, 2008. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Eliason was not questioned about any deposition
 
designations for trial during the Rule 40 hearing. By failing to 
question Eliason about the reasons for the deposition 
designations, Serrano failed to present any evidence that 
Eliason's actions or omissions resulted in the withdrawal or 
substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i at 514, 78 P.3d at 327. Serrano failed to 
demonstrate that Eliason was ineffective with respect to the deposition designations of McCubbins. Conclusion of Law 2 was 
not wrong. 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Denying
 
Petitioner's Amended Petition for Post-Conviction Relief to
 Release Prisoner From Custody; Findings of Fact and Conclusions
 
of Law" filed on September 16, 2008 in the Circuit Court of the
 
Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 20, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
David J. Gierlach
 
for Petitioner-Appellant.
 
Jack N. Matsukawa, Presiding Judge
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai' i,
for Respondent-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
11
 