NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29570
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
GAIL MARTIN, Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee, v.
C. BREWER AND COMPANY, LTD., a Hawaii corporation; MAUNA KEA
AGRIBUSINESS CO., INC., a Hawaii corporation, and Lawrence Patao,
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 03-1-186)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this case arising out of a December 18, 2001 motor
 
vehicle accident, Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Gail Martin
 
(Martin) appeals from the "Amended Judgment as to All Claims and
 
All Parties," entered on December 9, 2008, by the Circuit Court
 
of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).1 Defendants­
Appellees/Cross-Appellants C. Brewer and Company, Ltd. (C.
 Brewer), Mauna Kea Agribusiness Co., Inc. (Mauna Kea), and
 
Lawrence Patao (Patao)
2
 (collectively, Defendants) cross-appeal
from seventeen orders entered by the Circuit Court.
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 
2
 It appears that despite the spelling appearing in the caption, the
correct spelling of Patao's first name is Lawrence.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Martin alleges the Circuit Court erred by: (1) denying
 
Plaintiff's Motion for a New Trial, or in the Alternative for
 
Additur, on the basis that the jury's verdict was irreconcilably
 
inconsistent and against the great weight of the evidence; (2)
 
denying Plaintiff's Motion to Strike Defendants' Untimely
 
Supplement to Defendants' Answers to Interrogatories and to Limit
 
Testimony of Defendants' Witnesses, Including But Not Limited to,
 
Calvin Kam, M.D. (Dr. Kam), to Facts, Opinions and Bases of
 
Opinions Disclosed Prior to the July 23, 2007 Discovery Cut-off
 
Date (Motion to Strike); (3) abusing its discretion in admitting
 
Patao's testimony via deposition; (4) imposing time limits on
 
Martin's direct and cross-examination; (5) excluding Martin's
 
Exhibit 1040, a redacted copy of Patao's answers to
 
interrogatories; (6) refusing three jury instructions requested
 
by Martin; (7) excluding evidence pertaining to the inside of the
 
truck Patao was driving; (8) granting judgment as a matter of law
 
to C. Brewer on the issue of negligent hiring, retention, and
 
training; and (9) abusing its discretion in refusing to grant a
 
new trial where the jury's apportionment of fifty-percent
 
negligence to Martin was against the great weight of the
 
evidence.
 
Defendants allege eighteen points of error in their
 
cross-appeal, primarily regarding evidentiary rulings, but state
 
that consideration is necessary only if this court vacates
 
judgment and orders a new trial. In essence, these points
 
contend the court erred by: (1) denying Defendants' motions to
 
add expert witnesses; (2) not compelling Martin to submit to a
 
second independent medical examination; (3) granting Martin's
 
motion to preclude evidence of settlement discussions; (4)
 
denying a motion to determine admissibility of Dr. Grover's
 
testimony; (5) admitting Dr. Grover's testimony on billing
 
charges prior to the subject accident and on the reasonableness
 
of medical charges by other doctors; (6) admitting evidence
 
regarding obstruction to Patao's vision inside his truck; (7)
 
admitting Hayes's expert opinion testimony; (8) denying
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendant's motion to exclude evidence and testimony regarding
 
Martin's claims for negligent hiring, supervision, training and
 
retention and the company Defendants' driver safety program; (9)
 
admitting Dr. Olsen's testimony regarding causation,
 
apportionment, and reasonableness of medical expenses; and (10)
 
admitting Dr. Klein's opinions regarding apportionment.
 
After carefully reviewing Martin's points of error, the
 
arguments of the parties, the record, and the relevant authority,
 
we conclude Martin's points are without merit and affirm the
 
judgment. Consequently, we do not consider the issues raised in
 
Defendants' cross-appeal.
 
(1) Martin's primary argument on appeal is that the 
Circuit Court erred in denying her Motion for New Trial, in which 
Martin maintained, inter alia, that the jury's award of special 
damages but zero general damages was irreconcilably inconsistent. 
Relying on Walsh v. Chan, 80 Hawaif i 188, 907 P.2d 774 (App. 
1995), rev'd in part on other grounds 80 Hawaif i 212, 908 P.2d 
1198 (1995), Martin contends that where the jury has made some 
award of medical expenses, it must also award some general 
damages for pain and suffering. Defendants, relying on Dunbar v. 
Thompson, 79 Hawaif i 306, 312, 901 P.2d 1285, 1291 (App. 1995), 
maintain that "the denial of general damages does not automatically warrant a new trial." In light of the Hawaif i 
Supreme Court's decision in Kanahele v. Han, 125 Hawaif i 446, 
460, 263 P.3d 726, 740 (2011) in which the court rejected a zero-
general-damages award but emphasized that there are some 
instances where "[a] zero award of general damages may be allowed 
to stand[] despite an award of special damages," we invited the 
parties to submit supplemental briefs on this subject. Based on 
our review of their submissions and the record, we conclude this 
case is such an instance. 
"A verdict [of some special damages but zero general 
damages] is characterized as inconsistent where there is 
sufficient evidence to support an award for pain and suffering." 
Walsh, 80 Hawaif i at 194, 907 P.2d at 780. Here, the evidence of 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
any pain and suffering comes almost exclusively from Martin's
 
testimony. While prior cases relied on objective testimony,
 
there is no authority that "sufficient evidence of pain and
 
suffering" could not be based on the plaintiff's testimony. 
Additionally, the jurors here were instructed that "[p]ain is
 
subjective and medical science may or may not be able to
 
determine whether pain actually exists[,]" and they must decide
 
whether pain existed "considering all of the evidence," which
 
includes Martin's testimony.
 
Prior cases have shown that the evidence supporting 
special damages may be deemed sufficient evidence of pain "since 
both special damages for medical expenses and general damages for 
pain and suffering are largely dependent on the same proof." 
Dunbar, 79 Hawaif i at 315, 901 P.2d at 1294. The appellate 
courts have parsed the special damages award to determine for which charges the jury made the award and concluded that the 
award was meant to include at least some medical expenses. See 
Walsh, 80 Hawaif i at 195, 907 P.2d at 781 (jury award was 
consistent with the value of medical care attributable to "sprain 
injuries," including physical therapy, diagnostic tests and x-
rays, and pain medication); Kanahele, 125 Hawaif i at 450-51, 263 
P.3d at 730-31 (jury award covered medical costs, including doctor's surgical services). But see Dunbar, 79 Hawaif i at 312, 
901 P.3d at 1291 (unclear what special damages were to encompass, but likely included medical expenses). 
Parsing the damage award here, we conclude, as
 
Defendants have asserted and Martin does not dispute, that the
 
special damages award was intended to compensate Martin for her
 
3 4
emergency room (ER) care and car repairs.  Defendants
 
characterize the medical costs compensated for by the verdict as
 
"a precautionary medical examination[,]" not addressing the fact
 
3
 The bill for the emergency room care, from Hilo Medical Center was
$1,112.50 for the hospital and $537.47 for Dr. Goldberg's services.
 
4
 Lenn Miyao, owner of Hawaii Collision Center, estimated that the
total damage to Plaintiff's car was $2,757.58.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that among the emergency room expenses is a shot of Dilaudid, a
 
pain killer. Here, the ER expenses were not just for a
 
"precautionary" exam, as Defendants state, but included pain
 
medication.5 Given that "there is sufficient evidence to support
 
an award for pain and suffering," the lack of a general damages
 award to compensate for that is inconsistent with the jury's
 
special damages award for medical expense.
 
Nevertheless, the Circuit Court was not required to 
invalidate the jury's decision and grant a new trial, because 
"[a] conflict in the jury's answers to questions in a special 
verdict will warrant a new trial only if those answers are 
irreconcilably inconsistent, and the verdict will not be 
disturbed if the answers can be reconciled under any theory." 
Carr v. Strode, 79 Hawaif i 475, 489, 904 P.2d 489, 503 (1995) 
(citing Craft v. Peebles, 78 Hawaif i 287, 307, 893 P.2d 138, 158 
(1995)) (emphasis added). "[T]he court must search for a 
reasonable way to read the verdicts as expressing a coherent view 
of the case, and must exhaust this effort before it is free to 
dismiss the jury's verdict and remand the case for a new trial." 
Id. (quoting Toner v. Lederle Labs., 828 F.2d 510, 512 (9th Cir. 
1987)). Thus, the question becomes whether there are any grounds 
upon which the damages verdict could be reconciled. 
In Kanahele, the Hawaif i Supreme Court clearly adopted 
the three exceptions cited by the Dunbar court, holding: 
A zero award of general damages may be allowed to
stand, despite an award of special damages, when the
evidence indicated a dispute over the amount of claimedspecial damages such that the zero-general-damages verdictis evidence of the jury's intent to include in the specialdamages award an amount for pain and suffering, or there isno probative evidence that the plaintiff incurred pain andsuffering as a consequence of the defendant's act, or wherethe only evidence of pain and suffering is the plaintiff'ssubjective testimony, which the jury could reasonably haveconcluded was exaggerated or lacking in credibility. 
5
 Martin told the ER physicians that she had been using OxyContin
and other narcotic pain relievers for almost a decade prior to the accident,
so the jury might have inferred that this shot was given to replace pain
medications that Martin would have taken anyway, had she not been in the ER.
However, Dr. Greenberg's testimony does not establish the reasoning behind
administering the medication to Martin.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
125 Hawaif i at 460, 263 P.3d at 740 (citing Dunbar, 79 Hawaif i at 
316, 901 P.2d at 1295) (brackets and quotations omitted). 
6
However, as in Dunbar,  the Hawaif i Supreme Court held that 
Kanahele's circumstances did not fall into one of these 
exceptions. Id. 
The question presented by this case is whether Martin's
 
case falls within one of the recognized exceptions. Based on the
 
record, we conclude Martin's case falls into the third exception. 
As noted above, there is some evidence--Martin's testimony and
 
that of the treating ER doctor and the emergency medical
 
technician--that Martin was in pain after the accident, which the
 
jury's verdict establishes was partially caused by Defendants'
 
negligence and was "a legal cause of injury" to Martin. Given,
 
however, that the sole evidence of pain and suffering is Martin's
 
testimony and the testimony of the medical providers based on
 
Martin's complaints to them, the jury could have reasonably
 
concluded Martin's complaints were exaggerated or lacked
 
credibility. Furthermore, jurors might have concluded that
 
Martin was malingering when the defense introduced videos
 
documenting Martin's range of motion compared with her and her
 
daughter's testimony on Martin's physical limitations.7 Dr. Kam
 
also testified that Martin has been dependent on pain medication
 since the mid-1990s, and was "on serious drugs," including
 
various forms of oxycodone, in October 2001, a couple of months
 
6 The ICA in Walsh, decided in the same year, made no mention of
 
these exceptions.
 
7
 Martin claimed that in the days soon after the December 18, 2001
accident, she was running into walls, was dizzy and nauseous, and would get
car-sick when driving, that she could hardly sleep, that her hands were numb,
and that she had headaches. Martin's daughter, Jamie Holland-Brown, said that
following the subject accident her mom "couldn't lift her head off the
pillow," "was in pain all the time," had a constant headache, and "pretty much
locked herself in her room."
 
In contrast, Defendants introduced into evidence two surveillance videos
taken by their hired private investigator, which showed Martin on May 14,
2002, walking down stairs and driving, and on September 29, 2005 carrying a
box into the post office and driving a vehicle.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
prior to the subject accident. Based on this record, it is
 
reasonable to conclude that the jury found Martin's complaints of
 
pain resulting from the accident to be not credible.
 
Martin apparently concedes that none of the special
 
damages awarded were to compensate her for the 2002 surgeries,
 
massage therapy, chiropractic care or dental treatments. 
However, she argues that even assuming that the damages were for
 
the ER costs alone, general damages were still warranted because
 
she suffered mental and emotional distress caused because she
 
feared "possible aggravation" of pre-existing injuries. This
 
argument is dependent upon the jury deeming Martin's testimony
 
credible. The jury could have concluded that Martin's testimony
 
regarding her mental distress suffered while in the ER was not
 
credible, and thus not a basis for a general damages award.
 
The jury's answers to questions posed in a special 
verdict form "are to be construed in the context of the 
surrounding circumstances and in connection with the pleadings, 
instructions, and issues submitted." Dunbar, 79 Hawaif i at 312, 
901 P.2d at 1291 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). In view of the evidence produced at trial, the jury's verdict is 
not irreconcilably inconsistent and falls into the third 
exception to the general rule given in Kanahele. 
8
(2) We reject Martin's second point of error,  that
the Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying her Motion to
 
Strike.9 The Motion to Strike asserted that Defendants had sent
 
8 Martin violates Hawaif i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP)
28(b)(4) because the points of error section of her Opening Brief does not
cite "where in the record the alleged error occurred." The HRAP requiresparties to cite to the record in the points on appeal section of the OpeningBrief and warns that "[p]oints not presented in accordance with this sectionwill be disregarded," HRAP 28(b)(4). However, Martin's statement of the casedoes reference the Circuit Court's order denying the motion. Given the appellate courts' preference for adjudicating cases on the merits whenpossible, Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawaif i 490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012), we
address this point. 
9
 The Circuit Court's Order re: January 11, 2008 Status Conference
(Seventh Trial Readiness Order) contains the Circuit Court's decision on
Martin's motion. Relevant to this appeal, the Circuit Court ordered that:
(continued...)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unsigned supplemental responses to interrogatories with a letter
 
dated December 18, 2007--after the discovery cut-off date--and
 
included a letter from Dr. Kam, purporting to supplement his
 
October 29, 2001 report on an independent medical examination
 
done for litigation over Martin's 2000 accident. We conclude the
 
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion here.
 
Martin's Motion to Strike was based on Rules 37 and 11 
of the Hawaif i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) and thus sought 
sanctions based on these rules. The Circuit Court had discretion in determining whether to impose sanctions. See Kawamata Farms, 
Inc. v. United Agri Products, 86 Hawaif i 214, 241, 948 P.2d 1055, 
1082 (1997) (circuit court has broad discretion in determining 
sanctions under HRCP Rule 37); Gap v. Puna Geothermal Venture, 
106 Hawaif i 325, 331, 104 P.3d 912, 918 (2004) ("All aspects of a 
HRCP Rule 11 determination should be reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." (internal quotation marks omitted)). 
"[T]rial courts have broad powers to control the litigation 
process before them, including the presentation of evidence." 
Weinberg v. Dickson-Weinberg, 123 Hawaif i 68, 75, 229 P.3d 1133, 
1140 (2010) (citing Richardson v. Sport Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 76 Hawaif i 494, 507, 880 P.2d 169, 182 (1994)). 
First, as required under HRCP Rule 37, Martin fails to
 
identify any discovery order which her motion to strike was
 
designed to enforce. Martin does not point to any court order
 
requiring expert reports to be provided by a certain date. To
 
the extent Martin may be relying on the "Court Order Re: 
November 9, 2007 Trial Readiness Conference (Third Trial
 
Readiness Order)" dated November 21, 2007, that order did not
 
prohibit Defendants from providing additional information to
 
9(...continued)
[Dr. Kam] will be allowed to testify as to opinions rendered
in October, 2002 and December, 2007, provided that his
testimony is limited to data that was in existence on or
before the end of August, 2002. [Defendants' counsel] is to
make Dr. Kam available for deposition at [Martin's
counsel's] convenience.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Martin, by supplementing Dr. Kam's earlier answers to Martin's
 
interrogatories. Although Martin claims on appeal that the
 
December 18, 2007 letter was the first time that Defendants had
 
disclosed Dr. Kam's opinions relating to causation and
 
apportionment, on November 8, 2004, Defendants' Final Naming of
 
Witnesses listed Dr. Kam as an expert "[e]xpected to testify
 
regarding his review of records and opinions regarding damages
 
issues, including apportionment." (emphasis added) At the time
 
of the Motion to Strike, Martin had Dr. Kam's October 29, 2001
 
report,10 but had not, at least up until November 8, 2007,
 
deposed Dr. Kam.
 
Second, in response to Martin's Motion to Strike, the
 
Circuit Court limited the scope of Dr. Kam's testimony and gave
 Martin the opportunity to depose Dr. Kam at her convenience. 
Martin deposed Dr. Kam on January 14, 2008. Given the
 
circumstances in this case, the Circuit Court acted within its
 
discretion and Martin was not unduly prejudiced by the Circuit
 
Court's order.
 
Further, Martin has made no showing that sanctions were
 
appropriate under HRCP Rule 11.
 
Martin has failed to show the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in denying her Motion to Strike.
 
(3) The Circuit Court did not err in allowing
 
Defendants to submit a deposition from Patao in lieu of his
 
testimony. HRCP Rule 32 allows a deposition to be used at trial,
 
to the extent that the testimony would be admissible in evidence
 
if the witness were present and testifying, if the court finds
 
the witness is unable to attend or testify due to illness. HRCP
 
Rule 32(a)(3)(c).
11 The Circuit Court was not bound by the rules
 
10
 Martin asserts that the Circuit Court "erroneously references" Dr.
Kam's opinions rendered in October 2002. We agree that October 2002 is
inaccurate, but likely a typographical error.
 
11
 HRCP Rule 32(a)(3) reads, in relevant part:
 
(continued...) 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of evidence in considering the information Defendants presented
 
to make its decision. HRE Rule 104(a) provides, "In making its
 
determination [of preliminary questions] the court is not bound
 
by the rules of evidence except those with respect to
 
privileges." See also HRE 1101(d)(1) (the rules of evidence do
 
not apply to "[t]he determination of questions of fact
 preliminary to admissibility of evidence when the issue is to be
 
determined by the court under rule 104"). Dr. Roy Koga's (Dr.
 
Koga) statements speak to Patao's unavailability to testify due
 
to illness, a fact concerning the admissibility of the deposition
 
under HRCP Rule 32(a)(3)(C). Thus, the Circuit Court was not
 
bound by the personal knowledge requirement of HRE Rule 602, and
 
Dr. Koga's lack of personal knowledge did not warrant exclusion
 
of the deposition.
 
"On appeal, the trial court's determination of 
preliminary factual issues concerning the admission of evidence 
will be upheld unless clearly erroneous." State v. McGriff, 76 
Hawaifi 148, 157, 871 P.2d 782, 791 (1994). "A finding of fact 
is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to support the 
finding, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm 
conviction in reviewing the entire evidence that a mistake has 
been committed." Id. (quoting Hawaif i's Thousand Friends v. City 
& Cnty. of Honolulu, 75 Haw. 237, 248, 858 P.2d 726, 732 (1993) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)). Defense 
counsel's representations and Dr. Koga's testimony provided 
evidence of Patao's poor health. The Circuit Court could infer 
that, where Patao was hospitalized nine days earlier with a 
condition that requires two or three weeks of recuperation, Patao 
(...continued) 
The deposition of a witness, whether or not a party, may be
used by any party for any purpose if the court finds . . .
(C) that the witness is unable to attend or testify because
of age, illness, infirmity, or imprisonment[.]
 
The rule is nearly identical to Rule 32(a)(4)(C) of the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure (FRCP).
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
would be too ill to testify. Accordingly, Defendants met their
 
burden of proving Patao's inability to testify.
 
Martin further contends that the Circuit Court failed 
to make arrangements for Patao to testify in person, either the 
next day or the week following. However, as she did not request 
a continuance of the trial in order to obtain Patao's live 
testimony, this issue is deemed waived. See Enoka v. AIG Hawaii 
Ins. Co., Inc., 109 Hawaif i 537, 546, 128 P.3d 850, 859 (2006). 
(4) The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion by 
imposing time limits on the presentation of evidence and cross-examination of Defendants' witnesses. A review of the record 
shows that, although Martin may have noted that she did not like 
the time constraints, she never objected nor requested more time 
to extend cross-examination. Accordingly, this point of error is 
deemed waived given that "the rule in this jurisdiction prohibits 
an appellant from complaining for the first time on appeal of 
error to which he has acquiesced or to which he failed to 
object." Price v. AIG Hawaif i Ins. Co., Inc., 107 Hawaif i 106, 
111, 111 P.3d 1, 6 (2005) (quoting Okuhara v. Broida, 51 Haw. 253, 255, 456 P.2d 228, 230 (1969)) (internal quotation marks and 
alterations omitted). "[I]f counsel believe that relevant 
evidence must be heard after the time set for the hearing has 
expired, they must move for an extension of time." Doe v. Doe, 
98 Hawaif i 144, 154, 44 P.3d 1085, 1095 (2002). Where the 
parties make no objection, "there cannot be error, absent plain 
error." Id. The appellate court's discretion to address the 
plain error doctrine should be exercised sparingly and "only when justice so requires." Okada Trucking Co., Ltd., v. Bd. of Water 
Supply, 97 Hawaif i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
Use of such discretion in this instance would be
 
misplaced as the Circuit Court did not clearly err in limiting
 
testimony. Martin's counsel asked Dr. Robert Marvit (Dr.
 
Marvit), the psychiatrist, about the Mauro report and Dr. Marvit
 
stated that he did not find Dr. Anthony Mauro's (Dr. Mauro)
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclusions to be correct. Martin provides no affidavit that 
establishes what the other defense experts would have testified 
to regarding Dr. Mauro's report if questioning had continued. 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court's limitation on testimony was not 
an abuse of discretion. Accord Walton v. Cannon, Short & Gaston, 
23 S.W.3d 143, 154 (Tex. Ct. App. 2000) (cited in Barbee v. Queen's Medical Center, 119 Hawaif i 136, 155, 194 P.3d 1098, 1117 
(App. 2008)) (no abuse of discretion where party did not object to limitation and did not proffer evidence he was allegedly 
prevented from introducing). 
(5) The Circuit Court did not err when it denied
 
admission of Martin's proposed exhibit 1040 based on HRCP Rule
 
33(b)(1).
12 The refused Exhibit 1040 does not appear in the
 
record. Consequently, Martin has failed to comply with HRAP Rule
 28(b)(4)(A), which requires that when an appellant raises a point
 
of error involving the admission or rejection of evidence, the
 
point of error should include "a quotation of the ground urged
 
for the objection and the full substance of the evidence admitted
 
or rejected." Moreover, the admission of Martin's attorney that
 
the proposed exhibit "doesn't have a signature on it" but "does
 
have the fax line for Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto, the firm
 
representing [Patao]" shows that the interrogatories were not
 
"given fully in writing under oath" as required by HRCP Rule 33.
 
(6) Martin claims she was prejudiced by the Circuit
 
Court's refusal to issue three jury instructions that she
 
requested. "It is prejudicial error for the court to refuse to
 
give an instruction relevant under the evidence which correctly
 
states the law unless the point is adequately and fully covered
 
by other instructions given by the court." In re Estate of
 
12
 HRCP Rule 33(b)(1) states, in pertinent part, that 
[e]ach interrogatory shall be answered separately and fully
in writing under oath, unless it is objected to, in which
event the objecting party shall state the reasons for
objection and shall answer to the extent the interrogatory
is not objectionable.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Herbert,  90 Hawaif i 443, 467, 979 P.2d 39, 63 (1999) (citation 
and internal quotation marks omitted). "Whether a jury 
instruction properly states the law is a question that this court 
will review de novo
." Richardson, 76 Hawaif i at 504, 880 P.2d at 
179 (citing S. Utsunomiya Enter., Inc. v. Moomuku Country Club, 
75 Haw. 480, 506, 866 P.2d 951, 965 (1994)). 
(a) The Circuit Court did not err in refusing to
 
instruct the jury that Defendants were liable for subsequent
 
"inappropriate and/or improper medical treatment." Martin's
 
proposed instruction does not accurately state the rule for a
 
defendant's liability for subsequent medical negligence. 
"Inappropriate and/or improper medical care" could include
 
treatment that is necessary to treat an injury but which is done
 
negligently, but it could also include treatment that was not
 
reasonable or was unnecessary to treat an injury. Under Montalvo
 
v. Lapez, 77 Hawaif i 282, 884 P.2d 345 (1994), negligent 
defendants may be liable for the former but not the latter. 
(b) As Martin's "notice to agent" instruction was
 
irrelevant to the issues at trial, the Circuit Court did not err
 in refusing this instruction. Martin argued below that the
 
instruction was necessary because Patao testified that "he had
 
noticed that the gauges had blocked his view from the pickup
 
truck sometimes [sic] prior to the date of this accident. . . .
 
Under this [proposed instruction,] notice to agent is notice to
 
the principal, because he is the agent of the company for driving
 
that truck." We fail to see how the instruction was relevant,
 
given that Mauna Kea would be liable under the doctrine of
 
respondeat superior if the jury found Patao to be negligent. 
Martin makes no argument on appeal that the absence of the
 
instruction left the instructions given to the jury prejudicially
 
insufficient.
 
(c) It was not error for the Circuit Court to
 
refuse Martin's requested instruction no. 6, which purports to
 
instruct the jury on the "eggshell skull doctrine," as its
 
substance was covered by other instructions. Moreover, Martin's
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instruction does not properly state the law on apportioning for 
pre-existing injuries. Martin's proposed instruction would have 
made Defendants liable for aggravation of her pre-existing 
condition, without apportioning the damages attributable to that 
condition. Montalvo, 77 Hawaif i at 299-300, 884 P.2d at 362-63. 
(7) The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in 
excluding photographs showing the inside cab of the pesticide 
spray truck driven by Patao.13 A trial court's exclusion of 
photographs is proper where the photographs were not a fair and accurate representation of the scene at the time of alleged 
events. State v. Sequin, 73 Haw. 331, 337-38, 832 P.2d 269, 273 
(1992) (excluding aerial photos of crime scene taken after crime). Martin's counsel did not establish that the photographs 
accurately depicted the vehicle at the time of the accident. As 
the proponent of the photographs' admission, it was Martin's duty 
to lay the foundational facts necessary to authenticate them. 
State v. Joseph, 77 Hawaif i 235, 239, 883 P.2d 657, 661 (App. 
1994) ("[T]he proponent of the evidence must prove that the item is what the proponent claims it is."). 
(8) The Circuit Court did not err in granting a
 
judgment as a matter of law in favor of C. Brewer. The Circuit
 
Court granted Defendants' motion on the basis that Martin alleged
 
C. Brewer was liable only on the basis of respondeat superior,
 
and "there's no indication of a master/servant relationship
 
between Mr. Patao and C. Brewer[.]" Martin presents no argument
 
on this point, and thus this point is deemed waived. 
(9) The Circuit Court did not err in denying Martin's
 
motion for a new trial. Where, as here, the basis for the motion
 
is that the verdict is against the weight of the evidence, "the
 
13
 Again, it should be noted that Martin did not adhere to HRAP
requirements. HRAP 28(b)(4)(iii)(A) requires that when a point of error
"involves the admission or rejection of evidence, a quotation of the grounds
urged for the objection and the full substance of the evidence admitted or
rejected." Plaintiff appended her Opening Brief with three transcripts
related to this point of error, but does not provide accurate page numbers to
the grounds urged for rejection of the photographs.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial court no longer possess[es] unbridled discretion in the 
disposition of the motion." Lovell Enter., Inc. v. 
Campbell-Burns Wood Prods., Inc., 3 Haw. App. 531, 541, 654 P.2d 1361, 1368 (1982). "[A trial court's] conclusion that a verdict 
is not against the weight of the evidence is sustained unless we 
are of the opinion that the undisputed evidence results in a 
verdict that is without legal support such that justice requires 
a new trial[.]" Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawaif i 1, 11, 84 P.3d 509, 
519 (2004) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Substantial evidence supports the jury's conclusion 
that the accident was partially due to Martin's negligence. Patao testified that Martin stopped twice at the intersection, 
the second time being after she was five or six feet into the 
intersection, "on the bend already on the turn." Martin claims 
that she had pulled forward just enough to see around a vehicle 
on the left, not into the intersection. Bernard Maddox, 
Defendants' accident reconstructionist, could not rule out the 
possibility that Martin braked suddenly in an attempt to cause 
the accident. Because the vehicles were moved from the roadway 
before the police arrived, there is no independent evidence or 
witnesses to indicate where precisely the accident occurred. 
Patao's version supports the theory that Martin was negligent in 
stopping abruptly in the intersection. It was up to the jurors 
to decide how the accident occurred based upon the credibility of 
the witnesses. Their conclusion that Martin's negligence was 
fifty percent of the cause of the accident is not "without legal 
support such that justice requires a new trial[.]" Miyamoto, 104 
Hawaifi at 11, 84 P.3d at 519 (citation and internal quotation 
marks omitted). 
Therefore, the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit's
 
December 9, 2008 "Amended Judgment as to All Claims and All
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Parties," entering the jury verdict in favor of Martin for $4,430 
and against Defendants, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, February 21, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Mark K. Haugen,
for Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee. 
Presiding Judge 
Stephen G. DyerGary S. Miyamoto(Ayabe Chong, Nishimoto, Sia &Nakamura),for Defendants-Appellees/CrossAppellants. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
16
 