   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29636
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
DONALD J. LANGER and DAVID LANGER, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. RONALD RICE, Defendant-Appellee, and
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-20, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-1340)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Donald J. Langer and David Langer
 
1
(Langer)  appeal from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's
(
Circuit Court) Final Judgment entered on January 13, 2009.2
 
The Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor of Defendant-
Appellee Ronald Rice (Rice) on Langer's claims of breach of
 
contract (Counts I and II) and fraud in the inducement (Count
 
III). On appeal, Langer asserts that the Circuit Court erred in
 granting summary judgment in favor of Rice on these counts. We
 conclude that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary
 judgment on the basis of res judicata and/or judicial estoppel,
 but that Langer's fraudulent inducement claim is barred by the
 applicable statute of limitations.
 I. BACKGROUND
 
In the late 1960s, Rice manufactured and sold a suntan
 
product called "Tropic Tan." Langer purchased Tropic Tan from
 
1
 David Langer is Donald's brother and the assignee of certain
rights under the purported contract with Rice.
 
2
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rice for resale at motels and pool decks in Daytona Beach, 
Florida. Although Tropic Tan was manufactured in Florida, its label represented that it was manufactured in Hawai' i. Rice 
believed the made-in-Hawaii label was an effective sales tool. He then changed the name of his product to "Hawaiian Tropic." 
Rice approached Langer with business proposals 
regarding relocating Hawaiian Tropic to Hawai' i. In 1972, Langer 
and Rice formed a partnership in Hawai' i for the manufacture, 
distribution, and sale of Hawaiian Tropic. Shortly thereafter, however, both parties incorporated separate business entities in Hawai'i and Florida. Langer incorporated as "Don Suntan, Inc." 
and Rice as "Tanning Research Laboratories, Inc." Through these entities, Langer functioned as the exclusive distributor of Hawaiian Tropic in Hawai' i and various other regions through 
contracts with Rice's corporation. 
Between 1972 and 1976, Langer and Rice entered into
 
various discussions and/or agreements regarding Langer's interest
 in the Hawaiian Tropic business under Rice's corporation. These
 discussions and/or agreements were the basis for two prior
 lawsuits in Volusia County, Florida. Based on the prior
 lawsuits, Rice filed a motion for summary judgment in the instant
 case asserting, inter alia, that Langer's present claims were
 barred by res judicata. On January 13, 2009, the Circuit Court
 entered final judgment in favor of Rice and dismissed all claims
 on the basis of res judicata, judicial estoppel, and the statute
 of limitations. 
A. Present and Prior Cases
 1 . Present Case - the Sale Proceeds Agreement
 
In the present case, Langer alleges that he became
 
concerned that his investment in the Hawaiian Tropic brand would
 be lost if Rice sold the business. Rice agreed that if Langer
 continued to distribute the Hawaiian Tropic product, he would
 receive ten percent of the sale proceeds if the business ever
 sold. Sometime before May of 1973, Rice purportedly confirmed
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this agreement in a signed, handwritten letter (Proceeds 
Agreement) which provided: "Let it be known that . . . . In case 
of sale of Hawaiian Tropic, Don Langer will receive 10% of the 
gross proceeds of the sale if he is still living in Hawaii, working for Hawaiian Tropic, and meeting all of the above requirements of this Agreement." As consideration, Langer assisted in the development of Hawaiian Tropic, relocated to Hawai'i, managed the Hawaiian Tropic manufacturing facility, 
distributed and sold the product in Hawai' i, and relinquished his 
interest in the Hawaiian Tropic trademark. 
Langer contends that from 1972 to 1976, the parties
 
continued to negotiate regarding Langer's potential receipt of an
 interest in Rice's corporation. However, he maintains that the
 Proceeds Agreement remained a separate, enforceable contract. 
In 2007, Rice sold Hawaiian Tropic to Playtex Products, 
Inc. for approximately $108 million. On July 20, 2007, Langer filed the complaint herein, alleging that Rice breached the Proceeds Agreement by failing to deliver ten percent of the sales proceeds (Counts I and II). He also asserted that Rice fraudulently induced Langer to relocate to Hawai' i, manage the 
Hawaiian Tropic manufacturing facility, distribute and sell the product in Hawai' i, and relinquish his interest in the Hawaiian 
Tropic trademark in exchange for the Proceeds Agreement (Count III). 
2 . First Ten Percent Case - Stock Agreement
 
On September 29, 1982, Langer filed a complaint against
 
Rice in Volusia County, Florida (Case No. 82-4371-CA-01). 
Langer's primary claim centered on an agreement between the
 parties that allegedly arose in May of 1976. Langer alleged that
 after negotiations, Rice agreed to grant him ten percent of the
 stock in Tanning Research Laboratories, Inc. (Stock Agreement). 
As consideration, Langer assigned the Hawaiian Tropic trademark
 
and his interest in the partnership to Rice's corporation. Rice
 failed to tender the stock as agreed. Langer then sought damages
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for breach of contract, unjust enrichment, and fraudulent
 
inducement of the trademark and partnership assignments. 
Rice filed a motion for summary judgment arguing that
 
Langer's claims were time-barred under the applicable statute of
 limitations. In his memorandum in opposition, Langer
 characterized the Proceeds Agreement as part of an evolution of
 inchoate proposals that culminated in the Stock Agreement. 
Langer described the following documents as evidence of the
 evolving agreement: (1) the Proceeds Agreement, as evidenced by
 the same handwritten letter proffered in the instant case; (2) a
 draft "Irrevocable Trust" granting Langer ten percent of the
 stock in Rice's corporation, contingent on sale of the
 
corporation; and (3) further drafts and proposals regarding
 
Langer's acquisition of a ten percent interest in Rice's
 corporation. Langer testified that the Stock Agreement "most
 definitely" superseded all earlier proposals, including the
 Proceeds Agreement. 
The court entered summary judgment in favor of Rice on
 
all claims, based on the statute of limitations. Langer appealed
 the judgment to Florida's Fifth District Court of Appeal. In his
 appellate briefings, Langer described the Proceeds Agreement as
 "the beginning of continuous negotiations to reach an agreement
 establishing the time and manner in which Langer would receive
 his 10% interest in the Hawaiian Tropic business." The Florida
 Court of Appeal affirmed the judgment without opinion. 
3 . Second Ten Percent Case - Incentive Agreement
 
While Langer's appeal from summary judgment in the
 
first case was pending, his corporation (Don Suntan) had another
 case pending against Rice's corporation in Volusia County (No.
 83-955-CA-01). Langer filed an amended complaint in this case
 adding himself as an individual co-plaintiff. He also added
 three new counts to the complaint seeking declaratory relief and
 damages for breach of contract. Langer alleged that he and Rice
 had entered into an incentive agreement for a ten percent
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interest in Rice's corporation — essentially the same agreement
 
described in the first case. As consideration, Langer alleged
 his prior and continuing efforts to promote the Hawaiian Tropic
 product.
 
In the amended complaint, Langer addressed the Proceeds
 
Agreement and proffered the handwritten letter evidencing the
 agreement. He described the Proceeds Agreement as part of a
 single agreement that was modified over time and later culminated
 in an incentive agreement.
3 Langer alleged that as an incentive
 
for him to promote the Hawaiian Tropic product, the parties
 originally agreed that he would receive ten percent of the
 proceeds in the event of a sale. However, the parties later
 modified the Proceeds Agreement by mutual consent. Instead of
 ten percent of the sale proceeds, the parties agreed that Langer
 would receive ten percent of the stock in Rice's corporation. 
This modification was evidenced by several draft agreements,
 although Langer never produced an executed agreement. 
Rice's corporation filed a motion for summary judgment
 
on the amended claims regarding the Stock Agreement on the basis
 of res judicata. The Florida court granted the motion and
 
3 The pertinent text of the complaint reads:
 
31. In 1972 LANGER and RICE agreed that as incentive for
LANGER to use his best efforts in promoting products sold
under the tradename "Hawaiian Tropic" in the State of Hawaii
that Langer would receive in the event of sale of such
 
business 10% of the net proceeds. Said agreement was
evinced by a letter from RICE to LANGER.
32. On May 18, 1973, RICE formed the corporation, TANNING
RESEARCH, for the purpose of holding title to and conducting
the business of development, manufacture, distribution and
sale of suntan products sold under the tradename "Hawaiian
Tropic."
33. Subsequent to the incorporation of Tanning Research,
RICE on behalf of Tanning Research modified the original
 agreement with LANGER and agreed that LANGER would receive
10% of the stock of Tanning Research for his continuing
efforts in promoting "Hawaiian Tropic" products in the State
of Hawaii. Said modification is evidenced in part by
several proposed trust agreements prepared by Tanning
Research for the benefit of LANGER.
 
(Emphasis added). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dismissed the new claims. Langer did not appeal. However, in a
 
motion for rehearing, he conceded that res judicata "might apply
 as a bar to Count III [for declaratory relief and damages arising
 from the Stock Agreement]."
 II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
On appeal, Langer asserts that the Circuit Court erred
 
in granting summary judgment. Specifically, he maintains that
 the court erred by applying res judicata to bar his claims and by
 failing to resolve all presumptions and inferences concerning the
 prior cases in his favor. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
An appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant
 
or denial of summary judgment de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107
 
Hawai'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005). 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has often articulated the 
standard as the following: 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
 fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Id. (quoting Durette v. Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105
 
Hawai'i 490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 71 (2004)). 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 56(e) provides in 
relevant part:
 
Rule 56. Summary Judgment.
. . . .
 
(e)
 Form of Affidavits; Further Testimony; Defense Required.
. . . When a motion for summary judgment is made . . . an
adverse party may not rest upon the mere allegations or
denials of the adverse party's pleading, but the adverse
party's response, by affidavits or as otherwise provided in
this rule, must set forth specific facts showing that there
is a genuine issue for trial. If the adverse party does not
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
so respond, summary judgment, if appropriate, shall be
entered against the adverse party.
 
Haw. R. Civ. P. 56(e). 
Thus, "[a] party opposing a motion for summary judgment
 
cannot discharge his or her burden by alleging conclusions, 'nor
 
is [the party] entitled to a trial on the basis of a hope that
 [the party] can produce some evidence at that time.'" Henderson
 
v. Prof'l Coatings Corp., 72 Haw. 387, 401, 819 P.2d 84, 92
 (1991) (quoting 10A Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Mary
 Kay Kane, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil 2d § 2727
 (1983)).
 
Although Hawai' i courts have not considered the 
standard of review for judicial estoppel, other courts have held that "[w]hether the elements of judicial estoppel have been met by the facts in a particular case is a question of law . . . reviewable de novo." Olson v. Darlington Mut. Ins. Co., 723 
N.W.2d 713, 720 (Wis. Ct. App. 2006); accord Blix St. Records, Inc. v. Cassidy, 119 Cal. Rptr. 3d 574, 580 (Cal. Ct. App. 2010); Motorola Inc. v. Amkor Tech., Inc., 958 A.2d 852, 859 (Del. S. Ct. 2008); Marcuse v. Del Webb Cmtys., Inc., 163 P.3d 462, 468 (Nev. 2007); Watertown Concrete Products, Inc. v. Foster ex rel. Estate of Foster, 630 N.W.2d 108, 112 (S.D. 2001); In re Estate of Boote, 198 S.W.3d 699, 719 (Tenn. Ct. App. 2005); Baldwin v. Silver, 196 P.3d 170, 172 (Wash. Ct. App. 2008); but see, Hamilton v. State Farm Fire & Cas. Co., 270 F.3d 778, 782 (9th Cir. 2001) (stating that "[w]e review the district court's application of the doctrine of judicial estoppel to the facts of this case for an abuse of discretion"). Once the requisite elements are met, however, the trial court has discretion whether to invoke judicial estoppel. Olson, 723 N.W.2d at 720. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under the Full Faith and Credit Clause of the U.S.
 
Constitution,4 we must afford the previous Florida judgments the
 
same preclusive effect as the state that rendered them. See
 
infra part IV.B. Accordingly, we look to Florida law for the
 
applicable standard of review regarding res judicata. Whether a
 trial court correctly applied res judicata is a question of law
 reviewed de novo. Engle v. Liggett Grp., Inc., 945 So.2d 1246,
 
1259 (Fla. 2006).
 IV. DISCUSSION
 A. Judicial Estoppel
 At the hearing on Rice's motion, the Circuit Court
 
granted summary judgment on the basis of res judicata, judicial
 estoppel, and the applicable statute of limitations. Although
 the court did not further elaborate on its reasoning, presumably
 it concluded that Langer was judicially estopped from asserting
 that the Proceeds Agreement was a separate, enforceable
 agreement, contrary to his assertions in prior cases. On appeal,
 Langer contends that judicial estoppel is inapplicable because a
 necessary element of the doctrine (judicial acceptance of a
 party's prior position) is not met.
5 We agree.
 
Under the doctrine of judicial estoppel, "[a] party
 
will not be permitted to maintain inconsistent positions or to
 take a position in regard to a matter which is directly contrary
 to, or inconsistent with, one previously assumed by him." Roxas
 
4
 The Full Faith and Credit Clause states the following: 
Full Faith and Credit shall be given in each State to the public
Acts, Records, and judicial Proceedings of every other State. And
the Congress may by general Laws prescribe the Manner in which
such Acts, Records and Proceedings shall be proved, and the Effect
thereof.
 
U.S. Const. art. IV, § 1.
 
5
 Langer fails to assert any argument regarding judicial estoppel in
his opening brief, although both parties ultimately address it on appeal.This court therefore has discretion to disregard it. Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemedwaived."). 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
v. Marcos, 89 Hawai' i 91, 124, 969 P.2d 1209, 1242 (1998) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). The doctrine 
"prevents parties from playing 'fast and loose' with the court or 
blowing 'hot and cold' during the course of litigation." Id. 
The doctrine further prevents a party from "adopting a position that is inconsistent with a stance taken in prior litigation." Lamonds v. General Motors Corp., 34 F. Supp. 2d 391, 394 (W.D. Va. 1999). 
Judicial estoppel protects the integrity of the courts 
and the judicial process, not litigants. Rosa v. CWJ 
Contractors, Ltd., 4 Haw. App. 210, 219, 664 P.2d 745, 751 (App. 1983) ("At stake is the integrity of the judicial process."); Lamonds, 34 F. Supp. 2d at 394. It seeks to preserve "the orderliness, regularity, and expedition of litigation." Ueoka v. 
Szymanski, 107 Hawai' i 386, 397, 114 P.3d 892, 903 (2005) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted); see also State v. St. Cloud, 465 N.W.2d 177, 180 (S.D. 1991) (noting that
 judicial estoppel concerns "the intentional assertion of an
 inconsistent position that perverts the judicial machinery")
 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Judicial
 estoppel prevents a party who prevails on one position from later
 taking a contrary position to gain the upper hand. Ferguson v.
 
Building Materials Corp. of America, 295 S.W.3d 642, 643 (Tex.
 2009).
 
Most jurisdictions apply judicial estoppel when, at 
minimum, the following elements are met:
 
(1) The party to be estopped must be asserting a position
that is factually incompatible with a position taken in a
prior judicial or administrative proceeding;
(2) the prior inconsistent position must have been accepted
by the tribunal; and
(3) the party to be estopped must have taken inconsistent
positions intentionally for the purpose of gaining unfair
advantage.
 
King v. Herbert J. Thomas Mem'l Hosp., 159 F.3d 192, 196 (4th
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Cir. 1998) (paragraph structure altered).6 Although Hawai' i 
courts have not expressly adopted those elements, our case law is 
generally in accord. See Roxas, 89 Hawai' i at 124, 969 P.2d at 
1242; Rosa, 4 Haw. App. at 220, 664 P.2d at 752 ("A party is precluded from subsequently repudiating a theory of action accepted and acted upon by the court."). 
Here, the first element is met. Langer's position in
 
prior judicial proceedings (the two Florida cases) is factually
 incompatible with his position at bar. In the prior cases, he
 asserted in pleadings, memoranda, and appellate briefings that
 the Proceeds Agreement was not a final, enforceable contract but
 only the first step in negotiations culminating in the Stock
 Agreement. This position is incompatible with the basis of the
 complaint herein, that the Proceeds Agreement is a separate,
 enforceable contract that was not superseded by other agreements. 
See Island Directory Co., Inc. v. Iva's Kinimaka Enters., Inc.,
 10 Haw. App. 15, 23, 859 P.2d 935, 940 (App. 1993) (existence of
 a contract or agreement is a question of fact).
 
The third element concerns whether the party's
 
assertion of conflicting positions is intentional.
7 Lamonds, 34
 
F. Supp. 2d at 395. The party must have been chargeable with
 "full knowledge of the facts." Rosa, 4 Haw. App. at 218, 664
 
P.2d at 751 (quoting 28 Am. Jur. 2d Estoppel and Waiver § 68, at
 694-95 (1966)). Judicial estoppel will not apply where a party
 was genuinely mistaken or introduces new, intervening facts. See
 
6
 See also New Hampshire v. Maine, 532 U.S. 742, 750-51 (2001);
 
Bates v. Cook, Inc., 615 F. Supp. 662, 672-73 (M.D. Fla. 1984); Dupwe v.
Wallace, 140 S.W.3d 464, 467 (Ark. 2004); Moy v. Ng, 864 N.E.2d 752, 756-57
(Ill. Ct. App. 2007); Commonwealth v. DiBenedetto, 941 N.E.2d 580, 591-92
(Mass. 2011) (reciting substantially similar elements); St. Cloud, 465 N.W.2d
at 180 (reciting substantially similar elements); DeWoody v. Rippley, 951
S.W.2d 935, 944 (Tex. Ct. App. 1997); Johnson v. Si-Cor, Inc., 28 P.3d 832,
834 (Wash. Ct. App. 2001).
 
7
 This element does not require evidence of the party's actual
intent. Lamonds, 34 F. Supp. 2d at 395. Rather, it is designed to effectuate
the policy of judicial estoppel to protect the integrity of the judicial
process. Id.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Roxas, 89 Hawai' i at 124, 969 P.2d at 1242; St. Cloud, 465 N.W.2d 
at 180; King, 159 F.3d at 196-97. 
Here, Langer has not alleged any new facts or evidence
 
for his changed position regarding the Proceeds Agreement. To
 
the contrary, the complaints in all three cases indicate that
 Langer has characterized the Proceeds Agreement in the manner
 most amenable to his claims. In the Florida cases, he utilized
 the agreement to bolster his claim that a valid, enforceable
 Stock Agreement had emerged from years of negotiation. When that
 argument failed, he sought to enforce the Proceeds Agreement
 itself in the instant case. The assertion of conflicting
 positions is therefore intentional.
 
The second element, however, requires that the party's 
prior position was "accepted and acted upon by the court" or has "detrimentally affected the opposing party." Roxas, 89 Hawai' i 
at 124 n.19, 969 P.2d at 1242 n.19 (quoting Rosa, 4 Haw. App. at 220, 664 P.2d at 752). The prior court need not have expressly adopted the merits of the party's position; it is sufficient that the party obtained an advantage or benefit from the prior inconsistent position. See Ueoka, 107 Hawai' i at 397, 114 P.3d 
at 903; Lamonds, 34 F. Supp. 2d at 395; Moy, 864 N.E.2d at 757. 
Here, Langer was unsuccessful in using his prior 
position regarding the Proceeds Agreement to gain an advantage. His claims in the prior cases were dismissed on summary judgment. Moreover, the original summary judgment order was predicated upon the running of the statute of limitations — something far removed from the question of whether the Proceeds Agreement evolved and became supplanted by the Stock Agreement. As a result, the court in both cases did not accept or act upon his prior position. Nor did Langer's change in position detrimentally affect Rice, i.e., through reliance or unfair prejudice. See Roxas, 89 Hawai' i at 
124, 969 P.2d at 1242; see also Weiser v. Wert, 554 S.E.2d 762, 764 (Ga. Ct. App. 2001) (plaintiffs did not obtain advantage from prior position in bankruptcy proceeding which they voluntarily 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dismissed); Johnson, 28 P.3d at 833 (in bankruptcy case,
 
appellant's failure to disclose pending negligence claim against
 McDonald's did not warrant judicial estoppel where he derived no
 benefit or advantage from failing to disclose); c.f. Milton H.
 Greene Archives, Inc. v. CMG Worldwide, Inc., 568 F. Supp. 2d
 1152, 1196-99 (C.D. Cal. 2008) (party obtained unfair advantage
 by using prior position to gain favorable tax treatment). 
Because the prior courts did not accept or act upon Langer's
 position, we conclude that judicial estoppel is inapplicable.
 
B. Res Judicata
 Langer contends that the Circuit Court erred in
 
granting summary judgment on the basis of res judicata. He
 maintains that res judicata is not applicable because two
 essential elements (identity of cause of action and identity of
 "thing sued for") are lacking. Central to this claim is his
 assertion that the Proceeds Agreement is separately enforceable
 and apart from the Stock Agreement that formed the basis of the
 prior cases. 
As a threshold issue, we consider which law applies. 
Both parties have consistently relied upon Florida law both on
 appeal and in the proceedings below. The U.S. Supreme Court has
 held that under the Full Faith and Credit Clause of the U.S.
 Constitution, "where a state court has jurisdiction of the
 parties and subject matter, its judgment controls in other states
 to the same extent as it does in the state where rendered." 
Riley v. N.Y. Trust Co., 315 U.S. 343, 349 (1942) (emphasis
 added). For purposes of res judicata, "a litigation once pursued
 to judgment shall be as conclusive of the rights of the parties
 in every other court as in that where the judgment was rendered." 
Magnolia Petroleum Co. v. Hunt, 320 U.S. 430, 439 (1943). As a
 result, a cause of action "merged in a judgment in one state"
 under the doctrine of res judicata "is likewise merged in every
 other." Id. "Full faith and credit thus generally requires
 
every State to give to a judgment at least the res judicata
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
effect which the judgment would be accorded in the State which 
rendered it." Durfee v. Duke, 375 U.S. 106, 109 (1963); see also 
Wong v. Cayetano, 111 Hawai' i 462, 477, 143 P.3d 1, 16 (2006) (in 
determining preclusive effect of federal judgments, states must look to federal law regarding res judicata); Brown v. Progressive Direct Ins. Co., No. 29348, at *4 (App. May 5, 2010) (mem.). As the parties have done, we look to Florida law to determine whether res judicata bars the present suit.
8 
Res judicata, or claim preclusion, prevents parties
 
from relitigating a cause of action against the same opponents
 (or their privies) when final judgment was rendered on the
 merits. Wade v. Clower, 114 So. 548, 552 (Fla. 1927). Four
 
elements must be met for res judicata to apply:
 
(1) Identity of the cause of action;
 (2) Identity of the "thing sued for";
 (3) Identity of the persons and parties to the actions; and
 (4) Identity of the quality or capacity of the persons for
 or against whom the claim is made.
 
McGregor v. Provident Trust Co. of Philadelphia, 162 So. 323, 328
 (Fla. 1935). Res judicata bars subsequent litigation of "every
 other matter which might with propriety have been litigated and
 determined in [the prior] action." Wade, 114 So. at 552.
 
The parties do not dispute that elements (3) and (4)
 
are present. Langer and Rice, or their privies, were both
 parties in the prior Florida cases. Both were involved in the
 same capacity. At issue, however, are elements (1) and (2).
 
1 . Identity of the Cause of Action
 
Res judicata only applies if a party is asserting the
 
same cause of action. McGregor, 162 So. at 328. Florida case
 
law has paved a somewhat muddled path in determining what
 
8
 As a practical matter, Florida law regarding res judicata is
generally in accord with Hawai' i law. See Smallwood v. City and County of 
Honolulu, 118 Hawai' i 139, 146-47, 185 P.3d 887, 894-95 (App. 2008);
Tortorello v. Tortorello, 113 Hawai' i 432, 439, 153 P.3d 1117, 1124 (2007)
(setting forth elements of res judicata). 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
constitutes a single cause of action. A number of cases set
 
forth the definitive test as "whether the facts or evidence
 necessary to maintain the suit are the same in both actions." 
Albrecht v. State, 444 So.2d 8, 12 (Fla. 1984) (superseded by
 statute on other grounds); accord Leahy v. Batmasian, 960 So.2d
 14, 17 (Fla. 4th DCA 2007); Inter-Active Servs., Inc. v. Heathrow
 Master Ass'n., Inc., 809 So.2d 900, 902 (Fla. 5th DCA 2002). 
Other cases have applied a "transactional approach" and examined
 whether the claims arise out of the same transaction, series of
 events, or wrongful act. AMEC Civil, LLC v. State, Dep't of
 
Transp., 41 So.3d 235, 239 (Fla. 1st DCA 2010); Froman v.
 Kirland, 753 So.2d 114, 116 (Fla. 4th DCA 1999). 
The Fourth District Court of Appeal attempted to
 
provide some clarity in Tyson v. Viacom, Inc., 890 So.2d 1205
 (Fla. 4th DCA 2005). The plurality opinion explained that what
 constitutes a single "cause of action" depends on which aspect of
 res judicata is applicable. The overarching test "defines a
 cause of action in terms of identical facts." Id. at 1212. 
Thus, the determinative inquiry is "whether the essential
 elements of the cause of action, and thus the ultimate facts to
 be proved, are the same." Leahy, 960 So.2d at 17-18.
 
However, an additional definition must be employed when
 
applying a particular aspect of res judicata — the rule against
 splitting causes of action (or the rule against case-splitting). 
Tyson, 890 So.2d at 1212. This rule "defines a cause of action
 in terms of a single wrongful act" or as "the right which a party
 has to institute a judicial proceeding." Id. at 1212, 1220
 
(Gross, J., concurring specially). The majority opinion in Tyson
 receded from the broad, transactional approach espoused in
 earlier cases. Id. at 1213, 1222 (Gross, J., concurring
 
specially). It also explained that its definition is narrower
 than simply a group of operative facts giving rise to a suit. 
Id. at 1220.
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In illustrating the interplay between these two tests,
 
the plurality opinion explained:
 
Within one set of identical facts, three wrongful acts could
exist. In such a circumstance, bringing separate claims in
separate complaints based on each wrongful act would not run
afoul of the rule against splitting causes of action.
However, this factual scenario would still run afoul of res
judicata because the three separate claims would be based on
identical facts. This hurdle is overcome where there are
 three separate sets of facts in addition to three separate
wrongful acts. In such a circumstance there are three
claims, each of which constitutes an independent cause of
action capable of being raised in separate complaints.
Therefore, neither res judicata nor the rule against
splitting causes of action will bar a second complaint
including two claims in such a circumstance.
 
Id. at 1212. 
If the claims are premised on different facts, then
 
neither res judicata nor the rule against case-splitting will
 
apply. Id. Here, then, we must parse out whether the present
 
case involves separate facts from those adjudicated in the prior
 cases. See id. To do so, we examine the "issues as they were
 
made or tendered by the pleadings." Hay v. Salisbury, 109 So.
 
617, 621 (Fla. 1926); accord Variety Children's Hosp. v. Mt.
 Sinai Hosp. of Greater Miami, Inc., 448 So.2d 546, 547 (Fla. 3d
 DCA 1984); Daniel v. Dep't of Transp., 259 So.2d 771, 774 (Fla.
 1st DCA 1972) ("A fair way of determining the nature of a cause
 of action is to examine the main prayer of a plaintiff's
 complaint."). 
In the first Florida case, the complaint asserted four
 
counts: (1) breach of contract; (2) specific performance; (3)
 punitive damages; and (4) unjust enrichment. The claims centered
 on the Stock Agreement, described as ten percent of the stock in
 Rice's corporation as consideration for Langer's assignment of
 his interest in the partnership and the Hawaiian Tropic
 trademark. The complaint did not mention the Proceeds Agreement. 
The sole basis for Langer's requested relief was the Stock
 Agreement.
 
The Proceeds Agreement did not come to light in the
 
first case until Rice filed a motion for summary judgment on the
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
basis of the statute of limitations. In his opposing memorandum,
 
Langer referenced the Proceeds Agreement as "[t]he first written
 document evidencing an agreement between Langer and Rice wherein
 Langer would receive an interest in Rice's business." Langer
 testified in a deposition that the Stock Agreement superseded all
 earlier proposals, including the Proceeds Agreement. Yet his
 strategic characterization of the Proceeds Agreement did not
 alter the cause of action as framed in the complaint; it merely
 solidified his position in seeking to enforce the Stock
 Agreement. Langer raised the Proceeds Agreement as evidence of
 an enforceable Stock Agreement, not as a separate cause of
 action.
 
Moreover, given the procedural posture of the present 
case, we are required to draw all factual inferences in favor of Langer. Querubin, 107 Hawai' i at 56, 109 P.3d at 697. We must 
therefore assume that the Proceeds Agreement was in fact separately enforceable, despite Langer's rather contrary assertions in the prior cases. The first Florida case therefore did not seek to enforce the Proceeds Agreement. The sole cause of action concerned the Stock Agreement. 
In the second Florida case, Langer asserted three
 
counts concerning an "employment and incentive agreement": (1)
 declaratory judgment; (2) quantum meriut; and (3) breach of
 contract. The factual foundation for these claims was an alleged
 incentive agreement under which Langer would receive ten percent
 of the stock in Rice's corporation in exchange for his continuing
 efforts to promote Hawaiian Tropic. 
The alleged facts surrounding the incentive agreement
 
were virtually identical to those in Langer's first Florida cause
 of action. The sole differing fact was the consideration —
 Langer's continuing efforts to promote the product instead of the
 assignment of his trademark and interest in the partnership. To
 constitute the same cause of action, only the facts "essential to
 the maintenance of the suits" must be the same. Hay, 109 So. at
 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
621. To maintain a cause of action for breach of contract, a
 
party must prove a contract, a breach, and damages. Rollins,
 
Inc. v. Butland, 951 So.2d 860, 876 (Fla. 2d DCA 2006). In
 
comparing the first and second Florida cases, the necessary facts
 regarding the alleged agreements were identical. The contract
 Langer sought to enforce, whether framed as a "stock" or
 "incentive" agreement, was for ten percent of the stock in Rice's
 corporation. Rice allegedly breached the contract by failing to
 deliver the stock as agreed. The resulting damages were
 identical. The second Florida case thus asserted the same cause
 of action as the first: Rice's breach of the Stock Agreement.
 
Consistent with his position in the first Florida case,
 
Langer alleged in the second case that the incentive/stock
 agreement arose from the original Proceeds Agreement, which the
 parties modified by mutual consent. Nonetheless, the three
 counts only sought enforcement of the incentive agreement. As in
 the first case, Langer's characterization of the Proceeds
 Agreement merely provided evidentiary support for his claim
 regarding the incentive agreement. It did not raise a separate
 cause of action. The facts, as alleged, supported an action for
 breach of the Stock Agreement alone. 
As in the prior cases, the complaint herein asserts a
 
claim for breach of contract. The contract that forms the basis
 of the suit, however, is not the Stock Agreement. The alleged
 
9
consideration overlaps with that alleged in the prior cases,  yet
the terms of the contract are different. The Proceeds Agreement
 concerns ten percent of the proceeds upon sale of the Hawaiian
 Tropic business, not an immediate transfer of stock. Under the
 
9
 As in the first case, the complaint herein alleges the trademark
assignment as partial consideration. Following Rice's motion for summary
judgment on grounds of res judicata, Langer's counsel attempted to retract the
assertion that the trademark assignment was part of the consideration for the
Proceeds Agreement. Yet he did not amend the complaint to redact the reference
to the trademark assignment. To the contrary, in his First Amended Complaint,
Langer again alleged that the trademark assignment was part of the
consideration furnished for the Proceeds Agreement.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
handwritten letter evidencing the agreement, further conditions
 
apply. Langer would receive ten percent of the sales proceeds
 "if he is still living in Hawaii, working for Hawaiian Tropic,
 and meeting all of the above requirements of this Agreement." 
The facts necessary to establish a breach of the
 
Proceeds Agreement are different from those alleged in the prior
 cases. Most notably, a breach of the Proceeds Agreement could
 not occur until Rice sold the Hawaiian Tropic business. In
 contrast, the alleged breach of the Stock Agreement (or incentive
 agreement) occurred upon Rice's failure to immediately transfer
 the stock. The damages resulting from a breach of the Proceeds
 Agreement also differ from those alleged in the prior cases. 
Whereas the prior cases sought the immediate transfer of stock,
 the present case seeks damages in an amount determined by the
 recent sale of the business.
10 The complaint therefore alleges a
 
different set of facts than that involved in the Florida cases. 
Likewise, the evidence necessary to establish a breach
 
of the Proceeds Agreement is different from that involved in the
 prior cases. See Tyson, 890 So.2d at 1209 (stating that the
 
"[i]dentity of the cause of action" requirement exists when "the
 facts or evidence necessary to maintain the suit are the same in
 both actions") (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
In the prior cases, the requisite evidence included: (1) the
 existence of the Stock Agreement, which allegedly arose circa
 1975 to 1976; (2) Rice's failure to immediately transfer the
 stock; and (3) damages resulting from the failure of stock
 delivery. The present case, however, requires evidence
 establishing: (1) the existence of the Proceeds Agreement, which
 allegedly arose circa 1972 to 1973; (2) Rice's sale of the
 
10
 Rice argues that the Stock Agreement was merely a vehicle for
Langer to receive the same thing contemplated in the Proceeds Agreement — a
portion of the sale proceeds. He references the various draft voting trust
agreements as evidence of the agreements' functional equivalence. However,
Rice's argument frames the facts far too broadly. Although the agreements may
have overlapped in their intent and outcome, the present complaint nonetheless
alleges a separately enforceable agreement.
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawaiian Tropic business; (3) Langer's satisfaction of certain
 
conditions precedent; (4) Rice's failure to deliver ten percent
 of the sales proceeds; and (5) a different measure of damages. 
Certain evidence overlaps between the present and prior
 
cases. For example, the basis of Langer's present action is a
 handwritten letter from circa 1972 to 1973. Langer utilized the
 same letter in the prior cases as evidence of negotiations that
 culminated in the Stock Agreement. Nonetheless, the majority of
 the evidence is different, as are the "ultimate facts to be
 proved." Leahy, 960 So.2d at 18.
 Likewise, many of the facts alleged in the present case
 
overlap with those alleged in the prior cases. Most prominently,
 the consideration alleged for the Proceeds Agreement includes,
 inter alia, the Hawaiian Tropic trademark and Langer's efforts in
 promoting the product. In the first case, Langer alleged that
 the trademark assignment was part of the consideration for the
 Stock Agreement. In the second case, he asserted that his
 efforts in promoting the product constituted the consideration
 for the incentive agreement. Despite some overlap, the present
 complaint alleges sufficient independent consideration to form
 the basis of a separate contract. See 17A Am. Jur. 2d Contracts
 
§ 122 (discussing sufficiency of consideration). Several causes
 of action may arise from overlapping facts, as "separate sets of
 facts may exist within a larger set of facts." Tyson, 890 So.2d
 
at 1212. Res judicata does not bar such actions because "the
 whole is more than the sum of its parts." Id. (citation and
 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
Moreover, it is fundamental that two separate contracts
 
give rise to two causes of action, even if they overlap in
 subject matter or derive from the same negotiations. See B & V
 
Ltd. v. All Dade Gen. Constr., Inc., 662 So.2d 413, 415 (Fla. 3d
 DCA 1995). The same consideration can likewise serve as the
 basis for separate contracts, each creating a separate cause of
 action, so long as there is some new and independent
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consideration. See 17A Am. Jur. 2d Contracts § 122. Because
 
Langer's present complaint alleges the breach of a separate
 
contract, it constitutes a separate cause of action.
 
The nature of the alleged Proceeds Agreement confirms
 
that it supports a separate cause of action. By its terms, the
 agreement could not be performed until Rice sold the Hawaiian
 Tropic business and Langer satisfied certain conditions
 precedent. A cause of action for a breach of contract accrues
 upon the breach. Banks v. Lardin, 938 So.2d 571, 574 (Fla. 4th
 
DCA 2006). The cause of action for a breach of the Proceeds
 Agreement thus did not occur until 2007 (when the business was
 sold). In contrast, the cause of action for the breach of the
 Stock Agreement accrued decades ago (when Rice failed to
 immediately transfer the stock).
 
Likewise, the judgment in the first case confirms that
 
it only adjudicated a cause of action arising from the Stock
 Agreement. Rice moved for summary judgment on the grounds that
 enforcement of the Stock Agreement was time-barred. He
 maintained that "even if an agreement existed on the terms
 alleged by plaintiff in his Complaint and deposition, plaintiff's
 causes of action accrued more than four years before this suit
 was filed, and therefore are barred as a matter of law by the
 applicable statute of limitations." The resulting judgment thus
 barred the causes of action arising out of the Stock Agreement,
 which had accrued by 1978. 
The present cause of action arising from the Proceeds
 
Agreement did not accrue until 2007. See Banks, 938 So.2d at 574
 
(cause of action accrues upon breach). The prior judgment thus
 did not bar any causes of action arising out of the Proceeds
 Agreement because those rights had not yet accrued. See id.;
 
Lobato-Bleidt v. Lobato, 688 So.2d 431, 434 (Fla. 5th DCA 1997)
 ("A judgment is not res judicata as to rights which were not in
 existence and which could not have been litigated at the time the
 prior judgment was entered.") (emphases in original).
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Florida Third District Court of Appeal analyzed
 
similar facts in B & V Ltd., 662 So.2d 413. There, B & V entered
 
into several contracts with All Dade for roof repairs and
 replacements on numerous buildings. Id. at 414. Each contract
 
set forth the specifications for a single building. Id. In the
 
first case, All Dade sued B & V for breach of contract, alleging
 a failure to pay under contracts for certain buildings. Id. B &
 
V asserted an affirmative defense that the work was improperly
 performed. Id. In the second case, B & V sued All Dade to
 
recover damages for unsatisfactory work for a number of other
 buildings that were not involved in the first lawsuit. Id. All
 
Dade asserted that the second case was barred by res judicata. 
Id. at 414-15.
 
The court on appeal concluded that the cases involved
 
separate contracts, each giving rise to separate causes of
 action. Id. at 415. It noted that even though the contracts
 
were the result of contemporaneous negotiations, the work for
 each building was memorialized in a separate contract. Id. 
Additionally, the facts required to show poor workmanship for the
 buildings involved in the second suit were necessarily different
 from those involved in the first suit. Id. Res judicata thus
 
did not bar the second action asserting separate causes of
 action. Id. 
Likewise, the present complaint alleges a separate
 
contract, despite the overlapping negotiations and subject
 matter. As in B & V, the facts necessary to establish a breach
 of the Proceeds Agreement differ from those regarding the Stock
 Agreement. The present complaint therefore asserts a different
 cause of action.
 
2 .	 The Present Action Does Not Merely Assert a New
Legal Theory
 
Rice argues that Langer's claim in the present case
 
merely asserts a different theory regarding the previously
 
litigated agreements and is therefore barred by res judicata. 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under the rule against case-splitting, a party cannot avoid res
 
judicata merely by asserting a different legal theory regarding
 the same transaction or series of events. Signo v. Fla. Farm
 
Bureau Cas. Ins. Co., 454 So.2d 3, 5 (Fla. 4th DCA 1984). 
Although a single wrongful act may give rise to multiple legal
 theories, such theories do not constitute separate causes of
 action. Id. Moreover, different legal theories necessarily
 
require different variations or "shadings of the facts." Id.
 
(quoting Restatement (Second) of Judgments § 24, at 200 (1982)). 
Such variations are insufficient to support a separate cause of
 action. Id. 
For purposes of the rule against case-splitting, a
 
cause of action is defined as "the right which a party has to
 institute a judicial proceeding." Tyson, 890 So.2d at 1220-21;
 
accord AMEC Civil, LLC, 41 So.3d at 238. As discussed above, the
 court in Tyson clarified that a subsequent case involving a
 separate cause of action (as defined by the "same facts and
 evidence" test) will not run afoul of the rule against case
 splitting. See 890 So. 2d at 1212, 1215. The rule against case
 
splitting is therefore only relevant where the party asserts
 multiple causes of action arising from identical facts. See id.
 
at 1212. Where the subsequent case involves different facts, as
 it does here, the rule does not apply. See id. 
Signo illustrates these principles. There, the
 
plaintiff was involved in a vehicle collision with a driver who
 was transporting a load of corn for a produce company. 454 So.2d
 at 3-4. In the first suit, the plaintiff asserted a claim of
 vicarious liability against the driver's employers. Id. at 3. 
After the court entered summary judgment against her, the
 plaintiff filed another claim asserting that the driver's
 employers were liable for his negligent operation of the vehicle
 based on their status as bailees of the truck. Id. at 4. The
 
court noted that although facts required to prove the employers'
 status for vicarious liability differed slightly from those
 
22
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required to prove bailment, both claims involved the same
 
underlying facts: the collision of the vehicles. Id. at 4-5. 
It therefore held that "the mere changing of the theory on which
 the plaintiff proceeds does not constitute a distinct and
 different cause of action obviating the defense of res judicata." 
Id. at 5. It further opined:
 
That a number of different legal theories casting liability
on an actor may apply to a given episode does not create
multiple transactions and hence multiple claims. This
remains true although the several legal theories depend on
different shadings of the facts, or would emphasize
different elements of the facts, or would call for different
measures of liability or different kinds of relief.
 
Id. (quoting Restatement (Second) of the Law of Judgments § 24 at
 
200). 
Here, however, the present complaint does not merely
 
involve different shadings or emphases of the same facts. 
Rather, Langer's present cause of action is based on a
 fundamentally new set of facts: the Proceeds Agreement, a 
separate contract with different terms; Rice's sale of the
 business in 2007; and the resultant damages. None of those facts
 formed the basis of the prior cases. Langer's present action
 involves a different right, and the rule against case-splitting
 does not apply. See Tyson, 890 So.2d at 1220.
 
3 .	 Whether Present Claims Should Have Been Brought in
Prior Suit(s)
 
Rice argues that because Langer could have sued upon
 
the Proceeds Agreement in the earlier cases, the present action
 
is barred. Under the doctrine of anticipatory repudiation, a
 plaintiff acquires the elective right to sue when the other party
 repudiates the contract. Peachtree Cas. Ins. Co. v. Walden, 759
 
So.2d 7, 8 (Fla. 5th DCA 2000); accord Banks, 938 So.2d at 575. 
Anticipatory repudiation occurs when a party definitely and
 unconditionally renounces future performance of the contract. 
Peachtree, 759 So.2d at 8; see Banks, 938 So.2d at 575. In a
 deposition procured during the course of the first case, Rice
 
23
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testified that he never intended to give Langer ten percent of
 
the proceeds upon sale of the corporation. His testimony
 constitutes a definite and unconditional renunciation of the
 Proceeds Agreement. Langer therefore acquired the right to sue
 prior to the second Florida case.
 
Under Florida law, res judicata bars two types of
 
claims: (1) those that were actually raised and adjudicated in
 the prior case, and (2) those that could have been raised within
 the issues framed by the pleadings. Topps v. State, 865 So.2d
 
1253, 1255 (Fla. 2004); Youngblood v. Taylor, 89 So.2d 503, 505
 (Fla. 1956). A number of cases have phrased the second part in
 broad terms. See, e.g., AMEC Civil, 41 So.3d at 239 (explaining
 
that res judicata bars "all rights of the plaintiff to remedies
 against the defendant with respect to all or any part of the
 transaction, or series of connected transactions, out of which
 the action arose") (quoting Restatement (Second) of Judgments §
 24 at 196); Lobato-Bleidt, 688 So.2d at 433 ("The initial
 judgment is conclusive as to all matters that were or could have
 been raised."). The seminal case, Hay v. Salisbury, sets forth
 the rule as follows:
 
When the second suit is between the same parties as the
first, and on the same cause of action, the judgment in the
former is conclusive in the latter not only as to every
question which was decided, but also as to every other
matter which the parties might have litigated and had
determined, within the issues as they were made or tendered
 
by the pleadings or as incident to or essentially connected
 
with the subject-matter of the litigation, whether the same,
as a matter of fact, were or were not considered. As to
 
such matters a new suit on the same cause of action cannot
 
be maintained between the same parties. This rule applies
to every question falling within the purview of the original
action, both in respect to matters of claim and defense,
which could have been presented by the exercise of due
diligence.
 
109 So. at 621 (emphases added) (citations and internal quotation
 
marks omitted).11
 
11
 The court in Hay went on to state:
 
A judgment on the merits is an absolute bar to a subsequent
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Res judicata does not require all possible causes of
 
action arising from a related matter to be raised in a single
 
suit. See Tyson, 890 So.2d at 1216-17, 1220-21. Instead, it
 
only precludes relitigation of matters "within the issues as they
 were made or tendered by the pleadings or as incident to or
 essentially connected with the subject-matter of the litigation." 
Tyson, 890 So.2d at 1216 (quoting Hay, 109 So. at 621). 
Accordingly, only certain closely-connected causes of action must
 be raised in a single suit. Id. at 1216-17. 
For example, in Hay, the seller brought the first cause
 
of action to quiet title to real property. 109 So. at 619. The
 seller obtained a final decree declaring him owner of the
 property, free and clear of all claims of the purchaser. Id. In
 
the second suit, the purchaser sought specific performance of a
 contract for purchase of the real property. See id. at 620. The
 
court held that there was sufficient identity of causes of action
 because the alleged contract would have precluded the quiet title
 suit. Id. at 621. Indeed, the quiet title suit "was directed at
 
extinguishing any claim that [the purchaser] had under the
 purported contract." Tyson, 890 So.2d at 1217 (discussing Hay). 
The court could not have issued the decree quieting title without
 addressing the validity of the contract. Id. 
Another case confirms that res judicata only bars
 
different causes of action that are necessary to or essentially
 connected with the resolution of the prior litigation. In re
 
Haskin's Estate, 63 So.2d 320 (Fla. 1953). In Haskin, the
 plaintiff filed a claim against the estate alleging that the
 decedent had agreed to make a will naming her as the sole
 
action on the same claim, and concludes the parties and
their privies, not only as to every matter which was offered
and received to sustain or defeat the claim, but also as to
any other admissible matter that might have been offered for
either purpose.
 
Id. (emphasis added) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Because
 the present action does not concern the "same claim" or cause of action, this
particular phrasing of the rule is not applicable. 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
beneficiary. Haskin, 63 So.2d at 320. The probate judge entered
 
a final order declaring that she was not entitled to any portion
 
of the estate. Id. at 321. In a second suit, the plaintiff
 
brought a claim against the estate on the theory that she was the
 decedent's common-law wife. Id. The Supreme Court held that res
 
judicata applied because "nothing [was] presented in the second
 case that might not have been properly presented and settled in
 the first case." Id. The second suit was thus "essentially
 
connected" with the cause of action asserted in the first. 
Tyson, 890 So.2d at 1217 (discussing Haskin).
 
Here, by contrast, the claims regarding the Proceeds
 
and Stock Agreements were not so closely connected as to
 constitute a single cause of action under Hay and Haskin. 
Although Langer referenced the Proceeds Agreement as evidence of
 the Stock Agreement, it was not determinative of the claims
 asserted in the prior cases. The Stock Agreement did not turn on
 the enforceability or validity of the Proceeds Agreement. 
Moreover, the Proceeds Agreement was not included in
 
the "issues as they were made or tendered by the pleadings" in
 the prior cases. Hay, 109 So. at 621. Although mentioned in the
 
second case, it was not raised as a separate issue. The
 complaint merely alleged that the Proceeds Agreement was the
 first step in negotiations culminating in the Stock Agreement. 
It did not seek enforcement of the Proceeds Agreement itself nor
 raise the enforceability of the agreement. 
C. Statute of Limitations Issues
 The Circuit Court also granted summary judgment on the
 
basis of the statute of limitations. Rice argues that: (1)
 Langer's breach of contract claim is time-barred based on Rice's
 repudiation; and (2) Langer's fraudulent inducement claim accrued
 at the time the Proceeds Agreement was executed and is thus time-
barred.
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1 . The Breach of Contract Claims
 
As discussed above, anticipatory repudiation occurs
 
when a party communicates definite renunciation of future
 
performance under the contract. Peachtree, 759 So.2d at 8;
 
accord Romig v. deVallance, 2 Haw. App. 597, 605, 637 P.2d 1147,
 1152-53 (App. 1981). Because anticipatory repudiation merely
 gives rise to a right to sue, the statute of limitations only
 begins running if the plaintiff elects to sue upon the
 repudiation. See Banks, 938 So.2d at 575-76. If the plaintiff
 
elects not to sue, the statute begins running upon the other
 party's failure to perform under the contract. See id. at 576. 
Rice alleges that Langer's "contract claim is time-
barred . . . under the 'total breach doctrine'" because Langer's
 "claims under any purported future 10% payment began to accrue in
 1976 after [he] failed to receive stock or at the very latest in
 1982 after it became clear as a result of Rice's repudiation that
 no future payment would come." The "total breach" doctrine
 merely establishes that when a "breach is not wholly anticipatory
 because it involves some contractual nonperformance, the statute
 of limitations begins to run immediately." Kinsey v. United
 
States, 852 F.2d 556, 558 (Fed. Cir. 1988). A total breach thus
 requires a present breach in addition to repudiation. 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 243(2) (1981) ("[A] breach by
 non-performance accompanied or followed by a repudiation gives
 rise to a claim for damages for total breach."). 
However, Rice's arguments regarding the breach of
 
contract claim here fail. First, Langer's failure to receive
 stock in 1976 only pertains to the Stock Agreement (not the
 Proceeds Agreement, which is the subject of the present action). 
This is because not receiving the stock is unrelated to the
 parties' alleged separate contract regarding Langer obtaining 10%
 of the company's sales proceeds upon its sale. Thus, the statute
 of limitations may have begun running in 1976 for the Stock
 Agreement, but not for the Proceeds Agreement. Moreover, viewing
 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the evidence in the light most favorable to Langer, Rice's
 
deposition testimony12 from the 1982 case established, at most, 
 
anticipatory repudiation. Because performance was not due until
 sale of the business, an actual breach could not have occurred
 until 2007 (when the company was sold). As Langer elected not to
 sue upon the repudiation, the statute of limitations did not
 begin running until Rice's alleged breach in 2007. Therefore,
 the breach of contract claim is not time-barred because, under
 either Florida or Hawai' i law, it lies well within the statute of 
limitations for breach of contract.
13
  
12
 During the deposition, Rice asserted that he never intended to
give Langer 10% of the stock or net proceeds of Tanning Research Laboratories,
Inc. 
13
 The parties do not address whether the Florida or Hawai' i statute 
applies and, as the outcome is the same in either case, we need not reach thisissue. Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 657-1(1) states as follows: 
The following actions shall be commenced within six years next
 after the cause of action accrued, and not after:
 
(1) Actions for the recovery of any debt founded upon any
 
contract, obligation, or liability, excepting such as are
brought upon the judgment or decree of a court; excepting
further that actions for the recovery of any debt founded
upon any contract, obligation, or liability made pursuant to
chapter 577A shall be governed by chapter 577A;
 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 657-1 (1993) (emphasis added). 
Similarly, Florida Statutes § 95.11 states the following: 
Actions other than for recovery of real property shall be
commenced as follows:
 
. . . 
(2)
 Within five years.-­
. . . 
(b)
 A legal or equitable action on a contract, obligation,
or liability founded on a written instrument . . . .
. . . 
(3)
 Within four years.-­
. . . 
(k)
 A legal or equitable action on a contract, obligation,
or liability not founded on a written instrument . . . .
 
Fla. Stat. Ann. § 95.11 (West) (emphasis added) (showing that the
statute of limitations for a contract founded on a written instrument is
 five years and on a non-written one is four years).
 
28
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2 . The Fraudulent Inducement Claim
 
Langer also asserts a claim for fraudulent inducement
 
arising out of the Proceeds Agreement. Fraudulent inducement
 
requires: "(1) a false statement of material fact; (2) the maker
 of the false statement knew or should have known of the falsity
 of the statement; (3) the maker intended that the false statement
 induce another's reliance; and (4) the other party justifiably
 relied on the false statement to its detriment." Rose v. ADT
 
14
Sec. Servs., Inc. , 989 So. 2d 1244, 1247 (Fla. 1st  DCA 2008). 
Under Florida law, the statute of limitations for such a claim is
 
15
four years  (Tyson v. Viacom, Inc. , 890 So.2d 1205, 1213 (Fla.
4th DCA 2005)), and Hawai' i law provides for a six year statute of 
limitations16 (see Eastman v. McGowan, 86 Hawai' i 21, 27, 946 P.2d 
1317, 1323 (1997)). 
The parties do not address the choice-of-law issue 
concerning whether the Florida or Hawai' i statute applies. 
However, under either law, the statute of limitations has 
14
 Hawai'i law is very similar, requiring "(1) a representation of a
material fact, (2) made for the purpose of inducing the other party to act,
(3) known to be false but reasonably believed true by the other party, and (4)
upon which the other party relies and acts to [his or her] damage." Matsuura
 
v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Co., 102 Hawai' i 149, 163, 73 P.3d 687, 701
(2003) (brackets in original) (quoting Hawai' i Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v.
Keka, 94 Hawai' i 213, 230, 11 P.3d 1, 18 (2000)). 
15
 Florida Statutes § 95.11(3)(j) states as follows: 
Actions other than for recovery of real property shall be
commenced as follows:
 
. . . 
(3)
 Within four years.-­
. . . 
(j)
 A legal or equitable action founded on fraud.
 
Fla. Stat. Ann. § 95.11 (West).
 
HRS § 657-1(4) states as follows: 
The following actions shall be commenced within six years next
after the cause of action accrued, and not after:
 
(4) Personal actions of any nature whatsoever not
specifically covered by the laws of the State.
 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 657-1(4) (1993). 
29
 16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
expired. A claim for fraudulent inducement generally accrues 
upon execution of the contract. See Eastman v. McGowan, 86 
Hawai'i 21, 27, 946 P.2d 1317, 1323 (1997) (noting that 
fraudulent misrepresentation accrued, "[a]t a minimum," before promisor's death); see also Triangle Underwriters, Inc. v. Honeywell, Inc., 604 F.2d 737, 748 (2d Cir. 1979); Chabria v. EDO Western Corp., No. 2:06-CV-00543, 2009 WL 891746, at *15 (S.D. Ohio Mar. 30, 2009), aff'd, 374 F. App'x 653 (6th Cir. 2010); Kerce v. Bent Tree Corp., 305 S.E.2d 462, (Ga. Ct. App. 1983); Rogal v. Wechsler, 522 N.Y.S.2d 123, 124 (N.Y. App. Div. 1987). Additionally, Langer has not alleged fraudulent concealment of a cause of action, which would potentially toll the statute of limitations under HRS § 657-20.
17 Nevertheless, even if a 
tolling argument was made, the statute of limitations would only be tolled until Langer's second Florida case, where he was put on explicit notice that Rice had no intention of honoring the Proceeds Agreement at all. For similar reasons, Florida law (though articulating a different standard upon which accrual 
18
begins)  yields the same result.  This is because, as stated
 
above, Langer "discovered or should have [] discovered" that Rice
 did not intend to honor the Proceeds Agreement during his second 
17
 HRS § 657-20 states as follows: 
If any person who is liable to any of the actions mentioned in
this part or section 663-3, fraudulently conceals the existence of
the cause of action . . . the action may be commenced at any time
within six years after the person who is entitled to bring the
same discovers or should have discovered, the existence of the
cause of action or the identity of the person who is liable for
the claim, although the action would otherwise be barred by the
period of limitations.
 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 657-20 (1993).
 
18
 Florida law provides that accrual of a claim for fraud in the
inducement occurs when "the facts giving rise to the cause of action were
discovered or should have been discovered with the exercise of due diligence."
Fla. Stat. Ann. § 95.031(2)(a) (West); Tyson v. Viacom, Inc., 890 So. 2d 1205,
1213 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2005).
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Florida case, which is well beyond Florida's four-year statute of
 
limitations for fraud. 
Thus, the fraudulent inducement claim has long since
 
expired, whether accrual occurred upon the execution of the
 Proceeds Agreement circa 1973 or during Langer's second Florida
 suit in the early 1980s. Both of these time frames are well
 beyond the applicable statute of limitations period. Therefore,
 the Circuit Court did not err in granting summary judgment on
 Langer's fraudulent inducement claim on the basis of the statute
 of limitations.
 V. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the Circuit
 
Court erred in granting summary judgment on Counts I and II on
 the basis of res judicata. With respect to Counts I and II, we
 vacate the Circuit Court's January 13, 2009 Final Judgment and
 remand for further proceedings; we affirm the Final Judgment in
 all other respects.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 28, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Richard Turbin 
Rai Saint Chu
 Janice D. Heidt
 (Turbin Chu, Attorneys)
and 
David A. Vukelja
for Plaintiffs-Appellants
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
David W. Proudfoot (Belles Graham Proudfoot,
Wilson & Chun, LLP)
and
 
JAMES R. MCGIBBON
 for Defendant-Appellee
 Associate Judge
31
 