 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29946
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JAMIE REGO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 09-1-1135)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jamie A.C. Rego (Rego) was charged
 
with harassment, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
1
ยง 711-1106(1)(a) (Supp. 2012),  for spanking his eleven-year-old
daughter (Daughter) with a leather belt. At trial, Rego asserted
 the justification defense of parental discipline, as set forth in
 HRS ยง 703-309(1) (1993).
2 The Family Court of the First Circuit
 
1
 HRS ยง 711-1106(1)(a) provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of harassment if, with
intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any other person, that person:
 
(a)	 Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches another
person in an offensive manner or subjects the other
person to offensive physical contact[.] 
2 HRS ยง 703-309(1) provides:
 
The use of force upon or toward the person of another
is justifiable under the following circumstances:
 
(1) The actor is the parent or guardian or other
person similarly responsible for the general
(continued...)
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
(Family Court)  rejected Rego's parental discipline defense and
found him guilty as charged. We hold that there was insufficient
 evidence to disprove Rego's parental discipline defense, and we
 reverse Rego's harassment conviction.
 
I.
 
Rego and Daughter's mother had custody of Daughter on
 
alternating weeks. Daughter was eleven years old, five feet two
 inches tall, and weighed 122 pounds.
4 Daughter was attending a
 
party at the house of her mother's boyfriend's family, when Rego
 went to pick her up.
5 When Rego arrived, Daughter refused to
 
leave with Rego, despite Rego and others in the house urging
 Daughter to go with Rego. Rego physically picked Daughter up and
 carried her outside the house, and Daughter then walked to Rego's
 truck. During the thirty-minute ride to Rego's house, Daughter
 did not speak to Rego. When they arrived at Rego's house,
 
Daughter went to her room and began folding clothes and putting
 
them in her bag, as if she were leaving to go somewhere. 
2(...continued)
care and supervision of a minor, or a person
acting at the request of the parent, guardian,
or other responsible person, and:
 
(a)	 The force is employed with due regard for
the age and size of the minor and is
reasonably related to the purpose of
safeguarding or promoting the welfare of
the minor, including the prevention or
punishment of the minor's misconduct; and
 
(b) 	The force used is not designed to cause or
known to create a risk of causing
substantial bodily injury, disfigurement,
extreme pain or mental distress, or
neurological damage. 
3 The Honorable Wilson M.N. Loo presided.
 
4 Daughter testified regarding her height and weight at trial, which was
held five months after the charged incident.
 
5 Rego testified that he called Daughter to determine where she was
because he planned to pick her up. Daughter told Rego that she did not want
to be picked up and that he was wasting her allotted cellular telephone
minutes. Daughter then hung up on Rego and did not answer when he called her
back. Rego called Daughter's mother who told Rego where he could find
Daughter.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rego attempted to talk to Daughter, but Daughter told
 
Rego that she did want not to talk and ignored him. Daughter
 
refused to respond when Rego asked her to "[t]ell me what's
 wrong" and "[w]hy are you giving me attitude?" Rego warned
 Daughter that he would discipline her if she continued to ignore
 him. Rego warned Daughter, "If you don't tell me what's wrong,
 I'm gonna grab the belt." Despite the warning, Daughter
 continued to give Rego the "silent treatment" and did not look at
 Rego or answer him. 
Rego grabbed a belt and spanked Daughter three times,
 
attempting to strike her on the buttocks. The belt struck
 Daughter twice on the thigh under her buttocks and once on her
 right forearm, when she attempted to block being hit. The two
 strikes to Daughter's thigh resulted in two bruises approximately
 an inch long that were gone in a week. The strike that hit
 Daughter's forearm left a four to five inch welt that was "going
 away already" by the next day. Rego allowed Daughter to go to
 her "aunty's" house, which was close by. Rego talked to Daughter
 at the aunty's house, and Daughter spent the night there. The
 next day, Daughter went to school. 
Rego testified that he used the middle part of the belt
 
to spank Daughter. He explained that he spanked Daughter to
 discipline her and because "[t]here were consequences and her
 actions is not the right way to do things." 
II.
 
After finding Rego guilty, the Family Court sentenced
 
him to six months of probation and imposed a $300 fine. Rego
 appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment)
 filed by the Family Court on June 26, 2009.
 
On appeal, Rego argues that the Family Court erred in
 
convicting him because: (1) there was insufficient evidence to
 prove that he acted with the requisite intent to harass Daughter;
 and (2) there was insufficient evidence to disprove Rego's
 parental discipline defense.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State concedes that "based on precedent in this 
jurisdiction," there was insufficient evidence to negate Rego's 
parental discipline defense. We agree with this concession of error. Based on the decisions of the Hawai' i Supreme Court and 
this court, which have reversed convictions of defendants who have invoked the parental discipline defense under comparable circumstances, we conclude that there was insufficient evidence to disprove Rego's parental discipline defense. E.g., State v. 
Matavale, 115 Hawai' i 149, 165, 166 P.3d 322, 338 (2007) (holding 
that mother's discipline of daughter for lying to, misleading, and disrespecting mother was justified under parental discipline defense); State v. Roman, 119 Hawai' i 468, 481, 199 P.3d 57, 70 
(2008) (holding that use of force against minor for defiant behavior was justified under parental discipline defense); State v. Robertson, No. 28683, 2009 WL 4300387 (Hawai' i App. Nov. 30, 
2009) (holding that use of belt to disciple child for lying about misbehavior at school was justified under parental discipline defense).
6 
III. 
We reverse the Judgment of the Family Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 14, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Setsuko Regina Gormley
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Anne K. Clarkin Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 In light of our decision, we need not address Rego's argument that
there was insufficient evidence to prove that he acted with the requisite
intent to harass Daughter. 
4
 