FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
ALEXANDER & BALDWIN, INC., a Hawai 'i Corporation,
Plaintiff-Appellee, v. KEITH A. SILVA, Defendant-Appellant,
and HONOLU 'U; KAUKAHI; NAHINU; KENOI; MAHIAI; LUI MALO;
KAMAKA KALA; KEAU; KEAO; KEKUEWA; ROBERT KALALUHI;
(except Pualani Naehu), THOMAS KALALUHI; PETER KALALUHI
(except Leialoha Kalaluhi); MITCHEL KALALUHI (except
Nohealeimano Vaughn); KUHELELOA; A.K. MIKA (except
Mary Rose Nakai); STATE OF HAWAI 'I; OFFICE OF HAWAIIAN
AFFAIRS; KUKUIULA DEVELOPMENT COMPANY (HAWAII) LLC;
or their heirs and assignees; and JOHN DOES 1-50,
JANE DOES 1-50, DOE CORPORATION 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS
1-50 and DOE ENTITIES 1-50, Defendants
 
NO. 28556
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 04-1-0026)
 
JANUARY 11, 2011
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., LEONARD, J., AND
CIRCUIT COURT JUDGE BORDER, IN PLACE OF
NAKAMURA AND FUJISE, JJ., BOTH RECUSED
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
OPINION
 
Defendant-Appellant Keith A. Silva (Silva) appeals from
 
the First Amended Rule 54(b) Final Judgment for Plaintiff
 
Alexander & Baldwin [(A&B)] Against Defendants, Quieting Title to
 
Tax Map Key [(TMK)] Parcel Nos. (4) 2-6-4-11 and (4) 2-6-04-18
 (Amended Judgment), entered on April 20, 2007, in the Circuit
 Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
We hold that: (1) the Circuit Court was not required
 
to enter findings of fact and conclusions of law in support of
 
its order granting partial summary judgment in favor of A&B and
 
against Silva; (2) a quiet title plaintiff may seek partial
 
summary judgment on the issue of whether a particular defendant
 
has an interest in the subject property without the plaintiff
 
first establishing its own prima facie claim to title; (3) as the
 
party who will have the burden at trial to show that it has
 
superior title, the quiet title plaintiff-movant bears the burden
 
of production in showing that there is no genuine issue of
 
material fact regarding the defendant-claimant's interest, as
 
well as the ultimate burden of persuasion on the issue; (4) in
 
this case, A&B failed to satisfy its initial burden of production
 
with regard to Silva's alleged interest in Parcel 18 (described
 
below), thus the burden never shifted to Silva, and the Circuit
 
Court erred in granting A&B's request for partial summary
 
judgment with respect to Parcel 18; (5) viewing all of the
 
evidence and inferences in the light most favorable to Silva, A&B
 
having submitted no evidence in support of its own claim of title
 
and merely asserting that Silva's claim to title is fatally
 
flawed because Silva does not have an unbroken chain of paper
 
title or claim adverse possession, A&B failed to establish that
 
there was no genuine issue of material fact and that it was
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided. As noted herein,
other judges presided over certain orders at issue on this appeal.
 
2  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entitled to judgment against Silva as a matter of law with
 
respect to Parcel 11 (described below); (6) notwithstanding the
 
Circuit Court's subsequent ruling in favor of A&B on its quiet
 
title claims to Parcels 11 and 18, in light of our determination
 
that the Circuit Court erred in granting partial summary judgment
 
against Silva, whether A&B's evidence of title is superior to the
 
evidence of title brought forward by Silva appears to involve a
 
determination of disputed material facts; and (7) inasmuch as it
 
enters judgment in favor of A&B and against Silva, the Amended
 
Judgment is vacated and the case is remanded to the Circuit
 
Court.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On February 27, 2004, A&B filed a Complaint for Quiet 
Title and Partition pertaining to three parcels of land located 
in Koloa, Hawai 'i, on the island of Kaua 'i. In the Complaint, A&B 
alleged it is the sole and exclusive owner of TMK Parcels (4)2-6­
04-10 (Parcel 10) and (4)2-6-04-11 (Parcel 11) (together 
comprising Land Commission Award No. 4766), and TMK Parcel (4)2­
6-04-18 (Parcel 18) (constituting Land Commission Award No. 
5448). The Complaint listed several defendants; numerous others 
answered the Complaint, alleging ownership interests in the three 
parcels. On October 5, 2004, Silva filed his Answer to A&B's 
Complaint, claiming to own the land described in the Complaint 
"by inheritance and/or by deed." 
A&B proceeded by filing a motion for partial summary
 
judgment on April 28, 2005, against several defendants, not
 
including Silva, seeking an order that those defendants have no
 
interest in the subject parcels. The Circuit Court granted the
 
April 28, 2005 motion, concluding that the defendants identified
 
in the motion have no interest in Parcels 10, 11, and 18.
 
On June 8, 2005, A&B filed another motion for partial
 
summary judgment, this time against Silva, seeking an order
 
3        FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determining that Silva has no interest in the subject parcels.2
 
In support of its motion, A&B attached the affidavit of Colleen
 
Uahinui (Uahinui), which stated the following:
 
1.	 I am competent to testify to the matters contained
herein, and I do so based upon my own personal
knowledge. I am currently employed at Title Guaranty
of Hawaii Incorporated where I work in the Historic
Title Department whose primary objective is to
research the chain of title to real property in
Hawaii.
 
2.	 Land Commission Award No. 4766, Apana 3, was issued to
Nakaiewalu.
 
3.	 By Partition Deed the land of Nakaiewalu was divided
between the children of Oheohekuahiwi and Monimoni
 pursuant to a decision of Judge Jacob Hardy on
February 24, 1883.
 
In addition, A&B attached a copy of a chart purportedly produced
 
by Silva during discovery, which according to an affidavit by
 
A&B's attorney depicted Silva's purported chain of title to Land
 
Commission Award No. 4766. A&B's primary argument in support of
 
its motion for partial summary judgment was that Silva's chart
 
failed to establish a chain of paper title beginning with one of
 
the children of Oheohekuahiwi or Monimoni. 
2 Although A&B's motion for partial summary judgment was also filed
against Defendants Albert J. Silva and Randall M. Silva, this opinion refers
only to Defendant-Appellant Keith A. Silva because he was the only defendantto file an appeal from the judgment finalizing the order on this motion. This court has no jurisdiction to grant relief to a party who has failed to timelyappeal from a final judgment entered against that party. See Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rules 3(c) & 4(a); cf. Bacon v. Karlin, 68 Haw.
648, 650, 727 P.2d 1127, 1128 (1986) (failure to file a timely notice of
appeal in a civil matter is a jurisdictional defect that the parties cannotwaive and the appellate courts cannot disregard in the exercise of judicialdiscretion); Gold v. Harrison, 88 Hawai' i 94, 962 P.2d 353 (1998) (attorney
must be named in notice of appeal for reviewing party to have jurisdictionover imposition of sanctions against attorney); Stewart Properties, Inc. v.Brennan, 8 Haw. App. 431, 435, 807 P.2d 606, 608 (1991); see also 15A C.W
RIGHT, A. MILLER, E. COOPER, FEDERAL PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE, § 3902 at 69-70 (2010)
(footnotes omitted) ("The general standing doctrine that a litigant may notadvance the rights of others is reflected in the general rule that a party maynot appeal to protect the rights of others. The most obvious justification forthis rule is found in cases in which an appellant seeks to assert the rightsof its adversary. Since parties originally aligned as coparties may easilybecome adversaries as a case progresses, the rule against asserting the rightsof an adversary could easily apply to many efforts to advance the interests ofa nonappealing coparty."). 
4  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In his memorandum in opposition filed July 6, 2005
 
(Opposition), Silva claimed paper title to Parcel 10 and Parcel
 
11 and submitted numerous exhibits in support of his claims. 
Silva also argued that A&B failed to establish prima facie
 
evidence of its ownership and, therefore, was not entitled to
 
partial summary judgment against Silva. At the July 12, 2005
 
hearing on A&B's motion, Silva again argued that genuine issues
 
of material fact existed with respect to title and that A&B
 
failed to meet its burden as the plaintiff in a quiet title
 
action. Specifically, Silva asserted that A&B had not met its
 
burden of demonstrating its own title to the subject parcels and
 
had not provided any certified documents supporting its claim. 
On July 22, 2005, the Circuit Court issued an order 
pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(f) 
granting Silva additional time, as requested, to submit documents 
and relevant materials in order to further oppose A&B's motion 
for partial summary judgment. Accordingly, on July 26, 2005, 
Silva filed a supplemental memorandum in opposition to A&B's 
motion for partial summary judgment (Supplemental Opposition). 
A&B filed a reply memorandum on August 2, 2005. 
On October 12, 2005, the Circuit Court issued an order
 
granting A&B's motion for partial summary judgment against Silva,
 
concluding that Silva has no interest in Parcels 10, 11, and
 
18.3
 
Thereafter, on December 13, 2005, A&B filed another
 
motion for partial summary judgment, this time requesting that
 
the Circuit Court declare that A&B is the sole and exclusive
 
owner of Parcels 11 and 18. A&B claimed it has paper title or,
 
in the alternative, it acquired title to the two parcels through
 
adverse possession. A&B attached thirty-seven exhibits to its
 
memorandum in support of the motion, including certified copies
 
3
 The Honorable George M. Masuoka presided.
 
5    
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of relevant documents purportedly supporting its claim of paper
 
title.  At this time, the Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) was
 
the only remaining defendant who actively contested A&B's claim
 
to Parcels 11 and 18.
 
On March 8, 2006, the Circuit Court denied A&B's
 
December 13, 2005 motion for partial summary judgment without
 
prejudice, stating that "genuine issues of material fact remain
 
as to [A&B's] claim for adverse possession."4
 
On March 31, 2006, A&B filed another motion for partial
 
summary judgment against OHA, asking the Circuit Court to dismiss
 
any claims that OHA had with respect to Parcels 10, 11, and 18. 
In response, OHA disclaimed any interest in Parcels 10, 11, and
 
18. On May 17, 2006, the Circuit Court granted A&B's March 31,
 
2006 motion for partial summary judgment against OHA.
 
On September 22, 2006, A&B filed its final motion for
 
partial summary judgment, renewing its request that A&B be
 declared the sole and exclusive owner of Parcels 11 and 18. 
A&B's September 22, 2006 motion was unopposed.
5 On October 30,
 
2006, the Circuit Court granted A&B's September 22, 2006 motion,
 concluding that A&B is the sole and exclusive owner of Parcels 11
 
and 18.
6
 
On November 15, 2006, the Circuit Court entered an HRCP
 
Rule 54(b) judgment in favor of A&B and against all defendants. 
The Circuit Court entered judgment against Silva pursuant to the
 
October 12, 2005 order granting A&B's motion for partial summary
 
judgment against Silva. The judgment concluded, inter alia, that
 
A&B was the sole and exclusive owner of Parcel 11 and Parcel 18,
 
4
The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 
5
 Defendant Palani Vaughn filed a position statement that did not
oppose the relief sought by A&B in its September 22, 2006 motion for partial
summary judgment. Vaughn contested A&B's claim only with respect to Parcel 10.
6
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 
6  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
but also, incorrectly, identified Parcel 11 as the parcel with
 
unresolved claims. 
Subsequently, A&B sought to amend the November 15, 2006
 
judgment in order to clarify that Parcel 10 was the parcel with
 
unresolved claims. On April 20, 2007, the Circuit Court entered
 
the Amended Judgment incorporating that change. On May 21, 2007,
 
Silva filed a timely notice of appeal.
 
II.	 POINTS OF ERROR
 
Silva raises the following points of error on appeal:
 (1) The Circuit Court's findings and conclusions are
 
"insufficient and conclusory" because the appellate court has no
 basis upon which to determine how the Circuit Court decided the
 
subsidiary points of fact and law;
 
(2) The Circuit Court erred in granting partial
 
summary judgment against Silva because A&B failed to make a prima
 
facie showing of its own title, and Silva had no obligation to
 put on his case absent A&B's prima facie showing;
 
(3) The Circuit Court erred in finding that there are
 
no genuine issues of material fact concerning whether Silva has
 
an interest in the subject parcels;
 
(4) The Circuit Court erred in concluding that Silva
 
has no interest in Parcels 10, 11, and 18 because (a) in response
 
to A&B's motion for partial summary judgment, Silva claimed title
 
through two sources and A&B offered no evidence to the contrary,
 
and (b) there were triable issues of fact regarding Silva's
 
interest in the subject parcels; and
 
(5) The Circuit Court erred in entering judgment in
 
favor of A&B and against all defendants with respect to the
 
ownership of Parcels 11 and 18.
 
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant 
or denial of summary judgment de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107 
Hawai
'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (citation omitted). 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. The Issue of Findings and Conclusions
 
Silva argues, without citation to any rule, case, or 
other authority, that the Circuit Court reversibly erred because it did not enter findings of fact and conclusions of law in 
support of the order granting partial summary judgment against 
him. This argument is without merit. See, e.g., Dalton v. City 
& County of Honolulu, 51 Haw. 400, 403 n.2, 462 P.2d 199, 203 n.2 (1969) ("[F]indings of fact and conclusions of law are 
unnecessary in summary judgments. This is because disputed 
issues of fact cannot be resolved on summary judgment.") 
(citation omitted); Hawaii Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. Keka, 94 
Hawai
'i 213, 217 n.3, 11 P.3d 1, 5 n.3 (2000) (stating that "the 
circuit court was not required to enter any findings of fact in ruling on the Credit Union's motion [for] summary judgment"); 
Bhakta v. County of Maui, 109 Hawai
'i 198, 209, 124 P.3d 943, 954 
(2005) (citing Gump v. Walmart Stores, Inc., 93 Hawai 'i 428, 437, 
5 P.3d 418, 427 (App. 1999), aff'd in part and rev'd in part on 
other grounds, 93 Hawai 'i 417, 5 P.3d 407 (2000) (referring to 
the lower court's denial of a motion for summary judgment: "No findings of fact or conclusions of law were filed thereon, and 
none were required. Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
52(a)."). 
B. The Partial Summary Judgment Ruling Against Silva
 
Silva argues that the Circuit Court erred in concluding
 
that A&B carried its burden of demonstrating that there were no
 genuine issues of material fact concerning Silva's claims to the
 
subject parcels. 
First, we want to be clear about which parcels are at
 
issue on appeal. Even though the Circuit Court's October 12,
 
2005 order granting partial summary judgment against Silva finds
 
and concludes that Silva has no interest in Parcel 10 (as well as
 
Parcels 11 and 18), no issue concerning Silva's claimed interest
 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in Parcel 10 is before this court. The Amended Judgment
 
expressly states that it does not dispose of the claims and
 
crossclaims concerning Parcel 10. Thus, our review is limited to
 
the Circuit Court's ruling that Silva has no interest in Parcels
 
11 and 18.
 
1.	 The Propriety of Partial Summary Judgment in Quiet
Title Cases
 
Silva's primary argument is that the Circuit Court 
erred in granting A&B's June 8, 2005 motion for partial summary 
judgment against him because, at the time that the motion was 
granted, A&B had not yet submitted evidence supporting its own 
claim to an interest in the subject parcels. In essence, Silva 
argues that it is improper for a quiet title plaintiff to try to 
eliminate defendant-claimants seriatum until the plaintiff first 
establishes a prima facie case that the plaintiff has an interest 
in the property by paper title or adverse possession. Silva 
cites Harrison v. Davis, 22 Haw. 51 (1914), and Maui Land & 
Pineapple Co., Inc. v. Infiesto, 76 Hawai 'i 402, 879 P.2d 507 
(1994), in support of this argument. Silva's reliance on these cases is misplaced.
7 
Silva cites the Harrison case at page 54 of volume 22
 
of the Hawaiian Reports without any elucidation of the particular
 
statement of law or factual parallels that make it apropos to his
 
argument concerning A&B's request for partial summary judgment
 
against him. We presume that Silva cites Harrison for the
 
general legal proposition: "Ordinarily, upon an issue of title,
 
the plaintiff introduces evidence to prove that his title was in
 
its inception derived from the government and thence passed to
 
7
 A&B, on the other hand, argues that the Hawai' i Supreme Court
addressed this issue in First Hawaiian Bank v. Weeks. 70 Haw. 392, 772 P.2d
1187 (1989). A&B is mistaken. In Weeks, the supreme court reviewed an ordergranting plaintiffs summary judgment on the defendants' counterclaim, whichaffirmatively sought to quiet title in the defendants, and an order grantingsummary judgment on a cross-claim, which affirmatively sought to establishtitle in certain property. Id. at 393, 772 P.2d at 1188. 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
him by mesne conveyances, devise, descent or adverse possession." 
22 Haw. at 54. Albeit of continuing legal vitality, that
 
statement of law does not settle any questions concerning a
 
plaintiff's use of partial summary judgment motions in quiet
 
title actions. 
Indeed, the Harrison case followed a trial in which
 
Harrison, the plaintiff, sought to quiet the title to his claim
 
of an undivided one-half interest in a certain tract of land
 
under a twenty-five-year lease. Id. at 52. After the close of
 
the plaintiff's case, the trial court granted the defendant's
 
motion for non-suit (i.e., dismissal) in part on the grounds that
 
there purportedly was a lease outstanding when the lease that was
 
ultimately assigned to Harrison was made, and in part on the
 
grounds that Harrison had failed to deraign his title from the
 
government. Id. at 52-53.8 Concerning the latter grounds, the
 
supreme court made the above-quoted statement concerning the
 ordinary method a quiet title plaintiff uses to prove his claim.
 
But, the court then went on to excuse Harrison from making that
 
showing in support of his prima facie case because the defendant
 
had, in a prior partition action, personally signed a pleading
 
acknowledging the title held by a person who appeared to be a
 
common source for both Harrison's and the defendant's claims of
 
interest in the property. Id. at 55-56. The supreme court set
 
aside the judgment on the non-suit and remanded the case for
 further proceedings. Id. at 58.
 
Interestingly, after the resumption and completion of
 
the trial on remand, the trial court held that Davis, the
 
defendant, had not rebutted the prima facie case made by
 
Harrison, and Davis then took an appeal from the judgment in
 
favor of Harrison. Harrison v. Davis, 22 Haw. 465, 465-67 (1915)
 
8
 To "deraign title from the government" refers to the process of
proving title back to the original land grant awards by first establishing the
original land grant and then showing the chain of title to the purported title
holder.
 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Harrison II). In Harrison II, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
succinctly held: 
At the trial of an action to quiet title under the
statute (R.L. Ch. 132)9
 it is incumbent upon the plaintiff
to prove a title in or to the land in dispute, and, if he
fails to do so, it will be unnecessary for the defendant to
make any showing. In case each party adduces evidence of
title and it appears that the claims are adverse the court
will decide between them, but the defendant may not defeat
the plaintiff's case by showing that although he has no
title in himself, one who is not a party to the action has a
title superior to that relied on by the plaintiff.
 
22 Haw. at 466.
 
The Harrison cases clearly inform us of the parties'
 
respective burdens at trial in a quiet title action. At trial,
 
the quiet title plaintiff has the initial burden to prove a title
 
in or to the land in dispute. The plaintiff's prima facie case
 
can be made in various ways, but is usually done by bringing
 
forward evidence of the initial land grant award and tracing
 
ownership forward to the plaintiff through "mesne conveyances,
 
devise, or descent" or through evidence of adverse possession, as
 
provided in the quiet title statute. If the plaintiff fails to
 
meet his initial burden at trial, then the defendant need not
 
bring forward any evidence – the plaintiff's case is subject to
 
dismissal, the plaintiff is not entitled to have its title
 
quieted by the court, and the case ends without a determination
 
of title. If the plaintiff and the defendant both bring forward
 
evidence supporting their claims of title, then the court must
 
decide, based on the evidence presented, which party has title
 
superior to that of the other party. Harrison II also held that
 
the defendant may not prevent the plaintiff from quieting
 plaintiff's title, except by demonstrating that the defendant's
 
title is superior to the plaintiff's title, i.e., the defendant
 
may not defeat the plaintiff's claim by relying on evidence of a
 
third-party's superior title. 22 Haw. at 466. The Harrison
 
9
 Hawai'i's quiet title statute is now codified at Hawaii Revised
Statutes Chapter 669. 
11  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
cases do not, as suggested by Silva, preclude a quiet title
 
plaintiff's use of partial summary judgment motions to narrow the
 
issues in controversy.
 
In Maui Land & Pineapple, the supreme court reiterated 
that, in order to successfully quiet title, the quiet title 
plaintiff must bring forward prima facie evidence of paper title 
or title by adverse possession. 76 Hawai 'i at 407-08, 879 P.2d 
at 512-13. Maui Land & Pineapple clarified that the quiet title 
plaintiff need not have perfect title, but must prove a 
substantial interest in the property and title superior to that 
of the defendants. Id. at 408, 879 P.2d at 513. Although the 
Maui Land & Pineapple decision reviewed a trial court's granting 
of partial summary judgment in favor of a quiet title plaintiff, 
the plaintiff's motion therein affirmatively sought to establish 
its prima facie case and was not tailored to simply eliminate 
particular defendant-claimants, as in the case at bar. Id. at 
404, 879 P.2d at 509. Indeed, in Maui Land & Pineapple, at oral 
argument the defendants admitted that they could not sustain a 
claim to the property, thereby obviating any need for the court 
to further consider their claim. Id. at 404 n.1, 879 P.2d at 509 
n.1. Maui Land & Pineapple does not support Silva's argument
 
that partial summary judgment cannot used by a quiet title
 
plaintiff to narrow the issues in controversy. 
During the pendency of this appeal, the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court decided Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui, 116 Hawai 'i 239, 172 
P.3d 983 (2007), a quiet title action adjudicated on cross-motions for summary judgment. Omerod provides considerable 
guidance on and support for the principles laid out in the Harrison and Maui Land & Pineapple cases in the context of 
summary adjudication of quiet title disputes, but does not 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
squarely address the issue presented in this case.10 In Omerod,
 
the plaintiffs sought to quiet title in an undivided one-half
 
interest in the ahupua 'a of Hilea Nui on the Island of Hawai 'i. 
Omerod at 244-45, 172 P.3d at 988-89. The quiet title plaintiffs
 filed a summary judgment motion seeking an affirmative ruling
 
that they owned an equal interest in the subject land and that
 
the defendants, including Mauna Kea Agribusiness, Co. (MKA), did
 
not have absolute paper title and had not gained title through
 
adverse possession. Id. at 250, 172 P.3d at 994. MKA also filed
 
a summary judgment motion. The supreme court described the
 circuit court's conclusions about MKA's motion as follows:
 
[The circuit court concluded] that MKA did not have
the burden of proving title to an interest under LCA 9971,
Apana 11 nor in Hilea Nui, because MKA did not seek ajudgment quieting title to Hilea Nui or Hilea Iki in itsfavor but rather, it sought summary judgment dismissingOmerod's claims of title to the Ahupua' as of Hilea Iki and 
Hilea Nui. On the other hand, the [circuit] court notedthat MKA bore the burden of producing evidence in support ofits motion for summary judgment. However, because MKA, as adefendant in the quiet title action, did not bear the burdenof proving title to Hilea Iki or Hilea Nui at trial, itcould discharge its initial burden on summary judgment bypointing out that the record lacks substantial evidence tosupport a necessary element of the non-movant's claim.Thus, the [circuit] court concluded that MKA was simplyrequired to establish that Omerod is unable to establish aclaim to title to an interest in Hilea Nui. 
Id. at 252, 172 P.3d at 996 (internal quotation marks, brackets,
 
elipses, and citation omitted).
 
The supreme court later reconfirmed which issues were
 
decided on the cross-motions for summary judgment: "To
 
reiterate, in its March 22, 2004 Decision and Order, the
 
[circuit] court (1) granted summary judgment in favor of MKA and
 
TNC against Omerod and Kaluna to the extent that they claim an
 
interest in Hilea Nui under LCA 7715:14; and (2) denied Omerod's
 
and Kaluna's motions for summary judgment." Id. at 254, 172 P.3d
 
10
 The discussion herein of the Omerod case is simplified to
 
highlight the aspects of that case that are most relevant to the issues now
before this court. 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 998 (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). Thus,
 
the only issue before the supreme court in Omerod was whether the
 
quiet title plaintiffs were entitled to judgment in their favor
 
on the quiet title claims, as a matter of law. The supreme court
 
in Omerod was not faced with the question of whether the quiet
 
title plaintiffs could seek summary judgment against one or more
 
defendant-claimants to eliminate potentially meritless claims. 

In this context, and in light of the quiet title
 
plaintiffs' burden to prove their right to title in the subject
 
property, the supreme court held, inter alia:
 
[I]n their motion for summary judgment, [the quiet title
defendants] were required to show that there was no genuine
issue of material fact and they were entitled to judgment as
a matter of law on the underlying claim, i.e., [the
plaintiffs'] claim that they owned an undivided one-half
interest in Hilea Nui. [The defendants] were not required
to do more than show that [the quiet title plaintiffs] could
not possibly prevail on the underlying claim in order to
prevail on their motion for summary judgment. . . . 
Furthermore, this court has ruled that in an action to
quiet title, only the relative interests of the parties to
the action may be considered. See Ka' u Agribusiness Co. v.
Heirs or Assigns of Ahulau, 105 Hawai' i 182, 187-88, 95 P.3d
613, 618-19 (2004) (stating that "'[i]t is enough that the
interest asserted by the plaintiff ... is superior to that
of” the defendant such that a defendant "cannot argue that
the bill may not be granted for the Plaintiffs simply
because third parties ... may have a right to title of the
property"). Thus, in this action to quiet title brought by
Appellants, [the defendants] were only required to negate
Appellants' contentions that Appellants had a right to title
in the land.
 
Appellants' citation to Maui Land & Pineapple for the
proposition that the movant is required to show prima facie
evidence of title to the land in dispute is misapplied. That
case actually states, "In an action to quiet title, the
burden is on the plaintiff to prove title in and to the land
in dispute, and, absent such proof, it is unnecessary for
the defendant to make any showing." Thus, Maui Land &
Pineapple actually contradicts Appellants' argument. As
plaintiffs in the underlying quiet title action, Appellants
were required to prove their right to title in Hilea Nui.
 
Id. at 267-68, 172 P.3d at 1011-12 (some citations and emphasis
 
omitted).

 
In contrast, in the case at bar, in its June 8, 2005
 
motion, A&B was not seeking summary judgment on its claim to
 
14    
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
title. Instead, A&B was seeking to demonstrate that there were
 
no genuine issues of material fact concerning whether Silva has
 
any interest in the subject properties. 
Under Hawai 'i law, partial summary judgment is 
authorized under HRCP Rule 56(a), which provides that "[a] party 
seeking to recover upon a claim, counterclaim, or cross-claim or 
to obtain a declaratory judgment may move with or without 
supporting affidavits for a summary judgment in the party's favor 
upon all or any part thereof." (Emphasis added.) Thus, a party 
can file a motion for summary judgment for "any part" of a claim 
under HRCP Rule 56(a). The aforementioned quiet title cases do 
not hold that a plaintiff must prove title before filing a motion 
for partial summary judgment asking the court to find that a 
particular defendant has no interest in the subject property. 
Indeed, the supreme court has held: "The function of a motion 
for summary judgment is to determine whether an issue set forth 
in the pleadings is in fact in dispute and, if not, to eliminate 
any portion of the case for which trial is not required." 
Hawaii Prince Hotel Waikiki Corp. v. City & County of Honolulu, 
89 Hawai 'i 381, 974 P.2d 21 (1999) (citing J. F RIEDENTHAL , M. KANE & 
A. MILLER, CIVIL PROCEDURE: SUMMARY JUDGMENT § 9.1, at 433 (1985)). 
Accordingly, we reject Silva's argument that it is
 
improper for a quiet title plaintiff to seek partial summary
 judgment on the issue of whether a particular defendant has an
 
interest in the subject property without the plaintiff first
 
establishing its prima facie claim to title. Quiet title
 
plaintiffs, like any other claimant, may use the procedure set
 
forth in HRCP Rule 56(a) to eliminate any portion of the case for
 
which trial is not required, including the elimination of any
 
defendant-claimant whose claim to an interest in the subject
 
property is without sufficient evidentiary support to create a
 
genuine issue of material fact. The elimination of such claims
 
does not entitle the quiet title plaintiff to judgment in its
 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
favor. Whether, in this case, A&B met its burden as movant on
 
its partial summary motion is an entirely separate question.
 
2. A&B's Request for Summary Judgment
 
It is well-settled that the party moving for summary
 
judgment has the burden "to show the absence of any genuine issue
 as to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of
 
substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as a
 
matter of law." Jou v. Dai-Tokyo Royal State Ins. Co., 116
 
Hawai
'i 159, 164, 172 P.3d 471, 476 (2007) (citation omitted). 
That burden has two components:
 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing
support for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of
material facts exists with respect to the essential elements
of the claim or defense which the motion seeks to establish
 or which the motion questions; and (2) based on the
undisputed facts, it is entitled to summary judgment as a
matter of law. Only when the moving party satisfies its
initial burden of production does the burden shift to the
non-moving party to respond to the motion for summary
judgment and demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to
general allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of
trial.
 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving
party and requires the moving party to convince the court
that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that the
moving part is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
law.
 
Id. (citation omitted). Furthermore, "[t]he evidentiary standard 
required of a moving party in meeting its burden on a summary 
judgment motion depends on whether the moving party will have the 
burden of proof on the issue at trial." Omerod, 116 Hawai 'i at 
267, 172 P.3d at 1011. 
Thus, a quiet title plaintiff-movant is not required,
 
in every instance, to put on a prima facie case demonstrating its
 
own interest in the subject property; but, as the party who will
 
have the burden of proof at trial to show that it has superior
 
title, the plaintiff-movant does bear the burden of production in
 
showing that there is no genuine issue of material fact regarding
 
the defendant-claimant's interest, as well as the ultimate burden
 
of persuasion on the issue.
 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We first consider A&B's June 8, 2005 motion as it
 
pertains to Parcel 18. In the Complaint, A&B alleged and averred
 
that Parcel 18 constituted the land described in Land Commission
 
Award 5448. The only evidence in support of its partial summary
 
judgment motion, the affidavit of Uahinui, referred exclusively
 
to Land Commission Award No. 4766, and not to Land Commission
 
Award No. 5448. There was no evidence in the record before the
 
court on the partial summary judgment motion tending to support
 
A&B's alleged interest or to negate Silva's alleged interest in
 
Parcel 18. Thus, A&B failed to satisfy its initial burden of
 
production with regard to Silva's alleged interest in Parcel 18. 
The burden never shifted to Silva with regard to Silva's alleged
 
interest in Parcel 18.11 Accordingly, the Circuit Court erred in
 
granting A&B's request for partial summary judgment with respect
 to Parcel 18.
 
Next, we consider A&B's June 8, 2005 motion as it
 
pertains to Parcel 11. As reported above, the affidavit of
 
Uahinui states in its entirety:
 
1.	 I am competent to testify to the matters contained
herein, and I do so based upon my own personal
knowledge. I am currently employed at Title Guaranty
of Hawaii Incorporated where I work in the Historic
Title Department whose primary objective is to
research the chain of title to real property in
Hawaii.
 
2.	 Land Commission Award No. 4766, Apana 3, was issued to
Nakaiewalu.
 
3.	 By Partition Deed the land of Nakaiewalu was divided
between the children of Oheohekuahiwi and Monimoni
 pursuant to a decision of Judge Jacob Hardy on
February 24, 1883.
 
11
 It is not entirely clear from the record whether Silva is
continuing to claim an interest in Parcel 18 because the Opposition addresses
only Parcels 10 and 11. In his Answer, filed pro se, Silva appeared to assert
an interest in all of the properties identified in the Complaint. As A&B
 failed to carry its initial burden on its partial summary judgment motion
against Silva with respect to Parcel 18, further proceedings regarding Parcel
18 are necessary.
 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In his Opposition and at the July 12, 2005 hearing,
 
Silva objected to the admissibility of A&B's evidence, noting
 
that no certified documents support any of Uahinui's assertions
 
and that there were no stipulations that the assertions could be
 
treated as admissible evidence under HRCP Rule 56(e).12 While it
 
appears that Silva's objections may have been well-founded, with
 the Opposition, Silva himself submitted copies of the documents
 
referenced in Uahinui's affidavit, including Land Commission
 
Award No. 4766 and the 1883 Partition Deed. In his Supplemental
 
Opposition, Silva described those facts as undisputed. Thus, it
 
appears that there were no genuine issues of material fact with
 
respect to the statements in Uahinui's affidavit concerning the
 
initial Land Commission Award No. 4766 and the 1883 partition.
 
Nevertheless, in his Opposition and Supplemental
 
Opposition, Silva submitted copies of deeds, probate orders and
 
minutes, marriage licenses, birth and death certificates, and
 
other records in support of the following title history, which is
 
taken from Silva's Opposition and Supplemental Opposition:
 
•	 In 1852, Nakaiewalu, received Land Commission Award No.
4766.
 
12	 HRCP Rule 56(e) provides:
 
(e) Form of affidavits; further testimony; defense
 
rquired.  Supporting and opposing affidavits shall be made
on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as would
be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that
the affiant is competent to testify to the matters stated
therein. Sworn or certified copies of all papers or parts
thereof referred to in an affidavit shall be attached
 thereto or served therewith. The court may permit
affidavits to be supplemented or opposed by depositions,
answers to interrogatories, or further affidavits. When a
 motion for summary judgment is made and supported as
provided in this rule, an adverse party may not rest upon
the mere allegations or denials of the adverse party's
pleading, but the adverse party's response, by affidavits or
as otherwise provided in this rule, must set forth specific
facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial. If
 the adverse party does not so respond, summary judgment, if
appropriate, shall be entered against the adverse party.
 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
•	 In 1876, after Nakaiewalu died, his widow (Kapule)
succeeded to Nakaiewalu's interest pursuant to his
Will.
 
•	 In 1883, Land Commission Award No. 4766 was partitioned
into five parcels alloted to the three children of
Oheohekuahiwi (Kuheleloa (Lot 1), Keoua (Lot 2), and
Koleka (Lot 3)) and the two children of Monimoni
(Kalawa (Lot 4) and Pupuka (Lot 5)). (Lots 1 and 2
appear to now make up portions of Parcel 11.)
 
•	 In 1895, Keona [sic] conveyed a "2/5" interest in Land
Commission Award No. 4766 to A.K. Mika. Silva asserts
 that the 1895 Deed's reference to Keona was an error
 and Keona was the same person described as Keoua in the
1883 Partition Deed. Silva acknowledges that it is
unclear how Keoua would have acquired a 2/5 interest,
given that he only acquired Lot 2 in the 1883 Partition
Deed.
 
From the point of conveyance to A.K. Mika, Silva claims
 
title to Parcel 11 through two sources: (a) through Wahinealoha
 
Keo, and (b) through Kauhane Mika. 
Silva's claim through Wahinealoha Keo:
 
•	 In 1916, Mary Rose Nakai, claiming to be the daughter
and heir of A.K. Mika, conveyed by deed A.K. Mika's
interest in Land Commission Award No. 4766 to
 Wahinealoha Keo.
 
•	 By deed dated February 25, 1931, Wahinealoha Keo
conveyed the land received from Mary Rose Nakai to Eva
Kaiu. However, on August 17, 1931, Wahinealoha Keo
purportedly conveyed that same interest by deed to
William K. Waialeale. 
•	 On August 17, 1931, William K. Waialeale and his wife,
Edith Waialeale, conveyed Lot 1 and Lot 2 of Land
Commission Award No. 4766 to Annie Kona. 
•	 Silva then claimed title to Parcel 11 through
inheritance, identifying himself as a lineal descendant
of Annie Kona. Silva's claim to title through
inheritance is summarized as follows: Annie Kona
 (formerly Antonia Pacheco), who married Joe Pila Kona,
had seven children -- Stella, Flora, Mabel, Antone,
Dorothy, Fred and Lily. Stella Kona, who married John
Costa Rita, Jr., was survived by issue upon death. One
 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Stella Kona's surviving children was Bernice Cecelia
Rita, the mother of Silva.
 
Silva's claim through Kauhane Mika:
 
•	 In 1912, the wife of R.K. Mika, died. Her name was
 Kauhane Nakai Mika. Probate testimony given by Mary
Rose Nakai and Francis Nakai indicated that Kauhane
 Nakai Mika left no issue or spouse, but had five
nephews (children of deceased brother Joseph Nakai) and
that she owned a parcel of land containing 3 acres, 1
rood and 24 perches, which Silva represents is the same
area as that of the subject kuleana.
 
•	 In 1913, the administrator of Kauhane Mika's estate
declared that the inventory of her estate included real
property described as 3 acres Kula land in Koloa,
Kauai. Sworn testimony of a creditor and a nephew
stated that the land owned by Kauhane Mika was leased
to a Wahiawa plantation. Silva asked the court to take
 "judicial notice" that A&B's predecessor, McBryde Sugar
Company, operated a sugar plantation at Wahiawa. Silva
 maintains that Kauhane Mika's nephews were determined
to be her heirs, including Luka Nakai, aka Liebert
Nakai. Although a petition for letters of
administration filed in the Probate Court identified
 Mary Rose Nakai (decedent's sister-in-law) as an heir,
it appears that under applicable law, title to any
property owned by Kauhane Mika passed to her nephews
only.
13
 
•	 In 1929, the administrator of Luka, aka Liebert,
Nakai's estate declared that he died owning "2/5" of
the subject kuleana with an area of 1 acre and 1 rood
(1.25 acres), leaving two children, George Nakai and
Mabel Nakai (Mrs. Kusan Ah Nee).
 
•	 In 1931, George Nakai delivered a deed to Annie Kona
for "Lots 1 and 2, at Poeleele, Koloa. . . L.C.A. 4766
. . . and being the properties and lands popularly and
commonly known as the 'Mary Rose Nakai Property[,]' the
 
13
 Silva cited to Revised Laws of Hawaii § 3246 (1915), which
provided, in relevant part:
 
If the intestate be a woman, and . . . if she shall leave no
issue, nor father, nor mother, her estate shall descend
one-half to her husband and the other half to her brothers
 and sisters, and to the children of any brother or sister by
right of representation.
 
20  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
same being inherited by the said Grantor from his
father Libert Nakai." As reported above, Silva
maintains that he is the lineal descendant and heir of
 Annie Kona.
 
•	 Similarly, on July 3, 1931, Kusan Ah Nee, Jr. delivered
a deed to Edith Waialeale for land inherited from his
 wife Mabel, described in the deed as "Land at Poeleele,
Lots 1 and 2, L.C.A. 4766 . . . containing an area 1.25
acres." On July 9, 1931, Edith Waialeale executed a
deed conveying the "Land at Poeleele, Lots 1 and 2,
L.C.A. 4766 . . . containing an area 1.25 acres" to
Annie Kona. 
Silva tacitly admits that there are flaws and/or gaps
 
in his chain of paper title, but maintains that, along with the
 
probate court testimony concerning Kauhane Nakai Mika's lease to
 
a sugar plantation purported to be A&B's predecessor-in-interest,
 
he offered compelling evidence to support his claim of title to
 
Parcel 11.
 
A&B again submitted no evidence in support of its own
 
claim of title with its reply to Silva's Opposition and
 
Supplemental Opposition. Instead, A&B asserted that Silva's
 
claim to title is "fatally flawed" because Silva does not have an
 
unbroken chain of paper title and does not make a claim of title
 
by adverse possession.
 
We reject A&B's contention that it was Silva's burden 
to prove perfect title in order to defeat A&B's motion for 
partial summary judgment. See, e.g., Maui Land & Pineapple, 76 
Hawai
'i at 408, 879 P.2d at 513. Indeed, the supreme court has 
often stated that, on a motion for summary judgment: 
[t]he evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to
the non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of
the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai 'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) 
(quoting Durette v. Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai 'i 
490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 71 (2004)). 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Viewing all of the evidence and the inferences
 
therefrom in the light most favorable to Silva, Silva presented a
 
genuine issue of material fact worthy of trial concerning his
 
claim to title in Parcel 11. Accordingly, we conclude that the
 
Circuit Court erred in granting A&B's June 8, 2005 motion for
 
partial summary judgment against Silva with respect to Parcel 11.
 
C. A&B's Further Evidentiary Argument
 In its Answering Brief, A&B argues that there are
 
"several key facts which are fatal" to both of Silva's alleged
 
claims to title. A&B fails to provide any record citations for
 
the factual assertions in support of this argument. A&B provides
 
no elaboration of which documents it is relying on, which party
 
submitted them, or when they were submitted to the Circuit Court. 
Indeed, A&B's assertions seem irreconcilable with the record. 
For example, A&B asserts that Silva alleges that Liebert Nakai
 
inherited title from his mother, Mary Rose Nakai, and that prior
 
to her death, Mary Rose Nakai conveyed her interest through
 
14
Warranty Deed;  therefore, Silva could not inherit any interest
from Mary Rose Nakai. However, it appears that Silva's argument 
is that Liebert Nakai inherited his interest from Kauhane Mika, 
and not Mary Rose Nakai. This court is not obligated to sift 
through every document in the record to try to verify A&B's 
assertions. Cf. Lanai Co., Inc. v. Land Use Comm'n
, 105 Hawai 'i 
296, 309 n.31, 97 P.3d 372, 385 n.31 (2004) (court not obligated to sift through voluminous record to verify an appellant's 
inadequately documented contentions). 
Finally, A&B argues that it was required to establish
 
its title and did so; therefore, the outcome of the litigation
 
would be the same regardless of whether A&B's motion against
 
14
 Nor does A&B specify what interest in what property was
purportedly conveyed by Mary Rose Nakai, to whom it was conveyed, or when the
conveyance took place. Although we could deduce that A&B is referring to the
conveyance described by Silva in his Wahinealoha source line, A&B's argument
is unclear and is not sufficient for us to conclude that A&B carried its
 burden of persuasion on the June 8, 2005 motion for partial summary judgment.
 
22 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Silva was granted. Apparently – although there is no elaboration
 
or record citation or detail to support this proposition – A&B is
 
referring to the fact that the Circuit Court later granted A&B's
 
affirmative motion for summary judgment on its quiet title claims
 
to Parcels 11 and 18, after Silva and the other defendant-
claimants' claims had been summarily adjudicated. A&B cites no
 
authority for the proposition that this appellate court should
 
consider evidence that A&B could have, but did not, submit in
 
support of its June 8, 2005 motion for partial summary judgment
 
against Silva. Moreover, in light of our determination that the
 
Circuit Court erred in granting partial summary judgment against
 
Silva, whether A&B's evidence of title is superior to the
 
evidence of title brought forward by Silva appears to involve a
 
determination of disputed material facts that is not susceptible
 
to summary adjudication.15
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's April 20, 2007 Amended Judgment inasmuch as it enters
 judgment in favor of A&B and against Silva, and we remand this
 
case for further proceedings.
 
15
 It is not inconceivable that, on remand, this case could be
decided based upon further summary judgment proceedings. See, e.g., Weeks
, 70
Haw. at 397-99, 772 P.2d at 1190-92 (counterclaim seeking to collaterally
attack probate court's order of distribution could not be attacked, as amatter of law); 
see also, e.g., Omerod, 116 Hawai' i at 266, 172 P.3d at 1010
(appellants were collaterally estopped from claiming an interest in thesubject property as a matter of law based on prior decision of the BoundaryCommission). 
23 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 11, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Thomas D. Yano and
 
Michael J. Matsukawa
 for Defendant-Appellant
 
Michael W. Gibson
 
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
NO. 28556; OPINION
 
ALEXANDER & BALDWIN, INC., a Hawai' i Corporation, Plaintiff-Appellee, v. KEITH
A. SILVA, Defendant-Appellant,and HONOLU' U; KAUKAHI; NAHINU; KENOI; MAHIAI;
LUI MALO;KAMAKA KALA; KEAU; KEAO; KEKUEWA; ROBERT KALALUHI;(except Pualani
Naehu), THOMAS KALALUHI; PETER KALALUHI(except Leialoha Kalaluhi); MITCHELKALALUHI (except Nohealeimano Vaughn); KUHELELOA; A.K. MIKA (except Mary RoseNakai); STATE OF HAWAI' I; OFFICE OF HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS; KUKUIULA DEVELOPMENT
COMPANY (HAWAII) LLC;or their heirs and assignees; and JOHN DOES 1-50,JANEDOES 1-50, DOE CORPORATION 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50 and DOE ENTITIES 1-50,Defendants 
24 