  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29923 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CORNELIUS WESLEY DURHAM, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT

 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0220(2))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ. with
Nakamura, C.J., dissenting separately)
 
Defendant-Appellant Cornelius Wesley Durham (Durham)
 
appeals from the "Order Revoking Probation and Resentencing
 
Defendant" filed on June 26, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the
 
Second Circuit (circuit court).1 The circuit court revoked
 
Durham's probation and resentenced him to a five-year term of
 
probation with a one-year jail term. 
On appeal, Durham asserts: (1) that the circuit court
 
abused its discretion in revoking his probation because he did
 
not inexcusably fail to comply with a substantial condition of
 
his probation and (2) that he received ineffective assistance of
 
counsel.
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced, the issues raised by the parties, and the
 
relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Durham's points of
 
error as follows:
 
(1) It is well-established that "[a] sentencing court 
may revoke a defendant's probation and impose a new sentence if 
the defendant, who is granted probation, fails to abide by the 
terms of probation." State v. Perry, 93 Hawai 'i 189, 194, 998 
P.2d 70, 75 (App. 2000) (citing State v. Gamulo, 69 Haw. 424, 425-26, 744 P.2d 1208, 1209 (1987); State v. Viloria, 70 Haw. 58, 
60-61, 759 P.2d 1376, 1378 (1988)). 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 706-625(3) (Supp. 2006) 
provides, in relevant part: "[t]he court shall revoke probation 
if the defendant has inexcusably failed to comply with a 
substantial requirement imposed as a condition of the order or 
has been convicted of a felony." A circuit court's decision that 
a defendant failed to comply with a substantial requirement 
imposed as a condition of an order of probation is a finding of 
fact reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard, while its 
decision that the failure was inexcusable is a conclusion of law 
reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard. State v. Reyes, 
93 Hawai
'i 321, 327, 2 P.3d 725, 731 (App. 2000); State v. Lazar, 
82 Hawai 'i 441, 443, 922 P.2d 1054, 1056 (App. 1996). "A 
conclusion of law that is supported by the trial court's findings 
of fact and that reflects an application of the correct rule of 
law will not be overturned." Reyes, 93 Hawai 'i at 327, 2 P.3d at 
731 (quoting Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 119, 839 P.2d 10, 29 (1994)) (brackets omitted). 
The circuit court's finding that Durham "failed to
 
comply with a substantial requirement imposed as a condition of
 
[probation]" is a finding of fact which was not clearly
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
erroneous, as there is substantial evidence in the record to
 
support this finding. Pursuant to a plea agreement reached with
 
the State, Durham pled no contest to two counts of sexual assault
 
in the third degree in violation of HRS ยง 707-732(1)(d)) (1993
 
and Supp. 2006). Durham was sentenced to a five-year probation
 
term. As part of his probation, Durham was required to comply
 
with certain specified terms and conditions, including one which
 
provided: "You must participate satisfactorily in the Hawaii Sex
 
Offender Treatment Program (HSOTP) with the provision that you
 
obtain and maintain sex offender treatment, as approved by your
 
probation officer, at your own expense until clinically
 
discharged with the concurrence of your probation officer"
 
(Special Condition J).2 Thus, Durham's premature termination
 
from the Catholic Charities Sex Offender Treatment Program (SOTP)
 on June 27, 2008, prior to being clinically discharged and
 
without the concurrence of his probation officer, constituted a
 
failure to comply with a substantial requirement of his
 
probation. 
The circuit court's determination that such failure was
 
"inexcusable" was correct and was supported by the trial court's
 
findings of fact. Durham argues that he was only terminated due
 
to his attorney-friend Leslie Iczkovitz's interference, in
 
particular a letter sent by Iczkovitz to Durham's probation
 
officer and therapist, which was also copied to Durham.3
  
2 Durham signed the terms and conditions on September 28, 2007, thereby
attesting that "the foregoing terms and conditions have been explained to me;
I fully understand them, agree to abide by them in every way and understand
the consequences, I have received a copy of these terms and conditions of
probation."
3
 On June 25, 2008, Iczkovitz sent a letter purporting to represent
Durham "in the matter regarding his terms of probation" which was addressed to
both Durham's probation officer and his SOTP therapist. In the letter,
Iczkovitz accused them of violating Durham's constitutional rights through the
limitations placed on him as part of his sex offender treatment. Durham was
 copied on the letter. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, Durham was aware of the letter by Iczkovitz, had
 
discussed with Iczkovitz the restrictions being placed on him by
 
the SOTP, and Durham cannot disclaim responsibility for the
 
letter. The letter itself challenged the restrictions that were
 
placed on Durham by his therapist and probation officer as a
 
result of recent events that were deemed high risk or
 
inappropriate situations for him. 
Contrary to Durham's contention, the evidence adduced
 
at the revocation hearing on June 4, 2009 demonstrated that
 
Durham was terminated from the Catholic Charities SOTP for the
 
following four reasons: (1) the threat of legal action contained
 
in the Iczkovitz letter created an ethical conflict between
 
Durham and his therapist and interfered with the therapeutic
 
relationship; (2) the allegations in the letter demonstrated
 
Durham's resistance to treatment and a lack of desire to
 
participate; (3) Durham signed a behavioral contract "under
 
duress," which signaled a resistance to treatment; and (4) Durham
 
was unwilling to fully participate in group therapy by refusing
 
to discuss the letter with the group. We agree with the circuit
 
court that Durham's failure to comply with Special Condition J
 
was inexcusable.
 
(2) Durham's second point of error is that his 
attorney-friend Leslie Iczkovitz's faulty legal advice 
constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. This assertion 
lacks merit. Both the United States Constitution and the Hawai 'i 
Constitution guarantee a criminal defendant the right to effective assistance of counsel in his or her defense. See Haw. 
Const. art. I, ยง 14 ("[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right . . . to have the assistance of counsel for 
the accused's defense.") (emphasis added); U.S. Const. amend. VI. 
("[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the 
right . . . to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence."). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, Durham's counsel for his defense were Philip H.
 
Lowenthal, Esq. and the Office of the Public Defender, who
 
represented Durham during the criminal proceedings. Iczkovitz
 
was never Durham's attorney of record and neither Iczkovitz's
 
questionable advice nor his writing of the June 25, 2008 letter
 
can constitute ineffective assistance of counsel, as Iczkovitz
 
was not involved in Durham's "defense."
 
Accordingly, the Order Revoking Probation and
 
Resentencing Defendant filed on June 26, 2009 in the Circuit
 
Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 24, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Taryn R. Tomasa
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Associate Judge

Richard K. Minatoya
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge

 
5
 