NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 28651 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DOUGLAS R.M. KALEIKINI, JR., Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 06-1-0482(1))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.,
with Nakamura, C.J. concurring separately)
 
Appellant Douglas R.M. Kaleikini, Jr. (Kaleikini)
 
appeals from a Judgment entered on June 13, 2007 by the Circuit
 
1
Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court)  convicting him of
Robbery in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 708-841 (1993 Repl.).
 
On appeal, Kaleikini challenges his conviction by
 
raising the following points of error: (1) the Circuit Court
 committed plain error in giving its jury instructions regarding
 the offense of robbery in the second degree and regarding
 accomplice liability; (2) there was insufficient evidence to
 support Kaleikini's conviction as a principal or an accomplice;
 and (3) the prosecutor committed prosecutorial misconduct during
 closing argument.
 
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised therein, as well as
 the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Kaleikini's
 points of error as follows:
 
(1) While the case was before the Circuit Court, 
Kaleikini did not object to the jury instructions he now challenges on appeal. There is "a presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are correct[.]" State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai' i 
327, 337 n.6, 141 P.3d 974, 984 n.6 (2006). "[I]f the appellant overcomes the presumption that the instructions were correctly stated, the rule is that such erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial." Id. (quoting State v. Eberly, 107 Hawai' i 
239, 250, 112 P.3d 725, 736 (2005)) (emphasis omitted). Kaleikini does not overcome the presumption that the jury instructions on principal liability and accomplice liability were correct. 
The Circuit Court instructed the jury on the elements 
required to establish that Kaleikini committed robbery in the second degree as a principal and/or accomplice. Kaleikini argues that the Circuit Court erred in instructing the jury that it could convict him as a principal because there was no evidence to support his liability as a principal. As stated in the commentary to HRS § 702-221(1) (1993 Repl.) and recognized by the Hawai'i Supreme Court, "[d]istinctions between principals and 
accessories are dispensed with and a defendant may be convicted directly of an offense committed by another for whose conduct the defendant is accountable." HRS § 702-221, cmt. subsection (1); State v. Apao, 59 Haw. 625, 644, 586 P.2d 250, 262 (1978), superseded by statute on other grounds as acknowledged in Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 456 n.7, 848 P.2d 966, 974 n.7 (1993). 
The prosecution is not required to elect between charging the
 defendant as a principal or an accessory. Apao, 59 Haw. at 646,
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
586 P.2d at 263; see also State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai' i 462, 489 
n.24, 946 P.2d 32, 59 n.24 (1997). "Regardless of whether an 
indictment or complaint mentions accomplice or principal liability, the jury can be instructed on the law of principal and accomplice." State v. Yip, 92 Hawai' i 98, 114, 987 P.2d 996, 
1012 (App. 1999). The Circuit Court's instruction on the alternative theories of principal and/or accomplice liability was not in error. 
Kaleikini argues, secondly, that the instruction on 
accomplice liability was erroneous because it failed to require a finding by the jury that there was a principal who committed the offense, i.e. a juvenile male involved in the incident (juvenile male) and/or co-defendant Christopher Calibuso (Calibuso). A similar argument was rejected in State v. Keaweehu, 110 Hawai' i 
129, 129 P.3d 1157 (App. 2006), where this court reviewed for plain error jury instructions on accomplice liability that were substantially similar to the instructions in the instant case. In Keaweehu, the defendant argued that the instruction erroneously did not require "proof that a principal had engaged in criminal conduct," but this court determined that the instruction "sufficiently advised the jury that the charged offense must have been committed for the defendant to be an accomplice." Id. at 134, 129 P.3d at 1162; see also State v. 
Churchill, 4 Haw. App. 276, 281-84, 664 P.2d 757, 761-63 (1983). 
We are also unconvinced by Kaleikini's other challenges
 
to the jury instructions, and conclude that considering the
 instructions as a whole, they were not insufficient, erroneous,
 inconsistent or misleading. Therefore, Kaleikini's points of
 error regarding the jury instructions on principal and accomplice
 liability are rejected.
 
(2) Kaleikini next contends that the State failed to
 
adduce substantial evidence to support his conviction as either a
 principal or an accomplice in the offense. The State responds
 that, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
 State, there is substantial evidence to support Kaleikini's
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conviction. On appeal, the question is not whether guilt has 
been established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution there was substantial evidence to support the jury's determination. 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998); 
State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981). 
"The jury, as the trier of fact, is the sole judge of the credibility of witnesses or the weight of the evidence." Id. at 
637-38, 633 P.2d at 1117 (citations omitted). 
Based on our review of the record, we conclude that
 
there was sufficient evidence to support the jury's verdict
 against Kaleikini. 
As Kaleikini points out in his opening brief,
 
to prove Kaleikini was an accomplice of either the juvenile male
 and/or Calibuso, the State had to establish that Kaleikini, with
 the intention of promoting or facilitating the commission of the
 offense of robbery, either: (a) solicited the juvenile male
 and/or Calibuso to commit the offense; or (b) aided or agreed or
 attempted to aid the other person in planning or committing the
 offense. Given the evidence in this case, we conclude there was
 sufficient evidence to support a jury conclusion that Kaleikini,
 with an intention to promote or facilitate the commission of the
 offense, either aided or attempted to aid the juvenile male
 and/or Calibuso in the commission of the offense.
 
Complaining witness William Blake Gilmore (Gilmore), 
testified that at the time of the incident he was eighteen years old, about 6'1" tall, and weighed about one hundred fifty to one hundred sixty lbs. As he was returning alone down the trail at 'Îao Valley State Park, he heard rustling behind him and then saw 
the same four young men he had seen earlier while going up the trail with his family. The four males were coming down the trail at a pretty fast pace, lightly jogging, so Gilmore stepped aside onto the side of the trail. The four males were in two groups of two. Gilmore testified that the first two individuals jogged past him and then the other two were behind him. Initially, Gilmore thought the first two were just going down the trail, but 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
then they "turned around to confront [Gilmore]." Gilmore
 
identified Kaleikini as being "number 2" or one of the two
 individuals who went past him and then turned around to confront
 him.
 
Gilmore testified he was then grabbed from behind by
 
Calibuso, who was "number 4" or one of the two individuals who
 ended up behind him. According to Gilmore, Calibuso grabbed both
 of Gilmore's arms around the bicep area and locked Gilmore's arms
 behind his back. Gilmore testified he was then hit in the face
 with a closed fist by "number 1" who was identified as the
 juvenile male. The juvenile male told Gilmore to give his
 wallet. Gilmore further testified that, when he was being
 grabbed and while being punched, the other individuals were
 snickering, "[k]ind of giggling, like there's no way, kind of
 looking down upon me like a [sic] hopeless." According to
 Gilmore, Kaleikini was one of the males that was laughing at him
 when his arms were being held and he was being punched.
 
Gilmore refused to give his wallet, got free from
 
Calibuso's grasp, ran "through" the juvenile male, and started to
 run down the trail. Gilmore testified he was then tackled by the
 juvenile male into a bushy, rocky area on the side of the trail
 and, while face down, he felt hands stripping things from his
 pockets. According to Gilmore, as the juvenile male tried to
 remove Gilmore's wallet, Gilmore took his wallet back and then
 sprinted down the hill yelling for help. Gilmore testified that
 when he was about halfway down the hill from where the incident
 happened, he glanced back and saw that Kaleikini and the juvenile
 male had continued following him for a little while, but had
 stopped, likely because Gilmore was yelling loudly.
 
When asked if he felt that all four individuals were
 
equally guilty, Gilmore testified that he felt "number 3" did not
 want to be a part of it, "[b]ut the other three, I felt boxed me
 in a lot, trying to keep me there while the incident was
 happening." This included Kaleikini. Further, although defense
 counsel sought to challenge Gilmore based on his statements to
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
police, when asked if Kaleikini just stood and watched as the
 
robbery occurred, Gilmore responded "no." The jury was also
 allowed to pose questions to Gilmore, including: "Did number 2
 come to witness's defense to try to stop incident? Did he say
 anything like what are you doing or stop it?" In response,
 Gilmore testified "no."
 
Calibuso testified and stated that only the juvenile
 
male touched Gilmore, by punching Gilmore and grabbing Gilmore by
 the waist. Calibuso further testified that during the incident
 he did not laugh, but he heard his friends laughing. Calibuso
 confirmed that Kaleikini was the biggest of the four males in the
 group at about 6' tall and that the juvenile male was the
 smallest at about 5'3" or 5'4" and one-hundred twenty lbs. After
 the incident, Calibuso testified that he and the other three
 males did not wait for the police, the four of them met at a pond
 below the parking lot, and then had two friends pick up
 Kaleikini's truck, which was in the upper parking lot where
 police had been called.
 
Based on our review of the record, there was
 
substantial evidence to support the jury's conclusion to convict
 Kaleikini.
 
(3) Kaleikini contends that the deputy prosecuting
 
attorney (DPA) committed reversible prosecutorial misconduct due
 to comments made in closing argument that were designed to appeal
 to racial prejudice. Kaleikini challenges the following
 statements by the DPA:
 
There are many reasons to commit a robbery. In this
 
case we're aware of two reasons. One, for money; and two,
because these defendants believed that Iao Valley is their
mountain and that white boy didn't belong there. 
Isolate and outnumber. Four against one. It is the
 
same thing that all predators do.
 
When considering an allegation of prosecutorial
 
misconduct, an appellate court must decide: (1) whether the
 
conduct was improper; (2) if the conduct was improper, whether
 the misconduct was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt; and (3) if
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the misconduct was not harmless, whether the misconduct was so 
egregious as to bar re-prosecution. State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai' i 
20, 26, 108 P.3d 974, 980 (2005). 
On the initial question, we conclude the DPA did not 
design his comments to appeal to racial prejudice, but the DPA's use of the phrase "white boy" in closing argument was not proper to the extent it was attributed to Kaleikini. There was evidence showing that, during a confrontation at the bottom of the trail, Calibuso called Gilmore a "white boy."
2 However, there is no 
evidence in the record that Kaleikini made a reference to Gilmore's race. Instead, there is evidence that after learning about the incident, Gilmore's father, brother and sister headed back down the trail to find Gilmore when they came upon the four male individuals. During this interaction, there is evidence that Kaleikini made statements to the effect of "this is our mountain, you guys don't belong here and you shouldn't be up here." These statements are relevant to Kaleikini's state of mind, i.e. whether he intended to promote or facilitate the commission of the offense. See State v. Kiakona, 110 Hawai' i 
450, 459, 134 P.3d 616, 625 (App. 2006) (prosecutor's references to "turf," "locals" and "haole tourists" was not improper because intent was a central issue in the case). Nonetheless, Kaleikini's statements did not refer to race and there is no evidence to support the DPA's statement that both "defendants believed that . . . white boy" did not belong at ' Îao Valley. 
See State v. Sanchez, 82 Hawai' i 517, 534, 923 P.2d 934, 951 
(App. 1996) ("it would be unprofessional conduct for the 
2 Gilmore testified that after the initial altercation on the trail, he
and his brother were trying to take pictures of Calibuso and Kaleikini at the
bottom of the trail. According to Gilmore:
 
Calibuso turned around and took his shirt off and was challenging
us to a fight, both of us. Actually, me. He said, come fight me
white boy, one-on-one. Puts his arm out and said stay off my
mountain. I don't know why you white people come and try and get
on our mountain. We own this place. Go back to where you came
from.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
prosecutor intentionally to refer to or argue on the basis of
 
facts outside the record.) (internal quotation marks and citation
 omitted).
 
Where the alleged conduct is not proper, we consider 
whether it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Maluia, 107 
Hawai'i at 27, 108 P.3d at 981; State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i 405, 
412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999). For this analysis, we consider the nature of the conduct, the promptness of any curative instruction, and the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant. Maluia, 107 Hawai' i at 27, 108 P.3d at 981; 
Rogan, 91 Haw. at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238. Considering these factors, we conclude that the DPA's misconduct in this case was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
The nature of the DPA's misconduct was not egregious. 
The DPA made only one reference to "white boy," there was evidence that co-defendant Calibuso had called Gilmore a "white boy," and the phrase was uttered by the DPA in conjunction with a reference that defendants thought ' Îao Valley was "their 
mountain," something that Kaleikini said to Gilmore's family members.
3 
There was no curative instruction given by the Circuit
 
Court because the court determined that the DPA's statements were
 supported by the evidence. However, the Circuit Court did give
 the following instruction to the jury in the course of providing
 its other instructions: "Statements or remarks by counsel are not
 evidence. You should consider their arguments to you, but you
 are not bound by their recollections or interpretations of the
 evidence." The Circuit Court further instructed the jury:
 
You must not be influenced by pity for a defendant or
by passion or prejudiced [sic] against a defendant. Both
 
the prosecution and the defendants have a right to demand,
 
3
 Kaleikini argues that the DPA should not have referred to Kaleikini's
remarks because evidence of Kaleikini's hostility against tourists was
excluded by a pre-trial ruling. However, Kaleikini did not object when such
evidence was adduced at trial on two occasions (during the testimony of Weston
Gilmore and Dan Gilmore) and the admission of that evidence is not challenged
on appeal.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and they do demand and expect, that you will conscientiously
and dispassionately consider and weigh all of the evidence
and follow these instructions and that you will reach just
verdicts.
 
A jury is presumed to follow the instructions of the court. See 
State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai' i 405, 415, 16 P.3d 246, 256 (2001); 
State v. Kupihea, 80 Hawai' i 307, 318, 909 P.2d 1122, 1133 
(1996). 
As to the strength or weakness of the evidence against
 
Kaleikini, as we concluded above, there is substantial evidence
 
in the record that, with the intention to promote or facilitate
 the commission of the offense, Kaleikini aided or attempted to
 aid either the juvenile male or Calibuso in committing the
 offense.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment
 
entered on June 13, 2007 by the Circuit Court of the Second
 Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 30, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
James S. Tabe
 
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant Associate Judge
 
Scott K. Hanano
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui Associate Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
9
 