NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 28973
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI rI 
JAMES A. LOWE, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
LOUIS M. KEALOHA, Chief of Police, CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-2144)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant James A. Lowe (Lowe), pro se,
 
appeals from the March 27, 2008 judgment of the Circuit Court of
 
1
the First Circuit  (circuit court), which was entered pursuant to
a February 12, 2008 order granting the City & County of 
Honolulu's (City) motion to dismiss pursuant to Hawai ri Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6). 
Lowe filed a complaint against Boisse Correa (Correa),2
 
in his capacity as Chief of Police, and the City on November 13,
 2007, alleging that Correa and the City violated his Second
 
Amendment rights by not returning a pistol that Lowe surrendered
 
when a temporary restraining order was issued against him.
 
Lowe's opening brief is mostly unintelligible and is in 
wholesale nonconformity with Hawai
ri Rules of Appellate Procedure 
(HRAP) Rule 28(b). Although "failure to comply with HRAP [Rule] 
1
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided.
 
2
 Correa retired from the Honolulu Police Department (HPD) on
August 26, 2009.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
28(b)(4) is alone sufficient to affirm the judgment of the 
circuit court," the appellate court has a policy of affording 
litigants the opportunity "to have their cases heard on the 
merits, where possible." O'Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu, 77 
Hawairi 383, 385-86, 885 P.2d 361, 363-64 (1994). From Lowe's 
opening brief, it is evident that Lowe challenges the circuit 
court's order granting the City's motion to dismiss. 
Mindful that pleadings prepared by pro se litigants 
"should be interpreted liberally," Dupree v. Hiraga, 121 Hawai ri 
297, 314, 219 P.3d 1084, 1101 (2009), we read Lowe's complaint to allege that the HPD's policy -- requiring the owners of firearms 
confiscated under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 134-7 (Supp. 
2005) to submit certified copies of orders disposing of their 
case before HPD returns the firearm -- violates the Second 
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution (Second Amendment).
3 
In District of Columbia v. Heller, the United States
 
Supreme Court stated that its opinion finding the District's
 
handgun ban unconstitutional was not a categorical rejection of
 
all gun restrictions.
 
Like most rights, the right secured by the Second Amendment
is not unlimited. . . . [N]othing in our opinion should be
taken to cast doubt on longstanding prohibitions on the
possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill, or
laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive places
such as schools and government buildings, or laws imposing
conditions and qualifications on the commercial sale of
 arms.
 
3 Previous challenges to Hawaii's gun control laws were rejected on the
bases that an individual plaintiff lacks standing because the Second Amendmentright to bear arms is a "collective" right held by the states alone, Young v.Hawaii, 548 F. Supp. 2d 1151, 1168 (D. Haw. 2008) (citing Hickman v. Block, 81F.3d 98, 101-02 (9th Cir. 1996)), and that "the Second Amendment does notapply to the States through the fourteenth amendment to the United StatesConstitution." State v. Mendoza, 82 Hawair i 143, 146, 920 P.2d 357, 360
(1996). Both decisions are overruled by recent high court rulings. In District of Columbia v. Heller the U.S. Supreme Court established that "theright to keep and bear arms" is an individual right, not a collective one. 554U.S. 570, , 128 S.Ct. 2783, 2816 (2008). McDonald v. Chicago, 561 U.S.
, 130 S. Ct. 3020 (2010), held the Second Amendment was incorporated by the
Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and thus applicable to the
states.
 
Although Hawaii's Bill of Rights contains language that is
virtually identical to the Second Amendment, see Haw. Const. Art. 1, § 17,Lowe does not raise a challenge based on the Hawair i Constitution. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Heller, 554 U.S. 570, ___, 128 S. Ct. 2783, 2816-17 (2008). 
4
HRS § 134-7(f)  is such a prohibition, forbidding gun
possession by individuals under a restraining order. See United

 
States v. Emerson, 270 F.3d 203, 261 (5th Cir. 2001), Nollet v.
 
Justices of Trial Courts of Commonwealth of Mass., 83 F. Supp. 2d
 
204, 212-13 (D. Mass. 2000). Lowe told the circuit court, "I
 
don't complain that he seized it. . . . I complain that he keeps
 
it." Thus, Lowe declined to challenge the constitutionality of
 
5
 under which he
 HRS § 134-7(f) or HRS § 134-7.3 (Supp. 2009),
turned over the gun to HPD.
 
Lowe's objection appears to be with HPD's process for

 
returning weapons. HRS § 134-7.3(d) states that "[t]he chief of
 
police of the respective counties shall adopt procedures to
 
4 HRS § 134-7(f) reads:
 
(f) No person who has been restrained pursuant to an
order of any court, including an ex parte order as provided
in this subsection, from contacting, threatening, or
physically abusing any person, shall possess, control, or
transfer ownership of any firearm or ammunition therefor, so
long as the protective order, restraining order, or any
extension is in effect, unless the order, for good cause
shown, specifically permits the possession of a firearm and
ammunition. . . . Such person shall relinquish possession
and control of any firearm and ammunition owned by that
person to the police department of the appropriate county
for safekeeping for the duration of the order or extension
thereof. In the case of an ex parte order, the affidavit or
statement under oath that forms the basis for the order
 shall contain a statement of the facts that support a
finding that the person to be restrained owns, intends to
obtain or to transfer ownership of, or possesses a firearm,
and that the firearm may be used to threaten, injure, or
abuse any person. The ex parte order shall be effective
upon service pursuant to section 586-6. At the time of
 service of a restraining order involving firearms and
ammunition issued by any court, the police officer may take
custody of any and all firearms and ammunition in plain
sight, those discovered pursuant to a consensual search, and
those firearms surrendered by the person restrained. If the
 person restrained is the registered owner of a firearm and
knows the location of the firearm, but refuses to surrender
the firearm or refuses to disclose the location of the
 firearm, the person restrained shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
5
 HRS § 134-7.3 requires "[a]ny person disqualified from ownership,
possession, or control of firearms and ammunition under section 134-7 [to]
voluntarily surrender all firearms and ammunition to the chief of police."
HRS § 134-7.3(b).
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
implement and administer the provisions of this section
 
[requiring those unqualified to possess firearms to surrender
 
them or have them seized] by December 31, 2001." According to
 
the Firearms Unit of HPD's Records and Identification Division,
 
[t]o retrieve firearms held by the Honolulu Police
Department which were confiscated by a court order, please
submit a certified copy of the judgment of acquittal or
other final court order disposing of the family or
[district] court case. Certified copies may be obtained at:
Legal Research and Adoption Records Unit, Family Court,
First Circuit, 777 Punchbowl Street, Honolulu, Hawaii
96813.
 
available at http://www.honolulupd.org/info/gun-retrieving.htm.6
 
In response to a demand by Lowe, HPD informed him of this
 
requirement, telling him that "[w]hen your Temporary Restraining
 
Order is dissolved, please take the paperwork to the Firearms
 
Section of the Records and Identification Division. They will
 
process the paperwork for the return of your pistol." Lowe does
 
not complain that HPD's instruction that he should produce
 
"paperwork" is vague or that he did not know what paperwork would
 
be required. His Opening Brief merely alleges that this
 
requirement constitutes "intolerable acts."
 
Lowe does not put forth any evidence that he obtained a
 
certified copy of a court order or judgment. According to Lowe's
 
own admission at the January 9, 2008 hearing, he did not want to
 
have to pay the costs to get a certified copy of a judgment. 
Lowe argues on appeal that "there is no record to copy except the
 
6 A looseleaf flyer available at the Honolulu Police Department,
Records & Identification Division, Firearms Unit, Firearms Acquisition and
Registration Requirements (undated) provides virtually the same instruction
and reads,
 
[t]o retrieve firearms which were confiscated by a court
order, please submit a certified copy of the [Judgment] of
Acquittal or other final court order disposing of the Family
Court or Criminal case. Certified copies are obtained at:
Legal Documents Branch, Office of the Chief Court
Administrator, First Circuit Court, 777 Punchbowl Street,
Honolulu, Hawaii 96811
 
(emphasis omitted).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
transcript I paid for and which none [sic] will read." It is
 
unclear what document Lowe considers to be a "transcript" and
 
whether this document shows that the restraining order was in
 
fact dismissed, because it is not in the record. Lowe does not
 
contend that he showed a "certified court order" to the HPD
 
records division, as required by the department's procedures. 
Thus, Lowe has not averred facts that, when viewed in the light
 
most favorable to him, would establish that HPD wrongfully
 
withheld his gun. Because Lowe failed to prove his compliance
 
with the rules established by HPD and Correa under the authority
 
granted by § 134-7.3(d), Lowe failed to state a claim upon which
 
relief could be granted. The circuit court therefore did not err
 
in granting the City's motion to dismiss Lowe's constitutional
 
claims.
 
Lowe's complaint lastly alleges that the police
 
department committed "malfeasance" by the "private use of a
 
public utility." Lowe appears to object to the fact that he was
 
served by police officers, but his complaint fails to allege any
 
facts that he was indeed served. Even if he was served with
 
documents by a HPD officer, HRCP Rule 4(c) permits "[s]ervice of
 
all process . . . in any county by the chief of police or the
 
chief's duly authorized subordinate." Therefore, Lowe fails to
 
state a claim for malfeasance where the facts, when viewed in the
 
light most favorable to him, establish that Lowe was served in
 
accordance with the HCRP.
 
Therefore, the March 27, 2008 judgment of the Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai ri, December 22, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
James Lowe,
Plaintiff-Appellant, pro se. Chief Judge 
Kyle K. Chang,Deputy Corporation Counsel,City and County of Honolulu,for Defendants-Appellees. 

 Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5