NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29129 AND 29917
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
NO. 29129
 
BRIAN KIYOTAKA YAMAMOTO,
Plaintiff-Appellee, Cross-Appellant,
v.
 
LORI ANN LEIKO YAMAMOTO,
Defendant-Appellant, Cross-Appellee
 
and
 
NO. 29917
 
BRIAN KIYOTAKA YAMAMOTO,
Plaintiff-Appellee, Cross-Appellant,
v.
 
LORI ANN LEIKO YAMAMOTO,
Defendant-Appellant, Cross-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 99-0521)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Lori Ann Leiko Yamamoto ("Mother")
 
appeals from the March 28, 2008 Decision and Order Re: Short
 
Trial Held on 3/7/08 (the "March 28, 2008 Decision & Order") and
 from the April 25, 2008 Order Granting in Part and Denying in
 Part Defendant's Motion for Reconsideration of Order Filed March
 28, 2008, Filed April 7, 2008 (the "April 25, 2008 Order")
 entered in the Family Court of the First Circuit ("Family
 Court").
1 Plaintiff-Appellee Brian Kiyotaka Yamamoto ("Father")
 
cross appeals from both, the March 28, 2008 Decision & Order and
 
1/
 The Honorable Patricia C. Aburano entered the March 28, 2008
Decision & Order and the April 25, 2008 Order.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the April 25, 2008 Order. The appeal was assigned appellate case
 
number 29129. 
Mother subsequently appealed from the following orders 
entered by the Family Court: the March 18, 2009 Decision and Order, which granted in part and denied in part Mother's December 24, 2007 and March 10, 2007 motions for post-decree relief (the "March 18, 2009 Decision & Order"); the March 30, 2009 Amended Decision and Order; the June 3, 2009 Order Re Motions for Reconsideration (a) granting in part and denying in party Mother's March 27, 2009 Hawai' i Family Court Rules ("HFCR") Rule 
59 motion for reconsideration and (b) denying Father's April 8, 2009 HFCR Rule 59 motion for reconsideration; and the June 3, 2009 Order Denying [Mother's] Cross Motion for Sanctions and Attorneys' Fees and Costs Filed May 15, 2009 (the "June 3, 2009 Order Denying Cross Motion").
2 On July 7, 2009, Father filed a 
notice of cross-appeal from the same four orders. This second appeal was assigned appellate case number 29917. On October 14, 2010, the two appeals were consolidated for disposition under appellate case number 29129. 
On appeal, Mother asserts that the Family Court erred:
3
 
(1) by failing to void an agreement between the parties wherein
 Father agreed to allow the parties' youngest daughter ("LY") to
 attend a private school on the condition that Father would not be
 financially responsible for the tuition; (2) by refusing to
 direct Father to reimburse Mother for Father's pro rata share of
 LY's private school tuition since 2004; (3) by failing to award
 damages to Mother based on Father's failure to use his best
 efforts to secure scholarships for LY; (4) by failing to apply
 the doctrine of res judicata to the issues of the stock accounts
 and health insurance; (5) in determining Father's income; (6) in
 
2/
 The Honorable Linda S. Martel entered the March 18, 2009 Decision
& Order; the March 30, 2009 Amended Decision and Order; the June 3, 2009 Order
Re Motions for Reconsideration; and the June 3, 2009 Order Denying Cross
Motion.
 
3/
 Mother's points of error consist of a list of findings of fact
("FOF") and conclusions of law ("COL") that Mother contends were improperly
entered. For the most part, Mother's arguments do not address the FOF or the
COL or relate back to the points of error. "Points not argued may be deemed
waived." Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7). Consequently, we do not address the FOF
or COL and instead focus on Mother's arguments.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
determining past child support for the parties' adult dependent
 
child ("KY"); (7) by refusing to modify visitation; (8) by
 denying Mother's motion for reconsideration and/or clarification
 pursuant to HFCR Rules 59(e) and 60(b), as well as Mother's
 motion to stay pursuant to HFCR Rule 62(d); and (9) by refusing
 to modify prior orders regarding dependency exemptions.
 
Father contends that the Family Court erred by (10)
 
failing to impose sanctions against Mother and her counsel 
despite supporting evidence in the record. Furthermore, both
 parties allege that the Court erred by (11) denying their
 respective requests for attorneys' fees and costs.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 affirm the Family Court's decisions and address the parties'
 points of error as follows:
 
(1) The parties were divorced on December 11, 2000,
 
pursuant to a Decree Granting Divorce and Awarding Child Custody
 ("Decree"). At the time of the divorce, the parties' children
 were attending public schools. Nevertheless, the Decree
 addressed the issue of prospective private school tuition in two
 sections:
 
3. CHILD CUSTODY AND VISITATION: . . . .
 
.  .  .  .
 A. Legal Custody: [Father] and [Mother] are
awarded joint legal custody of their minor children, [KY],
[BY], and [LY] (the "Children"), until further order of the
Court. As joint legal custodians, the parties shall
together make every major decision involving each of the
parties' children. For each of the parties' children, such
major decisions would include, among others, . . . major
decisions involving the children's education, such as choice
of school, change in school, advancement or retention[.] . .
. If [Father] and [Mother] are unable to agree on a decision
concerning the Children that requires agreement, then the
parties shall attempt to mediate their dispute before either
party bring [sic] the matter back to Court.
 
.  .  .  .
 
OTHER MATTERS COVERED BY THIS DECREE ARE AS FOLLOWS:
 
. . . .
 
7. Private School Tuition: [Father] shall be
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
responsible for his pro rata share of private school tuition
in accordance with line 13 of the Child Support Guidelines
Worksheet and also in accordance with the income imputed to
[Father] herein. Likewise, [Mother] shall also be
responsible for her pro rata share of said tuition. In
 addition, [Father] shall use his best efforts to secure
scholarship funds from Yama's Fish Market to cover the cost
of said tuition regardless of his employment status. The
 parties [sic] children [sic] however, are currently enrolled
in public schools.
 
Paragraph 7 of the Decree expressly recognizes that the
 
children were, at the time of the Decree, enrolled in public
 
schools. Consequently, Paragraph 3.A. applies when addressing
 whether the status quo should be adjusted and the children should
 attend private school. Paragraph 3.A. requires that Father and
 Mother must agree on a "change in school" and, if they do not,
 then they will "attempt to mediate their dispute before . . .
 bring[ing] the matter back to Court."
 
An Agreement Regarding Hawaii Baptist Academy signed by
 
the parties on September 21, 2004 ("Agreement") describes the
 terms of agreement regarding LY's private educational expenses. 
The Agreement is not contrary to the terms of the Decree, does
 not usurp the jurisdiction of the Family Court, and is not void
 as a matter of public policy. Generally, without court approval,
 agreements between former spouses releasing one spouse from an
 obligation to pay child support are not valid and binding. E.g.,
 
Napoleon v. Napoleon, 59 Haw. 619, 624, 585 P.2d 1270, 1273
 (1978). Those cases are distinguishable, however, because here
 the Family court approved the Agreement and the Agreement did not
 deprive the children of any support to which they were entitled
 under the Decree.
 
The Decree specifically envisioned that the parties
 
would mediate "major decisions" of this sort before bringing them
 to court. By negotiating the Agreement, the parties complied
 with the terms of the Decree. While it would be preferable if
 the parties promptly presented agreements of this sort to the
 Family Court for approval, private school tuition here is not an
 element of child support, and the parties are free to privately
 contract to address the issue. This is particularly true where,
 as here, the Family Court subsequently ratified the Agreement. 
(2) Because we affirm the validity of the Agreement, we
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
accordingly hold that the Family Court did not err in refusing to
 
direct Father to reimburse Mother for LY's private school
 tuition. 
(3) Mother argues that Father did not use his best
 
efforts to secure scholarships for LY. Mother does not explain,
 however, how that contention – which mirrors the Family Court's
 own conclusion – translates into error. In the conclusion to her
 opening brief, Mother asks that "[Father] use his 'best efforts'
 in securing scholarship assistance from Yama's Fish Market, as
 well as any other source[.]" 
Although Mother challenges the majority of the Family
 
Court's FOF and COL, she does not explain how any of the FOF or
 COL relate to the issue of Father's failure to use his best
 efforts to secure financial aid or scholarship assistance for LY. 
Neither does Mother explain how the Family Court erred in
 concluding that Mother's claimed damages were speculative as
 there was no evidence that even if Father had provided the
 completed financial aid forms the family would have qualified for
 financial aid, and, if so, what the amount of that aid would have
 been. Consequently, Mother has not established that any related
 FOF is clearly erroneous or that any related COL is wrong.
 
(4) Mother explains her contention with regard to the
 
Family Court's failure to apply the doctrine of res judicata:
 
In the instant case, the issue of health insurance, in
addition to the issue of the children's trust accounts, was
litigated during the initial phase of the divorce. Father
 and Mother were the parties who litigated these issues. A
 final judgment was rendered on both issues in which Father
was to provide health insurance for the children and Mother
was awarded possession of the children's trust accounts.
Although Father filed a motion for reconsideration for both
issues, Father's motion was denied. The divorce decree,
filed on December 11, 2000, memorialized the order of the
 court. Father is the party against whom the doctrine is
being asserted and he was a party to the previous
adjudication.
 
Essentially, Mother argues that the doctrine of res judicata
 
should have prevented Father from subsequently seeking, and the
 Family Court from subsequently ordering, that Mother reimburse
 Father for one-half of the educational expenses incurred by the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
parties' adult daughter from the educational account.4
 
Furthermore, Mother argues that "Father should be ordered to
 
reimburse Mother for all [of the children's medical and dental]
 bills presented[.]" 
Mother's argument takes the fact that the Decree awards
 
Mother possession and control of the children's trust accounts
 and assigns Father the obligation to provide health insurance for
 
5
the children,  and the fact that Father filed an unsuccessful
motion for reconsideration as to both issues, and concludes that
 because the two issues were "adjudicated" between the parties in
 2000, the issues should not have been re-visited by the Family
 Court in its January 14, 2010 Findings of Fact & Conclusions of
 Law. Father contends that Mother did not timely allege res
 judicata as an affirmative defense in her answer and urges us to
 decline to consider the issue.
6
 
Whether or not res judicata was properly raised below,
 
the Family Court was correct in not applying it. The record
 shows that the issues and facts concerning KY's educational
 account during the post-decree proceedings were not identical and
 were not based on the same issues and facts that had been
 addressed at the time of the divorce. In the proceeding at
 issue, Father did not contest the original award of the
 children's accounts to Mother as the custodian but, rather,
 contended that KY's educational account needed to be considered
 in determining the appropriate amount of his contribution toward
 
4/
 Mother correctly notes that the Decree refers to the accounts as
"Children's Trust Accounts." In its Findings of Fact & Conclusions of Law,
the Family Court refers to the accounts as "educational accounts." The
 difference is immaterial. What matters is the fact that Mother's award was
 limited to "control and possession of the parties' children's trust accounts
which shall be used exclusively for the Children's educational benefit and
welfare."
 
5/
 Paragraph 4.C. of the Decree provided: "Children's Health Care:
 
[Father] shall provide medical and dental insurance for the parties' Children.
All uninsured medical and dental expenses of the Children shall be split
equally (50-50), including ordinary and extraordinary expenses." 
6/
 Mother's response to Father's argument is incomplete as all copies
of her Reply Brief (Docket No. 29917) are missing page 3. We make what we can
 of Mother's argument in the Reply Brief relating to the issue through the end
of page 2. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
KY's college education expenses. This was not an issue addressed
 
in, or at the time of, the Decree. 
As to the health insurance issue, the Decree's
 
determination that Father should provide health insurance for the
 children was later modified in 2003, with Mother providing
 insurance and Father's child support obligation calculated on
 that basis. The fact that the Decree directed that Father should
 provide insurance does not address the fact that the
 responsibility was subsequently shifted to Mother.
 
Consequently, the issues related to the children's
 
educational account and health insurance were different from the
 issues litigated at the time of the Decree. As such, the Family
 Court did not err in not applying the doctrine of res judicata as
 a bar to Father's claims.
 
(5) The Family Court did not err in determining
 
Father's income. The income figures that Mother cites to for
 support were subsequently modified by the Family Court because of
 what the Family Court determined were a material change in
 circumstances; thus, her reliance on them is unfounded.
7 Mother
 
fails to cite to anything in the record that would support her
 argument that the Family Court erred in determining Father's
 income in light of the unchallenged findings included in the
 February 11, 2003 Order; to the contrary, there was substantial
 evidence to refute Mother's claim that Father should be imputed
 an additional $1,900 per month.
 
(6) Mother challenges multiple FOF and COL related to
 
the Family Court's determination of the amount of past child
 support that she owed to KY. Her argument, however, is limited
 to a single issue: whether the court erred in determining that
 she was to pay KY $770 per month in child support as contained in
 FOF 9h. The remainder of Mother's challenges to the other child
 support-related FOF or COL are therefore deemed to be waived. 
Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7). 
7/
 In the February 11, 2003 Order Regarding Defendant's Motion &
Affidavit for Post Decree Relief filed October 15, 2001 ("February 11, 2003
Order"), the Honorable Matthew J. Viola found that "[Father] has met his
burden and established through the evidence adduced at trial that a material
change in circumstance has occurred with respect to his gross monthly
income. . . ." Mother does not appeal from the February 11, 2003 Order.
 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Mother does not demonstrate that the Family Court
 
clearly erred in determining that she owed KY $770 per month in
 
back child support. An award of child support computed according
 to the Amended Child Support Guidelines ("ACSG"), as here, is
 presumptively correct unless exceptional circumstances warrant
 departure, and the party seeking a deviation from it has the
 burden of proof. H
AW. REV. STAT. § 571-52.5 (1993); Richardson v.
 
Richardson, 8 Haw. App. 446, 457, 808 P.2d 1279, 1286-87 (1991). 
Although Mother contends that the Family Court failed 
to consider KY's earnings, property, or needs, she points to no evidence that establishes that claim. When determining if a child should contribute to their own support, courts must "recognize that an adult-student-son/daughter may have reasonable expenses in excess of those paid/payable by the payee-parent (with funds supplied by both parents) and may elect to work to obtain the money to pay those expenses." Nabarette v. Nabarette, 
86 Hawai' i 368, 372, 949 P.2d 208, 212 (App. 1997). Here, the 
record establishes that KY had expenses in excess of those covered by child support payments from both Mother and Father; thus, KY's net income does not necessarily warrant a deviation from the child support formula set forth in the ACSG because her income does not exceed her reasonable needs. 
Because Mother fails to demonstrate that the Family
 
Court did not consider KY's earnings, property, or needs, and
 because it would have been well within the court's discretion to
 conclude under the circumstances that because KY had expenses in
 excess of the child support payments she received, no adjustment
 was necessary to reflect her additional income, the court did not
 abuse its discretion.
 
(7) The Family Court did not err in refusing to modify
 
visitation. To obtain a change of a custody order, the movant
 "must show a material change of circumstances since the previous
 custody order, and must show that such a change of custody is in
 the best interest of the child."  Nadeau v. Nadeau, 10 Haw. App.
 
111, 121, 861 P.2d 754, 759 (1993). The Family Court
 specifically found that Mother did not prove a material change of
 circumstances with regard to the issue of visitation, and Mother
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
does not direct us to any evidence establishing the court's
 
error. Rather, she presents rhetorical questions challenging
 Father's ability to comply with the Family Court's order. As
 such, Mother fails to meet her burden under Nadeau, and the
 Family Court did not err in refusing to modify visitation in the
 manner sought by Mother.
 
(8) Mother contends that she "informed the lower court
 
that the reconciliation of amounts owed to either Mother or
 Father was incorrect[,]" but that her motions "were simply
 ignored." Contrary to Mother's assertion, the Family Court did
 not "ignore" her motions. The June 3, 2009 Order Re Motions for
 Reconsideration addressed the issues presented in Mother's motion
 for reconsideration and her amended motion for reconsideration,
 even granting her motions in part.
8 Mother also fails to make an
 
argument regarding the Family Court's treatment of her Motion to
 Stay in her opening brief, and so we deem the point to be waived. 
Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7).
 
With regard to Mother's second argument that the Family
 
Court could have treated an untimely Rule 59(e) motion as a Rule
 60(b) motion, Mother's Motion for Reconsideration was not
 untimely filed, and the Family Court did not treat it otherwise. 
In sum, Mother has demonstrated no error.
 
(9) The Family Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
denying Mother's request to modify the dependency tax exemption. 
Mother does not challenge the original or continued award of the
 dependency-related tax exemption to each parent on an alternating
 annual basis. Rather, she contends that the Family Court erred
 in not subsequently modifying the award of the dependency
 exemption on the basis that she demonstrated a change in material
 circumstances.
 
The only material change to which Mother points is the
 
increase in her income versus the decrease in Father's income
 
8/
 Even if we were treat Mother's argument as a substantive one ­
that the Family Court erred in denying her motion to reconsider the
reconciliation of amounts - we would have no basis upon which to evaluate the
contention. Nowhere does Mother explain how the Family Court erred. CSEA v. 
Doe, 88 Hawai' i 159, 174 n.20, 963 P.2d 1135, 1150 n.20 (App. 1998). A 
conclusory statement is not argument. State v. Vinuya, 96 Hawai' i 472, 486,
32 P.3d 116, 130 (App. 2001). Therefore, we need not address the matter. 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
since issuance of the Decree. From that, Mother contends that
 
because she "provides more than fifty percent (50%) of [the minor
 children's] support, [she] should be entitled to claim both
 children as tax dependency exemptions."
 
Modifications of a divorce decree must be based on
 
substantial and material changes in the relevant circumstances
 that were before the court when it made the original order. H
AW.
 
REV. STAT. § 580-47(c).  The Family Court specifically found that
 
"Mother failed to prove any change in circumstance to justify
 modifying the prior orders regarding the dependency
 exemptions[,]" and Mother's argument, addressing only a singular
 change in circumstances, provides an insufficient basis upon
 which we could determine that the Family Court abused its
 discretion in not modifying the dependency exemption award, that
 the finding is clearly erroneous, or that the conclusion is
 wrong.
 
(10) The Family Court did not abuse its discretion or
 
err as a matter of law by refusing to impose sanctions on Mother
 under HFCR 37, HFCR 11, or its inherent powers. Father does not
 demonstrate that he raised the issues of sanctions under HFCR 37
 or the court's inherent powers before the Family Court below. 
Consequently, we disregard those points. Haw. R. App. P.
 28(b)(4) ("Points not presented in accordance with this section
 will be disregarded."). Father did, however, raise the issue of
 HFCR 11 sanctions below.
 
A Rule 11 inquiry is "heavily fact-intensive, requiring 
careful consideration of the particular circumstances of each case, and involving questions of reasonableness, credibility and, often, motive." In re Tax Appeal of Hawaiian Flour Mills, Inc., 
76 Hawai' i 1, 15, 868 P.2d 419, 433 (1994) (citing Cooter & Gell 
v. Hartmarx Corp., 496 U.S. 384, 401–02 (1990)). "Because the
 trial court is better positioned than an appellate court to
 marshall and weigh the pertinent facts, its determinations are
 due a substantial degree of deference." Id. at 15, 868 P.2d at
 
433. "Deployed on the front lines of litigation, the trial court
 
'is best acquainted with the local bar's litigation practices and
 thus best situated to determine when a sanction is warranted to
 
10
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
serve Rule 11's goal of specific and general deterrence.'" Id. at
 
15, 868 P.2d at 433 (quoting Cooter & Gell, 496 U.S. at 404).
 
Father contends, but does not sufficiently demonstrate 
by referencing solely to the argument advanced in the memorandum he submitted to the Family Court, that Mother acted fraudulently in presenting false statements in her motions. Presented with a limited record, limited argument, and reference to a single argument by Mother in support of a single motion, we cannot conclude that the Family Court decision not to impose sanctions "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or evidenced a disregard for rules or principles of law or practice to the parties' substantial detriment." Maui Tomorrow v. State, Bd. of Land & 
Natural Res. of State, 110 Hawai' i 234, 246, 131 P.3d 517, 529 
(2006). 
(11) The Family Court did not abuse its discretion by
 
requiring each party to bear its own litigation expenses or by
 declining to enter specific findings of fact in support of that
 decision. Furthermore, the court did not err as a matter of law
 by declining to award attorneys' fees to Father. 
Mother's claim for fees related to her efforts to have
 
Father pay a pro rata share of KY's private school tuition fails
 because, as discussed above, under the Agreement, Father was not
 liable for any part of the tuition expenses to which he had not
 agreed.
9 Thus, Father did not violate the Decree.
 
Father, on the other hand, contends that he is entitled
 
to attorneys' fees under HRS § 607-14,10 because Mother's
 
litigation of the Agreement's validity constituted an assumpsit
 claim, and, since Father prevailed, an award of attorneys' fees
 was mandatory. See H
AW. REV. STAT. § 607-14. Mother's post-
decree action, however, was directed at enforcing Father's
 
9/
 Mother also argues that, under the Decree's enforcement clause,
Father should be liable for her attorneys' fees related to her efforts to have
the court clarify or redetermine certain amounts owed by each party. Such
 matters, however, do not implicate Father's compliance with the Decree, and,
thus, related attorneys' fees are not awardable under the Decree's enforcement
clause.
 
10/
 HRS § 607-14 provides that: "In all the courts, in all actions in
the nature of assumpsit . . . , there shall be taxed as attorneys' fees, to be
paid by the losing party . . . , a fee that the court determines to be
reasonable . . . ." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 607-14 (2011).
 
11
    
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
obligations under the Decree. Such action is not in the nature 
of assumpsit. Compare 808 Dev., LLC v. Murakami, 111 Hawai' i349, 
366, 141 P.3d 996, 1013 (2006) ("Assumpsit is a common law form of action which allows for the recovery of damages for non­performance" of contractual or quasi-contractual obligations (quoting Blair v. Ing, 96 Hawai' i 327, 332, 31 P.3d 184, 189 
(2001)), with AIG Hawai' i Ins. Co. v. Bateman, 82 Hawai' i 453, 
456, 923 P.2d 395, 398 (1996) ("Rescission and cancellation are equitable remedies.").
11 
Father also contends that, regarding the matters
 
resolved by the court's March 18, 2009 Decision & Order and the
 March 30, 2009 Amended Decision and Order, the Family Court
 abused its discretion by not entering specific findings of fact
 in support of its determination that each party bear their own
 litigation costs and by declining to award Father attorney's
 fees. 
Ordinarily, under the "American Rule," each party bears 
its own litigation costs. Lee v. Aiu, 85 Hawai' i 19, 32, 936 
P.2d 655, 668 (1997). HRS § 580-47(f) authorizes a deviation from this rule; it provides a family court with broad discretion to award attorneys' fees in matters relating to revision or enforcement of orders pursuant to a divorce decree. See H
AW. REV. 
STAT. § 580-47(f); Doe v. Roe, 85 Hawai' i 151, 164, 938 P.2d 1170, 
1183 (App. 1997). 
Under HRS § 580-47, where a family court declines to
 
award attorneys' fees to either party, it is generally not
 required to enter accompanying findings of fact. See Jane Doe
 
12
VII v. Richard Roe VII, 8 Haw. App. 437, 809 P.2d 449 (1991) . 
11/
 In relation to the litigation surrounding the Agreement, Father
also argues that because he completely prevailed, there was no equitable basis
to decline a fee award. However, Father did not completely prevail; in
validating the Agreement, the court also ordered Father to complete and submit
financial aid paperwork, as he had previously agreed, but neglected, to do.
Furthermore, given that Mother remained wholly responsible for tuition
incurred throughout the duration that she enrolled LY in private school, we
cannot say that the Family Court abused its discretion in declining to award
fees. See H
AW. REV. STAT. § 580-47(f) (enumerating factors for the court to
consider when determining a fee award for post-divorce-decree matters).
 
12/
 In Doe VII, the family court denied a motion to modify child
support and denied attorneys' fees as well, stating only that "it is equitable
for the parties to pay their own attorney fees and costs." Id. at 442-444,
 
12
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
This practice comports with both the default American Rule and
 
with the standard of review for family court decisions, which
 requires a manifest abuse of discretion before a family court's
 decision will be disturbed.  See In re Doe, 77 Haw. 109, 115, 883
 P.2d 30, 36 (1994). 
Here, we conclude that the Family Court's failure to
 
enter specific findings of fact does not prevent meaningful
 appellate review of its decision to deny the requests of both
 parties for the award of attorneys' fees and costs. Rather than
 resolving only the question of increased child support, see Doe
 VII, 8 Haw. App. at 444, 809 P.2d at 453, this order resolved
 multiple issues with each party prevailing on some, but not all,
 matters. Mother recognizes that she did not prevail on several
 of her claims (and, conversely, that Father did prevail), but
 importantly, she successfully moved for and obtained sole legal
 custody of BY and LY. Additionally, much of the order reconciled
 various overpayments and amounts owed by each to the other party,
 netting these to determine a final amount owed. On this record,
 we cannot say that either party prevailed, and certainly not to
 the point that entry of specific findings of fact was required
 before requiring the parties to pay their own way. 
Similarly, on this record, the Family Court's decision
 
to not award Father attorneys' fees did not clearly exceed the
 bounds of reason. See In re Doe, 77 Haw. at 115, 883 P.2d at 36. 
While Mother's income was roughly twice that of Father's, the
 respective merits of the parties' positions and the burdens
 imposed on each did not necessarily warrant an award of fees. 
See H
AW. REV. STAT. 580-47(f). Therefore, the court did not abuse
 
its discretion in declining to award attorneys' fees to Father.
 
Therefore,
 
809 P.2d at 452–53 (bracket omitted). This court, characterizing that
statement as conclusory, nevertheless ruled that such explanation was adequate
given that the motion was denied. Id. at 444, 809 P.2d at 453. Additionally,
in light of its decision vacating the order denying an increase in child
support and remanding, this court advised that a conclusory explanation is
inadequate where the motion for modification is granted, and "there is no
[other] express or apparent explanation on the record." Id.; accord
 
Richardson, 8 Haw. App. at 459, 808 P.2d at 1288. This court further stated
 
that such explanation "may be adequate with respect to divorce cases
culminating in the entry of the initial child support order."  Doe VII, 8 Haw.
 
App. at 444, 809 P.2d at 453. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the March 28, 2008 Decision &
 
Order; the April 25, 2008 Order; the March 18, 2009 Decision &
 
Order; the March 30, 2009 Amended Decision and Order; the June 3,
 2009 Order Re Motions for Reconsideration; and the June 3, 2009
 Order Denying Cross Motion are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 22, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Marrionnette L.S. Andrews and Chief Judge
Cheryl Y. Arakaki
for Defendant-Appellant/
Cross-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
John W. Schmidtke, Jr.
for Plaintiff-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant
 
Associate Judge
 
14
 