NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29853
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
WILLIAM K. KEKONA, III, also known as "BILLY",
Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0723(3))
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
WILLIAM K. KEKONA, III, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0398(3))
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
WILLIAM K. KEKONA, III, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CRIMINAL NO. 08-1-0166(3))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise, Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant William K. Kekona, III, (Kekona)
 
pleaded no contest to bail jumping pursuant to a plea agreement
 
in which Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) agreed to 
recommend five years of probation. Kekona was subsequently
 charged with numerous additional crimes. Pursuant to plea
 agreements to resolve the additional charges, Kekona knowingly
 and voluntarily waived his right to the State's performance of
 its probation recommendation in the bail jumping case and agreed
 that the State would ask for five years of imprisonment on the
 bail jumping charge. Kekona was sentenced in accordance with the
 terms of the plea agreements on the additional charges. He now
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
seeks to vacate his plea and sentence on the bail jumping charge
 
on the ground that the State breached its original agreement to
 recommend probation.
 
This case presents the question of whether a defendant
 
can knowingly and voluntarily waive the State's performance of a
 condition of a plea agreement. We hold, under the circumstances
 presented here, that the answer to this question is yes. 
Accordingly, we affirm Kekona's conviction and sentence on the
 bail jumping charge as well as his convictions and sentences on
 the additional charges. 
BACKGROUND 
Kekona appeals from the Judgment filed on April 24,
 
2009, in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit court)
 and the Family Court of the Second Circuit (family court)
 (collectively referred to as the "trial court") in three cases,
 Cr. No. 07-1-0723 (3), Cr. No. 08-1-0398(3), and FC-Cr. No. 08-1­0166(3).
1
 
I.
 
On November 30, 2007, Kekona was charged by indictment
 
with first degree bail jumping in Cr. No. 07-1-0723(3). On April
 8, 2008, Kekona pleaded no contest to the bail jumping charge
 pursuant to a plea agreement (the "original plea agreement") in
 which the State agreed to recommend five years of probation. The
 written original plea agreement stated in pertinent part, "In
 exchange for Defendant's No Contest plea, the State agrees to
 five (5) years probation, with no further jail to be imposed in
 this matter." During his change of plea colloquy, Kekona
 acknowledged that he understood that the circuit court was "not
 required to follow any deal or agreement" between Kekona and the
 State. 
1 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided over the
proceedings relevant to this appeal in all three cases.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
II.
 
Kekona was subsequently charged with numerous
 
additional crimes. These additional crimes were alleged to have
 
been committed by Kekona after his entry of the no contest plea
 on the bail jumping charge. On May 9, 2008, Kekona was charged
 
2
by complaint in family court in FC-Cr. No. 08-1-0166(3)  with
violating an order for protection (Count I) and interfering with
 the reporting of an emergency or crime (Count II). 
On June 16, 2008, Kekona was charged by complaint in

 
circuit court in Cr. No. 08-1-0398(3) with first degree assault
 (Count I); violating an order for protection (Count II);
 intimidating a witness (Count III); and first degree terroristic
 threatening (Count IV). Counts I, III, and IV alleged that
 Kekona was subject to sentencing for extended terms of
 imprisonment as a persistent and multiple offender in accordance
 with Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 706-661, 706-662(1), and
 706-662(4) (Supp. 2009). On July 23, 2008, the charges set forth
 in FC-Cr. No. 08-1-0166(3) and Cr. No. 08-1-0398(3) (hereinafter
 referred to as the "additional charges") were consolidated for
 trial.
 
III.
 
On February 26, 2009, Kekona pleaded no contest to the
 
additional charges in FC-Cr. No. 08-1-0166(3) and Cr. No. 08-1­0398(3) pursuant to written plea agreements (collectively
 referred to as the "subsequent plea agreements"). The plea
 agreement in Cr. No. 08-1-0398(3) provided in pertinent part:
 
8.	 I have not been promised any kind of deal or favor
or leniency by anyone for my plea, except that I
have been told that the government has agreed as
follows . . . : 
Open recommendation. 
State will recommend 10 years on Count I, 5
years on counts III and IV; one year on count II. And
 
State will ask 5 years on Cr. No. 07-1-0723(3) [(the
 
2 The original case number was FC-Cr. No. 08-1-0166(4) but
eventually became FC-Cr. No. 08-1-0166(3).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
bail jumping case)]. All counts to run concurrent. 
This case to run concurrent with FC No. 08-1-0166(3)
and with Cr. No. 07-1-0723(3) (Bail Jumping). State
 will take no further action on the Intimidating a
Witness and Violation of Order for Protection charges,
under MPD Report No. 08-46559 and 08-46568, which are
pending screening. Defendant agrees to waive
restitution hearing and pay restitution as determined
by the Adult Probation Division. 
Defense may request Probation. Defense requests
updated Presentence report.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
The plea agreement in FC-Cr. No. 08-1-0166(3) provided
 
in pertinent part:
 
8.	 I have not been promised any kind of deal or favor
or leniency by anyone for my plea, except that I
have been told that the government has agreed as
follows . . . : 
Open recommendation. 
State will recommend one year on Count I, and 30
days on Count II. All counts to run concurrent. This
 
case to run concurrent with CR. No. 08-1-0398(3) and
with Cr. No. 07-1-0723(3) (Bail Jumping). State will
 take no further action on the Intimidating a Witness
and Violation of Order for Protection charges, under
MPD Report No. 08-46559 and 08-46568, which are
pending screening. Defendant agrees to waive
restitution hearing and pay restitution as determined
by the Adult Probation Division. 
Defense may request Probation. Defense requests
updated Presentence report.
 
At the change of plea hearing on the additional
 
charges, the trial court read Paragraph 8 of the subsequent plea
 
agreements in Cr. No. 08-1-0398(3) and FC-Cr. No. 08-1-0166(3) to
 Kekona. The trial court explained that the term "open
 recommendation" as used in Paragraph 8 means that the State will
 be asking for the "regular" maximum terms of imprisonment and
 will not be seeking extended terms of imprisonment. The trial
 court advised Kekona that the State will not be seeking
 consecutive sentences. The trial court further advised Kekona
 that, pursuant to the subsequent plea agreements, Kekona and the
 State had revised their plea agreement in the bail jumping case,
 such that the State can ask for imprisonment instead of its
 previous agreement to ask for probation. Kekona acknowledged
 
4

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that he understood these terms. The colloquy between the trial
 
court and Kekona was in pertinent part as follows: 
THE COURT: Open recommendation means they'll be
asking for the regular maximum terms of imprisonment for
each of the six counts. They will not be asking for
consecutive sentencing or extended terms of sentencing under
this plea agreement, and they have -- I guess you and the
government have revised the bailjumping plea agreement, such
that the government can ask for prison on that. They've
previously agreed to ask for probation. Do you understand
that?
 
[KEKONA]:  Yes.
 
THE COURT: As clarified on the record, is this your
understanding [of] the plea agreement with the government in
these two cases?
 
[KEKONA]: Yes.
 
THE COURT: Has anyone said anything different
concerning your plea agreement?
 
[KEKONA]:  No. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
At the change of plea hearing on the additional
 
charges, Kekona also confirmed that he had signed the subsequent
 
plea agreements after reviewing them with his attorney. He 
signed the acknowledgment in the subsequent plea agreement forms
 that stated, "I acknowledge that the Judge questioned me
 personally in open court to make sure that I knew what I was
 doing in pleading guilty or no contest and understood this form
 before I signed it." The trial court accepted Kekona's pleas of
 no contest to the additional charges in Cr. No. 08-1-0398(3) and
 FC-Cr. No. 08-1-0166(3), finding that Kekona had entered those
 pleas "intelligently, knowingly, voluntarily, and with the advice
 of counsel." 
IV.
 On April 23, 2009, Kekona appeared for sentencing
 
before the trial court on the bail jumping charge in Cr. No. 07­1-0723(3) as well as the additional charges in Cr. 08-1-0398(3)
 and FC-Cr. No. 08-1-0166(3). At the outset of the hearing, the
 trial court noted that the original plea agreement in the bail
 jumping case had been modified by the subsequent plea agreements
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
on the additional charges. The trial court explained that it
 
would rule within the framework of the subsequent plea
 agreements, which, as the trial court stated, included the
 State's recommendation of "five years [of imprisonment] on the
 bail jumping, because originally, there was a different agreement
 there." Kekona's counsel agreed that Kekona was "not asking for
 an exception" from the subsequent plea agreements. 
At sentencing, the prosecutor, consistent with the
 
subsequent plea agreements, recommended that the trial court
 sentence Kekona to concurrent non-extended maximum terms of
 imprisonment, including five years of imprisonment on the bail
 jumping charge. Kekona's counsel did not object to the
 prosecutor's recommendation. The trial court imposed the
 concurrent terms of imprisonment recommended by the prosecutor. 
This included a ten-year term of imprisonment for the class B
 felony and five-year terms of imprisonment for the three class C
 felonies. 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Kekona contends that the State violated the
 
terms of its plea agreement in the bail jumping case by
 recommending five years of incarceration at sentencing when the
 original plea agreement called for the State to recommend
 probation. Kekona claims that his agreement to revise the
 original plea agreement in the subsequent plea agreements was
 invalid because the trial court did not consolidate the bail
 jumping case with the other cases and did not have Kekona re-
plead to the bail jumping charge. Kekona requests that his
 sentence and plea in the bail jumping case be vacated, and he
 also requests that the case be remanded for "re-sentencing on the
 charges in the other two cases." We conclude that Kekona's
 arguments on appeal are without merit.
3
 
3 Kekona provides no argument to support his contention that
he is entitled to resentencing on the additional charges. He
 
does not challenge the validity of the subsequent plea
(continued...)
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has stated: 
A plea agreement is essentially a contract entered
into between the State and the defendant, in which the
defendant agrees to plead guilty or no contest to a charge
and to forego certain constitutional rights (including the
right to trial) in exchange for which the State promises
some form of leniency or cooperation in prosecution.
Indeed, courts have often looked to contract law analogies
in determining the rights and obligations of the parties to
a plea agreement. However, because the plea negotiation
process implicates constitutional considerations -­including the fairness and voluntariness of the plea -- we
have recognized that resort to contract principles cannot
solely be determinative of the rights and duties comprising
the plea bargain. 
State v. Adams, 76 Hawai 'i 408, 412, 879 P.2d 513, 517 (1994) 
(citation omitted; emphasis added). 
"Disputes over the meaning of plea agreements involve 
questions of fact," and we review the trial court's factual 
determinations under the clearly erroneous standard. State v. 
Abbott, 79 Hawai 'i 317, 319, 901 P.2d 1296, 1298 (App. 1995). 
"Whether the State has actually breached the terms of a plea agreement, however, is a question of law, which we review de novo under the right/wrong standard of review." Id. at 320, 901 P.2d 
at 1299. 
I.
 
We conclude that the decision in this case is 
controlled by the principle of waiver. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
has "long permitted defendants to waive constitutional rights, provided it is done knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily." State v. Timoteo, 87 Hawai
'i 108, 123, 952 P.2d 865, 880 (1997) 
(Ramil, J., dissenting, joined by Levinson, J.). It is also well established that a party to a contract can waive the performance of a condition or term of the contract. See Wilart Assocs. v. 
Kapiolani Plaza, Ltd., 7 Haw. App. 354, 358-60, 766 P.2d 1207, 
3(...continued)
agreements, his no contest pleas to the additional charges, or
the sentences imposed on the additional charges. Thus, even if
we were to determine that Kekona's arguments regarding the bail
jumping charge had merit, he would not be entitled to require
resentencing on the additional charges. 
7

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1210-11 (1988); First Trust Co. v. Cabrinha, 24 Haw. 777, 784 
(Hawai 'i Terr. 1919). 
II.
 
Here, Kekona entered into the original plea agreement
 
with the State on the bail jumping charge in which the State
 agreed to recommend probation. Absent any action by Kekona to
 free the State of this obligation, Kekona had the right to insist
 on the State's performance. However, Kekona chose to waive his
 right to insist on the State's performance of its obligation to
 recommend probation. He did so by entering into subsequent plea
 agreements regarding the additional charges in which he
 specifically agreed that the State could recommend five years of
 imprisonment on the bail jumping charge. In effect, Kekona used
 the waiver of his right to insist on the State's performance of
 its obligation to recommend probation on the bail jumping charge
 as partial consideration for the subsequent plea agreements. 
Kekona obtained substantial benefits from the subsequent plea
 agreements in the form of the State's promise to not seek
 consecutive or extended terms of imprisonment on the additional
 charges and to forego pursuing other potential charges.
 
"Waiver is the intentional relinquishment of a known
 
right[.]" Wilart Assocs., 7 Haw. App. at 359, 766 P.2d at 1210
 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
A party to a contract may waive, by express agreement
or by its course of conduct, its legal right to strict
performance of the terms of a contract. The waiver doctrine
 is intended to prevent the waiving party from lulling
another into a false belief that strict compliance with a
contractual duty will not be required and then suing for
noncompliance. 
Lake County Grading Co. v. Advance Mechanical, 654 N.E.2d 1109,
 
1118 (Ill. App. Ct. 1995) (citation omitted). A defendant can
 waive a breach by the prosecution of a plea agreement or the
 right to challenge the validity of a prior guilty plea through a
 subsequent plea agreement. See Donahue v. State, 655 S.W.2d 642,
 
645-46 (Mo. Ct. App. 1983) (defendant waived any breach of prior
 plea agreement requiring the imposition of concurrent sentences
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by entering into a subsequent plea agreement calling for the
 
imposition of consecutive sentences); Ferina v. State, 742 S.W.2d
 215, 216-17 (Mo. Ct. App. 1987) (defendant waived right to
 challenge the validity of a prior guilty plea by agreeing to
 withdraw this claim as part of a subsequent plea agreement). 
III.
 
The record reflects that in entering into the
 
subsequent plea agreements, Kekona knowingly and voluntarily
 waived his right to enforce the State's agreement in the original
 plea agreement to recommend probation on the bail jumping charge. 
The subsequent plea agreement on the additional charges in Cr.
 No. 08-1-0398(3) provided that the State would ask for five years
 of imprisonment on the bail jumping charge. At the change of
 plea hearing on the additional charges, the trial court advised
 Kekona that the subsequent plea agreements had revised the
 original plea agreement so that the State could ask for prison on
 the bail jumping charge, even though it had previously agreed to
 ask for probation. Kekona acknowledged that he understood that
 the original plea agreement had been revised. 
The record shows that Kekona entered into the
 
subsequent plea agreements with the full knowledge and
 understanding that he was agreeing to give up his right to
 enforce the State's performance of its obligation under the
 original plea agreement to recommend probation on the bail
 jumping charge. The record further establishes that Kekona
 entered into the subsequent plea agreements and pleaded no
 contest to the additional charges intelligently, knowingly, and
 voluntarily. Through the subsequent plea agreements, Kekona
 knowingly and voluntarily waived his right to enforce the State's
 promise in the original plea agreement to recommend probation on
 the bail jumping charge. 
We perceive no unfairness in holding Kekona to his
 
waiver, which Kekona used to his advantage. Kekona used his
 waiver to obtain concessions from the State in the subsequent
 plea agreements, which included the State's agreement not to seek
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
consecutive or extended terms of imprisonment on the additional
 
charges. Having obtained the benefit of the subsequent plea
 agreements, Kekona cannot be allowed to avoid the consequences of
 his waiver. Indeed, it would be manifestly unfair to permit
 Kekona, after using his waiver as partial consideration for the
 subsequent plea agreements from which he benefitted, to then
 invalidate his bail jumping plea on the ground that the State
 "breached" the original plea agreement by failing to perform the
 very condition Kekona had agreed to waive. 
While consolidating the bail jumping case with the
 
other cases or having Kekona re-plead to the bail jumping charge
 would have produced a cleaner record, the failure of the trial
 court to do so did not prejudice Kekona's substantial rights. 
Kekona understood and agreed that he was giving up his right to
 enforce the State's prior agreement to recommend probation on the
 bail jumping charge as part of the subsequent plea agreements. 
Kekona does not claim otherwise. The bail jumping charge was a
 class C felony, with a maximum non-extended prison term of five
 years. The additional charges included a class B felony, with a
 maximum non-extended prison term of ten years, and two class C
 felonies. The State's recommendation of probation on the bail
 jumping charge would have been of little benefit to Kekona if the
 State recommended imprisonment on the class B and C felonies
 included in the additional charges.
4 Moreover, with respect to
 
the potential severity of Kekona's punishment, the trial court's
 decision on whether to impose extended or non-extended terms of
 imprisonment or consecutive or concurrent terms of imprisonment
 on the additional charges was far more important to Kekona than
 the trial court's decision on whether to impose probation or
 
4 We note that because Kekona was sentenced on the
 
additional charges and the bail jumping charge at the same time,
the trial court could not have sentenced Kekona to maximum non-
extended terms of imprisonment on the additional charges and also
sentenced him to probation on the bail jumping charge. See HRS §
 
706-629(1)(a) (1993).
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
imprisonment on the bail jumping charge. 
Kekona reduced his risk of being sentenced to more than
 
ten years of imprisonment by securing the State's agreement in
 
the subsequent plea agreements to recommend concurrent terms of
 imprisonment for all the charges. As part of the subsequent plea
 agreements, Kekona and the State agreed that with respect to the
 additional charges, the State would recommend concurrent non-
extended terms of imprisonment of ten years on the class B felony
 and five years on the two class C felonies. Given Kekona's
 agreement to the State's incarceration recommendation on the
 additional charges, Kekona had little to gain by insisting on a
 probation recommendation on the bail jumping charge. Kekona does
 not contend, and there is no basis for believing, that Kekona
 would have struck a different deal than set forth in the
 subsequent plea agreements if all the cases had been consolidated
 or if Kekona had been asked to re-plead to the bail jumping
 charge. 
CONCLUSION
 
We affirm the April 24, 2009, Judgment filed by the
 
trial court in Cr. No. 07-1-0723(3), Cr. No. 08-1-0398(3), and
 FC-Cr. No. 08-1-0166(3).
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 22, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Matthew S. Kohm 
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Richard K. MinatoyaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
11
 