NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28243
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ALLSTATE INSURANCE COMPANY,
Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
v.
 
ALBERTO A.F. SILVA,
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and
 
BRIAN E. PONCE, ET AL.,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 

 (CIVIL NO. 98-0502)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Alberto A. Silva
 
(Silva) appeals from the September 28, 2006 (1) Final Judgment,
 
and (2) "Order Granting In Part And Denying In Part Defendant
 Alberto A. F. Silva's Motion For Entry Of Judgment Against
 Plaintiff Allstate Insurance Company Or Final Order Dismissing
 Case; Motion For Attorneys Fees And Costs; Motion To Amend Answer
 To Complaint To Include Counterclaim Maturing Or Acquired After
 Pleading" (Order re Judgment/Fees), entered in the Circuit Court
 
1
of the Third Circuit  (Circuit Court).  Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-
Appellant Allstate Insurance Company (Allstate) cross-appealed.

 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On October 20, 1997, Silva filed a complaint in the
circuit court of the third circuit, Civil No. 97-516,
against [Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellee Brian E. Ponce
(Ponce)] alleging, inter alia, that Ponce "operated and
controlled a motor vehicle negligently, carelessly, without
due care, and/or . . . was inattentive to his driving, and
 
1 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
as a proximate result of said conduct the motor vehicle he
was operating collided with the motorcycle operated by
Silva," causing Silva various damages. Silva prayed for the
following relief: (1) general damages; (2) special damages;
(3) reasonable attorneys fees, expert witness fees, and
costs; (4) interest on damages and losses he suffered from
the date of the [motor vehicle accident (MVA)] and/or damage
computed at the judgment rate provided by law; and (5) such
other and further relief as the circuit court might deem
just and proper. By letter dated May 22, 1998, Silva
informed Allstate that he had brought suit against its
insured (i.e., Ponce), that he had served process on Ponce
on April 22, 1998, and that "the twenty days to answer or
plead otherwise had expired." Silva further requested
notification "as to Allstate's position in the matter."
 
On October 14, 1998 Allstate filed a complaint for
declaratory relief in the present matter seeking
 
a declaration that neither Ponce nor Silva are
 entitled to coverage and/or insurance benefit
including without limitation a defense and/or
indemnity under Ponce's Allstate automobile insurance
policy no. 407 086 497 . . . with respect to any
claims arising out of Ponce's involvement in an MVA
which occurred on June 19, 1997, including any claims
asserted in an action entitled Alberto A.F. Silva v.
 Brian E. Ponce, et al., Civil No. 97-516, Circuit
Court of the Third Circuit of the State of Hawaii.
 
Based on the facts alleged in the complaint, Allstate prayedfor the following relief: (1) "a binding declaration by thecircuit court that Allstate has no duty to defend and/orindemnify Ponce under the [Hawai' i Joint Underwriting Plan
(HJUP)] policy for any claims arising out of the MVA,including without limitations any claims asserted in CivilNo. 97-516"; (2) "a binding declaration that Allstate has noduty to make any payments to any person or entity under theHJUP policy for any accident related injuries or claims";(3) "a binding declaration that even if Ponce qualified as
an 'insured' under the subject policy at the time of the
MVA, coverage did not apply to the accident since Ponce
failed to comply with the notice provisions under the
policy"; and (4) "costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, and
such other and further relief as the circuit court deemed
 just and equitable."
 
Allstate Ins. Co. v. Ponce, 105 Hawai 'i 445, 450-51, 99 P.3d 96, 
101-102 (2004) (original brackets omitted). 
After a jury-waived trial on June 26, 2000, the Circuit
 
Court entered judgment in favor of Allstate and against Ponce and
 
Silva with respect to all claims alleged in the complaint for
 declaratory relief. Id. at 452, 99 P.3d at 103. Silva appealed. 
Id.
 
On October 6, 2004, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court vacated 
the Circuit Court's decision, holding that Allstate had a duty to
 defend and/or indemnify under Ponce's automobile insurance policy
 
2

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(Policy), and the case was remanded to the Circuit Court. Id. at
 
458-59, 99 P.3d at 109-10. On November 4, 2004, Allstate paid
 
$25,000 to Silva, representing the Policy's limit for bodily
 injury. 
Almost two years later, on July 21, 2006, Silva filed a
 
motion for entry of judgment, for attorneys' fees, and to amend
 his answer to include a counterclaim (Motion for Judgment/Fees). 
Allstate opposed the motion, arguing that because the Policy
 limits had been paid, the case was moot. In addition, Allstate
 argued that attorneys' fees were unavailable under section 607­14, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS), as the action was not in the
 nature of assumpsit.
 
On September 28, 2006, the Circuit Court entered the
 
Order re Judgment/Fees and the Final Judgment. The Order re
 Judgment/Fees granted Silva's request for entry of judgment,
 awarded Silva $6,250 in attorneys' fees under HRS § 607-14 and
 $4,212.29 in costs, and denied Silva's request to amend his
 answer to assert a claim of bad faith. The Circuit Court did not
 explain the factors that guided it or how it determined the
 reasonableness of $6,250 in attorneys' fees; however, the amount
 equals 25% of the Policy's bodily injury limit, which, Allstate
 explained was the limit of its liability.
 II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
On appeal, Silva contends the Circuit Court erred in
 
failing to award attorneys' fees under HRS §§ 431:10-242, 632-3,
 and 607-1. Allstate contends the Circuit Court erred in granting
 Silva's motion for entry of judgment, granting Silva's motion for
 attorneys' fees under HRS § 607-14, and awarding costs to Silva,
 among other errors.
 III. DISCUSSION
 
In its Order re Judgment/Fees, the Circuit Court
 
explained its rationale for awarding attorneys' fees under HRS
 § 607-14:
 
As between ALLSTATE and Defendant Ponce, the action
was a contract claim. Defendant Ponce did not assert a
 
claim against ALLSTATE. If Defendant Ponce asserted a claim
 against ALLSTATE, it would have been for a judgment
declaring that ALLSTATE had the duty to provide Defendant
Ponce with a legal defense and indemnification. The
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
expenses of the legal defense and the funds for
indemnification would have been considered damages recovered
by Defendant Ponce from ALLSTATE. In this case, SILVA's
successful defense of Defendant Ponce's position in this
action was the functional equivalent of Defendant Ponce
bringing a successful action based upon the contract between
ALLSTATE and Defendant Ponce. In other words, the defense
was an action in the nature of assumpsit.
 
. . . Defendant Ponce assigned to SILVA all claims for
relief Defendant Ponce may have against ALLSTATE. This
 included any breach of contract claim arising from
ALLSTATE's failure to pay on the liability insurance policy
which is the subject of this case. Although the Assignment
came after the entry of judgment in this case, the
Assignment is another factor which supports the
determination that the action between ALLSTATE and SILVA is
 an action in the nature of assumpsit based upon the contract
between ALLSTATE and Defendant Ponce.
 
In Chock v. Government Employees Ins. Co., 103 Hawai 'i 
263, 81 P.3d 1178 (2003), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held: 
The circuit court erred in awarding attorneys' fees to
GEICO pursuant to HRS § 607-14 (Supp. 1998) in this
declaratory judgment consolidated action. The relief sought
by Chock and GEICO was a declaration as to the applicability
of insurance coverage for Chock's injuries, not money
damages. As we have previously held, "[w]hen the recovery of
money damages is not the basis of a claim factually
implicating a contract, the action is not 'in the nature of
assumpsit.'" Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 93 Hawai' i 1, 7,
994 P.2d 1047, 1053 (2000). An action that seeks only a
declaration as to a party's rights or responsibilities, even
if factually implicating a contract, is not "in the nature
of assumpsit." Therefore, GEICO cannot recover attorneys'
fees from Chock because HRS § 607-14 does not provide for
attorneys' fees in declaratory judgment actions.
 
Id. at 268, 81 P.3d at 1183 (emphasis added) (footnote omitted).
 
This case is not distinguishable from Chock. Allstate
 
sought a declaration as to the applicability of insurance
 
coverage, not money damages. Allstate only sought a declaration
 as to a party's rights or responsibilities, which, under Chock,
 is not in the nature of assumpsit. Therefore, the Circuit Court
 erred in awarding Silva attorney fees under HRS § 607-14.
 
The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
awarding costs in favor of Silva. "[C]osts shall be allowed as
 of course to the prevailing party unless the court otherwise
 directs[.]" Haw. R. Civ. Pro. 54(d)(1). A presumption exists in
 favor of awarding costs to the prevailing party and that
 presumption must be overcome by the losing party. Wong v.
 
Takeuchi, 88 Hawai
'i 46, 52, 961 P.2d 611, 617 (1998). "Rule 
4

    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
54(d) creates a strong presumption that the prevailing party will
 
recover costs . . . [and that] presumption . . . must be overcome
 by some showing that an award would be inequitable under the
 circumstances. The losing party bears the burden of making this
 showing." Id. (quoting 10 J
AMES WM. MOORE ET AL ., MOORE'S FEDERAL
 
PRACTICE § 54.101(1)(a-b) (3d ed. 1998). Silva was the prevailing
 
party in the Circuit Court.
 
The Circuit Court satisfied its obligation to
 
adequately explain its reasons for denying deposition, facsimile
 and long distance telephone costs to Silva. Allstate, however,
 has not demonstrated that allowance of the remainder of the
 requested costs is inequitable under the circumstances.
 
Silva's points on appeal are either moot or without
 
merit.
 IV. CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the Circuit Court's September 28, 2006 Final
 
Judgment, except to the extent that we affirm the award of costs
 to Silva. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 9, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Phillip L. Carey
for Defendant-Appellant/
Cross-Appellee, Alberto A.F.Silva
 
Presiding Judge
Kevin P.H. Sumida and
 Lance S. Au (Sumida & Tsuchiyama)
for Plaintiff-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant, Allstate
Insurance Company Associate Judge

Associate Judge
 
5

 