FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
ROSALINDA ITURRALDE, Individually and in her Capacity as
Personal Representative of the Estate of ARTURO ITURRALDE,
Plaintiff-Appellant, Cross-Appellee, v.
HILO MEDICAL CENTER, a Hawai' i Non-Profit Corporation,
HAWAI'I HEALTH SYSTEMS CORPORATION, a Public Benefit Corporation,
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Defendants-Appellees, Cross-Appellants and
MEDTRONIC SOFAMOR DANEK, USA, a Tennessee Corporation
Licensed to do Business in Hawai' i, and
Robert Ricketson, M.D., Defendants-Appellees
 
NO. 28792
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 03-1-0017 (HILO))
 
MARCH 30, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Rosalinda Iturralde
 
(Appellant or, in reference to her individual capacity,
 
Rosalinda), individually and in her capacity as personal
 representative of the Estate of Arturo Iturralde (Arturo's
 Estate), and Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants Hilo Medical
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Center, Hawai' i Health Systems Corporation, State of Hawai' i 
(collectively, HMC), appeal from the Amended Final Judgment 
(Judgment) of the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).
1/ The Judgment, entered September 10, 2007, awarded 
various damages against HMC and Defendant-Appellee Robert 
Ricketson, M.D. (Dr. Ricketson). It awarded judgment in favor of 
Defendant-Appellee Medtronic Sofamor Danek USA, Inc. (Medtronic) 
on all claims. 
On appeal, Appellant asserts that the Circuit Court
 
erred in: (1) awarding joint and several damages against HMC in
 
an amount different from the amount awarded by jury against Dr.
 
Ricketson; (2) adopting Medtronic's proposed jury instruction on
 
the substantial change doctrine of products liability; (3)
 
adopting Medtronic's proposed jury instructions and special
 
verdict interrogatory on foreseeability and superseding cause;
 
and (4) failing to hold HMC jointly liable for damages awarded to
 
Rosalinda for negligent infliction of emotional distress (NIED). 
On cross-appeal, HMC asserts that the Circuit Court erred in: 
(1) failing to apply Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 663-10.5
 
(Supp. 2006), as amended, to preclude HMC from being held jointly
 
and severally liable in tort; and (2) failing to offset the
 
judgment against HMC by the good-faith settlement of non-party
 
Hawaii Orthopaedics, Inc.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. Arturo Iturralde's Medical Care
 
Decedent Arturo Iturralde (Arturo) was admitted to HMC,
 
a state-owned hospital in Hilo, in January of 2001, for an
 
assessment of increasing weakness in his legs that had resulted
 
in several falls. Dr. Ricketson, an orthopedic surgeon with
 
credentials at HMC, examined Arturo on January 24, 2001. He
 
diagnosed Arturo with degenerative spondylolisthesis L4-5 with
 
1/
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 
2
   
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stenosis, a condition that exerted pressure on the nerves. This
 
condition could potentially be relieved through spinal fusion
 
surgery, which involved implanting two rods into the spine to
 
form a bilateral fixation. Dr. Ricketson scheduled Arturo for
 
the surgery the following Monday, January 29, 2001.
 
Dr. Ricketson directed HMC to order an M8 Titanium CD
 
Horizon Kit (Kit) from Medtronic, which would contain all the
 
necessary instrumentation and tools, including the two titanium
 
implant rods crucial for the surgery. Because Medtronic did not
 
have the instrumentation portion of the Kit in stock at its
 
Memphis facility, it sent the order in two shipments: one from
 
Memphis and one from Tulane. HMC received both shipments on
 
Saturday, January 27, 2001, at approximately 7:30 pm. The
 
contents were sterilized and sent to the operating room. At no
 
time did any HMC staff complete an inventory of the contents of
 
the Kit, as required by well-established HMC policy. Before Dr.
 
Ricketson commenced the surgery, nurse Vicki Barry advised him
 
that an inventory of the Kit had not been completed. 
Nevertheless, Dr. Ricketson proceeded with the surgery. He
 
removed portions of Arturo's vertebrae in preparation for
 
implanting the rods. 
Over two hours into the operation, when he was ready to
 
affix the two titanium rods to both sides of Arturo's spine,
 
surgical staff informed Dr. Ricketson that they could not locate
 
the rods. At trial, several staff testified that they had
 
engaged in an extensive search throughout the hospital, to no
 
avail. A staff member contacted Eric Hanson, the Medtronic sales
 
representative in Honolulu. He could not immediately confirm
 
whether the rods had been shipped. However, he had implant rods
 
available in Honolulu and offered to personally deliver them to
 
HMC within ninety minutes. 
Dr. Ricketson's testimony was that he believed that the
 
delay was too risky for the patient. He proceeded with the
 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
surgery, absent the titanium rods. He cut a three to four
 
centimeter section from the shaft of a surgical, stainless steel
 
screwdriver included in the Kit. He then implanted the shaft
 
into Arturo's spine, creating an improvised unilateral rod. The
 
screwdriver shaft was not intended or approved for human
 
implantation. 
Following the surgery, HMC personnel did not inform
 
Arturo that a screwdriver shaft had been implanted in his spine. 
Dr. Ricketson issued post-operative orders for Arturo to commence
 
physical therapy and begin walking. Sometime during the next
 
day, Arturo likely sustained one or more falls, and the
 
screwdriver shaft shattered. On February 5, 2001, Dr. Ricketson
 
again operated on Arturo in order to remove the screwdriver
 
pieces and implant the proper titanium rods. 
Nurse Janelle Feldmeyer (Feldmeyer) had been present
 
during portions of the initial operation and was aware of what
 Dr. Ricketson had done. She immediately reported the incident to
 
her supervisors. They informed her that it was the surgeon's
 
responsibility to communicate such incidents to the patient. 
When Dr. Ricketson failed to do so, Feldmeyer resolved to inform
 
Arturo herself. However, she was unable to speak with him
 
because he did not speak English, and the hospital reportedly had
 
posted a security guard at his room. 
Feldmeyer made arrangements to discretely obtain the
 
fractured screwdriver shaft after it was removed during the
 
second surgery. After obtaining the shaft, she delivered it to
 
an attorney's office. She then telephoned Rosalinda, Arturo's
 
younger sister and caretaker, and informed her that part of a
 
screwdriver had been implanted into Arturo's back. Rosalinda
 
relayed this information to her brother. 
After Arturo was discharged from HMC, his condition
 
steadily worsened. His ability to live independently, ambulate,
 
and care for his personal hygiene declined. He required regular
 
4
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
catheterization that had to be performed by close family members
 
or home nursing aides. He was often in great pain; he became
 
depressed, and he reportedly lost the will to keep going. 
The titanium rods eventually became dislodged and
 
Arturo underwent two further revision surgeries in Honolulu
 
followed by a period of rehabilitation. After the final surgery,
 
his physical condition continued to decline. He underwent
 
permanent catheterization and suffered from multiple bouts of
 
urosepsis (infection of the urinary tract) resulting in multiple
 
hospitalizations and emergency room visits. He became completely
 
bedridden and ultimately passed away on June 18, 2003, from
 
complications of urosepsis.
 
B. Dr. Ricketson
 HMC extends hospital privileges to health care 
professionals who, through a credentialing process, document their "current professional competence, good judgment, and 
adequate physical and mental health, and who adhere to the ethics 
of their respective professions." At the time Dr. Ricketson 
applied for hospital privileges at HMC, he had a history of 
serious professional problems. He was subject to professional 
disciplinary orders in Oklahoma, Texas, and Hawai' i based on 
numerous lapses in judgment, including falsifying medical records, violating state and federal drug laws, abusing his 
authority to write prescriptions, lying to licensing authorities, 
and failing to report prior actions against his license. On 
October 13, 2000, the State of Hawai' i had placed Dr. Ricketson 
on probation for failing to disclose prior disciplinary actions. Despite these serious lapses, HMC granted Dr. Ricketson hospital 
credentials. 
C. Relevant Procedural History
 Appellant asserted claims of negligence, negligent
 
credentialing, breach of warranty, and strict liability against
 the various defendants. Appellant also raised negligence and
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
negligent credentialing claims against non-party Hawaii
 
Orthopaedics, Inc., a professional corporation that employed Dr.
 
Ricketson. A jury trial took place from February 6 through March
 
13, 2006. The Circuit Court employed the jury in an advisory
 
capacity with respect to the claims against HMC, pursuant to HRS
 
§ 662-5 (1993).2/
  
The jury returned a special verdict finding Medtronic
 
not liable for any of the claims against it. The jury found that
 
both Dr. Ricketson and HMC were negligent, and their negligence
 
was a substantial factor in causing Arturo's harm. The jury
 
apportioned 65% of the fault to Dr. Ricketson and 35% to HMC. 
It awarded $307,000 in special damages to Arturo's Estate, $1.7
 
million in general damages to the Estate, and $170,000 in general
 
damages to Rosalinda. It also awarded $3.4 million in punitive
 
damages against Dr. Ricketson individually. The jury did not
 
apportion any of Arturo's harm to pre-existing injuries. 
The Circuit Court had employed the jury in an advisory
 
capacity with regard to the claims against HMC and declined to
 
follow the jury's determination of damages with respect to those
 
claims. The court determined that Arturo suffered general,
 
unadjusted damages in the sum of $2,000,000. The Circuit Court
 
concluded that HMC and Dr. Ricketson were jointly and severally
 
liable and adopted the jury's apportionment of fault. However,
 
the court found that 75% of the damages were attributable to
 
Arturo's pre-existing medical conditions. Accordingly, the
 
Circuit Court concluded that HMC was only jointly and severally
 
liable for 25% of the total damages found by the court. 
2/
 This statute provides:
 
§ 662-5. Jury. Any action against the State under
this chapter shall be tried by the court without a jury;
provided that the court, with the consent of all the
parties, may order a trial with a jury whose verdict shall
have the same effect as if trial by jury had been a matter
of right.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court further concluded that HMC was not
 
jointly and severably liable for damages to Rosalinda in her
 
personal capacity for NIED based on HRS §§ 663-10.5 (Supp. 2006)
 
and 663-10.9 (1993 & Supp. 1999), which limit claims for which
 
the state may be held jointly and severally liable. The court
 
reasoned that Rosalinda's claim was derivative of Arturo's
 
injuries and death, and was therefore not within the scope of HRS
 
§ 663-10.5 or § 10.9. Accordingly, it limited HMC's joint and
 
several damages to those awarded in favor of Arturo's Estate.3/
  
Finally, Appellant had previously reached a good-faith
 
settlement with Hawaii Orthopaedics, Inc. for $200,000, plus a
 
promissory note, payment of which was contingent on the outcome
 
of Appellant's claims. The Circuit Court concluded that HMC was
 
not entitled to offset its damages by the amount of the
 
settlement pursuant to HRS § 663-15.5 (Supp. 2003). 
A timely notice of appeal was filed on October 9, 2007.
 
HMC's notice of cross-appeal was filed on October 15, 2007.
 
3/
 On September 10, 2007, an amended final judgment was entered as
follows:
 
a. Against HMC, awarded to Arturo's Estate upon Counts I, II, and VIII of
the First Amended Complaint:
General Damages $500,000 (joint & several with Dr. Ricketson)
Special Damages $76,750 (joint & several with Dr. Ricketson) 
b. Against HMC, awarded to Rosalinda upon Counts I and II:
General Damages $52,500 (several liability) 
---------­
$629,250 Total Judgment against HMC 
c. Against Dr. Ricketson, awarded to Arturo's Estate upon Counts I andVIII: 
General DamagesGeneral DamagesSpecial DamagesSpecial DamagesPunitive Damages $500,000 (joint & several with HMC)$1,200,000 (several liability)$76,750 (joint & several with HMC)$230,250 (several liability)$3,400,000 (several liability) 
d. Against Dr. Rickeston, awarded to Rosalinda upon Count I:General Damages
 $110,500 (several liability) ---------­
$5,517,500 Total Judgment against Dr. Ricketson 
7
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Appellant raises the following contentions in her
 
points of error:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred in awarding joint and
 
several damages against HMC in an amount different from those
 
awarded by the jury against Dr. Ricketson;
 
(2) With respect to Appellant's claims against
 
Medtronic, the Circuit Court erred in its adoption and/or
 
rejection of certain jury instructions and a special verdict form
 
question;4/ and
 
(3) The Circuit Court erred in failing to hold HMC
 
jointly liable to Rosalinda for negligent infliction of emotional
 
distress, based on a mistaken interpretation of HRS § 663-10.9; 
HMC asserts the following points of error on cross-
appeal:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred in failing to apply HRS
 
§ 663-10.5, as amended, which precludes HMC from being held
 
jointly and severally liable in tort; and 
(2) If the Circuit Court was correct in holding HMC
 
jointly and severally liable, it erred in failing to offset the
 
judgment by the amount of Hawaii Orthopaedics, Inc.'s good-faith
 
settlement. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Statutory interpretation is a question of law 
reviewable de novo. Lingle v. Hawai' i Gov't Emps. Ass'n, Local 
152, 107 Hawai' i 178, 183, 111 P.3d 587, 592 (2005). 
Our statutory construction is guided by the following
well established principles:
 
our foremost obligation is to ascertain and give
effect to the intention of the legislature, which is
to be obtained primarily from the language contained
in the statute itself. And we must read statutory 
4/
 Specifically, Appellant identifies six alleged errors, which are
discussed in Section IV.D. below.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
language in the context of the entire statute and
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.
 
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used
in a statute, an ambiguity exists.
 
In construing an ambiguous statute, the meaning of the
ambiguous words may be sought by examining the
context, with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and
sentences may be compared, in order to ascertain their
true meaning. Moreover, the courts may resort to
extrinsic aids in determining legislative intent. One
 avenue is the use of legislative history as an
interpretive tool.
 
[The appellate] court may also consider the reason and
spirit of the law, and the cause which induced the
legislature to enact it to discover its true meaning.
 
Id. (citation, internal quotation marks, brackets and ellipses
 
omitted).
 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness. [The appellate]
court ordinarily reviews COLs under the right/wrong
standard. Thus, a COL that is supported by the trial court's
FOFs and that reflects an application of the correct rule of
law will not be overturned.
 
Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Employees' Ret. Sys., 106 Hawai' i 416, 
430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) (internal quotation marks, 
citations, and brackets in original omitted). 
"The standard of review for a trial court's issuance or 
refusal of a jury instruction is whether, when read and 
considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially 
insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." Moyle v. 
Y & Y Hyup Shin, Corp., 118 Hawai' i 385, 391, 191 P.3d 1062, 1068 
(2008) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
"Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a 
ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the 
record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial." Nelson v. 
Univ. of Hawai' i, 97 Hawai' i 376, 386, 38 P.3d 95, 105 (2001) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV.	 DISCUSSION
 
A.	 HRS § 663-10.5
 
HMC contends that HRS § 663-10.5, as amended in 2006,
 
precludes it from being held jointly and severally liable in this
 case. For the reasons discussed below, we disagree.
 
First, we must consider HRS § 663-10.9, which abolishes
 
joint and several liability except for certain tort claims,
 
including claims for: (1) economic damages against joint
 
tortfeasors in actions involving injury or death; and (2) certain
 
noneconomic damages in actions involving injury or death where
 
the joint tortfeasor's individual degree of negligence is found
 
to be at least 25%. HRS § 663-10.9(1)&(3) (Supp. 2010).
5/
 
5/
 HRS § 663-10.9 (Supp. 2010) provides:
 
Abolition of joint and several liability; exceptions.
Joint and several liability for joint tortfeasors as defined
in section 663-11 is abolished except in the following
circumstances:
 
(1) 	For the recovery of economic damages against joint
tortfeasors in actions involving injury or death to
persons;
 
(2) 	For the recovery of economic and noneconomic damages
against joint tortfeasors in actions involving:
(A) 	Intentional torts;
 
(B) 	Torts relating to environmental pollution;
(C) 	Toxic and asbestos-related torts;
(D) 	Torts relating to aircraft accidents;
(E) 	Strict and products liability torts; or
(F) 	Torts relating to motor vehicle accidents except
as provided in paragraph (4);
 
(3) 	For the recovery of noneconomic damages in actions, other
than those enumerated in paragraph (2), involving injury or
death to persons against those tortfeasors whose individual
degree of negligence is found to be twenty-five per cent or
more under section 663-31. Where a tortfeasor's degree of
negligence is less than twenty-five per cent, then the
amount recoverable against that tortfeasor for noneconomic
damages shall be in direct proportion to the degree of
negligence assigned; and
 
(4)	 For recovery of noneconomic damages in motor vehicle
accidents involving tort actions relating to the maintenance
and design of highways including actions involving
guardrails, utility poles, street and directional signs, and
any other highway-related device upon a showing that the
affected joint tortfeasor was given reasonable prior notice
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 663-10.5 further limits the joint and several
 
liability of governmental entities. This provision, as in effect
 
at the time Appellant's claims arose, stated in relevant part:
 
Notwithstanding sections 663-11 to 663-13, 663-16, 663-17,
and section 663-31, in any case where a government entity is
determined to be a tortfeasor along with one or more other
tortfeasors, the government entity shall be liable for no
more than that percentage share of the damages attributable
to the government entity.
 
HRS § 663-10.5 (Supp. 2001). Accordingly, this statute limited
 
the claims for which state governmental entities could be held
 
jointly and severally liable. 
In Kienker v. Bauer, 110 Hawai' i 97, 129 P.3d 1125 
(2006), the Hawai' i Supreme Court considered whether HRS § 663­
10.5 completely abolished joint and several liability of
 government entities. There, the plaintiffs sought to hold the
 
State liable for negligent highway design that resulted in a
 
motor vehicle collision. Id. at 100, 129 P.3d at 1128. HRS
 
§ 663-10.9 permitted joint and several liability for "tort
 actions relating to the maintenance and design of highways" where
 
the tortfeasor had prior notice of the defect. Id. at 101 n.6,
 
129 P.3d at 1129 n.6 (quoting HRS § 663-10.9(4)). 
The State in Kienker maintained that HRS § 663-10.5
 
superseded the exceptions listed in § 663-10.9, thereby entirely
 abolishing joint and several liability for governmental entities. 
Id. at 104-05, 107-08, 129 P.3d at 1132-33, 1135-36. The supreme
 
of a prior occurrence under similar circumstances to the
occurrence upon which the tort claim is based. In actions
 in which the affected joint tortfeasor has not been shown to
have had such reasonable prior notice, the recovery of
noneconomic damages shall be as provided in paragraph (3).
 
(5) 	Provided, however, that joint and several liability
for economic and noneconomic damages for claims
against design professionals, as defined in chapter
672, and certified public accountants, as defined in
chapter 466, is abolished in actions not involving
physical injury or death to persons. 
11
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court rejected that argument. Id. at 107-10, 129 P.3d at 1135­
38. It reasoned that at the time the Legislature enacted HRS
 
§ 663-10.5, it was aware of the exceptions listed in HRS § 663­
10.9, yet failed to expressly override them. Id. at 108-09, 129
 
P.3d at 1136-37. Under its plain language, HRS § 663-10.5 did
 
not express an intent to supersede HRS § 663-10.9. Id. at 109,
 
129 P.3d at 1137. Because the statutes merely overlapped in
 
their subject matter, the court gave full effect to both, holding
 
that the State remained subject to joint and several liability
 
under the provisions of HRS § 663-10.9.6/ Id.
 
Following Kienker, HRS § 663-10.5 was amended. The
 
revised statute retained the possibility of joint and several
 
liability claims against the State with regard to the highways
 
provision of HRS § 663-10.9. See Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 86, in
 
2006 Senate Journal, at 942. However, the amended provision
 expressly abolished joint and several liability against the State
 
for all other claims. Id. The relevant provision, as amended in
 
2006, now reads:
 
Any other law to the contrary notwithstanding, including but
not limited to sections 663-10.9, 663-11 to 663-13, 663-16,
663-17, and 663-31, in any case where a government entity is
determined to be a tortfeasor along with one or more other
tortfeasors, the government entity shall be liable for no
more than that percentage share of the damages attributable
to the government entity; provided that joint and several
liability shall be retained for tort claims relating to the
maintenance and design of highways pursuant to section
663-10.9.
 
HRS § 663-10.5 (Supp. 2010) (emphasis added). 
6/
 HMC asserts that Kienker is inapplicable because it dealt only
 
with the highways exception of HRS § 663-10.9. However, the supreme court's
reasoning concerning statutory interpretation is applicable to all provisions
of that section. Id. at 108-10, 129 P.3d at 1136-38. The court did not limit
 
its discussion to the highways exception, but rather discussed HRS § 663-10.9
as a whole. Id. Although it also referenced the legislative history
particular to the highways exception, the court did so merely to confirm its
conclusion, not to limit its conclusion to that exception. Id. at 110-11, 129
 
P.3d at 1138-39. 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The enactment provided that the amendment "shall apply
 
retroactively to the extent permitted by law." 2006 Haw. Sess.
 
L. 2006, Act 112, § 3 at 326. The Conference Committee Report
 
explained: "To avoid any confusion as to the application of
 
section 663-10.5, HRS, following Kienker, this measure is given
 
retroactive application to the extent permitted by law so as to
 
implement its intent without violating accrued or substantive
 
rights." See 2006 Senate Journal, at 942 (Conf. Com. Rep. No. 86
 
on H.B. No. 237). HMC argues that the amendment applies
 retroactively in this case to abolish its joint and several
 
liability. 
After HMC submitted its opening brief, however, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court rejected that argument in a similar case. 
Kaho'ohanohano v. Dept. of Human Servs., 117 Hawai' i 262, 178 P.3d 
538 (2008). There, the plaintiffs brought a negligence claim 
against the state Department of Human Services (DHS) for failing 
to properly investigate and protect a minor from abuse. Id. at 
266, 178 P.3d at 542. DHS was found jointly and severally liable 
for negligence under HRS § 663-10.9(1) and (3), the same 
provisions under which HMC was found to be liable here. Id. at 
309, 178 P.3d at 585. On appeal, DHS contended that the 2006 amendment to HRS § 663-10.5 applied retroactively to abolish its 
joint and several liability for negligence claims involving 
personal injuries or death. Id. at 310, 178 P.3d at 586. 
The supreme court noted that "[g]enerally, the law
 
disfavors the retroactive application of statutes and rules." 
Id. at 310, 178 P.3d at 586 (citations and original ellipsis
 
omitted). In the case of HRS § 663-10.5, the Legislature
 
provided retroactivity only "to the extent permitted by law"
 
where doing so will not "violat[e] accrued or substantive
 
rights." Id. at 311, 178 P.3d at 587 (citation omitted). The
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court adopted the approach of other jurisdictions in concluding
 
that "a change in the right of recovery is deemed to have altered
 
the parties' vested right and [is] substantive in nature,"
 
thereby precluding retroactive application in certain cases. Id.
 
at 312-14, 178 P.3d at 588-90. It quoted with approval a
 Wisconsin decision holding that 
[a]n existing right of action which has accrued under the
rules of common law or in accordance with its principles is
a vested property right. [The plaintiff's] negligence claim
accrued on the date of his accident and injury. It is the
fact and date of injury that sets in force and operation the
factors that create and establish the basis for a claim of
 damages. Contrary to [the tortfeasor's] assertion, it is the
date of injury which is the triggering event with respect to
the application of [the amendment to the contributor
negligence statute]--the date that [the plaintiff's] claim
accrued. Included in [his] negligence claim is the right to
recover under an unmodified doctrine of joint and several
liability since, at the time [his] claim accrued, common law
imposed joint and several liability upon any jointly liable
 person.
 
Id. at 313, 178 P.3d at 589 (quoting Matthies v. Positive Safety 
Mfg. Co., 628 N.W.2d 842, 852-53 (Wis. 2001) (internal quotation 
marks, citations, original brackets, emphasis and footnotes 
omitted)). Under Kaho' ohanohano, "because the plaintiff was 
entitled to recover under the doctrine of joint and several liability when his claim accrued, the statutory change affected 
his vested rights." Id. at 313-14, 178 P.3d at 589-90 (citation 
omitted). 
Applying this reasoning, the supreme court held that
 
the plaintiffs were entitled to recover under the doctrine of
 joint and several liability in place at the time their claim
 
accrued, i.e., the date of the injury. Id. at 315, 178 P.3d at
 
591. Accordingly, the 2006 amendment to HRS § 663-10.5 did not
 
apply retroactively to bar their claim. Id.
 
The same result is warranted here. Arturo's Estate was
 
entitled to recover under the doctrine of joint and several
 
14
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
liability in place at the time of Arturo's injury. The Circuit
 
Court did not err in holding HMC jointly and severally liable.7/
 
B. HMC's Request for an Offset
 Appellant asserted and settled various negligence
 
claims against non-party Hawaii Orthopaedics, Inc., a
 professional corporation that employed Dr. Ricketson, and its
 
sole shareholder, Dr. Edward Gutteling. The Circuit Court
 
determined the release to be a good faith settlement pursuant to
 
HRS § 663-15.5(b).
 
HMC contends that the Circuit Court erred in failing to
 
reduce the judgment by the amount of this settlement. HMC argues
 
that, as a joint tortfeasor with Hawaii Orthopaedics, Inc., HMC
 
was entitled to offset its liability pursuant to HRS § 663­
15.5(a), which provides, in relevant part:
8/
 
663-15.5 Release; joint tortfeasors; co-obligors;
good faith settlement. (a) A release, dismissal with or
without prejudice, or a covenant not to sue or not to
enforce a judgment that is given in good faith under
subsection (b) to one or more joint tortfeasors, or to one
or more co-obligors who are mutually subject to contribution
rights, shall:
 
(1) Not discharge any other joint tortfeasor or
 
7/
 HMC further maintains that under the pre-2006 doctrine of joint
and several liability, HRS § 663-10.5 permitted only joint and several
liability for negligent highway maintenance and design claims. Kaho'ohanohano 
disposes of this argument as well. There, DHS asserted a similar argument:
that in enacting the 2006 amendment, the Legislature merely sought to confirmits original intent regarding the scope of HRS § 663-10.5. 117 Hawai' i at 
315, 178 P.3d at 591. The supreme court rejected that argument and held thatthe plaintiffs were entitled to recover under joint and several liability fornegligence claims involving injury under HRS § 663-10.9(1) and (3). Id. 
8/
 Appellant argues that HMC waived this argument by failing to
assert it when the Circuit Court determined the settlement was in good faith.
However, HRS § 663-15.5 does not require joint tortfeasors to request the
reduction at that time. Indeed, as the claims against HMC and Dr. Ricketson
had not yet been adjudicated, such a request would likely have been premature.
It is therefore sufficient that HMC raised the issue with the Circuit Court
 below. Appellant also contends that HMC failed to present any evidence at
trial of the amount of the settlement. Yet under the plain language of HRS
§ 663-15.5(a)(2), the amount of the set-off in this case is the consideration
paid for the release. No further evidence is required.
 
15
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
co-obligor not released from liability unless its terms so
provide;
 
(2) Reduce the claims against the other joint
tortfeasor or co-obligor not released in the amount
stipulated by the release, dismissal, or covenant, or in the
amount of the consideration paid for it, whichever is
greater; and
 
(3) Discharge the party to whom it is given from all
liability for any contribution to any other joint tortfeasor
or co-obligor.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
At issue is whether, for purposes of this provision,
 
HMC was a joint tortfeasor with Hawaii Orthopaedics, Inc. The
 
definition of "joint tortfeasors" encompasses "two or more
 
persons jointly or severally liable in tort for the same injury
 
to person or property, whether or not judgment has been recovered
 
against all or some of them." HRS § 663-11 (1993). 
Appellant contends that the release concerns claims
 
against Dr. Gutteling and not the corporation itself, as
 
evidenced by Dr. Gutteling's personal payment of the
 
settlement.9/ The release, however, names both Dr. Gutteling and
 
Hawaii Orthopaedics, Inc. as releasees and expressly releases all
 claims against the releasees related to the screwdriver incident. 
Furthermore, Dr. Gutteling was subject to personal liability for
 
claims against the professional corporation because he allegedly
 
failed to maintain adequate malpractice insurance. See HRS
 
§ 415A-11(c) (2004). It is immaterial that he personally funded
 the settlement check.
 
9/
 Appellant further suggest that HRS § 663-15.5 is inapplicable when
the settling tortfeasor was not a party to the lawsuit. However, that section
specifically provides that the existence of a lawsuit is not required. HRS 
§ 663-15.5(g) ("The procedures, rights, and obligations of this section . . .do[] not require the existence of a lawsuit."). The Hawai' i Supreme Court has
recognized that a joint tortfeasor need not be a party to the suit. Gump v.
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 93 Hawai' i 417, 422, 5 P.3d 407, 412 (2000). 
16
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellant further argues that Hawaii Orthopaedics, Inc. 
cannot be a joint tortfeasor with HMC because the former's 
liability was solely premised on the doctrine of respondeat 
superior. Appellant's theory presumes that because the employer 
and employee are joint tortfeasors with each other, they cannot 
also be joint tortfeasors with anyone else. However, a 
vicariously liable employer "share[s] a common liability" with 
its employee. Saranillio v. Silva, 78 Hawai' i 1, 13, 889 P.2d 
685, 697 (1995). Their liability is "a consolidated or unified one." Id. at 12, 889 P.2d at 696 (internal quotation marks and 
citations omitted). Thus, where the "consolidated liability" of a vicariously liable employer and the liability of a third party 
result from the "same injury," they are joint tortfeasors. Id. 
at 13, 889 P.2d at 697. 
Here, Hawaii Orthopaedics, Inc.'s potential liability
 
concerned the same injury for which HMC was liable: that
 
resulting from Dr. Ricketson's negligence. The Circuit Court
 
therefore erred in concluding that HMC was not entitled to offset
 
its damages. 
C. The Court's Determination of HMC's Liability
 Appellant asserts that the Circuit Court erred in 
independently determining HMC's liability, resulting in joint and several damages different from those "awarded" by the jury. 
Appellant reasons that, because the Circuit Court found HMC to be 
a joint tortfeasor with Dr. Ricketson, it could not award damages 
against HMC in an amount different from those the jury awarded 
against Dr. Ricketson. However, because HMC is a part of the 
Hawai'i Health Systems Corp., a State agency, and for the reasons 
discussed below, we reject this argument. See HRS § 323F-2 
(2010) (establishing that Hawai' i Health Systems Corp. is "a 
17
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
public body corporate and politic and an instrumentality and
 
agency of the State").
 
We start with the proposition that the State has waived
 
its sovereign immunity for tort liability under the State Tort
 
Liability Act. HRS § 662-2 (1993) provides: 
The State hereby waives its immunity for liability for
the torts of its employees and shall be liable in the same
manner and to the same extent as a private individual under
like circumstances, but shall not be liable for interest
prior to judgment or for punitive damages.
 
Appellant contends that, under this provision, HMC must
 
be held jointly and severally liable in the same manner and to
 
the same extent as Dr. Ricketson, a private individual, i.e., in
 
the amount of the jury verdict on damages. However, HRS § 662-5
 
provides:
 
Any action against the State under this chapter shall
be tried by the court without a jury; provided that the
court, with the consent of all the parties, may order a
trial with a jury whose verdict shall have the same effect
as if trial by jury had been a matter of right.
 
The State's tort liability waiver in HRS § 662-2 is a 
general provision that must be read together with similar 
provisions on the same subject matter. Richardson v. City & Cnty 
of Honolulu, 76 Hawai' i 46, 55, 868 P.2d 1193, 1202 (1994) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). ("[L]aws in 
pari materia, or upon the same subject matter, shall be construed 
with reference to each other."). Read together, HRS § 662-5 acts 
a limitation on the general waiver found in HRS § 662-2. The 
general waiver does not, then, provide a right to a jury trial 
for tort actions against state entities. See Dyniewicz v. Cnty 
of Haw., 6 Haw. App. 582, 591, 733 P.2d 1224, 1230 (1987) ("Under HRS § 662-5 Plaintiffs are not entitled to a jury trial of its 
claim against the State unless . . . the State consents [and 
other procedural requirements are satisfied]."). Appellant does 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not contend that the State consented to a jury trial on the
 
claims against the State. 
Other statutory provisions limit the state's tort 
liability in various ways. As discussed above, HRS § 663-10.5 
(Supp. 2006) expressly abolishes joint and several liability for 
state governmental entities except in limited circumstances. 
Under Appellant's reading of HRS § 662-2, HRS § 663-10.5, as well 
as HRS § 662-5, would be devoid of any effect. Richardson, 76 
Hawai'i at 55, 868 P.2d at 1202 (where statutes overlap in their 
application, effect will be given to both if possible). 
Appellant acknowledges that the general waiver is limited by HRS 
§§ 663-10.5 and 663-10.9, precluding joint and several liability 
except in certain circumstances. Just as those provisions limit 
the manner in which the state may be held liable "to the same 
extent as a private individual," so too does the bench trial 
requirement of HRS § 662-5. 
We also reject Appellant's reliance on United States v.
 
Yellow Cab Co., 340 U.S. 543, 555-56 (1951), for the proposition
 
that common questions of fact determined by the jury must also
 
bind the court. The Court in Yellow Cab discussed the procedural
 
solution of holding a single trial with two independent fact-
finders, the court and the jury. Id. It did not adopt the
 
substantive principle that common questions of fact, determined
 by the jury, are binding on the court. It merely recognized that
 
procedural difficulties do not impose a blanket prohibition on
 
raising claims against private and governmental defendants in the
 
same action. Id.; see Bates v. Tenco Services, Inc., 132 F.R.D.
 
160, 164 n.7 (D.S.C. 1990) (recognizing that in Yellow Cab, the
 Court rejected the government's argument that holding a single
 
trial with two fact-finders would be too complicated, reasoning
 
that such a procedure was no different than trying legal issues
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to jury and equitable issues to judge in single proceeding); 
see also Black v. United States, 421 F.2d 255, 257-59 (10th Cir.
 
1970) (affirming trial court's independent adjudication of
 
government's joint and several liability in greater amount than
 
damages awarded by jury); Englehardt v. United States, 69 F.
 
Supp. 451, 455 (D.C. Md. 1947) ("joint defendants have been tried
 
at one time although the verdict must be separately announced by
 
the judge and by the jury as to the respective defendants")
 
(citations omitted).
 
Appellant's further argument rests on the supremacy of
 
the jury's award against Dr. Ricketson. Appellant argues that by
 
holding HMC liable for a lesser amount, the Circuit Court
 
compromised the right to a jury trial on the claims against Dr.
 
Ricketson and undermined principles of joint and several
 
liability. The error in Appellant's reasoning lies in the
 
presumption -- necessarily at the root of the argument -- that
 
the jury's verdict is binding as to Dr. Ricketson's joint
 
liability with HMC. However, under HRS § 662-5, the jury had no
 
ability to render a binding verdict against HMC. It only
 
possessed the ability to do so against Dr. Rickeston severally
 
(or jointly with Medtronic). The Circuit Court gave full effect
 
to the jury's determination by entering judgment against Dr.
 
Ricketson in the amount of the verdict. Thus, the Circuit Court
 
did not err when it concluded that "HRS § 663-10.9 operates to
 
have what would have been a totally several judgment [against Dr.
 
Ricketson], to be joint and several [] as to the damages awarded
 
by the court pursuant to HRS [§ 662-5]." (Emphasis added.)
 
In its waiving of sovereign immunity, the State limited
 
its liability to an amount determined by a judge rather than a
 
jury. HMC and Ricketson are joint tortfeasors only to the extent
 
of the court's determination. Here, their joint general damages
 
20
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
liability was $500,000, or the 25% of the unadjusted damages
 
determined by the court to be attributable to Arturo's injuries –
 
the other 75% being attributed by the court to pre-existing
 
medical conditions. As a result, Appellant may fully recover
 
from either of the defendants for their shared liability.
 
Finally, Appellant contends that by adjudicating HMC's
 
liability, the Circuit Court contravened the requirement of HRS
 
§ 663-10.9(3) that joint and several liability attach to
 
defendants whose individual degree of negligence is found to be
 
25% or more. Yet read together with HRS § 662-5, this provision
 
requires the imposition of joint and several liability only as
 
adjudicated by the court, not the jury. Having determined that
 
HMC's individual degree of negligence was more than 25%, the
 
Circuit Court properly awarded joint and several damages against
 
HMC, to the full extent that the court determined Arturo's
 
injuries to arise out of the subject incident. It therefore
 
complied with HRS § 663-10.9(3).10/
 
D.	 Alleged Errors in the Jury Instructions and Special
Verdict Form
 
Appellant identifies six points of error in which she
 
argues that the Circuit Court erred in its instructions to the
 
jury concerning Appellant's negligence and products liability
 
claims against Medtronic. 
The first two contentions relate to the products
 
liability claim against Medtronic. First, Appellant argues that
 
the Circuit Court erred in giving Instruction 49:
 
If a defendant presents evidence that the product was
substantially changed or modified by someone else before the
 
10/
 Appellant also argues that because HMC brought cross-claims
against its co-defendants, and it did not have a right to a bench trial on its
cross-claims, the jury's verdict on the issues of apportionment had collateral
estoppel effect in the bench trial. This issue was not raised below and
 therefore need not be addressed on appeal. See HRS § 641-2 (Supp. 2010).
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
product reached the consumer or ultimate user or that the
product was misused, the plaintiff must then prove that the
product was not substantially changed or modified and/or it
was not misused. If you determine that the product was
substantially changed by someone else prior to its use by
the plaintiff, or that the product was misused and such
misuse was not foreseeable, you must find that the product
was not defective.
 
Second, Appellant asserts that the Circuit Court erred
 
in failing to give plaintiffs' proposed instruction that:
 
A product is defective if it lacks an essential part. If
 you find that the kit of instrumentation shipped by
Medtronic did not contain the titanium rods when shipped,
you must find that the Medtronic kit was defective.
 
In the third and fourth instruction-related points of
 
error, Appellant argues that the Circuit Court erred in giving
 
its Instruction 27, rather than the plaintiffs' proposed
 
instruction, on the issue of foreseeability. Instruction 27
 
provided:
 
In determining whether a person was negligent, it may help
to ask whether a reasonable person in the same situation
would have foreseen or anticipated that injury or damage
could result from that person's action or inaction. If such
 a result would be foreseeable by a reasonable person and if
the conduct reasonably could be avoided, then not to avoid
it would be negligence.
 
The rejected instruction stated:
 
In determining whether Medtronic was negligent because it
(1)
 failed to include the titanium rods in the kit it
shipped, or (2) failed to notify its agent, the doctor, or
Hilo Medical Center that the shipment from Memphis was
incomplete, it may help to ask whether a reasonable company
in the same situation would have foreseen and anticipated
that injury or damage could result from either of the
company's failures. You must determine whether the
 commencement of the surgery without confirming the rods were
present was foreseeable. If so, then the failure to take
reasonable action to avoid the harm would be negligent. The
 specific harm that occurred does not have to be foreseeable.
Defendant Ricketson's use of the screwdriver was a harm that
 does not have to be specifically foreseeable.
 
In the fifth and sixth instruction-related contentions,
 
Appellant argues that the Circuit Court erred in giving
 
Instruction 29 and Special Verdict Interrogatory 5, both
 
22
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concerning superseding cause. The court's instruction provided:
 
A superseding cause is an act which relieves a defendant or
defendants of responsibility for plaintiffs' injury. To be
 a superseding cause, an act must: (1) Occur after
defendant's conduct,(2) Be a substantial factor in bringing
about the injury to plaintiffs, (3) Intervene in such a way
that defendant's conduct is no longer a substantial factor
in bringing about the injury, and (4) Not be reasonably
foreseeable at the time defendant acted or failed to act.
 
If the act was a normal consequence of the situation created
by defendant's conduct, then said act is not a superseding
 cause.
 
The interrogatory stated:
 
If you answered "Yes" to Question Nos. 1, 3 or 4 as to
Defendant Medtronic: Were the actions of Defendant
 Ricketson a superseding cause of injuries to Arturo
Itturalde.
 
As noted above, the central issue before us is whether, 
when read and considered as a whole, the Circuit Court's 
instructions were prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, 
inconsistent, or misleading. Moyle, 118 Hawai' i at 391, 191 P.3d 
at 1068. We necessarily consider the challenged instructions in the context of the parties' allegations and defenses, the 
evidence adduced at trial, and the law applicable to the 
particular issues of fact to be decided. 
1. Products Liability and Substantial Change
 
First, we consider the contested products liability
 
related instructions. The Hawai' i Supreme Court adopted a 
standard for strict products liability claims in Stewart v.
 
Budget Rent-A-Car Corp., 52 Haw. 71, 470 P.2d 240 (1970). It
 
articulated the standard as follows:
 
[O]ne who sells or leases a defective product which is
dangerous to the user or consumer or to his property is
subject to liability for physical harm caused by the
defective product to the ultimate user or consumer, or to
his property, if (a) the seller or lessor is engaged in the
business of selling or leasing such product, and (b) the
product is expected to and does reach the user or consumer
without substantial change in its condition after it is sold
or leased.
 
23
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 75, 470 P.2d at 243 (emphasis added). This is, in
 
essence, the rule adopted in the R ESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 402A
 
(1965). Id. Under part (b) of that standard, a seller is not
 
liable if the product is delivered "in a safe condition, and
 
subsequent mishandling or other causes make it harmful by the
 
time it is consumed." R ESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 402A cmt. g. 
The plaintiff may only recover if the product was in a defective
 condition when it left the hands of the seller or manufacturer. 
Ellsworth v. Sherne Lingerie, Inc., 495 A.2d 348, 356 (Md. 1985)
 
(citing R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 402A cmt. g); Ford Motor Co.
 
v. Ledesma, 242 S.W.3d 32, 42 (Tex. 2007). In addition, the
 plaintiff must prove a causal connection between the defect and
 
the plaintiff's injuries. Acoba v. Gen. Tire, Inc., 92 Hawai' i 
1, 16, 986 P.2d 288, 303 (1999). In Acoba, the supreme court
 stated:
 
To establish a prima facie claim for strict product
liability, the plaintiff has the burden to prove (1) a
defect in the product which rendered it unreasonably
dangerous for its intended or reasonably foreseeable use;
and (2) a causal connection between the defect and the
plaintiff's injuries. Proof of defect and causation may be
provided by expert testimony or by circumstantial evidence.
. . . Generally, whether a product is unreasonably dangerous
is a question for the trier of fact.
 
Id. at 16-17, 986 P.2d at 303-04 (citations, brackets and
 
internal quotation marks omitted).
 
In Stender v. Vincent, 92 Hawai' i 355, 373, 992 P.2d 
50, 68 (2000), the Hawai' i Supreme Court further addressed the 
issue of "substantial change" in the context of a products liability case, adopting a burden-shifting rule. The court 
observed that not every products liability case involves the 
issue of substantial change, so it is not reasonable to require a 
plaintiff to "prov[e] a negative from the start." Id. at 371-73, 
992 P.2d at 66-68 (citations omitted). For the rule to apply, the defendant must first allege and adduce some evidence of a 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
substantial change in the product. Id. at 372, 992 P.2d at 67. 
Once the issue is so joined, the plaintiff maintains the ultimate
 
burden of proof that the product was dangerously defective when
 
it left the hands of the defendant manufacturer or distributor. 
Id. 
Here, the first sentence of Instruction 49 is
 
consistent, at least in substantial part, with the products
 
liability standards enunciated in Stewart and Acoba, and the
 
burden-shifting standard adopted in Stender – 
If a defendant presents evidence that the product was
substantially changed or modified by someone else before the
product reached the consumer or ultimate user or that the
product was misused, the plaintiff must then prove that the
product was not substantially changed or modified and/or it
was not misused.
 
This part of Instruction 49 is also consistent with
 
Medtronics' theory of the case, which was supported by evidence
 
adduced at trial and/or reasonable inferences therefrom. 
Specifically, Medtronics argued that the Kit provided to HMC was
 
complete and contained the titanium rods that were ordered for
 
Arturo's surgery, but the Kit was "substantially changed or
 
modified" by someone else when the rods were lost or misplaced
 
prior to the surgery. The evidence included a witness who
 
testified that the Kit was complete when shipped, a packing list
 
which included the rods as being packed, testimony concerning a
 
prior incident at HMC in which a portion of a shipment had been
 
misplaced and lost for 3 months, and HMC's head nurse's testimony
 
regarding prior occasions where a surgery was started without all
 
of the equipment that had been shipped for a surgery.
 
However, Instruction 49 does more than simply state the
 
above-referenced standards. The instruction injects the concept
 
of "misuse" of the product, which is not in-and-of-itself
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
erroneous or necessarily inconsistent with applicable law.11/ And
 
then, the instruction informs the jury that it must make certain,
 
critical, factual findings, if there was a substantial change or
 
an unforeseeable misuse of the product:
 
If you determine that the product was substantially changed
by someone else prior to its use by the plaintiff, or that
the product was misused and such misuse was not foreseeable,
you must find that the product was not defective.
 
This part of the instruction has two subparts, both of
 
which require the jury to determine that the product was "not
 
defective" upon the identified circumstances. The jury was told
 
that if either (1) "you determine that the product was
 
substantially changed by someone else prior to its use by the
 
plaintiff . . . you must find that the product was not defective"
 
or (2) "you determine . . . or that the product was misused and
 
such misuse was not foreseeable, you must find that the product
 
was not defective." 
As Appellant argues, under the circumstances of this
 
case, and without additional clarification, the first subpart
 
renders Instruction 49 prejudicially insufficient and misleading.
 
A substantial change to a product may negate causation where the
 
alteration, and not the originally defective condition of the
 
product, was the proximate cause of the injury. See, e.g.,
 
Navarro v. George Koch & Sons, Inc., 512 A.2d 507, 516 (N.J.
 Super. Ct. App. Div. 1986) ("a manufacturer can also preclude
 
liability if it can prove that the substantial alteration was the
 
sole cause or the intervening superseding cause of the
 
[injury]"); accord Sheldon v. W. Bend Equip. Corp., 718 F.2d 603,
 
607-08 (3d Cir. 1983). Conversely, liability still attaches if
 
the subsequent alteration was not the sole or superseding cause
 
of the injury. See, e.g., Schooley v. Ingersoll Rand, Inc., 631
 
11/
 See n. 12 infra.
 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
N.E.2d 932, 938 (Ind. Ct. App. 1994); Fisher v. Walsh Parts &
 
Serv. Co., Inc., 296 F. Supp. 2d 551, 563-64 (E.D. Pa. 2003).
 Here, there is no question that at least part of the
 
"product" was substantially changed or modified, particularly
 
from a lay person's point of view. Dr. Ricketson cut up a
 
screwdriver that was part of the Kit and inserted it in Arturo's
 
back, in lieu of titanium rods that were designed for that
 
purpose. However, that fact alone should not have dictated a
 
finding that the Kit was not defective, without regard to the
 
jury's finding on whether the Kit was shipped with or without the
 
titanium rods. If the jury determined that the Kit was shipped
 
without the titanium rods, that determination alone could have
 
supported a finding that the product was defective,
 
notwithstanding Dr. Ricketson's actions. Accordingly, the
 
Circuit Court erred in giving this instruction.12/
 
Erroneous jury instructions are presumptively harmful, 
Medtronics makes no argument overcoming the presumption of harm, 
and we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court's error in giving 
this instruction was harmless error. See, e.g., Udac v. Takata 
Corp., 121 Hawai' i 143, 149, 214 P.3d 1133, 1139 (App. 2009). 
Although identified as a point of error, Appellant
 
makes no argument regarding the Circuit Court's refusal to give
 the specific proposed instruction that:
 
A product is defective if it lacks an essential part. If
 
you find that the kit of instrumentation shipped by
Medtronic did not contain the titanium rods when shipped,
you must find that the Medtronic kit was defective.
 
12/
 Appellant makes no discernible argument concerning the Circuit
Court's instruction on the "misuse" of a product. As we conclude thatInstruction 49 is otherwise erroneous, we decline to address this issue. Seealso Int'l Sav. and Loan Ass'n, Ltd. v. Carbonel, 93 Hawai' i 464, 473, 5 P.3d
454, 463 (App. 2000) ("[A]n appellate court need not address matters as towhich the appellant has failed to present a discernible argument") (citationsomitted). We note, however, that it appears that the infirmities in thesubstantial change aspect of this instruction are also manifested in themisuse portion of the instruction. 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, we deem this point waived. Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7).13/  We note, however, 
that in reformulating a "substantial change" instruction or 
instructions, the parties and the Circuit Court must be careful 
to avoid giving an instruction that is misleading. While 
Medtronics is entitled to an instruction that includes the 
"without-substantial-change" aspect of the Hawai' i products 
liability standard,14/ as articulated in Stewart and Stender, it 
must be made sufficiently clear that the "substantial change" 
being argued in the context of the products liability claim is 
the change or modification to the Kit after its shipment from 
Medtronics to HMC, i.e., that HMC lost or misplaced the rods, and 
not the later "changes" made by Dr. Ricketson. 
2. Foreseeability & Superseding Cause
 
Appellant challenges the Circuit Court's instructions
 
on foreseeability and superseding causes, as pertaining to the
 
negligence claim against Medtronic. Appellant argues that the
 
instructions were erroneous because, inter alia, the court's
 
instructions failed to clarify that only the general nature of
 
the harm, rather than its specific nature, need be foreseeable in
 
order to negate a superseding cause. 
The Circuit Court's instructions defining legal cause
 
and superseding cause included the following:
 
13/
 We note that a trial court's refusal to give a specific
instruction, even if that instruction is relevant under the evidence and
correctly states the law, is not error if the point has been adequately andfully covered by other instructions. See, e.g., Udac v. Takata Corp., 121 
Hawai'i 143, 149, 214 P.3d 1133, 1139 (App. 2009) (citing Sherry v. Asing, 56
Haw. 135, 144, 531 P.2d 648, 655 (1975)). By failing to address this point,including citation to applicable authorities, Appellant has failed todemonstrate that this instruction correctly states the law and/or that theinstructions to the jury were not otherwise sufficient. 
14/
 The other instructions failed to inform the jury on this part of
the products liability doctrine.
 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
29An act or omission is a legal cause of an injury if it was a
substantial factor in bringing about the injury.
One or more substantial factors such as the conduct of more
than one person may operate separately or together to cause
an injury or damage.  In such a case, each may be a legal
cause of the injury.
A superseding cause is an act which relieves a defendant or
defendants of responsibility for plaintiffs' injury.
To be a superseding cause, an act must:
1. Occur after defendant's conduct,
2. Be a substantial factor in bringing about the injury to
plaintiffs,
3. Intervene in such a way that defendant's conduct is no
longer a substantial factor in bringing about the injury,
and 
4. Not be reasonably foreseeable at the time defendant acted
or failed to act.
If the act was a normal consequence of the situation created
by defendant's conduct, then said act is not a superseding
cause.
(Emphasis added).  Although the superseding cause instruction is
identical in all material respects to Hawai i Standard Civil Jury
Instruction 7.2, appellate courts are not bound by pattern jury
instructions.  State v. Mark , 123 Hawai i 205, 219, 231 P.3d 478,
492 (2010).»
»
A superseding cause severs the original tortfeasor's
liability.  Mitchell v. Branch , 45 Haw. 128, 132-33, 363 P.2d
969, 973-74 (1961).  Whether a subsequent cause constitutes a
superseding cause is a factual question that turns on
foreseeability.  Ontai v. Straub Clinic & Hosp. Inc. , 66 Haw.
237, 249, 659 P.2d 734, 743 (1983).  A subsequent cause of
injury, including the negligence of a third party, is not a
superseding cause if it is reasonably foreseeable.  Brown v.
Clark Equip. Co., 62 Haw. 530, 540, 618 P.2d 267, 274 (1980). 
Only in an "extraordinary" case will intervening negligence
constitute a superseding cause.  Mitchell , 45 Haw. at 135, 363
P.2d at 975. "Foreseeability is a crucial aspect of a superseding  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
cause analysis." 57A A M. JUR. 2D Negligence § 583. Thus, we
 
examine the sufficiency of these instructions with particular
 
care.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court addressed a similar jury 
instruction issue in Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel, Inc., 69 
Haw. 376, 742 P.2d 377 (1987). There, a guest was murdered at 
the Waikiki Gateway Hotel. Id. at 381-82, 742 P.2d at 382. Her 
father sued the hotel on a negligence theory. Id. at 382, 742 
P.2d at 382. The supreme court held, inter alia, that the jury 
instructions regarding superseding cause were defective. Id. at 
392-93, 742 P.2d at 387-88. As pertinent to this case, the court 
found error in the instruction concerning foreseeability, which 
read: "An act is reasonably foreseeable if it appears to have 
been ordinary or usual under all the circumstances then 
existing." Id. at 393, 742 P.2d at 387-88. The court noted, "We 
fail to see how murder can be 'ordinary or usual' under any circumstance. We could say the same about lightning striking at 
any given place or time; yet since 'the possibility is there, 
. . . it may require precautions for the protection of 
inflammables.'" Id. (citation omitted). The supreme court 
concluded that the trial court erred in employing the "ordinary or usual" language. Id. The test for reasonable foreseeability 
is not "whether the act or risk appears to have been ordinary or usual under all the circumstances." Id. (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted). Instead, the appropriate standard is whether "there is some probability of harm sufficiently 
serious that a reasonable and prudent person would take 
precautions to avoid it." Id. (internal quotation marks, 
brackets, and citation omitted). 
Here, the instruction utilizes synonymous words and
 
conveys the same erroneous concept as the instruction in Knodle. 
30
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court's instruction charges: "If the act was a
 
normal consequence of the situation created by defendant's
 
conduct, then said act is not a superseding cause." (Emphasis
 
added). Without further clarification, the instruction suggests
 
that if the subsequent act is not what a reasonable person would
 
consider to be a "normal consequence" of the situation created by
 
defendant's conduct, then said intervening act is a superseding
 
cause. Thus, it wholly fails to convey the relevant standard -­
whether the probability of harm is "sufficiently serious that a
 
reasonable and prudent person would take precautions to avoid
 
it." Knodle, 69 Haw. at 393, 742 P.2d at 388 (citation omitted). 
As in Knodle, the "normal consequence" language
 
improperly tipped the scales in favor of the conclusion that Dr.
 
Ricketson's negligence was not foreseeable. A reasonable person
 
would be hard-pressed to consider a surgeon's improvised act of
 
implanting a sawed-off screwdriver into a patient's spine to be a
 
"normal consequence" of Medtronic's (alleged) failure to ship the
 
rods. Under the correct standard enunciated in Knodle, however,
 
the jury might have reached a different conclusion.
 
Appellant's related contention that the instruction 
could have misled the jury by failing to clarify that only the 
general nature of the subsequent harm need be foreseeable is also 
well-taken. A tortfeasor need not have foreseen the precise 
nature of the resulting injury or the exact manner in which it 
occurred. See Taylor-Rice v. State 91 Hawai' i 60, 77, 979 P.2d 
1086, 1103 (1999) (intervening tortfeasor's actions were reasonably foreseeable even though exact nature of injury was 
not); 57A A
M. JUR. 2D Negligence § 587. Where the resulting harm 
is within the "scope of risk" created by the original tortfeasor's conduct, the particular nature of the harm need not 
have been foreseeable. See R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 442B. 
31
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Instead, the relevant inquiry is whether the harm was "one of the
 
cluster of harms in a generally foreseeable category." Winschel
 
v. Brown, 171 P.3d 142, 147 (Alaska 2007) (internal quotation
 marks omitted) (quoting D
AN B. DOBBS, THE LAW OF TORTS 336 (2001 &
 
Supp. 2007)); see also Corey v. Jones, 650 F.2d 803 (5th Cir.
 1981) (trial court erred in refusing to instruct the jury that
 
the particular injuries need not be foreseeable). Here, in
 
conjunction with the instruction on superseding cause, the
 
Circuit Court failed to clarify that only the general nature of
 
subsequent harm need be foreseeable. The jury may have been left
 
with the impression that Medtronic could not be liable unless it
 
was specifically foreseeable that Dr. Ricketson would implant a
 
sawed-off screwdriver into Arturo's spine.
15/  Accordingly, we
 
conclude that the Circuit Court prejudicially erred in failing to
 clarify that the precise nature of the injuries need not be
 
foreseeable.
 
We reject, however, Appellant's assertion that the
 
Circuit Court should not have given any instruction or included a
 
special verdict question on superseding cause and that the issue
 
should have been decided by the court. An instruction on
 
superseding cause was clearly warranted by the record, as it was
 
a core facet of Medtronic's defense. Moreover, the evidence
 
could have supported either outcome. It was properly an issue
 
for the jury. Mitchell, 45 Haw. at 139, 363 P.2d at 977 ("Where
 
there is conflicting evidence . . . on the issue of proximate
 causation, the question is one for the trier of fact."). Thus,
 
15/
 Also, we note inconsistencies in the jury's special verdict
responses that are indicative of confusion on the issue of superseding cause.
The jury answered "no" as to whether Medtronic was negligent. However, it
answered "yes" as to whether Dr. Ricketson's actions were a superseding cause
of Arturo's injuries, relieving Medtronic of liability. If the jury
understood the instructions, it should not have reached the superseding cause
issue unless it first found Medtronic to have been negligent.
 
32
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Circuit Court did not err in instructing and querying the
 
jury on superseding cause; rather, it erred in providing an
 
incomplete instruction on the issue.16/
 
We also reject Appellant's contention that the Circuit
 
Court reversibly erred in failing to give the jury plaintiffs'
 
foreseeability instruction, set forth above, instead of
 
Instruction 27. Although separately identified as points of
 
error, Appellant makes no discernible argument that the court's
 
instruction, and/or the failure to give its alternative
 
instruction, caused the jury instructions as a whole to be
 
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent or
 
misleading. In substantial part, Instruction 27 appears to state
 
the same negligence principle set forth in the plaintiffs'
 
proposed instruction, except without the plaintiffs' inclusion of
 
specific "facts" particular to this case. The plaintiffs'
 
proposed instruction also included that the specific harm that
 
occurred does not have to be foreseeable. We have agreed that
 
the Circuit Court erred in failing to include this proposition in
 
its instructions. However, we cannot conclude that the Circuit
 
Court plainly erred in failing to articulate the law with the
 
fact-specific references requested by the plaintiffs. Appellant
 
cites no legal authority in support of this proposition and we
 
find none. Moreover, the specific wording proposed by the
 
plaintiffs appear to be impermissibly suggestive of certain
 
16/
 Although not raised as a separate point of error and not
identified as an issue raised in the trial court, Appellant appears to argue
that the Circuit Court erred in failing to give an instruction that negligentmedical treatment is a foreseeable result of an injury. We decline to find plain error here, as that "black letter law" clearly applies to a situationwhere a defendant's negligence legally caused an injury that was thenaggravated by medical negligence. See, e.g., Montalvo v. Lopez, 77 Hawai' i 
282, 300, 884 P.2d 345, 363 (1994). We cannot conclude that such an instruction clearly and fully states the applicable law under thecircumstances of this case. Appellant cites no authorities supporting thatproposition and we find none. 
33
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
factual determinations, including a determination that Medtronics
 
failed to include the titanium rods in the Kit. We conclude that
 
the Circuit Court did not plainly err in phrasing Instruction 27
 
generically, as opposed to couching its instruction in terms of
 
the specific facts of this case.
 
E. Rosalinda's NIED Claim
 Finally, Appellant argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in concluding that HMC could not be jointly and severally liable
 
for damages awarded to Rosalinda for her NIED claim. We agree.
 
The Circuit Court adopted the advisory jury's
 
conclusion that HMC was liable for Rosalinda's NIED claim. 
However, it concluded that "Rosalinda's damages are not involving
 
injury to her, being derivative of the injuries and/or death of
 
Arturo, and thus, the provisions of section 663-10.5 operate to
 
impose several liability on HMC to the extent attributable to
 
it."
17/ Accordingly, it only awarded several damages against HMC
 
on the NIED claim. 
As discussed above, HRS § 663-10.9 abolishes joint and
 
several liability except for certain types of claims. See supra
 
Section IV.A. It preserves joint and several liability for,
 
inter alia, actions "involving injury or death[.]" HRS § 663­
10.9(1), (3). The Circuit Court apparently concluded that under
 
HRS § 663-10.9, HMC could not be jointly liable for the NIED
 
claim because it did not involve injury.
 
Our case law has amply recognized that NIED claims 
involve injuries, albeit those of a non-physical nature. In a 
seminal case, the Hawai' i Supreme Court rejected the "physical 
17/
 The Circuit Court's reliance on HRS § 663-10.5 is puzzling. As
 
discussed above, it correctly concluded that HMC remained subject to joint and
several liability for actions "involving injury or death" under section 663­10.9, despite the language of HRS § 663-10.5. See infra Section IV.A. It thus
appears that the court based its conclusion on HRS § 663-10.9, not HRS § 10.5.
 
34
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
injury" rule requiring NIED plaintiffs to demonstrate some level 
of physical injury. Rodrigues v. State, 52 Haw. 156, 173, 472 
P.2d 509, 520 (1970); see also Doe Parents No. 1 v. State, Dep't of Educ., 100 Hawai' i 34, 69, 58 P.3d 545, 580 (2002) (discussing 
significance of Rodrigues). It thereby recognized mental distress as "a legally cognizable injury." Larsen v. Pacesetter 
Sys., Inc., 74 Haw. 1, 42-43, 837 P.2d 1273, 1294 (1992) (discussing Rodrigues). The court reasoned that an NIED claim is 
essentially "a negligence claim in which the alleged actual 
injury is wholly psychic[.]" Doe Parents No. 1, 100 Hawai' i at 
69, 58 P.3d at 580. Where "the alleged actual injury is for psychological distress alone," an NIED claim achieves 
compensation for "persons who have sustained emotional injuries 
attributable to the wrongful conduct of others." Id. at 68, 58 
P.3d at 579 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). The court has therefore repeatedly recognized that the essence of an 
NIED claim involves psychological injury. Id. at 69, 58 P.3d at 
580.
 
An NIED claim is only "derivative" in the sense that it 
generally does not arise absent a "predicate injury either to property or to another person" that is separate from the 
claimant's psychological injury. Id. at 69, 58 P.3d at 580. 
Here, Arturo's injuries and death comprise the requisite predicate injury. Rosalinda's NIED claim for her own injuries, 
however, is "independent and separate" from those of Arturo. 
Torres v. Nw. Eng'g Co., 86 Hawai' i 383, 404-05, 949 P.2d 1004, 
1025-26 (App. 1997) (quoting Tabieros v. Clark Equip. Co., 85 Hawai'i 336, 361, 944 P.2d 1279, 1304 (1997) (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted)). Because HRS § 663-10.9 does not limit "injury" to those of a physical nature, we conclude that it 
extends to NIED claims. As a result, the Circuit Court erred in 
35
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failing to hold HMC jointly and severally liable for damages
 
attributable to Rosalinda's NIED claim.
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, the Circuit Court's
 
September 10, 2007 Judgment is vacated and this case is remanded
 
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Mark S. Davis
 
Anne L. Williams
 
and
 
Robert P. Marx
 (Davis Levin Livingston)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants/
Cross-Appellees
 
George W. Playdon, Jr.
Kelvin H. Kaneshiro
 R. Aaron Creps
(Reinwald O'Connor &
Playdon LLP)
for Defendants-Appellees/
Cross-Appellants
 
Edmund Burke
 
David Y. Suzuki
 Patricia Aburano
 (Burke McPheeters Bordner
& Estes)
and
 
Murray S. Levin
(Pepper Hamilton LLP)
for Defendant-Appellee
MEDTRONIC SOFAMOR DANEK USA
 
ROBERT RICKETSON, M.D.
Defendant-Appellee
 
36
 