NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29419
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
LARRY D. WRIGHT and CAROL A. WRIGHT,
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants-Appellees,
v. FAY WILLIAMS, Defendant-Appellee, and
JACK THOMPSON, Defendant/Counterclaim
Plaintiff-Appellant, and RICHARD B. GOODIN,
Intervenor-Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellee
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-0019)
 
AND
 
RICHARD B. GOODIN, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. LARRY D. WRIGHT and CAROL R. WRIGHT,
Defendants-Appellees
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-172)
 
AND
 
RICHARD B. GOODIN, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. LARRY D. WRIGHT, CAROL R. WRIGHT,
Defendants-Appellees
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-174)
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jack Thompson (Thompson) appeals
 
from the June 12, 2008 Judgment of the Circuit Court of the Third
 
Circuit (Circuit Court).
1/  The Judgment awards damages in a
 
1/
 The Honorable Glenn Hara presided.
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
breach of contract action to Plaintiffs-Appellees Larry D. and 
Carol R. Wright (the Wrights) in the amount of $125,000.00, 
offset by the alleged purchase price of $25,000.00 and rental 
arrears totaling $7,655.33, stemming from a February 9, 2003 
agreement for the sale of certain real property located in 
Leilani Estates on the island of Hawai 'i (Property). 
On February 9, 2003, the Wrights and Thompson signed a
 
handwritten agreement, prepared by Mrs. Wright, that stated in
 its entirety (2/9/03 Agreement):
 
To whom it may concern:
Larry D. and Carol R. Wright will pay rent to Jack
Thompson a monthly amount of $400.00 (Four Hundred Dollars)
for property & house in Lelani [sic] Estates. All rent will
 be applied to purchase price. Purchase price $25,000.00.
 
Shortly before the parties signed the 2/9/03 Agreement,
 
Thompson's father, who had held title to the Property, died.
 
Based on his father's Will, Thompson believed that he would
 
inherit the Property. At trial, Mr. Wright testified that the
 
purchase price was to be paid "[a]fter the probate", that he and
 
his wife would wait one year for "the probate and him to get the
 
papers up for us to sign", and that the Wrights "would pay
 
[Thompson] $400 a month until he did so."2/ The Wrights
 
immediately moved into the Property, i.e., on February 9, 2003. 
The Wrights paid $400 per month to Thompson for a period of 14
 
months, but then terminated the payments when they learned that
 
the Property was distributed out of the probate to Thompson's
 
mother, Fay Williams (Williams), for delinquent child support
 
2/
 At trial, Thompson testified, "I wasn't interested in rent.
wanted to be paid, but they, uh, said something about probate and that that
would take a while and that they would pay rent until that time." Thompson
believed he would acquire the Property from his father because Thompson "was
his only son and [Thompson] was his only heir, and [they] had a will drawn
up." When asked whether he was aware that he had to probate his father's
estate in order to convey the Property, Thompson stated that, at the time of
the agreement with the Wrights, he was not, and that he had only heard the
word "probate" maybe once or twice in his life and had no idea what that
meant.
 
2 I NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
payments, and not to Thompson. The Wrights nevertheless
 
continued to occupy the Property.
 
As found by the Circuit Court, the Wrights thereafter
 
attempted to purchase the Property from Williams pursuant to a
 
September 27, 2004 offer entitled "Agreement of Real Estate
 
Sale," in which they proposed to purchase the Property from
 
Williams for $30,000.00. Thompson and the Wrights testified,
 
varyingly, regarding a meeting held in November of 2004 at the
 
Wrights' attorney's office. It appears that Williams had
 
countersigned the September 27, 2004 offer and Thompson brought a
 
signed copy to the meeting. The Wrights testified that after
 
they and their attorney reviewed Williams' signature, "the
 
agreement was returned to Jack Thompson who was not willing to
 
relinquish possession of it." Thompson testified that the
 
attorney said that the form of the agreement was not acceptable
 
and gave it back to him, saying, "We can't use this." 
Apparently, no copies were made. A fully executed copy of the
 
agreement was not in evidence.
 
On November 12, 2004, the Wrights' attorney sent a
 
quitclaim deed to Williams and asked her to sign it and send it
 
back to him. She did not. On December 6, 2004, the Wrights'
 
attorney again wrote to Williams: "Your son has informed by
 
[sic] my clients, Larry and Carol Wright, that you are no longer
 
willing to sell your Leilani Estates property for the contract
 
price of $30,000.00." The letter further stated that Williams'
 
"refusal to sell the property for the original purchase price
 
constitutes a breach of the Agreement of Real Estate Sale dated
 
September 27, 2004." The letter threatened a lawsuit against
 
Williams and Thompson to, inter alia, enforce that agreement.
 
Thompson testified that, after the November meeting
 
with the Wrights and their attorney, he realized he had been
 
mistaken about an encroachment issue and the value of the
 
Property. After conferring with Williams, Thompson had contacted
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Wrights, and requested a purchase price of $125,000, which
 
they rejected. Thompson further testified that his mother became
 
concerned that she would be dragged into a lawsuit in Hawaii and
 
then conveyed the Property to him by way of a Quitclaim Deed
 
dated December 23, 2004, and recorded on January 12, 2005.
 
On January 20, 2005, the Wrights filed suit against
 
Williams and Thompson, seeking to enforce the agreement with
 
Williams or, alternatively, the 2/9/03 Agreement with Thompson. 
Thompson filed counterclaims for unpaid rent and possession.
 
It appears that, some time after the lawsuit was filed,
 
Thompson agreed to sell the Property to Richard Goodin (Goodin). 
The Property was conveyed by Thompson to Goodin via a Warranty
 
Deed dated November 4, 2005 and recorded on January 10, 2006. 
Goodin filed separate actions against the Wrights for ejection
 
and for intervention in the Wrights' action. The three cases
 
were consolidated in the Circuit Court.
 
Following a bench trial, the Circuit Court entered
 
Findings of Fact (FOFs) and Conclusions of Law (COLs) and the
 
above-referenced Judgment. In its FOFs and COLs, the Circuit
 
Court found, inter alia, that: (1) "As Williams did not deliver
 
an acceptance to [the Wrights'] offer to purchase the Property on
 
terms reflected in an Agreement of Real Estate Sale dated
 
September 27, 2004, these negotiations did not result in any
 
agreement as to the sale of the Property between Williams and
 
[the Wrights]"; and (2) Thompson breached the 2/9/03 Agreement
 
with the Wrights when he conveyed the Property to Goodin after he
 
acquired title to it. Thompson timely filed an appeal. No other
 
appeals were taken from the Circuit Court's Judgment.
 
On appeal, Thompson argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in finding that he breached the agreement with the Wrights and
 
challenges various of the Circuit Court's FOFs and COLs.
 
Specifically, Thompson argues that no breach occurred because: 
(1) a condition precedent to the contract -- that Thompson obtain
 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
title to the Property from his father's estate through the
 
probate process -- never occurred; (2) the Wrights discharged and
 
materially breached the contract by ceasing to pay rent; (3) the
 
parties mutually abandoned and rescinded the 2/9/03 by seeking to
 
negotiate the sale anew; and (4) the doctrine of impossibility
 
discharged Thompson's obligation when he was "divested" of
 
ownership in the property pursuant to a probate court order. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Thompson's contentions as follows:
 
"In this jurisdiction, a trial court's FOFs are subject 
to the clearly erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly 
erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the 
appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction 
that a mistake has been committed." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of 
Employees' Ret. Sys. of Haw., 106 Hawai 'i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 
353 (2005) (internal quotation marks, citations, and ellipses 
omitted). 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is freely
reviewable for its correctness. [The appellate] court
ordinarily reviews COLs under the right/wrong standard.
Thus, a COL that is supported by the trial court's FOFs and
that reflects an application of the correct rule of law will
not be overturned. However, a COL that presents mixed
questions of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly
erroneous standard because the court's conclusions are
 dependent upon the facts and circumstances of each
individual case.
 
Id. 
The Circuit Court's FOFs and the record in this case
 
strongly support Thompson's argument that the Wrights abandoned
 
the 2/9/03 Agreement.
 
"A contract is abandoned when one party acts in a 
manner inconsistent with the existence of the contract and the 
other party acquiesces." Kuroda v. Kuroda, 87 Hawai 'i 419, 427, 
958 P.2d 541, 549 (App. 1998). Abandonment need not be express. 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dring v. Dring, 87 Hawai 'i 369, 376, 956 P.2d 1301, 1308 (App. 
1998). A party's intent to abandon the contract may be inferred 
from the facts and circumstances. Id. Furthermore, as this 
court has recognized: 
Abandonment is evidenced as long as there is a voluntary
relinquishment of a right or of property with the intention
of not reclaiming it or reassuming its ownership or
enjoyment. Intent to abandon and an external act effecting
the intent must be shown. Abandonment need not be expressed;
it may be inferred from the conduct of the parties and the
attendant circumstances
. 
Anderson v. Oceanic Props., Inc.,
 3 Haw. App. 350, 358, 650 P.2d 
612, 618 (App. 1982). Abandonment results in a discharge of all 
obligations under the contract. Dring, 87 Hawai 'i at 376, 956 
P.2d at 1308. 
Although Thompson argued below that the Wrights
 
abandoned the 2/9/03 Agreement, the Circuit Court did not
 expressly consider abandonment in its FOFs and COLs.
 
"[T]he substitution of a new contract in place of the
 
original one may constitute an abandonment of the original
 
agreement." 77 A
M. JUR. 2D VENDOR AND PURCHASER ยง 447 (2010). Here,
 
the Wrights' pursuit of a new contract demonstrates their intent
 to abandon the original one. Mrs. Wright testified that after
 
she learned about the probate outcome, she and her husband viewed
 
the contract as no longer in force or effect.
3/ In accordance
 
with this understanding, the Wrights ceased making payments to
 Thompson and instead pursued a new contract with Williams. They
 
actively sought the new agreement and drafted it themselves. 
They agreed to less favorable terms -- a 20% increase in the
 
purchase price and a release of Williams' liability for an
 
encroachment issue. Finally, Mr. Wright testified that they were
 
prepared to finalize the transaction with Williams at their
 
3/
 At trial, the Wrights' counsel conceded that the Williams
agreement superseded the contract with Thompson.
 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attorney's office, and his wife brought $30,000 in cash to that
 
end. 
The Wrights' conduct and testimony clearly indicate
 
they voluntarily relinquished any rights they had to enforce the
 
contract with Thompson. The only evidence to the contrary, i.e.,
 
their continued occupation of the Property, is equally consistent
 
with their intent to abandon the agreement with Thompson and
 
pursue a new one with Williams. See, e.g., Oceanic Props., Inc.,
 
3 Haw. App. at 359, 650 P.2d at 619 (purchaser's failure to
 deposit additional moneys into escrow, failure to make further
 
payments, and failure to obtain financing "clearly evinced an
 
intent not to go through with any part of her bargain"). Here,
 
the Wrights discontinued payment to Thompson and actively sought
 
to enter a new agreement with Williams. Indeed, after Williams
 
allegedly backed out of the Agreement of Real Estate Sale dated
 
September 27, 2004, on their behalf, their attorney sent a demand
 
letter insisting on Williams' performance under that agreement. 
The evidence in the record clearly shows that Thompson likewise
 
abandoned the 2/9/03 Agreement or acquiesced in the abandonment
 
by the Wrights. In light of the substantial, uncontroverted
 
evidence in the record, we are left with a definite and firm
 
conviction, and therefore conclude, that the Circuit Court erred
 
in failing to find that the 2/9/03 Agreement was abandoned.
4/
   
For these reasons, we reverse that portion of the
 
Circuit Court's June 12, 2008 Judgment awarding damages against 
4/
 We need not reach Thompson's other arguments.
 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Thompson and to the Wrights, and affirm the Judgment in all other
 
respects.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 26, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Paul J. Sulla 
for JACK THOMPSON, Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellantand for FAY WILLIAMS,Defendant-Appellee and Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Larry D. Wright and
Carol D. WrightPro Se Plaintiffs/CounterclaimDefendants-Appellees 
Richard B. Goodin 
Pro Se Intervenor-Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellee 
8 