 
JOHN S. ATHENS, Claimant-Appellee, v.
INTERNATIONAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.,
Employer-Appellant, and FIRST INSURANCE
COMPANY OF HAWAII, LTD., Insurance Carrier-Appellee
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29495
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2006-086
(2-05-45770)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Employer-Appellant International Archaeological 
Research Institute (Employer) appeals from the Hawai' i Labor and 
Industrial Relations Appeals Board's (LIRAB) August 26, 2008 
"Decision And Order" (Decision And Order). 
Employer raises the following points of error:
 
(1) LIRAB erred in overruling Employer's objections to
 
Dr. Eron's PowerPoint presentation, and in denying Employer's
 related oral and written motions to strike;
 
(2) LIRAB clearly erred in entering Findings of Fact
 
(FOFs) 21 and 22, which state, in part:
 
21. Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the only
issue before the Board on this appeal is whether Claimant's
[idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia (ICL)] was a compensable
consequence or result of the January 5, 2005 work injury.
The Board finds that the issue of whether Claimant's ICL was
 aggravated by the compensable January 5, 2005 injuiry is not
subsumed in the issue of compensable consequence as
identified in the January 31, 2007 pre-trial order.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
22. Even if Claimant and Employer were allowed to
proceed on the alternative argument that Claimant's
cryptococcal meningitis aggravated his preexisting ICL, the
opinions of Dr. Berman and Dr. Eron established by
substantial evidence that Claimant's cryptococcal meningitis
did not aggravate an underlying ICL condition or disease.
 . . . .
 
3. LIRAB erred in concluding that Claimant's ICL was
 
neither a compensable consequence of the January 5, 2005
 
cryptococcal meningitis, nor was the ICL caused by the
 
cryptococcal meningitis; and
 
4. LIRAB erred in denying reconsideration of the
 
Decision and Order.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve
 
Employer's contentions as follows: 
(1) Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) ยง 12-47-41
 
(2007) provides that:
 
The [LIRAB] shall not be bound by statutory and common law
rules relating to the admission or rejection of evidence.
The [LIRAB] may exercise its own discretion in these
matters, limited only by considerations of relevancy,
materiality, and repetition, by the rules of privilege
recognized by law, and with a view to securing a just,
speedy, and inexpensive determination of the proceedings.
 
Thus, the LIRAB has "wide discretion in managing
 
evidence[,]" and the LIRAB's evidentiary rulings should be
 
upheld, absent a showing of an abuse of discretion. Sugano v.
 
Dept. of Atty. Gen., No. 29246, 2010 WL 231100, at *3 (Haw. App.
 Jan. 22, 2010). We cannot conclude that the LIRAB's
 
allowance of Dr. Eron's PowerPoint slides as a demonstrative aide
 was an abuse of discretion. Employer also argues that the slides
 
included an additional theory, not contained in Dr. Eron's
 
original reports, thus constituting an unfair and prejudicial
 
surprise. However, it appears that the subject portion of Dr.
 
Eron's presentation was based on information contained in
 
Claimant's medical and laboratory reports, that it was consistent
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with Dr. Eron's other testimony, and that the LIRAB did not
 
clearly exceed the bounds of reason or disregard rules or
 
principles of law or practice to Employer's substantial detriment
 
in allowing the presentation.
 
(2) Employer contends that the theory that the 
Claimant's ICL was aggravated by his infection should have been 
considered by the LIRAB under the issue of compensable 
consequence. It appears, however, that Claimant's claim was that 
the cryptococcal meningitis was the underlying cause of the ICL, 
not that it aggravated a pre-existing condition. In fact, 
Claimant specifically denied that he was claiming an aggravation 
of a pre-existing condition. In addition, the authority relied 
on by Employer, Diaz v. Oahu Sugar Co., 77 Hawai' i 152, 883 P.2d 
73 (1994), is inapposite. We cannot conclude that the LIRAB erred when it found that the issue of whether the Claimant's ICL 
was aggravated by the compensable injury was not subsumed in the 
issue of compensable consequence. 
(3) There was substantial evidence to support the 
LIRAB's conclusion that Claimant's ICL was not a compensable 
consequence of his compensable cryptococcal meningitis. The 
testimony of Dr Eron, Dr. Day, and Dr. Berman, inter alia, 
directly supported the conclusion that the ICL was not work-
related, pre-existed the cryptococcal meningitis infection, and 
was not caused by the cryptococcal meningitis infection. 
Although not presented in terms of absolute certitude, the 
testimony supporting the LIRAB's conclusion presents "a high 
quantum of evidence which, at the minimum, [is] relevant and 
credible evidence of a quality and quantity sufficient to justify 
a conclusion by a reasonable person that an injury or death is 
not work connected." Nakamura v. State, 98 Hawai' i 263, 267-68, 
47 P.3d 730, 734-35 (2002) (citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) The LIRAB did not abuse its discretion in denying
 
the Employer's September 25, 2008 motion for reconsideration,
 
based on new evidence not available at the time of the original
 
hearing. The Employer argues that after the date of the LIRAB
 
hearing, the Claimant's medication for the cryptococcal
 
meningitis was stopped, which resulted in an increase in his CD4
 
count from 149 on March 14, 2006 to 173 on May 16, 2008.1
 
Thereafter, however, his CD4 count again dropped to 151 on August
 29, 2008. Claimant's attending physician stated that it could not
 
be confirmed that the Claimant's treatment contributed to his
 
lymphocytopenia. Although the temporary increase in the
 
Claimant's CD4 count following the discontinuance of the
 
treatment could not have been presented at the LIRAB hearing, we
 
cannot conclude that the LIRAB abused its discretion by declining
 
to reconsider its prior decision based on a temporary increase in
 
Claimant's CD4 level to a level that was still well below the
 
normal range. The subsequent decrease, together with the lack of
 
testimony affirmatively supporting Employer's theory that this
 
new evidence was highly probative regarding a causal connection
 
between the cryptococcal meningitis, and/or the treatment of the 
cryptococcal meningitis, and Claimant's ICL, lead us to reject
 
Employer's argument that the LIRAB abused its discretion when it
 
denied the motion for reconsideration.
 
1
 A normal CD4 level appears to be approximately between 410 and
1560, depending on the assay. For the sake of comparison, testimony was
presented that a patient with AIDS would have a CD4 count of less than 200.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the LIRAB's August 26, 2008 Decision
 
and Order is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 30, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Scott G. Leong
Shawn L.M. Benton (Leong Kunihiro Lezy & Benton)for Employer-Appellant Presiding Judge 
John S. Athens 
Claimant-Appellee Pro Se Associate Judge 
Carlton W.T. Chun 
Leilani A. DeCourcy(Chun & DeCourcy, LLC)for Insurance Carrier-Appellee Associate Judge 
5
 