NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29005
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CHRISTIAN BRYAN FITZGERALD, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
NORINE ROSE FITZGERALD, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
HILO DIVISION
 
(FC-D NO. 05-1-0135)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Christian Bryan Fitzgerald
 
(Husband) appeals from the October 10, 2007 Findings of Fact and
 
Conclusions of Law; the February 4, 2008 Divorce Decree that
 
dissolved his marriage with Defendant-Appellee Norine Rose
 
Fitzgerald (Wife); and the February 4, 2008 Order denying
 
Husband's Motion to Reconsider, Alter, or Amend the Order all
 
entered by the Family Court of the Third Circuit, Hilo Division
 
(family court).1
 
Preliminarily, we note that Husband, who is an 
attorney, has filed an opening brief that is in wholesale 
nonconformity with appellate rules.2 The Hawai' i Supreme Court 
1
 The Honorable Ben H. Gaddis presided.
 
2
 More specifically, Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP)
Rule 28(b)(3) requires "[a] concise statement of the case, setting forth
. . . the facts material to consideration of the questions and pointspresented . . . . In presenting those material facts, all supporting andcontradictory evidence shall be presented in summary fashion . . . . There 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
has long held that an appeal may be dismissed for the appellant's 
failure to conform his or her opening brief to HRAP Rule 28. 
Hous. Fin. & Dev. Corp. v. Ferguson, 91 Hawai' i 81, 85, 979 P.2d 
1107, 1111 (1999); see also Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai'i 225, 228, 909 P.2d 553, 556 (1995) ("appellant's brief in 
almost no respect conforms to the requirements of [HRAP] Rule 28(b), which we have held is, alone, sufficient basis to affirm 
the judgment of the circuit court" (citation omitted)). 
With that noted, Hawai' i appellate courts have 
"consistently adhered to the policy of affording litigants the 
opportunity to have their cases heard on the merits, where 
possible[.]" Schefke v. Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd., 96 
Hawai'i 408, 420, 32 P.3d 52, 64 (2001) (internal quotation marks 
and citation omitted). Therefore, despite the procedural 
deficiencies in his opening brief, we will attempt to address 
Husband's appeal on the merits where possible. After a careful 
consideration of the issues raised by the parties in light of the 
record, applicable authority, and arguments presented, we resolve 
Husband's points on appeal as follows: 
In points of error numbered 4, 5, and 6, Husband
 
challenges the family court's calculation of Husband's net income
 
for child support purposes. Husband claims the family court
 
erred when it did not deduct alimony paid by him from his gross
 
income. However, Husband did not argue or raise this point at
 
trial; he merely alluded to this point in his Motion to
 
Reconsider, Alter, or Amend the Family Court's October 22, 2007
 
2(...continued)
shall be appended to the brief a copy of the judgment, decree, findings of
fact and conclusions of law, order, opinion or decision relevant to any point
on appeal, unless otherwise ordered by the court." 
HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(C)
requires that, "when the point involves a finding or conclusion of the court
. . . , either a quotation of the finding or conclusion urged as error or
reference to appended findings and conclusions" shall be included in each
point of error. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7), requires that the opening brief contain
"[t]he argument, containing the contentions of the appellant on the points
presented and the reasons therefor, with citations to the authorities,
statutes and parts of the record relied on." Finally, Husband's brief does
not contain a statement of related cases, in direct contradiction of HRAP
Rule 28(b)(11).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
order. Moreover, Husband's own calculations listed Wife's income
 
as zero and did not deduct his alimony payments to Wife from his
 
income.
 
In any event, any error by the family court was 
harmless because it did not alter Husband's child support 
obligations under the guidelines. See Instructions for the 2004 
Hawai'i Child Support Guidelines, reprinted in 1 Hawaii State Bar 
Association, 2005 Hawai' i Divorce Manual, ยง 4, Appx. 3 (7th ed. 
2005), available at http://www.state.hi.us/jud/Oahu/Family/ 2004csg/2004csg_instructions.pdf, at 3 (2004 Child Support 
Guidelines). Under the guidelines, $743--the federal poverty 
guidelines for minimum essential needs--would be deducted from 
Wife's gross income to obtain her Standard of Living Allowance 
income. Since Wife's only source of income was the alimony paid 
by Husband, her income would still be zero for child support 
calculation purposes. As Husband was the only spouse with 
positive income, Husband's support payable would remain $2,172, 
the same figure calculated by the family court. 
Points of error 5 and 6 regarding computation of his 
net income are without merit. He does not specifically argue why 
the $3,709 net income figure was incorrect, and his claim that 
the family court attributed income and imposed an obligation to 
work to his current partner, with whom he lives on O' ahu, is not 
supported by the record. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not 
argued may be deemed waived.") 
In points of error numbered 1, 2, 3, 9, and 10, 
Husband challenges the family court's computation of the child
 
support amount. Citing to Findings of Fact (Findings) 17 and 29,
 
he alleges in point of error number 1 that the family court erred
 
"in finding paternity yet declaring no legal obligation existed
 
to support a biological child[,]" not of the marriage, residing
 
in Texas ("FF"). The record reveals that the family court
 
considered FF and refused to recognize any support obligation
 
because no court orders establishing paternity, custody, or
 
support obligation for FF existed at the time. See 2004 Child
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Support Guidelines, at page 9 n.2 ("For the purposes of these
 
Child Support Guidelines, Obligor's "other children" are
 
Obligor's biological or adopted child(ren) living in the
 
Obligor's household and any child(ren) whom the Obligor is
 
legally obligated to support and is actually supporting."). 
Furthermore, Husband points to no evidence in the record
 
documenting support payments to FF. Because Husband presents no
 
authority nor does he establish facts, documented in the record,
 
supporting his contention that this ruling was erroneous, Husband
 
has failed to establish error.
 
In point of error number 2, Husband argues the family
 
court erred by failing to recognize that the April 2007
 
Stipulated Order Re: Custody, Visitation and Support Orders After
 
Voluntary Establishment of Paternity (First Circuit Support
 
Order) Husband filed with his current partner in a separate
 
action maintained in the First Circuit constituted a exceptional
 
circumstance. However, the record reveals that the family court
 
did reference the First Circuit Support Order in its Findings of
 
Fact and Conclusions of Law and considered Husband's request that
 
the court "deviate from the child support guidelines because his
 
obligations towards his other children constitute an exceptional
 
circumstance." In rejecting Husband's request, the family court
 
observed that the guidelines provide "that no deviation be
 
granted unless the total child support paid for the children of
 
the obligor exceeds his net income under the guidelines" and
 
noted that Husband's total child support obligation for the
 
children of Wife and his current partner did not exceed his net
 
income. Husband has therefore failed to show the family court
 
erred by not deviating from the 2004 Child Support Guidelines.
 
It appears that Husband's point of error number 3, is
 
cumulative of points 1 and 2 and therefore we also reject it.
 
In point of error number 9, Husband complains that the
 
award of alimony to Wife necessarily negatively affected his
 
ability to provide support payments to the children. As Husband
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
fails to provide a discernable argument supporting this point, we
 
decline to address it. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
 
In point of error number 10, Husband argues that the 
court abused its discretion in ordering spousal support to the 
detriment of child support, which impairs Husband's right to 
maintain a relationship with his children under the United States 
Constitution. Husband's constitutional claim was not raised at 
the trial level, either in his pre-judgment filings or his post-
judgment Motion to Reconsider, Alter, or Amend Order. Therefore, 
this claim is not properly before us. See Hill v. Inouye, 90 
Hawai'i 76, 82, 976 P.2d 390, 396 (1998) ("The general rule 
provides that '[i]ssues not properly raised on appeal will be 
deemed to be waived.'") (quoting Pele Defense Fund v. Paty, 73 
Haw. 578, 613, 837 P.2d 1247, 1268 (1992)). 
In point of error number 7, Husband contends that the
 
family court erred in finding that Husband did not provide health
 
insurance for his children with Wife. Wife claimed she could not
 
access the records to Husband's plan in order to arrange for
 
treatment. In the context of ruling on health insurance costs
 
for child support computation purposes, the family court found
 
that the parties had not established what those costs were. The
 
family court found that Wife was unable to use Husband's medical
 
plan and instead was using the State Medicaid program to obtain
 
medical benefits. The family court noted that it was
 
"imperative" that Husband rectify the situation and that when
 
Husband established he had done so, Husband could claim this cost
 
in computing child support. The family court did not err
 
regarding this issue.
 
In point of error number 8, Husband contends that the
 
family court erred in signing the uncontested divorce decree
 
submitted in March 2007 and then, upon receiving Husband's
 
subsequent Motion to Reconsider, Alter, or Amend, giving the
 
rejected divorce decree to only one party, Wife, and removing it
 
from the record. Husband's action in filing his Motion to
 
Reconsider, Alter, or Amend Order on March 29, 2007 rendered this
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
case, originally filed as an uncontested divorce action, into a
 
contested matter. As such, the family court ceased processing
 
the proposed uncontested divorce decree, proffered before
 
Husband's motion was filed, and returned it to its preparer,
 
Wife. Husband does not show how this action caused him prejudice
 
or otherwise changed the outcome of this case. We fail to see
 
error in the family court's action.
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Family Court of
 
the Third Circuit, Hilo Division's October 10, 2007 Findings of
 
Fact and Conclusions of Law; the February 4, 2008 Divorce Decree;
 
and the February 4, 2008 Order denying Husband's Motion to
 
Reconsider, Alter, or Amend the Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 23, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Christian Bryan Fitzgerald,
Plaintiff-Appellant, pro se.
 
Chief Judge
 
Norine Rose Fitzgerald,
Defendant-Appellee, pro se.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
6
 