NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29851
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
FRANCISCO ABADILLA, JR., Plaintiff-Appellant
v.
 
SANFORD IWATA; JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE ASSOCIATIONS 1-10; DOE JOINT VENTURERS 1-10;
DOE TRUSTS 1-10 and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
INCLUSIVE, Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-36)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Francisco Abadilla, Jr. (Abadilla)
 
was injured at work after a machine used to crush rocks
 
"exploded" and parts from the machine struck him in the stomach. 
Abadilla sued his co-employee Defendant-Appellee Sanford Iwata
 (Iwata), who was the president and general manager of the company
 that employed Abadilla, seeking compensatory and punitive
 damages. 
The Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court)1
 
granted summary judgment in favor of Iwata on all counts asserted
 against Iwata in Abadilla's First Amended Complaint.
 
Under Hawai' i's workers' compensation law, an employee 
is precluded from suing a co-employee for injuries caused by 
1/
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
negligence, but can sue a co-employee for injuries caused by
 
wilful and wanton misconduct. The principal issue in this appeal
 is whether there were genuine issues of material fact regarding
 whether Abadilla's injuries were caused by Iwata's wilful and
 wanton misconduct. As explained below, we conclude that the
 answer to this question is yes. We further conclude that there
 were genuine issues of material fact with respect to Iwata's
 punitive damages claim. Accordingly, we hold that the Circuit
 Court erred in its grant of summary judgment in favor of Iwata on
 Counts I, III, and V of the First Amended Complaint, which
 Abadilla challenges on appeal. We vacate the entry of judgment
 against Abadilla on Counts I, III, and V, and we remand the case
 for further proceedings.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
In reviewing a trial court's grant of summary judgment, 
"we must view all of the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion." Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai' i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 
697 (2005) (block quote format and citation omitted). We therefore present the evidence submitted in connection with Iwata's motions for summary judgment in the light most favorable to Abadilla. 
A.
 
Abadilla was employed by Sanford's Service Center, Inc.
 
(SSC) as an equipment operator. SSC operated a rock quarry on
 the Big Island and was in the business of supplying gravel,
 cinder, and soil. Iwata was the president and general manager of
 
SSC and a co-employee of Abadilla. Iwata's duties included
 
serving as a supervisor, mechanic, job estimator, laborer,
 trainer, safety compliance officer, equipment operator, and
 driver. Iwata was responsible for safety training and compliance
 and took care of "most of the maintenance and the field work."
 
As the operator of a rock quarry, SSC was governed by federal 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mine Safety Health Administration (MSHA) regulations, and Iwata
 
held a mining training certificate. 
As part of its business, SCC owned and used a
 
Cedarapids Horizontal Rotor Secondary Impactor (Impactor) to
 crush larger rocks into smaller rocks or aggregate. Abadilla was
 trained by Iwata regarding the maintenance of the Impactor. The
 Impactor crushed rocks as follows: Rocks were fed by a chute
 into the inner chamber of the Impactor, which contained a
 rotating impeller shaft to which metal bars were attached. The
 metal bars (also known as "blow bars") attached to the rotating
 impeller would hit the rocks against fixed breaker plates 
causing the rocks to fracture into smaller pieces. The metal
 bars were held in place with wedges or chocks designed to prevent
 them from coming out during operation. The chamber was lined
 with high-chrome tiles that were bolted down. While in
 operation, the cover to the chamber was kept closed by hydraulic
 cylinders and multiple locks.
 
B.
 
During a prior incident which occurred several months
 
before Abadilla sustained his injuries (hereinafter, the "prior
 malfunction incident"), the Impactor malfunctioned and
 "exploded," causing major damage to the Impactor. On that
 occasion, Abadilla was loading cinder onto a truck and another
 employee named Fernando was operating the Impactor. After the
 explosion, Abadilla observed that the cover to the Impactor had
 opened up, and that pieces of the bar assembly were "all over the
 place." Jack Lee (Lee), an employee of SSC, believed that the
 explosion occurred when one of the blow bars "got loose" in the
 Impactor. As a result of the malfunction/explosion, the impeller
 shaft, blow bars, and other parts of the machine were cracked or
 damaged and a metal piece attached to the impeller shaft had
 broken off. No one was injured in the incident. 
There is no indication that Iwata or SSC sought
 
assistance from the manufacturer of the Impactor, Cedarapids, or 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
others in determining the exact cause of the Impactor's
 
malfunction/explosion. The damage to the Impactor was repaired
 in-house by SCC with the assistance of an outside welder, Gilbert
 Padamada (Padamada). At Iwata's direction, Padamada welded a
 metal piece that had broken off back onto the impeller shaft and
 fixed other cracks in the machine. The welds were not tested by
 x-ray or any other means, and Iwata did not contact the
 manufacturer of the Impactor to ask about the proper means of
 fixing the damage. 
Abadilla and other employees were instructed to weld
 
worn locking wedges holding the metal bars in place, rather than
 replacing them with new locking wedges and bolts. Abadilla
 warned Iwata that this practice was unsafe. Delbert Cambra
 (Cambra), a foreman at the company that previously owned the
 Impactor who had been responsible for its care and maintenance,
 stated that he would not weld the wedges in place. Cambra
 explained that welding the wedges in place would limit their
 usefulness and that the parts being held would probably not "stay
 tight." 
C.
 
It took several months for the repairs to the Impactor
 
to be completed. The machine was running for about two to three
 weeks before the incident resulting in injuries to Abadilla
 occurred. After the Impactor was placed back into service, the
 Impactor was not running smoothly but would vibrate, and the
 bearings holding the impeller shaft would run hot. Iwata was
 aware of this situation. Iwata instructed Abadilla to grease the
 Impactor every thirty minutes while the machine was running to
 get a better coverage with the grease, and so that the greasing
 would not slow down the process of crushing rock. Iwata's
 instruction was contrary to MSHA regulations, which generally
 require that maintenance and repair on a machine only be
 performed after the power is off and the machine blocked against
 hazardous motion. 30 C.F.R. § 14105 (1999). It was also
 contrary to the operating manual for the Impactor, which provided
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that greasing be done every forty-eight hours and warned against
 
over-lubrication because "[t]oo much lubrication will cause
 abnormally high operating temperatures." Iwata was not aware of
 these provisions of the MSHA regulations and the operating
 manual.
 
On the day that Abadilla was injured, he was greasing
 
the Impactor while it was running in accordance with Iwata's
 instructions. While Abadilla was engaged in this activity, the
 Impactor again "exploded" and metal parts from within the
 Impactor flew outside the machine. Abadilla was hit in the
 stomach by metal parts or pieces that broke off and were expelled
 from the Impactor, allegedly causing severe bodily injuries. 
Lee, who was working with Abadilla at the time of the
 
accident, observed that the cover to the Impactor had been blown
 open during the explosion. Metal parts normally attached to the
 impeller shaft had broken off, and all kinds of metal pieces,
 including pieces of the blow bars as well as the wedges or
 chocks, were outside the machine on the ground. Lee concluded
 that a blow bar that came loose or cracked caused the Impactor to
 explode, because a metal piece that fell inside the Impactor
 would cause damage to the machine. 
Prior to the explosion that injured Abadilla, one or
 
two of the locks designed to hold the cover to the Impactor in
 place were missing or broken. According to Abadilla, the
 explosion which injured him occurred because the parts that had 
been welded after the prior malfunction incident came apart while
 the Impactor was running. Adadilla was able to identify areas in
 which parts had separated from the impeller shaft that
 corresponded to areas that had been repaired by welding after the
 previous malfunction/explosion. 
II.
 
Abadilla filed a First Amended Complaint against Iwata
 
and Doe Defendants, alleging five causes of action: (1) Iwata
 knew or should have known that the Impactor used by Abidilla on
 property under Iwata's ownership or control was mechanically
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unfit for use and unsafe (Count I); (2) Doe Defendants
 
negligently failed to implement adequate safety precautions and
 properly train employees with respect to heavy machinery and
 equipment (Count II); (3) Iwata was responsible for supervising
 Abadilla, inspecting, repairing, and maintaining the Impactor,
 and ensuring proper safety precautions were followed in
 repairing, maintaining, and operating the Impactor, and Iwata
 negligently failed to fulfil these responsibilities (Count III);
 (4) Iwata was strictly liable for Abadilla's injuries (Count IV);
 and (5) Iwata engaged in the conduct described in the previous
 counts recklessly, wantonly, in a manner that was grossly
 negligent, and with a conscious indifference to Abadilla's
 safety, thereby justifying the imposition of punitive damages
 (Count V). 
Iwata filed a series of motions for summary judgment 
which cumulatively sought summary judgment on all the counts alleged against him in the First Amended Complaint. Among other things, Iwata argued that Abadilla's negligence claims against Iwata were barred by Hawai' i's workers' compensation law. In 
opposing Iwata's motions for summary judgement, Abadilla argued that suits against a co-employee for wilful, wanton, and reckless misconduct were not barred by Hawai' i's workers' compensation 
law, and that there were genuine issues of material fact concerning whether his injuries were caused by Iwata's wilful, wanton, or reckless misconduct. 
The Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor of
 
Iwata on Counts I, III, IV, and V of the First Amended Complaint. 
On April 28, 2009, the Circuit Court entered Final Judgment in
 favor of Iwata and against Abadilla on all claims raised against
 Iwata in the First Amended Complaint. This appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
On appeal, Abadilla argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in granting summary judgment in favor of Iwata on Counts I, III,
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and V of the First Amended Complaint.2 We agree.
 
We review a trial court's grant or denial of summary 
judgment de novo, under the same standard applicable to the trial 
court. Querubin, 107 Hawai' i at 56, 109 P.3d at 697; Iddings v. 
Mee–Lee, 82 Hawai' i 1, 5, 919 P.2d 263, 267 (1996). 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
 fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Querubin, 107 Hawai' i at 56, 109 P.3d at 697 (brackets and 
citation omitted). "[A]ny doubt concerning the propriety of 
granting the motion should be resolved in favor of the non-moving party." GECC Fin. Corp. v. Jaffarian, 79 Hawai' i 516, 521, 904 
P.2d 530, 535 (App. 1995). 
II.
 
The key issue in this appeal is whether there were
 
genuine issues of material fact concerning whether Abadilla was
 injured as the result of Iwata's wilful and wanton misconduct. 
There is no dispute that Abadilla sustained a work-
related injury and that Iwata was Abadilla's co-employee. Generally, the benefits provided by Hawai' i's workers' 
compensation law, HRS Chapter 386, is an employee's exclusive remedy for work-related injuries. Iddings, 82 Hawai' i at 5, 919 
P.2d at 267. HRS § 386-5 (1993) provides, in relevant part, that "[t]he rights and remedies [granted under HRS Chapter 386] to an employee or the employee's dependents on account of a work injury suffered by the employee shall exclude all other liability of the employer to the employee[.]" 
2/
 Abadilla does not challenge the entry of judgment against him on
Count IV, and we therefore affirm the Final Judgment with respect to that
count. Count II was against Doe defendants and did not pertain to Iwata. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In Iddings, the Hawai' i Supreme Court construed HRS 
§ 386-8 (1993)3
 as extending the employer's immunity from suit to
an injured worker's co-employees. Iddings, 82 Hawai' i at 6, 919 
P.2d at 268. The supreme court, however, held that HRS 
§ 386-8 also contains an exception to this co-employee immunity for personal injuries caused by a co-employee's "wilful and wanton misconduct." Id. Pursuant to Iddings, HRS §§ 386-5 and 
386-8 bar an employee from suing a co-employee for a work-related injury and establishing liability on a theory of negligence, but does not bar suit and establishment of liability on a theory of wilful and wanton misconduct. 
The supreme court established the following test for
 
the "wilful and wanton misconduct" exception to co-employee
 immunity set forth in HRS § 386-8:
 
[T]he term "wilful and wanton misconduct," as used in HRS
§ 386-8, includes conduct that is either: (1) motivated by
an actual intent to cause injury; or (2) committed in
circumstances indicating that the injuring employee (a) has
knowledge of the peril to be apprehended, (b) has knowledge
that the injury is a probable, as opposed to a possible,
result of the danger, and (c) consciously fails to avoid the
peril.
 
Iddings, 82 Hawai' i at 12, 919 P.2d at 174. The court noted that 
the "wilful and wanton misconduct" exception includes suits based 
on reckless conduct. Id. It also held that under this 
exception, a claim based on wilful and wanton misconduct would 
3/
 HRS § 386-8 provides in pertinent part:
 
When a work injury for which compensation is payable under
this chapter has been sustained under circumstances creating in
some person other than the employer or another employee of the
employer acting in the course of his [or her] employment a legal
liability to pay damages on account thereof, the injured employee
or his [or her] dependents . . . may claim compensation under
this chapter and recover damages from such third person.
 
. . . .
 
Another employee of the same employer shall not be relieved
of his [or her] liability as a third party, if the personal injury
is caused by his [or her] wilful and wanton misconduct.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
have to be proven by clear and convincing evidence. Id. at 14,
 
919 P.2d at 276. 
In Iddings, the supreme court applied its test for the
 
"wilful and wanton misconduct" exception in reviewing the trial
 
court's grant of summary judgment in favor of the defendant, Dr.
 Mee-Lee. Iddings, a psychiatric nurse at Castle Medical Center
 (CMC), suffered injuries when she was shoved against furniture in
 the Intensive Care Module while subduing a violent patient. Id.
 
at 4, 919 P.2d at 266. Iddings sued Dr. Mee-Lee, a co-employee
 who was in charge of her unit. Iddings claimed that Dr. Mee-Lee
 had engaged in wilful and wanton misconduct by allowing "the
 Intensive Care Module to become overcrowded with patients and
 furniture, despite being aware of a risk of injury stemming from
 the alleged overcrowding." Id. 
In opposing Dr. Mee-Lee's motion for summary judgment,
 
Iddings submitted an affidavit which alleged that: (1) Dr. Mee-
Lee had been advised over a year prior to Iddings's being injured
 that Iddings's unit was unsafe due to overcrowding; (2) patients
 in the Intensive Care Module are frequently violent, and
 overcrowding increases the danger by raising the likelihood of
 violent responses among patients and requiring extra furniture to
 be brought into the unit; (3) prior to being injured, Iddings
 attended many meetings during which the staff told Dr. Mee-Lee
 that overcrowding in the unit "presented a dangerous condition to
 staff working in the unit"; (4) Iddings was aware of
 approximately ten individuals who were injured within the unit
 during the six month period before her accident, and she was sure
 that Dr. Mee-Lee was aware of these incidents because they were
 discussed at meetings where she and Dr. Mee-Lee were present; and
 (5) Dr. Mee-Lee exercised control over the number of patients in
 the unit when it suited his purposes, such as reducing the
 patient census during a hospital accreditation inspection. Id.
 
at 20, 919 P.2d at 282. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on the allegations made in Iddings's affidavit,
 
the supreme court concluded that:
 
there are genuine issues of material fact regarding whether
Dr. Mee-Lee engaged in "wilful and wanton misconduct,"
thereby excepting his conduct from the immunity accorded him
against suits by co-employees under HRS § 386-8.
Specifically, we believe that there are genuine issues of
material fact regarding whether Dr. Mee-Lee's alleged
failure to reduce the patient population, and, accordingly,
the furniture in the CMC's Intensive Care Module that
 allegedly caused Iddings's injuries, occurred in
circumstances indicating that Dr. Mee-Lee: (1) had knowledge
of the risk of injury to CMC staff stemming from the alleged
overcrowding; (2) had knowledge that injury was a probable,
as opposed to a possible, result of the danger; and (3)
consciously failed to avoid the peril. 
Id. at 21, 919 P.2d at 283. Accordingly, the supreme court held
 
that the trial court had erred in granting summary judgment in
 favor of Dr. Mee-Lee. Id.
 
III.
 
We conclude that when the evidence is viewed in the
 
light most favorable to Abadilla, there were genuine issues of
 material fact regarding whether Iwata engaged in wilful and
 wanton misconduct which caused Abadilla's injuries. Viewing the
 evidence and the inferences therefrom in this light, there was
 evidence that Iwata knew, several months before Abadilla
 sustained his injuries, that the Impactor had malfunctioned and
 exploded. Iwata was also aware that a malfunction in the
 Impactor could result in metal parts being expelled from the
 machine, because during the prior malfunction incident, the cover
 to the Impactor had been blown open. Despite the significant
 safety risks presented by another malfunction, Iwata did not
 consult with the manufacturer of the Impactor regarding the cause
 of the prior malfunction or the proper method of repairing the
 damage. Instead, Iwata apparently decided on his own to repair
 the machine by directing a welder to reattach a metal piece that
 had broken off of the impeller shaft and to close other cracks in
 the machine. He also instructed employees to weld worn locking
 wedges used to hold the metal bars in place, rather than 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
replacing them with new locking wedges and bolts, despite
 
Abadilla's informing him that this practice was unsafe. 
Iwata did not have the welds tested before placing the
 
Impactor back into service. He also did not fix one or two of
 the locks that were or broken or missing, which were among the
 multiple locks designed to keep the cover of the Impactor in
 place. Iwata was aware that after the repairs were made, the
 Impactor was not running smoothly, but was vibrating, and that
 the bearings were running hot. Contrary to MSHA regulations and
 the operating manual for the Impactor, Iwata instructed Abadilla
 to grease the Impactor every thirty minutes while the machine was
 running to avoid slowing down production. Iwata failed to
 familiarize himself with the pertinent MSHA regulations or
 provisions of the operating manual before giving these
 instructions. 
Abadilla was injured when the Impactor malfunctioned
 
and exploded and metal parts from the Impactor were expelled from
 the machine and struck him in the stomach. At the time of his
 injury, Abadilla was greasing the Impactor while it was running
 pursuant to Iwata's instructions. The prior malfunction incident
 was very similar to the incident which injured Abadilla. Both
 incidents apparently resulted from metal parts within the
 Impactor detaching from the machine while it was running, causing
 the machine to "explode" and the cover to the Impactor to be
 blown open. The damage to the Impactor was similar in both
 incidents. The same metal pieces that had come apart and had
 been welded back after the prior malfunction incident were found
 to have come apart in the incident that caused injuries to
 Abadilla. 
Based on this evidence, we conclude that there were
 
genuine issues of material fact regarding whether Iwata: (1) had
 knowledge of the risk of injury to Abadilla stemming from the
 alleged improper repair and maintenance of the Impactor and the
 alleged improper instruction to Abadilla to grease the machine
 while it was running; (2) had knowledge that injury was a
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
probable, as opposed to a possible, result of the danger; and (3) 
consciously failed to avoid the peril. See Iddings, 82 Hawai' i 
at 21, 919 P.2d at 283. Therefore, there were genuine issues of material fact regarding whether Iwata engaged in wilful and wanton misconduct. Based on the similarity between the prior malfunction incident and the incident which caused Abadilla's injuries, we further conclude that there were genuine issues of material fact concerning whether Iwata's wilful and wanton misconduct caused Abadilla's injuries. Because of the existence of these genuine issues of material fact, the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Iwata on Counts I and III.
 
IV.
 
In Iddings, the supreme court observed that while the
 
standards are not identical, "tortious conduct meriting the
 imposition of punitive damages and tortious conduct falling
 within the exception to co-employee immunity in HRS § 386-8 are
 measured by similar terms[.]" Id. at 9 n.6, 919 F.2d at 271 n.6. 
To recover punitive damages, 
[t]he plaintiff must prove by clear and convincing evidence
that the defendant has acted wantonly or oppressively or
with such malice as implies a spirit of mischief or criminal
indifference to civil obligations, or where there has been
some wilful misconduct or that entire want of care which
 would raise the presumption of a conscious indifference to
consequences.
 
Masaki v. General Motors Corp., 71 Haw. 1, 16-17, 780 P.2d 566,
 
575 (1989). 
Based on our analysis that there were genuine issues of
 
material fact regarding whether Iwata engaged in wilful and
 wanton misconduct which caused Abadilla's injuries, we conclude
 that there were also genuine issues of material fact regarding
 Abadilla's claim for punitive damages. Accordingly, we conclude
 that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment in
 favor of Iwata on Count V.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION
 
The co-employee immunity set forth in HRS § 386-8
 
protects Iwata from liability based on a theory of negligence,
 
but not from liability based on wilful or wanton misconduct. We
 vacate the Final Judgment with respect to the entry of judgment
 on Counts I, III, and V of the First Amended Complaint in favor
 of Iwata and against Abadilla, and we remand the case for further
 proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 31, 2013. 
Steven K. Hisaka
 
(Janice T. Futa,
Dwayne S. Lerma, and Jo Anne E. Goya, with him
on the briefs)
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Gregory K. Markham
(Keith K. Kato, with him on
the brief)
for Defendant-Appellee 
13
 