NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29545
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
THE ESTATE OF SAMUEL WAH KAM,
also known as YORK WAH KAM, Deceased
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(PROBATE NO. 05-1-0290)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginzoa, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant Mark Young (Young), pro se,
 
appeals from a December 3, 2008 First Circuit Probate Court
 
(Probate Court) Judgment On Order Granting Petition For Approval
 
of Final Accounts and Distribution and Complete Settlement of
 
Estate (Judgment) of Petitioner-Appellee The Estate of Samuel Wah
 
Kam, also known as York Wah Kam (Estate).1 On appeal, Young
 
maintains that the Probate Court erred by finding that the
 Estate's counsel's (Counsel) fees and costs were reasonable and
 
ordering payment of the requested amounts.
 
After careful review of the issues raised, the parties'
 
arguments, record on appeal, and legal authorities, we resolve
 
Young's appeal as follows and affirm.
 
1
 The Honorable Colleen K. Hirai presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Young states that "the only issue being appealed is the
 
reasonableness of the attorney fees."2 Young argues, among other
 
things, that Counsel double-charged, her fees were excessive and
 
violated the Hawaii Rules of Professional Conduct (HRPC), Counsel
 
had the burden of proving that the hours charged were necessary,
 
and the sale of the house was hampered by allowing the decedent's
 
friend and his family to stay at the house rent-free. We
 
disagree.
 
Hawaifi Probate Rules (HPR) Rule 40 is applicable here3 
2 Initially, we note that Young's Opening Brief fails to comply with
Hawaifi Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b). Young's failure to
comply with HRAP Rule 28(b) in his Opening Brief hampers our review of this 
case. Young's non-compliance includes: (1) failure to provide a subjectindex, in violation of Rule 28(b)(1)(2) failure to set forth the course anddisposition of proceedings in the Probate Court, failure to provide recordreferences for fourteen of the nineteen statements under his "Statement of Case," and failure to append to his brief a copy of the judgment or any otherrelevant court orders, in violation of Rule 28(b)(3); (3) failure to include astatement of the points of error, in violation of HRAP Rule 28(b)(4); (4)failure to include a standard of review section, in violation of Rule28(b)(5); (5) failure to discuss the specific findings and conclusions beingchallenged and failure to cite to the specific court orders at issue in theargument section, in violation of Rule 28(b)(7); and (6) failure to include astatement of related cases, in violation of Rule 28(b)(11). 
While HRAP Rule 30 provides: "When the brief of an appellant is
otherwise not in conformity with these rules, the appeal may be dismissed orthe brief stricken and monetary or other sanctions may be levied by theappellate court." "Nonetheless, inasmuch as this court has consistentlyadhered to the policy of affording litigants the opportunity to have theircases heard on the merits, where possible, we address the issues [raised] onthe merits." Hous. Fin. & Dev. Corp. v. Ferguson, 91 Hawaif i 81, 85-86, 979
P.2d 1107, 1111-12 (1999) (internal citations and quotation marks omitted). 
Although Young has filed his Opening Brief as a pro se litigant,
we note that he has represented in this case that he is a licensed attorney in
Pennsylvania.
 
3
 HPR Rule 40, entitled "Non-Statutory and Extraordinary Fees[,]"
provides:
 
(a) Amount. A fiduciary may pay fees for services of
a fiduciary, attorney, or other professional that are not
set by statute or court rule as long as the fees are just
and reasonable in amount for the scope of services rendered.
The reasonableness of the fees allowed shall be determined
 by all the facts and circumstances of the work performed
including the complexity or ease of the matter, the
experience, expertise, and uniqueness of services rendered,
the amount of time spent on the matter, and the amount
charged by others in similar situations.
 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and sets the standard for attorneys' fees as reasonableness under
 
all the circumstances. HPR Rule 41, entitled "Evidence and
 
4
Notice[,]"  sets forth the procedure by which an interested
person may object to an attorney's requested fees and costs and
 
requires that the objection be made before the hearing on the fee
 
request.
 
Young fails to indicate how the Probate Court abused
 
its discretion in its finding that Counsel's fees and costs were
 
reasonable under the standard set out in HPR Rule 40. 
Furthermore, the record indicates that Young failed to timely
 
object under HPR Rule 41 to Counsel's affidavits for fees and
 
costs, except for the affidavit filed on March 7, 2007.
 
In her March 7, 2007 affidavit for fees and costs
 
covering the period from March 11, 2006 through February 24,
 
2007, Counsel requested $14,863.11.5 In his March 14, 2007
 
position statement, Young argued that Counsel's request for
 attorneys' fees and costs for this period was excessive and that
 
3(...continued)
(b) Timing of Payment. A fiduciary may pay
non-statutory and extraordinary fees as they are earned,
subject to repayment if any interested person objects and if
the court finds them excessive.
 
4 HPR Rule 41 provides:
 
Whenever there is an objection to the fees of a
fiduciary or attorney, or court approval of such fees is
sought for any reason, the fiduciary or attorney whose fees
are at issue shall file an affidavit, setting forth the
amount and basis of calculation of the fees sought and any
costs advanced which are to be reimbursed, at the same time
as any petition seeking approval of such fees or any
response to a petition objecting to such fees. The
 affidavit should specifically detail the charges for the
services and costs rendered to the date of the affidavit and
 the anticipated charges and costs to complete the matter
through preparation, processing, and service of the order.
Any interested person may file with the court and serve on
 
the petitioner or its counsel an objection to the fees and
 costs requested no later than 24 hours prior to the hearing.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
5
 On March 29, 2007, Counsel filed a First Amended Affidavit,
modifying the period of work completed from March 16, 2006 through
February 24, 2007, and served it on all the heirs. The total requested amount
slightly decreased from $14,863.11 to $14,130.13.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Counsel's "role was limited and thus, the necessity for these fee
 
amounts is not demonstrated on this record." Young did not raise
 
additional arguments, including the double-charging objections to
 
costs that he now makes on appeal, in this position statement.
 
In the Probate Court's March 30, 2007 order, it found
 
Counsel's request for fees and costs in the First Amended
 
Affidavit to be reasonable.
 
Young argues that the Probate Court improperly allowed
 
Counsel "to double charge for selling a house, where [Counsel]
 
charged $14,863.11 to sell the house in addition to an hourly
 
rate to 'protect' the estate[.]". Young's argument is not
 
supported by the record. Counsel's First Amended Affidavit
 
itemizes all of her work performed from the period of March 16,
 
2006 through February 24, 2007, and it details her services
 
rendered that go beyond just "selling a house." Similar to
 
Counsel's January 26, 2006 and March 15, 2006 affidavits, her
 
First Amended Affidavit includes descriptions of services
 
rendered, the dates they were performed, and the amount of time
 
spent on each service. We do not find, nor does Young identify,
 
any evidence of double-charging on Counsel's itemized list of
 
services performed.
 
Because we find no evidence in the record indicating an
 
abuse of discretion by the Probate Court in approving Counsel's
 
fees and costs for work performed from March 16, 2006 through
 
February 24, 2007, we reject Young's arguments challenging the
 
reasonableness of these fees and costs.
 
Young's reference to the HRPC is inapposite because the
 
HRPC does not establish any legal basis for Young's contention
 
that the Probate Court's award of attorney's fees and costs was
 
improper. The scope of the HRPC provides, in relevant part,
 
"[v]iolation of a rule should not give rise to a cause of action
 
nor should it create any presumption that a legal duty has been
 
breached. . . . [The rules] are not designed to be a basis for
 
civil liability." HRPC Scope ¶[6].
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Young's argument that the delay in the sale of the
 
house caused the sale to miss the real estate boom, resulting in
 
a lower sales price, also must fail. Young offers no evidence in
 
the record in support of his argument that the occupancy of the
 
Estates' property by decedent's friend and his family hurt the
 
Estate, and we find none.
 
In sum, we cannot conclude that the Probate Court
 
abused its discretion by ordering payment of Counsel's requested
 
fees and costs, totaling $51,953.38, in light of the facts and
 
evidence in the record.
 
Therefore the First Circuit Probate Court's December 3,
 
2008 Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, October 29, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Mark W.S. Young,
Respondent-Appellant, pro se.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Joyce K. Matsumori-Hoshijo,
for Petitioner-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
5
 