NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29118
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CASTLE FAMILY LLC, a Hawaii Limited Liability Company,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
THE KAILUAN INC., a Hawaii Corporation,
Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-20, JANE DOES 1-20, and DOE ENTITIES 1-20,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0012)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant The Kailuan, Inc. (TKI) appeals 
from the "Rule 54(b), Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure, Final 
Judgment" filed on April 1, 2008 in the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit1
 (circuit court). 
On appeal, TKI contends
 
(1) the circuit court improperly granted the request
 
for preliminary injunction filed by Plaintiff-Appellee Castle
 Family, LLC (Castle);
 
(2) Conclusions of Law (COLs) 58 and 66 through 68 of
 
the circuit court's February 11, 2008 "Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting in Part and Denying in
 
Part Plaintiff's Motion for Temporary Restraining Order,
 
Preliminary Injunction, and Writ of Ejectment Filed on 1/7/08"
 
(FOFs/COLs/Order) are wrong;
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) COLS 62 and 63 of the FOFs/COLs/Order are wrong;
 
and
 
(4) the circuit court erred in granting Castle's
 
January 31, 2008 Motion for Summary Judgment.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 
TKI's appeal is without merit.
 
This appeal turns on TKI's argument that the circuit
 
court improperly read HRS § 514C-2 (2006 Repl.) to require an
 
"agreement" between the seller and buyer to trigger the right of
 
first refusal. TKI contends that because Castle at one point in
 
time had, and may still have, an intent to sell the fee interest
 
under The Kailuan, TKI's right of first refusal is triggered
 
under § 514C-2.
 
HRS § 514C-2 provides:
 
§514C-2 Right of first refusal.  When the leased fee
 
interest in land under a condominium project or cooperative
project or any part thereof is to be sold to any party other
than the association of owners or the cooperative housing
corporation, the seller shall first provide the board of
directors of the association of owners or the cooperative
housing corporation with written notice delivered or mailed
by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested,
postage prepaid, to any two of the president, vice-
president, or managing agent (if any), of its intent to sell
that interest, together with a complete and correct copy of
the purchaser's written offer, which offer shall contain the
full and complete terms thereof. The association of
 apartment owners or cooperative housing corporation shall
have a right of first refusal to purchase that leased fee
interest for the same price as is contained in the written
purchase offer.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
We review the circuit court's interpretation of HRS 
§ 514C-2 de novo. Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. of State of 
Hawaii, 120 Hawai 'i 181, 197, 202 P.3d 1226, 1242, 
reconsideration denied, 2009 WL 1567327 (2009). As a principle 
of statutory interpretation, where statutory language is plain 
and unambiguous, we give effect to this plain meaning of the 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
statute. Id. Our foremost obligation is to recognize and give 
effect to the legislature's intent. Bhakta v. County of Maui, 
109 Hawai 'i 198, 208, 124 P.3d 943, 953 (2005). We also must 
read statutory language in the context of the entire statute and 
construe it consistently with the statute's purpose. Hawaii Home 
Infusion Assocs. v. Befitel, 114 Hawai 'i 87, 91, 157 P.3d 526, 
530 (2007). 
Applying these principles, we read HRS § 514C-2 to
 
require more than a subjective intent by the seller to sell at
 
some point in time. Rather, an ongoing intent by the seller to
 
sell under terms set forth in a complete written offer from a
 
purchaser are necessary to trigger the right of first refusal.2
 
We note that the plain language of the statute expressly requires
 the seller to give written notice of intent to sell when "the
 
leased fee interest in land under a condominium project or
 
cooperative project or any part thereof is to be sold." 
(Emphasis added.) Read in isolation, this language could suggest
 
that the seller's intention to sell alone obligates the seller to
 
give notice pursuant to the right of first refusal. However, the
 
seller also must provide "a complete and correct copy of the
 
purchaser's written offer, which offer shall contain the full and
 
complete terms thereof." (Emphasis added.) Read together, these
 
parts indicate that the right of first refusal hinges on both the
 
seller's ongoing intent to sell coupled with a satisfactory offer
 
from the buyer. Only the buyer's offer, not the seller's intent,
 
can contain the "full and complete terms thereof." We therefore
 
conclude that a right of first refusal under HRS § 514C-2
 
requires (a) the seller's ongoing intent to sell under (b) terms
 
satisfactory to the seller set forth in a written offer from the
 
buyer. 
2
 While the trial court referred to this situation as an "agreement,"
it is technically not yet a binding agreement. Rather, it is more precisely a
situation where the seller wishes to sell on satisfactory terms presented by a
purchaser, subject to the statutory right of first refusal.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This reading of HRS § 514C-2 is consistent with the
 
circuit court's COL 62, which provides, in part:
 
The plain language of HRS § 514C-2 requires as a
prerequisite, an agreement to sell and to buy between the
owner of the property and the third-party purchaser before
the cooperative housing corporation's right of first refusal
is triggered. The plain language of the statute requires a
specific written offer to buy the property from the
purchaser which must contain the full and complete terms of
the offer to purchase. 
Other jurisdictions similarly hold. See Hartzheim v.
 
Valley Land & Cattle Co., 153 Cal. App. 4th 383, 389 (Cal. Ct.
 
App. 2007) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted;
 
emphasis added) ("The right [of first refusal] does not become an
 
option to purchase until the owner of the property voluntarily
 
decides to sell the property and receives a bona fide offer to
 
purchase it from a third party."); Jeremy's Ale House Also, Inc.
 
v. Joselyn Luchnick Irrevocable Trust, 22 A.D.3d 6, 9-10 (N.Y.
 
App. Div. 2005) (emphasis added) ("The right of first refusal 
. . . requires the owner, when and if he decides to sell, to
 
offer the property first to the [holder] so that he may meet a
 
third-party offer or buy the property at some other price set by
 
a previously stipulated method."); Stephens v. Trust for Public
 
Land, 479 F. Supp. 2d 1341, 1349 (D.C.N.D. Ga. 2007) (The right
 
of first refusal in an underlying contract did not require seller
 
to give notice upon forming the subjective desire to sell the
 
property.). 
Here, it is uncontested that Castle at one point
 
included The Kailuan among a group of apartment buildings for
 
which a request for proposals was conducted to find potential
 
buyers for the properties. Irrespective of what proposals may
 
have been obtained, it is also uncontested that Castle later
 
removed The Kailuan from the properties to be sold. Under these
 
circumstances, the right of first refusal was not triggered.
 
Therefore,
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The "Rule 54(b), Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure, 
Final Judgment" filed on April 1, 2008 in the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 25, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Gerard A. Jervis
 
Joseph A. Gomes
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
Rosemary T. Fazio
Francis P. Hogan
Connie C. Chow
 (Ashford & Wriston)
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
5
 