NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29918
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ROBERT M. OYADOMARI, JR., Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR OF THE COURTS, STATE OF HAWAI 'I,
Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT,
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DAA-09-0005)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Robert M. Oyadomari, Jr.
 
(Oyadomari) appeals from the Decision and Order Affirming
 
Administrative Revocation filed on May 11, 2009 in the District
 
Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (district court).1
 
On appeal, Oyadomari contends the district court erred
 
in concluding that (1) the denial of the subpoena duces tecum
 
(SDT) by the Administrative Driver's License Revocation Office
 
(ADLRO) was harmless error and (2) there was substantial evidence
 
to support the determination of the ADLRO Hearing Officer
 
(Hearing Officer) that there was reasonable suspicion of a
 
traffic violation to warrant the police officer's stop of
 
Oyadomari.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Oyadomari was arrested on November 26, 2008 by Officer
 
Moszkowicz. The administrative hearing was originally scheduled
 
1
 The Honorable William A. Cardwell presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for December 19, 2008. On either December 18 or 19, 2008,
 
Oyadomari requested a continuance to allow counsel to investigate
 
and "to determine proper subpoena request." ADLRO granted the
 
continuance. On December 23, 2008, Oyadomari submitted to ADLRO
 
a "Request for Subpoenas To Be Issued," requesting that subpoenas
 
be issued to Officers Kau and Moszkowicz, and an SDT for "[a]ny
 
and all audio and video recording of the stop and/or arrest of
 
Oyadomari." On December 26, 2008, ADLRO granted the issuance of
 
subpoenas to the officers, but denied the issuance of the SDT.
 
At the ADLRO hearing, Officer Moszkowicz testified that
 
on November 26, 2008 at approximately 9:30 p.m., he was on North
 
King Street between Winant Street and Haka Drive setting up
 
flares for a roadblock. At that location, there are three
 
westbound lanes on North King Street. He first saw Oyadomari
 
when Oyadomari was on King Street at the intersection where
 
Houghtailing becomes Waiakamilo (Waiakamilo intersection). His
 
attention was drawn to Oyadomari because Oyadomari's vehicle was
 
the first one to approach as Officer Moszkowicz was setting out
 
the flares. Officer Moszkowicz observed Oyadomari make a U-turn
 
just past the intersection of North King Street and Winant
 
Street. Oyadomari was unable to complete the U-turn and had to
 
stop, reverse, and then proceed forward. Oyadomari came to a
 
stop at the stop light at the Waiakamilo intersection.
 
Officer Moszkowicz radioed Officer Kau and said that he
 
had observed Oyadomari execute a U-turn. Officer Kau
 
acknowledged that he had also seen the U-turn. Officer Kau
 
effected the stop of Oyadomari. Officer Moszkowicz testified
 
that he believed the U-turn executed by Oyadomari violated an
 
ordinance prohibiting U-turns on highways that have three or more
 
lanes unless expressly permitted by a sign.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Oyadomari failed the Standardized Field Sobriety Test. 
Officer Kau told Officer Moszkowicz that Oyadomari also failed
 
the Preliminary Alcohol Screening Test. Oyadomari refused to
 
take a breath or blood test.
 
Officer Kau testified that he presently has, and did
 
have at the time of the stop, a camera in his car that would have
 
recorded a video of his conversation with Oyadomari (the
 
Recording). However, he does not keep a video if there are no
 
complaints and he records over it. He testified that "three
 
weeks is pretty much the maximum that it will hold."
 
Oyadomari asked to subpoena the Recording and for a
 
continuance to allow him an opportunity to view the Recording. 
Officer Kau testified that the camera is his personal camera and
 
the Recording of the Oyadomari incident had already been lost. 
The hearing was stopped to allow Officer Kau to go out to his car
 
and check the camera. Officer Kau reported that the incident was
 
not on the camera.
 
Oyadomari testified that he did not make a U-turn, but
 
turned left into a parking lot to avoid the roadblock.
 
In the February 23, 2009 Findings of Fact, Conclusions
 
of Law and Decision, the Hearing Officer found that after the
 
arrest of Oyadomari, Oyadomari refused to submit to a breath or
 
blood test. The Hearing Officer concluded that Oyadomari had had
 
three alcohol enforcement contacts within the prior five years
 
and revoked his driver's license for life.
 
The Hearing Officer also found that ADLRO had properly
 
denied the pre-hearing request for an SDT for any and all
 
Recordings of the stop and/or arrest of Oyadomari because (1)
 
there was no evidence at that stage of the proceedings of the
 
existence of any recordings and therefore the request was based
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
upon mere speculation; (2) the Recording was only of Officer
 
Kau's initial contact with Oyadomari and did not include the
 
alleged traffic violation, stop, or arrest and therefore was not
 
relevant; and (3) the Recording had been erased by the time the
 
request was made.
 
On appeal to the district court, the court affirmed the
 
administrative revocation. In its May 11, 2009 Decision and
 
Order Affirming Administrative Revocation (D&O), the district
 
court held that "ADLRO abused it [sic] discretion in denying the
 
request for [an SDT] directed only to officers who submitted
 
sworn statements. The Hearing Officer erred in ruling that the
 
denial was proper." However, the district court also found that
 
the police officer testified and the Hearing Officer found that
 
the Recording no longer existed after a maximum of three weeks. 
The district court found that the Recording had been erased by
 
the time Oyadomari submitted the request for an SDT and therefore
 
the error in denying the request for the SDT was harmless. The
 
district court also determined that there was sufficient evidence
 
to support the Hearing Officer's determination of reasonable
 
suspicion to justify the stop of Oyadomari based upon an observed
 
traffic violation.
 
Oyadomari timely appealed.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
This is a secondary appeal from the district court's 
review of the administrative revocation of a driver's license. We review the district court's decision under the right/wrong 
standard. Brune v. Administrative Director of Courts, State of 
Hawai
'i, 110 Hawai 'i 172, 176-177, 130 P.3d 1037, 1041-42 (2006). 
The district court's review of the administrative director's 
decision is limited to whether the director: 
(1) Exceeded constitutional or statutory authority;
 
(2) Erroneously interpreted the law;
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(3) Acted in an arbitrary or capricious manner; 
(4) Committed an abuse of discretion; or 
(5) Made a determination that was unsupported by the
evidence in the record. 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-40(c) (2007 Repl.).
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. ADLRO'S DENIAL OF THE SDT WAS HARMLESS ERROR.
 
The Hearing Officer determined that ADLRO had not erred
 
by not issuing an SDT for the Recording because, inter alia, the
 
Recording did not exist at the time of the initial request for
 
it. The district court found that although ADLRO should have
 
approved the December 23, 2008 request for the SDT, the non­
existence of the Recording at the time of the request made the
 
error harmless.
 
The "Request for Subpoenas To Be Issued" sought an SDT 
for "[a]ny and all audio and video recording of the stop and 
arrest of Oyadomari." In Biscoe v. Tanaka, 76 Hawai 'i 380, 878 
P.2d 719 (1994), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court affirmed the denial of 
a request for an SDT where "[t]he request merely named the 
Custodian of Records and provided an address." Id. at 385, 878 
P.2d at 724. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court held: 
In order to ensure that an arrestee's rights are adequately
protected, the director should issue all requested subpoenas
unless the witness does not possess any relevant evidence or
the subpoena request is otherwise deficient. If a proper
request is made for a subpoena for a relevant witness, the
refusal to issue the subpoena would constitute an abuse of
discretion.
 
Id. By stating the subject matter of the recordings sought and
 
the relevancy to the purpose of the hearing being apparent,
 
Oyadomari's request appears to have been explicit as to its
 
object and not otherwise deficient so that the request should
 
have been granted.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
However, even if the request had been granted, the
 
evidence supported the Hearing Officer's determination that at
 
the time the SDT was requested, Officer Kau no longer possessed a
 
relevant Recording. Officer Kau testified that he retained video
 
recordings no more than three weeks (21 days) after the event. 
The incident took place on November 26, 2008. The request for
 
the SDT was made on December 23, 2008. The period of time that
 
had elapsed between the date of the incident and the request for
 
the SDT was 27 days or 6 days longer than the maximum period that
 
Officer Kau retained his video recordings. There was substantial
 
evidence that no Recording existed at the time the request was
 
made, and, therefore, the issuance of the SDT would have been
 
futile and the error in denying the SDT, harmless. The district
 
court was therefore right in not reversing the determination of
 
the Hearing Officer based upon the harmless error.
 
B.	 THERE WAS SUBSTANTIAL EVIDENCE TO SUPPORT THE
 
HEARING OFFICER'S DETERMINATION THAT THERE WAS
 REASONABLE SUSPICION OF A TRAFFIC VIOLATION TO
 WARRANT THE POLICE OFFICER'S STOP OF OYADOMARI.
 
The district court was correct in concluding there was
 
reasonable suspicion of a traffic violation to justify a traffic
 
stop of Oyadomari. Officer Kau had reasonable suspicion of a
 
traffic violation to justify a stop of Oyadomari based upon
 
Officer Kau's observation of Oyadomari executing a U-turn on a 
highway with three or more lanes.
 
Officer Moszkowicz testified that he observed Oyadomari
 
execute a U-turn and he radioed Officer Kau to inform him of his
 
observations. Officer Kau acknowledged that he also saw
 
Oyadomari execute the U-turn. Officer Moszkowicz testified that
 
Oyadomari was on a three-lane highway.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH) § 15-8.4 provides:
 
Sec. 15-8.4 Limitations on U-turns.
 The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so
as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a
business district, upon any highway[2] with three or more
 
lanes, or at any intersection where traffic is controlled by
traffic signal lights, except as otherwise permitted by
official signs and markings. 
(Footnote not in original.)
 
Based on ROH § 15-8.4, it was reasonable for Officers
 
Moszkowicz and Kau to believe that Oyadomari had committed a
 
traffic violation. 
Oyadomari argues that the U-turn was not illegal
 
because HRS § 291C-82(c) (2007 Repl.) requires the posting of a
 
sign stating that U-turns are prohibited and there was no
 
evidence of such a sign. HRS § 291C-82 provides:
 
§291C-82 Turning so as to proceed in the opposite
direction.  (a) No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the
approach to or near the crest of a grade, where such vehicle
cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from either direction within five hundred feet.
 
(b) In addition to the prohibition in subsection (a),
the director of transportation is authorized to and the
counties may by ordinance with respect to highways under
their respective jurisdictions prohibit the turning of any
vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction on the
highway at any location where such turning would be
dangerous to those using the highway or would unduly
interfere with the free movement of traffic.
 
(c) The director of transportation and the counties
by ordinance with respect to the highways under their
respective jurisdictions shall place signs which are clearly
visible to an ordinarily observant person prohibiting the
turning of a vehicle to proceed in the opposite direction. 
2
 ROH Sec. 15-2.23 defines "highway":
 
Sec. 15-2.23 Streets and related terms.
 
. . . . 
"Street or highway" means the entire width between the
property lines of every way publicly owned and maintained when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel . . . .
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The signs shall be official signs and no person shall turn
any vehicle in violation of the restrictions stated on such
signs.
 
Reasonable suspicion does not require definitive proof 
or even probable cause to believe that a violation has occurred. 
Because the mere possibility that Oyadomari might not have been 
guilty based upon HRS § 291C-82(c) would not divest the police 
officers of a reasonable suspicion of a traffic violation, we 
express no opinion on Oyadomari's interpretation of HRS § 291C­
82(c). "[R]easonable suspicion could still warrant effecting a 
traffic stop of the driver, despite the possibility of innocence 
. . . ." State v. Spillner, 116 Hawai 'i 351, 361, 173 P.3d 498, 
508 (2007) (emphasis in original). Officers Moszkowicz and Kau 
had sufficient information to support a reasonable suspicion of a 
violation of the plain language of ROH § 15-8.4, and therefore 
the traffic stop of Oyadomari was proper. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The Decision and Order Affirming Administrative
 
Revocation filed on May 11, 2009 in the District Court of the
 
First Circuit, Honolulu Division, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, July 26, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Kenneth J. Shimozono 
(Takemoto & Shimozono)for Petitioner-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Dorothy Sellers,Solicitor General,Rebecca A. Copeland,Deputy Solicitor General,for Respondent-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
8
 