 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29390
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
LESS ALLEN SCHNABEL, JR., Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0863)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION

 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth, Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Less Allen Schnabel, Jr. (Schnabel)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered on
 
September 10, 2008 by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(Circuit Court).1 After a jury trial, Schnabel was convicted of
 
Manslaughter under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-702 (2009
 Supp.). The case arises from an incident on April 22, 2007 at
 
Zablan Beach Park where Schnabel punched Christopher Reuther
 
(Reuther) and Reuther subsequently died.
 
Schnabel raises the following points of error on
 
appeal: (1) the Circuit Court erred in ruling that evidence in a
 
juvenile proceeding involving Schnabel would be admissible to
 
impeach Schnabel if he testified that he did not know that one
 
punch could cause death; (2) he had ineffective assistance of
 
1
 The Honorable Michael A. Town presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel because his trial counsel failed to subpoena the
 
physician who attended Reuther prior to his death and who signed
 
the death certificate; (3) the deputy prosecuting attorney
 
engaged in misconduct during closing argument; (4) there was
 
insufficient evidence to support Schnabel's conviction because
 
his use of force was in self-defense; and (5) there was
 
insufficient evidence that he recklessly caused Reuther's death.
 
Based on our careful review of the record and the
 
briefs submitted by the parties, and having given due
 
consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we
 
affirm the judgment of conviction.
 
I.	 Use of Evidence From Juvenile Proceedings for Impeachment
Purposes
 
During proceedings below, the State of Hawai 'i (State) 
notified the defense that it intended to utilize evidence from a 
Family Court juvenile proceeding involving Schnabel and the 
adjudication in the juvenile case. The State indicated it 
intended to show, pursuant to Rule 404(b) of the Hawaii Rules of 
Evidence (HRE), that Schnabel was present at the juvenile 
proceedings during the testimony of Dr. Jorge Camara, and 
therefore had knowledge of Dr. Camara's testimony that, the 
injuries to the victim in that case created a "substantial risk 
of death." According to Dr. Camara's testimony in the juvenile 
proceeding, the incident there had involved punches and kicks to 
the victim resulting in a fracture of one of the victim's eye 
sockets, and the severity of the injury created a substantial 
risk of death because it could have led to a brain hemorrhage or 
subdural hematoma. 
The defense filed a motion in limine to preclude the
 
State's use of the proffered evidence from the juvenile
 
proceeding. The Circuit Court initially ruled that the State
 
would not be allowed to introduce evidence of the prior juvenile
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
incident. The Circuit Court stated that "[t]he only option would
 
be you'd have to approach the court. I have to hear what
 
Mr. Schnabel had to say, if anything, and then measure it at that
 
point, but basically it's not coming in at all." During further
 
proceedings and in addressing the State's request for
 
reconsideration and clarification of the Circuit Court's ruling,
 
the Circuit Court ultimately ruled that if Schnabel testified
 
that he did not know one punch could cause death, that he would
 
open the door and the State would have the opportunity to bring
 
in evidence regarding Dr. Camara's testimony. The Circuit
 
Court's ruling would not have allowed the State to point out the
 
adjudication in the prior juvenile proceeding. However, if
 
Schnabel testified he did not know a punch could cause death, the
 
State could seek to impeach him by showing that he had been
 
present for Dr. Camara's testimony in the juvenile proceeding.
 
At trial, Schnabel did not testify. The defense
 
asserted that one factor for Schnabel's decision not to testify
 
was the Circuit Court's ruling on the motion in limine.
 
Schnabel argues on appeal that because the incident in
 
the juvenile proceeding involved multiple punches and kicks, it
 
was factually dissimilar to this case which involved one punch
 
and thus the evidence from that case was not relevant under HRE
 
Rule 401. Schnabel further argues that because the evidence from
 
the juvenile proceeding was irrelevant, any testimony from him
 
about not knowing one punch could cause death should not open the
 
door to cross-examination of him about the juvenile proceedings. 
Because he chose not to testify, Schnabel contends the Circuit
 
Court's ruling on the motion in limine was not harmless error. 
We disagree with Schnabel as to each point.
 
We review the Circuit Court's ruling under the
 
following standards of review:
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"Prior bad act" evidence under Hawai' i Rules of Evidence 
(HRE) Rule 404(b) (1993) is admissible when "it is 1)
relevant and 2) more probative than prejudicial." State v. Maelega, 80 Hawai' i 172, 183, 907 P.2d 758, 769 (1995). A 
trial court's determination that evidence is "relevant" 
within the meaning of HRE Rule 401 (1993) is reviewed under
the right/wrong standard of review. State v. Pulse, 83
Hawai'i 229, 247, 925 P.2d 797, 815 (1996). However, a
trial court's balancing of the probative value of prior badact evidence against the prejudicial effect of such evidenceunder HRE Rule 403 (1993) is reviewed for abuse of
discretion. See id. An abuse of discretion occurs when the 
court "clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards
rules or principles of law to the substantial detriment of a
party litigant." State v. Furutani, 76 Hawai' i 172, 179, 873
P.2d 51, 58 (1994). 
State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai 'i 390, 404, 56 P.3d 692, 706 (2002) 
(internal parentheticals omitted) (quoting State v. Torres, 85 
Hawai'i 417, 421, 945 P.2d 849, 853 (App. 1997)). Moreover, the 
scope of cross-examination is within the sound discretion of the trial court. State v. Jackson, 81 Hawai
'i 39, 47, 912 P.2d 71, 
79 (1996). 
We first determine that, if Schnabel had testified that
 
he did not know that one punch could cause death, the evidence of
 Dr. Camara's testimony from the juvenile proceeding would have
 
been relevant. Even though the incident in the juvenile
 
proceeding did not involve a single punch, it was evidence having
 
a tendency to make Schnabel's proffered assertion that he did not
 
know a single punch could cause death "more probable or less
 
probable than it would be without the evidence." HRE Rule 401. 
The Circuit Court was thus correct as to the relevance of the
 
evidence. We further conclude that admitting Dr. Camara's
 
testimony under such circumstances would be more probative than
 
prejudicial, and thus the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 
discretion in this regard. We note the Circuit Court indicated
 
its intent, in the event Dr. Camara's testimony was to be
 
admitted, to provide limiting instructions and to not allow the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
State to point out Schnabel's adjudication in the juvenile
 
proceedings.
 
We also conclude that, if Schnabel had testified as 
indicated, he would have opened the door to cross-examination 
about what he learned in the juvenile proceedings from 
Dr. Camara's testimony. "[T]he proper scope of cross-examination 
includes full development of matters broached on direct 
examination, including facts reasonably related to matters 
touched on direct." State v. McElroy, 105 Hawai 'i 352, 356, 97 
P.3d 1004, 1008 (2004) (emphasis deleted) (quoting State v. Napulou, 85 Hawai
'i 49, 57, 936 P.2d 1297, 1305 (App. 1997)). 
The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion as to the proper scope of cross-examination. 
Because the Circuit Court did not err in its ruling on 
Schnabel's motion in limine regarding the juvenile proceedings,
 
there was no infringement of Schnabel's right to testify.
 
II. Lack of Subpoena of Attending Physician
 
Schnabel asserts that he received ineffective
 
assistance of trial counsel because his counsel should have
 
subpoenaed the physician who attended Reuther prior to his death
 
and who signed the death certificate. Schnabel contends this
 
physician listed the cause of death as a ruptured aneurysm and
 
did not refer the matter to the medical examiner as would have
 
been the case if there was a suspicion that a trauma or foul play
 
could have been the cause of death. Based on these assertions,
 
Schnabel argues that this physician would have contradicted the
 
findings of medical examiner Kanthi DeAlwis, who testified that
 
the cause of Reuther's death was "[t]raumatic subarachnoid
 
hemorrhage due to . . . [an] assaultive blunt force injury to the
 
head."
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
As the State correctly points out, "[i]neffective 
assistance of counsel claims based on the failure to obtain 
witnesses must be supported by affidavits or sworn statements 
describing the testimony of the proffered witnesses." State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998) (citation 
omitted). Because there is no affidavit or sworn statement in 
the record as to the substance of what the physician would have 
testified if called, we are left to speculate whether the 
physician would have testified as Schnabel asserts and what 
impact, if any, there was from not calling this witness. We 
conclude that Schnabel has failed to meet his burden of showing 
that the failure to subpoena the physician constituted 
ineffective assistance of counsel. See State v. Reed, 77 Hawai 'i 
72, 84, 881 P.2d 1218, 1230 (1994), overruled on other grounds 
by, State v. Balanza, 93 Hawai 'i 279, 1 P.3d 281 (2000); see also 
State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai 'i 462, 481, 946 P.2d 32, 51 (1997). 
III. Alleged Conduct of the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
 
Schnabel contends that on two occasions during closing
 
argument, the deputy prosecuting attorney (DPA) engaged in
 
misconduct. First, Schnabel argues the DPA presented a
 
powerpoint slide to the jury appealing to their emotions, which
 
stated: "Is there a substantial and unjustifiable risk of death
 
from one punch? . . . Ask Chris if it's substantial and
 
unjustified. He's dead!" Second, Schnabel points to statements
 
by the DPA urging the jurors to decide from their "gut" whether
 
Schnabel was guilty, allegedly at the expense of following the
 
legal standards provided by the jury instructions. On each
 
occasion, defense counsel objected and the Circuit Court
 
overruled the objection.
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We review these issues under the following standard:
 
Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed under
the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which
requires an examination of the record and a determination of
whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error
complained of might have contributed to the conviction;
factors considered are: (1) the nature of the conduct,
(2) the promptness of a curative instruction, and (3) the
strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant.
 
State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai 'i 20, 24, 108 P.3d 974, 978 (2005). 
With regard to the powerpoint slide, the DPA at trial
 
argued that the slide was offered because the fact that someone
 
died was "arguably substantial enough to show that the risk did
 
exist and it was significant." The Circuit Court allowed the
 
slide, reasoning that it had already instructed the jury that
 
pity, passion or prejudice should not influence their decision.2
 
Although the prosecution should not engage in argument 
calculated to inflame the passions or prejudices of the jury, see 
State v. Sanchez, 82 Hawai 'i 517, 533, 923 P.2d 934, 950 (App. 
1996), the DPA had some leeway during closing argument to draw reasonable inferences from the record. 
With regard to the prosecution's closing argument, a
prosecutor is permitted to draw reasonable inferences from
the evidence and wide latitude is allowed in discussing the
evidence. It is also within the bounds of legitimate
argument for prosecutors to state, discuss, and comment on
the evidence as well as to draw all reasonable inferences
 from the evidence. In other words, closing argument affords
the prosecution (as well as the defense) the opportunity to
persuade the jury that its theory of the case is valid,
based upon the evidence adduced and all reasonable
inferences that can be drawn therefrom.
 
2
 The instruction to the jury stated, in relevant part:
 
You must not be influenced by pity for the defendant or by
passion or prejudice against the defendant. Both the
 prosecution and the defendant have a right to demand, and
they do demand and expect, that you will conscientiously and
dispassionately consider and weigh all of the evidence and
follow these instructions, and that you will reach a just
verdict.
 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai 'i 405, 412-13, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238-39 
(1999) (citations and quotation marks omitted). While the 
powerpoint slide in question had an unnecessary sarcastic tone, 
it did not reach the level of improper conduct. It was based on 
evidence in the record that Reuther had died, and it dealt with 
an important issue in the case, whether there was substantial and 
unjustifiable risk of death from one punch. Moreover, unlike in 
Sanchez, the DPA's statements did not seek to inject issues 
broader than Schnabel's guilt or innocence. 
With regard to the DPA's statements that the jurors
 
should rely on their "gut feeling", the statements were made in
 
the context of telling the jurors to "read these instructions but
 
use your common sense." That statement alone would not cause
 
concern. We do, though, have a concern about the DPA saying
 
"[d]on't get too caught up in the mumbo jumbo of all the words
 
but use your common sense." However, upon objection from defense
 
counsel, the Circuit Court stated it would allow the argument as
 
an illustration and that "the jury has the instructions." 
Moreover, after a further objection and a bench conference, the
 
Circuit Court immediately gave a curative instruction.3 Given
 
these circumstances, in particular the immediate curative
 instruction from the Circuit Court, as well as the strength of
 
the evidence against Schnabel, we conclude that the statements of
 
the DPA were harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
3
 The Circuit Court instructed the jury as follows:
 
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I give the attorneys
some latitude at closing. The instructions you have as to
what reasonable doubt is and isn't and that pity, passion
and prejudice have no play, I'll allow you to argue that
basically as an illustration of your take on common sense.
There's no definition of reason and common sense so I'll
 give you a little bit of latitude over objection. Thank
 you.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. Self-Defense
 
Schnabel argues that he used justifiable force, a
 
single punch, in self-protection and that the state failed to
 
prove facts to negative this defense. Given the record and the
 
evidence, we disagree.
 
For purposes of the defense of self-protection under
 
HRS § 703-304 (1993 Repl. & Supp. 2009), the following standards
 
apply:
 
Since self-protection is not designated as an affirmative
defense by the Hawai' i Penal Code or any other statute, a
defendant who comes forward with some credible evidence of facts constituting the defense is, pursuant to HRS §701-115(2)(a) (1985), "entitled to an acquittal if the trierof fact finds that the evidence, when considered in thelight of any contrary prosecution evidence, raises areasonable doubt as to the defendant's guilt[.]" Moreover,once the issue of self-protection is raised, the burden ison the prosecution to disprove the facts that have beenintroduced or to prove facts negativing the defense and to
do so beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. McNulty, 60 Haw. 259, 262, 588 P.2d 438, 442 (1978); State v. Straub, 9
Haw.App. 435, 444, 843 P.2d 1389, 1393 (1993). 
State v. Lubong, 77 Hawai 'i 429, 431, 886 P.2d 766, 768 (App. 
1994). Moreover, to assess the sufficiency of the evidence, we
 
consider the following:
 
In reviewing the legal sufficiency of the evidence on
appeal, however, the test is whether, viewing the evidence
in the light most favorable to the State, substantial
evidence exists to support the conclusion of the trier of
fact. State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 432, 864 P.2d 583, 589-90
(1993). "Substantial evidence" is credible evidence which is
of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person
of reasonable caution to reach a conclusion. Id. In
 
reviewing whether substantial evidence exists to support a
conviction, moreover, due deference must be given to the
right of the trier of fact to determine credibility, weigh
the evidence, and draw reasonable inferences from the
 
evidence adduced. State v. Naeole, 62 Haw. 563, 565, 617
P.2d 820, 823 (1980).
 
Lubong, 77 Hawai 'i at 432, 886 P.2d at 769. 
Schnabel relies on the testimony of Kristie Reverio 
(Reverio) for his claim of self-defense. Reverio testified that
 
the incident at Zablan Beach Park occurred when Reuther took
 
9

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pictures toward the area where Reverio and Schnabel were
 
standing. According to Reverio, Schnabel confronted Reuther,
 
they exchanged words and Reuther put down his camera bag and
 
moved toward Schnabel in a fighting stance. Schnabel argues that
 
given this scenario his use of force, one punch, was reasonable. 
We need not address the reasonableness of Schnabel's conduct in
 
the light of Reverio's testimony, because this issue is
 
determined by the testimony of other witnesses who had a very
 
different account of the events leading to Schnabel striking
 
Reuther. The testimony of other witnesses, including Harold Kaeo
 
(Kaeo), Kuikahi Enos (Enos), and Nicole Ako (Ako), provided
 
substantial evidence for the jury to reject Reverio's version of
 
events and to support a determination by the jury that Reuther
 
was not the aggressor in the incident. To the contrary, the
 
testimony of Kaeo, Enos and Ako –- even though not aligned as to
 
all the details –- provided substantial evidence for the jury to
 
conclude that Reuther was standing by his car when Schnabel
 
approached him and without warning punched Reuther in the head.
 
"It is well-settled that an appellate court will not 
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and 
the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of 
fact." State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai 'i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 
697 (1999) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). Given the evidence adduced at trial, there was 
substantial evidence to disprove Reverio's account of the events 
and to support the jury's rejection of Schnabel's claim of self-
defense. 
V.	 Sufficiency of the Evidence that Schnabel Recklessly Caused
Reuther's Death
 
The final point of error raised by Schnabel is that
 
there was insufficient evidence that he recklessly caused
 
Reuther's death from one punch. In order to establish
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
recklessness, the prosecution had the burden of proving that 
Schnabel consciously disregarded a substantial and unjustifiable 
risk that his conduct would cause Reuther's death. As the State 
correctly points out, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held that: 
it is not necessary for the prosecution to introduce direct
evidence of a defendant's state of mind in order to prove
that the defendant acted intentionally, knowingly or
recklessly. Given the difficulty of proving the requisite
state of mind by direct evidence in criminal cases, proof by
circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences arising
from circumstances surrounding the defendant's conduct is
sufficient. The mind of an alleged offender may be read
from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all
the circumstances.
 
State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai 'i 131, 140-41, 913 P.2d 57, 66-67 
(1996)(internal citations omitted). See also State v. Batson, 73 
Haw. 236, 831 P.2d 924 (1992); State v. Hernandez, 61 Haw. 475, 
605 P.2d 75 (1980). 
Based on the circumstantial evidence in this case and
 
the reasonable inferences from the circumstances of Schnabel's
 
conduct, we conclude that there was sufficient evidence that
 
Schnabel acted recklessly in causing Reuther's death. Although
 
witness testimony differed in some respects, there was
 
substantial evidence that Schnabel, who was bigger than Reuther,
 
struck Reuther without warning in the head with a closed fist,
 
and that the punch was of significant force.
 
According to the testimony of Kaeo, Schnabel had called
 
out to Reuther to take Schnabel's picture and Kaeo was concerned
 
that Reuther was somehow being set up. According to Kaeo, after
 
Reuther showed Schnabel the picture, Reuther walked over to his
 
car and opened the trunk. Schnabel approached, walked behind
 
Reuther, and "went whack'em" in the face with a closed fist. 
Schnabel then grabbed a bag from the trunk and walked away. 
According to Kaeo, Schnabel was "a lot bigger" than Reuther. The
 
force of Schnabel's strike was such that Kaeo testified it caused
 
Reuther to do "like one full half-circle, and then after he
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
caught himself a little, and then he took like maybe one, two,
 
three steps, and then he just went fall back." Kaeo went over to
 
check on Reuther, who was lying on the ground with his eyes wide
 
open and his body was "shaking a little."
 
Ako, who testified she had walked to Zablan Beach Park
 
with Schnabel, stated that Schnabel got agitated and upset when
 
Reuther took a picture of them. She testified she and Schnabel
 
were "tripping" because they did not know Reuther and did not
 
expect someone to come up and take their picture. Schnabel swore
 
at Reuther and told him, among other things, "Fuck, you betta
 
leave." Reuther walked to his car and was putting his camera
 
away, but because he appeared not to be leaving, Ako went up to
 
him and told him he should leave. According to Ako, Schnabel
 
then approached the car, told Reuther to "[g]et the fuck out of
 
here," and hit Reuther in his face. Ako stated Reuther was
 
closing the car trunk just before he got hit. Ako testified that
 
after the punch by Schnabel, Reuther "put his hands up and he
 
took three steps back, and he fell down." According to Ako,
 
Reuther was gasping for air and he "stayed there until he went
 
stop."
 
Enos testified that Reuther was standing next to his
 
car when he got "whacked" by Schnabel. According to Enos, after
 
getting punched, Reuther was "jumping around, and then . . . he
 
just went fall down." After Reuther was hit, Enos saw Schnabel
 
grab a bag from Reuther's car and run away.
 
The medical examiner, Dr. Kanthi DeAlwis testified
 
Reuther had a bruise behind his left ear, consistent with a fist
 
blow. Corresponding to the bruise behind the left ear, Reuther
 
had a big area of bleeding in the tissues underneath. DeAlwis
 
testified that the basilar artery had stretched and was torn, and
 
"that spread all this blood covering the basal part of the brain,
 
and we call this a traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage[.]" She
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
further testified that the impact to cause the injury was
 
"significant enough to have caused the artery to have stretched
 
to a point to have that tear."
 
Given the record in this case, there was sufficient
 
evidence for the jury to conclude that Schnabel, who was bigger
 
than Reuther, unexpectedly and without warning punched Reuther in
 
the head with a closed fist, and that the force of the strike was
 
so severe that it either caused Reuther to partially spin or jump
 
around and to take steps backwards before he fell and died. The
 
evidence also shows that the force of the strike was strong
 
enough to stretch and tear Reuther's basilar artery and cause the
 
traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage. On this record, under the
 
standard of Eastman, there is sufficient evidence that Schnabel
 
was reckless in causing Reuther's death.
 
VI.	 Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence entered on September 10, 2008 is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 12, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Emmanuel V. Tipon
for Defendant-Appellant 
Presiding Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
13
 