NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29286
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
STATE OF HAWAI» I, Plantiff-Appellee, v.
ANGIE DELIGHT CARR, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0549(1))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Angie Delight Carr (Carr) appeals
 
from a June 20, 2008 judgment of conviction in the Circuit Court
 
of the Second Circuit (circuit court).1 Carr was convicted of
 
Negligent Injury in the First Degree in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-705 (1993) (Negligent Injury
 
Offense), Accidents Involving Death or Serious Bodily Injury in
 
violation of HRS § 291C-12 (2007) (Leaving the Scene Offense),
 
and Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant in
 
violation of HRS § 291E-61 (2007).
 
After a careful review of the record, the issues raised
 
and the arguments made by the parties, and the applicable
 
authority, we resolve Carr's appeal as follows.
 
1. Relying on State v. Liuafi , 1 Haw. App. 625, 623
 
P.2d 1271 (1981), Carr argues that she can only be convicted of
 
either the Negligent Injury Offense or the Leaving the Scene
 
Offense because inconsistent findings of fact are required to
 
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
establish the commission of each. However, Liuafi  is inapposite
 
as it involved the charges of Accidents Involving Death or
 
Personal Injury2 and Attempted Murder.3  In Liuafi , this court
 
noted that the charge of Attempted Murder, requiring an
 
intentional or knowing state of mind was inconsistent with an
 
"accident" giving rise to the duty to give information and render
 
aid. Id.  at 640-42, 623 P.2d at 1281-82. Here, Carr was charged
 
2 Accidents Involving Death or Personal Injury, or failure to render
assistance as it was called by the Liuafi  court was defined in HRS ÿÿ 291C-12
(1976) as follows:
 
(a) The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident
resulting in injury to or death of any person shall
immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the accident or
as close thereto as possible but shall then forthwith return
to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the
accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of section
291C-14. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing
traffic more than is necessary.
 
This subsection (a) remains substantially the same except that, in 1992, the
scope of the offense was limited to those accidents involving death or serious
bodily injury. 1992 Haw. Sess. Laws Acts 243 and 244 at 642-43. Other
 subsections, not pertinent to this case, were subsequently added to this
statute. 
3 Liuafi was charged with Attempted Murder in violation of HRS ÿÿÿÿ 707­
701 and 705-500 (1976) which provided, in pertinent part, 
ÿÿ707-701 Murder.(1) Except as provided in section
707-702, a person commits the offense of murder if he
intentionally or knowingly causes the death of another
person. 
ÿÿ705-500 Criminal attempt. (1) A person is guilty of
an attempt to commit a crime if he:
 
(a)	 Intentionally engages in conduct which would
constitute the crime if the attendant
 circumstances were as he believes them to be; or
 
(b)	 Intentionally engages in conduct which, under
the circumstances as he believes them to be,
constitutes a substantial step in a course of
conduct intended to culminate in his commission
 
of the crime.
 
(2) When causing a particular result is an element of
the crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the
crime if, acting with the state of mind required to
establish liability with respect to the attendant
circumstances specified in the definition of the crime, he
intentionally engages in conduct which is a substantial step
in a course of conduct intended or known to cause such a
 result.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and pleaded no contest to Negligent Injury Offense and Leaving
 
the Scene Offense. The states of mind required for each are not
 
inconsistent with the other. The circuit court did not abuse its
 
discretion in denying Carr's motion to dismiss on this basis.
 
2. and 4. Carr also contends that the circuit court
 
abused its discretion by denying her motion for deferred
 
acceptance of her no contest plea. Carr points to the
 
prosecution's "unfair characterization of defendant" in its
 
argument in opposition to Carr's motion. We see no abuse. In
 
addition to Carr's acknowledgment, in her change of plea form,
 
that the circuit court could deny her deferral motion and her
 
failure to object to the prosecution's argument, Carr points to
 
no authority, and we find none, that supports her claim these
 
arguments were improper.
 
More importantly, the record reflects that the circuit
 
court's decision was based on its application of the requirements
 
4
of HRS ÿÿ 853-1(a) (1993).  The circuit court found that granting
 
a deferral in Carr's case "would depreciate the seriousness of
 
what has happened here" as "the ends of justice and the welfare
 
of society" indicated that "some incarceration [was]
 
appropriate."
 
4 HRS ÿÿ 853-1 (a) provides,
 
ÿÿ853-1 Deferred acceptance of guilty plea or nolo
contendere plea; discharge and dismissal, expungement of
records.  (a) Upon proper motion as provided by this
chapter:
 
(1)	 When a defendant voluntarily pleads guilty or
nolo contendere, prior to commencement of trial,
to a felony, misdemeanor, or petty misdemeanor;
 
(2)	 It appears to the court that the defendant is
not likely again to engage in a criminal course
of conduct; and 
(3)	 The ends of justice and the welfare of society
do not require that the defendant shall
presently suffer the penalty imposed by law,
 
the court, without accepting the plea of nolo contendere or
entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the
defendant and after considering the recommendations, if any,
of the prosecutor, may defer further proceedings.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. Finally, the record does not support Carr's
 
contention that she was not afforded her right to allocution. 
The circuit court gave Carr the opportunity--which Carr
 
exercised--to address the court and the complaining witness and
 
his family prior to sentencing. The complaining witness, his
 
friends and family, and the prosecutor were then given the
 
opportunity to speak on the record. Carr's counsel did not
 
request an additional opportunity to address the court before
 
sentencing and on appeal offers no authority for the proposition
 
that the circuit court was required to, sua sponte, offer Carr
 
another opportunity to speak.
 
Based on the foregoing, the June 20, 2008 Judgment of 
the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, June 7, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Christopher R. Evans,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
 
Richard K. Minatoya,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui, Associate Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 