 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29655
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
FRANCIS M. SHYANGUYA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(HPD Criminal No. 08347776)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Francis M. Shyanguya (Shyanguya)
 
was arrested after allegedly offering to pay an undercover police
 
officer to engage in sexual conduct. He was convicted after a
 
1
bench trial  of the offense of prostitution, in violation of
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1200(1) (1993).2
 
On appeal, Shyanguya argues that his conviction should
 
be vacated. Relying on State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i 383, 219 
1
 The Honorable Russel S. Nagata presided.
 
2
 At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 712-1200(1) and (2) (1993)
provided:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of prostitution if the
person engages in, or agrees or offers to engage in, sexual
conduct with another person for a fee.
 
(2) As used in subsection (1), "sexual conduct" means
"sexual penetration," "deviate sexual intercourse," or "sexual
contact," as those terms are defined in section 707-700.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d 1170 (2009), Shyanguya contends that the charge against him
 
was defective because it failed to allege the specific type of
 conduct under the statutory definition of "sexual conduct" that
 he offered or agreed to engage in for a fee. Shyanguya also
 contends that his trial counsel failed to provide effective
 assistance in representing Shyanguya at trial. We affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
At trial, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) 
presented its case through the testimony of Honolulu Police Department Officer Jennifer Katanya (Officer Katanya). Officer Katanya testified that, acting in an undercover capacity and posing as a prostitute, she posted an "adult services ad" on the "craigslist" internet website. The ad, entitled "Come and get it !!!! -w4m - 24 (Waikiki - Incall)," stated in relevant part: 
Hello gentlemen.
I'm a beautiful hapa female who will make all your fantasies
come true. I'm 5'6, 120 lbs., 34C-25-35. I am seeking
professional, mature, respectful, and clean gentlemen who
want a classy, sexy, hot experience. I'm here only for a
short while so give me a call and make a date tonight at
[phone number]. My name is Bree. 
. . . . 
Rates 
Cash only please
1/2 hour date - $200
 1 hour date $250 
Ask me for my Tuesday special rates.
 
At about 11:00 p.m., Officer Katanya received a phone
 
call from a male who said that his name was "Francis." The male
 
caller asked if Officer Katanya was available and asked what her
 rates were. Officer Katanya replied that she was available and
 explained her rates. Officer Katanya stated that it would be
 "200 for the hour and 150 for half an hour[,] [b]ut it depended
 on what he wanted to do." The male caller stated that "he wanted
 full service." Based on her training and experience, Officer
 Katanya knew that "full service" meant sexual intercourse and
 fellatio in street vernacular. 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Officer Katanya and the male caller agreed to meet at
 
the entrance of a hotel. Shyanguya arrived and met Officer
 
Katanya at the hotel entrance, and Officer Katanya recognized
 Shyanguya's voice as that of the male caller because he spoke
 with a "[s]light accent." They went into a hotel room and
 Shyanguya took out $100. Officer Katanya asked, "[W]hat did you
 wanna do again?" and Shyanguya said "he wanted to do full
 service." Officer Katanya asked how much money Shyanguya had,
 and he replied, "I only have a hundred dollars so we'll just do
 full service for the half an hour."
 
Officer Katanya asked Shyanguya if he had any condoms. 
Shyanguya replied that he had "condoms and lubrication" in a
 plastic bag he brought with him. Shyanguya also had a copy of
 Officer Katanya's ad in the bag. After Shyanguya placed his
 money and bag on a table, Officer Katanya signaled for the arrest
 team to enter, and Shyanguya was arrested. 
II.
 
Shyanguya testified in his own defense and provided a
 
version of the events that differed in significant respects from
 Officer Katanya's version. 
Shyanguya testified that he did not view the ad
 
referred to by Officer Katanya on the "craigslist" website, but
 instead responded to an ad he saw on the "Cityvibe" website. The
 Cityvibe ad was almost identical to the ad Officer Katanya had
 placed on craigslist.
3
 
Shyanguya called the number in the Cityvibe ad, and the
 
female who answered identified herself as "Bree." Shyanguya
 asked "Bree" whether she was available and about the rates for
 the Tuesday special. "Bree" replied that the rate was "150." 
They agreed to meet. 
3 The only differences were the title of the ad and the photograph of
the backside of a female shown in the ad. Officer Katanya testified that she
had received calls informing her that an ad she placed on craigslist had also
been seen on Cityvibe.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Shyanguya met a women outside a hotel who identified
 
herself as "Bree," and they went into a hotel room. The first
 
thing "Bree" said upon entering the room was "do you have the
 money." Shyanguya said he did, and she told him to put the money
 on a table. Shyanguya asked "Bree" if she was a "cop," but she
 did not respond. Shyanguya saw condoms on the television armoire
 and said that he only had a hundred dollars. "Bree" began
 "badgering" Shyanguya, asking him, "[W]hat would you like to do." 
Shyanguya responded, "I don't wanna do anything. I just want
 everything you advertise for." Shyanguya testified that what
 "Bree" had advertised for was "her fantasy."
 
Shyanguya "wanted a fantasy" and expected to receive
 
"[t]he fantasy that was advertised." Shyanuga denied that he
 ever used the term "full service" or made a request to engage in
 sexual activity during any of his conversations with "Bree." 
Shyanguya admitted that he had brought condoms and lubricant with
 him that night, which were in a plastic bag that was seized by
 the police. 
III.
 
At the conclusion of trial, the District Court of the
 
First Circuit (District Court) found Shyanguya guilty as charged
 of prostitution, for offering to engage in sexual conduct for a
 fee. The District Court sentenced Shyanguya to a $500 fine and
 $30 crime victim fee. The District Court filed its "Notice of
 Entry of Judgment and/or Order" (Judgment) on February 2, 2009,
 and this appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 A.
 
Shyanguya was charged by written complaint, which
 
stated:
 
On or about the 16th day of September, 2008, in the
City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, FRANCIS M.
SHYANGUYA, also known as Frncis M. Shyanguya did engage in,
or agree or offer to engage in, sexual conduct with another
person for a fee, thereby committing the offense of 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Prostitution, in violation of Section 712-1200(1) of the
Hawaii Revised Statues. 
(Emphasis in original.)
 
Shyanguya argues that the complaint was defective 
because it only charged him with agreeing or offering to engage 
in "sexual conduct," a term that is defined by statute, and failed to allege the specific type of conduct under the statutory definition that he offered or agreed to engage in. Citing Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i at 394, 219 P.3d at 1181, Shyanguya argues 
that because the statutory definition of the term "sexual conduct" does not "comport with its commonly understood definition[,]" the charge against him was insufficient for failure to allege an essential element of the offense and did not provide him with fair notice of the alleged offense. 
Because Shyanguya challenges the sufficiency of his 
charge for the first time on appeal, the Motta/Wells liberal construction rule is applicable. Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i at 399, 
219 P.3d at 1186. Under the liberal construction rule, we "will 'not reverse a conviction based on a defective indictment or complaint unless the defendant can show prejudice or that the indictment or complaint cannot within reason be construed to charge a crime.'" Id. at 400, 219 P.3d at 1187 (brackets and 
citation omitted). As explained below, we conclude that Shyanguya's challenge to the sufficiency of the charge is without merit. 
B.
 
Shyanguya was charged with violating HRS § 712-1200(1),
 
which provided that:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of prostitution if
the person engages in, or agrees or offers to engage in,
sexual conduct with another person for a fee.
 
(Emphasis added.) The term "sexual conduct" as used in HRS 
§ 712-1200(1) is specifically defined to mean "'sexual
 penetration,' 'deviate sexual intercourse,' or 'sexual contact,'
 as those terms are defined in [HRS] section 707-700." HRS § 712­
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1200(2) (1993). The terms "sexual penetration," "deviate sexual
 
intercourse," and "sexual contact" are, in turn, defined in HRS 
§ 707-700 (1993 & Supp. 2011) as follows:
 
"Sexual penetration" means:
 
(1)	 Vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse, fellatio,
deviate sexual intercourse, or any intrusion of
any part of a person's body or of any object
into the genital or anal opening of another
person's body; it occurs upon any penetration,
however slight, but emission is not required.
As used in this definition, "genital opening"
includes the anterior surface of the vulva or
 labia majora; or 
(2)	 Cunnilingus or anilingus, whether or not actual
penetration has occurred. 
. . . .
 
"Deviate sexual intercourse" means any act of sexual
gratification between a person and an animal or a corpse,
involving the sex organs of one and the mouth, anus, or sex
organs of the other.
 
. . . .
 
"Sexual contact" means any touching, other than acts
of "sexual penetration", of the sexual or other intimate
parts of a person not married to the actor, or of the sexual
or other intimate parts of the actor by the person, whether
directly or through the clothing or other material intended
to cover the sexual or other intimate parts.
 
(Sequence of defined terms altered.)
 
C.
 
At the outset, we note that the offense of prostitution
 
set forth in HRS § 712-1200(1) does not specify a mens rea, and
 
the charge against Shyanguya also did not allege a mens rea. In
 State v. Nesmith, Nos. SCWC-10-0000072, SCWC-30438, 2012 WL
 1648974 (Hawai' i April 12, 2012), the Hawai' i Supreme Court held 
that the failure to allege a mens rea in charging the offense of
 operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII)
 in violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) rendered the charge
 insufficient. Nesmith, 2012 WL 1648974, at *4. Like the HRS 
§ 291E-61(a)(1) OVUII offense, the offense of prostitution in
 violation of HRS § 712-1200(1) does not specify a mens rea in the 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statutory definition of the offense, but would appear to require
 
proof of mens rea to establish the offense. See HRS § 702-204
 
(1993). 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court's decision in Nesmith raises, 
but does not clearly answer, the question of whether a deficiency in a charge for failing to allege the requisite mens rea is a jurisdictional defect. In Nesmith, the concurring and dissenting opinion by Justice Acoba reads the majority opinion as concluding "that a state of mind is a 'fact' that must be included in an HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) charge for due process purposes only, but not an element of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) that must be included in the charge for purposes of jurisdiction." Nesmith, 2012 WL 1648974, 
at *19 (Acoba, J., concurring and dissenting) (brackets omitted). Although the Nesmith majority opinion does not state this distinction between the sufficiency of a charge for due process purposes and for jurisdictional purposes in unmistakable terms, pending further clarification by the Hawai' i Supreme Court, we 
adopt Justice Acoba's reading of the majority's opinion. Under this reading, the failure to allege a mens rea in the prostitution charge against Shyanguya would not constitute a jurisdictional defect in the charge. We therefore conclude that Shyanguya waived any challenge to the sufficiency of the charge for failure to allege a mens rea by not objecting on this basis in the District Court and by not asserting this claim on appeal. See State v. Hoglund, 71 Haw. 147, 150-51, 785 P.2d 1311, 1313 (1990); State v. Ildefonso, 72 Haw. 573, 584, 827 P.2d 648, 655 (1992) ("Our review of the record reveals that [the defendant] did not raise this argument at trial, and thus it is deemed to have been waived."); Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
Rule 28(b)(4) (2008)("Points [of error] not presented in accordance with this section will be disregarded[.]"); HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) (2008) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D.
 
Returning to the deficiency in the charge asserted by
 
Shyanguya, we conclude that the State's use of the term "sexual
 
conduct" and its failure to allege specific conduct under the
 statutory definition of that term did not render the charge
 insufficient. 
Wheeler is inapposite. Unlike in Wheeler, the
 
statutory definition of "sexual conduct," in the context of a
 prostitution offense, is consistent with and does comport with
 its commonly understood meaning. The term "sexual" means "of,
 pertaining to, or for sex; sexual matters[.]" Dictionary.com.,
 
http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/sexual (defining "sexual")
 (last accessed June 20, 2012). The term "conduct" means
 "personal behavior; way of acting[.]" Dictionary.com.,
 
http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/conduct (defining
 "conduct") (last accessed June 20, 2012). Thus, the term "sexual
 conduct" encompasses personal behavior pertaining to or for sex
 or sexual matters.
 
Because the statutory definition of "sexual conduct," 
as that term is used in the HRS § 712-1200(1) prostitution offense, comports with its commonly understood meaning, we conclude that the charge against Shyanguya was sufficient, as it gave him fair notice of the offense with which he was charged. See State v. Mita, 124 Hawai' i 385, 391-92, 245 P.3d 458, 464-65 
(2010) ("Wheeler does not require that the State provide statutory definitions in every charge which tracks the language of a statute that includes terms defined elsewhere in the code. Requiring the State to do so would render charges unduly complex, in contravention of the policy reflected in HRPP [(Hawai' i Rules 
of Penal Procedure)] Rule 7(d) that 'the charge shall be a plain, concise and definite statement of the essential facts constituting the offense charged.'" (brackets omitted)). Under our analysis, the charge was sufficient even if Shyanguya had made a timely objection to the sufficiency of the charge based on 
8
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
its use of the term "sexual conduct." It therefore follows that
 
the charge passes muster under the Motta/Wells liberal
 construction rule.
4
 
II.
 
Shyanguya contends that his trial counsel provided 
ineffective assistance at trial as a result of counsel's alleged
 "damaging and inept cross-examination, inadequate and prejudicial
 direct examination, and superficial and inadequate closing
 arguments." 
A defendant who raises a claim of ineffective 
assistance of counsel bears the burden of showing: (1) "specific errors or omissions of defense counsel reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment or diligence"; and (2) "that these errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. 
Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 348–49, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980); State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998). "General 
claims of ineffectiveness are insufficient and every action or omission is not subject to inquiry." Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 
442, 462, 848 P.2d 966, 976 (1993). As a general rule, "matters presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." Richie, 88 
Hawai'i at 39-40, 960 P.2d at 1247-48 (1998) (internal quotation 
marks and citations omitted; emphasis in original). If counsel's allegedly erroneous actions or omissions have "an obvious 
4
 In addition to the written complaint, the State also orally charged
Shyanguya prior to trial. The oral charge was essentially the same as the
written complaint, except that the oral charge omitted the year of the allegedoffense. We reject Shyanguya's contention that the omission of the offenseyear in the oral charge rendered the charge against him insufficient. Under Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 7(a) (2008), it is the written
complaint that constitutes the charge in this case. At the time relevant to this case, HRPP Rule 7(a) stated that "[t]he charge against a defendant is anindictment, an information, or a complaint filed in court[.]" We conclude that because the written complaint included the year of the alleged offense,the omission of the year in the oral charge did not cause the charge againstShyanguya to become deficient. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
tactical basis for benefitting the defendant's case[,]" they
 
"will not be subject to further scrutiny." Briones, 74 Haw. at
 
462-63, 848 P.2d at 976 (emphasis in original). We conclude that
 Shyanguya has failed to meet his burden of showing that his trial
 counsel provided ineffective assistance. 
A. 
Shyanguya contends that trial counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance because counsel should have cross-examined
 Officer Katanya more extensively on the subject of her knowledge
 of street vernacular, to obtain details such as how many
 customers in her undercover operations used the term "full
 service." Shyanguya suggests that such cross-examination could
 have served to cast doubt on Officer Katanya's testimony that
 "full service" means sexual intercourse and fellatio in street
 vernacular. 
Officer Katanya testified on direct examination that
 
she had posed as a prostitute in more than 200 undercover
 operations similar to Shyanguya's case and that her knowledge of
 street vernacular was based on this undercover experience, as
 well as other training. The cross-examination suggested by
 Shyanguya could have served to bolster Officer Katanya's
 credibility if, for example, it elicited testimony that based on
 Officer Katanya's extensive undercover experience, Shyanguya's
 actions and the use of the term "full service" were typical of
 customers seeking to engage in sexual conduct for a fee. We
 conclude that Shyanguya's speculation concerning whether more
 extensive cross-examination of Officer Katanya would have been
 beneficial does not support his claim of ineffective assistance
 of counsel. We decline to second-guess the strategic decisions
 made by Shyanguya's counsel in cross-examining Officer Katanya.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
On direct examination of Shyanguya, his trial counsel
 
elicited testimony that Shyanguya had been advised that he may be
 
better off pleading no contest than going to trial because a
 guilty verdict after trial may reduce Shyanguya's chances of
 becoming a United States citizen. Shyanguya testified that
 despite this advice and the increased risk resulting from
 contesting the case at trial, he decided to go to trial because
 he believed he was innocent. 
Shyanguya argues that his trial counsel's "attempt to
 
bolster Shyanguya's credibility by playing the 'citizenship
 card'" was highly improper, irrelevant, and prejudicial and
 constituted ineffective assistance. Assuming that defense
 counsel's eliciting this testimony was improper, it was
 prejudicial to the State and benefitted Shyanguya, because it
 bolstered Shyanguya's credibility by suggesting that he insisted
 on going to trial, despite the increased risk to his desired
 citizenship, because he believed he was innocent. Alleged
 improper actions by defense counsel that benefit the defendant
 and prejudice the State do not provide a basis for a claim of
 ineffective assistance of counsel.
 
C.
 
Finally, Shyanguya argues that his trial counsel was
 
ineffective for failing to make a better closing argument. We
 are not persuaded. Shyanguya acknowledges that trial counsel
 attacked Officer Katanya's credibility in closing argument by
 pointing out errors in her police report and arguing that her
 recollection of Shyanguya's case was blurred because of the large
 number of undercover operations in which she had been involved. 
We conclude that Shyanguya's suggestion that trial counsel could
 have made a better argument on certain points did not demonstrate
 that counsel provided ineffective assistance.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Judgment of 
the District Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 25, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Mary Ann Barnard
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
12
 