NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29044
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
BRANDON M. VALEROS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 06-1-2281)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Brandon Valeros (Valeros) appeals 
from his February 5, 2008 judgment of conviction in the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).1 Valeros was 
convicted of Assault in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-711(1)(d) (Supp. 2006). 
On appeal, Valeros contends the circuit court (1) erred 
by allowing the State to call Timothy Santiago (Santiago) as a 
rebuttal alibi witness without proper disclosure under Hawai
'i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 12.1; (2) violated Valeros's right to a fair and impartial judge by assisting the prosecution 
on evidentiary matters; (3) erred by allowing the prosecution to 
substantively argue evidence whose admissibility the court had 
limited to credibility purposes; and (4) erred by allowing the 
prosecution to impeach Valeros with an unauthenticated police 
report, in violation of Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 901. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
1
 The Honorable Virginia Lea Crandall presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the arguments advanced and issues raised, we resolve Valeros's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
either allowing Santiago to testify as the State's rebuttal alibi
 
witness or denying Valeros's Motion for a New Trial on these
 
grounds. Santiago's testimony violated neither HRPP Rule 12.12
 
nor Valeros's constitutional rights.
 
2
 HRPP Rule 12.1 states:
 
(a) Notice by defendant. If a defendant intends to
 
rely upon the defense of alibi, the defendant shall, within
the time provided for the filing of pretrial motions or at
such later time as the court may direct, notify the
prosecutor in writing of such intention and file a copy of
such notice with the court.
 
(b) Disclosure of information and witnesses. Upon
receipt of notice that the defendant intends to rely upon an
alibi defense, the prosecutor shall inform the defendant in
writing of the specific time, date, and place at which the
offense is alleged to have been committed. The defendant
shall then inform the prosecutor in writing of the specific
place at which the defendant claims to have been at the time
of the alleged offense and the names and addresses of the
witnesses upon whom the defendant intends to rely to
establish such alibi. The prosecutor shall then inform the
defendant in writing of the names and addresses of the
witnesses upon whom the government intends to rely to
establish defendant's presence at the scene of the alleged
offense.
 
(c) Time of giving information. The court may fix the
time within which the exchange of information referred to in
section (b) shall be accomplished.
 
(d) Continuing duty to disclose. If prior to or during
trial, a party learns of an additional witness whose
identity, if known, should have been included in the
information furnished under section (b) of this rule, the
party shall promptly notify the other party or the party’s
attorney of the existence and identity of such additional
witness.
 
(e) Failure to comply. Upon the failure of either
party to comply with the requirements of this rule, the
court may exclude the testimony of any undisclosed witness
offered by such party as to the defendant's absence from, or
presence at, the scene of the alleged offense. This rule
shall not limit the right of the defendant to testify in the
defendant's own behalf.
 
(f) Exceptions. For good cause shown, the court may
grant an exception to any of the requirements of this rule.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A reading of HRPP Rule 12.1 does not support Valeros's
 
argument that the rule's plain language required disclosure of
 
Santiago's testimony on these facts. Specifically, HRPP
 
Rule 12.1(b) does not initially require disclosure unless a party
 
intends to rely on a witness and it does not appear from the
 
record that the State intended to rely on Santiago as a witness
 
at the time of its initial disclosure.
 
In regards to Valeros's argument that Santiago's
 
testimony violated the continuing duty to disclose obligation
 
under HRPP Rule 12.1(d), that provision only applies to an 
"additional witness whose identity, if known, should have been
 
included in the information furnished" pursuant to the required
 
disclosures under HRPP Rule 12.1(b). Santiago was already
 
disclosed by the defense. Consequently, he was not an
 
"additional witness" within the meaning of this rule.
 
Furthermore, even if there had been a violation, the
 
rule does not require exclusion of the offending testimony. HRPP
 
Rule 12.1(e) ("Upon the failure of either party to comply with
 
the requirements of this rule, the court may exclude the
 
testimony of any undisclosed witness offered by such
 
party . . .") (emphasis added). Where Santiago was originally
 
Valeros's own witness and the circuit court gave Valeros an
 
opportunity to re-interview Santiago prior to the latter's
 
testimony at trial, it was not an abuse of discretion to allow
 
Santiago's testimony.
 
(2) The circuit court did not commit error or engage in 
improper conduct during Santiago's testimony. Valeros contends 
that the trial judge improperly assisted the prosecution. Read 
in context, however, the record indicates that the trial court 
called the bench conference to clarify a misunderstanding 
resulting from the sustained hearsay objection. Valeros has not 
demonstrated that the trial court assumed the role of an advocate 
or that its intervention was erroneous, prejudicial or the basis 
of an unfair trial. See State v. Hauge, 103 Hawai' i 38, 48, 79 
P.3d 131, 141 (2003) ("[R]eversal on the grounds of judicial bias 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
or misconduct is warranted only upon a showing that the trial was
 
unfair."); Mahoney v. Mitchell, 4 Haw. App. 410, 418, 668 P.2d
 
35, 40-41 (1983) (stating that unfairness requires a clear and
 
precise demonstration of prejudice).
 
(3) The prosecutor did not violate the circuit court's
 
limiting instruction during closing remarks. Valeros asserts
 
that the prosecutor's argument violated the court's earlier
 
instruction that the investigator's testimony regarding
 
Santiago's statements could be considered for impeachment
 
purposes only. We disagree. The prosecutor pointed to the
 
testimony in the context of discussing the credibility of
 
Valeros's witnesses. The remarks were in line with the court's
 
instructions and the trial court did not abuse its discretion in
 
allowing them.
 
(4) There was no error in the prosecution's use of an 
unauthenticated police report to impeach Valeros's trial 
testimony. The prosecution laid the foundation for introduction 
of the police report under HRE Rules 608(b) and 613(b) by asking 
Valeros whether he made the inconsistent statement regarding his 
weight at the time of his arrest to Officer Christopher Chung 
(Officer Chung) and misrepresenting his weight to the officer 
would qualify as a specific instance of conduct bearing on 
Valeros's credibility. Although the prosecutor could have 
recalled Officer Chung to authenticate the police report as 
extrinsic evidence that Valeros made a prior inconsistent 
statement regarding his weight, the prosecutor chose not to do 
so. Nevertheless, the jury was instructed that it must base its 
verdict on the evidence and that statements by counsel do not 
constitute evidence and we presume, absent contrary evidence that 
the jury followed those instructions. See, e.g., State v. 
Kupihea, 80 Hawai' i 307, 317-18, 909 P.2d 1122, 1132-33 (1996) 
(jury instruction that counsel's argument was not evidence 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
presumed to be followed). As such, the trial court did not err
 
in allowing impeachment without introduction of the police
 
report.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment, entered on
 
February 5, 2008, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 16, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Karen T. Nakasone,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu, Associate Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
5
 