 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29291
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
RONALD KANESHIRO, Petitioner-Appellant,
vs.
 
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR OF THE COURTS,
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(Ewa Division)
(HPD Traffic No. 1DAA-08-0004)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard, J., and Circuit Judge Alm,
in place of Foley, Fujise, Reifurth, and Ginoza, JJ., all
recused.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Ronald Kaneshiro (Kaneshiro) was 
stopped at a sobriety checkpoint roadblock and arrested for 
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII). Respondent-Appellee Administrative Director of the Courts, State of Hawai
'i (Director), acting through a hearing officer of the 
Administrative Driver's License Revocation Office (ADLRO), sustained the administrative revocation of Kaneshiro's driver's license. Kaneshiro sought judicial review of the Director's decision. The District Court of the First Circuit (District 
1
Court)  affirmed the Director's decision and issued a "Decision
and Order Affirming Administrative Revocation" and a "Judgment on 
1
 The Honorable William A. Cardwell presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appeal" (Judgment) on May 19, 2008. Kaneshiro appeals from the
 
this Judgment.
 
Kaneshiro's sole argument on appeal is that the
 
District Court erred in holding that there was sufficient
 evidence to find that the police stopped Kaneshiro's vehicle in
 conformity with the predetermined roadblock procedure of stopping
 every fifth vehicle. As explained below, we agree with Kaneshiro
 that the District Court erred in holing there was sufficient
 evidence, and we reverse the District Court's Judgment.
 
I.
 
Where a driver's OVUII arrest is based on a roadblock 
stop, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) HRS ยง 291E-38(e) (2007) provides that the "[D]irector shall affirm the administrative revocation only if the [D]irector determines that . . . the vehicle was stopped at an intoxicant control roadblock established and operated in compliance with sections 291E-19 and 291E-20[.]" (Emphases added.) Among other things, HRS ยง 291E-20 (2007) requires that "[e]very intoxicant control roadblock program shall . . . [r]equire that all vehicles approaching roadblocks be stopped or that certain vehicles be stopped by selecting vehicles in a specified numerical sequence or pattern[.]" HRS ยง 291E-20(a)(1). The government bears the initial burden of proving the grounds for revocation, and the arrestee cannot be called upon to respond before this initial burden has been satisfied. See Freitas v. Admin. Dir. of Courts, 
108 Hawai' i 31, 45, 116 P.3d 673, 687 (2005); Kernan v. Tanaka, 
75 Haw. 1, 30, 856 P.2d 1207, 1222 (1993). 
In this case, Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Sergeant
 
Duke Zoller (Sergeant Zoller) established the procedure and
 numerical sequence for the roadblock as the stopping of every
 fifth vehicle. HPD Officer Christopher Bugarin (Officer Bugarin)
 
was in charge of identifying which vehicle to stop. Officer
 
Bugarin's police report, which was submitted in support of the
 administrative revocation of Kaneshiro's license, stated that
 Officer Bugarin was instructed to stop every fifth vehicle for
 
2
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
inspection and that he stopped Kaneshiro's vehicle because it was
 
the designated fifth vehicle. However, the hearing officer
 struck Officer Bugarin's police report and did not consider the
 report as evidence because it was not submitted in the form of a
 sworn statement.
2
 
We conclude that without Officer Bugarin's report,
 
there was insufficient evidence to show that the police had
 operated the roadblock and stopped Kaneshiro's vehicle in
 compliance with the minimum statutory requirements. In other
 words, there was insufficient evidence to support a finding that
 Kaneshiro's vehicle had been stopped in compliance with the
 established procedure of stopping every fifth vehicle in
 sequence. The only evidence admitted at the hearing on this
 issue was that Sergeant Zoller had predetermined that the
 procedure for the roadblock was to stop every fifth vehicle and
 that several other officers at the roadblock (besides Officer
 Bugarin) were aware of this predetermined procedure. However, no
 evidence was offered that Officer Bugarin followed the
 predetermined procedure. Indeed, Officers Felix Gasmen and
 Stuart Uyetake, who testified at the hearing, both stated that
 they did not know whether Officer Bugarin had followed the
 predetermined procedure in selecting Kaneshiro's vehicle for
 inspection. 
The Director argues that the hearing officer could
 
reasonably infer, based on the evidence that a predetermined
 procedure had been established, that the procedure had been
 followed by Officer Bugarin. We disagree. The establishment of
 a procedure and compliance with that procedure are two different
 things. There was no evidence admitted at the hearing that
 Officer Bugarin followed the predetermined procedure, that he
 stopped Kaneshiro's vehicle in compliance with the procedure, or
 
2
 In Desmond v. Admin. Dir. of Courts, 91 Hawai' i 212, 982 P.2d 346
(App. 1998), this court noted that "[t]he job of the [ADLRO] would be simpler
if all statements of every law enforcement official were worded as swornstatements." Desmond, 91 Hawai' i at 219 n.4, 982 P.2d at 353 n.4. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that he was even aware of the procedure. We conclude that, even
 
when viewed in the light most favorable to the government, the
 hearing officer could not reasonably infer that the predetermined
 procedure had been followed based merely on evidence that the
 procedure had been established. 
We also disagree with the Director's argument that the 
presumption of "[o]fficial duty regularly performed" (official duty presumption) set forth in Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 304(c)(2) (1993) can be applied to fill the evidentiary deficiency. HRE Rule 304(c)(2) provides that the presumption that official duty has been regularly performed does not apply to the lawfulness of an arrest made without a warrant. The commentary to HRE Rule 304(c)(2) reveals that the presumption was not intended to apply to warrantless seizures or searches. Commentary to HRE Rule 304 ("The qualification barring extension of the [official duty] presumption to the lawfulness of arrests or searches conducted without warrants is implicit in search and seizure law[.]"). Under Hawai' i law, a warrantless seizure or 
search is presumptively invalid and unreasonable. State v. 
Heapy, 113 Hawai' i 283, 290, 151 P.3d 764, 771 (2007); State v. 
Ortiz, 67 Haw. 181, 184, 683 P.2d 822, 825 (1984). In light of Hawai'i's jurisprudence, we conclude that the hearing officer 
could not base his determination that Officer Bugarin complied with the predetermined procedure of stopping every fifth vehicle and that Kaneshiro's warrantless seizure was lawful upon the official duty presumption. See Heapy, 113 Hawai' i at 290, 151 
P.3d at 771; Ortiz, 67 Haw. at 184, 683 P.2d at 825; see also State v. Rolison, 6 Haw. App. 569, 733 P.2d 326 (1987) (imposing burden on the government to show strict compliance with Intoxilyzer rules in laying foundation for the admission of Intoxilyzer results); but see Roselfsema v. Dep't of Motor Vehicles, 48 Cal. Rptr. 2d 817, 821-22 (Cal. Ct. App. 1995) (applying official duty presumption in determining the lawfulness of a roadblock stop). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the Judgment of
 
the District Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, December 19, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Earle A. Partington
for Petitioner-Appellant Chief Judge 
Girard D. Lau Deputy Attorney GeneralDepartment of the Attorney Generalfor Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge 
Circuit Court Judge 
5
 