NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29997
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI rI 
JAMES JUNGBLUT, Plaintiff-Appellant, v. GLENN NISHIO and MARC
NISHIO, Defendants-Appellees, and JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE JOINT VENTURERS
1-10; DOE LIMITED LIABILITY ENTITIES 1-10; DOE NON-PROFIT
ENTITIES 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10; DOE UNINCORPORATED
ENTITIES 1-10; AND OTHER DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-1251)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION

 
(By: Fujise and Leonard, JJ.,
with Nakamura, C.J., concurring separately)
 
In this motor vehicle tort case, Plaintiff-Appellant
 
James Jungblut (Jungblut) appeals from the Circuit Court of the
 
1
First Circuit's (circuit court)  July 17, 2009 Final Judgment.  
On appeal, Jungblut contends that the circuit court erred by 
granting Defendants Glenn Nishio and Marc Nishio's (collectively, 
Defendants) motion to dismiss Jungblut's complaint with 
prejudice. Jungblut contends that the circuit court abused its 
discretion because it dismissed his case solely because Jungblut 
failed to personally appear at a settlement conference, in 
violation of Rule 12.1(a) of the Rules of the Circuit Courts of 
the State of Hawai ri (RCCH). We agree. 
1   The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
On July 14, 2005, Jungblut filed a Complaint against
 
Defendants for negligence stemming from a motor vehicle accident. 
Defendants answered the Complaint and demanded a jury trial. The
 
case was submitted to the Court Annexed Arbitration Program and,
 
on October 31, 2007, Jungblut filed a Notice of Appeal and
 
Request for Trial De Novo from the Arbitration Award that was
 
issued.
 
On March 12, 2008, Defendants moved to dismiss this
 
case for want of prosecution. Based in part on Jungblut's
 
counsel's representations that the delays were his fault, the
 
circuit court denied the motion to dismiss on April 15, 2008.
 
On April 24, 2008, the circuit court issued a Notice of
 
Early Settlement Conference (First Notice) to be held on June 23,
 
2008. Among other things, the First Notice stated that 
(1) lead trial counsel and pro se parties shall attend the
settlement conference in person and (2) the client/insurer
with "full settlement authority" may either attend in person
or be "available by telephone."
 
The First Notice warned the parties that 
[f]ailure to appear at a settlement conference or to comply
with any of the provisions of Circuit Court Rule 12.1 or
 
this Notice may subject a party or their attorney to severe
sanctions, including dismissal.
 
No transcript of the June 23, 2008 conference was included in
 
this record, but it appears that negotiations were not fruitful
 
at that time, the case continued, and discovery was conducted
 
during the ten-month period thereafter.
 
On April 16, 2009, the circuit court issued a second
 
Notice of Early Settlement Conference (Second Notice) setting a
 
settlement conference for June 10, 2009. The Second Notice again
 
included the language quoted above.
 
On June 10, 2009, the parties' attorneys appeared and
 
the following exchange occurred:
 
MR. MYHRE: Good afternoon, Your Honor. Jim Myhre on
behalf of [Defendants].
 
MR. HORNER: Good afternoon, Your Honor. Robin Horner
 
for plaintiff James Jungblut.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: All right. Let the record reflect the
 
absence of plaintiff James Jungblut. And the record should
 
also reflect that this court did orally through Mr. Horner
order Mr. Jungblut to be here personally, and he is not here
today. And so the court is wondering, Mr. Myhre, if your
client has any motion to make.
 
MR. MYHRE: Uh, yes, Your Honor. We would ask that
 
the court dismiss plaintiff's claim in this matter. This
 case has been pending for some time, and it's been the
subject of several different motions including previous
motions for failure to prosecute, motions to compel for not
complying with discovery, a lot of inactivity in the case,
and nonresponsiveness from the plaintiff in this case.
 
We've been through several different early settlement
conferences in this case, and during those settlement
conferences plaintiff did not appear at the settlement
conference. The court tried to propose alternative ways to
have this case resolved through a mock trial previously
which defendants were agreeable to doing.
 
Plaintiff personally, as I understand it, was
represented by his counsel, refused this procedure, and now
here we are. We're a month away from trial or a little more
than a month away from here for final settlement conference
to see if we can get this case resolved. And Mr. Jungblut,
plaintiff, is not here. I believe it's within the court's
 discretion under the rules of court to order him to appear
before a settlement conference personally. He apparently
has chosen not to comply, and for those reasons we would ask
that the court grant our motion to dismiss his claim.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Mr. Horner.
 
MR. HORNER: Uh, thank you. As I -- as I understand
 
the motion, I believe the motion is a motion, oral motion
for sanctions for plaintiff's failure to attend the
settlement conference.
 
THE COURT: Yes.
 
MR. HORNER: Uh, we acknowledge the oral order of the
court for him to appear. We have presented some information
to the court, as we are pleading the plaintiff could not
appear today due to economic hardship. And we have provided
the court with some information to verify that. We argue
that plaintiff by necessity could not attend because he
could not afford the -- to purchase the ticket and still pay
his household expenses.
 
And so due to the economic hardship, and, you know,
the plaintiff is ill, and I don't believe his condition is
stabilized. He lacks sufficient money for treatment. He
 lacks medical insurance. So he cannot maintain steady
employment, so he lacks the financial ability to appear
today. You know, we -- we apologize to the court. We ask
 the court's discretion [sic] in this matter due to his
situation that he could not attend. Thank you.
 
THE COURT: Well, let me ask Mr. Horner. I understand
 
this case is set for trial during the week of July 20, 2009.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
That is this summer. Is it your client's intention to come
here and participate in the trial in July?
 
MR. HORNER: It is my belief that it is his intention
to come here in July participate [sic] in the trial.
 
THE COURT: Okay. You can have a seat.
 
Uh, I think there is already a substantial record of a
lack of activity in the part of the plaintiff to prosecute
this action. And with respect to settlement, this is the
third settlement conference that we have had. The first was
 in June 23, 2008, and at that time there was a further
deposition that was to be taken of independent witness
Mr. Espinoza, Richard Espinoza, E-s-p-i-n-o-z-a.
 
And the court spoke to the parties about the
possibility of alternative dispute resolution in the form of
binding arbitration. And the court continued the settlement
 conference to October 10, 2008 at which time the -- I
believe the deposition of Mr. Espinoza had been taken, and
there was no change in the plaintiff's settlement posture at
all from the June 23rd session to the October session. And
 this is notwithstanding facts in the case that call into
question significant issues regarding plaintiff's ability to
prove and prevail in this action.
 
This is a motor vehicle accident case that arises out
 
of an intersection collision that occurred on July 9, 2002.
This occurred at the intersection of King Street and Punahou
Street which is a signalized intersection. Both vehicles
 were on Punahou Street traveling opposite -- in opposite
directions approaching or traveling toward the intersection.
 
Plaintiff was on the portion of Punahou Street that is
on the makai or south side of King Street headed in the
mauka or north direction. The plaintiff was driving a brown
vehicle. The defendant was driving a gray vehicle. He was
 also on Punahou Street but traveling in the opposite
direction or approaching the intersection traveling in the
north to south direction. Plaintiff was traveling south to
north. And as both vehicles approached the intersection,
the plaintiff claims that he had the green light and he was
intending to drive straight through the intersection of King
Street and Punahou Street.
 
The defendant indicated that he was intending to turn
left from Punahou Street onto King Street and that he came
to a stop or he was driving behind two vehicles that also
were approaching Punahou [sic] Street. And then the
 defendant claims that he had eventually a green arrow to
allow him to turn left, and while he was in the process of
executing his left turn on a green arrow, the plaintiff
entered the intersection and a collision occurred. So both
 vehicles claim that they had the right of way -- plaintiff,
by virtue of a green light, and the defendant, by virtue of
 a green arrow.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Um, there is the testimony of an independent witness
who was at the time of the accident having lunch at Pee-Wee
Drive-In which is located on the corner of Punahou and King
Street at the intersection. Mr. Espinoza is a 51-year-old
married gentleman, and he testifies in his deposition as
follows:
 
Question: 
What happened?
 
Answer: Well, I was eating my lunch, and I heard
squealing tires. So I looked up, and I witnessed the brown
car coming mauka on Punahou across the intersection about
mid -- mid-intersection, a little past mid-intersection, and
it struck the vehicle making a left turn. From where I was
 sitting, I looked up immediate -- excuse me. I looked
 immediately up to the signal because it was right in my
view. It was just to the left, and I saw that the arrow was
green for the car turning left which was the gray vehicle.
 
. . . . 
[THE COURT:] With that objective eye witness
testimony, there is -- together with the testimony of the
defendant, there are significant questions regarding
liability and right-of-way in this case. And there is also
 a question of severity of injury as the defendant indicates
the cost of repair of damage to the defendant's vehicle was
$383.44. And there was no cost estimate for the repair of
plaintiff's vehicle.
 
So notwithstanding these facts, the plaintiff has
maintained a substantial settlement demand that has not
 waivered [sic] at all even through today, the third
settlement conference. And the defendant, in light of the
liability issues in the case and damages question, has only
been willing to make a nominal settlement offer. And the
 court is perplexed by the plaintiff's insistence on
maintaining a substantial settlement demand in light of the
facts of this case and the law that applies to this case.
 
And this court has been trying to, if not settle the
case, direct the parties to alternative dispute resolution
in one form or another. And the defense indicated a
 willingness to do that, but the plaintiff has not indicated
any willingness to explore ADR in lieu of going to trial.
 
So this court was very interested in having a face-to­
face chat with Mr. Jungblut to explore the reasons why he
feels that he is entitled to a substantial sum of money in a
case that has significant questions regarding liability and
fault. Talking over the phone or through an attorney does
not satisfy this court's experience or belief based on
experience that negotiations face to face are by far the
most effective means of exploring settlement possibilities.
 
With the plaintiff sitting in the comfort of his home,
he can be very confident in not agreeing to altering his
settlement position at all, but this court has found that
when parties are eye to eye across the table that settlement
discussions are substantially more effective. And in light
of the liability questions in this case, this court is of
the opinion that face-to-face negotiations are clearly
indicated and Mr. Jungblut's inability to be here frustrated
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
this court's ability to understand Mr. Jungblut's position
in light of the facts of the case.
 
There has been no showing of good faith on the part of
Mr. Jungblut in terms of prosecuting this case or to explore
in a meaningful way settlement options or alternative
dispute options. And the court views Mr. Jungblut's
inability to be present today as yet another indication that
is interfering with this court's orderly administration of
this case.
 
So for these and any other good cause shown in the
record, the court finds and concludes that there is good
cause to dismiss the instant case with prejudice. And so
 therefore the court will grant the oral motion by the
defense.
 
Upon asking the parties' attorneys for further
 
argument, Jungblut's attorney represented that Jungblut was
 
willing to appear by way of telephone and pointed out that if the
 
circuit court believed an in-person appearance was necessary for
 
this settlement conference, the insurance representative should
 
have been ordered to appear in person as well.
 
The circuit court explained that, based on its
 
discussion with Jungblut's counsel just prior to the settlement
 
conference, it understood Jungblut had not changed his position
 
"at all" regarding settlement. As to requiring the adjuster to
 
be present the circuit court noted that the defense had been
 
"reasonable" and shown some "latitude" regarding its settlement
 
offer in the past, but that because Jungblut had not changed his
 
position regarding settlement, there seemed to be no need for the
 
adjuster to alter his settlement position or to be present for
 
further negotiations. The circuit court continued,
 
This court was of the mind that the party who was standing
in the way of settlement was the plaintiff, and that's who
this court needed to negotiate with eye to eye. The defense
 was prepared to negotiate, and so this court did not believe
it was necessary to have the adjuster physically present.
And for the record the court was advised that the adjuster
is also available by telephone.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2
On June 26, 2009, based RCCH Rule 12.1(a)(6),  the
circuit court issued an order dismissing Jungblut's Complaint
 
with prejudice. On July 17, 2009, the circuit court entered
 
Final Judgment, from which Jungblut timely filed this appeal.
 
II.

 
3
On appeal, Jungblut argues  the circuit court abused
its discretion when it dismissed Jungblut's Complaint for the
 
following reasons: (1) Jungblut should not have been required to
 
appear in person when Defendants' insurance representative was
 
not so ordered although neither had significantly changed their
 
2    HCCR Rule 12.1(a)(6) provides, 
SANCTIONS.  The failure of a party or his attorney to appear at a 
scheduled settlement conference, the neglect of a party or his attorney to 
discuss or attempt to negotiate a settlement prior to the conference, or the failure of a party to have a person authorized to settle the case present at the conference shall, unless a good cause for such failure or neglect is shown, be deemed an undue interference with orderly procedures.  As sanctions, the court may, in its discretion: 
(i) Dismiss the action on its own motion, or on the motion of any 
party or hold a party in default, as the case may be; 
(ii) Order a party to pay the opposing party's reasonable 
expenses and attorneys' fees; 
(iii) Order a change in the calendar status of the action; 
(iv) Impose any other sanction as may be appropriate.
3   Jungblut's point on appeal is in noncompliance with Hawai ri Rules of Appellate 
Procedure Rule 28(b)(4) as it does not state "(ii) where in the record the alleged error occurred; and (iii) where in the record the alleged error was objected to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to the attention of the court."  On this basis alone we could refuse to consider it. O'Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawai ri 383, 385, 885 P.2d 361, 363 (1994); 
Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai ri 225, 228, 909 P.2d 553, 556 (1995); City & Cnty. of 
Honolulu v. Kailua Auto Wreckers, Inc., 66 Haw. 532, 533, 668 P.2d 34, 35 (1983).  Counsel is cautioned that future violations of the rules may result in sanctions. 
Notwithstanding this violation, as the appellate courts in this jurisdiction have a 
policy of deciding a case on its merits, where possible, O'Connor, 77 Hawai ri at 386, 885 P.2d at 
364, we address Jungblut's point on appeal on the merits. 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
respective settlement positions; (2) Jungblut should have been
 
contacted by telephone at the settlement conference; (3) the
 
financial hardship caused by requiring Jungblut to appear at the
 
settlement conference was not adequately considered; and
 
(4) Jungblut's mental illness should have been considered.
 
The Hawai ri Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) authorize 
the involuntary dismissal of a case for the failure to prosecute, 
to comply with the HRCP, or to comply with a court order.4 
However, "[d]ismissals with prejudice are not favored," Richardson v. Lane, 6 Haw. App. 614, 619, 736 P.2d 63, 67 (1987), 
and "[t]he power of the court to prevent undue delays and to 
achieve the orderly disposition of cases must be weighed against 
the policy of law which favors disposition of litigation on its 
merits." Id. at 619, 736 P.2d at 68 (quoting Marshall v. 
Sielaff, 492 F.2d 917, 918 (3d Cir. 1974)); see also Shasteen, Inc. v. Hilton Hawaiian Village Joint Venture, 79 Hawai
ri 103, 
107, 899 P.2d 386, 390 (1995). 
The review of a dismissal under HRCP Rule 41(b) is for 
abuse of discretion, Shasteen, 79 Hawai ri at 107, 899 P.2d at 390 
(quoting Compass Dev. Inc. v. Blevins, 10 Haw. App. 388, 397, 876 
4     HRCP Rule 41(b), governing involuntary dismissals, provides, 
(1)  For failure of the plaintiff to prosecute or to comply with these 
rules or any order of court, a defendant  may move for dismissal of an 
action or of any claim against it. 
(2) For failure to prosecute or to comply with these rules or any 
order of the court, the court may sua sponte dismiss an action or any claim with written notice to the parties.  Such dismissal may be set aside and the action or claim reinstated by order of the court for good cause shown upon motion duly filed not later than 10 days from the date of the order of dismissal. 
(3) Unless the court in its order for dismissal otherwise specifies, a 
dismissal under this subdivision and any dismissal not provided for in this rule, other than a dismissal for lack of jurisdiction, for improper venue, or for failure to join a party under Rule 19, operates as an adjudication upon the merits. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
P.2d 1335, 1340 (1994)), and "[a]bsent deliberate delay,
 
contumacious conduct or actual prejudice" an order of dismissal
 
cannot be affirmed. Id. (quoting Lim v. Harvis Constr., Inc.,
 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
65 Haw. 71, 73 647 P.2d 290, 292 (1982) (internal quotation marks
 
omitted).
 
The record does not support any of these preconditions. 
In ruling on Defendants' motion to dismiss, the circuit court
 
relied upon Jungblut's absence from the conference as its
 
primary, if not only, reason for dismissing the Complaint. 
Initially, we question the practice of requiring the physical
 
presence of one party, but not the other, for a settlement
 
conference.
 
In any event, the circuit court did not find that
 
Jungblut's absence from the settlement conference was
 
contumacious nor did it find that Jungblut's absence amounted to
 
deliberate delay of the proceedings in this case or that
 
Defendants were actually prejudiced by the nonappearance. 
Moreover, the circuit court did not address Jungblut's proffered
 
reason for his nonappearance, that is, that it would have been a
 
severe economic hardship for him to attend because he could not
 
afford to purchase the plane ticket and still pay his household
 
expenses. 
Finally, "[w]hile a court has inherent power to dismiss
 
a case for want of prosecution, a dismissal of a complaint is
 
such a severe sanction, that it should be used only in extreme
 
circumstances when there is a clear record of delay or
 
contumacious conduct and where lesser sanctions would not serve
 
the interest of justice." Compass Dev., Inc., 10 Haw. App. at
 
396, 876 P.2d at 1339 (quoting Lim, 65 Haw. at 73, 647 P.2d at
 292) (brackets, elipsis, and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The record does not reflect whether lesser sanctions, such as
 
taxation of Defendants' costs for their attorney's time at the
 
settlement conference and rescheduling the settlement conference
 
to a date just before trial, when Jungblut did plan to return to
 
the state, could have both served the circuit court's concerns
 
regarding a meaningful settlement conference and would have
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
compensated Defendants for their expenses in sending counsel to
 
the aborted settlement conference.
 
III.
 
The July 17, 2009 Final Judgment of the Circuit Court
 
of the First Circuit is vacated and the case is remanded for
 
proceedings not inconsistent with this memorandum opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai ri, September 30, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Robin R. Horner,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 Associate Judge

James V. Myhre
Robert A. Mash,for Defendants-Appellees.
 
Associate Judge

11

 