NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29381 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ATLANTIC CREDIT & FINANCE INC., Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
EDWARD N. MAHAULU, aka EDWARD MAHAULU, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
NORTH AND SOUTH HILO DIVISION
 
(CIVIL NO. 3RC07-1-092)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In an appeal from a civil lawsuit arising out of
 
allegations of breach of a credit card agreement, Defendant-
Appellant Edward N. Mahaulu, 
pro se, (Mahaulu) appeals from the
 
September 3, 2008 "Order Denying Defendant's Motion To Vacate A
 
Void Judgment Filed November 16, 2007" (Order Denying Motion To
 
Vacate Judgment) issued by the District Court of the Third
 
Circuit, North and South Hilo Division (district court).1
 
Mahaulu articulates several points of error in his
 
opening brief, but none of the points he raises address the Order
 
Denying Motion To Vacate Judgment. Rather, Mahaulu's points of
 
error on appeal are focused only on the district court's previous
 
orders that: granted a reconsideration motion and a summary
 
1
 The Honorable Harry P. N. Freitas presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment motion in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Atlantic Credit &
 
Finance, Inc. (Atlantic Credit); and granted in part Mahaulu's
 
motion to alter or amend judgment.
 
Mahaulu asserts that the district court committed plain
 
error by relying on documents submitted through the declaration
 
of Heather Clary, Atlantic Credit's Assistant Director, that
 
allegedly did not meet the requirements of Rule 56(e) of the
 
District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP). Mahaulu argues
 
that, due to this alleged error, the district court lost subject
 
matter jurisdiction and the case should have been immediately
 
dismissed. Mahaulu further argues that the district court
 
committed plain error by not requiring Atlantic Credit to prove
 
that it was the actual "holder in due course" of the alleged note
 
and to prove damages.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, having given due consideration to the
 
arguments advanced by the parties and the relevant statutory and
 
case law, we resolve Mahaulu's points of error as follows.
 
We first address the threshold matter of this court's 
jurisdiction. Mahaulu failed to timely appeal from either the 
district court's October 31, 2007 summary judgment order or the 
November 7, 2007 judgment in favor of Atlantic Credit. In order 
for Mahaulu to have preserved appellate review of the October 31, 
2007 summary judgment order and the November 7, 2007 judgment, he 
would have had to file a notice of appeal no later than 
December 19, 2007. See Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
(HRAP) Rule 4(a)(3) (2006).2 December 19, 2007 was thirty days 
after entry of the November 19, 2007 order disposing of Mahaulu's 
2
 HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) extends the appeal period when a party files
certain timely motions, including a motion to alter or amend a judgment.
Mahaulu timely filed a motion to alter or amend judgment on November 8, 2007,
and therefore, "the time for filing the notice of appeal [was] extended until
30 days after entry of an order disposing of the motion[.]" HRAP Rule 4(a)(3).
 
2
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
motion to alter or amend the judgment.3 The first notice of
 
appeal filed by Mahaulu was on January 14, 2008 (which referenced
 
that he was appealing from the district court's denial of his
 
Motion to Vacate a Void Judgment). Therefore, although Mahaulu
 
made belated attempts to assert that he was appealing from all of
 
the decisions by the district court, he never timely appealed
 
from the October 31, 2007 summary judgment order or the
 
November 7, 2007 judgment. Bacon v. Karlin, 68 Haw. 648, 650,
 
727 P.2d 1127, 1129 (1986) ("an appellant's failure to file a
 timely notice of appeal is a jurisdictional defect that can
 
neither be waived by the parties nor disregarded by the court in
 
the exercise of judicial discretion") (internal quotation marks
 
and brackets omitted).
 
We therefore address Mahaulu's points on appeal only to 
the extent that they implicate the district court's subject 
matter jurisdiction in this case. See Lingle v. Hawai' i Gov't 
Employees Ass'n, AFSCME, Local 152, 107 Hawai' i 178, 182, 111 
P.3d 587, 591 (2005) ("Questions regarding subject matter 
jurisdiction may be raised at any stage of a cause of action. 
When reviewing a case where the circuit court lacked subject 
matter jurisdiction, the appellate court retains jurisdiction, 
not on the merits, but for the purpose of correcting the error in 
jurisdiction."). 
Our review of the record confirms that the district
 
court properly exercised jurisdiction in adjudicating the claims
 
in this case. Mahaulu is incorrect in his assertion that the
 
district court would lose jurisdiction by allegedly failing
 
3
 Although the district court also issued a "corrected" order on
December 5, 2007 regarding Mahaulu's motion to alter or amend judgment, the
corrected order made non-substantive amendments and therefore did not extend the appeal period. See Poe v. Hawaii Labor Relations Bd., 98 Hawai' i 416,
418, 49 P.3d 382, 384 (2002). Moreover, even if December 5, 2007 was thetriggering date for the appeal period, Mahaulu still did not appeal withinthirty days of that date. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to ensure that documents referred to in the declaration of
 
Heather Clary met the requirements of DCRCP Rule 56(e). We also
 
find no merit in any other issue raised by Mahaulu questioning
 
the district court's jurisdiction.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the district
 
court's September 3, 2008 Order Denying Motion To Vacate Judgment
 
is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 9, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Edward N. Mahaulu 
for Defendant-Appellant pro se 
Marvin S.C. DangJason M. Oliver (Law Offices of
Marvin S.C. Dang, LLLC)
for Plaintiff-Appellee Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
4
 