  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29654
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MICHAEL JAMES GALON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0042K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Michael James Galon (Galon) 
appeals from the Judgment filed on January 23, 2009, in the 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).1 Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged Galon by complaint with 
two counts of promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree; two counts of unlawful use of drug paraphernalia; and one count of promoting a detrimental drug in the third degree. Galon entered a conditional guilty plea as to all counts, in which he reserved the right to appeal the denial of his "Motion to Suppress Evidence and Statements." The Circuit Court sentenced Galon to concurrent term of five years of imprisonment on the felony counts and thirty days on the petty misdemeanor count. We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. 
1 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
On appeal, Galon challenges the validity of a search
 
warrant for his residence and his person which resulted in the
 
recovery of incriminating evidence. The search warrant was based
 on information provided by a cooperating individual (Cooperator). 
The Cooperator contacted the police as a victim of domestic
 violence, seeking assistance from the police because she had been
 assaulted by her live-in boyfriend. Galon was not the
 Cooperator's boyfriend. In addition to reporting the assault,
 the Cooperator provided the police with information about
 individuals, including Galon, whom she stated were involved in
 drug trafficking. The Cooperator admitted that she had
 previously distributed crystal methamphetamine, was a user of
 methamphetamine and marijuana, and was familiar with these drugs. 
Officer Jeremy Lewis (Officer Lewis) prepared an
 
affidavit in support of a warrant to search Galon's residence and
 his person. The affidavit reveals the name of the Cooperator;
 describes the circumstances under which she contacted the police
 for assistance and provided information about the distribution of
 narcotics; and details her admissions regarding her own
 involvement in the distribution and use of illicit narcotics. 
The affidavit states that the Cooperator provided the following
 information to Officer Lewis: (1) Galon was distributing crystal
 methamphetamine in Kailua-Kona; (2) the Cooperator identified the
 street where Galon lived; (3) on one occasion, the Cooperator (a)
 observed Galon in his car in possession of approximately seven
 packets, each containing an "eight ball" or one-eighth ounce of
 crystal methamphetamine, that were in Galon's fanny pack; (b) the
 Cooperator went in the car with Galon to his residence; (c) while
 the Cooperator was at the residence, an unknown male attempted to
 buy drugs from Galon, the Cooperator saw the fanny pack
 containing the crystal methamphetamine in Galon's bedroom, and
 the Cooperator saw Galon smoke crystal methamphetamine from an
 "ice" pipe in the livingroom; and (d) Galon drove to another
 location where Cooperator saw Galon and another person smoke
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
crystal methamphetamine using a glass pipe. Officer Lewis's
 
affidavit further states that the Cooperator was shown an arrest
 photograph of Galon, which she positively identified as depicting
 Galon. The affidavit also attached a copy of Galon's "Criminal
 Justice Inquiry -- Full Rap Sheet" (Rap Sheet) which showed that
 Galon had an extensive criminal record. 
II.
 
Galon argues that Officer Lewis's affidavit did not
 
establish probable cause for the issuance of the search warrant
 because: 1) the affidavit did not contain sufficient information
 to support a belief by Officer Lewis that the Cooperator was
 credible or the information she provided was reliable; (2) the
 Cooperator was more like the "usual police informer" rather than
 an "ordinary citizen who witnesses a crime," and thus
 
circumstances indicating that the Cooperator was credible or the
 
information she provided was reliable was required; and (3)
 without the Cooperator's statements, the affidavit does not
 support a finding of probable cause for the issuance of the
 search warrant. Based on these arguments, Galon asserts that the
 Circuit Court erred in upholding the validity of the search
 warrant. 
We resolve Galon's arguments as follows:
 
A.
 
We conclude that the affidavit contained sufficient
 
information to support a belief by Officer Lewis, and the judge
 issuing the warrant, that the Cooperator was credible or the
 information she provided was reliable. We further conclude that
 the affidavit, including the Cooperator's statements, established
 probable cause for the search warrant. Accordingly, the Circuit
 Court did not err in upholding the validity of the warrant and in
 denying Galon's amended and first supplemental motions to
 suppress evidence and statements. 
We review de novo a judge's determination of probable
 
cause for the issuance of a search warrant. Carlisle ex. rel.
 
State v. Ten Thousand Four Hundred Forty-Seven Dollars in U.S.
 
3
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Currency ($10,477.00), 104 Hawai' i 323, 328, 89 P.3d 823, 828 
(2004). The Hawai' i Supreme Court applies the two prong test 
announced in Aguilar v. Texas, 378 U.S. 108 (1964), and expounded 
upon in Spinelli v. United States, 393 U.S. 410 (1969), for evaluating the validity of search warrants based on hearsay information provided by an informant. Carlisle, 104 Hawai' i at 
330, 89 P.3d at 830. 
Under this test, the affidavit must contain [1] some of the
underlying circumstances from which the informant concluded
that the narcotics were where he claimed they were, and [2]
some of the underlying circumstances from which the officer
concluded that the informant, whose identity need not be
disclosed[,] was credible or his information reliable. 
Id. (internal quotation marks, ellipsis points, emphasis, and
 
citations omitted).
 
Galon concedes that the first prong of the Aguilar test
 
was satisfied since the information provided by the Cooperator
 was based on her personal observations. Galon, however, contends
 
that Officer Lewis's affidavit fails the second prong of the
 
Aguilar test because Galon asserts that Officer Lewis's affidavit
 "does not have any information regarding why [the Cooperator's]
 hearsay statements are trustworthy or credible." We disagree.
 
We conclude that Officer Lewis's affidavit, as required
 
by Aguilar, contains sufficient information of the underlying
 circumstances to support Officer Lewis's conclusion that the
 Cooperator was credible or the information she provided was
 reliable. The affidavit states that the Cooperator approached
 the police as a crime victim. The affidavit reveals that the
 Cooperator volunteered to provide information about others she
 knew were involved in drug trafficking. And, in providing such
 information, the Cooperator admitted to her own involvement in
 illegal drug activity, including that she previously distributed
 crystal methamphetamine and was a user of crystal methamphetamine
 and marijuana. 
The Cooperator's admissions about her prior
 
distribution and her use of illicit drugs were self-incriminating
 and against her penal interests. Such admissions are relevant
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
indicia of the Cooperator's credibility and provide a basis for
 
Officer Lewis to conclude that the Cooperator was credible and
 was providing reliable information. State v. Yaw, 58 Haw. 485,
 
490, 572 P.2d 856, 860 (1977) (concluding that admissions against
 penal interest have been considered to be a relevant indicia of
 an informant's credibility); United States v. Harris, 403 U.S.
 573, 583-84 (1971) (plurality opinion) ("Admissions of crime,
 like admissions against proprietary interests, carry their own
 indicia of credibility -- sufficient at least to support a
 finding of probable cause to search."); State v. Goldberg, 519
 A.2d 907, 910 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1986) ("[W]hen a cocaine
 user voluntarily turns in his supplier to the police in the hope
 of shaking his reliance on the drug, and in doing so admits his
 own criminal conduct, such evidence sharply increases the degree
 of reliability needed for the issuance of a search warrant.").
 
Officer Lewis's affidavit also contains information 
that corroborates aspects of the Cooperator's statements. Officer Lewis attached Galon's Rap Sheet as part of the affidavit. This Rap Sheet showed that Galon had been convicted of numerous felony and misdemeanor offenses and that he had been arrested on one occasion for drug offenses. See State v. Navas 
81 Hawai' i 29, 36, 911 P.2d 1101, 1108 (App. 1995) ("The use of 
prior arrests and convictions to aid in establishing probable cause is not only permissible, but is often helpful. This is especially so where, as in the matter presently before the court, the previous arrest or conviction involves a crime of the same general nature as the one which the warrant is seeking to uncover." (quoting United States v. Conley, 4 F.3d 1200, 1207 (3d Cir. 1993))). The Rap Sheet contained Galon's residence address which corroborated the Cooperator's statement regarding the street on which Galon lived. The affidavit also states that the Cooperator identified an arrest photograph of Galon shown to her by the police as a picture of Galon. The corroboration of 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
certain aspects of the Cooperator's statement by independent
 
information obtained by Officer Lewis provides additional support
 for the conclusion that information the Cooperator provided was
 reliable. 
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that Officer
 
Lewis's affidavit established probable cause for the issuance of
 the search warrant. Therefore, the Circuit Court properly denied
 Galon's amended and first supplemental motions to suppress
 evidence and statements. 
B.
 
We need not decide whether the Cooperator should be
 
viewed more like the "usual police informer" rather than an
 "ordinary citizen who witnesses a crime." Galon contends that
 
this distinction is relevant because Officer Lewis's affidavit is
 
devoid of information showing that the Cooperator was credible or
 the information she provided was reliable, and thus the validity
 the affidavit depends solely on the presumption of reliability
 given to an ordinary citizen who witnesses a crime. See State v.
 
Decano, 60 Haw. 205, 210-11, 588 P.2d 909, 913-14 (1978) (stating
 that information given by a ordinary citizen who witnesses a
 crime is presumed reliable). However, contrary to Galon's
 contention, Officer Lewis's affidavit is not devoid of
 information regarding the Cooperator's credibility or the
 reliability of her information. We have already concluded that
 the affidavit contains sufficient information to support Officer
 Lewis's conclusion that the Cooperator was credible or the
 information she provided was reliable.
 
We also need not address Galon's argument that without
 
the Cooperator's statements, Officer Lewis's affidavit fails to
 establish probable cause for the search warrant. We have
 determined that the judge issuing the warrant properly considered
 the Cooperator's statements in evaluating whether the affidavit
 established probable cause.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
We affirm the January 23, 2009, Judgment of the Circuit
 
Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 26, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
James Biven 
for Defendant-Appelllant Chief Judge 
Linda L. Walton Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 