NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 28389
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI fI 
STATE OF HAWAI fI, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CURTIS P. WORSHAM, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 06-1-1079)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Curtis P. Worsham (Worsham) appeals
 
from the January 22, 2007 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence of
 
1
the Family Court of the First Circuit (family court),  convicting
Worsham of violating an order for protection, in violation of
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 586-11 (2006).
 
Worsham raises the following points of error on appeal:
 
(1)
 the family court abused its discretion in allowing hearsay
 
from the investigating police officer, in allowing that officer
 to give his opinion as to the complaining witness's (CW)
 
credibility, and in allowing that officer to indirectly volunteer
 
his personal opinion on an ultimate issue; and (2) defense
 
counsel rendered ineffective assistance by failing to subpoena a
 
necessary alibi witness, failing to obtain a relevant report made
 
by Worsham against the CW, and engaging in harmful cross-
examination. We find both points to be without merit and affirm.
 
1
 The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Worsham argues that the family court abused its
 
discretion in improperly admitting, over objection, hearsay
 
testimony of the CW for a limited purpose under Feliciano and
 
committed plain error in permitting the State to weave that
 
hearsay into questions eliciting the police officer's opinion as
 
to the credibility of the CW. Under State v. Feliciano, 2 Haw.
 
App. 633, 636, 638 P.2d 866, 869 (1982) (citing State v. Perez,
 
64 Haw. 232, 638 P.2d 335 (1981)), a trial court may "admit
 
extrajudicial statements offered to explain an officer's conduct
 
during the investigation procedures leading up to the arrest of
 
the defendant, but not for their truth."
 
Here, it appears that the testimony regarding out-of­
court statements of the CW was properly admitted, not to prove
 
the truth of what the CW said, but to establish the basis for the
 
officer's subsequent actions. In addition, the family court
 
issued a contemporaneous limiting instruction and the CW
 
testified at trial and was subject to cross-examination. 
Worsham's argument that incriminating out-of-court
 
statements are not admissible under Feliciano is without merit. 
While it is true that the Feliciano court noted that the hearsay
 
involved there was not incriminating, the decision did not limit
 
its holding to non-incriminating statements. Moreover, Perez,
 
cited with approval by the Feliciano court, was a case involving
 
incriminating statements. Perez, 64 Haw. at 233, 638 P.2d at 336
 
("The guy you looking for is Leroy Perez.").
 
Worsham also challenges the officer's testimony
 
regarding the consistency of the CW's oral and written statements
 on state and federal confrontation clause grounds. Worsham
 
argues that questions regarding whether the CW's written
 
statement was consistent with what she orally told the officer
 
was tantamount to a request for an opinion from the officer as to
 
the CW's credibility. However, a review of the record supports
 
the conclusion that the officer was simply testifying to a fact,
 
i.e., whether the oral and written statements were consistent. 
He was not asked for and did not opine on the CW's credibility. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Worsham argues that defense counsel rendered
 
ineffective assistance by failing to subpoena a necessary alibi
 
witness, by failing to obtain a relevant police report made by
 
Worsham, and by harmful cross-examination.
 
Worsham's unverified assertions concerning his trial 
counsel's failure to subpoena a necessary alibi witness and to 
obtain a relevant police report made by Worsham are insufficient 
to satisfy Worsham's burden of proving ineffective assistance of 
counsel. State v. Reed, 77 Hawai fi 72, 83-85, 881 P.2d 1218, 
1229-31 (1994), overruled on other grounds by State v. Balanza, 93 Hawai
fi 279, 1 P.3d 281 (2000). Worsham's uncorroborated 
assertions regarding (1) what Joshua Godbolt would have testified to if called as a witness and (2) the existence of a police 
report made by Worsham against the CW for a January 21, 2006 
phone call is insufficient to establish his ineffective 
assistance of counsel claim under Reed. Moreover, assuming there 
is evidence of a subsequent protective order violation complaint 
by Worsham against CW, it would be of marginal if any relevance 
to the instant prosecution against Worsham. 
Worsham's claims concerning his trial counsel's harmful
 
cross-examination are also unconvincing. It appears that the
 
elicitation of testimony pertaining to previous violations of the
 
protection order by Worsham was not the result of ineffective
 
assistance of counsel but was based on counsel's pretrial
 
discovery which showed no previous complaints.
 
Likewise, while Worsham's counsel may have inartfully
 
fleshed out the "visibility" factor as it pertained to the
 
witnesses' identifications of Worsham, there was ample testimony
 
upon which counsel could argue that the State's witnesses'
 
identifications were suspect. In any event, the area of cross-
examination by counsel is in the realm of trial strategy in which
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel is given broad latitude. State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419,
 
441-42, 864 P.2d 583, 593 (1993).
 
Based on the foregoing, it is hereby ordered that the
 
January 22, 2007 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence of the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai fi, June 29, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Mary Ann Barnard,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
 
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 