NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 28207
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
AUSTIN ASHLEY, MARISSA ASHLEY and
ACTION TEAM REALTY, INC., Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
TODD E. HART and HART OF KONA REALTY, INC.,
Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
DEBRA A. HART, Defendant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(S.P. NO. 06-1-0010K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Todd E. Hart (Todd Hart) and Hart
 
of Kona Realty, Inc. (HKRI) (collectively Hart Appellants) appeal
 
from the September 20, 2006 Final Judgment entered by the Circuit
 
1
Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court)  in favor of
Plaintiffs-Appellees Austin Ashley, Marissa Ashley, and Action

 
Team Realty, Inc. (collectively, the Ashleys) confirming a Final
 Arbitration Award dated June 5, 2006 (Arbitration Award). The
 
Final Judgment was entered pursuant to the circuit court's
 
September 11, 2006 order granting the Ashleys' motion to confirm,
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and denying the Hart Appellants' motion to vacate, the
 
Arbitration Award.
 
For the reasons discussed below, we vacate the Final
 
Judgment in favor of the Ashleys and remand for further
 
proceedings. The Hart Appellants raise a number of issues on
 
appeal, most of which we reject. However, further proceedings
 
are necessary under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 658A­
23(a)(2)(C) (Supp. 2010) with respect to: the Arbitrator's
 
apparent ex parte consultation with an attorney in her office;
 
and two apparent ex parte telephone contacts between the
 
Arbitrator and counsel for the Ashleys. 
I. Case Background
 
This case arises from a Sale of Assets Agreement 
(Agreement) dated November 4, 2004 and entered into between 
Action Team Realty, Inc., whose principals were Todd Hart and 
Debra Hart (collectively the Harts), and Ashley Realty, Inc.2 
The Agreement called for, among other things, the assets of Action Team Realty, Inc. to be delivered to Ashley Realty, Inc., 
for the Harts to refrain from competition in real estate on the 
island of Hawai
'i, and for Todd Hart to act as principal broker 
for the Ashleys after the sale for a period of time. 
A dispute between the parties subsequently arose,
 
wherein the Ashleys claimed that the Harts breached the Agreement
 
because, inter alia: Todd Hart failed to comply with the non­
compete provision by appropriating to himself certain real estate
 
listings and by continuing to use the name of the company he
 
sold; the Harts failed to disclose potential lawsuits; and Todd
 
Hart failed to serve properly as principal broker for the company
 
purchased by the Ashleys. The Harts in turn claimed that the
 
Ashleys were liable for breach of contract for allegedly
 
2
 Debra Hart is not a party to the appeal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
discontinuing payments required under the Agreement. The parties
 
agreed to submit the dispute to arbitration before Arbitrator
 
Shawn Nakoa (Arbitrator). The arbitration provision in the
 
Agreement stated:
 
In the event of any disagreement or dispute with respect to
the rights or obligations of the Parties under this
Agreement, such disagreement or dispute shall be determined
by a single arbitrator selected by the Parties or, in the
event the Parties are unable to mutually agree upon a single
arbitrator, to a single arbitrator appointed by the [circuit
court] as provided by [HRS] Chapter 658. . . . The award of
the arbitrator shall be final, conclusive and binding upon
the Parties to this Agreement except as may otherwise be
provided in [HRS] Chapter 658 but such award shall not be
subject to further appeal.
3
 
Following arbitration hearings on March 29-30, 2006,
 
the Arbitrator found in favor of the Ashleys and against the
 
Harts. On June 5, 2006, the Arbitrator issued the Arbitration
 
Award, which determined that: Todd Hart committed multiple
 
breaches of the covenant not to compete under the Agreement; Todd
 
Hart committed multiple breaches of the warranty of quiet
 
enjoyment under the Agreement; given the multiple breaches by
 
Todd Hart, the Ashleys' failure to continue making monthly
 
payments under the Agreement was reasonable and they did not
 
materially breach the Agreement. The following award was made:
 
The Arbitrator hereby releases [the Ashleys']
obligations under the subject Promissory Note and Mortgage.
In addition, the Arbitrator hereby awards [the Ashleys]
$500,000.00 in damages. [The Ashleys] are awarded attorney's
fees and Arbitration costs pursuant to the [Agreement]. In
 addition, [the Harts] shall not use the tag line or logo
"Call Todd!" in the future.
 
The Harts were also ordered to pay attorney's fees and costs in
 
the amount of $68,564.88.
 
3
 Although the Agreement references HRS Chapter 658, that chapter was
repealed by legislative action in 2001 and replaced by HRS Chapter 658A
effective July 1, 2002. Pursuant to HRS § 658A-3(c), "[a]fter June 30, 2004,
this chapter governs an agreement to arbitrate whenever made."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The parties thereafter continued to litigate this
 
matter before the circuit court. On June 9, 2006, the Ashleys
 
filed a motion to confirm the Arbitration Award. On July 27,
 
2006, the Hart Appellants filed a motion to vacate the
 
Arbitration Award. On September 11, 2006, the circuit court
 
issued a single order granting the Ashleys' motion to confirm the
 
Arbitration Award and denying the Hart Appellants' motion to
 
vacate the Arbitration Award. On September 20, 2006, the circuit
 
court entered the judgment in favor of the Ashleys, and this
 
appeal followed.
 
II. Issues on Appeal
 
On appeal, the Hart Appellants contend that the circuit
 
court erred in confirming the Arbitration Award because:
 
(1) the Arbitrator engaged in ex parte communications
 
with the Ashleys' counsel, which was misconduct "prejudicing the
 rights of a party to the arbitration proceeding," and indicates
 
"evident partiality" under HRS § 658A-23 (Supp. 2010); 
(2) the Arbitrator exceeded the scope of her authority
 
by: (a) considering evidence outside of the Arbitration hearing;
 
(b) awarding damages in the amount of $500,000; (c) awarding
 
damages in the form of rescission of the Promissory Note; and
 
(d) ruling on the rights and liabilities of a person who was not
 
a party to the Agreement or the Arbitration proceeding;
 
(3) Ken Ross (Ross), an attorney in the Arbitrator's
 
office who was not appointed by the parties, participated in
 
arbitrating the matter without the consent of the parties and
 
without making appropriate disclosures; 
(4) the Arbitration Award is in violation of public
 
policy; and
 
(5) the Arbitration Award is ambiguous and imperfect
 
as to form.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. Standards of Review
 
"We review the circuit court's ruling on an arbitration 
award de novo, but we also are mindful that the circuit court's 
review of arbitral awards must be extremely narrow and 
exceedingly deferential." Kona Village Realty, Inc. v. Sunstone 
Realty Partners, XIV, LLC, 121 Hawai 'i 110, 112, 214 P.3d 1100, 
1102 (App. 2009) (quoting Tatibouet v. Ellsworth, 99 Hawai 'i 226, 
233, 54 P.3d 397, 404 (2002) (internal quotation marks omitted)). 
Hawaii's appellate courts have repeatedly noted that 
"because of the legislative policy to encourage arbitration and thereby discourage litigation, arbitrators have broad discretion 
in resolving the dispute[,]" and that "where the parties agree to 
arbitrate, they thereby assume all the hazards of the arbitration 
process, including the risk that the arbitrators may make 
mistakes in the application of law and in their findings of 
fact." Kona Village Realty, 121 Hawai
'i at 112, 214 P.3d at 1102 
(quoting Schmidt v. Pac. Benefit Servs., Inc., 113 Hawai 'i 161, 
165-66, 150 P.3d 810, 814-15 (2006)). Consequently, "judicial 
review of an arbitration award is confined to the strictest 
possible limits," Kona Village Realty, 121 Hawai 'i at 112, 214 
P.3d at 1102; Daiichi Hawai 'i Real Estate v. Lichter, 103 Hawai 'i 
325, 336, 82 P.3d 411, 422 (2003). Pursuant to HRS Chapter 658A, 
an arbitration award may only be vacated as specified in HRS § 
658A-23. 
As for the circuit court's findings of fact and 
conclusions of law, we review its findings of fact under the 
clearly erroneous standard and its conclusions of law de novo, 
under the right/wrong standard. Daiichi Hawai 'i Real Estate, 103 
Hawai'i at 337, 82 P.3d at 423. 
IV. Ex Parte Consultation With Ross
 
We take the issues on appeal out-of-order and first
 
address the Hart Appellants' argument that Ross improperly
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
participated in arbitrating the case. The Hart Appellants raise
 
a variety of arguments as to why the Arbitrator's alleged ex
 
parte consultation with Ross should be a basis for vacating the
 
Arbitration Award, including that the Arbitrator exceeded her
 
powers and that the arbitration process was undermined because
 
they did not consent to Ross's participation and Ross did not
 
make disclosures required under HRS § 658A-12.
 
The Agreement authorized a single arbitrator selected
 
by the parties to resolve the parties' disputes. The billing
 
records from the Arbitrator's office reflect that she conferred
 
with Ross for a total of 1.1 hours, with the following entries
 
for work performed by Ross:
 
01-31-06 CONF W/SMN RE POSTPON[E]MENT, ETC. [0.30 hours]
 
04-05-06 CONF W/SMN RE LIABILITY AND DAMAGES [0.30 hours]
 04-18-06 (ACTION TEAM/ASHLEY) REVIEW ARBITRATION
AWARD/CONF W/SMN RE SUGGESTED CHANGES TO AWARD
TO REFLECT DECISION MADE [0.50 hours]
 
It is pointedly disputed in the record on appeal
 
whether or not the parties agreed that the Arbitrator could
 
consult with her colleagues, including Ross. The Hart Appellants
 
contend that they first learned of Ross's participation when they
 
received the Arbitrator's invoices after the Arbitration Award
 
was issued, and that they never consented to his participation. 
To the contrary, the Ashleys contend that at the initial pre-
hearing conference on September 13, 2005, the Arbitrator
 
discussed consulting with her colleagues and the parties agreed. 
The declaration of Stephen Whittaker (Whittaker), counsel for the
 
Ashleys, states that:
 
The Arbitrator raised an issue regarding the rules she would
follow, including her authority to consult with her
colleagues in accordance with the Court Annexed Arbitration
Program. The parties participating, including Ms. Kotner
for Mr. Hart and Hart of Kona Realty, Inc., agreed to apply
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the CAAP rules, to allow the Arbitrator to consult her
colleagues . . . ."4
 
The Hart Appellants respond, relying on the declaration of their
 
counsel Usha Kilpatrick Kotner (Kotner), as follows:
 
I was present at the arbitration pre-hearing conference held
in this matter on September 13, 2005. I do not recall
 discussing the issue of the Arbitrator's authority to
consult with her colleagues at such pre-hearing conference,
or at any other time. I have reviewed my notes written
contemporaneously during the conference, and I do not find
any reference to a discussion regarding the Arbitrator's
authority to consult with her colleagues.
 
The circuit court did not make any findings as to
 
whether the parties discussed and/or agreed to the Arbitrator's
 
consultation with her colleagues, did not make any conclusions as
 
to the alleged lack of consent or disclosures related to Ross,
 
and did not address any potential prejudice to the Hart
 
Appellants. The circuit court instead made the limited ruling
 
that the Arbitrator did not exceed her powers because:
 
"Defendants do not point to any specific provision in Chapter
 
658A, HRS, which prohibits the Arbitrator consulting with anyone
 
in her office"; and, to the extent the American Arbitration
 
Association's (AAA) Code of Ethics for Arbitrators applied, it
 
assumes an arbitrator can receive assistance from others in the
 
arbitrator's office.5 In our view, these rulings do not properly
 
address or resolve the issue.
 
4 The Ashleys assert that under CAAP guidelines, an arbitrator may
consult with colleagues. Following the pre-hearing conference, in
correspondence to the parties dated September 19, 2005, the Arbitrator noted
there was a discussion at the pre-hearing conference about using the CAAP
procedures, but that she had determined that HRS Chapter 658A applied. There
 is no reference in the correspondence to consulting with her colleagues and it
is unclear what import the discussion on the CAAP rules has to this issue.
5
 The circuit court did not address that the AAA Code of Ethics
 
provision it quoted also provided that the arbitrator should inform the
parties of the use of assistance from others. Nonetheless, because the AAA
rules were not adopted in the Agreement in this case, it is of limited use.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
A significant question raised by the Hart Appellants is 
whether the arbitration process was undermined due to Ross's 
participation. Although there does not appear to be controlling 
Hawai'i case law addressing a similar circumstance, cases from 
federal courts provide some guidance, suggesting that the 
relevant inquiry is whether an arbitrator's alleged ex parte 
communications with a consultant or expert rose to the level of 
prejudicial misconduct.6 See United States Life Ins. Co. v. 
Superior Nat'l Ins. Co., 591 F.3d 1167 (9th Cir. 2010); Lefkovitz 
v. Wagner, 395 F.3d 773 (7th Cir. 2005); Journal Times v.
 
Milwaukee Typographical Union No. 23, 409 F. Supp. 24 (D.Wis.
 
1976). "The burden of establishing grounds for vacating an
 
arbitration award is on the party seeking it." United States
 
Life Ins. Co., 591 F.3d at 1173.
 
The relevant question is therefore whether the Hart
 
Appellants can establish prejudicial misconduct under HRS § 658A­23(a)(2)(C), which provides:
 
[§658A-23] Vacating award. (a) Upon motion to the
court by a party to an arbitration proceeding, the court
shall vacate an award made in the arbitration proceeding if:
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 There was:
 . . . .
 (C) 	Misconduct by an arbitrator
prejudicing the rights of a
party to the arbitration
proceeding;
 
On the existing record, we cannot and therefore make no
 
conclusion on the issue. Rather, given the evidence of apparent
 
6
 Similar to the Uniform Arbitration Act adopted by Hawai' i, § 10(a)(3)
of the Federal Arbitration Act provides for an arbitration award to be vacated
because of, inter alia, "any other misbehavior by which the rights of any
party have been prejudiced." Reliance on relevant federal case law istherefore appropriate. See Daiichi Hawai' i Real Estate Corp., 103 Hawai' i at 
339, 82 P.3d at 425. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ex parte consultations with Ross and the disputed facts, further
 
proceedings are necessary to determine whether the alleged
 
consultation with Ross was prejudicial misconduct. First, based
 
on the declarations of counsel, there is direct contrary evidence
 
as to whether the Arbitrator disclosed and/or the parties agreed
 
that she would be consulting with her colleagues. Second, given
 
the limited description of work in the billing statements and
 
without any evidence as to potential conflicts Ross may have, we
 
are unable to properly assess whether the consultation by Ross
 
was prejudicial to the Hart Appellants. In this regard, even if
 
there were undisclosed ex parte communications, the Hart
 
Appellants would have the burden of establishing prejudice. "Ex
 
parte conduct by an arbitration panel requires vacatur of an
 
award only if the ex parte conduct constitutes misbehavior that
 
prejudices the rights of a party." United States Life Ins. Co.,
 
591 F.3d at 1176.
 
In Clawson v. Habilitat, Inc., 71 Haw. 76, 783 P.2d 
1230 (1989), where there was factual uncertainty in the record, 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court remanded the case for entry of factual 
findings and conclusions of law related to whether an arbitration award should be vacated. The supreme court held that "whenever 
material facts are in dispute in determining whether an 
arbitration award should be vacated, the circuit court should 
conduct an evidentiary hearing and render findings of fact and 
conclusions of law in support of granting or denying the motion 
to vacate the arbitration award." Id. at 79, 783 P.2d at 1232. 
Further, the revised Uniform Arbitration Act adopted in 
Hawai
'i in 2001 and codified as HRS Chapter 658A, also 
contemplates that if there is prima facie evidence of, inter 
alia, prejudicial misconduct, the Arbitrator may provide evidence 
on the issue. HRS § 658A-14(d)(2) (Supp. 2010). Although an 
arbitrator is generally "not competent to testify" and "shall not 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
be required to produce records" regarding matters in an
 
arbitration proceeding, HRS § 658A-14(d)(2) provides an exception
 
in limited circumstances. That is, HRS § 658A-14(d)(2) states
 
that the general rule precluding an arbitrator's testimony or
 
production of records does not apply "[t]o a hearing on a motion
 
to vacate an award under section 658A-23(a)(1) or (2) if the
 
movant establishes prima facie that a ground for vacating the
 
award exists."7
 
We therefore remand this issue to the circuit court for
 
further proceedings, to make relevant findings and conclusions,
 
and to determine whether the Arbitrator's consultation with Ross
 
constituted prejudicial misconduct under HRS § 658A-23(a)(2)(C). 
In addition to any further relevant information from the parties,
 
their counsel, Ross, and/or others, we believe these
 
circumstances allow for the Arbitrator to clarify this issue. 
V.	 Ex Parte Communications Between the Arbitrator and the
 
Ashleys' Counsel
 
The Hart Appellants also claim that the Arbitrator had
 
ex parte communications with Whittaker, the Ashleys' counsel, and
 
failed to disclose the communications. The Hart Appellants point
 
to the following communications: (1) six telephone conversations
 
between the Arbitrator and Whittaker, which appear in the billing
 
records of Whittaker and the Arbitrator; (2) subpoenas from
 
Whittaker, which the Hart Appellants claim not to have timely
 
received; and (3) two sets of the Arbitrator’s invoices that were
 
not timely provided to the Hart Appellants.
 
The Hart Appellants urge that the Arbitration Award
 
must therefore be vacated based on the provisions of HRS § 658A­
23(a)(2)(A) and (C). These provisions state:
 
7
 In a submission to the circuit court, the Ashleys noted the
possibility that HRS § 658A-14(d)(2) may be applicable in this case.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[§658A-23] Vacating award. (a) Upon motion to the
court by a party to an arbitration proceeding, the court
shall vacate an award made in the arbitration proceeding if:
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 There was:
 (A) 	Evident partiality by an arbitrator
appointed as a neutral arbitrator;
 
. . . . or
 
(C) 	Misconduct by an arbitrator
prejudicing the rights of a party to
the arbitration proceeding;
 
We conclude that, with respect to two ex parte
 
telephone contacts, there are material facts in dispute requiring
 
further proceedings on the question of prejudicial misconduct. 
In all other respects, the circuit court's ruling on these issues
 
was not in error.
 
A.	 Prejudicial Misconduct
 
The circuit court found, and the Ashleys do not

 
dispute, that there were ex parte telephone discussions between
 
the Arbitrator and Whittaker. Whittaker's declaration, however,
 
shows that four calls in mid-March 2006 were about ministerial
 
matters involving subpoena duces tecum Whittaker wanted for
 
witnesses to appear on the date of the hearing (scheduled to
 
begin on March 29, 2006) and to bring documents. These ex parte
 
discussions included such matters as the Arbitrator's logistical
 
concern about numerous witnesses appearing at her office with
 
documents.8 The matter of the subpoenas was discussed at a joint
 
conference call with the parties a few days later, on March 15,
 
2006, although the record does not indicate if the ex parte
 
8
 It is relevant to note that the circuit court made the finding, which
is unchallenged on appeal, that "[n]or is this a case where the issuance of
subpoenas resulted in the receipt of ex parte evidence." The record indicates
 
that, rather than live witnesses at the hearing, Whittaker instead chose to
submit evidence by way of their declarations.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discussions themselves were discussed. We conclude there was no
 
prejudicial misconduct with respect to these calls.
 
For two other calls, however, one on December 7, 2005
 
and another on January 26, 2006, the material facts are in
 
dispute. The entry for December 7, 2005 in the Arbitrator's
 
billing records states: "TELEPHONE CONFERENCE WITH S. WHITTAKER
 
RE UPCOMING HEARING." The entry for January 26, 2006 contained
 
in Whittaker's billing records states: " . . . brief conference
 
with Shawn Nakoa." The declaration of Whittaker and attached
 
exhibits suggests that around the time of the December 7, 2005
 
telephone call, there were issues regarding representation of the
 
Hart Appellants and Debra Hart, but there is no direct evidence
 
as to the subject of the call between the Arbitrator and
 
Whittaker. As to the January 26, 2006 call, the record reflects
 
this is the same day the Arbitrator made an ex parte contact with
 
David Smith (Smith), the Hart Appellants' substitute counsel for
 
a short period, regarding "representation." Again, however,
 
there is no direct evidence as to the subject of the Arbitrator's
 
call with Whittaker.
 
Given this record, the entries regarding ex parte calls
 
between the Arbitrator and Whittaker on December 7, 2005 and
 January 26, 2006 present material facts in dispute that require
 
further inquiry. Clawson, 71 Haw. at 79, 783 P.2d at 1232. 
Therefore, we remand to the circuit court for further
 proceedings, to make relevant findings and conclusions, and to
 
determine whether the Arbitrator's telephone contacts with
 
Whittaker on these dates constitute prejudicial misconduct under
 
HRS § 658A-23(a)(2)(C). In addition to any other relevant
 
information, we believe these circumstances also allow for the
 
Arbitrator to clarify this issue pursuant to HRS § 658A-14(d)(2).
 
As to the other alleged ex parte contacts with
 
Whittaker, we agree with the circuit court's determination that
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the delayed production of Whittaker's subpoenas and the
 
Arbitrator's billing statements do not support a determination of
 
prejudicial misconduct. As to the subpoenas, the declarations of
 
Whittaker and Kotner establish that Whittaker's subpoena of
 
witnesses was discussed at the joint conference call with the
 
Arbitrator on March 15, 2006. There is also nothing in the
 
record to suggest the Arbitrator had the obligation to serve the
 
witness subpoenas on the Hart Appellants.9 Additionally, the
 
circuit court correctly found that the subpoenaed witnesses did
 not testify at the arbitration hearing. Rather, "[i]n lieu of
 
live witness testimony, declarations were presented. The
 
Arbitrator offered to Defendants the opportunity to call the
 
declarants as witnesses to cross examine them. Defendants'
 
counsel declined."
 
With regard to their untimely receipt of the
 
Arbitrator's billing statements, the Hart Appellants argue that
 
they were denied the opportunity to raise objections based on
 
information in the statements. They have, however, raised such
 
objections before the circuit court and again in the instant
 
appeal and therefore have not been prejudiced.
 
B. Evident Partiality
 
With regard to HRS § 658A-23(a)(2)(A), evident 
partiality is present "when undisclosed facts show a reasonable impression of partiality." Kay v. Kaiser Found. Health Plan, 
Inc., 119 Hawai
'i 219, 226, 194 P.3d 1181, 1188 (App. 2008) 
(finding evident partiality where undisclosed facts concerning 
arbitrator's prior and on-going relationship with medical 
defendant created impression of possible bias such that 
9
 HRS § 658A-17(a) provides the authority for an arbitrator to issue
subpoenas and states that a "subpoena shall be served in the manner for
service of subpoenas in a civil action." Rule 45(a) of the Hawai' i Rules of 
Civil Procedure provides that the clerk of court shall issue a subpoena "to aparty requesting it, who shall fill it in before service." 
13
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
arbitrator's failure to disclose her dealings prejudicially 
tainted arbitration award). "The burden of proving facts which 
would establish a reasonable impression of partiality rests 
squarely on the party challenging the award." Daiichi Hawai 'i 
Real Estate, 103 Hawai 'i at 339, 82 P.3d at 425 (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
With regard to the 
ex parte telephone calls between the
 
Arbitrator and Whittaker, the record as a whole convinces us that
 there is no "reasonable impression of partiality." That is, not
 
only did the calls in mid-March 2006 address ministerial matters,
 
but there is clear evidence that ex parte contacts occurred on
 
both sides. The Arbitrator's billing records have entries
 
showing two attempts on November 10, 2005 to make ex parte
 
contact with the Hart Appellants' counsel, Kotner,10 as well as
 
the ex parte telephone call on January 26, 2006 with Smith, the
 
Hart Appellants' substitute counsel for a short period of time. 
These entries reflect that the Arbitrator initiated contact with
 
counsel on both sides on occasion in an ex parte manner. While
 
this practice may not be ideal (and although we perceive the
 
question of prejudicial misconduct to be a separate and distinct
 
issue), the overall record reflects no evident partiality.
 
On this record, we conclude that there is not "a
 
reasonable impression of partiality" on the part of the
 
Arbitrator. The claim by the Hart Appellants that "the failure
 
to disclose ex parte communications per se constitutes evident
 
partiality under [HRS] § 658A-23(a)(2)(A)" is without
 
authoritative support.  Moreover, their reliance on Valrose Maui,
 
10 The Arbitrator's billing records indicate the calls to Kotner were
made after the Arbitrator reviewed a fax from Kotner that she was withdrawing
as counsel for the Harts. Kotner later returned to the case to represent the
Hart Appellants.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Inc. v. Maclyn Morris, Inc., 105 F. Supp. 2d 1118 (D. Hawai 'i 
2000) is misplaced. 
In Valrose, the United States District Court for the 
District of Hawai 'i applied Hawai 'i law and vacated an arbitration 
award based on its conclusion that there was "a reasonable 
impression of partiality" on the part of the arbitrator due to an 
undisclosed conflict of interest. Valrose, 105 F. Supp. 2d at 
1124. In that case, while the arbitration was pending, the 
arbitrator had an undisclosed ex parte discussion with counsel 
representing the plaintiff about the possibility of the 
arbitrator serving as mediator in an unrelated case involving one 
of the attorney's other clients. Id. It was also undisclosed 
that, while the arbitration proceeding was ongoing, the arbitrator was appointed as the mediator in the other action. 
Id. The U.S. District Court concluded that the failure to 
disclose the known conflict of interest warranted the arbitration award being vacated. Id. 
In contrast, for the case at bar, the circuit court
 
correctly found that there was no evidence that the alleged ex
 
parte communications created a possible conflict of interest for
 
the Arbitrator and no evidence that the Arbitrator failed to
 
disclose a possible conflict of interest.
 
With regard to the other alleged ex parte
 
communications with Whittaker, those communications also do not
 establish evident partiality. As noted above, for the alleged
 
untimely service of Whittaker's witness subpoenas, there is
 
nothing in the record to indicate that it was the Arbitrator's
 
obligation to serve the subpoenas on the Hart Appellants. 
Additionally, regarding the late service of the Arbitrator's
 
billing statements to the Hart Appellants, it was not clear error
 
for the circuit court to find that the failure to concurrently
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
provide the Hart Appellants with two of the billing statements
 
appears to have been an oversight.
 
VI. Scope of Arbitrator's Authority
 
An arbitration award must be vacated where "[a]n 
arbitrator exceeded the arbitrator's powers." HRS § 658A­
23(a)(4). "The scope of an arbitrator's authority is determined 
by the relevant agreement." Hamada v. Westcott, 102 Hawai 'i 210, 
214, 74 P.3d 33, 37 (2003) (brackets and citations omitted). The arbitration provision in the Agreement in this case conferred 
upon the Arbitrator the authority to decide "any disagreement or 
dispute with respect to the rights or obligations of the Parties 
under this Agreement." Given this broad language, we conclude 
the Arbitrator did not exceed the scope of her authority as 
asserted by the Hart Appellants. 
A. Alleged Outside Evidence and Advice
 The Hart Appellants contend that the Arbitrator
 
exceeded her powers by considering "advice" from Debra Hart's
 family court attorney, Ira Leitel (Leitel), and family court
 
documents regarding the rights and obligations of the Harts in a
 
pending divorce action. We do not agree.
 
During the pendency of this matter, Todd Hart and Debra
 
Hart were involved in divorce proceedings, and the Arbitrator
 
requested and received redacted copies of family court orders
 
entered therein. In the Arbitration Award, the Arbitrator ruled
 
that pursuant to the Agreement, "Todd E. Hart's multiple breaches
 
of the Covenant Not to Compete are chargeable to Debra Hart
 
equally where both Mr. and Mrs. Hart ("Sellers") promised the
 
Buyers good title to the assets and freedom from competition on
 
the Big Island for a period of five (5) years." The Arbitration
 
Award then contains a footnote that reads, "Ira Leitel, Esq.,
 
Debra Hart's divorce attorney, advised (during a pre-hearing
 
conference) that the Family Court has ordered that Mr. Hart shall
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be responsible for any breaches and consequences of the subject
 
Arbitration."
 
Despite the claims by the Hart Appellants, the
 
Arbitrator merely noted the consequences of the orders in the
 
family court matter as they related to her resolution of the
 
instant dispute, which was not beyond the Arbitrator's powers
 
under the Agreement. Similarly, the fact that the family court
 
matters were presented outside the hearing does not take their
 
consideration beyond the Arbitrator's powers under the Agreement. 
Rather, there was no objection to Leitel appearing at a pre-
hearing conference for the arbitration and the parties were well
 
aware that he provided documents requested by the Arbitrator.
 
B. Damages
 The Arbitrator did not exceed her powers by awarding
 
damages in the amount of $500,000 in addition to ordering
 rescission of the promissory note. The provisions in the
 
Agreement as to potential remedies are very broad. There is a
 
remedy provision in the event that the Harts breached the
 
Covenant Not to Compete, which states: 
In the event of any breach or anticipated breach of this
restrictive covenant, the Buyer shall be entitled to sue in
equity to enjoin such breach or anticipated breach and to
seek any other and all legal equitable remedies to which
Buyer may be entitled on account thereof and shall be
entitled to receive as compensation for any such breach
damages in the amount of any commissions received by the
Indemnitors from any such sale which is in violation of this
covenant not to compete, together with such attorneys[']
fees and costs as the Buyer may incur in enforcing this
covenant and in collecting any such damages.
 
Additionally, the Agreement provides:
 
No remedy conferred by any of the specific provisions of
this Agreement is intended to be exclusive of any other
remedy, and each and every remedy shall be cumulative and
shall be in addition to every other remedy provided at law
or in equity or by statu[t]e or otherwise. The election of
 any one or more remedies by the Buyer or the Seller shall
not constitute a waiver of the right to pursue other
available remedies.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Ashleys requested damages of $828,436 in lost commissions and
 
$273,555 in lost time and effort, as well as relief from their
 
obligations to make payments to the Harts under a promissory note
 
executed by the parties in favor of the Harts. The Arbitrator
 
awarded the Ashleys $500,000 in damages and released the Ashleys
 
from their obligations under the promissory note. Such an award
 
was within the Arbitrator's powers under the Agreement.
 
For similar reasons, we do not agree with the Hart
 
Appellants' claim that the Ashleys' remedy was limited to
 
recovery of commissions actually earned. The provisions of the
 
Agreement are far broader than asserted by the Hart Appellants.
 
We also do not agree with the Hart Appellants' argument
 
that the Arbitration Award constitutes punitive damages. The
 
Ashleys did not request punitive damages and nothing in the award
 
indicates that the damages awarded were intended to be punitive
 
in nature. 
C. Ruling Regarding Non-Party
 The Hart Appellants contend that the Arbitrator 
exceeded her powers because the Arbitration Award allegedly addressed the conduct of a non-party. In claiming that the Harts 
violated the Agreement’s Covenant Not to Compete, the Ashleys 
asserted that Todd Hart was competing in the real estate industry 
on the island of Hawai
'i through Carol Hono (Hono). The 
Arbitration Award does not make any ruling with regard to Hono and does not make the award applicable to her. The Hart 
Appellants incorrectly couch the Arbitration Award as affecting 
the "rights and liabilities" of a non-party. Further, even if it 
is assumed, as urged by the Hart Appellants, that the Arbitrator 
found Todd Hart breached the Agreement "through real estate work 
performed and commissions allegedly earned by [Hono]," that would 
have been within the Arbitrator's power given the relevant issues 
at stake in the arbitration. We therefore reject this argument. 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
VII. Public Policy
 
The Hart Appellants also urge this court to find that 
the circuit court erred in confirming the final Arbitration Award 
because the award is in violation of public policy. As this 
court has recognized in the past, "there is a limited public 
policy exception to the general deference given arbitration 
awards." Inlandboatmen's Union v. Sause Bros., Inc., 77 Hawai 'i 
187, 194, 881 P.2d 1255, 1262 (App. 1994) (no public policy exception where violation of statute was merely hypothetical and 
not clearly shown). However, that exception has been narrowly 
defined: 
[T]he test established for application of the public policy
exception requires a court to determine that (1) the award
would violate some explicit public policy that is well
defined and dominant, and that is ascertained by reference
to the laws and legal precedents and not from general
considerations of supposed public interests, and (2) the
violation of the public policy is clearly shown.
 
Id. at 193-94, 881 P.2d at 1261-62 (citation, internal quotation
 
marks, brackets, and ellipses omitted).
 
The Hart Appellants have not established that the
 
Arbitration Award violates "some explicit public policy." 
Although they take issue with the Arbitrator's award to the
 
Ashleys of both monetary damages as well as release from
 
obligations under the promissory note, even assuming arguendo
 
that a court could not provide such relief, "[t]he fact that such
 
a remedy could not or would not be granted by the court is not a
 
ground for refusing to confirm an award under section 658A-22 or
 
for vacating an award under section 658A-23." HRS § 658A-21(c)
 
(Supp. 2010).
 
VIII. Ambiguous/Imperfect Award
 
The Hart Appellants argue that the Arbitration Award
 
should be vacated because it is ambiguous and imperfect as to
 form. They cite no authority for their proposition that an
 
arbitration award can be vacated because it is ambiguous and/or
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
imperfect as to form. Under HRS § 658A-20 (Supp. 2010),
 
clarification and modification of the Arbitration Award by the
 
Arbitrator is allowed, and the Hart Appellants made such a
 
request to the Arbitrator. They did not, however, seek
 
modification or correction of the Arbitration Award from the
 
circuit court pursuant to HRS § 658A-24 (Supp. 2010). The Hart
 
Appellants have not preserved court review to modify or correct
 
the Arbitration Award, and we cannot vacate the award due to
 
alleged ambiguity or imperfection.
 
IX. Conclusion
 
We vacate the Final Judgment entered by the circuit
 
court on September 20, 2006 and remand for further proceedings
 
consistent with this opinion on the limited issues of:
 
(a) whether the Arbitrator's alleged ex parte consultation with
 
Ross constituted prejudicial misconduct under HRS § 658A­
23(a)(2)(C); and (b) whether the Arbitrator's ex parte telephone
 
contacts with Whittaker on December 7, 2005 and January 26, 2006
 
constituted prejudicial misconduct under HRS § 658A-23(a)(2)(C).
 
We affirm the circuit court as to all other issues 
raised in this appeal. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 25, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Francis L. Jung
Usha Kilpatrick KotnerAnn Southwick Datta Chief Judge 
(Jung & Vassar, P.C.)for Defendants-Appellants 
Stephen D. Whittaker(Stephen D. Whittaker, AAL, LLLC)for Plaintiffs-Appellees Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
20

 