 
JONATHAN S. DURRETT, as Next Friend of
ALANA K. DURRETT, a minor, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
ACT, INC., an Iowa Corporation, Defendant-Appellee
and DOES 1-10, Defendant
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28704
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0622)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
This case involves a dispute between Jonathan S.
 
Durrett, as Next Friend of Alana K. Durrett, a minor
 
("Appellant"), and ACT, Inc. ("ACT") regarding ACT's stated
 intention to cancel Ms. Durrett's October 2006 ACT examination
 scores ("Scores"). 
ACT proposed to cancel the Scores because Ms.
 
Durrett did not explain to ACT's satisfaction the difference
 between the Scores and her scores on three earlier ACT tests, or
 the similarity between her October 2006 test responses and those
 of another examinee who had the same test form and who was seated
 near Ms. Durrett during the exam.
 
Appellant filed a complaint in the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit ("Circuit Court"), alleging breach of contract and
 seeking reformation of the contract along with injunctive and
 declaratory relief. The Circuit Court
1 issued a temporary
 
restraining order ex parte. ACT responded by filing, on
 April 23, 2007, a motion to stay proceedings pending arbitration
 of the dispute or to dismiss the complaint for lack of subject
 matter jurisdiction or improper venue ("Motion to Stay"). On
 
1/
 The Honorable Randall K.O. Lee presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
July 24, 2007, the Circuit Court2 issued its Order Granting
 
Defendant ACT, Inc.'s Motion To Stay Proceedings Pending
 
Arbitration Or To Dismiss For Lack Of Subject Matter Jurisdiction
 Or Improper Venue, Filed On April 30, 2007 ("Order Granting
 Stay"). Appellant appeals from the Order Granting Stay. We
 affirm. 
I. Background
 
A. Registration Process
 According to ACT, "[t]he ACT examination is a
 
standardized test used by colleges and universities to assist
 with their admissions decisions." "More than three thousand
 colleges and universities use ACT examination scores to help them
 make decisions about admissions, scholarship awards and course
 placement."
 
Ms. Durrett took the ACT examination in April, June and
 
August, 2006 before taking the October 2006 examination. To
 register for the exam online at the time, student applicants were
 required to enter a social security number, provide credit card
 information for payment, agree to ACT's rules and procedures, and
 submit the electronic form.
3 To successfully register online, a
 
student applicant had to electronically "check" a box certifying
 that they "read, understand, and hereby agree to abide by all
 procedures and requirements, including those concerning test
 score cancellation and binding arbitration." The box appears
 directly below the following text in section Y of the electronic
 form:
 
Student: Read and check below
 
By checking the box below, I certify that I am the person
whose name appears on this form and that the information is
accurate to the best of my knowledge. I have read,
understand, and hereby agree to abide by all procedures and
requirements, including those concerning test score
cancellation and binding arbitration. To read ACT's
 
policies regarding test security procedures, test score
cancellation and binding arbitration, and remedies in
response to ACT errors or testing disruptions/compromises,
Click here .
 
2/
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
3/
 The process described reflects ACT's process for electronic
registration for the ACT exam at the time that Ms. Durrett registered online
for the October 2006 examination. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A student applicant would not be able to complete online
 
registration for the ACT examination without "agree[ing] to the
 above statement" by electronically checking the box. 
ACT's procedures and requirements concerning test score
 
cancellation and binding arbitration appeared in a separate pop­up window that opened when selecting the option to "Click here." 
The score cancellation instructions stated that:
 
ACT reserves the right to cancel test scores when there is
reason to believe the scores are invalid. . . . In all
 instances, the final and exclusive remedy available to
examinees who want to appeal or otherwise challenge a
decision by ACT to cancel their test scores shall be binding
arbitration through written submissions to the Dallas,
Texas, office of the American Arbitration Association. The
 
issue for arbitration shall be whether ACT acted reasonably
and in good faith in deciding to cancel the scores.
 
In registering for the exam, Ms. Durrett electronically
 
checked the box in section Y, stating that she read, understood,
 
and agreed to abide by ACT's rules and procedures, including
 specifically those relating to test score cancellation and
 binding arbitration. Furthermore, on her answer folder for the
 October 2006 ACT examination, Ms. Durrett certified in writing
 that she "agree[d] to the conditions set forth in the ACT
 registration booklet or website instructions for this exam,
 including the arbitration and dispute remedy provisions." A
 student applicant could not complete the ACT examination unless
 the student applicant signed the certification portion on the
 front of the test answer folder and agreed to the conditions set
 
out in the ACT registration booklet and website instructions.
 
B. ACT Challenges the Scores
 Ms. Durrett received a letter from ACT, dated
 
January 29, 2007, questioning the validity of her Scores. ACT
 noted that Ms. Durrett's Scores were significantly higher than
 her three previous test scores and an unusual similarity between
 her October 2006 responses and those of an examinee with the same
 test form who was seated near to Ms. Durrett during the exam. 
Ms. Durrett was given three options to address the anomaly: she
 could retake the exam through private testing that ACT would
 
arrange, cancel her Scores, or provide a statement in her own
 words that could help establish the validity of the Scores. In
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the absence of any election, ACT stated that it may then cancel
 
the Scores. Ms. Durrett chose to submit a written statement,
 dated March 1, 2007, along with supporting statements and a
 transcript.
 
On March 26, 2007, ACT responded that Ms. Durrett's
 
statement and documentation were "insufficient to establish the
 validity of the scores." Ms. Durrett was given the options of
 retaking the test, cancelling the Scores, or challenging ACT s
 decision via binding arbitration through written submissions
 only.
 
Ms. Durrett chose none of the offered alternatives. 
Instead, on April 5, 2007, Appellant filed a Complaint seeking to
 prevent ACT from cancelling the Scores. ACT filed its Motion to
 Stay, which the Circuit Court subsequently granted. Appellant
 
then filed this appeal.
4
 
II.	 Points of Error
 
On appeal, Appellant contends that the Circuit Court
 
erred by: (1) finding that there was a valid arbitration
 
agreement between Ms. Durrett and ACT; (2) granting the Motion to
 Stay because the making of the arbitration agreement between Ms.
 Durrett and ACT was at issue; (3) failing to find that the
 arbitration agreement was voidable as a contract of adhesion; and
 (4) failing to find that the arbitration agreement was voidable
 under the infancy doctrine.
 
III. Standard of Review
 
A.	 Motion to Stay Pending Arbitration
 
A petition to stay proceedings pending arbitration is
reviewed de novo because the existence of a valid and
 
enforceable agreement to arbitrate is a question of law.
The trial court's decision is reviewed using the same
standard employed by the trial court and based upon the same
evidentiary materials as were before it in determination of
the motion.
 
4/
 Neither party argues that the appeal is moot. Notwithstanding
that, we observe that Ms. Durrett anticipated entering college in 2007 and itis unclear whether ACT still intends to cancel the Scores or, if it does, what
practical difference that makes to Ms. Durrett at this point. Nevertheless we 
proceed, because this case falls within the "capable of repetition yet evading
review" exception to the mootness doctrine. Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. 
Lethem, 119 Hawai
»i 1, 5, 193 P.3d 839, 843 (2008). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ueoka v. Szymanski, 107 Hawai» i 386, 392, 114 P.3d 892, 898, 
reconsideration denied, 108 Hawai» i 59, 116 P.3d 701 (2005) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted).
 
B.	 Contract Interpretation
 
As a general rule, the construction and legal effect
to be given a contract is a question of law freely
reviewable by an appellate court. The determination whether
 a contract is ambiguous is likewise a question of law that
is freely reviewable on appeal. These principles apply
equally to appellate review of the construction and legal
effect to be given a contractual agreement to arbitrate.
 
Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai» i 226, 239, 921 P.2d 146, 
159 (1996) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
IV.	 Discussion
 
A.	 There Is A Valid Arbitration Agreement Between Ms.
Durrett And ACT
 
ACT does not seek to compel arbitration in the instant
 
case; consequently, Section 3 of the Federal Arbitration Act
 
("FAA") ("Section 3") governs the dispute. See Brown, 82 Hawai» i 
at 234, 921 P.2d at 154 ("the FAA applies equally in state or
 
federal courts"). 
Section 3 provides that:
 
If any suit or proceeding be brought in any of the courts of
the United States upon any issue referable to arbitration
under an agreement in writing for such arbitration, the
court in which such suit is pending, upon being satisfied
that the issue involved in such suit or proceeding is
referable to arbitration under such an agreement, shall on
application of one of the parties stay the trial of the
action until such arbitration has been had in accordance
 
with the terms of the agreement, providing the applicant for
the stay is not in default in proceeding with such
arbitration.
 
9 U.S.C. ÿÿ 3 (2011). Assuming that the ACT contract with Ms.
 
Durrett is valid and binding,5 the FAA governs the obligation of
 
ACT and Ms. Durrett to arbitrate their Score cancellation
 
dispute. 	
Brown, 82 Hawai» i at 235, 921 P.2d at 155. 
An order granting a motion to stay is reviewed de novo. 
Thus, we look at the same materials that were before the Circuit
 
Court when it decided the Motion to Stay. Koolau Radiology, Inc.
 
v. Queen's Medical Ctr., 73 Haw. 433, 439-40, 834 P.2d 1294, 1298
 
(1992). "Generally, in deciding whether to grant a motion to
 
5/
 We address whether the arbitration agreement is itself a binding
contract infra in sections IV.A.1. and 2.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stay proceedings pending arbitration, courts consider '1) whether 
an arbitration agreement exists between the parties; and 2) if so, whether the subject matter of the dispute is arbitrable under such agreement.'" Simbajon v. Gentry, 81 Hawai» i 193, 196, 914 
P.2d 1386, 1389 (App. 1996) (quoting Koolau Radiology, 73 Haw. at 445, 834 P.2d at 1300). These are the same questions that a court considers when presented with a motion to compel arbitration. Koolau Radiology, 73 Haw. at 445, 834 P.2d at 1300. 
As a result, we look to those cases for guidance. 
1. 	An Arbitration Agreement Exists Between Ms.
Durrett And ACT 
Hawai» i courts have "long recognized the strong public 
policy supporting Hawai
» i's arbitration statutes as codified in 
[Hawaii Revised Statutes] Chapter 658. We have stated that 'the 
proclaimed public policy . . . is to encourage arbitration as a means of settling differences and thereby avoiding litigation.'" Lee v. Heftel, 81 Hawai» i 1, 4, 911 P.2d 721, 724 (1996) 
(original brackets omitted) (quoting Bateman Constr., Inc. v. 
Haitsuka Bros., 77 Hawai» i 481, 484, 889 P.2d 58, 61 (1995)). 
To be valid and enforceable, an arbitration agreement 
must be: (1) in writing; (2) unambiguous as to the intent to submit disputes or controversies to arbitration; and (3) supported by bilateral consideration. Brown, 82 Hawai
» i at 239, 
921 P.2d at 159. 
a.	 Existence Of A Writing
 
The parties do not dispute that the arbitration
 
provision in this case constitutes a writing. The provision was
 clearly contained in the registration booklet and website
 
instructions.
6 Thus, the first element of a writing is met.
 
6/
 Electronic agreements where a customer must affirmatively click a
box on a website acknowledging receipt of and assent to the contract term
before he or she is allowed to proceed using the website are commonly known as
"clickwrap" agreements. "Courts routinely enforce clickwraps." Major v.
 
McCallister, 302 S.W.3d 227, 229 (Mo. Ct. App. 2009); see, also, Specht v. 
Netscape Commc'n Corp., 306 F3d. 17, 22 n.4 (2d Cir. 2002); A.V. v.
 
iParadigms, 544 F.Supp.2d 473, 480 (E.D. Va. 2008); DeJohn v. The.TV Corp.
 
Int'l, 245 F.Supp.2d 913, 921 (N.D. Ill. 2003) (clickwrap contract is valid
even when the terms of the agreement are not prominently displayed, as long as
the party has an opportunity to review the terms by clicking on a link to the
text). See also ProCD, Inc. v. Zeidenberg, 86 F.3d 1447, 1451 (7th Cir.
(continued...)
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
b. Unambiguous Intent To Submit To Arbitration
 
There must be mutual assent or a meeting of the minds
 
on all essential elements or terms to create a binding contract,
 
which is determined using an objective standard.  Earl M.
 
Jorgensen Co. v. Mark Constr., Inc., 56 Haw. 466, 470-71, 540
 P.2d 978, 982 (1975). 
Appellant argues that the arbitration terms were not
 
fully disclosed before registration was completed, and thus there
 was no meeting of the minds. Specifically, Appellant contends
 that Ms. Durrett never agreed that (1) the arbitration would be
 by written submissions only; (2) the arbitration would be
 submitted to the American Arbitration Association ("AAA") in
 Dallas, Texas; (3) ACT would select the arbitrator;
7 (4) the
 
decision of the arbitrator would be final and binding; (5) she
 
would abide by the arbitration award; (6) ACT would determine the
 issue to be arbitrated; and (7) the only issue for arbitration
 would be whether ACT acted reasonably and in good faith in
 canceling Ms. Durrett's scores.
 
The record reflects, however, that ACT's online
 
instructions thoroughly described the process for resolving score
 disputes and made clear that the final and exclusive remedy for
 challenging a score dispute was binding arbitration. The website
 instructions stated that, "the final and exclusive remedy
 available to examinees" who want to challenge ACT's decision to
 cancel their scores "shall be binding arbitration through written
 submissions to the Dallas, Texas, office of the [AAA]." The
 
website instructions further specified that the "issue for
 arbitration shall be whether ACT acted reasonably and in good
 faith in deciding to cancel the scores." 
6/(...continued)
1996). "Even though they are electronic, clickwrap agreements are considered
to be writings because they are printable and storable." Feldman v. Google,
 
Inc., 513 F.Supp.2d 229, 236 (E.D. Pa. 2007).
 
7/
 Appellant appears to misstate this point. The form that ACT sent
 
to Ms. Durrett stated that "AAA will select the arbitrator who will preside in
the case." ACT's Director of Test Security stated in an affidavit to the
Circuit Court that AAA would select an arbitrator, and that the arbitrator
would be from the same state as the student applicant. As such, while ACT
selects the arbitration association through which the arbitration will be
conducted, ACT does not "select the arbitrator."
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
When she registered for the exam, Ms. Durrett certified
 
that she "read, understood, and agreed to abide by all procedures
 
and requirements, including those concerning test score
 cancellation and binding arbitration." In addition to certifying
 her agreement upon registering for the exam, Ms. Durrett agreed
 to abide by ACT's rules and procedures when she sat for the
 October 2006 examination. On her test answer folder, Ms. Durrett
 signed and certified that she agreed to the conditions "set forth
 in the ACT registration booklet and website instructions for the
 exam, including the arbitration and dispute remedy provisions." 
As such, Appellant's reliance upon Douglass v. Plfueger 
Hawaii, Inc., 110 Hawai» i 520, 135 P.3d 129 (2006) as an example 
of ambiguous intent is misplaced. The Hawai» i Supreme Court held 
in Douglass that the arbitration provision contained in the 
employee handbook was manifestly unambiguous in its expressed intent that "any and all claims arising out of the employee's employment with the Company and his/her termination shall be settled by final and binding arbitration[,]" but found no mutual assent when the employee merely signed an acknowledgment form verifying receipt of the handbook. 110 Hawai» i at 532, 135 P.3d 
at 141. Unlike the instant case, the record in Douglass did not 
indicate that the employee was "informed of the existence of the arbitration provision, let alone that he would be bound by it." 110 Hawai» i at 533, 135 P.3d at 142. See also Swift Securities, 
Ltd. v. Yau, No. 28759, 2009 WL 383679 (Haw. February 13, 2009) 
(no unambiguous intent to arbitrate when the word "arbitration" 
does not appear anywhere in the agreement). 
This case is markedly different; not only because the
 
agreement is entered into electronically, but because ACT took
 steps not taken by the enforcing party in the cases above to
 ensure that contracting parties understood that they were signing
 an agreement to arbitrate. Most importantly, the link to the
 arbitration provision was located directly above the box where
 Ms. Durrett indicated her assent to those same terms, the
 provision unambiguously stated that arbitration would be "the
 
final and exclusive remedy" available to Ms. Durrett if she chose
 to challenge a score cancellation decision, "binding arbitration"
 
8
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was explicitly referred to (twice) in the acknowledgment form,
 
and Ms. Durrett was asked to, and did, provide her explicit
 assent to abide by the arbitration provision by electronically
 checking the box.
8 See Vickery v. Hastert, No. 28586, 2009 WL
 
383682 (Haw. February 13, 2009) (no ambiguity in a physical
 contract where arbitration provision was followed by an
 instruction to "[p]lease check whether you agree to this
 arbitration provision", and the plaintiff checked "Yes. Agree.")
 
Appellant argues further, citing Specht v. Netscape
 
Commc'n Corp., 306 F.3d 17 (2d Cir. 2002), contending that the
 arbitration terms were not "clear and conspicuous" because
 viewing them required accessing a separate web page, and was not
 required to complete the registration process.
9 The notable
 
feature in Specht was that users confronted with the "Download"
 
button, located at or near the bottom of their screen, did not
 encounter any reference to further information about the plug-in
 program or the existence of license terms governing its use
 unless they happened to scroll down to the next screen. 306 F.3d
 at 23. In this case, however, the link to the arbitration
 provision was located directly above the box where Ms. Durrett
 indicated her assent to those same terms, and the introductory
 text referred explicitly to "test score cancellation and binding
 arbitration."  As such, Ms. Durrett was conspicuously confronted
 
with the fact that she was agreeing to binding arbitration and
 
provided with the opportunity to view those terms immediately
 before she indicated her agreement by electronically checking the
 
box.
 
8/
 In addition, Ms. Durrett executed a hand-written certification on
the front of her October 2006 ACT test answer folder on which it also states: 
"I agree to the conditions set forth in the ACT registration booklet or
website instructions for this exam, including the arbitration and dispute
remedy provisions." Beneath that, Ms. Durrett hand-wrote: "I agree to the
statement above and certify that I am the person whose name and address
appears on this form." Ms. Durrett then signed and dated the certification. 
9/
 Nothing requires that student applicants actually read the terms
and conditions under the methodology preferred by the Appellant. We are not
 
persuaded that requiring that student applicants scroll through to the bottom
of the text before encountering a box or a button affirming that the student
applicant has read the material and agrees to be bound by it, or makes it any
more likely that the material will be read, or make the terms any more "clear
and conspicuous" than the practice already adopted here by ACT.
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ms. Durrett electronically signed the agreement, 
asserting thereby that she had read, understood and agreed to its 
terms, but stated in a declaration thereafter that she had not, in fact, read or understood ACT's procedures and requirements. "[T]he general rule of contract law is that one who assents to a contract is bound by it and cannot complain that he has not read it or did not know what it contained." Douglass, 110 Hawai» i at 
534 n.12, 135 P.3d at 143 n.12 (quoting Leong v. Kaiser Found. Hosp. 71 Haw. 240, 245-46, 788 P.2d 164, 168 (1990) (internal quotation marks omitted). Consequently, we conclude that Ms. Durrett and ACT unambiguously indicated their intent to submit score cancellation disputes or controversies to arbitration. 
c.	 
The Arbitration Agreement Is Supported By
Bilateral Consideration 
"Consideration is defined as a bargained for exchange 
whereby the promisor receives some benefit or the promisee 
suffers a detriment." Douglass, 110 Hawai» i at 534, 135 P.3d at 
143 (citing Shanghai Inv. Co. v. Alteka Co., 92 Hawai» i 482, 496, 
993 P.2d 516, 530 (2000) overruled on other grounds by Blair v. Ing, 96 Hawai» i 327, 31 P.3d 184 (2001)). 
Appellant argues that ACT's arbitration clause was not 
supported by bilateral consideration because "only the registrant is required to forego their right to a judicial forum and accept the binding arbitration process." Appellant correctly notes that the registration booklet and website instructions do not make it "manifestly unambiguous" that both the registrant and ACT are bound by arbitration. See Brown, 82 Hawai» i at 239-40, 921 P.2d 
at 159-60 (upholding an arbitration provision because it was 
manifestly unambiguous that both parties were bound by the arbitration agreement). 
We have previously held that an arbitration provision 
included as part of a larger contract does not require its own consideration to be binding: 
Douglass and Brown are inapplicable to this case with
respect to this issue because they concerned arbitration
agreements that were not part of a larger contract, whereas
the arbitration provision in this case was part of the
Agreement. In Douglass and Brown, the Hawai »i Supreme Court
was tasked with determining whether the respective
arbitration agreements, standing alone, could constitute
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contracts. Here, we need not make such a determination
because neither party disputes that the Agreement involved a
mutual exchange of consideration. As Damon Key states in
its answering brief, "[t]he consideration given by Damon Key
for the contract was its agreement to provide legal services
to Jason. This consideration by Damon Key is sufficient to
make the arbitration clause of the contract enforceable even
 if Damon Key's requirement to arbitrate is not co-extensive
with that of Jason." The Vickerys cite to no case law, and
we find none, for the proposition that an arbitration
provision must involve its own separate, mutual exchange of
consideration.
 
Vickery v. Hastert, No. 28586, 2009 WL 383682 *7 (Haw. App.
 
February 13, 2009) (footnote omitted). As we did in Vickery, we
 conclude that there was sufficient bilateral consideration in the
 registration contract to support upholding the arbitration
 provision. 
2.	 The Subject Matter Of The Dispute Is Arbitrable
 
Although the public policy underlying Hawai» i law 
strongly favors arbitration over litigation, the mere existence of an arbitration agreement does not mean the parties must submit to arbitration if the dispute is outside the scope of the arbitration agreement. Brown, 82 Hawai» i at 244, 921 P.2d at 
164. The scope of the arbitration agreement depends on the 
wording of the contract. Rainbow Chevrolet, Inc. v. Asahi Jyuken 
(USA), Inc., 78 Hawai» i 107, 113, 890 P.2d 694, 700 (App. 1995), 
superseded by statute as stated in, Ueoka v. Szymanski, 107 
Hawai» i 386, 114 P.3d 892 (2005). 
In this case, there is no ambiguity regarding the
 
subject matter of the dispute. Appellant challenges ACT's
 decision to cancel Ms. Durrett's Scores. This dispute falls
 within the language of the contract and arbitration agreement. 
Consequently, there is a valid arbitration agreement between Ms.
 Durrett and ACT.
 
B.	 The Proposed Cancellation Of Ms. Durrett's Scores Was
Referable To Arbitration Under The Arbitration
 
Agreement Without First Holding A Trial
 
Section 3 states that if any suit or proceeding is
 
brought to court that deals with an issue referable to
 arbitration "under an agreement in writing for such arbitration,"
 
the court where the suit is pending, "upon being satisfied that
 the issue involved in such suit or proceeding is referable to
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arbitration under such an agreement, shall on application of one
 
of the parties stay the trial of the action until such
 arbitration has been had in accordance with the terms of the
 agreement." 9 U.S.C. ÿÿ 3.
 
Appellant refers to Section 4 of the FAA ("Section 4")
 
and the United States Supreme Court's decision in Prima Paint
 Corp. v. Flood & Conklin Mf. Co., 388 U.S. 395 (1967) and argues
 
that the Circuit Court erred in granting the Motion to Stay
 because the making of the arbitration agreement was in issue, and
 a trial, therefore, should have been had on that issue. Under
 Section 4, if the making of the arbitration agreement is in
 issue, the Circuit Court must proceed to trial on that issue. 
Section 4, however, is not implicated by ACT's Motion
 
to Stay. This is not a proceeding to compel arbitration under
 
Section 4, but a motion to stay the proceedings under Section 3. 
Tepper Realty Co. v. Mosaic Tile Co., 259 F.Supp. 688, 692
 (S.D.N.Y. 1966) ("When a defendant asks for a stay under ÿÿ 3, he
 is not seeking specific performance (i.e., an order requiring
 that the parties proceed to arbitration), but merely a stay of a
 kind long familiar in common law and in equity actions.") 
Neither Section 3 nor Prima Paint requires a trial at
 
all. Kelly v. UHC Mgmt. Co., 967 F.Supp. 1240, 1254 (N.D. Ala.
 
1997) ("The plain language of ÿÿ 3 states that the court is to
 stay the action 'upon being satisfied' that the issue involved is
 referable to arbitration. . . . No mention whatsoever is made of
 a right to a jury trial under ÿÿ 3."). Here, the issue was a
 
dispute over ACT's decision to cancel Ms. Durrett's Scores. This
 was precisely the issue to be decided by arbitration under the
 arbitration agreement. Therefore, the Circuit Court properly
 stayed the proceedings pending arbitration once it was satisfied
 that the issue involved was referable under the arbitration
 agreement.
 
As such, being satisfied that the proposed cancellation
 
of Ms. Durrett's Scores was referable to arbitration under the
 arbitration agreement, the Circuit Court was, therefore, not
 
required to hold a trial before granting the Motion to Stay.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C.	 The Arbitration Agreement Is Not An Unenforceable
Contract Of Adhesion 
Contracts of adhesion are unenforceable if two 
conditions are present: "(1) the contract is the result of coercive bargaining between parties of unequal bargaining strength; 
and (2) the contract unfairly limits the obligations 
and liabilities of, or otherwise unfairly advantages, the 
stronger party." Brown, 82 Hawai» i at 247, 921 P.2d at 167. 
"Arbitration agreements are not usually regarded as unenforceable contracts of adhesion because the second condition is generally lacking . . ., the agreement 'bears equally' on the contracting parties and does not limit the obligations or liabilities of any of them[.]" Id. (quoting Leong, 71 Haw. at 247-48, 788 P.2d at 
168). Arbitration agreements merely substitute one forum for 
another. Id. That is the case here, too. ACT did not unfairly limit 
its own obligations and liabilities or give itself unfair advantages in the arbitration agreement. 
ACT did not, for 
example, reserve the right to change the terms of the agreement at its sole discretion.
10 ACT, like Ms. Durrett, will be bound 
by the arbitrator's decision if the examinee wishes to challenge ACT's decision to cancel exam scores. ACT, like Ms. Durrett, can only provide written submissions to the arbitrator for determination of whether it acted reasonably. Finally, there is no discernible advantage to ACT associated with providing written submissions to the Dallas, Texas office of the AAA. Contra, 
Domingo v. Ameriquest Mortgage Co., 70 F.App'x. 919 (9th Cir. 2003) (finding a forum selection clause unenforceable when 
employees are in a worse position than the stronger party to afford costs of travel). With written submissions, neither party
 has to travel to Dallas, Texas.
 
10/
 Appellant erroneously equates ACT's reservation of rights to amend
the terms and conditions of access to and use of the company's internet site
with the defendant's reservation of rights to amend the terms in the employee
handbook in Douglass, and contends that this "allows ACT to unilaterally
change the terms [of the arbitration provision]." This is not consistent with
 
the effect of ACT's reservation of rights, which do not permit ACT to change
the terms of the arbitration provision at all.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, although ACT had superior bargaining strength,
 
neither its obligations nor its liabilities were limited by the
 
arbitration agreement. Therefore, the arbitration agreement in
 this case is not an unenforceable adhesion contract.
 
D.	 The Circuit Court Did Not Err In Failing To Address
Whether The Arbitration Agreement Was Voidable
 
Hawai»i has long recognized the common law rule ­
referred to as "the infancy doctrine" or "the infancy law
doctrine" - that contracts entered into by minors arevoidable. Under this doctrine, a minor may, upon reachingthe age of majority, choose either to ratify or avoidcontractual obligations entered into during his or her
minority. See 4 Richard A. Lord, Williston on Contracts 
§ 8:14 (4th ed. 1992); see also Restatement (Second) of
Contracts, §§ 7, 12, and 14 (1979). 
Douglass, 110 Hawai» i at 525, 135 P.3d at 134 (some citations 
omitted); see Zen v. Koon Chan, 27 Haw. 369, 371 (Haw. Terr. 
1923) ("A minor's act and that of an alleged insane person are voidable only but they become void upon disaffirmance by the minor on coming of age and by the insane person upon attaining sanity."). 
Appellant does not argue that Ms. Durrett has voided
 
all or part of her arbitration agreement with ACT. Similarly,
 Ms. Durrett contested only entering into the arbitration
 agreement, declaring below that she "was not aware that by
 registering I was agreeing to arbitration and was giving up the
 right to file a lawsuit", "did not understand or agree to
 arbitration", "never agreed to submit any disputes over the
 [Scores] to arbitration in Dallas, Texas on written submissions
 only", and "did not sign an agreement to arbitrate disputes
 concerning my [Scores]". Ms. Durrett does not contend that she
 was disavowing or had disavowed it. 
Under the infancy doctrine, the contract is "voidable,"
 
not "void." As Ms. Durrett did not argue or present any evidence
 that she voided any agreement under the infancy doctrine, the
 Circuit Court did not err when it failed to rule on the subject
 of Ms. Durrett's infancy or its effects on the case.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
V.	 Conclusion
 
For the reasons expressed above, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's July 24, 2007 Order Granting Stay. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai» i, July 12, 2011. 
Adrian W. Rosehill 
(Alan J. Ma with him on the briefs) (Stubenberg & Durrett) for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Melvi Miyagi (John T. Komeiji and Karen Y. Arikawa with him on the brief) 
(Watanabe Ing, LLP) for Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
15
 