 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29602
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
EDGARDO L. TACANG, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 08-1-0005(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise, and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Edgardo L. Tacang (Tacang) appeals

 
from the "Order Denying, Without Evidentiary Hearing, Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or Release Petitioner From
 Custody," (Order Denying Petition) filed on December 18, 2008, in
 the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
In the underlying criminal case (Cr. No. 03-1-0034(3)),
 
Tacang was found guilty on February 18, 2004, after a jury trial
 of: (1) Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree, in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1242(1)(b)(i)
 (1993 & Supp. 2002) (Count 1); (2) Prohibited Acts Related to
 Drug Paraphernalia, in violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (1993)
 (Count 2); (3) Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in
 
1 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violation of HRS § 712-1243(1) (1993 & Supp. 2002) (Count 3); 
(4) Prohibited Acts Related to Drug Paraphernalia, in violation
 of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (Count 4); and (5) Attempted Promoting a
 Dangerous Drug in the First Degree, in violation of HRS §§ 705­500 (1993) and 712-1241(1)(b)(ii)(A) (Supp. 2002) (Count 5). The
 circuit court ruled that Counts 1 and 2 merged into Count 5 and
 therefore did not impose sentences on Counts 1 and 2. The
 circuit court sentenced Tacang to twenty years of imprisonment on
 Count 5, with an mandatory minimum term of three years, and five
 years of imprisonment on Counts 3 and 4, with a mandatory minimum
 term of two and one-half years on Count 3, all terms to run
 concurrently. Tacang did not file a direct appeal.
 
On March 24, 2008, Tacang filed a Petition for Post-
Conviction Relief, pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP) Rule 40, and a Supplemental Petition on July 21, 2008 (collectively, "Petition"). Tacang argued, among other things 
that there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction 
for Attempted Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the First Degree as charged in Count 5. The circuit court rejected Tacang's claim that there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction on Count 5 as well as the other claims Tacang raised in his Petition. 
I.
 
On appeal, Tacang states the following points of error:
 
1. There's no evidence to support the conviction of
Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree in violation
of Hawaii Revised Statutes ["HRS"] Section 712-1242.
 
2. There was no evidence to support the conviction of
Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree in violation
of HRS § 712-1243.
 
3. There is insufficient evidence to support the
conviction of Attempted Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the
First Degree in violation of HRS § 712-1241.
 
4. There was ineffective assistance of counsel for
 
failing to argue the points of errors presented to the trier
of fact at trial.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5. Judy Wood, chemist for the Maui Police Department
["MPD"] failed to present sufficient proof that the
substance(s) was indeed Methamphetamine and not merely
contained traces of said substance(s).
 
6. Judy Wood failed to lay foundation, that the
actual instrument(s) used to weigh and test the alleged
substance(s) were in good working order and could be relied
upon for the accuracy of these test(s).
 
7. Judy Wood testified that she calibrated the
equipment in question, which would create doubt, that the
equipment was accurate and be relied upon in order to
convict appellant herein.
 
8. The alleged evidence had been received by the MPD
on January 13, 2003, but was not tested by Judy Wood until
one year later. The question presents itself, had the
evidence been tampered with?
 
9. Maui Police Officer Wade Maeda, testified that the
money found on appellant at the time of his arrest, had been
tested for traces of drugs, but none had been found.
 
10. The five plastic packets tested by officer Madeda
[sic], contained mere traces of an alleged substance
(methamphetamine).
 
11. The names and amounts of monies found on the note
 
books, were not the names of drug dealers, as the State
argues, but were mere persons that worked with appellant on
some repair jobs.
 
12. According to Officer Maeda, there was an
undiclosed [sic] Confidential Informant ["C.I"], who was
never identified at trial, nor was his or her name disclosed
to appellant so appellant had the opportunity to defend
himself against the false accusations brought against him.
 
13. There were two different weights presented into
evidence regarding to [sic] the alleged substance(s) which
led to the conviction herein.
 
1. The Evidence Report indicates, that there
were a total of 5.80 grams of methamphetamine present
when testing the weight of these five packets.
 
2. At trial, Office Maeda testified, that the
total weight of the alleged substance(s) was 4.72
grams.
 
14. Officer Maeda testified that he "Field Tested"
 
the weight and substance contained within these five
packets. The weight and measurement of any substance as to
weight and contents, is the job of the Maui Crime Lab, and
not the field officer.
 
15. The scales found during the search of appellant's
residence, were used to measure feed for his chickens, and
not illegal drugs as stated by the prosecution.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
16. The State illegally raised the alleged offense of
Promotion of a Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree, to
Attempted Promotion in the First Degree.
 
17[.] The money confiscated from appellant, namely
$ 6,055[.]00 had no traces of drugs or any illegal material,
and was not part of any illegal drug activity. These funds
 were for the purchase of building materials for the various
jobs appellant was involved in.
 
(Some brackets in original.)
 
II.
 
With respect to point of error 3, we conclude that
 
there was insufficient evidence to support Tacang's conviction
 
for Attempted Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the First Degree as
 charged in Count 5. In support of his argument on this point of
 error, Tacang cites State v. Ugalino, 107 Hawai
'i 144, 111 P.3d 
39 (App. 2005), a case decided more than eleven months after
 Tacang's Judgment in his criminal case was entered. In Ugalino,
 this court, based on evidence very similar to that presented in
 Tacang's criminal case, held that there was insufficient evidence
 to support Ugalino's conviction for Attempted Promoting a
 Dangerous Drug in the First Degree. Our analysis in Ugalino was
 in pertinent part as follows: 
Ugalino was convicted of both 1) possessing at least
one-eighth ounce of methamphetamine in violation of HRS
§ 712-1242(1)(b)(i) (1993) (Count 1) and 2) attempting to
distribute at least one-eighth ounce of methamphetamine in
violation of HRS §§ 705-500 and 712-1241(1)(b)(ii)(A) (1993)
(Count 3). Both convictions were based on the 17.44 grams
of methamphetamine recovered from Ugalino's pocket. On
 appeal, Ugalino argues that his conviction on Count 3 should
be vacated or reversed on a number of grounds. Because we
 conclude that Ugalino's claim that there was insufficient
evidence to support the conviction on Count 3 is
dispositive, we do not address his other claims.
 
. . . .
 
In order to prove the attempted distribution of
methamphetamine charged in Count 3, the State was required
to show that Ugalino engaged in conduct constituting "a
substantial step in the course of conduct intended to
culminate" in the distribution of at least one-eighth 
ounce of methamphetamine. HRS §§ 705-500 and
712-1241(1)(b)(ii)(A). "Conduct shall not be considered a
substantial step . . . unless it is strongly corroborative
of the defendant's criminal intent." HRS § 705-500(3). We
 conclude that there was insufficient evidence that Ugalino
took a substantial step toward the distribution of at least
one-eighth ounce (3.54 grams) of the 17.44 grams of
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
methamphetamine in his possession. We therefore reverse his
 
conviction on Count 3.
 
There was no evidence that Ugalino had engaged in
negotiations, offered, or agreed to distribute any of the
17.44 grams of methamphetamine found in his possession.
Indeed, there was no direct evidence of what Ugalino
intended to do with the 17.44 grams. The State, however,
argues that Ugalino's attempt to distribute at least
one-eighth ounce could reasonably be inferred from the 17.44
grams of methamphetamine and eight empty ziplock packets
Ugalino possessed and the other trial evidence. Based on the
particular evidence adduced at Ugalino's trial, we disagree.
 
To establish the charged attempted distribution, the
State was required to prove that Ugalino intended to
distribute at least one-eighth ounce of the 17.44 grams.
The evidence showed that Ugalino was a methamphetamine user.
Officer Wingad testified that the butane lighter recovered
from Ugalino's pocket was the "lighter of choice" for
methamphetamine users and the glass pipe found in Ugalino's
garage was a device used to smoke methamphetamine. Officer
 Wingad also testified that he strongly suspected Ugalino was
on drugs because of Ugalino's aggressive demeanor and the
"overwhelming" strength Ugalino displayed despite his small
size. During his closing argument, the Deputy Prosecuting
Attorney conceded that Ugalino was "probably" a drug user.
 
The State introduced circumstantial evidence that
 
Ugalino may also have been a methamphetamine dealer. It
 failed, however, to introduce evidence providing the jury
with a rational basis for evaluating how much of the 17.44
grams Ugalino would distribute versus how much he would keep
for personal use. The State did not introduce evidence of
 how much methamphetamine Ugalino had sold or consumed in the
past. Nor was there any expert testimony about the amount
of methamphetamine a typical user would consume, the
quantity of methamphetamine a typical user would hold for
consumption, or the street value of methamphetamine. The
 only evidence on the portion of the 17.44 grams Ugalino
intended to distribute was Sergeant Gannon's expert
testimony that each of the eight empty ziplock packets found
in Ugalino's pocket would commonly be used to hold between
.1 and .2 grams of methamphetamine, but could hold up to .5
grams of methamphetamine. At best, Sergeant Gannon's
testimony permitted the jury reasonably to infer that
Ugalino intended to distribute a total of between .8 and 1.6
grams of the 17.44 grams of methamphetamine. This is less
 than the one-eighth ounce threshold necessary to prove
Ugalino's attempted distribution charge.
 
Id. at 52-54, 111 P.3d at 157-59.
 
As in Ugalino, the evidence in Tacang's criminal case,
 
which included a glass pipe with methamphetamine residue found in
 
Tacang's room, showed that Tacang was a methamphetamine user. 
The prosecutor in closing argument acknowledged that Tacang
 "perhaps" was a drug user. While there was substantial
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
circumstantial evidence that Tacang may also have been a
 
methamphetamine dealer, there was insufficient evidence to show
 that Tacang attempted to distribute at least one-eighth ounce
 (3.54 grams) of the total 5.75 grams of methamphetamine recovered
 from his room. We reverse Tacang's conviction on Count 5.
2
 
III.
 
In light of our reversal of Tacang's conviction on
 
Count 5, we decline to address Tacang's points of error to the
 extent that they are related to Count 5. To the extent that
 Tacang's points of error relate to his other convictions and
 sentences, we conclude that they are without merit.
 
We reverse Tacang's conviction on Count 5, and we
 
vacate the portion of the circuit court's December 18, 2008,
 Order Denying Petition that concluded that there was sufficient
 evidence to support the conviction on Count 5 and denied Tacang's
 Petition with respect to Count 5. We affirm the Order Denying
 Petition in all other respects. The circuit court merged Counts
 1 and 2 into Count 5 and did not impose a sentence on Counts 1
 and 2. In light of our reversal of Count 5, we remand the case
 for sentencing on Counts 1 and 2 and for further proceedings
 consistent with this Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 31, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Edgardo L. Tacang
Petitioner-AppellantPro Se Chief Judge 
Kim E. Whitworth Associate Judge 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney 
2 With respect to Count 5, we do not consider whether we
should remand the case for entry of judgment on the offense of
Attempted Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree as a
lesser included offense. Tacang has already been found guilty of
Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree as charged in
Count 1. As requested by the prosecution, the circuit court
merged Count 1 with Count 5 and has not imposed a sentence on
Count 1. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
County of Maui Associate Judge
Respondent-Appellee
 
7
 