 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29375
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
STEVE OSHIRO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0957)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise, and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Steve Oshiro (Oshiro), also known
 
as Steven Oshiro, appeals from the Judgment entered on September
 
17, 2008, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
 court).
1 Oshiro was charged with manslaughter, in violation of
 
2
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-702(1)(a) (1993),  for
recklessly causing the death of another person as the result of a

 
1 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 
2 At the time relevant to this appeal, HRS § 707-702(1)(a)
provided:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of manslaughter
if:
 
(a) He recklessly causes the death of another
person[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
motor vehicle collision. He pleaded no contest to the 
manslaughter charge pursuant to a plea agreement with Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai
'i (State). After obtaining new counsel 
and prior to sentencing, Oshiro filed a motion to withdraw his no-contest plea (Motion to Withdraw). The circuit court denied Oshiro's Motion to Withdraw and sentenced him to twenty years of imprisonment, consistent with the plea agreement. 
On appeal, Oshiro contends that the circuit court erred
 
in denying his Motion to Withdraw on the grounds that: 1) Oshiro
 did not waive his rights knowingly, intelligently, and
 voluntarily when he entered his plea; and 2) Oshiro presented
 changed circumstances or new information justifying the
 withdrawal of his plea. We affirm.
 
I.
 
On January 8, 2008, Oshiro pleaded no contest to the
 
manslaughter charge pursuant to a plea agreement. The plea
 agreement contained a number of provisions, including that
 "[Oshiro] agrees that if prior to sentencing he withdraws his no-
contest plea and the case is re-set for trial, he will be
 incarcerated without bail pending trial" (hereinafter, the "no­bail provision"). Oshiro obtained new counsel and filed his
 Motion to Withdraw. Oshiro argued that there were fair and just
 reasons for allowing him to withdraw his no-contest plea, namely,
 (1) he did not knowingly, intelligently, or voluntarily waive his
 rights; and 2) changed circumstances or new information justified
 the withdrawal. 
Oshiro contended that his plea was not made knowingly,
 
3
intelligently, or voluntarily because his former counsel  had
erroneously advised Oshiro that he could withdraw his plea at any
 time before sentencing. In support of this contention, Oshiro
 submitted his affidavit in which Oshiro asserted that his former
 
3 We refer to the attorney who represented and advised
Oshiro in the circuit court proceedings up through the no-contest
plea and until new counsel was substituted as Oshiro's "former
counsel."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
counsel "told me and my family that I could always withdraw my
 
4
plea of guilty  at any time before sentencing." Oshiro also
 
submitted affidavits from family members and a friend who stated
 
that in a group meeting held a few days after Oshiro's no-contest
 plea, Oshiro's former counsel told them words to the effect that
 "[Oshiro] knows this and I will tell you this too, until [Oshiro]
 is sentenced, he can take back the plea agreement." 
In addition, Oshiro argued that the no-bail provision

 
of the plea agreement unconstitutionally punished Oshiro for
 exercising his right to trial and was unenforceable. Oshiro also
 claimed that information that he had provided a urine sample was
 new information that his former counsel had not known at the time
 of Oshiro's no-contest plea.
 
The circuit court held an evidentiary hearing on
 
Oshiro's Motion to Withdraw. Oshiro's former counsel was the
 sole witness called to testify. Oshiro's former counsel denied
 telling Oshiro or members of Oshiro's family that Oshiro could
 always withdraw his plea before sentencing. Oshiro's former
 counsel testified that he would never give anyone that advice
 because "that's an incorrect statement of the law." With respect
 to the information about the urine sample, Oshiro's former
 counsel testified that he had been told by the lawyer who
 represented Oshiro at the time of Oshiro's arrest that Oshiro had
 provided a urine sample at the hospital immediately after the
 fatal collision. Oshiro's former counsel further testified,
 however, that he could not find any confirmation of this
 information and still did not know whether Oshiro had submitted
 to a urine test. Oshiro's former counsel noted that information
 about a urine test was "not listed anywhere in the discovery. 
It's not listed anywhere in the followup." 
The circuit court denied Oshiro's Motion to Withdraw,
 
and issued written findings of fact and conclusions of law in
 support of its decision. In its findings of fact, the circuit
 
4 We presume Oshiro meant his plea of no contest.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court stated that to the extent that the testimony of Oshiro's
 
former counsel conflicted with the statements submitted by Oshiro
 and his family and friend, "the Court finds [Oshiro's former
 counsel's] testimony credible and not the other statements." The 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
circuit court specifically found the following testimony of
 
Oshiro's former counsel to be "factual": 
At no time did [Oshiro's former counsel] say to
Defendant Oshiro or to his family that Defendant Oshiro
"could always withdraw his plea at any time prior to
sentencing"; nor did he say, "[Oshiro] knows this and I will
tell you this too, until he is sentenced, he can take back
his plea agreement." [Oshiro's former counsel] testified he
would not have said those things because they were not true
and they were improper statements of the law.
 
The circuit court found that there was no evidence
 
presented to support the allegation that Oshiro had provided a
 
urine sample immediately after the collision. It also concluded
 that the no-bail provision did not violate public policy or
 justify setting aside the plea agreement. 
II.

 
The following principles apply to our review of the
 
circuit court's denial of Oshiro's Motion to Withdraw.
 
We review the denial of a motion to withdraw a no-
contest plea prior to the imposition of sentence for abuse of
 discretion. State v. Merino, 81 Hawai
'i 198, 211, 915 P.2d 672, 
685 (1996). In State v. Jim, 58 Haw. 574, 574 P.2d 521 (1978)
 the Hawai
'i Supreme Court discussed the standards for withdrawal 
of a guilty plea under the predecessor to Hawai 'i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 32, which are the same standards applicable
 to Oshiro's Motion to Withdraw. 
A defendant does not have an absolute right to
withdraw his [or her] guilty plea, and a motion for
withdrawal of a guilty plea under the . . . rule must
therefore be determined under either of two established
 principles. Where the request is made after sentence has
been imposed, the "manifest injustice" standard is to be
applied. But where the motion is presented to the trial
court before the imposition of sentence, a more liberal
approach is to be taken, and the motion should be granted if
the defendant has presented a fair and just reason for his
request and the [prosecution] has not relied upon the guilty
plea to its substantial prejudice.
 
Jim, 58 Haw. at 575-76, 574 P.2d at 522-23 (citations and
 
footnote omitted). The defendant bears the "burden of
 establishing plausible and legitimate grounds for the withdrawal" 
5

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of the defendant's no-contest plea. Merino, 81 Hawai 'i at 223, 
915 P.2d at 697. 
The two fundamental bases for showing a "fair and just
 
reason" for withdrawing a no-contest plea are (1) the defendant
 
did not waive his or her rights knowingly, intelligently, or
 voluntarily; and 2) changed circumstances or new information
 justify withdrawal of the plea. Id. at 223-24, 915 P.2d at 697­
98. A defendant must first demonstrate a fair and just reason
 
for the withdrawal of the plea before the court need consider
 whether the prosecution detrimentally relied upon the plea. Id.
 
at 223, 915 P.2d at 698. We review a defendant's claim that his
 or her plea was not knowingly, intelligently, or voluntarily
 entered, thus constituting a fair and just reason for withdrawing
 the plea, under the de novo standard. Id. at 225, 915 P.2d at
 
699.
 
III.
 
We conclude that the circuit court did not err in
 
ruling that Oshiro failed to demonstrate a fair and just reason
 for withdrawing his no-contest plea.
 
A.
 
Oshiro argues that he did not knowingly, intelligently,
 
and voluntarily waive his rights when he entered his no-contest
 plea because he entered his plea "under the erroneous belief that
 he could withdraw his plea at any time before sentencing." In
 support of this contention, Oshiro submitted an affidavit to the
 circuit court in which he asserted that his former counsel "told
 me and my family that I could always withdraw my plea of [no
 
5
contest]  at any time before sentencing."  Oshiro also submitted
 
affidavits from his family and a friend to corroborate his claim
 that his former counsel erroneously advised him that he could
 withdraw his plea at any time before sentencing. 
However, in denying Oshiro's Motion to Withdraw, the

 
circuit court found that the testimony of Oshiro's former counsel
 on this issue was more credible than the conflicting statements
 
5 See footnote 4, supra.
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of Oshiro and his family and friend. Based on that credibility 
determination, the circuit court found, contrary to Oshiro's claim, that Oshiro's former counsel did not advise Oshiro that Oshiro could withdraw his plea at any time before sentencing and that Oshiro had failed to present a fair and just reason for withdrawing his no-contest plea with respect to this issue. We give deference to the circuit court's evaluation of credibility and the weight of the evidence. Domingo v. State, 76 Hawai
'i 
237, 242, 873 P.2d 775, 780 (1994) ("[I]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trial judge." (internal quotations marks and citation omitted)). Accordingly, we reject Oshiro's claim that his plea was not entered knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily because he erroneously believed he could withdraw his plea at any time before sentencing. 
We note that Oshiro's former counsel submitted a
 
declaration in connection with Oshiro's Motion to Withdraw. In
 his declaration, Oshiro's former counsel discussed certain
 provisions of the plea agreement relating to the conditions for
 and the consequences of Oshiro's withdrawal of his plea. 
Oshiro's former counsel opined in his declaration:
 
Based on my review of the various statements, the plea
agreement and my memory of the events related to this Motion
[to Withdraw], I now believe that Mr. Oshiro believed that
he could withdraw his No Contest plea prior to sentencing.
Given the specific language of the unique plea agreement and
the explanation of this language to Mr. Oshiro, I understand
why Mr. Oshiro believed that he would be allowed to withdraw
his plea prior to sentencing.
 
However, Oshiro himself did not assert by affidavit or
 
through his testimony that he was misled by the terms of the plea
 
agreement or his former counsel's explanation of those terms.6
 
Rather, Oshiro, in his affidavit, asserted only that his former
 
6 The record reflects that Oshiro was present at the hearing
on his Motion to Withdraw, but he did not testify.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
counsel told Oshiro that he could always withdraw his plea at any
 
time before sentencing, an assertion the circuit court did not
 find credible. It is the justification asserted by Oshiro that
 controls the evaluation of whether Oshiro had a fair and just
 reason to withdraw his plea. We conclude that the opinion or
 speculation of Oshiro's former counsel on what Oshiro might have
 believed, which was based on matters Oshiro did not say he relied
 upon, does not provide a basis for us to overturn the circuit
 court's decision. 
B.
 
We reject Oshiro's claim that he could not have 
knowingly and intelligently entered his plea because the no-bail provision was unenforceable. It is well established that a defendant may waive his or her constitutional rights. See, 
e.g., Merino, 81 Hawai
'i at 219, 915 P.2d at 693 (right to 
counsel); State v. Timoteo, 87 Hawai 'i 108, 123, 952 P.2d 865, 
880 (1997) (Ramil, J., dissenting, joined by Levinson, J.) (citing examples). In addition, plea bargaining is an important component of our criminal justice system and "does not violate the [United States] Constitution even though a guilty plea waives important constitutional rights." Town of Newton v. Rumery, 480 
U.S. 386, 393, (1987); see Bordenkircher v. Hayes, 434 U.S. 357,
 361 (1978).
 
Oshiro agreed to the no-bail provision and thereby
 
bargained away certain of his rights during the give and take of
 negotiations over his plea agreement.
7 Oshiro provides no
 
persuasive authority to support his contention that as part of a
 negotiated plea agreement, the no-bail provision was
 unconstitutional, violated public policy, or was unenforceable. 
Moreover, the no-bail provision, which was adverse to Oshiro,
 
7 Oshiro agreed to the terms of the plea agreement as the
scheduled trial was approaching. Trial was scheduled for the
 
week of January 14, 2008, the parties agreed to the terms of the
plea agreement in December 2007 after extensive negotiations, and
Oshiro entered his no-contest plea on January 8, 2008. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
provided a disincentive for him to enter into the no-contest
 
plea. Thus, regardless of whether the no-bail provision was
 unenforceable, it did not induce Oshiro to enter into his no-
contest plea. Accordingly, the no-bail provision did not provide
 a fair and just reason for Oshiro to withdraw his plea.
 
C.
 
Finally, we conclude that Oshiro's claim that he was
 
entitled to withdraw his plea based on new information or changed
 circumstances is without merit. On appeal, Oshiro argues that
 the new information that entitled him to withdraw his plea was 
the allegation that he provided a urine sample after the
 collision. However, the circuit court found that no evidence had
 been presented to support that allegation. Oshiro's former
 counsel testified that he had not been able to confirm the
 allegation regarding the urine sample and did not know whether 
Oshiro had submitted to a urine test. Oshiro's former counsel
 also testified that no information regarding a urine test was
 mentioned in the discovery materials. Oshiro himself did not
 aver through testimony or his own affidavit that he had provided
 a urine sample after the collision. We conclude that the circuit
 court did not err in determining that Oshiro had failed to
 substantiate the urine-sample allegation.
 
Moreover, Oshiro did not proffer any information 
regarding the results of any testing of his alleged urine sample -- whether it showed the presence or absence of drugs or alcohol.
8 One of the conditions that a defendant must satisfy to 
establish his or her entitlement to withdraw a no-contest plea based on new information or changed circumstances is that the new information or changed circumstances, "if believed by a reasonable juror, would exculpate the defendant[.]" Merino, 81 
Hawai
'i at 224, 915 P.2d at 698 (block quote format and citation 
omitted). Here, the bare allegation that Oshiro provided a urine 
8 The State's theory was that Oshiro's ability to drive had
been impaired by his use of drugs, but not alcohol.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sample, even if believed, would not have exculpated him. We
 
conclude that the circuit court did not err in ruling that
 Oshiro's urine-sample allegation did not provide a fair and just
 reason for Oshiro to withdraw his plea.
 
IV.
 
We hold that the circuit court did not err in denying
 
Oshiro's Motion to Withdraw, and we affirm the 
September 17, 2008, Judgment of the circuit court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 30, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Michael Jay Green
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10

 