NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29766
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROBERT JOHNSON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
LIHUE DIVISION

 
(CASE NO. 5DTC-08-002197)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Robert Johnson (Johnson) appeals
 
from the Judgment filed on March 12, 2009 in the District Court
 
1
of the Fifth Circuit, Lihue Division  (district court).
Johnson pled no contest to Driving Motor Vehicle

 
Without Valid Driver's License, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) ยง 286-102 (2007 Repl.).
 
On appeal, Johnson contends (1) the district court
 
erred by denying his motion to dismiss; (2) he did not knowingly,
 
intelligently, and voluntarily enter his no contest plea because
 
his trial counsel and the district court failed to inform him
 
that pleading no contest would "cut off his right to appeal the
 
adverse ruling in his motion to dismiss"; and (3) he received
 
ineffective assistance of trial counsel because of errors
 
1
 The Honorable Laurel Loo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
committed by his trial counsel at the motion to dismiss hearing
 
and because his trial counsel did not inform him that by pleading
 
no contest to the charge, he would be unable to appeal the denial
 
of his motion to dismiss.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Johnson's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) Johnson's contention that the district court erred 
by denying his Motion to Dismiss is without merit. Johnson pled 
no contest and therefore waived all non-jurisdictional defects in 
the proceeding, including whether the district court erred by 
denying his Motion to Dismiss. State v. Morin, 71 Haw. 159, 162, 
785 P.2d 1316, 1318-19 (1990); see also State v. Domingo, 82 Hawai
'i 265, 267-68, 921 P.2d 1166, 1168-69 (1996). 
(2) Johnson contends his no contest plea was not made 
knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily. Johnson requests this 
court to "vacate the plea and judgment entered on March 12, 
2009." Johnson is essentially requesting this court to allow him 
to withdraw his plea. Johnson did not move to withdraw his plea 
in the district court within 10 days after his sentencing, as 
required under Rule 32(d) of the Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP). Therefore, under Rule 32(d), Johnson must move to withdraw his no contest plea pursuant to HRPP Rule 40, not in a 
direct appeal. Johnson's claim that his plea was not knowing, 
intelligent, and voluntary is denied without prejudice to his 
raising this issue in a petition pursuant to HRPP Rule 40. 
(3) Johnson contends he was provided ineffective
 
assistance of trial counsel because of errors committed by his
 
trial counsel at the hearing on his Motion to Dismiss and because
 
his trial counsel failed to inform him that he could reserve his
 
right to appeal the denial of his Motion to Dismiss. The record
 
is not clear as to the reason why Johnson's trial counsel did not
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
propose a conditional plea or why he took the actions alleged at
 
the motion to dismiss hearing, or the reason Johnson's trial
 
counsel stated that Johnson would plead no contest immediately
 
after the district court denied his Motion to Dismiss. "If the
 
record is unclear or void as to the basis for counsel's action,
 
counsel shall be given the opportunity to explain his or her
 
actions in an appropriate proceeding before the trial court
 
judge." Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 463, 848 P.2d 966, 977
 
(1993). Therefore, Johnson's claim of ineffective assistance of
 trial counsel is denied without prejudice to his raising this
 
issue in a petition pursuant to HRPP Rule 40.
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment filed on
 
March 12, 2009 in the District Court of the Fifth Circuit, Lihue
 Division, is affirmed without prejudice to Johnson's filing a
 
petition pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 to withdraw his plea and to
 
allege ineffective assistance of trial counsel.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 16, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Charles A. Foster 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Tracy Murakami,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Kauaifor Plaintiff-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
3
 