NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29874
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
WARNE KEAHI YOUNG, Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0509)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Appellant-Appellant pro se Warne Keahi Young (Young)
 
appeals from the First Amended Judgment (Judgment) filed on
 
1
May 5, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit
court). The circuit court entered judgment in the amount of 
$3,500 in favor of Appellee-Appellee State of Hawai 'i Department 
of Health (the State) and against Young on all of Young's claims. 
After a contested hearing before the State, the State

 
ordered Young to cease maintaining an unsanitary dog kennel in
 violation of several laws and pay $3,500 as an administrative
 
penalty for the violations. The State filed its Findings of
 
1
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order (FOF/COL/D&O) on
 
February 12, 2007.
 
Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 91-14 (1993 
& Supp. 2009) and Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 72, Young 
appealed the State's FOF/COL/D&O to the circuit court. 
Young and the State filed briefs. The circuit court 
held a hearing on Young's appeal on November 21, 2007. On January 2, 2008, the circuit court entered its Decision and 
Order, finding that there was reliable, probative, and 
substantial evidence in the record to support the FOF/COL/D&O and 
there were no material facts in dispute. The circuit court 
concluded that Young's contention that his rights to due process 
and equal protection under the United States and Hawai
'i 
Constitutions had been violated was without merit. The circuit court affirmed the FOF/COL/D&O and ordered Young to pay $3,500. 
On May 5, 2009, the circuit court entered the Judgment,
 
and on June 4, 2009, Young filed an appeal to this court.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 
Young's appeal is without merit.
 
Young housed up to twenty-six dogs on his property,
 
creating a nuisance and threat to public health that unlawfully
 
impacted his immediate neighbors and the larger community. The
 
nuisance, a result of odor caused by dog urine and feces, was
 
reported to the State by neighbors. During subsequent
 
inspections, which began on March 16, 2001, the State's Vector
 
Control inspectors found animal waste odors, feces, flies, and
 
specifically the adult dog dung fly on Young's property. Young
 
failed to remedy the odors and the flies present on his property
 
after receiving guidance from four different inspectors, over the
 
course of at least twenty-five inspections from March 16, 2001 to
 
December 16, 2005.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HRS §§ 322-1 (1993) and 322-2 (1993) empower and
 
instruct the State to investigate and remove any and all nuisance
 
and vectors that impact human health. HRS § 322-1 (Removal,
 
prevention) requires the State to
 
examine into all nuisances, foul or noxious odors, gases or
vapors, water in which mosquito larvae exist, sources of
filth, and all causes of sickness or disease, on shore, and
in any vessel, which may be known to them or brought to
their attention, which in their opinion are dangerous or
injurious to health, and into any and all conditions created
or existing which cause or tend to cause sickness or disease
or to be dangerous or injurious to health, and shall cause
the same to be abated, destroyed, removed, or prevented.
 
HRS § 322-2 provides in part:
 
§322-2 Ordering owner to remove.  Whenever any such
nuisance, foul or noxious odors, gases or vapors, water in
which mosquito larvae exist, source of filth, or cause of
sickness or disease is found on private property, the
department of health shall cause notice to be given to the
owner to remove and abate the same at the owner's own
 expense within such reasonable time as the department may
deem proper. 
Hawai'i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 11-26-11 provides: 
§11-26-11. Flies; protection against breeding.  No
 
person, firm, or corporation shall have or keep upon
premises owned, leased, or occupied by them, any article,
substance, or thing of whatever kind, nature, or description
in which flies may breed, unless the same be kept protected
from flies or maintained in a manner consistent with pest
management methods.
 
HAR § 11-26-14 provides:
 
§11-26-14. Flies; management of domestic animal
wastes.  Every property owner or tenant shall prevent the
accumulation of and shall remove or manage all fly breeding
media generated by domestic animals including dog and cat
manure as often as necessary to prevent harboring of flies
or excessive breeding. Excessive breeding shall mean the
production of flies in quantities as may endanger the health
or interfere with the comfort of persons who occupy property
in the neighborhood.
 
Contrary to Young's arguments on appeal, the above
 
statutes and regulations are not vague, and their enforcement
 
against Young was not a violation of his rights to due process
 
and equal protection under the law.
 
Therefore,

 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The First Amended Judgment filed on May 5, 2009 in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 25, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Warne Keahi Young,
Appellant-Appellant pro se.
 
Heidi M. Rian and Wade H. Hargrove III,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Appellee-Appellee.
 Presiding Judge

Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge
 
4
 