  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 28802
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CIVIL NO. 07-1-0529
 
In the Matter of UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS,
AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFL-CIO, Complainant-Appellant,
and
 
KENNETH NAKAMATSU, Director, Department of
Human Resources, City and County of Honolulu and
Mufi Hannemann, Mayor, City and County
of Honolulu (2006-027), Respondents-Appellees,
and
 
HAWAII LABOR RELATIONS BOARD,
JAMES B. NICHOLSON, NORMAN K KATO II, and
SARAH R. HIRAKAMI, Agency-Appellees.1/
 
CIVIL NO. 07-1-0612
 
In the Matter of UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS,
AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO, Complainant Appellee-Appellant,
and
 
KENNETH NAKAMATSU, Director, Department of
Human Resources, City and County of Honolulu and
Mufi Hannemann, Mayor, City and County
of Honolulu (2006-027), Respondents Appellants-Appellees,
and
 
HAWAII LABOR RELATIONS BOARD,
JAMES B. NICHOLSON, NORMAN K KATO II, and
SARAH R. HIRAKAMI, Agency Appellees-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley, Leonard, JJ.)
 
In this secondary appeal arising out of a dispute over
 
alleged prohibited labor practices, Plaintiff-Appellant United
 
Public Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO (UPW) appeals from the
 "Judgment of Remand" filed on October 10, 2007, in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).
2/ Both UPW and
 
Defendants-Appellees the Mayor and the Director of the Department
 of Human Resources, City and County of Honolulu, (collectively,
 "Employer") appealed to the circuit court from a decision (Order
 
1/
 Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 43(c) (2000), we
have substituted the current public officers as parties. 
2/ The Honorable Sabrina S. McKenna presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
No. 2432) issued by the Hawaii Labor Relations Board (HLRB), and 
the appeals were consolidated. The circuit court remanded the case regarding Order No. 2432 to the HLRB for further consideration in light of a stay order issued by this court in a closely related appeal, Appeal No. 27962. On March 19, 2010, we issued a memorandum opinion in Appeal No. 27962, In re United Public Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO, No. 27962, 2010 WL 1057102 (Hawai
'i App. Mar. 19, 2010). 
On appeal, UPW asserts that the circuit court erred in
 
refusing to decide the validity of Order No. 2432 on the merits
 and remanding the case regarding Order No. 2432 to the HLRB. For
 the reasons discussed below, we vacate the circuit court's
 "Judgment of Remand" and remand the case to the circuit court
 with directions to remand the case to the HLRB for
 reconsideration and further proceedings in light of our decision
 in Appeal No. 27962.
 
I.
 
The instant appeal and Appeal No. 27962 arise out of
 
the following underlying facts, which are summarized below: 
A.
 
Gregory Ortiz ("Ortiz"), a member of UPW, was employed
 
by the City and County of Honolulu (City) as Heavy Truck Driver I
 in the Road Maintenance Division of the Department of Facilities
 Maintenance. Ortiz was discharged from his position as a Heavy
 Truck Driver I for unauthorized use of a City vehicle. UPW filed
 a grievance challenging the discharge. An arbitrator ruled that
 the discharge sanction was too severe and ordered that Ortiz be
 reinstated. Ortiz returned to work, but on that day was required
 to undergo a "pre-employment" controlled substances test before
 being permitted to engage in safety-sensitive functions as a
 heavy truck driver. Ortiz failed the controlled substances test
 and was later terminated.
 
UPW filed a prohibited practices complaint against
 
Employer, alleging, among other things, that by requiring Ortiz
 to undergo the "pre-employment" controlled substances test,
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Employer did not comply with the arbitrator's order to reinstate
 
Ortiz. The HLRB ruled in Decision No. 452 that (1) UPW did not
 prove that Employer failed to comply with the arbitration award
 and committed a prohibited practice by subjecting Ortiz to "pre­employment" drug testing; and (2) Employer had committed a
 prohibited practice by refusing to negotiate or consult with UPW
 on appropriate subjects, namely, "procedures for drug testing
 employees returning to work after 30 days and/or who have been
 removed from the random testing pool." The HLRB ordered Employer
 (1) to cease and desist from taking unilateral actions on matters
 subject to the negotiations process and deal with the UPW
 appropriately and (2) on the matter of drug testing, to negotiate
 modifications to Section 63.04 a. of the collective bargaining
 agreement (CBA) to conform with United States Department of
 Transportation (DOT) Rules § 382.301
3/ for commercial driver's
 
license (CDL) drivers. 
UPW and Employer each appealed the HLRB's Decision No.
 
452 to the circuit court, which consolidated the two appeals. 
The circuit court subsequently affirmed the HLRB's decision and
 entered its judgment. UPW and Employer appealed the circuit
 court's judgment to this court and the appeal was docketed as
 Appeal No. 27962. We will refer to the proceedings in the HLRB
 that resulted in Decision No. 452 and the proceedings in the
 circuit court and this court arising out of Decision No. 452 as
 "Ortiz I." 
B.
 
Employer moved this court for a stay of enforcement of
 
the HLRB's Decision No. 452 pending appeal. This court denied
 without prejudice Employer's motion for stay of enforcement
 because Employer did not initially seek relief from the circuit
 court and Employer failed to demonstrate that application to the
 circuit court for relief was not practicable. Employer
 
3/ The HLRB's erroneous reference to DOT Rules § 382.102 was later
corrected by the circuit court to DOT Rules § 382.301, which is set forth at
49 C.F.R. § 382.301. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
subsequently moved the circuit court for a stay of enforcement, 
which the circuit court denied. Employer again filed a motion
 for stay of enforcement pending appeal with this court.
 
C.
 
Meanwhile, after the circuit court affirmed the HLRB's
 
Decision No. 452 in Ortiz I, UPW sent Employer a letter
 reiterating its request to negotiate modifications to the CBA in
 accordance with the HLRB's Decision No. 452 and requesting
 further information in connection with the bargaining request to
 be produced by Employer. Employer responded that discussions
 regarding the requested negotiations should not take place until
 the parties were able to obtain a ruling on the Employer's motion
 for stay of enforcement in Ortiz I; Employer also requested the
 legal bases for the UPW's request for information.
 
As a result, UPW filed a second prohibited practices
 
complaint against Employer with the HLRB, alleging violations of 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 89-13(a)(5) and (7).
4/ UPW
 
contended that Employer breached its statutory duty to negotiate
 in good faith and failed to comply with the remedial order of the
 HLRB in Decision No. 452, because Employer refused to negotiate
 modifications to the CBA and failed to provide the requested
 information necessary for the negotiations.
 
UPW moved for summary judgment on the second prohibited
 
practices complaint. On March 6, 2007, the HLRB issued Order No.
 2432, ruling that Employer breached its duty to bargain in good
 
4/ Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 89-13(a) (Supp. 2009) provides, in
relevant part:
 
(a) It shall be a prohibited practice for a public employer
or its designated representative wilfully to:
 
. . . .
 
(5)	 Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the
exclusive representative as required in section 89-9;
 
. . . .
 
(7)	 Refuse or fail to comply with any provision of this
chapter[.] 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
faith by (1) refusing to meet, confer, and negotiate
 
modifications to Section 63.04 a. of the CBA to conform with DOT
 Rule 382.301 as previously ordered and (2) failing to provide the
 requested information for the purposes of negotiations, both in
 violation of HRS § 89-13(a)(5). The HLRB dismissed UPW's
 prohibited practice claims based upon an alleged violation of HRS
 § 89-13(a)(7). The HLRB ordered Employer to cease and desist
 from continuing to engage in "the foregoing prohibited
 practices"; provide UPW with the requested information; and meet
 and confer with UPW "to negotiate over modifications to Section
 63.04a [of the CBA] to conform with DOT Rule 382.301 in
 accordance with [HLRB] Decision [No.] 452, as modified and
 corrected by the First Circuit Court." 
One day after the HLRB issued Order No. 2432, this
 
court issued a ruling on Employer's motion for stay of
 enforcement in Ortiz I. We granted a stay of the circuit court's
 judgment affirming the HLRB's Decision No. 452 and the part of
 the HLRB's Decision No. 452 that ordered Employer to negotiate
 modifications to Section 63.04 a. of the CBA to conform with DOT
 rules for CDL drivers with respect to drug testing.
 
D.
 
UPW and Employer both appealed the HLRB's Order No.
 
2432 to the circuit court, which consolidated the two appeals. 
We will refer to the proceedings in the HLRB that resulted in
 
Order No. 2432 and the proceedings in the circuit court and this
 court arising out of Order No. 2432 as "Ortiz II." On October
 10, 2007, the circuit court issued its "Judgment of Remand"
 pursuant to its order remanding the case regarding the HLRB's
 Order No. 2432 to the HLRB. In its order remanding the case, the
 circuit court found in relevant part:
 
After reviewing the entire record and considering the
written submissions of the parties and oral arguments
presented, the Court finds the ripeness doctrine prevents it
at this time from deciding the issue raised on appeal by
[UPW]. The Court further finds that it is unclear what the
 [HLRB] . . . would have done if the stay issued by the
Intermediate Court of Appeals . . . in [Appeal] No. 27962
had been granted the day before.
 
5
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that this case is
remanded to the [HLRB] for further consideration by the
Board to take proceedings consistent with the stay issued by
the ICA in [Appeal] No. 27962.
 
II.
 
A.
 
On appeal, UPW argues that the circuit court erred by
 
declining to review the HLRB's Order No. 2432 on the merits and
 
(1) applying the ripeness doctrine as a basis for remand; (2)
 
failing to consider the effect of its ruling on public employees;
 
and (3) exceeding its authority in instructing the HLRB on remand
 to recognize the stay issued by the ICA in Ortiz I.
 
In our memorandum opinion in Ortiz I, we concluded in
 
relevant part that: (1) the HLRB was correct in denying UPW's
 claim that Employer failed to comply with the arbitration award
 and committed a prohibited practice by subjecting Ortiz to "pre­employment" drug testing; and (2) the HLRB was partially correct
 and partially wrong in determining that Employer did commit a
 prohibited practice by breaching its duty to negotiate and
 consult with UPW regarding certain drug-testing procedures. 
Accordingly, we affirmed in part and vacated in part the circuit
 court's judgment affirming the HLRB's Decision No. 452. 
Significant to the instant appeal, we concluded in pertinent part
 as follows:
 
1. We vacate the circuit court's Judgment to the
extent that it affirmed: (a) the HLRB's decision that
Employer committed a prohibited practice based on (i)
Section 63.01 b. of the CBA or (ii) an alleged unilateral
change by Employer of the conditions of employment set forth
in Section 63.04 a. of the CBA by removing employees from
the random drug testing pool; and (b) the resulting order of
the HLRB that Employer negotiate modifications to Section
63.04 a. to conform with DOT Rules § 382.301.
 
2. We affirm the circuit court's Judgment to the
extent it affirmed the HLRB's decision that Employer
committed a prohibited practice by breaching Employer's duty
to negotiate and consult with UPW when Employer failed to
respond to UPW's letter requesting a modification to Section
63.04 a. of the CBA.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
We conclude that this case (Ortiz II) should be
 
remanded to the HLRB to reconsider its Order No. 2432 in light of
 
our decision in Ortiz I. In Ortiz I, we effectively vacated a
 significant portion of the HLRB's Decision No. 452, which UPW
 sought to enforce and relied upon in its prohibited practices
 claims in Ortiz II, and we remanded the case (Ortiz I) for
 further proceedings consistent with our decision. In the HLRB's 
Order No. 2432 in Ortiz II, the HLRB ordered Employer "to
 negotiate [with UPW] over modifications to Section 63.04a [of the
 CBA] to conform with DOT Rule 382.301 in accordance with [HLRB]
 Decision [No.] 452, as modified and corrected by the First
 Circuit Court." However, in Ortiz I, we concluded that "the HLRB
 was not justified in ordering Employer to negotiate modifications
 to Section 63.04 a. to conform with DOT Rules § 382.301"
 (emphasis in original), and we vacated the circuit court's
 judgment to the extent that it affirmed "the resulting order of
 the HLRB that Employer negotiate modifications to Section 
63.04 a. to conform with DOT Rules § 382.301." Accordingly, in
 Ortiz I, we invalidated a portion of the HLRB's Decision No. 452
 upon which the HLRB's Order No. 2432 in Ortiz II was based. 
In addition, in Ortiz I, we concluded that Employer
 
breached its duty to negotiate and consult with UPW by failing to
 respond to UPW's letter, which advised Employer of UPW's desire
 to negotiate and consult over a requested modification to Section
 63.04 a. of the CBA regarding "[t]he issue of whether an employee
 who was discharged pending grievance or will be absent from work
 for more than thirty days would be permitted to remain in the
 random drug testing pool and thus be exempt from having to
 undergo a controlled substances test before resuming safety-
sensitive functions . . . ." We affirmed the circuit court's
 judgment to the extent "it affirmed the HLRB's decision that
 Employer committed a prohibited practice by breaching Employer's 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
duty to negotiate and consult with UPW when Employer failed to
 
respond to UPW's letter requesting a modification to Section
 63.04 a. of the CBA." Ortiz I therefore clarified the nature and
 scope of Employer's duty to negotiate and consult which may
 affect the HLRB's evaluation of issues raised in Ortiz II.
 
Accordingly, we vacate the circuit court's "Judgment of
 
Remand," and we remand the case to the circuit court with
 directions to remand the case to the HLRB for reconsideration and
 further proceedings in light of our decision in Ortiz I. 
We conclude that our decision in Ortiz I and our 
decision to send this case back to the HLRB to reconsider its Order No. 2432 in light of Ortiz I renders moot the issues raised by UPW in this appeal. UPW argues on appeal that the circuit court erred by refusing to address the validity of the HLRB's Order No. 2432 on the merits and instead remanding the case to the HLRB. As noted, however, in Ortiz I, we invalidated a portion of the HLRB's Decision No. 452 upon which the HLRB's Order No. 2432 was based. Our decision in Ortiz I means that the assumptions underlying the HLRB's Order No. 2432 have changed, and the HLRB will need to reevaluate its decision in Ortiz II in light of our decision in Ortiz I. Accordingly, the remedy sought by UPW--to have the circuit court rule on the merits of the HLRB's Order No. 2432--has been compromised by subsequent events. See Lathrop v. Sakatani, 111 Hawai
'i 307, 312-13, 141 P.3d 480, 
485-86 (2006) ("The [mootness] doctrine seems appropriate where events subsequent to the judgment of the trial court have so affected the relations between the parties that the two conditions for justiciability relevant on appeal--adverse interest and effective remedy--have been compromised." (Block quote format and citation omitted.)). 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the circuit court's
 
October 10, 2007, "Judgment of Remand," and we remand the case to
 the circuit court with directions to remand the case to the HLRB
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for reconsideration and further proceedings in light of our
 
decision in Ortiz I. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, July 7, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Herbert R. Takahashi
 
Rebecca L. Covert
 (Takahashi Vasconcellos &
Covert)
for Complainant-Appellant/ Chief Judge
Complainant Appellee-Appellant
 
John S. Mukai
 
Deputy Corporation Counsel Associate Judge
City and County of Honolulu
for Respondents-Appellees/
Respondents Appellants-Appellees
 
Associate Judge
Valri Lei Kunimoto
 for Agency-Appellees/
Agency Appellees-Appellees
 
9
 