 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29271
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
WALTER RAMSEY, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
SACHIKO ITO, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 06-1-3590)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Walter Ramsey (Husband) appeals
 
from the Family Court of the First Circuit's (family court)1
 
Divorce Decree filed June 19, 2008, which dissolved Husband's
 
marriage with Defendant-Appellee Sachiko Ito (Wife). On appeal
 
Husband argues that the family court erred in holding that a
 
premarital agreement signed by Husband and Wife is enforceable
 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 572D-6 (2006 Repl.).
 
Husband raises the following points of error on appeal:
 
(1) The family court's Finding of Fact (FOF) No. 13 is
 
clearly erroneous. FOF No. 13 states that "[t]he Premarital
 Agreement states that Husband and Wife provided each other with
 
financial disclosures; Husband has not provided any proof that
 
Wife's financial disclosures were not provided at the time of
 
entering into the Premarital Agreement.";
 
1
 The Honorable Karen M. Radius presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) The family court's FOF No. 14 is clearly erroneous. 
FOF No. 14 states that "[a]s per the Premarital Agreement,
 
Husband expressly waived "further information regarding the
 
assets and liabilities or debts of [Wife].";
 
(3) The family court's FOF No. 19 is clearly erroneous. 
FOF No. 19 states that "[n]o testimony or evidence was provided
 
as to whether Husband owned AOL stock at the time of the
 
divorce.";
 
(4) The family court's FOF No. 20 is clearly erroneous. 
FOF No. 20 states that "[n]o proof was provided as to earnings
 
that either Husband or Wife received and invested during the
 
marriage.";
 
(5) The family court's Conclusions of Law (COL) Nos. 8,
 
9, and 10 are wrong. COL No. 8 states that "Husband and Wife
 
were provided fair and reasonable disclosure of the property or
 
financial obligations of the other party before executing the
 
Premarital Agreement." COL No. 9 states that "Husband and Wife
 
voluntarily and expressly waived, in writing, any right to
 
disclosure of the property or financial obligations of the other
 
party beyond the disclosure provided." COL No. 10 states that
 
"Husband and Wife had, or reasonably could have had, an adequate
 
knowledge of the property and financial obligation of the other
 
party. No evidence was presented that either party requested
 
further disclosure through counsel prior to signing the
 
premarital agreement.";
 
(6) The family court's COL No. 11 is in error. COL No.
 
11 provides that "[t]he Premarital Agreement was not
 
unconscionable when it was executed."; and
 
(7) The family court's COL Nos. 14 and 15 are in error. 
COL No. 14 states that "[t]he Premarital Agreement by and between
 
Husband and Wife shall not be set aside." COL No. 15 states that
 
"[a]ccordingly, as per the Premarital Agreement, Husband shall
 
pay to Wife SIXTEEN HUNDRED AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($1,600.00) per
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
month alimony for a period of thirty-six (36) months, commencing
 
on April 15, 2008."
 
Upon careful review of the record, the briefs
 
submitted, and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve
 
Husband's appeal as follows. 
Husband argues that the premarital agreement between
 
Husband and Wife is unenforceable pursuant to HRS § 572D-6 (1996
 
Repl.), which states:
 
[§572D-6] Enforcement.  (a) A premarital agreement is
enforceable and shall be binding in any action unless the
party against whom enforcement is sought proves that:
(1) That party did not execute the agreement
voluntarily; or
(2) The agreement was unconscionable when it was
executed and, before execution of the agreement,
that party: 
(A) Was not provided a fair and reasonable
disclosure of the property or financial
obligations of the other party;
(B) Did not voluntarily and expressly waive, in
writing, any right to disclosure of the
property or financial obligations of the
other party beyond the disclosure provided;
and
 
(C) Did not have, or reasonably could not have
had, an adequate knowledge of the property or
financial obligations of the other party.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
We hold that the family court did not err in concluding
 
that the premarital agreement is enforceable. There is no
 
dispute that Husband entered the agreement voluntarily. 
Therefore, the dispute in this case centers on whether Husband
 
met his burden to show that the agreement was unenforceable under
 
HRS § 572D-6(a)(2). In this regard, Husband failed to prove, at
 
the very least, the third prong under HRS § 572D-6(a)(2)(C). In
 
other words, Husband did not establish that he "[d]id not have,
 
or reasonably could not have had, an adequate knowledge of the
 
property or financial obligations" of Wife. The corresponding
 
COL challenged on appeal is COL No. 10, which states that
 
"Husband and Wife had, or reasonably could have had, an adequate
 
knowledge of the property and financial obligation of the other
 
party. No evidence was presented that either party requested
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
further disclosure through counsel prior to signing the
 
premarital agreement." 
A conclusion of law that presents mixed questions of 
fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard 
because the conclusion is dependent upon the facts and 
circumstances of the particular case. See Del Monte Fresh 
Produce (Hawaii), Inc. v. Int'l Longshore & Warehouse Union, Local 142, AFL-CIO, 112 Hawai' i 489, 499, 146 P.3d 1066, 1076 
(2006). "As a general matter, a finding of fact or a mixed determination of law and fact is clearly erroneous when '(1) the 
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding or 
determination, or (2) despite substantial evidence to support the 
finding or determination, the appellate court is left with the 
definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.'" Id. 
(quoting In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai' i 97, 119, 
9 P.3d 409, 431 (2000)). 
Pursuant to the plain language of HRS § 572D-6, it was 
Husband's burden to demonstrate that, in addition to the 
agreement being unconscionable when it was executed, all three 
prongs of HRS § 572D-6(a)(2) were met. While Husband makes the 
conclusory argument that "Husband did not and could not have had 
an adequate knowledge of the property or financial obligations of 
Wife[,]" he fails to provide a discernible argument as to why COL 
No. 10 is clearly erroneous. See Norton v. Admin. Dir. of Court, 
State of Hawai' i, 80 Hawai' i 197, 200, 908 P.2d 545, 548 (1995) (a 
court may disregard a party's particular contention where that 
party makes no discernible argument in support of that position). 
Even assuming arguendo that Husband has not waived his
 
argument with respect to COL No. 10, the family court did not
 clearly err in its COL No. 10. Husband's own testimony supports
 
COL No. 10. When asked whether he asked for any financial
 
information regarding his Wife's assets, Husband answered "No." 
Moreover, Husband does not dispute the family court's
 
finding that "[p]rior to being married, Husband and Wife entered
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
into a Premarital Agreement on October 3, 2002," that at the time
 
of entering the Premarital Agreement both Husband and Wife were
 
represented by separate attorneys, and that "[o]ne month after
 
signing the Premarital Agreement, Husband signed in front of his
 
lawyer that he understood the consequences of the execution of
 
the agreement, signed it voluntarily and that he received legal
 
advice." Furthermore, it is undisputed that the premarital
 
agreement states, in relevant part, that:
 
Although they know they have the right to it, neither
[Husband] or [Wife] requires further information regarding
the assets and liabilities or debts of the other. In
 addition, [Husband] has a sufficient knowledge of [Wife's]
income and her capacity to earn and receive income, and
[Wife] has a sufficient knowledge of [Husband's] income and
his capacity to earn and receive income. 
Husband thus failed to show, at a minimum, that he
 
"[d]id not have, or reasonably could not have had, an adequate
 
knowledge of the property or financial obligations of the other
 
party." HRS § 572D-6(a)(2)(C) (emphasis added). There is
 
substantial evidence in the record to support the family court's
 
determination enforcing the premarital agreement.
 
We need not and thus do not address the remainder of
 
Husband's points of error. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the family court's June 19,
 
2008 Divorce Decree is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 31, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Justin L. Sturdivant 
(Smith & Sturdivant, LLLC)for Plaintiff-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Thomas D. Farrell Gary G. Singhfor Defendant-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 