FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
» I 
---o0o--­
IN THE MATTER OF THE TAX APPEAL OF
 
REEL HOOKER SPORTFISHING, INC., Plaintiff-Appellant v.
STATE OF HAWAI» I, DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION, Defendant-Appellee,
and EXACT GAME FISHING, INC., Plaintiff-Appellant v.
STATE OF HAWAI» I, DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION, Defendant-Appellee,
and FINEST KIND, INC., Plaintiff-Appellant v.
STATE OF HAWAI» I, DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION, Defendant-Appellee
 
NO. 29598
 
APPEAL FROM THE TAX APPEAL COURT
 
(CASE NOS. 07-0072, 07-0073 and 07-0074)
 
MAY 28, 2010
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
This is a tax appeal case in which the taxpayers, who 
are in the charter boat fishing business, challenge the 
assessment of Hawai
» i General Excise Tax (GET) on their 
businesses on the ground that a federal statute limiting non-
federal taxes upon vessels operating in U.S. navigable waters, 33 
United States Code (U.S.C.) ÿÿ 5(b) (2006), preempts the 
application of the Hawai» i GET statute, Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) ÿÿ 237-13(6)(A) (2001 & Supp. 2008), to their charter 
fishing revenue. Plaintiffs-Appellants Reel Hooker Sportfishing, 
Inc., Exact Game Fishing, Inc., and Finest Kind, Inc. 
(collectively Taxpayers) appeal from the Consolidated Judgment 
entered on December 22, 2008 (Judgment), by the Hawai» i Tax FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appeal Court (Tax Appeal Court),1 which entered Judgment against 
Taxpayers and in favor of Defendants-Appellees Director of 
Taxation, State of Hawai» i, and Department of Taxation, State of 
Hawai» i (State).2 We hold that 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b) does not preempt 
the assessment of Hawai» i GET on the charter fishing revenue of 
these Hawai» i businesses because GET is a tax assessed on gross 
business receipts for the privilege of doing business in Hawai» i, 
and is not a tax on their vessels or passengers. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Taxpayers are Hawai» i corporations, incorporated under 
and in accordance with the laws of the State of Hawai» i. 
Taxpayers own and operate three passenger vessels that are licensed by the federal government to carry up to six passengers 
in the "coastwise" trade. The coastwise endorsement entitles the 
vessels to unrestricted access to the navigable waters 
surrounding the islands of Maui, Lanai and Molokai. Taxpayers 
are in the charter fishing business, providing customers with the 
opportunity to fish for various species of pelagic game fish, 
including marlin, tuna, ono (wahoo), and mahimahi. The fishing 
excursions originate at Maui's Lahaina Harbor. 
The principal source of Taxpayers' earnings is the
 
fares paid by their charter passengers. Since beginning
 
operations decades ago, Taxpayers have added GET to the charter
 
fares collected from their passengers, which is consistent with
 
the practice in the charter fishing industry.
 
1/
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. 
2/
 Taxpayers also seek relief from the following orders, also entered
on December 22, 2008: (1) Order Granting Director of Taxation, State of
Hawai»i and Department of Taxation, State of Hawai »i's Motion for Summary
Judgment Filed October 10, 2008; (2) Order Denying Reel Hooker Sportfishing,
Inc.'s Motion for Summary Judgment on First Amended Complaint to Recover
Monies Paid Under Protest Pursuant to HRS § 40-35 Filed August 26, 2008; (3)Order Denying Exact Game Fishing, Inc.'s Motion for Summary Judgment on First
Amended Complaint to Recover Monies Paid Under Protest Pursuant to HRS § 40-35Filed August 21, 2008; and (4) Order Denying Finest Kind, Inc.'s Motion for
Summary Judgment on First Amended Complaint to Recover Monies Paid UnderProtest Pursuant to HRS § 40-35 Filed August 26, 2008. 
2   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On or about June 22, 2007, Taxpayers each filed a
 
complaint against the State in the Tax Appeal Court, seeking
 
relief from GET assessments for tax years 2004 and 2005. In
 
their complaints, Taxpayers requested refunds for amounts paid
 
under protest pursuant to HRS § 40-35 (1993), claiming that the
 
State improperly imposed GET under HRS § 237-13(6)(A)3 because it
 
is preempted by 33 U.S.C. § 5(b).4
 
On October 22, 2007, the Tax Appeal Court entered a
 
stipulation and order consolidating Taxpayers' three cases under
 Tax Appeal Case No. 07-0072.  Taxpayers subsequently filed a
 
first amended complaint on December 24, 2007. In response, the
 
State filed a consolidated answer on January 3, 2008.
 
The Tax Appeal Court heard the parties' cross-motions
 
for summary judgment on November 3, 2008. On December 22, 2008,
 
3/
 HRS § 237-13(6)(A) (2001) provides: 
Upon every person engaging or continuing within the State in
any service business or calling including professional
services not otherwise specifically taxed under this
chapter, there is likewise hereby levied and shall be
assessed and collected a tax equal to four percent of the
gross income of the business, and in the case of a
wholesaler under section 237-4(a)(10), the tax shall be
equal to one-half of one percent of the gross income of the
business. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a wholesaler under
section 237-4(a)(10) shall be subject to section 237-13.3.
 
4/
 33 U.S.C. § 5(b) provides: 
No taxes, tolls, operating charges, fees, or any other
impositions whatever shall be levied upon or collected from
any vessel or other water craft, or from its passengers or
crew, by any non-Federal interest, if the vessel or water
craft is operating on any navigable waters subject to the
authority of the United States, or under the right to
freedom of navigation on those waters, except for (1) fees
charged under section 2236 of this title; (2) reasonable
fees charged on a fair and equitable basis that (A) are used
solely to pay the cost of a service to the vessel or water
craft; (B) enhance the safety and efficiency of interstate
and foreign commerce; and (C) do not impose more than a
small burden on interstate or foreign commerce; or (3)
property taxes on vessels or watercraft, other than vessels
or watercraft that are primarily engaged in foreign commerce
if those taxes are permissible under the United States
Constitution. 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Tax Appeal Court entered orders granting summary judgment to
 
the State and denying the Taxpayers' motions. Final judgment
 
also was entered. On January 21, 2009, Taxpayers timely filed a
 
notice of appeal.
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
On appeal, Taxpayers contend that the Tax Appeal Court
 
erred because it: (1) looked beyond 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b)'s plain,
 
unambiguous and explicit prohibition of state taxation of the
 
earnings on Taxpayers' vessels; (2) construed 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b) to
 
allow assessment of GET on the charter revenue of Taxpayers'
 
vessels notwithstanding a resulting direct conflict with the
 
federal law; and (3) construed 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b) to allow a
 
privilege tax on Taxpayers' business of transporting passengers
 
to and from a state boat harbor.
 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
"We review the circuit court's grant or denial of 
summary judgment de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai» i 48, 
56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (quoting Durette v. Aloha Plastic 
Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai» i 490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 71 (2004)). 
Likewise, the meaning of a statute is a question of law that is 
reviewed de novo. See, e.g., Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. of 
State of Hawai» i, 120 Hawai» i 181, 197, 202 P.3d 1226, 1242 
(2009). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
The dispositive issue in this tax appeal is whether HRS
 
ÿÿ 237-13(6)(A) is preempted by the Marine Transportation Security
 
Act of 2002, codified at 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b). A state law is
 
preempted by federal law when there is (1) express preemption or
 
(2) implied preemption.
 
Express preemption exists when Congress makes its
 
intent known through explicit statutory language preempting state
 
action in a given area. See, e.g., English v. Gen. Elec. Co.,
 
496 U.S. 72, 79 (1990); Wardair Canada, Inc. v. Florida Dep't of
 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Revenue, 477 U.S. 1, 6 (1986). When the text of an express
 
preemption clause is susceptible to multiple interpretations,
 
courts generally accept the reading that disfavors preemption. 
Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC , 544 U.S. 431, 449 (2005). 
Implied preemption occurs when there is either (1)
 
conflict preemption or (2) field preemption. A state law is 
preempted under the conflict preemption doctrine when it is
 
impossible to comply with both the state and federal laws, or
 
when the state law impedes the objectives of the federal law. 
Gade v. Nat'l Solid Wastes Mgmt. Ass'n , 505 U.S. 88, 98 (1992). 
Field preemption occurs when the federal legislative scheme is so
 
pervasive that it occupies the field, leaving no room for states
 
to supplement federal law. Id.  at 98, 115. 
The United States Supreme Court has held that the
 
burden of establishing preemption rests with the party who is
 
seeking the benefit of it. De Buono v. NYSA-ILA Med. and
 
Clinical Serv. Fund, 520 U.S. 806, 814 (1997). That party must
 therefore "bear the considerable burden of overcoming the
 
starting presumption that Congress does not intend to supplant
 
state law." Id. Thus, preemption is disfavored unless the
 
"nature of the regulated subject matter permits no other
 
conclusion" or "Congress has unmistakably so ordained." Florida
 
Lime & Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Paul, 373 U.S. 132, 142 (1963). 
In analyzing whether a state law is preempted, the
 
"purpose of Congress is the ultimate touchstone." Retail Clerks
 
Intern. Ass'n., local 1625, AFL-CIO v. Schermerhorn, 375 U.S. 96,
 
103 (1963). The purpose of Congress can be "explicitly stated in
 
the statute's language, or implicitly contained in its structure
 
and purpose." Jones v. Rath Packing Co. , 430 U.S. 519, 525
 
(1977). 
A. Hawai» i GET 
Pursuant to HRS ÿÿ 237-13(6)(A), GET is levied,
 
assessed, and collected upon "every person engaging or continuing
 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
within the State in any service business or calling including
 
professional services not otherwise specifically taxed," which
 
indisputably includes Taxpayers' gross income from their charter
 
fishing business. GET is a tax on gross income or gross
 
receipts. See HRS ÿÿ 237-3 (2001). The Hawai » i Supreme Court has 
described GET as a tax on the privilege of doing business in the
 
State.
 
Hawai»i's general excise tax is a gross receipts tax on the
privilege of doing business in Hawai »i, thus Hawai »i's 
general excise tax is a privilege tax. . . . A privilege tax
is assessed a party based on the fact that the party chose
to engage in business activity within the state. Such a taxis justified on the ground that companies conductingbusiness enjoy the protections and benefits given by thestate. 
In re Tax Appeal of Baker & Taylor, Inc. v. Kawafuchi , 103 
Hawai» i 359, 365, 82 P.3d 804, 810 (2004) (citations and footnote 
omitted; format altered). 
B. Express Preemption
 
Taxpayers argue that 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b) expressly
 
preempts the imposition of GET on the earnings of their vessels,
 
emphasizing the statutory language as follows: "No taxes . . .
 
shall be levied upon or collected from any vessel . . . or from
 
its passengers . . . by any non-federal interest," if the vessel
 
is operating on any navigable waters of the United States. 
The Supreme Court has emphasized that the plain 
language of federal laws must be narrowly construed because of 
the presumption against preemption. Cipollone v. Liggett Group, 
Inc., 505 U.S. 504, 505 (1992). In this case, the plain language of 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b) prevents anyone except the federal government 
from imposing a tax on a vessel or on its passengers or crew, 
while that vessel is operating on navigable waters. In contrast, 
HRS ÿÿ 237-13(6)(A) requires Hawai » i businesses to pay a privilege 
tax for engaging and conducting business in the State of Hawai» i. 
Contrary to Taxpayers' assertion, the express language of 33 
U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b) does not explicitly prohibit a state from taxing a
 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
corporation's gross income for engaging in business in that
 
state. The federal statute refers only to vessels and their
 
passengers and crews, and simply does not address the business
 
revenue or gross income generated by a business that operates the
 
vessel.
 
Indeed, the case cited by Taxpayers as "illustrative" 
of their express preemption argument in fact undercuts it. In 
Aloha Airlines, Inc. v. Director of Taxation of Hawai» i, 464 U.S. 
7 (1983), the Supreme Court found that the explicit language of 49 U.S.C. § 1513(a) preempted taxes levied and assessed upon the 
gross income of an airline pursuant to HRS § 239-6 (1970).
5 As 
noted in Aloha Airlines , 49 U.S.C. ÿÿ 1513(a) expressly states 
that "no state . . . shall levy a tax . . . on persons traveling 
in air commerce or on the sale of air transportation or on the 
gross receipts derived therefrom." 464 U.S. at 11 (emphasis 
added). The Court found that HRS § 239-6 was expressly preempted 
because it imposes a state tax on the gross receipts of airlines 
selling air transportation and carrying persons traveling in air 
commerce. Id. The statute at issue in Aloha Airlines plainly 
differs from the statute at issue in this case because the 
explicit language of 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b) does not prohibit a state 
from imposing a tax on the gross income of businesses within that 
state. Since Congress has not explicitly and unambiguously 
prohibited states from imposing taxes on the gross income of 
businesses in 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b), there is no express preemption 
through its statutory language. As argued by the State, if 
5/
 During the relevant period, HRS ÿÿ 239-6 provided, in part:
 
Airlines, certain carriers. There shall be levied and
 
assessed upon each airline a tax of four per cent of its
gross income each year from the airline business; provided
that if an airline adopts a rate schedule for students in
grade twelve or below traveling in school groups providing
such students at reasonable hours a rate less than one-half
 
of the regular adult fare, the tax shall be three per cent
of its gross income each year from the airline business. 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Congress had intended in 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b) to preempt states from
 
imposing taxes on the gross income or gross receipts derived from
 
commerce over navigable waters, it could have so stated, as was
 
done in 49 U.S.C. ÿÿ 1513(a).
 
Inherent in Taxpayers' express preemption argument is
 
the contention that any tax on the gross receipts received by
 
Taxpayers for carrying passengers aboard their vessels is in fact
 
a tax on the vessel and passenger alike. This proposition is
 
simply not supported by the authorities relied on by the
 
Taxpayers nor any others that have been considered by this court. 
See, e.g., Gloucester Ferry Co. v. Penn., 114 U.S. 196 (1885)
 
(cited by Taxpayers) (rejecting, as an interference with
 interstate commerce, Pennsylvania's attempt to tax dividends of a
 
New Jersey ferry company that merely loaded and unloaded
 
passengers and freight at a Philadelphia dock). Particularly in
 
light of strong presumption against preemption, we decline to
 
broadly construe the term "vessel" to include the gross income
 
generated by a taxpayer's use of its vessel.
 
Thus, we reject Taxpayers' argument that 33 U.S.C.
 
ÿÿ 5(b) expressly preempts the assessment of GET.
 
C. Implied Preemption
 
1. Conflict Preemption
 
Taxpayers contend that HRS § 237-13(6)(A) is impliedly
 
preempted because it is in direct conflict with 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b).
 
Specifically, Taxpayers argue that "state law is violated if
 
Taxpayers do not pay the [GET] tax, yet if they do so, they
 
violate federal law by collecting it on behalf of the state." 
First, this is a faulty premise. For better or worse, 
HRS ÿÿ 237-16(A)(6) requires only that businesses pay GET to the 
State, it does not require that businesses collect this tax from 
their customers. While collection of the GET from customers and 
clients is a common, arguably uniform, practice that is not 
prohibited by Hawai» i law, the GET is a privilege tax on the 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
business, not its customer. The fact that Taxpayers fund their
 
payment of the GET through a pass-through charge to their
 
customers/passengers does not change the nature of the GET from a
 
tax on their businesses to a tax on their passengers.
 
Taxpayers also argue that the imposition of GET on
 
their charter fishing business impedes the objectives of the
 
federal law and, therefore, is barred by the conflict preemption
 
doctrine. Taxpayers contend that the purpose of 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b)
 
was to decrease the financial burden on vessel operators and
 
their passengers by exempting them from state and local taxes
 
that interfere with interstate commerce by mandating a broad
 
prohibition against state and local taxation. The legislative
 
history suggests a more targeted concern and more narrow
 
legislative solution. The U.S. House Conference Report states
 
that the purpose of 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b) was "to clarify existing law
 
with respect to Constitutionally permitted fees and taxes on a
 
vessel," and "to prohibit fees and taxes on a vessel simply
 
because that vessel sails through a given jurisdiction." H.R.
 
Rep. No. 108-334, at 180 (2002) (Conf. Rep.) (emphasis added). 
The Report also notes that the amendment did "not affect whether
 
sales or income taxes are applicable with respect to vessels." 
Id. Indeed, a sponsor of the bill that was codified as 33 U.S.C.
 
ÿÿ 5(b) explained the purpose of the legislation as follows:
 
[The proposed legislation] addresses the current problem,
and the potential for greater future problems, of local
jurisdictions seeking to impose taxes and fees on vessels
merely transiting or making innocent passage through
navigable waters subject to the authority of the United
States that are adjacent to the taxing community. We are
 seeing instances in which local communities are seeking to
impose taxes or fees on vessels even where the vessel is not
calling on, or landing, in the local community. These are
 cases where no passengers are disembarking, in the case of
passenger vessels, or no cargo is being unloaded in the case
of cargo vessels and where the vessels are not stopping for
the purpose of receiving any other service offered by the
port. In most instances, these types of taxes would not be
allowed under the Commerce Clause of the United States
 
Constitution. Unfortunately, without a statutory
clarification, the only means to determine whether the
 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
burden is an impermissible burden under the Constitution is
to pursue years of litigation.
 
148 Cong. Rec. E2143-04 (2002).
 
Taxpayers and Amicus Curiae Paradise Cruise, Limited,
 
dba Star of Honolulu Cruises & Events (Amicus Curiae) also ask
 
this court to consider an unpublished Tennessee decision
 
concluding that 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b) preempted a Tennessee privilege
 
tax law. Upon review, however, the statute at issue in High
 
County Adventures, Inc. v. Polk County, No. E2007-02678-COA-R3­CV, 2008 WL 4853105 (Tenn. Ct. App., November 10, 2008), levied a
 
privilege tax upon consumers participating in commercial
 
whitewater rafting excursions, not upon the rafting businesses,
 
although the businesses were tasked with collecting the tax from
 
their customers/passengers. The Tennessee court, noting the lack
 
of any explicit preemption language in 33 U.S.C. ÿÿ 5(b), held
 
that there was a manifest and irreconcilable conflict between
 
Polk County's privilege tax on consumers participating in rafting
 
excursions on navigable waters and the federal law. Id. at *12­
13.
6 As Taxpayers, in their role as Hawai» i businesses, and not 
their boating customers/passengers, are taxed pursuant to HRS 
ÿÿ 237-14(6)(A), the Tennessee court's rationale is inapplicable 
to this case. 
2. Field Preemption
 
Taxpayers argue that taxation of the earnings from
 
their vessels pursuant to HRS ÿÿ 237-13(6)(A) creates an obstacle
 to uniform federal regulation of maritime commerce and Amicus
 
Curiae argues that federal law so fully occupies the legislative
 
6/
 We are also unpersuaded by the August 30, 2005 order issued by a
trial court in Pennsylvania, i.e., the Court of Common Pleas of Fayette
County, Pennsylvania (No. 220 of 2005, G.D.), that was provided by Amicus
Curiae. In contrast to our analysis here, the Pennsylvania court summarilyconstrued its statute as levying a tax on the use of the river. As discussed 
above, Hawai
»i courts have long held GET to be a privilege tax on businesses,
for the privilege of doing business in Hawai »i, without regard to the nature
of the business. Thus, we reject the notion that Taxpayers are being taxed
simply for their use of Hawai »i's navigable waters. 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
field that the GET is impliedly preempted. While we recognize
 
the broad scope of federal maritime legislation, we fail to see
 
how the imposition of GET on the gross receipts of Taxpayers'
 
charter fishing businesses interferes in any way with the uniform
 
federal regulation of maritime commerce. Accordingly, we reject
 
the argument that the doctrine of field preemption is applicable
 
to this case.
 
V.	 CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, the Circuit Court's December
 
22, 2008 Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, May 28, 2010. 
Dennis Niles 
(Shannon S. Imlay and
Ronald N.W. Kim with Presiding Judge 
him on the briefs)(Paul Johnson Park & Niles)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants Associate Judge 
Damien A. Elefante, Deputy
Attorney General (Hugh R. Jones,Deputy Attorney General, with
him on the brief Associate Judge 
for Appellee STATE OF HAWAI» I,
DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION 
11 