NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29181 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
BRANDT HOMES INCORPORATED, a Hawaii corporation,

Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ANTHONY CHARLES GRANDE, and NARINDAR KAUR GRANDE,
Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10,
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10,
and DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants.
 
ANTHONY CHARLES GRANDE and NARINDAR KAUR GRANDE,
Counterclaimants-Appellants,
v.
 
BRANDT HOMES INCORPORATED, JEFFREY BRANDT,
and NA PALI HAWEO COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION,
Counterclaim Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-2061)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants/Counterclaimants/Appellants Anthony Charles
 
Grande and Narindar Kaur Grande (the Grandes) appeal from the
 
Final Judgment filed on March 10, 2008 in the Circuit Court of
 
1
the First Circuit (circuit court)  in favor of
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellee Brandt Homes, Inc. and
 
Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellee Jeffrey Brandt (collectively the
 
Brandt Appellees).
 
The Grandes retained Brandt Homes, Inc. to construct a
 
residence for the Grandes in the Na Pali Haweo planned community
 
above Hawaii Kai. A dispute arose between the parties because
 
portions of the residence did not comply with Na Pali Haweo
 
Community Association (Association) design guidelines under
 
applicable covenants, conditions, and restrictions. Brandt
 
Homes, Inc. initiated this lawsuit seeking to recover $31,875.14
 
for unpaid labor and materials used in the construction. The
 
Grandes filed a counterclaim against the Brandt Appellees,
 
claiming the Brandt Appellees were responsible for the purported
 
failure to conform to the design guidelines and therefore were
 
responsible for, inter alia, all expenses the Grandes incurred in
 
defending lawsuits by the Association and a neighbor and for the
 
costs of modifying and completing construction. After a bench
 
trial, the circuit court entered judgment in favor of the Brandt
 
Appellees and awarded them attorneys' fees and costs.
 
On appeal, the Grandes assert that the circuit court
 
reversibly erred by: (1) denying the Grandes judgment and at
 
least nominal damages on their counterclaim and awarding the
 
Brandt Appellees attorneys' fees and costs as the prevailing
 
parties; (2) denying the Grandes' motion for partial summary
 
judgment; (3) entering judgment in favor of the Brandt Appellees
 
on the complaint; (4) granting the Brandt Appellees' motion for
 
protective order regarding the deposition notice of Edward Resh
 
2
(Resh),  precluding Resh and the Grandes' counsel from testifying
at trial, and refusing to take judicial notice of particular
 
facts; (5) concluding that Resh had authority to agree to
 
2
 Resh is an architect and was retained by the Grandes to design the
residence and superintend its construction.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
deviations from the design plan, that Resh approved certain
 
deviations, and thus the Brandt Appellees were not responsible to
 
the Grandes for damages; (6) concluding that Brandt Homes, Inc.'s
 
error in building the house too close to the property line was
 
insignificant and that Brandt Homes, Inc. need not compensate the
 
Grandes for the error; (7) concluding that Brandt Homes, Inc.
 
properly walked off the job and need not compensate the Grandes
 
for resultant damages; (8) denying the Grandes' motion for
 
reconsideration and/or new trial.3
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced, the issues raised by the parties, and the
 
relevant case law, we resolve the Grandes' points of error as
 
follows:
 
(1) The circuit court concluded that the Brandt
 
Appellees substantially performed under, and did not materially
 
breach, the contract with the Grandes. The Grandes point to the
 
circuit court's finding that a portion of the garage area was
 
approximately three inches short of the mandated twenty foot
 
front setback to argue that the Brandt Appellees breached the
 
construction contract. However, the circuit court also made
 
findings that:
 
this very minor discrepancy alone would have caused no
significant difficulty for the Grandes and that it was only
in combination with the other, material breaches of the
Guidelines, together with the Grandes' stubborn refusal to
wholeheartedly attempt to reach some sort of accommodation
with the Association that compelled the latter to refuse
what would otherwise have been an easily-granted variance.
 
3
 There are eight points of error presented in the "Points of Error"
section of the Appellants' Opening Brief. However, there are only seven
points listed under the "Argument" section of the brief. For consistency's
sake, we refer to the Appellants' points of error as they are numbered in the
Points of Error section rather than in the Argument section. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court determined that the material breaches of the
 
design guidelines were not the fault of the Brandt Appellees. 
Additionally, as discussed infra regarding their sixth point of
 
error, the Grandes waived any challenge to the circuit court's
 
finding that the approximate three inch error by the Brandt
 
Appellees was insignificant. Therefore, given the circuit
 
court's findings and its conclusion that the Brandt Appellees did
 
not materially breach the contract with the Grandes, the circuit
 
court did not err in granting judgment in favor of the Brandt
 
Appellees on the Grandes' counterclaim, properly did not award
 
nominal damages to the Grandes on their counterclaim, and did not
 
err in awarding attorneys' fees and costs to the Brandt Appellees
 
as prevailing parties on the counterclaim.
 
(2) The Grandes' motion for partial summary judgment
 
was supported by a declaration from Resh which stated that parts
 
of the construction by the Brandt Appellees "did not comply with
 
the construction contract, the Description of Work, the General
 
Notes, the Plans and Specifications, or the Design Guidelines" in
 
various, multiple respects. On appeal, the Grandes rely on a
 
provision in the construction contract which they assert required
 
that disputes under the contract be submitted to Resh and which
 
made his decision final, unless arbitration was requested. The
 
Grandes contend that Resh's declaration resolved various issues
 
in the case and, because the Brandt Appellees failed to seek
 
arbitration to contest Resh's declaration, his determinations are
 
final.
 
The Grandes have waived this argument. Although the
 
Grandes made reference in their moving papers to the contract
 
provision allowing Resh to decide disputes, the issue of
 
arbitration was not raised or addressed in their motion for
 
partial summary judgment. Rather, the Grandes sought to raise
 
the issue of arbitration by way of a Motion For Leave to File
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Second Amended Answer filed on May 14, 2007, which was a year and 
a half after the Complaint had been filed and with trial 
scheduled to begin on June 18, 2007. The circuit court denied 
this motion, the Grandes did not raise this as a point of error, 
and therefore they have waived the issues related to arbitration. 
See Whitey's Boat Cruises, Inc. v. Napali-Kauai Boat Charters, 
Inc., 110 Hawai 'i 302, 318 n.26, 132 P.3d 1213, 1229 n.26 (2006) 
("Appellants did not assign as error the circuit court's dismissal of Appellants' claim for injunctive relief . . . [a]s 
such, Appellants' contention with respect to injunctive relief is 
deemed waived.") (citing HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) ("Points not 
presented in accordance with this section will be 
disregarded[.]") and HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may 
be deemed waived.")). 
(3) The Grandes' third point of error contends that
 
because they should prevail on their counterclaim and be awarded
 
at least nominal damages, they are entitled to an offset on the
 
judgment, as well as the attorneys' fees and costs awarded to the
 
Brandt Appellees. For the reasons discussed above, the circuit
 
court properly determined that the Grandes did not prevail on
 
their counterclaim and as a result no offsets are warranted.
 
(4) The Grandes' fourth point of error concerns the 
deposition of Resh, who was listed by the Grandes as an expert 
witness for trial and was the subject of several motions before 
the circuit court. Rule 26 of the Hawai
'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) (2004) governs discovery matters in civil litigation. Because "the extent to which discovery is permitted 
under Rule 26 is subject to considerable latitude and the 
discretion of the trial court . . . the exercise of such 
discretion will not be disturbed in the absence of a clear abuse 
of discretion that results in substantial prejudice to a party." 
Hac v. Univ. of Hawai
'i, 102 Hawai 'i 92, 100-01, 73 P.3d 46, 54-55 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2003) (internal quotation marks, citations, brackets, and 
ellipsis omitted). Likewise, we review determinations by a trial 
court whether an expert witness will be allowed to testify at 
trial under the abuse of discretion standard. See Craft v. 
Peebles, 78 Hawai 'i 287, 301, 893 P.2d 138, 152 (1995) ("On 
appeal, the admissibility of expert testimony is reviewed for 
abuse of discretion.") (citation omitted); see also State v. 
Murphy, 59 Haw. 1, 575 P.2d 448 (1978) ("The general rule is that 
admissibility of expert testimony is a matter within the broad 
discretion of the trial judge, and his decision will not be 
overturned on appeal unless manifestly erroneous or clearly an 
abuse of discretion.") (citations omitted). 
On May 11, 2007, after twice noticing Resh's
 
deposition, the Brandt Appellees brought a motion to compel
 
Resh's deposition asserting that Resh was refusing to make
 
himself available for deposition although he had, during the
 
approximate same time period, signed the declaration that was
 
used to support the Grandes' motion for partial summary judgment. 
The Grandes opposed the Brandt Appellees' motion to compel Resh's
 
deposition on various grounds, and the circuit court ultimately
 
denied the motion to compel given Resh's medical condition at the
 
time. In denying the motion to compel, however, the circuit
 
court noted that it would preclude Resh from testifying at trial
 
unless the Brandt Appellees were given an opportunity to depose
 
him. Subsequently, the circuit court also denied a motion for
 
protective order filed by the Grandes which had sought to
 
preclude or limit the deposition of Resh, and the circuit court
 
reiterated that Resh would not be allowed to testify at trial
 
unless the Brandt Appellees were given an opportunity to depose
 
him.
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On June 1, 2007, the Brandt Appellees again noticed 
Resh's deposition, but the sheriff hired to serve a subpoena on 
Resh was unable to locate him upon several attempts at service. 
Then, on June 13, 2007, the Grandes noticed Resh's deposition, to 
be taken two days later on June 15, 2007. Because of the short 
notice and because the deposition of Jeffrey Brandt had already 
been scheduled all day for June 15, 2007, the Brandt Appellees 
filed a motion for protective order. The circuit court granted 
the Brandt Appellees' motion for protective order and further 
ordered that, pursuant to its prior orders, Resh would not be 
allowed to testify at trial, which was scheduled to commence on 
June 18, 2007. The circuit court's order stated: "Mr. Resh's 
deposition could not be used at trial because the Notice violated 
Rule 32(a)(3) of the Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure and Brandt 
was not served with reasonable notice. Further, Mr. Resh will not be allowed to testify at trial based on previous Orders of 
this Court."
4 
Given the circumstances set out above, it was not an
 
abuse of discretion by the circuit court to grant the motion for
 protective order precluding Resh's deposition on two day's notice
 
and to be taken just three days prior to trial. In addition, it
 
was not an abuse of discretion to preclude Resh from testifying
 
at trial as an expert witness, where the Brandt Appellees had
 
sought to take his deposition but had been unable to do so.
 
4 HRCP Rule 32(a)(3) (2004) provides in relevant part:
 
nor shall a deposition be used against a party who, having
received less than 11 days notice of a deposition, has
promptly upon receiving such notice filed a motion for a
protective order under Rule 26(c)(2) requesting that the
deposition not be held or be held at a different time or
place and such motion is pending at the time the deposition
is held.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Grandes fail to make any substantive argument, fail
 
to cite any authority, and fail to properly cite to relevant
 
portions of the record related to their assertions that: it was
 
error for the trial court to preclude their counsel from
 
testifying at trial, and that the circuit court should have taken
 
judicial notice of facts and documents. We therefore deem these
 
issues waived.5
 
(5) The Grandes' points of error five and seven
 
address findings of fact made by the trial court. HRAP Rule
 
10(b)(3) (2006) mandates that "[i]f the appellant intends to urge
 
on appeal that a finding or conclusion is unsupported by the
 
evidence or is contrary to the evidence, the appellant shall
 
include in the record a transcript of all evidence relevant to
 
such finding or conclusion." (emphasis added). Here, the Grandes
 
failed to make any trial transcripts a part of the record on
 
appeal.
 
"The law is clear in this jurisdiction that the
 
appellant has the burden of furnishing the appellate court with a
 
sufficient record to positively show the alleged error. An
 
appellant must include in the record all of the evidence on which
 
the lower court might have based its findings and if this is not
 
done, the lower court must be affirmed." Union Bldg. Materials
 
5 Rule 28(b)(7) of the Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) ,
provides: 
Within 40 days after the filing of the record on appeal, the
appellant shall file an opening brief, containing the
following sections in the order here indicated: . . . [t]he
argument, containing the contentions of the appellant on the
points presented and the reasons therefor, with citations to
the authorities, statutes and parts of the record relied on.
The argument may be preceded by a concise summary. Points
 
not argued may be deemed waived." 
(2007) (emphasis added).
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Corp. v. Kakaako Corp., 5 Haw. App. 146, 151-52, 682 P.2d 82, 87
 
(1984) (internal citations omitted) (emphasis added).
 
The Grandes did not meet their burden of providing this
 
court with a "sufficient record to positively show the alleged
 
error." Therefore, we find no error with regard to the findings
 
of the circuit court challenged by the Grandes in points of error
 
five and seven.
 
(6) The Grandes provide no argument with regard to
 
their sixth point of error, that the circuit court erred in
 
finding that Brandt Homes, Inc.'s mistake in building the house
 
too close to the front property line was insignificant. Pursuant
 
to HRAP Rule 28(b)(7), we deem this point of error as waived. 
Further, even if this issue were not waived, the Grandes would
 
not prevail on this point of error for the same reasons set out
 
above regarding points of error five and seven.
 
(7) For their last point of error, the Grandes argue,
 
in total, that:
 
Even if everything the trial court did through its entry of
judgment was correct, the US District Court's subsequent
entry of summary judgment against [the] Grandes, and its
direction of the entry of a permanent injunction against
them, should have triggered an order granting them a new
trial, and/or deleting the judgments against them.
 
The Grandes cite no authority, make no references to the record,
 
and provide no discernible basis to support their assertion. We
 
find no error by the circuit court in denying the Grandes' motion
 
for reconsideration and for new trial.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Final Judgment as to
 
Claims Between Brandt Homes, Incorporated/Jeffrey Brandt and
 Anthony Charles Grande/Narindar Kaur Grande" filed on March 10,
 
2008 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 1, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Steven B. Jacobson 
for Defendants-Appellants Presiding Judge 
Cid H. InouyeKristi L. Arakaki (O'Connor Playdon & Guben LLP)for Plaintiffs-Appellees 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10

 