NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29032
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
MAUNA KEA ANAINA HOU; ROYAL ORDER OF KAMEHAMEHA I;
SIERRA CLUB, HAWAI' I CHAPTER; and CLARENCE CHING,
Plaintiffs/Appellants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
v.
 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI' I INSTITUTE FOR ASTRONOMY,
Defendant/Appellee-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and
 
BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES; HARRY FERGESTROM;
and HAWAI' I ISLAND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BOARD, INC.,
Defendants/Appellees-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 04-1-0397)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Circuit Judges Perkins and Lee,
in place of Nakamura, C.J., Fujise, Leonard, Reifurth,
and Ginoza, JJ., all recused)
 
Plaintiffs/Appellants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants Mauna
 
Kea Anaina Hou; Royal Order of Kamehameha I; Sierra Club, Hawai' i 
Chapter; and Clarence Ching (collectively, Appellants) cross-
appeal from the "Final Judgment in Favor of Appellants Mauna Kea
 
Anaina Hou, Royal Order of Kamehameha I, Sierra Club, Hawai' i 
Chapter, and Clarence Ching and Against Appellees Board of Land
 and Natural Resources, State of Hawai' i, University of Hawai' i 
Institute for Astronomy, Harry Fergestrom, and Hawai' i Island NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Economic Development Board, Inc." (Final Judgment) filed on
 
January 29, 2008 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit1
 
(circuit court). The Final Judgment
 
(1) incorporated the September 13, 2007 "Order Denying 
Appellants' Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Taxation of Costs Filed on June 21, 2007" (Order Denying Fees/Costs), in 
which the circuit court denied attorneys' fees and costs to 
Appellants arising out of their appeal from the grant by the 
Board of Land and Natural Resources (BLNR) of a conservation-
district use permit to Defendant/Appellee-Appellant/Cross-
Appellee University of Hawai' i Institute for Astronomy (UHIFA); 
and 
(2) reversed in part and affirmed in part BLNR's
 
decision regarding the conservation-district use permit and
 related management plan.
 
The only issue before this court on appeal is the
 
circuit court's denial of Appellants' attorneys' fees and costs,
 
and Appellants contend the circuit court in its Order Denying
 
Fees/Costs erred in finding as follows:
 
(1) "Even assuming arguendo that the [private attorney
 
general] doctrine has been adopted in this State, the Court finds
 
no basis for applying it to the particular circumstances of this
 
case."
 
(2) "The Court further finds that Appellants' [Motion
 
for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Taxation of Costs (Motion for
 
Fees/Costs)] is not supported by any statute, rule of court, bad
 
faith, agreement, or precedent."
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Some of the facts set forth in this section are from
 
the circuit court's January 19, 2007 "Decision and Order: (1)
 
Reversing BLNR's Decision Granting Conservation District Use
 
Permit for the Construction and Operation of Six 1.8 Meter
 
Outrigger Telescopes Within the Summit Area of the Mauna Kea
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Science Reserve Dated October 29, 2004; (2) Reversing BLNR's 
Finding[s] of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order 
Dated October 29, 2004; and (3) Affirming in Part BLNR's 
Finding[s] of Fact, Conclusion[s] of Law and Decision and Order 
for Management Plan Dated October 29, 2004." The circuit court's 
findings are not challenged on appeal and are therefore binding 
on this court. Hui Kako' o Aina Ho' opulapula v. Bd. of Land & 
Natural Res., 112 Hawai' i 28, 40, 143 P.3d 1230, 1242 (2006). 
The summit of Mauna Kea is public land owned by the 
State of Hawai' i (State) under the jurisdiction of the BLNR and 
located in the Conservation District, in a Resource Subzone. In 
1968, BLNR leased the Mauna Kea Science Reserve, located at the 
summit, to the University of Hawai' i (UH). The following year, 
UHIFA was established and "eventually assumed responsibility within the UH system for Mauna Kea." 
UHIFA has addressed the development of astronomical
 
research facilities at the summit in a number of planning
 
documents, not all of which were approved by BLNR. UHIFA's 1985
 
Master Plan, approved by BLNR, included a "General Description of
 
Planned Astronomy Development" for the reserve that included
 
thirteen steel-framed, domed telescope facilities, including two
 
10-meter telescopes comprising the William M. Keck Observatory
 
(Keck Observatory). In 1995, BLNR adopted a "Revised Management
 
Plan," which superceded the 1985 plan, but "did not provide for
 
the same scope or coverage" as the 1985 Master Plan. The 1995
 
plan was "virtually silent on the matter of future development of
 
astronomy facilities on Mauna Kea." In 2000, UHIFA developed the
 
Mauna Kea Science Reserve Master Plan (2000 Master Plan), which
 
was adopted by the UH Board of Regents, but not approved by BLNR. 
In 2001, UHIFA filed a Conservation-District Use Permit
 
Application with BLNR to construct and operate up to six
 
Outrigger Telescopes, adjacent to the Keck Observatory telescopes
 
(Outrigger Telescopes Project). Initially, UHIFA did not submit
 
a management plan that would support the project, but later
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
submitted a "project specific management plan" covering
 
approximately five acres near the Keck Observatory.
 
Appellants and other parties requested a contested case
 
hearing. Following the hearing, BLNR granted a permit to the
 
Outrigger Telescopes Project and approved the management plan
 
(Outrigger Management Plan) on October 29, 2004.
 
On November 29, 2004, Appellants filed an appeal with
 
the circuit court contesting (1) BLNR's October 29, 2004,
 
decision granting the conservation-district use permit (CDUP);
 
(2) BLNR's October 29, 2004 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law
 
and Decision and Order; (3) BLNR's October 29, 2004 Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order for Management
 
Plan; and (4) all orders and rulings incorporated in these
 
documents. Appellants contended: (1) BLNR erred by accepting
 
UHIFA's conservation-district use permit application as complete
 
where it lacked an environmental impact statement or
 
environmental assessment and an "approved management plan"; (2)
 
BLNR denied Appellants due process where it did not adequately
 
notify interested parties that UHIFA sought approval of a
 
management plan; (3) BLNR's notice of the contested case hearing
 
did not adequately inform interested parties; (4) UHIFA's
 
environmental assessments "failed to fully assess impacts of the
 
UHIFA's Management Plan Drafts"; (5) BLNR erred by approving
 
UHIFA's planning documents because they "were not comprehensive
 
management plans designed to address long term 'cumulative land
 
use proposals'" as required by Chapter 13 of the Hawaii
 
Administrative Rules (HAR); (6) BLNR erroneously approved the
 
CDUP; (7) BLNR failed to "properly evaluate and protect
 
2
 rights to the extent feasible as required by [Appellants'] PASHArticle XII, Section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution"; (8) BLNR 
violated its public trust duties; (9) Appellants were denied due process when BLNR and its hearing officer did not allow 
2
 Public Access Shoreline Hawaii v. Hawai' i Cnty. Planning Comm'n, 79 
Hawai'i 425, 903 P.2d 1246 (1995) (holding that Native Hawaiians retained
right, with regard to undeveloped land, to pursue traditional activities). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Appellants to present testimony regarding deficiencies in UHIFA's
 
2000 Master Plan; (10) BLNR denied Appellants due process by
 
excluding Appellants' expert's testimony regarding the National
 
Historic Preservation Act; and (11) BLNR failed "to collect fair
 
market value lease rent from third-party non-state entities," in
 
breach of trust and in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
Chapter 171.
 
The circuit court ruled in favor of Appellants and made
 
the following conclusions of law, which are relevant to this
 
appeal: 
18. The plain meaning of the term "comprehensive
management plan" and the DLNR's [Department of Land and
Natural Resources'] own past interpretation of that term
support the conclusion that, as a matter of law, DLNR
Administrative Rule [HAR] § 13-5-24, for the R-3 Resource
Subzone requires a management plan which covers multiple
land uses within the larger overall area that UHIFA controls
at the top of Mauna Kea in the conservation district.
 
19. The Outrigger Management Plan covers only a
single project, not the comprehensive "multiple land uses"
and large land area required by the definition of
"management plan" in [HAR] § 13-5-2.
 
20. Thus, the Outrigger Management Plan does not
 
qualify as a "management plan" under [HAR] § 13-5-24.
 
21. A "management plan" under [HAR] § 13-5-24 is a
precondition to granting a CDUP for the R3 Resource Subzone
land use at issue here.
 
22. Although a Court will normally give deference to
an agency's expertise and experience in its particular
field, the agency's decision must be consistent with the
legislative purpose in its own authorizing statute. In this
 instance, BLNR's decision approving the Outrigger Management
Plan involves a mixed question of law and fact. However,
BLNR's interpretation is not consistent with the
Legislature's stated purpose in managing the Conservation
District. [HRS] § l83C-l expressly provides: 
The legislature finds that lands within the state land
use conservation district contain important natural
resources essential to the preservation of the State's
fragile natural ecosystems and the sustainability of
the State's water supply. It is therefore, the intent
of the legislature to conserve, protect and preserve
the important natural resources of the State through
appropriate management and use to promote their
long-term sustainability and the public health, safety
and welfare. 
[HRS] § l83C-l (2005 Supp.) (emphasis added). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
23. The resource that needs to be conserved,
 
protected and preserved is the summit area of Mauna Kea, not
 
just the area of the Outrigger Telescopes Project. 
24. Allowing management plans on a project by
project basis would result in foreseeable contradictory
management conditions for each project or the imposition of
special conditions on some projects and not others. 
25. The consequence would be projects within a
management area that do not conform to a comprehensive
management plan. 
26. This result would not be consistent with the
 
purposes of appropriate management nor the promotion of
long-term sustainability of protected resources required by
[HRS] § 183-1.
 
27. The Court concludes that BLNR failed to follow
 
the provisions of [HAR] § 13-5-24.
 
28. [Appellants'] substantial rights have been
prejudiced by the BLNR's approval of CDUP for UHIFA's
Outrigger Telescopes Project and approval [of] the Outrigger
Management Plan without an approved comprehensive management
plan.
 
29. Because these legal determinations are
dispositive, the Court does not need to reach any other
legal or factual issues.
 
(Emphasis in original.)
 
On June 21, 2007, Appellants filed the Motion for
 
Fees/Costs, requesting $218,895.99 in fees and $3,277.38 in
 
costs. Appellants cited the private attorney general doctrine as
 
the sole basis for an award of attorneys' fees.
 
UHIFA and BLNR filed opposition memoranda to the 
motion, and the Hawai' i Island Economic Development Board, Inc., 
filed a joinder in their memoranda. 
The circuit court heard arguments on the motion on 
August 22, 2007. In support of the motion, Appellants' attorney
 stated that he had spent more than 700 hours working on the case, 
forgoing other work during that time, and that without the
 
ability to recoup some attorneys' fees under the doctrine, fewer
 
attorneys would be likely to take public-interest cases such as
 
this in the future. Appellants' attorney also argued that the
 
complex issues involved here could not be handled by pro se
 
litigants. BLNR's attorney argued that the private attorney
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
general doctrine "should not be applied to BLNR when it acts a
 
tribunal."
 
The parties argued over the applicability of a three-
prong test set forth in 
In re Water Use Permit Applications, 96
 
Hawai'i 27, 29, 25 P.3d 802, 804 (2001) (Waiahole II). The 
circuit court denied Appellants' Motion for Fees/Costs, stating:
 
[A]s to prong 2 [of Waiahole II], the Court basically is
focusing on the aspect of . . . requiring that the
government completely abandon the activity opposed by
[Appellants]. 
In this case it doesn't appear to the Court that the
BLNR -- BLNR abandoned its responsibilities as opposed to,
um interpreting the administrative rules and the applicable
statutes in a manner that was adverse to [Appellants]. And
 the Court's view is that in that scenario it's not
 abandoning its role in the area as much as interpreting it
in a manner that [Appellants] find not acceptable to them.
 
The circuit court acknowledged being sympathetic to attorneys
 
working pro bono, but then stated:
 
[O]n the other hand, um, I really have a problem about
awarding fees in this type of a case. And I just can not
[sic] see where there would be a logical limitation as to
when fees would not be imposed any time there is an agency
decision which involves some interpretation that affects,
um, whatever we might want to put a spin on that involves
public policy.
 
On September 13, 2007, the circuit court issued its
 
Order Denying Fees/Costs, which provided in part: 
While the Supreme Court of Hawaii has reviewed the
background of the [private attorney general] doctrine, it
has never applied it. Even assuming arguendo that the
doctrine has been adopted in this State, the Court finds no
basis for applying it to the particular circumstances of
this case. The Court further finds that the Appellants'
motion is not supported by any statute, rule of court, bad
faith, agreement, or precedent.
 
On January 29, 2008, the circuit court entered the 
Final Judgment, which provided: 
In accordance with Rules 54(b), 72(k) and 58 of the
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure [HRCP]; and 
Pursuant to the Decision and Order: (1) Reversing
 
BLNR's Decision Granting Conservation District Use Permit
 
for the Construction and Operation of Six 1.8 Meter
 Outrigger Telescopes Within the Summit Area of the Mauna Kea
 Science Reserve Dated October 29, 2004; (2) Reversing BLNR's
 Finding[s] of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision and
 Order Dated October 29, 2004; and (3) Affirming in Part
 BLNR's Finding[s] of Fact, Conclusion[s] of Law and Decision
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and Order for Management Plan Dated October 29, 2004, filed
January 19, 2007 in this Court; and
 
Pursuant to the Order Denying Appellants' Motion for
 
Award of Attorneys' Fees and Taxation of Costs Filed on
 
June 21, 2007 filed September 13, 2007.
 
All claims were resolved and no further claims remain
 
in this case.
 
There is no just reason for delay in entry of this
Judgment.
 
Therefore, JUDGMENT IS HEREBY EXPRESSLY ENTERED: (1)
IN FAVOR OF Appellants MAUNA KEA ANAINA HOU, ROYAL ORDER OF
KAMEHAMEHA I, SIERRA CLUB, HAWAI' I CHAPTER, and CLARENCE
CHING (collectively "Mauna Kea Appellants"), and AGAINSTAppellees the BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES, STATE OFHAWAI'I ("BLNR"), the UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI' I INSTITUTE FOR 
ASTRONOMY ("UHIFA"), HARRY FERGESTROM, and the HAWAI' I 
ISLAND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BOARD, INC. on the claimsadjudicated by this Court's January 19, 2007 Decision andOrder; and (2) AGAINST Mauna Kea Appellants on their Motionfor Attorneys' Fees pursuant to this Court's Order filedSeptember 13, 2007. 
UHIFA filed its notice of appeal on February 26, 2008, 
but subsequently moved to dismiss the appeal, which was approved
 
by this court.3 Appellants timely filed their notice of cross-
appeal on February 28, 2008.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
"The trial court's grant or denial of attorney's fees 
and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. of State of Hawai' i, 120 Hawai' i 
4
181, 197, 202 P.3d 1226, 1242 (2009) (Sierra Club II)  (internal
quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
"An abuse of
 
discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly exceeded the
 bounds of reason or has disregarded rules or principles of law or
 
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Chun
 
v. Bd. of Trs. of Employees' Ret. Sys. of State of Hawai' i, 106 
3
 On August 8, 2008, UHIFA filed a motion to dismiss its appeal, which
this court granted on September 2, 2008. Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, et al., v.
Univ. of Hawai' i Inst. for Astronomy, 2008 WL 4147581 (Haw. App. Sept. 2, 
2008).
4
 In this opinion, we will refer to Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. of 
State of Hawai' i, 120 Hawai' i 181, 202 P.3d 1226 (2009), as Sierra Club II;
Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. of State of Hawai' i, 115 Hawai' i 299, 167 P.3d
292 (2007), as Sierra Club I; and both cases collectively as Sierra Club. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i 416, 431, 106 P.3d 339, 354 (2005) (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. JURISDICTION
 
In its Answering Brief, UHIFA argues that this court 
lacks jurisdiction because the Final Judgment was not a final, 
appealable judgment under Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming & 
Wright, 76 Hawai' i 115, 869 P.2d 1334 (1994). 
Pursuant to HRS § 91-15 (1993), "[r]eview of any final
 
judgment of the circuit court under this chapter shall be
 
governed by chapter 602." HRS § 602-57(1) (Supp. 2010) provides
 
that this court has jurisdiction "[t]o hear and determine appeals
 
from any court or agency when appeals are allowed by law." HRS
 
§ 641-1(a) (Supp. 2010) authorizes appeals to this court from
 
"final judgments, orders, or decrees of circuit . . . courts." 
Appeals "shall be taken in the manner . . . provided by the rules
 
of court." HRS § 641-1(c) (1993). 
In Jenkins, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held: 
(1) An appeal may be taken from circuit court orders
resolving claims against parties only after the orders have
been reduced to a judgment and the judgment has been entered
in favor of and against the appropriate parties pursuant to
HRCP 58; (2) if a judgment purports to be the final judgment
in a case involving multiple claims or multiple parties, the
judgment (a) must specifically identify the party or parties
for and against whom the judgment is entered, and (b) must
(i) identify the claims for which it is entered, and (ii)
dismiss any claims not specifically identified; (3) if the
judgment resolves fewer than all claims against all parties,
or reserves any claim for later action by the court, an
appeal may be taken only if the judgment contains the
language necessary for certification under HRCP 54(b); and
(4) an appeal from any judgment will be dismissed as
premature if the judgment does not, on its face, either
resolve all claims against all parties or contain the
finding necessary for certification under HRCP 54(b).
 
. . . .
 
. . . If claims are resolved by a series of orders, a
final judgment upon all the claims must be entered. The
 
"judgment shall not contain a recital of the pleadings,"
HRCP 54(a), but it must, on its face, show finality as to
all claims against all parties. An appeal from an order
that is not reduced to a judgment in favor of or against the
party by the time the record is filed in the supreme court
will be dismissed. If a judgment purports to be certified
under HRCP 54(b), the necessary finding of no just reason
for delay must be included in the judgment.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
76 Hawai' i at 119-20, 869 P.2d at 1338-39 (citation and footnote 
omitted; emphasis in original). 
HRCP Rule 72(k) requires that, upon a circuit court's 
determination of an administrative appeal, "the court having 
jurisdiction shall enter judgment." 
The requirements of 
Jenkins 
apply to circuit court judgments entered in appeals from agency decisions. Raquinio v. Nakanelua, 77 Hawai' i 499, 500, 889 P.2d 
76, 77 (App. 1995) (applying Jenkins
 in an appeal from a decision 
by the Director of Labor and Industrial Relations). 
The Final Judgment complies with the separate document 
rule of HRCP Rule 58, incorporating the "Decision and Order (1) 
Reversing BLNR's Decision Granting Conservation District Use 
Permit for the Construction and Operation of Six 1.8 Meter 
Outrigger Telescopes Within the Summit Area of the Mauna Kea 
Science Reserve Dated October 29, 2004; (2) Reversing BLNR's 
Finding[s] of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order 
Dated October 29, 2004; and (3) Affirming in Part BLNR's 
Finding[s] of Fact, Conclusion[s] of Law and Decision and Order 
for Management Plan Dated October 29, 2004" and the Order Denying 
Fees/Costs. Moreover, the Final Judgment enters judgment as to 
all parties in the case and states that "[a]ll claims were 
resolved and no further claims remain in this case." The Final 
Judgment did not, however, address the eleven "claims for relief" 
or "counts" listed by Appellants in their statement of the case. 
Nevertheless, the Final Judgment did contain an express 
finding that there was "no just reason for delay in entry of this 
Judgment." Thus, the Final Judgment contains the certification 
required by HRCP Rule 54(b) and 
Jenkins
 and is appealable. 
Appellants' notice of cross-appeal was filed on 
February 28, 2008 -- two days following the filing of UHIFA's 
notice of appeal. Under Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
Rule 4.1(b)(1), the notice of cross-appeal was timely. Therefore, we have jurisdiction to consider Appellants' appeal. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B. PRIVATE ATTORNEY GENERAL DOCTRINE
 
The sole issue on appeal is whether the circuit court 
erred in declining to award attorneys' fees to Appellants, 
undisputedly the prevailing party below. "Normally, pursuant to 
the 'American Rule,' each party is responsible for paying his or 
her own litigation expenses. This general rule, however, is 
subject to a number of exceptions: attorney's fees are 
chargeable against the opposing party when so authorized by 
statute, rule of court, agreement, stipulation, or precedent." 
Waiahole II, 96 Hawai' i at 29, 25 P.3d at 804 (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted). 
As a judicially-created exception to the American Rule, 
the private attorney general doctrine is "an equitable rule that allows courts in their discretion to award attorneys' fees to 
plaintiffs who have 'vindicated important public rights.'" Id. 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). At the time of the circuit court's decision, the doctrine had been discussed, 
but not expressly adopted, in two Hawai' i Supreme Court cases: 
Waiahole II and Maui Tomorrow v. State of Hawai' i Bd. of Land & 
Natural Res., 110 Hawai' i 234, 131 P.3d 517 (2006). During the 
pendency of the instant appeal, the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
expressly adopted the private attorney general doctrine and 
awarded attorneys' fees against the State of Hawai' i Department 
of Transportation (DOT) and Hawaii Superferry, Inc. (Superferry), a private company, based on the doctrine. Sierra Club II, 120 
Hawai'i at 225, 202 P.3d at 1270. 
In evaluating whether a party is entitled to attorney's 
fees under the doctrine, Hawai' i adopted the three-prong approach 
enunciated by the California Supreme Court.
5 Id. at 218, 202 
5
 The California Supreme Court adopted the doctrine in response to
Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. v. Wilderness Society, 421 U.S. 240, 95 S. Ct.
1612 (1975), which rejected the doctrine in federal courts. See Serrano v.
 
Priest, 569 P.2d 1303, 1313 (Cal. 1977) (en banc); Ann K. Wooster, Annotation,
Private Attorney General Doctrine -- State Cases, 106 A.L.R.5th 523, 557
(2003). The United States Supreme Court cautioned that the doctrine would
allow courts to encroach "on a policy matter that Congress has reserved for
(continued...)
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d at 1263; see also Waiahole II, 96 Hawai' i at 29, 25 P.3d at 
804. The three factors that the court considers when applying 
the doctrine are: "(1) the strength or societal importance of 
the public policy vindicated by the litigation, (2) the necessity 
for private enforcement and the magnitude of the resultant burden 
on the plaintiff, (3) the number of people standing to benefit 
from the decision." Sierra Club II, 120 Hawai' i at 218, 202 P.3d 
at 1263 (quoting Maui Tomorrow, 110 Hawai' i at 244, 131 P.3d at 
527); see also Serrano v. Priest, 569 P.2d 1303, 1314 (Cal. 1977) 
(en banc). 
C.	 APPLICATION OF THE THREE-PRONG TEST OF THE PRIVATE
 
ATTORNEY GENERAL DOCTRINE
 
1.	 First Prong: Strength or Societal Importance of
the Public Policy Vindicated by the Litigation
 
In the three Hawai' i Supreme Court cases discussing the 
private attorney general doctrine, the court concluded that the 
first prong was met in cases that involved "constitutional rights 
of profound significance," Waiahole II, 96 Hawai' i at 31, 25 P.3d 
at 806 (water rights case "involved constitutional rights of profound significance"); involved a provision of the Hawai' i 
Constitution, Maui Tomorrow, 110 Hawai' i at 244-45, 131 P.3d at 
527-28; and established "the principle of procedural standing in 
environmental law," Sierra Club II, 120 Hawai' i at 220, 202 P.3d 
1265. 
In the instant case, the circuit court held that BLNR
 
had failed to apply an administrative regulation: HAR § 13-5-24
 (promulgated pursuant to HRS § 183C-3). Clearly, this was not a
 
(...continued)
itself," and leave courts "to pick and choose among plaintiffs and the
statutes under which they sue and to award fees in some cases but not in
others, depending upon the courts' assessment of the importance of the public
policies involved in particular cases." 
Alyeska
, 421 U.S. at 269. The
 
Supreme Court held that federal courts could not grant attorney's fees without
statutory authorization and, in doing so, "invited Congress to instruct the
courts as to which fee-shifting policies Congress wished the courts to
enforce." David Shub, Private Attorneys General, Prevailing Parties, and
Public Benefit: Attorney's Fees Awards for Civil Rights Plaintiffs, 42 Duke
L.J. 706, 710 (1992).
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
case involving "constitutional rights of profound significance." 
However, the circuit court did not expressly address this first
 
prong. 
2.	 Second Prong: Necessity of Private Enforcement
and the Magnitude of the Resultant Burden on the
Plaintiff
 
The circuit court, in its oral findings, held that 
Appellants had not demonstrated their entitlement to attorneys' 
fees under the second prong of the test ("the necessity for 
private enforcement and the magnitude of the resultant burden on 
the plaintiff"). This prong was not met by the plaintiffs in 
Waiahole II and Maui Tomorrow, but was satisfied by the 
plaintiffs in Sierra Club II. In Sierra Club II, the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court concluded that the State agency "wholly abandoned" its duty to the public, 120 Hawai' i at 221, 202 P.3d at 1266, and 
the plaintiffs were "solely responsible" for challenging DOT's interpretation of its duties. Id. at 220, 202 P.3d at 1265. 
a.	 Waiahole II
 
Waiahole II was the second in a series of Hawai' i 
Supreme Court opinions concerning the "extended dispute over the 
water distributed by the Waiahole Ditch System, a major 
irrigation infrastructure on the island of O' ahu supplying the 
island's leeward side with water diverted from its windward side." In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai' i 97, 110, 
9 P.3d 409, 422 (2000) (Waiahole I). Out of the twenty-five parties that had participated in the contested case hearing, id. 
at 113, 9 P.3 at 425, four parties (Windward Parties) requested 
attorneys' fees under the private attorney general doctrine. 
Waiahole II, 96 Hawai' i at 28, 25 P.3d at 803. The supreme court 
held that if it "were to embrace the doctrine as a general matter," the doctrine did not apply "to the particular 
circumstances" presented. Id. at 31, 25 P.3d at 806. In 
particular, the supreme court noted that "'the necessity for private enforcement and the magnitude of the resultant burden on 
the plaintiff,' is less convincing" than cases applying the 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
doctrine. Id. (citing to Stewart v. Utah Pub. Serv. Comm'n, 885
 
P.2d 759, 783 (Utah 1994); Serrano, 569 P.2d at 1315 n.20;
 
Montanans for Responsible Use of Sch. Trust v. Montana ex rel.
 
Bd. of Land Comm'rs., 989 P.2d 800, 812 (Mont. 1999)). The
 
supreme court stated that in the other cases, the plaintiffs had
 
"served as the sole representative of the vindicated public
 
interest" and "[t]he government either completely abandoned, or
 
actively opposed, the plaintiff's cause." Waiahole II, 96
 
Hawai'i at 31, 25 P.3d at 806. The supreme court further stated 
that the Windward Parties, on the other hand, "represented one of
 
many competing public and private interests in an adversarial
 
proceeding before the governmental body designated by
 
constitution and statute as the primary representative of the
 
people with respect to water resources." Id. The supreme court
 
concluded:
 
The relevant point, of course, is not the extent of
the Windward Parties' success on appeal, but, rather, the
role played by the government. In sum, unlike other cases,
in which the plaintiffs single-handedly challenged a
previously established government law or policy, in this
case, the Windward Parties challenged the decision of a
tribunal in an adversarial proceeding not contesting any
action or policy of the government. The Windward Parties
 cite no case in which attorneys' fees were awarded in an
adversarial proceeding against a tribunal and the losing
parties and in favor of the prevailing party, based on the
reversal of the tribunal's decision on appeal. Nor does
 such a rule appear prudent from a policy standpoint, where
public tribunals in adversarial settings must invariably
consider and weigh various "public interests." Therefore,
we hold that this case does not qualify for an award of
attorneys' fees under the conventional application of the
private attorney general doctrine.
 
Id. at 32, 25 P.3d at 807. The court in Waiahole II reasoned
 
that because there were so many parties to the contested case
 
advocating for different positions, an attorney's fee award was
 
an unnecessary incentive for the litigants. 
b. Maui Tomorrow
 
In 
Maui Tomorrow, the Hawai' i Supreme Court found in 
favor of the opponents as to the second prong to the extent the
 
opponents contested "a policy of the BLNR to lease water rights
 
without performing the required analysis," but found that the
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
second prong was not satisfied because the State "did not 
'abandon' or 'actively oppose' [the opponents'] cause." 110 
Hawai'i at 245, 131 P.3d at 528. The court reasoned that BLNR 
"recognized the State's 'duty to protect'" Hawaiian traditional and customary rights "to the extent feasible," but acted upon the 
belief that another agency "was the appropriate agency to fulfill 
the State's duty." Id. 
c. Sierra Club
 
In Sierra Club II, the Hawai' i Supreme Court quoted 
from its opinion in Maui Tomorrow, mentioning that the court had 
been "careful to note . . . that the policy [challenged by the 
opponents in Maui Tomorrow] was the result of an 'erroneous' 
understanding between two state agencies, rather than actions by 
the State to abandon or actively oppose the [opponents'] cause." 
Sierra Club II, 120 Hawai' i at 220, 202 P.3d at 1265. In 
contrast to the BLNR in the Maui Tomorrow case, the supreme court held that DOT "wholly abandoned [its] duty" under HRS Chapter 343 
to get an environmental assessment by "issuing an erroneous 
exemption to Superferry." Sierra Club II, 120 Hawai' i at 221, 
202 P.3d at 1266. The court held that by exempting the Superferry from the standard environmental review process, DOT 
"simply did not recognize its duty to consider both the primary 
and secondary impacts of the Superferry project on the 
environment." Id. 
d. Mauna Kea
 
The instant case is similar to Sierra Club in that 
Sierra Club II "clarified DOT's responsibilities under HRS 
[C]hapter 343," 120 Hawai' i at 221, 202 P.3d at 1266, and the 
instant case clarified BLNR's duties under HAR § 13-5-24. Appellants rely on this clarification as evidence that BLNR 
"wholly abandoned" its responsibilities for managing 
conservation-district land. Appellants argue that "[a]s in 
Sierra Club, the State Defendants simply did not recognize their 
duty and refused to carry it out." However, the instant case is 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
distinguishable from Sierra Club in factual and procedural
 
respects.
 
First, DOT's grant of an exemption from the preparation 
of an environmental assessment at issue in Sierra Club differs 
from the grant of a permit and approval of the management plan 
here. DOT's February 2005 exemption determination was made 
"[f]ollowing discussions with Hawaii Superferry and consultation 
with State and County agencies regarding the intended use of the 
[Kahalui] harbor facility and in consideration of the provisions 
in Chapter 343, [HRS] and Chapter 11-20 [HAR]." Sierra Club I, 
115 Hawai' i at 310, 167 P.3d at 303. In contrast, BLNR's 
decision was made following a contested case hearing, in which 
six non-State parties participated in hearings over eight days.6 
Second, Sierra Club followed a direct action in the 
circuit court. Sierra Club I, 115 Hawai' i at 311, 167 P.3d at 
304 (Sierra Club and other environmental groups filed a complaint "for declaratory, injunctive and other relief" against, inter 
alia, DOT and Superferry). As in Waiahole II and Maui Tomorrow, 
the instant case stems from an appeal from an agency decision. 
In Sierra Club I, the supreme court stated:
 
Contrary to the expressly stated purpose and intent of
[the Hawai' i Environmental Policy Act], the public was
prevented from participating in an environmental review
process for the Superferry project by DOT's grant of anexemption to the requirements of HRS [C]hapter 343. . . ."All parties involved and society as a whole" would havebenefitted had the public been allowed to participate in thereview process of the Superferry project, as was envisionedby the legislature when it enacted the Hawai' i Environmental 
Policy Act. 
115 Hawai' i at 343, 167 P.3d at 336. In contrast to the 
Superferry case where public participation was cut off by DOT's 
abandonment of its duties, Appellants participated in the agency 
proceedings below. 
In Waiahole II, the supreme court suggested that it was
 
inclined to adopt a rule that forbids attorney's fees in all
 
6
 Although Appellants complain of defects in notice provided prior to
the contested case hearing, the circuit court made no determination regarding
the adequacy of the notice provided.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeals from contested cases when it asserted that "such a rule" 
awarding fees "in an adversarial proceeding against a tribunal 
and the losing parties and in favor of the prevailing party, 
based on the reversal of the tribunal's decision on appeal" would 
not be "prudent from a policy standpoint." 96 Hawai' i at 32, 25 
P.3d at 807. 
Given the foregoing, we cannot conclude the circuit
 
court abused its discretion to the extent it held Appellants did
 not satisfy this second prong.
 
3.	 Third Prong: The number of people standing
to benefit from the decision
 
Because Appellants did not satisfy the second prong, 
there is no need to address the number of people standing to 
benefit from the decision, as required by the third prong. In 
Waiahole II, the supreme court held that the private attorney 
general doctrine did not apply because although the plaintiffs 
met the "first and third prongs of the doctrine's three-prong 
test," they failed to satisfy the second prong. 96 Hawai' i at 
31, 25 P.3d at 806. 
Therefore, we conclude the circuit court did not
 
clearly exceed the bounds of reason or disregard rules or
 principles of law or practice to Appellants' substantial
 
detriment.
 
D.	 SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY
 
Because we are affirming the Final Judgment of the
 
circuit court based on its holding that Appellants failed to
 
satisfy the three prongs of the private attorney general
 
doctrine, there is no need to address the parties' arguments
 
concerning the applicability of sovereign immunity.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 The "Final Judgment in Favor of Appellants Mauna Kea 
Anaina Hou, Royal Order of Kamehameha I, Sierra Club, Hawai' i 
Chapter, and Clarence Ching and Against Appellees Board of Land 
and Natural Resources, State of Hawai' i, University of Hawai' i 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Institute for Astronomy, Harry Fergestrom, and Hawai' i Island 
Economic Development Board, Inc." filed on January 29, 2008 in 
the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 24, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Paul Alson 
William M. Tam Blake Oshiro Shannon M.I. Lau (Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)Dexter K. Kaiama for Plaintiffs/Appellants­Appellees/Cross-Appellants. 
Presiding Judge 
Darolyn H. Lendio(University General Counsel)(Bruce Matsui, Associate
General Counsel, on theSupplemental Brief)
(University of Hawai' i)
Lisa Woods MungerLisa A. Bail (Goodsill Anderson Quinn &
Stifel)
for Defendant/Appellee­Appellant/Cross-AppelleeUniversity of Hawai' i Institute 
for Astronomy. Acting Associate Judge
Acting Associate Judge 
Deirdre Marie-Iha,
Deputy Solicitor General,for Defendant/Appellee-AppelleeBoard of Land and Natural Resources. 
Michael W. Moore (Tsukazaki Yeh & Moore)for Defendant/Appellee-AppelleeHawai'i Island Economic Development
Board, Inc. 
18
 