 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29615
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee
v.
 
PETER TIA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0985)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise and Ginoza, JJ. with
Foley, Presiding Judge, dissenting separately)
 
Defendant-Appellant Peter Tia (Tia) appeals from the
 
Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered on
 
January 29, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (circuit court).
1 Tia argues on appeal that the circuit court
 
erred in denying his motion to suppress evidence because the
 evidence in question was obtained due to an improper pat-down
 search incident to a lawful arrest.
 
Based upon a careful review of the record and the
 
briefs submitted by the parties, and having given due
 consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by
 the parties, we agree that the trial court erred and Tia's motion
 to suppress should have been granted.
 I. STATEMENT OF FACTS
 
On June 24, 2008, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i 
(State) filed a felony information charging Tia with "knowingly possess[ing] the drug cocaine, thereby committing the offense of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in violation of Section 712-1243 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes [HRS]."
2 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
2
 HRS § 712-1243, entitled "[p]romoting a dangerous drug in the third
degree," reads as follows: "(1) [a] person commits the offense of promoting a
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On August 25, 2008, Tia filed a Motion to Suppress
 
Evidence, requesting that the circuit court suppress any physical
 
evidence, testimony, or documentation of a packet and its
 contents, allegedly cocaine. Tia asserted that such evidence was
 seized from him in violation of his constitutional rights and
 argued that, while it is permissible to pat-down an arrestee
 incident to a lawful arrest, the pat-down search in this case was
 illegal because it was overly intrusive. 
On September 4, 2008, the State filed a Memorandum in
 
Opposition to Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence, arguing
 that the pat-down search was proper, the packet came into plain
 view during the pat-down search, and that the packet would have
 been inevitably discovered during a pre-incarceration search. 
On September 23, 2008, a hearing was held on the 
suppression motion. Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Daniel Sellers (Officer Sellers) was the only witness to testify at the hearing. Officer Sellers testified he was on routine patrol on June 23, 2008 and as he drove makai-bound on Nu
'uanu 
Avenue, he recognized Tia sitting at a bus stop just makai of Pauahi Street. Officer Sellers believed that Tia had an outstanding warrant for a narcotics-related arrest and called HPD to verify his belief. Upon confirming with HPD records personnel that there was a $75,000 warrant for Tia's arrest, Officer Sellers returned to the bus stop where he had seen Tia. Tia was no longer at the bus stop, but Officer Sellers guessed that Tia was likely in a nearby bar because it was the only place open. Another officer, Officer Nahulu, soon arrived to assist in the transport of Tia. Officer Sellers located Tia at the bar, approached Tia and asked him to step outside. Tia voluntarily complied, and once outside Officer Sellers notified Tia that Tia was being arrested for the outstanding warrant. Officer Sellers 
2(...continued)
dangerous drug in the third degree if the person knowingly possesses any
dangerous drug in any amount. (2) [p]romoting a dangerous drug in the third
degree is a class C felony." HRS § 712-1243 (2007). 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
handcuffed Tia and walked Tia to Officer Nahulu's transport
 
vehicle.
 
Officer Sellers testified that as he patted down Tia's
 
right front shorts pocket, he:
 
felt a hard cylindrical object in which I had no idea at the
time what it was, so I made the decision to take it out
during -- prior to transport, because I didn't know if it
was a weapon or could contain a weapon. I reached inside
 Mr. Tia's right pocket and removed this cylindrical object,
which as soon as I pulled and exposed it from the pocket, I
could see that it was an M&M's container. I continued to
 pull it out, in which that time a clear plastic Ziploc bag
containing rock-like objects resembling that of cocaine fell
to the ground as I pulled the M&M's container out of his
pocket. 
When asked whether the cocaine packet was inside or next to the
 
M&M's container, Officer Sellers responded that he: 
believe[d] it had to have been next to it, because when I
reached into his pocket, I grasped only the element -- I'm
sorry, M&M's container, and when I pulled it out, the packet
must have been loose in Mr. Tia's pocket as it fell
simultaneously as I pulled it out of his pocket. So the cap
on the M&M container was closed and remained closed until –­I mean, not until, but all the way until I submitted it in
to evidence.
 
Officer Sellers further testified that he did not have to open
 
anything to see the packet, and that he never opened the M&M's
 container.
 
On cross-examination, Officer Sellers noted that his
 
initial police report indicated that he thought the hard
 cylindrical object could be a weapon. He further testified that
 on other occasions he has "pulled out small little batons out of
 there, collapsible type of batons that are similar shape" and he
 did not want to take the chance of transporting Tia with a weapon
 or something he could use to escape. When he reached into Tia's
 pocket, Officer Sellers was able to see the top of the M&M's
 container, which was a little sideways, and at that point he knew
 it was not a baton, but that it was a M&M's container. However,
 he continued to remove the container because he was concerned it
 could contain a handcuff key which could possibly assist Tia as a
 means of escape.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Officer Sellers also briefly testified about the type
 
of search Tia would undergo at the central receiving division,
 
stating that Tia would have undergone a more thorough search at
 which time everything would be removed from his pockets. 
On September 25, 2008, the court issued its ruling
 
denying Tia's motion to suppress. After a recitation of the
 facts adduced at the hearing, the court stated:
 
The Court finds that had the officer believed it was
 
just a weapon when he pulled it out even midway and exposed
that it was a candy container, obviously he knew that was
not a weapon, so that falls by the wayside. Namely, once he
exposed that it was an M&M's container, his reasonable
belief that this was a weapon wasn't reasonable at that
point. 
The Court finds that the officer nevertheless was
 
reasonable to believe that the container may have had a
means for escape, namely the officer had indicated through
his testimony, and it's uncontroverted because there was no
cross-examination or examination of the officer, that he had
other occasion –- on other occasions seen people have
handcuff keys in containers.
 
His actions is [sic] also consistent because the
search was prior to placing the defendant into the transport
car. The officer never opened up the container, he just
removed it for safe keeping. When he pulled the container
out, a ziploc bag containing a substance, which later was
the substance, fell out of the pocket and therefore was
exposed.
 
The Court finds that the motion to suppress evidence
is denied based on the search incident to lawful arrest as
 well as the subsequent exposure of the item based on the
search.
 
The state also proffers an argument, namely inevitable
discovery, and the argument or the defense of the claim of
inevitable discovery would be valid in this case, however,
the officer's testimony fell short of the claim of
inevitable discovery. As the supreme court has held, the
burden is on the state to prove by clear and convincing
evidence that inevitable discovery is warranted in this
case.
 
The officer testified in passing generally that people
who are arrested are taken down and they're searched. We
 don't know -- and the Court cannot just make a presumption
that this is done on [sic] every case, so therefore, as the
basis for inevitable discovery, although it's a valid -­that would make a valid exception to the search in this
case, the evidence by the officer wasn't sufficient in terms
of clear and convincing.
 
So the Court does grant –- does deny the motion to
suppress evidence, finding that the search was incident to a
lawful arrest, and will prepare the order as such. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On October 6, 2008, the circuit court issued findings
 
3
of fact and conclusions of law  in an order denying the motion to
suppress. 
Relevant portions of the circuit court's findings of
 
fact and conclusions of law state:
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
. . . .
 
12.
	 Upon arriving at the police transport vehicle, Officer
Seller[s] began to conduct a pat down search of the
Defendant immediately before placing Defendant into
the transporting vehicle.
 
13.	 Officer Seller[s] testified that he conducted the pat
down search to insure that the Defendant had no
 weapons or a means to escape prior to entering the
police transport vehicle.
 
14.	 Officer Seller[s] testified that he didn't want to
take a chance that the Defendant would be transported
with a possible weapon or a means that he could use to
escape.
 
15.	 While patting down Defendant's right front pocket,
Officer Seller[s] felt a "hard, thick, cylindrical
object tucked within the pocket." According to
Officer Seller's [sic] affidavit . . . he was "unsure
if [the] object could possibly by [sic] a weapon or
contain a weapon, so [he] decided at the time to
remove [the] unknown object prior to transport."
 
16.	 . . . Officer Seller[s] testified that at the time he
felt the object in the Defendant's pocket, he believed
that the object may have been a weapon or could be
used as a means to escape. Officer Seller[s]
testified that he believed that the items might have
been a collapsible baton or a container containing a
handcuff key.
 
17.	 Officer Seller[s] testified that as he began to pull
the object out, he saw the top of the object and could
see that the object was a ["]mini M&M's" candy
container.
 
18.	 Officer Seller[s] stated that when he saw the candy
container he believed that the container was not a
 weapon. However Officer Seller[s] testified that he
still believed that the object could have been used as
a means of escape and removed the container from the
Defendant's pocket.
 
3
 Footnotes to the court's findings of fact and conclusions of law have
been incorporated into the body of the text.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
19.	 Officer Seller[s] again stated that he removed the
object from the Defendant's immediate possession since
he believed that the container could have housed a
 handcuff key at the time and could be used for escape.
 
20.	 As Officer Seller[s] removed the object from the
Defendant's pocket a small clear zip-lock bag
containing [a] whitish rock-like object simultaneously
fell to the sidewalk from the same pocket. 
21.	 Officer Seller[s] stated in his Affidavit . . . that
based on his training and experience in drug
recognition, he immediately recognized the packing and
the whitish rock-like objects within to be "crack
cocaine."
 
22.	 Officer Seller[s] recovered the container, taking it
out of the Defendant's possession, without further
opening the container. At the hearing there was no
evidence presented that Officer Seller[s] opened the
container and further searched inside of the
 container.
 
23.	 Officer Seller[s] finally testified that persons
arrested are taken to the police station and their
pockets are searched. Although the Court, based on
the Officer's general statement, could have arguably
assumed that every arrestee received into the Central
Receiving Division would have his or her pockets
searched, it was unable to make such an assumption
since there was no evidence to establish that the
 Officer had personal knowledge of the police
procedures and policies for said proc[e]dures.
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
. . . .
 
3.	 The 4
th amendment provides the right to be free of
unreasonable search and seizures. The 4th amendment
 
is applicable to the states via the 14th amendment and
 
further protection is provided by the parallel state
constitution.
 
4.	 Under the 4th amendment, illegally obtained evidence
and the fruits discovered are inadmissible.
 
5.	 Warrantless searches are presumed to be unreasonable
unless it [sic] falls into a recognized exception to
the warrant requirement. 
6.	 Here, the parties stipulated that the search in this
instant matter was a warrantless search.
 
. . . .
 
8.	 It is per se reasonable for the arresting officer to
conduct a warrantless limited pat-down search of an
arrestee's person and the area under the arrestee's
immediate control for weapons, escape
instrumentalities, or contraband. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
9.	 Once probable cause is found for an arrest, a search
incidental thereto is limited in scope to a situation
where it is reasonably necessary to discover the
fruits or instrumentalities of the crime for which the
 defendant is arrested, or to protect the officer from
attack, or to prevent the offender from escaping.
 
10.	 A search incident to lawful arrest is within the
 warrant exception only if the officer legitimately had
probable cause to believe that what he felt was or
contained a weapon or property that could have been
used to facilitate the [defendant's] escape. 
11.	 Here, Defendant was validly arrested pursuant to an
outstanding bench warrant of arrest.
 
. . . .
 
15.	 Although Officer Seller[s] testified that when he saw
the top of the object he believed that the container
was a candy container and not a weapon, the Court
finds that based on Officer Seller's [sic] eleven (11)
years of service with the Honolulu Police Department
he reasonably believed that the object may have
contained a handcuff key to be used as a means of
escape and therefore the search was a permissible
search incident to arrest.
 
. . . .
 
18.	 Based on Officer Seller's [sic] testimony the Court
finds that Officer Seller's [sic] action did not
exceed the scope of a legitimate search incident to
arrest since Officer Seller's [sic] removal of the
M&M's container was motivated by his belief that the
container may have contained something that could be
used as a means of escape, namely a handcuff key in
the container.
 
. . . .
 
20.	 The inevitable discovery exception to the warrant
requirement is a sound principle which prevents the
setting aside of convictions that would have been
obtained in the absence of police misconduct if the
prosecution presents clear and convincing evidence
that any evidence obtained in violation of article I,
section 7, would inevitably have been discovered by
lawful means.
 
21.	 Police inventories are Fourth Amendment searches,
however the court has also "concluded that [post­arrest] searches [are] reasonable because the
government's legitimate interests outweighed the
intrusion on the defendant's Fourth Amendment
 interests.
 
22.	 In a post-inventory search, the testimony of an
officer regarding pre-incarceration search procedures
of prisoners satisfied the clear and convincing
standard of proof required by the inevitable discovery
exception if the officer's testimony is credible. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
23.	 Here, although the prosecutor presented argument
raising the inevitable discovery doctrine, Officer
Seller's [sic] generalized testimony did not present
to the court clear and convincing testimony regarding
pre-incarceration search procedures of prisoners and
what legitimate governmental interest(s) outweigh the
intrusion on the Defendant's Fourth Amendment
 interests. 
24.	 Although Officer Sellers testified that persons placed
under lawful arrest would have their pockets searched
for contraband prior to being received at the police
Central Receiving Division, his testimony was a
general statement without [] any foundation
establishing personal knowledge, outlining the
standard procedures of the Central Receiving Division,
or explaining the policy for said procedures. Although
the court could reasonabl[y] assume that a search of a
person for contraband is conducted by the police at
the police station, the burden is on the State to
present clear and convincing evidence establishing the
procedures and policies of the Police Department. 
25.	 Although the evidence did not meet the evidentiary
standard of proof under the inevitable discovery
doctrine, the court nevertheless concludes that the
police officer's act of reaching into Defendant's
pocket was within the scope of a search incident to
lawful arrest since the officer reasonably believed
that the object may have been used for a means of
escape thus the inadvertent discovery of the zip-lock
bag containing crack-cocaine did not violate the
defendant's 4
th amendment right against unreasonable
search and seizure. Although Defendant did not raise
any Constitutional challenges to the seizure of the
zip-lock bag containing [a] whitish rock-like object,
the prosecutor addressed this issue in her memorandum
in opposition to the motion by raising the Plain View
Doctrine. Under the Plain View Doctrine, objects
sighted in plain view will be admissible [if] the
original intrusion is justified. The Court finds that
 under the Plain View doctrine the zip-lock baggie
containing the crack cocaine was properly seized under
this doctrine [and] thus did not violate the
Defendant's 4th Amendment Right. 
(citations omitted; some brackets in original and some added). 
The circuit court's findings of fact are unchallenged on appeal.
 II.	 DISCUSSION
 A.	 Standard of Review
 
A [circuit] court's ruling on a motion to suppress
evidence is reviewed de novo to determine whether the ruling
was "right" or "wrong." State v. Edwards, 96 Hawai' i 224,
231, 30 P.3d 238, 245 (2001) (citing State v. Jenkins, 93
Hawai'i 87, 100, 997 P.2d 13, 26 (2000)). The proponent of
the motion to suppress has the burden of establishing, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the statements or items
sought to be excluded were unlawfully secured and that his
or her right to be free from unreasonable searches or
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
seizures was violated under the fourth amendment to the 
United States Constitution and article I, section 7 of theHawai'i Constitution. See State v. Wilson, 92 Hawai' i 45, 48,
987 P.2d 268, 271 (1999) (citations omitted). 
State v. Estabillio, 121 Hawai 'i 261, 269, 218 P.3d 749, 757 
(2009) (quoting State v. Kaleohano, 99 Hawai 'i 370, 375, 56 P.3d 
138, 143 (2002)). 
Further, on appeal, we consider evidence at both the 
suppression hearing and the trial. State v. Sanford, 97 Hawai 'i 
247, 251 n.8, 35 P.3d 764, 768 n.8 (App. 2001); State v. Nakachi, 
7 Haw.App. 28, 33 n.7, 742 P.2d 388, 392 n.7 (1987); State v. Uddipa, 3 Haw.App. 415, 416-17, 651 P.2d 507, 509 (1982). 
B.	 A Pat-Down Search Incident to Lawful Arrest Must Be
 
Reasonably Limited In Scope
 
A warrantless pat-down search of an individual incident 
to a lawful arrest is permissible so long as the search is 
reasonably limited in scope. Under Hawai
'i case law, the scope 
of such a search must be reasonably necessary to discover: (a) fruits or instrumentalities of the crime for which the defendant is being arrested; (b) weapons; (c) instruments of escape; or (d) contraband.
4 See State v. Reed, 70 Haw. 107, 762 P.2d 803 
(1988); State v. Enos, 68 Haw. 509, 720 P.2d 1012 (1986); State v. Kaluna, 55 Haw. 361, 520 P.2d 51 (1974); see also State v.
 Ortiz, 67 Haw. 181, 683 P.2d 822 (1984). The decisions in
 Kaluna, Enos, and Reed provide particular guidance for purposes
 of analyzing the instant case.
 
In Kaluna, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that seized 
drugs were properly suppressed where, while in custody at the police station, the arrestee removed her outer garments in preparation for a search, the arrestee handed the attending officer a piece of folded tissue removed from the arrestee's brassiere, the attending officer opened the tissue "[j]ust to see 
4
 Based on the case law, it appears that the contraband to justify a
warrantless pat-down search must be of a nature to reasonably endanger officer
safety, or the officer must have prior knowledge or suspicion of the existence
of the contraband. See Enos, 68 Haw. at 511, 720 P.2d at 1014; Reed, 70 Haw.
at 114, 762 P.2d at 807.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
what she had", and the tissue contained four capsules of a
 
barbiturate. 55 Haw. at 362-63, 520 P.2d at 54. The court
 explained:
 
once probable cause is found for an arrest, a search
incidental thereto
 
is further limited in scope to a situation where it is
reasonably necessary to discover the fruits or
 
instrumentalities of the crime for which the defendant is
 arrested, or to protect the officer from attack, or to
prevent the offender from escaping.
 
Id. at 370-71, 520 P.2d at 59 (emphasis in original). Under the
 
facts in Kaluna, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held it was 
objectively unreasonable that the small tissue could have been
 used by the arrestee to escape or harm her captors, especially
 where it had been removed from her possession. Thus, it was
 improper for the officer to open the tissue to satisfy her
 curiosity as to what it contained.
 
Importantly, the court further elaborated on standards
 
to be applied in future cases:
 
Today's construction of the Hawaii Constitution should not
hamper the police in the legitimate exercise of their
authority. We merely hold that each case of search and
seizure without a warrant must turn on its own facts, and
that each proffered justification for a warrantless search
must meet the test of necessity inherent in the concept of
reasonableness. . . . [W]here the nature of the offense or
the circumstances of arrest give rise to a legitimate and
reasonable apprehension on the part of the arresting officer
that the arrestee is armed and dangerous, a protective
search for weapons is justified.
 
In sum, we hold that a search incident to a valid
custodial arrest does not give rise to a unique right to
search; instead, the circumstances surrounding the arrest
generate the authority to search without a warrant. If
 these circumstances show a legitimate basis for a search –
such as protection of the arresting officer or preservation
of evidence of the crime for which the arrest is made – then
 a search is lawful only if no broader than necessary in
light of the justification. A search which exceeds this
 scope is a search without reason. And a search without
 reason we regard as manifestly "unreasonable" under the
Hawaii Constitution.
 
Id. at 371-72, 520 P.2d at 60 (emphasis added) (citations and
 
footnotes omitted).
 
In Enos, the defendant appealed his conviction for
 
promoting a dangerous drug, asserting the drugs in question were
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
illegally seized from his pants pocket during a search following
 
his arrest for drunk driving. Upon the defendant's arrest, the
 arresting officer had conducted a pat-down search for weapons or
 contraband without any prior knowledge or suspicion that the
 defendant had any weapons or contraband. During the pat-down,
 the officer felt what appeared to be cellophane packets in the
 defendant's front pocket, suspected they contained contraband,
 and thus removed the packets and seized them as evidence.
 
Under these facts, while reiterating that, "[w]e have
 
repeatedly upheld the right of an officer making an arrest to
 take reasonable and appropriate steps to protect himself from
 possible weapons to which the arrestee may have access[,]" 68
 Haw. at 511, 720 P.2d at 1014, the court held that the search
 violated the defendant's constitutional rights, explaining:
 
Here, the officer found no weapons. On this record, there
was nothing to indicate that there were, concealed on the
person of appellant, any fruits or instrumentalities of the
crime of drunken driving. Given the finding by the court,
which was in accord with the testimony, that the officer was
without any prior knowledge or suspicion of the existence of
contraband, the warrantless search and seizure, beyond the
pat-down for weapons, violated appellant's rights under the
Constitution of the State of Hawaii. The order denying a
suppression of the four cellophane packets was error.
 
Id.
 
In Reed, the defendant was arrested for an outstanding 
warrant and a pat-down search incident to that arrest was 
conducted, yielding a switchblade knife and a plastic Tylenol bottle that contained pills alleged to be valium. The Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court upheld the propriety of the pat-down search with regard to the seizure of the switchblade knife. However, the court vacated the defendant's conviction for possession of the illegal drugs that were in the Tylenol bottle. 
The Court first addressed the switchblade knife,
 
explaining that:
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In the present case . . . Officer DeAguiar did not engage in
a general exploration of Reed's pockets but instead
correctly made a limited frisk, felt the knife in Reed's
right rear pants pocket, and extracted the weapon. . . .
Notwithstanding that Officer DeAguiar had no specific
suspicion that Reed was armed, we view the warrantless,
limited pat-down search after a valid arrest for weapons,
escape instrumentalities, or contraband as reasonable and
necessary for the arresting police officer's safety. See
State v. Clark, 65 Haw. 488, 654 P.2d 355 (1982); cf. State
v. Ortiz, 67 Haw. 181, 683 P.2d 822 (1984). This type of
search is not dependent on the nature of the crime or the
circumstances of the arrest.
 
70 Haw. at 114, 762 P.2d at 807 (emphasis added). The court
 
therefore stated:
 
We thus hold that it is per se reasonable for the arresting
police officers to conduct a warrantless, limited pat-down
search of an arrestee's person and the area under the
arrestee's immediate control for weapons, escape
instrumentalities, or contraband.
 
Id. at 115, 762 P.2d at 808.
 
In addressing the Tylenol bottle and its contents, the
 
court first stated:
 
We once more stress that the pat-down frisk, as a form of
the search incident to a valid arrest, must 1) be confined
to a search of the arrestee's person or the area within his
or her immediate reach for weapons, escape
instrumentalities, or contraband; and 2) balance the weighty
government interest in police safety against the arrestee's
right to be free from unreasonable government intrusion.
State v. Barrett, 67 Haw. 650, 701 P.2d 1277 (1985); see
State v. Goodwin, 7 Haw.App. 261, 752 P.2d 598 (1988).
 
Id. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court then pointed to and relied on the 
analysis of that part of the dissenting opinion issued by the
 
Intermediate Court of Appeals that stated:
 
My holding would validate the pat-down search, the permanent
seizure of the switchblade knife, and the feeling of the
plastic Tylenol bottle when it was in Appellant's "left
front pocket". It would validate the temporary seizure of,
removal from Appellant's pocket, and examination of the
unopened plastic Tylenol bottle only if, when Officer
 DeAguiar legitimately felt the bottle when it was in
 
Appellant's pocket, he had probable cause to believe that
 what he felt was or contained a weapon or property that
 could have been used to facilitate Appellant's escape. If
 Officer DeAguiar had probable cause to believe that what he
felt was or contained contraband other than a weapon or
property that could have been used to facilitate Appellant's
escape, then he was not authorized to temporarily seize what
he felt, to remove it from Appellant's pocket, or to examine
it.
 
Id. at 116, 762 P.2d at 808-809 (emphasis in original).
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The court determined that additional fact finding was
 
necessary regarding the seizure of the Tylenol bottle and its
 
contents. Therefore, the conviction for possession of the
 switchblade was affirmed, but the conviction for promotion of
 drugs was vacated and remanded for further proceedings.
 
C.	 The Pat-Down Search In This Case Went Beyond
Permissible Limits
 
In the instant case, under Kaluna, Enos and Reed,
 
Officer Sellers properly conducted a pat-down search of Tia upon
 
Tia's arrest. Even though Officer Sellers did not indicate any
 specific basis to believe Tia was carrying a weapon or other
 properly discoverable item, the initiation of a pat-down search
 incident to the arrest was valid.
 
Upon feeling the "hard cylindrical object" in Tia's
 
right front pocket, the question then becomes whether Officer
 Sellers had a sufficient basis to take further steps to determine
 what it was. Officer Sellers did not know what it was but had a
 concern that it might be a weapon, stating that in the past he
 has pulled out "collapsible type of batons that are similar in
 shape." Kaluna, Enos, and Reed articulate a concern for officer
 
safety upon the arrest of an individual, to be balanced against
 the arrestee's right to be free from unreasonable intrusion. 
Under the guidance of these cases, we believe it was proper for
 Officer Sellers to take reasonable steps to identify the object
 he felt in Tia's pocket. In Kaluna, the court stated:
 
[W]here the nature of the offense or the circumstances of
arrest give rise to a legitimate and reasonable apprehension
on the part of the arresting officer that the arrestee is
armed and dangerous, a protective search for weapons is
justified.
 
55 Haw. at 372, 520 P.2d at 60 (emphasis added). In Enos, the
 
court recognized that it had "repeatedly upheld the right of an
 officer making an arrest to take reasonable and appropriate steps
 to protect himself from possible weapons to which the arrestee
 may have access." 68 Haw. at 511, 720 P.2d at 1014 (emphasis
 added). See also State v. Ortiz, 67 Haw. at 187, 683 P.2d at 827
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Explaining that in the context of an investigatory stop, after
 
police officer felt an object in a knapsack like the butt of a
 handgun, he had reasonable basis to open the bag and verify what
 it was. "Police officers need not risk a shot in the back by
 returning containers which they reasonably suspect contain a
 dangerous weapon but may lack probable cause to seize.").
 
In Reed, the court separately addressed the discovery
 
of the switchblade and the Tylenol bottle in that case. That is,
 although a probable cause standard was applied to determine if
 the "temporary seizure of, removal from Appellant's pocket, and
 examination of the unopened plastic Tylenol bottle" was
 justified, 70 Haw. at 116, 762 P.2d at 808-809, the court
 separately concluded that removal of the switchblade from the
 defendant's rear pants pocket was proper, even though there was
 no discussion as to whether upon feeling the object the officer
 knew or had probable cause to know it was a weapon. In the
 instant case, Officer Sellers was able to identify the object and
 determine it was not a weapon prior to removing it from Tia's
 pocket. More importantly, however, given the standards discussed
 in Kaluna, Enos, Reed, and Ortiz, and the concern for officer
 safety articulated in those decisions –- especially with regard
 to potential weapons –- we conclude that Reed would not prevent
 Officer Sellers from identifying an object he had a legitimate
 concern could be a weapon.
 
Because we believe Officer Sellers had a legitimate and
 
reasonable apprehension that the object he felt was a weapon, he
 properly sought to further identify it. However, the record is
 also clear that once the object reached the top of Tia's pocket,
 and before it was removed from the pocket, Officer Sellers
 determined that it was a M&M's container and that it was not a
 weapon. At this juncture, as noted by the circuit court, the
 concern about a weapon ceased to be a basis for any further
 intrusion and did not allow for removal of the container on that
 basis.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Officer Sellers did continue to remove the M&M's 
container, even after determining it was not a weapon, on the 
assertion that it could hold a means of escape, i.e., a handcuff key. At this juncture, similar to the Tylenol bottle in Reed and as required by Reed, the probable cause standard applied. Therefore, Officer Sellers must have had probable cause to believe the container held an instrument of escape. Reed, 70 
Haw. at 116, 762 P.2d at 808-809. The probable cause standard is expressed by the Hawai
'i Supreme Court as follows: 
Probable cause exists when the facts and circumstances
 
within one's knowledge and of which one has reasonable
trustworthy information are sufficient in themselves to
warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that an
offense has been committed. This requires more than a mere
suspicion but less than a certainty.
 
State v. Maganis, 109 Hawai 'i 84, 86, 123 P.3d 679, 681 (2005); 
see also, State v. Navas, 81 Hawai 'i 113, 116, 913 P.2d 39, 42 
(1996). 
Based on the record in this case, Officer Sellers did
 
not have probable cause to believe the M&M's container held a
 
handcuff key or other instrument of escape. As guided by Kaluna,
 we consider the nature of the offense warranting the arrest, as
 well as the circumstances surrounding the arrest. 55 Haw. at
 372, 520 P.2d at 60. Here, Officer Sellers did not articulate,
 and the record does not reveal, probable cause that Tia was
 carrying a handcuff key in the M&M's container in his pocket. 
The circumstances of the case were that Officer Sellers came upon
 Tia while on routine patrol, believed there was a warrant for
 Tia's arrest, and arrested Tia after confirming the warrant. 
Nothing in the basis for the arrest -- the warrant itself –­would add a reasonable concern that Tia might carry a handcuff
 key on his person. Moreover, throughout the encounter with
 Officer Sellers, Tia cooperated, voluntarily exited the bar where
 he was found, and did not act in any manner that raised a
 concern. Therefore, under these facts, the justification that a
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
handcuff key might be in the M&M's container is not reasonable
 
and falls short of the probable cause standard.
 
As clarified by the circuit court, the packet
 
containing cocaine fell out of Tia's pocket as the M&M's
 container was being removed from his pocket. If not for the
 improper removal of the container, the packet of cocaine would
 have remained in Tia's pocket.
 
D. Inevitable Discovery
 The State argues that even if the pat-down search was 
illegal, the packet of cocaine should not be suppressed because it would have been inevitably discovered by lawful means. The inevitable discovery exception to the exclusion rule, and the requirements for its application, were adopted by the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court in State v. Lopez, 78 Haw. 433, 896 P.2d 889 (1995). In order for evidence to be admitted under this exception, the prosecution must "present clear and convincing evidence that any evidence obtained in violation of article I, section 7, would inevitably have been discovered by lawful means." Lopez, 78 Hawai
'i at 451, 896 P.2d at 907. 
"Clear and convincing evidence means such evidence as
 
will produce 'in the mind of a reasonable person a firm belief as
 to the facts sought to be established.'" Lopez at 451 n.30, 896
 P.2d at 907 n.30 (brackets omitted) (quoting Almeida v. Almeida,
 4 Haw. App. 513, 518, 669 P.2d 174, 179 (1983)). 
In Kaluna, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court discussed the 
constitutionality of a limited pre-incarceration search. There, the court held: 
that the police have full authority to prohibit the entry of
weapons, drugs or other potentially harmful items into jail.
To this end, they may require internees to surrender any
possible repositories for such items prior to incarceration.
However, a concomitant of this wide authority to prohibit
the entry of personal belongings which may harbor forbidden
contents is a complete absence of authority to conduct a
general exploratory search of the belongings themselves.
 
55 Haw. at 373, 520 P.2d at 61.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Here, the circuit court issued findings of fact and
 
conclusions of law determining that the State had failed to
 
present clear and convincing evidence that the packet of cocaine
 would have inevitably been discovered during a legal pre-
incarceration search.
5 In Finding of Fact No. 23, the circuit
 
court stated:
 
23.	 Officer Seller[s] finally testified that persons
arrested are taken to the police station and their
pockets are searched. Although the Court, based on
the Officer's general statement, could have arguably
assumed that every arrestee received into the Central
Receiving Division would have his or her pockets
searched, it was unable to make such an assumption
since there was no evidence to establish that the
 Officer had personal knowledge of the police
procedures and policies for said procedures.
 
In Conclusion of Law No. 24, the circuit court stated:
 
24.	 Although Officer Sellers testified that persons placed
under lawful arrest would have their pockets searched
for contraband prior to being received at the police
Central Receiving Division, his testimony was a
general statement without [] any foundation
establishing personal knowledge, outlining the
standard procedures of the Central Receiving Division,
or explaining the policy for said procedures. Although
the court could reasonabl[y] assume that a search of a
person for contraband is conducted by the police at
the police station, the burden is on the State to
present clear and convincing evidence establishing the
procedures and policies of the Police Department. 
We agree with the circuit court that the State failed
 
to carry its burden of presenting clear and convincing evidence
 
on the issue of inevitable discovery. Officer Sellers, the
 
5 In State v. Silva, this court affirmed a trial court's conclusion 
that the State had proved, by clear and convincing evidence, "that the
contents of Defendant's pockets would have been revealed in an inventorysearch based on a finding that 'there's nothing in the record to suggest thatthe contraband was in a closed container.'" 91 Hawai' i 111, 120, 979 P.2d
1137, 1146 (App. 1999), aff'd State v. Silva, 91 Hawai' i 80, 979 P.2d 1106
(1999). The court concluded that under Kaluna, the contraband would clearlyhave been discovered in an inventory search where the defendant did "notcontest that the objects were in his pocket" and where "there was no evidencethat [the contraband] was in a closed container." Id. at 121, 979 P.2d at 
1147. While the Silva opinion did not discuss any evidence presented in thatcase, if any, regarding the pre-incarceration search procedures, this courtfurther noted in State v. Rodrigues, 122 Hawai' i 229, 238, 225 P.3d 671, 680
(2010) that "we do not read Silva to relieve the State of its burden topresent clear and convincing evidence that discovery of contraband would havebeen inevitable upon an inventory search at the police cellblock." 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
arresting officer, was the only witness to testify about the pre-
incarceration procedures of the Honolulu Police Department, his
 testimony was very limited at both the suppression hearing and at
 trial, and he provided no foundation for his knowledge about the
 procedures. As the circuit court properly concluded, such
 generalized statements without sufficient foundation cannot meet
 the heightened standard of clear and convincing evidence required
 by Lopez.
 III. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the above, we conclude that the circuit court
 
erred in denying Tia's motion to suppress. The Amended Judgment
 of Conviction and Sentence entered on January 29, 2009 is
 therefore vacated and the case is remanded for proceedings
 consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 10, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Venetia K. Carpenter-Asui
for Defendant-Appellant Associate Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
18
 