NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29987
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
PETE MUÑOZ and CONNIE MUÑOZ, Plaintiffs-Appellants, v. YOSHIMI
HATA, SANAE HATA, SANAE HATA TRUST, JUNE THOMAS, PAUL THOMAS,
JOHN DOES 1-5, JANE DOES 1-5, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5, DOE
PARTNERSHIPS 1-5, DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITES 1-5,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0541(2))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J. and Fujise, J.,
with Leonard, J., dissenting.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Connie and Pete Muñoz
 
(collectively the Muñozes) appeal from the July 28, 2009 Amended
 
Final Judgment in favor of Defendants-Appellees Yoshimi Hata,
 
Sanae Hata, Sanae Hata Trust, June Thomas, and Paul Thomas
 
(collectively the Defendants) entered by the Circuit Court of the
 
Second Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 
BACKGROUND
 
This appeal stems from the termination of a lease and
 
eviction of the Muñozes as tenants by Yoshimi Hata and Sanae Hata
 
(collectively Defendants Hata) as landlords. Defendant June
 
Thomas is the daughter of Defendants Hata and is married to
 
Defendant Paul Thomas (collectively Defendants Thomas). 
1
 The Honorable Shackley F. Raffetto presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants Thomas reside with Defendants Hata. Pursuant to a
 
lease dated December 31, 1988, the Muñozes occupied a small
 
portion of Defendants Hata's property on Maui (the property) from
 
January 1, 1989, until December 11, 2006. Pursuant to an
 
amendment to the lease during this tenancy, Defendants Hata
 
allowed the Muñozes to build a house (subject house) on the
 
property. By a letter dated June 23, 2006, Defendants Hata
 
terminated the lease and asked the Muñozes to vacate and remove
 
the subject house from the property on or before October 23,
 
2006.
 
On October 23, 2006, Defendants Hata filed an action
 
for summary possession in the District Court of the Second
 
Circuit, Wailuku Division (District Court).2 While the Muñozes
 
did not contest the right of Defendants Hata to regain possession
 of the property, in both their Answer and Counter Complaint they
 
contested the amount of time given by Defendants Hata to remove
 
the subject house from the property. The Muñozes requested that
 
the District Court grant them a reasonable, yet indeterminate
 
amount of time in which to move the subject house to a new
 
location.
 
On December 5, 2006, the District Court entered a
 
Judgment for Possession and a Writ of Possession in favor of
 
Defendants Hata with an effective date of December 11, 2006. The
 
Writ of Possession ordered the removal of
 
Defendant(s) and all persons holding under or through
him/her/them from the premises above-mentioned, including
his/her/their personal belongings and properties, and to put
Plaintiff(s) in full possession thereof[.]
 
On January 17, 2007, the District Court entered a Final Judgment,
 
ordering
 
2
 This lawsuit was assigned Civil DC No. 06-1-1584.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the Judgment for Possession and the Writ of Possession
filed on December 5, 2006 and executed on December 11, 2006,
are hereby entered as a final judgment in favor of
Plaintiffs and against the Defendants.
 
There are no other claims and/or parties remaining in
the action.
 
This Final Judgment was affirmed on appeal by summary disposition
 
order on September 10, 2008. However, this court's decision was
 
limited to review of the judgment entered on Defendants Hata's
 
complaint for summary possession. We observed,
 
[i]n their "Counter Complaint Exceeding Opposing
Claim" filed on October 31, 2006 (counterclaim), [the
Muñozes] described the history of their use of the leased
premises and requested that the district court "allow [them]
an indeterminate time period to move their home to a new
location, predicated on [the Muñozes'] genuine efforts to
expedite this move and those efforts to be determined by
monthly certified reports submitted by [the Muñozes] to
[Defendants Hata's] attorney." It does not appear from the
record that the district court entered a final order or
 judgment as to [the Muñozes'] counterclaim. We therefore
 have no jurisdiction to address [the Muñozes'] arguments on
appeal regarding the counterclaim.
 
Hata v. Muñoz, 118 Hawaif i 420, 191 P.3d 1097, No. 28291 at *3 
(App. Sept. 10, 2008) (SDO) (footnote omitted) (Hata I). 
Meanwhile, on December 19, 2007, the Muñozes filed the
 
instant action against Defendants Hata, the Sanae Hata Trust, and
 
Defendants Thomas, alleging that the Defendants took possession
 
of the Muñozes' house without permission on or about December 12,
 
2006. The Muñozes made two claims, one for conversion and one
 
for intentional and/or negligent infliction of emotional distress
 
(IIED) arising from this incident.
 
On April 18, 2008, the Circuit Court granted the
 
Muñozes' request for medical accommodation which provided that
 
all hearings would be set for 9:30 a.m. or later.
 
On November 19, 2008, the Defendants filed a Motion for
 
Summary Judgment; the Muñozes filed their Answer to the
 
Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment on December 29, 2008. 
The Defendants filed a reply to the Muñozes' answer on January 2,
 
2009. The hearing on the summary judgment motion commenced on
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
January 7, 2009 at 8:30 a.m.; the Muñozes were not present.3
 
The Circuit Court granted the Defendants' summary judgment motion
 
and the order was filed on February 2, 2009.
 
However, before the February 2, 2009 order was filed,
 
the Muñozes moved for reconsideration of the order granting
 
summary judgment. The Muñozes did not attend the hearing held on
 
their motion which was set for March 18, 2009 at 9:30 a.m. The
 
Circuit Court entered an order denying the Muñozes motion for
 
reconsideration stating, inter alia, the following:
 
1. Plaintiffs claim that they were not given
adequate time to respond to Defendant's Motion for Summary
Judgment or to be represented at the hearing on the Motion
for Summary Judgment held on January 7, 2009. They were
thus provided this setting in order to do so. Plaintiffs
 had their opportunity to make their representations and
arguments to the Court on their Motion for Reconsideration
at the hearing held on March 18, 2009 set for 9:30 a.m. but
failed to appear in court when the case was called at 9:40
 a.m.
 
2. Again after reviewing the pleadings and
records herein, the Court does not find any claims raised by
the Plaintiffs in this action that had not been or could not
 have been previously raised in both the prior Second Circuit
Court case, Civil No. 06-1-0283(1), Pete and Connie Munoz
 vs. Yoshimi Hata, Sanae Hata, Sanae Hata Trust, Paul and
 
June Thomas, Larry and Lori Land, and the summary possession
proceedings, DC Civil No. 06-1-1584, Yoshimi Hata and Sanae
 Hata vs. Pete Munoz and Connie Munoz. Further, in their
Motion for Reconsideration no new evidence that could not
 have already been presented to this Court in their previous
opposition was submitted and the standard for
reconsideration was not met.
 
3. After reviewing Plaintiffs' letter dated
March 3, 2009, attached as Exhibit "A" to Defendants'
Request for Court Instructions Directing Plaintiffs to
Refrain from Abusive Correspondence filed March 11, 2009,
the parties are reminded to refrain from correspondence and
sending abusive letters to each other.
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Plaintiff's Motion
 
for Reconsideration, filed January 21, 2009, is denied in
its entirety.
 
The Muñozes appear to raise the following points in
 
this appeal:
 
3
 The Muñozes arrived at the correct courtroom in circuit court at
 
9:27 a.m.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1.	 The Circuit Court erred in not following its
"Order Granting Plaintiffs' Ex-Parte Motion for
Accommodating Medically Disabled Persons Under the
Federal Disability Act" which resulted in the
Muñozes failing to attend the January 7, 2009
Summary Judgment hearing.
 
2.	 The Circuit Court erred in granting summary
judgment in favor of the Defendants based on the
preclusive doctrines of res judicata and
 
collateral estoppel.
 
3.	 Judge Shackley F. Raffetto was biased against the
Muñozes because of the language in Judge Joel E.
August's Certificate of Recusation and Order of
Reassignment.
 
DISCUSSION
 
A.
 
While the Circuit Court erred in setting the hearing on
 
Defendants' motion for summary judgment at 8:30 a.m. contrary to
 
its April 18, 2008 order granting the Muñozes' motion for
 
accommodation, as the Muñozes have failed to demonstrate they
 
were prevented from responding to the motion for summary judgment
 
or were otherwise harmed by this early setting, we conclude that
 
the error was harmless. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 641-2
 
(Supp. 2012). The Muñozes filed their opposition to the motion
 
for summary judgment with the Circuit Court. The Muñozes also
 
filed their January 21, 2009 "Motion for Reconsideration on
 
Defendant's [sic] Motion for Summary Judgment," where they
 
specifically raised the early setting of the hearing on the
 
motion for summary judgment along with their position on the
 
summary judgment decision on the merits. We note that while the
 
Muñozes were given a hearing on their motion for reconsideration,
 
they failed to appear.
4 As this court stated in Hata I, "it is
 
4
 The Muñozes claim that they considered 
the matter of reconsideration is moot by virtue of the fact
that a Final Judgment was filed on 24 February 2009. "Final
 Determination. Final judgment is synonymous. The final
 setting of the rights of the parties to an action beyond all
(continued...)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
axiomatic that the 'fundamental requirement of due process is the
 
opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful
 
manner.' The record on appeal indicates that [the Muñozes] were
 
provided opportunities to be meaningfully heard . . ., but they
 
failed to take advantage of them." Hata I, at *5 (internal
 
citations omitted).
 
B.
 
We review the granting of a motion for summary judgment 
de novo, Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawaifi 286, 295-96, 141 P.3d 459, 468-69 (2006), and conclude 
the Circuit Court erred in granting the Defendants' motion for summary judgment. The Muñozes argue that the Circuit Court's 
determination that their action against the Defendants was barred 
by res judicata and collateral estoppel was wrong because "there 
exists no substantial facts and evidence to show that res judicata and collateral estoppel exists" and that "you cannot 
bring action against someone until the act or actions have 
occurred." 
Res judicata is applicable when the following three
 
requirements have been met:
 
(1) the claim or cause of action in the present action is
identical to the one decided in the prior adjudication; (2)
there was a final judgment on the merits in the prior
adjudication; and (3) the parties to the present action are
the same or in privity with the parties in the prior action.
 
Smallwood v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 118 Hawaif i 139, 146-47, 
185 P.3d 887, 894-95 (App. 2008). All three requirements must be 
met for the doctrine to apply. Aloha Unlimited, Inc. v. 
Coughlin, 79 Hawaif i 527, 536, 904 P.2d 541, 550 (App. 1995) 
("three questions must be answered in the affirmative"). 
In the instant case, the Muñozes appear to raise two
 
claims. The first appeared to allege Defendants unlawfully took
 
possession of the subject house and the second appeared to claim
 
4(...continued)
appeal." (Black's Law Dictionary, Revised Fourth Edition)
Beyond all appeal within the Circuit Court.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IIED by virtue of this allegedly unlawful taking. Our review of
 
the record reveals that, with regard to both claims, the second
 
requirement for the application of res judicata--that there must
 
be a final judgment on the merits--has not been met. As observed
 
in Hata I, the District Court did not rule on the Muñozes'
 
counterclaim for more time to remove the subject house and final
 
judgment was entered on the Defendants' complaint for summary
 
possession only. Hata I, at *3. Consequently, there was no
 
final judgment on the merits of the Muñozes' counterclaim, making
 
the doctrine of res judicata inapplicable to that claim. As to
 
the IIED claim, as it was based on the taking of the subject
 
house, that had not occurred at the time the Muñozes filed their
 
counterclaim, the same could not have been pleaded nor could have
 
been decided.
 
In order to establish collateral estoppel, the party
 
asserting this preclusive doctrine has the burden of establishing
 
that:
 
(1) the fact or issue in the present action is identical to
the one decided in the prior adjudication; (2) there was a
final judgment on the merits in the prior adjudication; (3)
the parties to the present action are the same or in privity
with the parties in the prior action; and (4) the fact or
issue decided in the prior action was actually litigated,
finally decided, and essential to the earlier valid and
final judgment.
 
Smallwood, 118 Hawaif i at 147, 185 P.3d at 895. As with the 
doctrine of res judicata, because both of the claims in the
 
present lawsuit were not previously decided, the requirements of
 
collateral estoppel have not been met. The Circuit Courts' entry
 
of summary judgment based on these doctrines must therefore be
 
vacated.
 
C.
 
Finally, the Muñozes challenge the neutrality of Judge 
Raffetto. In Aga v. Hundahl, 78 Hawaif i 230, 891 P.2d 1022 
(1995), the Hawaif i Supreme Court stated that 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in the administration of justice by a court of law, no
principle is better recognized as absolutely essential than
that in every case, be it criminal or civil, the parties
involved therein are entitled to the cold neutrality of an
impartial judge. The right of litigants to a fair trial
must be scrupulously guarded.
 
Id. at 242, 891 P.2d at 1034 (brackets and ellipsis omitted) 
(quoting Peters v. Jamieson, 48 Haw. 247, 262, 397 P.2d 575, 585 
(1964)). "However, reversal on the grounds of judicial bias or 
misconduct is warranted only upon a showing that the trial was 
unfair. Unfairness, in turn, requires a clear and precise 
demonstration of prejudice." Aga, 78 Hawaif i at 242, 891 P.2d at 
1034 (citations omitted). However, "standing alone, mere erroneous or adverse rulings by the trial judge do not spell bias 
or prejudice." Id. (internal quotation marks, citation, and 
brackets omitted). 
This court notes that HRS § 601-7(b) (1993) requires
 
that "a judge shall be disqualified whenever a party files a
 legally sufficient affidavit showing bias or prejudice but
 
contains the critical requirement that the affidavit be timely
 
filed before the hearing or the action or proceeding and, if not,
 
that good cause shall be shown." Yorita v. Okumoto, 3 Haw. App.
 
148, 152, 643 P.2d 820, 824 (1982). The Muñozes do not allege
 that they filed such an affidavit before the Circuit Court.
 
The Muñozes allege that Judge Raffetto was biased
 
towards the Muñozes because of language contained in Judge
 
August's Certificate of Recusation and Order of Reassignment
 
[Certificate of Recusation] in which Judge August disqualified
 
himself from this action. In his Certificate of Recusation filed
 
on December 19, 2007, Judge August states that
 
[
t]he undersigned is currently presiding in a proceeding in
which [the Muñozes] are the Guardians for an incompetent
adult defendant. [The Muñozes] have taken a hostile attitude
toward the Court and the Court feels it would be difficult
 to be objective in deciding issues that might arise in this
 case.
 
In their opening brief, the Muñozes rhetorically argue, "Would it
 
not be reasonable and acceptable for anyone to consider the
 
remarks made in Judge August's [Certificate of Recusation] not to
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be extremely prejudiced towards [the Muñozes] and the overall
 
conduct of their case?" The Muñozes also contend that the
 
statement made by Judge August "coming from a fellow judge is
 
contagious" regarding their hostility towards the court.
 
Without more, such accusations are insufficient to 
establish bias. Indeed, even circumstantial evidence of a trial 
judge's erroneous or adverse rulings is insufficient to support a 
claim of judicial bias. Aga, 78 Hawaif i at 242, 891 P.2d at 
1034. The Muñozes have failed to point to any proof of "clear and precise demonstration of prejudice" on Judge Raffetto's part. 
Therefore, we conclude this point of error is meritless. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the reasons stated herein, we vacate the July 28,
 
2009 Amended Final Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the
 
Second Circuit and remand for further proceedings consistent with
 
this memorandum opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, April 26, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Pete Muñoz and 
Connie Muñoz Plaintiffs-Appellants, pro se. 
Chief Judge 
Deborah K. Wright andKeith D. Kirschbraun,for Defendants-Appellees. 
Associate Judge 
9
 