NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. 29824 and 29825
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
NO. 29824
 
JOHN PICARDY and ELLEN PICARDY, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
SKY RIVER MANAGEMENT, LLC; PIERRE and
PAMELA OMIDYAR; ELAHE MIR DJALALI OMIDYAR; ANNA CHRISTIAN;
KEVIN MAHONEY; DOUGLAS COOMBS, Defendants-Appellees,
 
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0290)
 
and
 
NO. 29825
 
ERIN PICARDY, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
SKY RIVER MANAGEMENT, LLC; PIERRE and
PAMELA OMIDYAR; ELAHE MIR DJALALI OMIDYAR; ANNA CHRISTIAN;
KEVIN MAHONEY, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0330)
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
In Appeal No. 29824, Plaintiffs-Appellants John Picardy
 
(Mr. Picardy) and Ellen Picardy (Mrs. Picardy) filed a complaint
  
 3
 The Honorable Sabrina S. McKenna presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in Civil No. 09-1-0290 against Defendants-Appellees Sky River
 
Management, LLC (SRM), Pierre and Pamela Omidyar, Elahe Mir
 Djalali Omidyar, Anna Christian, and Kevin Mahoney (collectively,
 "Defendants"). Defendants filed a "Motion to Stay Proceedings
 and Compel Arbitration."
1 The Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(Circuit Court) granted the motion and filed an "Order Granting
 Defendants' Motion to Stay Proceedings and Compel Arbitration"
 (Order Staying Proceedings and Compelling Arbitration).
2 Mr. and
 
Mrs. Picardy appeal from this order in Appeal No. 29824. 
In Appeal No. 29825, Plaintiff-Appellant Erin Picardy
 
(Erin), the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Picardy, in a separate
 proceeding, filed a complaint in Civil No. 09-1-0330 against
 Defendants. Defendants filed a "Motion to Stay Proceedings." 
The Circuit Court granted the motion and filed an "Order Granting
 Defendants' Motion to Stay Proceedings" (Order Staying
 Proceedings).
3 Erin appeals from this order in Appeal No. 29825. 
In Appeal No. 29824, Mr. and Mrs. Picardy argue that
 
the Circuit Court erred in granting Defendants' Motion to Stay
 Proceedings and Compel Arbitration because: (1) the Arbitration
 Agreement is unconscionable; (2) the Arbitration Agreement
 violates public policy; (3) the Arbitration Agreement does not
 encompass Mr. Picardy's claim of fraudulent inducement; and (4) 
Mr. Picardy was induced to sign the Arbitration Agreement by
 fraud. In Appeal No. 29825, Erin argues that the Circuit Court
 erred in granting Defendants' Motion to Stay Proceedings because
 her claims were not derivative of the claims of her father. We
 affirm the Circuit Court's Order Staying Proceedings and
 Compelling Arbitration in Civil No. 09-1-0290 and its Order
 
1
 After Defendants filed their Motion to Stay Proceedings and Compel
Arbitration, Mr. and Mrs. Picardy filed a first amended complaint which added
Douglas Coombs as a defendant. 
2 The Honorable Victoria S. Marks presided.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Staying Proceedings in Civil No. 09-1-0330.4
 
I.
 
SRM provides aviation support, security services,
 
property management, and administrative services for the Omidyar
 
family. SRM's headquarters and administrative offices, and the
 majority of its approximately sixty employees, including
 Defendant Anna Christian (Christian) and Defendant Douglas Coombs
 
5
(Coombs),  are based in Nevada.
At the time Mr. Picardy applied for employment with
 
SRM, he was a Special Agent with the Diplomatic Security Service
 for the United States Department of State (State Department) and
 was stationed at the American Embassy in Canberra, Australia. 
Mr. Picardy had been a Special Agent for the State Department
 since 1987 and had performed classified duties, including
 protective security, security operations management, criminal and
 administrative investigations, and terrorist threat and risk
 analysis. 
Mr. Picardy was informed of a job opening at SRM for
 
the position of Assistant Director of Security (Hawaii), which
 was based in Honolulu. 
Mr. Picardy applied for the position, and
 
was flown to Nevada for interviews with SRM. Although SRM
 originally quoted Mr. Picardy an annual salary of $140,000 for
 the position, he was able to negotiate a higher salary of
 $180,000. SRM offered Mr. Picardy the position, which it stated
 was an "at-will" position, meaning that either SRM or Mr. Picardy
 could terminate the employment at any time, with or without
 advance notice. SRM's offer was also conditioned on Mr. Picardy
 signing an Arbitration Agreement, which provided in relevant part
 
4
 After briefing was completed, we ordered Appeal Nos. 29824 and 29825
consolidated under Appeal No. 29825. 
5 In their first amended complaint, Mr. and Mrs. Picardy alleged on
information and belief that Christian and Coombs were residents of the State
 
of Nevada. Defendants also represented in the Circuit Court that Christian
and Coombs resided in Nevada. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that SRM and Mr. Picardy agreed "to arbitrate any dispute,
 
demand, claim, or controversy . . . they may have against each
 other . . . which arises from the employment relationship between
 [Mr. Picardy] and [SRM] or the termination thereof." 
Mr. Picardy accepted SRM's offer of employment and
 
signed the Arbitration Agreement. Mr. Picardy took early
 retirement from his federal employment and relocated with Mrs.
 Picardy and Erin to Honolulu. Four days after Mr. Picardy began
 work, SRM terminated his employment based on Mr. Picardy
 allegedly making inappropriate remarks of a sexual nature to
 other SRM employees. 
Mr. and Mrs. Picardy filed suit asserting claims for
 
wrongful discharge in violation of public policy, fraudulent
 inducement, and intentional infliction of emotional distress
 (IIED). Erin filed suit in a separate action asserting claims
 for fraud and intentional misrepresentation and IIED. In the
 action brought by Mr. and Mrs. Picardy, Defendants moved to stay
 the proceedings and compel arbitration. The Circuit Court orally
 granted the motion on March 18, 2009, and later issued its Order
 Staying Proceedings and Compelling Arbitration on April 14, 2009. 
The Circuit Court compelled Mr. Picardy to submit all his claims
 to arbitration pursuant to the Arbitration Agreement, and it
 stayed Mrs. Picardy's claims pending final resolution of all of
 Mr. Picardy's claims by arbitration.
 
In the action brought by Erin, Defendants moved to stay
 
the proceedings until Mr. Picardy's claims were resolved through
 arbitration. Defendants' motion was based on their argument that
 Erin's claims were derivative of Mr. Picardy's claims. The
 Circuit Court granted Defendants' motion. On April 15, 2009, the
 Circuit Court filed its Order Staying Proceedings, which stayed
 Erin's claims pending final resolution by arbitration of Mr.
 Picardy's claims. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
We resolve the issues raised on appeal by Mr. and Mrs.
 
Picardy as follows:
 
A.
 
Mr. and Mrs. Picardy argue that the Arbitration
 
Agreement is unconscionable because: (1) its forum selection
 
provision, which requires the arbitration to be conducted by an
 arbitrator in Nevada and Nevada law to govern the employment
 relationship, is unfair; (2) the provision that "[e]ach party
 shall bear its own fees, costs and expenses in the arbitration"
 is unfair; and (3) it lacks mutuality. Mr. and Mrs. Picardy
 contend that the Circuit Court erred in failing to determine that
 the Arbitration Agreement was an unenforceable contract of
 adhesion. We disagree.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has stated that "the 
proclaimed public policy of our legislature is to encourage arbitration as a means of settling differences and thereby avoid litigation." Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai' i 226, 232 
n.7, 921 P.2d 146, 152 n.7 (1996) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Under Hawai' i law, 
a contract that is "adhesive" -- in the sense that it is
 
drafted or otherwise proffered by the stronger of the
contracting parties on a "take it or leave it" basis -- is
unenforceable if two conditions are present: (1) the
contract is the result of coercive bargaining between
parties of unequal bargaining strength; and (2) the contract
unfairly limits the obligations and liabilities of, or
otherwise unfairly advantages, the stronger party.
 
Id. at 247, 921 P.2d at 167. Generally, the party challenging a
 
contract provision as unconscionable bears the burden of proving
 that the provision is unconscionable. E.g., Harris v. Green Tree
 
Fin. Corp., 183 F.3d 173, 181 (3d Cir. 1999); Rogers v. Royal
 Caribbean Cruise Line, 547 F.3d 1148, 1158 (9th Cir. 2008); Faber
 v. Menard, Inc., 367 F.3d 1048, 1053 (8th Cir. 2004).
 
Mr. and Mrs. Picardy argue that the Arbitration
 
Agreement's forum selection and costs provisions unfairly
 advantages SRM by requiring them to arbitrate the dispute in
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nevada, "a remote and inconvenient forum," and by imposing costs
 
that would make arbitration unduly expensive. We conclude that
 these arguments are without merit.
 
Prior to filing suit in Hawai' i, Mr. Picardy flew with 
Erin to Kansas City to have Erin take a test and look for possible housing. Mr. Picardy grew up in the Kansas City area and had family there. Mr. Picardy eventually bought a house and relocated to Kansas. Therefore, Nevada is not a "remote and inconvenient forum," but is closer and more easily accessible to Mr. Picardy and his family than Hawai' i. 
With respect to the costs of arbitration, the supreme 
court in Brown rejected the argument that arbitration is inherently unfair to employees because of "the allegedly greater costs of arbitration as compared to litigation[.]" Brown, 82 
Hawai'i at 246 n.23, 921 P.2d at 166 n.23. In addition, in this 
case, the Arbitration Agreement states that arbitration shall be conducted pursuant to the Employment Arbitration Rules of the American Arbitration Association (AAA). It appears that under these rules, SRM is required to pay all of the AAA administrative fees, hearing fees, hearing room rental fees, and the arbitrator's compensation. Furthermore, as the Circuit Court found, "SRM has further expressly agreed to pay all such fees plus AAA's deposit and filing fees," an agreement which we hold is binding on SRM. Under these circumstances, we conclude that Mr. and Mrs. Picardy have failed to show that the forum selection and cost provisions of the Arbitration Agreement unfairly advantages SRM or are unconscionable. 
Mr. and Mrs. Picardy argue that the Arbitration
 
Agreement is unconscionable because it lacks mutuality. The
 Arbitration Agreement excludes claims for equitable or injunctive
 relief based on a breach of the Employee Proprietary Information
 and Inventions Agreement. Mr. and Mrs. Picardy contend that
 although this exclusion authorizes both parties to bring such
 claims in court, it renders the Arbitration Agreement non-mutual
 because only SRM would pursue the excluded claims. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants assert that Mr. and Mrs. Picardy did not 
argue in the Circuit Court that the Arbitration Agreement lacked 
mutuality based on the excluded claims, and therefore, Mr. and Mrs. Picardy waived this argument. We agree. Our review of the record reveals that Mr. and Mrs. Picardy did not argue in the Circuit Court that the Arbitration Agreement lacked mutuality based on the excluded claims. Accordingly, we conclude that this argument was waived. See State v. Ildefonso, 72 Haw. 573, 584, 
827 P.2d 648, 655 (1992) (concluding that an argument not raised at trial was deemed to have been waived); State v. Moses, 102 Hawai'i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) ("As a general rule, if 
a party does not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal; this rule applies in both criminal and civil cases."). In any event, even if we were to consider Mr. and Mrs. Picardy's argument on the merits, we conclude that they have not met their burden of showing that the excluded claims render the Arbitration Agreement unconscionable. 
B.
 
We reject Mr. and Mrs. Picardy's contention that the 
Arbitration Agreement violates public policy in Hawai' i by 
requiring a dispute regarding employment in Hawai' i to be 
arbitrated with reference to Nevada law. The Hawai' i Supreme 
Court has upheld the validity of choice-of-law provisions in contracts. See Airgo, Inc. v. Horizon Cargo Transport, Inc., 66 
Haw. 590, 595, 670 P.2d 1277, 1281 (1983). In Airgo, the supreme court stated: 
One of the prime objectives of contract law is to protect
the justified expectations of the parties. When the parties
choose the law of a particular state to govern their
contractual relationship and the chosen law has some nexus
with the parties or the contract, that law will generally be
applied.
 
Id. 
Here, we conclude that there is a sufficient nexus with
 
Nevada to justify the choice-of-law provision in the Arbitration
 
Agreement. Among other things, SRM is headquartered in Nevada;
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the majority of its employees are located in Nevada; Mr. Picardy
 
interviewed for the job in Nevada; and Christian and Coombs,
 named as defendants by Mr. and Mrs. Picardy, reside in Nevada. 
In addition, Mr. and Mrs. Picardy do not explain how 
the application of Nevada law would differ from Hawai' i law, much 
less show that the application of Nevada law would diminish their ability to obtain relief. Thus, Mr. and Mrs. Picardy have not met their burden of showing that the Arbitration Agreement's choice-of-law provision violates Hawai' i public policy. 
C.
 
Mr. and Mrs. Picardy contend that the Arbitration
 
Agreement does not encompass Mr. Picardy's claim of fraudulent
 inducement. We disagree.
 
The Arbitration Agreement encompasses "any dispute,
 
demand, claim, or controversy . . . which arises from the
 employment relationship between [Mr. Picardy] and [SRM] or the
 termination thereof." The term "arise" means "[t]o originate; to
 stem (from)." Black's Law Dictionary 122 (9th ed. 2009). The
 
premise of Mr. Picardy's fraudulent inducement claim is that
 Defendants fraudulently induced him to work for SRM by allegedly
 knowingly or recklessly falsely misrepresenting that the position
 would be long-term.
6 This claim stems from and requires
 
evaluation of Defendants' intentions concerning the employment
 relationship. In addition, absent Mr. Picardy's acceptance of
 the employment offer and his subsequent termination, he would not
 have suffered damages on his claim. We conclude that Mr.
 Picardy's fraudulent inducement claim arises from the employment
 relationship between himself and SRM and therefore was covered by
 the Arbitration Agreement.
 D.
 
Mr. and Mrs. Picardy argue that Mr. Picardy was induced
 
6
 As noted in footnote 1, supra, Mr. and Mrs. Picardy added Coombs as a
 
defendant in their first amended complaint. The reference to "Defendants" in
 
this section II. C. and in section II. D., includes Coombs.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to sign the Arbitration Agreement by fraud. This argument is
 
without merit. Mr. and Mrs. Picardy's complaint and first
 amended complaint do not contain any allegation that would
 support a claim that Defendants misrepresented the terms of the
 Arbitration Agreement or that Mr. Picardy was misled concerning
 the nature or effect of the Arbitration Agreement. Mr. Picardy
 was clearly advised that his signing of the Arbitration Agreement
 was a condition of SRM's job offer. He was also advised by SRM
 to review the Arbitration Agreement carefully and was encouraged
 to discuss it with his legal counsel. The Circuit Court found
 that the misrepresentations alleged by Mr. Picardy that formed
 the basis of his fraudulent inducement claim pertained to his
 acceptance of employment with SRM in general, and were not
 directed at the Arbitration Agreement. We agree with the Circuit
 Court's assessment. We conclude that Mr. Picardy was not induced
 to sign the Arbitration Agreement by fraud.
 
III.
 
Erin argues that her claims were not derivative of the
 
claims of her father and therefore the Circuit Court erred in
 granting Defendants' Motion to Stay. We disagree.
 
The allegations in Erin's complaint closely track the 
allegations in her parents' original complaint and first amended complaint. Erin's complaint and her parents' original complaint name the same defendants. Erin claims that SRM made misrepresentations to her father, which her father then conveyed to her. Erin does not claim that Defendants made any misrepresentations to her directly. We conclude that Erin's claims are derivative of her father's claims and that the Circuit Court did not err in staying her case pending resolution of the arbitration of her father's claims. See Brown, 82 Hawai' i at 
243, 921 P.2d at 163 (staying wife's claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress and loss of consortium as derivative of husband's claims that were subject to arbitration because the viability of wife's claims was conditioned upon the employer's liability to husband). 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Order Staying Proceedings
 
and Compelling Arbitration in Civil No. 09-1-0290 and its Order
 
Staying Proceedings in Civil No. 09-1-0330.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 22, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
 
John F. Perkin
 
Brandee J.K. Faria Richard E. Wilson
 (Perkin & Faria)
for Plaintiff-Appellant
JOHN PICARDY and ELLEN PICARDY ERIN PICARDY
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Kelly G. LaPorte
David F.E. Banks Amanda M. Jones
 (Cades Schutte LLP)
for Defendants-Appellees
 Associate Judge
10
 