NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 28598
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
fI 
JOHN P. STEWART, Plaintiff-Appellant, v. STATE FARM MUTUAL
AUTOMOBILE COMPANY; UNITED STATES FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY; JOHN
DOES 1-25; JANE DOES 1-25, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-25; DOE
PARTNERSHIPS 1-25; and DOE JOINT VENTURES 1-25, Defendants-
Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 03-1-268)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant John P. Stewart (Stewart) appeals
 
from the May 17, 2007 judgment of the Circuit Court of the Third
 
1
Circuit, Hilo Division (circuit court),  entering summary
judgment in favor of Defendants-Appellees State Farm Mutual
 
and United States Fire
2
Automobile Insurance Company (State Farm)  
Insurance Company (USFIC) (collectively, Appellees) on Stewart's
 
claim that the insurers acted in bad faith in denying his claim
 
for underinsured motorist (UIM) insurance benefits arising from
 
an automobile accident caused by Argie Nance (Driver). 
On appeal, Stewart argues that the circuit court erred
 
in granting summary judgment based on its erroneous
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 
2
 State Farm notes that, contrary to the name listed in the case
caption, the company's name is State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
interpretation of Best Place, Inc. v. Penn Am. Ins. Co., 82 
Hawaifi 120, 133, 920 P.2d 334, 347 (1996), that "ordinarilly 
. . . a bad faith claim can arise only if the insurer owed the insured a duty to pay and the insurer delayed or denied payment." 
We agree that the circuit court's interpretation is wrong, 
because the Hawaif i Supreme Court, citing Best Place, has 
expressly held that, under some circumstances an insured may not be "precluded from bringing [a] bad faith claim even where there 
is no coverage liability on the underlying policy." Enoka v. AIG 
Hawaii Ins. Co., 109 Hawaif i 537, 552, 128 P.3d 850, 865 (2006). 
Nevertheless, where "the circuit court's decision is 
correct, its conclusion will not be disturbed on the ground that it gave the wrong reason for its ruling." Delos Reyes v. 
Kuboyama, 76 Hawaif i 137, 140, 870 P.2d 1281, 1284 (1994). We 
affirm the circuit court's grant of summary judgment in 
Appellees' favor where Stewart failed to establish a genuine 
issue of material fact that Appellees acted in bad faith. 
In Best Place, the Hawaif i Supreme Court said: 
[T]he tort of bad faith is not a tortious breach of
contract, but rather a separate and distinct wrong
 which
results from the breach of a duty imposed as a consequenceof the relationship established by contract. . . . As such,an insurer could be liable for the tort of bad faith for certain conduct where it would not be liable for a tortious breach of contract. 
82 Hawaif i at 131, 920 P.2d at 345 (emphasis added) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
The 
Enoka court acknowledged 
that Best Place did not answer "whether the tort of bad faith is 
recognized when the insurer has no contractual duty to pay 
benefits to the insured based on the clear and unambiguous 
language of the insurance policy[.]" 109 Hawaif i at 549, 128 
P.3d at 862. The court ruled that "[s]urely an insurer must act in good faith in dealing with its insured and in handling the 
insured's claim, even when the policy clearly and unambiguously 
excludes coverage." Id. at 552, 128 P.3d at 865. The circuit 
court's reason for granting summary judgment to Appellees was contrary to the holding in Enoka and was therefore erroneous. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Because this court may affirm the grant of summary 
judgment for any reason found in the record supporting 
affirmance, Delos Reyes, 76 Hawaif i at 140, 870 P.2d at 1284 
(1994), we consider whether Stewart sufficiently presented facts showing a genuine issue of material fact and therefore whether 
Appellees should have been denied summary judgment. See Hawaif i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56. 
In a first-party bad faith claim:
 
[T]he insured need not show a conscious awareness of wrongdoing or
unjustifiable conduct, nor an evil motive or intent to harm the
insured. . . . [C]onduct based on an interpretation of the
insurance contract that is reasonable does not constitute bad
 faith. In addition, an erroneous decision not to pay a claim for
benefits due under a policy does not by itself justify an award of
compensatory damages. Rather, the decision not to pay a claim must
be in "bad faith."
 
Best Place, 82 Hawaif i at 133, 920 P.2d at 347 (citations 
omitted). Clearly, "[a] reasonableness standard governs bad
 
faith claims." Guajardo v. AIG Hawaif i Ins. Co., 118 Hawaif i 196, 
206, 187 P.3d 580, 590 (2008).
 
Reasonableness can only constitute a question of law
suitable for summary judgment "when the facts are undisputedand not fairly susceptible of divergent inferences,"because, "[w]here, upon all the evidence, but one inferencemay reasonably be drawn, there is no issue for the jury."Courbat v. Dahana Ranch, Inc., 111 Hawaif i 254, 263, 141
P.3d 427, 436 (2006) (quoting Amfac, Inc. v. WaikikiBeachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 108, 839 P.2d 10, 24(1992)); see also Tran v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co.,999 F.Supp. 1369, 1373 (D. Haw. 1998) (concluding thatallegations of bad faith between insurer and insured overfair dealing and meaning of policy were "exactly the type ofissues, under Best Place, that the jury should consider, andones that should not be made by the court"). 
Id. (brackets omitted).
 
Because there is no bright line rule that defines how
 
insurers should investigate, what constitutes the necessary
 
investigation depends heavily on the terms of the policy, the
 
factual circumstances of the loss, and the applicable law. 
William T. Barker & Ronald D. Kent, New Appleman Insurance Bad
 
Faith Litigation ยง 5.04[1][a], [d] at 5-14, 5-21 (2d ed. 2010).
 
Stewart alleged that USFIC did not promptly and
 
thoroughly investigate his claim before consenting to Stewart's
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
settlement with Driver's insurer and instead relied on Driver's 
insurer to provide information. However, he makes no complaint 
with State Farm's pre-settlement investigation, although he 
claims State Farm "evidently did nothing," because State Farm 
gave its consent within one month of his request for consent to 
settle. The supreme court has advised that prior to consenting 
to a settlement, the "the UIM carrier's investigation should 
address factors such as the amount of assets held by the 
tortfeasor, the likelihood of recovery via subrogation, and the 
expenses and risks of litigating the insured's cause of action." 
Taylor v. Gov't Emps. Ins. Co., 90 Hawaif i 302, 311, 978 P.2d 
740, 749 (1999) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). See also Gov't Emps. Ins. Co. v. Dizol, 176 F. Supp. 2d 1005, 
1023 (D. Haw. 2001). The undisputed facts are that USFIC 
requested information from Stewart regarding his injuries and his 
lost wages, USFIC did an "asset check" of Driver, and an adjuster 
talked with Driver's insurance carrier and Driver's daughter to 
ascertain that Driver had few assets to satisfy a potential 
judgment. The pre-settlement investigation conducted here fits 
the guidelines for UIM investigations suggested by Taylor. 
Stewart contends that Appellees' investigation was
 
tortious where their adjusters did not contact him or his
 
treating physician. His reliance on Egan v. Mutual of Omaha Ins.
 
Co., 598 P.2d 452 (Cal. 1979), on this point is misplaced. In
 
Egan, the insurer conducted no independent investigation into the
 
medical basis for the insured's disability claim, the primary
 
issue in the case. Here, Appellees had an independent medical
 
exam (IME) performed on Stewart to investigate his injuries and
 
their source. Furthermore, they conducted their own
 
investigation into the case's primary issue, the amount of
 
Stewart's damages, by hiring their own economic consultant. 
Finally, Stewart presented no evidence of any industry standard
 
but only the usual practice of his claims-adjustment expert, Bill
 
Souza.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In his complaints related to claims-handling rather
 
than claim investigation, Stewart contends (1) that USFIC acted
 
unreasonably when it consented to Driver's offer to settle three
 
months after Stewart's request for the insurers' consent to
 
settle; (2) that the Appellees acted unreasonably by hiring an
 
attorney to handle the claim through arbitration and turning the
 
claim over to him, allegedly without doing their own
 
investigation first; (3) that Appellees unreasonably relied on
 
Dr. Clifford Lau's IME; and (4) that Appellees lied about the
 
policy limits. The second, third, and fourth complaints have no
 
merit.
 
Stewart presented no evidence that reasonable insurers
 
would not hire an attorney following a letter that simultaneously
 
demanded payment and arbitration. He provides no factual support
 
for his allegation that Appellees' appointed independent medical
 
examiner was biased and incompetent to give an opinion on the
 
apportionment of Stewart's injuries. Furthermore, Stewart also
 
failed to produce "facts as would be admissible in evidence,"
 
HRCP Rule 56(e), that Appellees lied to him about the policy
 
limits.
 
Stewart present a genuine issue of material fact as to 
whether USFIC acted unreasonably in waiting three months to give 
Stewart permission to settle with Driver and her insurer, 
especially in light of State Farm's faster agreement to settle. 
The circuit court declined to grant summary judgment to USFIC on 
this claim, but USFIC and Stewart stipulated to dismiss this 
claim with prejudice. Therefore, it is not before us on appeal. 
Cf. Standard Mgmt. Inc. v. Kekona, 99 Hawaif i 125, 131, 53 P.3d 
264, 270 (App. 2001) ("Generally, a trial court lacks continuing jurisdiction to settle disputes arising out of a settlement 
agreement that produced a stipulation to dismiss the underlying 
action with prejudice."). 
Even when considering the evidence in the record and
 
the inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to
 
Stewart, Stewart failed to present evidence sufficient to create
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a genuine issue of material fact tending to establish that 
Appellees committed bad faith in the handling or investigation of 
Stewart's UIM claim. Accordingly, summary judgment was 
appropriate. See Taylor, 90 Hawaif i at 305, 978 P.2d at 743. 
Therefore,
 The May 17, 2007 judgment of the Circuit Court of the
 
Third Circuit, Hilo Division, entering summary judgment in favor
 of Appellees and against Stewart, is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawaif i, February 10, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Phillip L. Carey,
for Plantiff-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Richard B. Miller Patricia Kehau Wall (Tom Petrus & Miller),for Defendant-Appellee StateFarm Mutual Automobile Associate Judge 
Insurance Company. 
Keith K. Hiraoka 
(Roeca, Louie & Hiraoka),for Defendant-Appellee UnitedStates Fire Insurance Company. Associate Judge 
6
 