NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29774
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ALAN D. URIE, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR OF THE COURTS, STATE OF HAWAI 'I,
Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(JR No. 1DAA-09-0002; Original Case No. 08-04412)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard, J., and
Circuit Judge Ayabe, in place of Foley, Fujise,
Reifurth, and Ginoza, JJ., all recused)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Alan D. Urie (Urie) appeals from 
the Judgment on Appeal (Judgment) entered on March 9, 2009, by 
the District Court of the First Circuit (district court).1 The 
district court affirmed the administrative revocation of Urie's driver's license by Respondent-Appellee Administrative Director of the Courts, State of Hawai
'i (Director), acting through a 
hearing officer of the Administrative Driver's License Revocation Office (ADLRO).
2 
On appeal, Urie argues that the district court erred in
 
affirming the decision of the ADLRO hearing officer because
 "[t]he hearing officer unlawfully increased Urie's license
 revocation period in retaliation for [Urie's] request for a
 hearing without due process and without sufficient basis in the
 
1/ The Honorable William A. Cardwell presided.
 
2/ Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-1 (2007) states that "'Director'
means the administrative director of the courts or any other person within the
judiciary appointed by the director to conduct administrative reviews or
hearings or carry out other functions relating to administrative revocation
under part III [entitled 'Administrative Revocation Process']." 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record to justify such an increase." We disagree with Urie's
 
arguments and affirm the district court.
 
I.
 
Officer Albert Lee (Officer Lee) observed Urie driving
 
through the intersection of South King Street and Kalakaua Avenue
 at 11:44 p.m. on August 27, 2008. Urie's vehicle was traveling
 at a high rate of speed, which Officer Lee estimated was
 substantially in excess of the speed limit. Officer Lee noticed
 that Urie did not slow down for other cars attempting to enter
 the roadway or maneuvering into or out of parking stalls on the
 same side of the roadway. Officer Lee also observed Urie's
 vehicle straddle an adjacent lane. Officer Lee stopped Urie's
 vehicle at the intersection of South King Street and Hauoli
 Street.
 
Urie had a strong odor of alcohol, his eyes were red,
 
watery, and glassy, and he was unsteady on his feet. Urie
 refused to take the standardized field sobriety test and said he
 knew he would fail the test because he had been drinking all
 night. 
II.
 
Judicial review of the Director's decision to
 
administratively revoke a driver's license is governed by Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-40 (2007). HRS § 291E-40(c)
 provides: 
(c) The sole issues before the court shall be
 
whether the [D]irector:
 
(1) Exceeded constitutional or statutory authority; 
(2) Erroneously interpreted the law; 
(3) Acted in an arbitrary or capricious manner; 
(4) Committed an abuse of discretion; or 
(5) Made a determination that was unsupported by the
evidence in the record. 
This is a secondary appeal from the district court's
 
review of the Director's decision to administratively revoke
 
Urie's driver's license. The standard for reviewing the district
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court's decision is the right/wrong standard. Brune v. Admin. 
Dir. of Courts, 110 Hawai 'i 172, 176-177, 130 P.3d 1037, 1041-42 
(2006). 
III.
 
A.
 
Urie's contention that the hearing officer unlawfully
 
increased Urie's license revocation period in retaliation for
 
Urie's request for a hearing is without merit. The
 administrative review officer, acting on behalf of the Director,
3
 
had imposed a one-year revocation of Urie's license. Prior to
 proceeding with the formal hearing, the hearing officer advised
 Urie that based on her review of the existing record, she was
 inclined to increase the revocation period to two years. The
 hearing officer cited the fact that Urie's current arrest had
 occurred "just eight months" after he had been adjudicated on his
 prior alcohol enforcement contact and referred to Urie as posing
 a "public safety hazzard." The hearing officer gave Urie the
 option of waiving the hearing, and thereby submitting to the one-
year revocation period imposed by the administrative review
 officer, or proceeding with the hearing. 
Urie decided to proceed with the hearing. At the
 
conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer revoked Urie's
 driver's license for two years. The hearing officer made the
 following findings in support of her decision to revoke Urie's
 license for two years:
 
This Hearing Officer finds that the record reflects,
among other things, that [Urie] was traveling intoxicated at
a high rate of speed on a week night and could have caused
more than a few accidents. This Hearing Officer finds that
coupled with the 2008 alcohol enforcement contact (January
16, 2008), it appears that [Urie] poses a significant
traffic safety hazard on the public roadways, and the
revocation period shall be two years.
 
The record does not support Urie's argument that the
 
hearing officer retaliated against Urie for demanding a hearing. 
The hearing officer explained that her statements regarding her
 
3/ See footnote 2, supra. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
pre-hearing inclination to increase the period of revocation were
 
not intended as a threat to retaliate against Urie for requesting
 a hearing, but simply represented her providing Urie with notice
 of her inclination based upon her review of the existing record. 
As the district court found:
 
The Hearing Officer was simply providing guidance to [Urie]
and his attorney for their use in deciding to proceed with
the hearing. The Hearing Officer could not know what facts
or argument [Urie] may have had to rebut the record as it
stood at that point. Only [Urie] and his attorney knew his
case. Attempting to assist [Urie] in making a decision
whether or not to proceed with a hearing is not punishment
for proceeding.
 
B. 
Urie contends that the hearing officer was not 
authorized to increase the revocation period set by the 
administrative review officer where (1) there was no new evidence presented at the hearing, but (2) even less evidence because the hearing officer struck the intoxilyzer test results. Urie further contends that the hearing officer could not rely on the fact that Urie was a repeat offender to increase Urie's revocation period. We conclude that Urie's contentions lack merit. 
In 2005, the Hawai
'i Supreme in Custer v. Admin. Dir. 
of the Courts
, 108 Hawai 'i 350, 356, 120 P.3d 249, 255 (2005), 
held that under the then-existing statutes, the Director, acting through an ADLRO hearing officer during the administrative hearing process, did not have the authority to increase the period of revocation imposed by the administrative review decision. In 2006, the Legislature amended HRS § 291E-38 to expressly authorize the Director, acting through an ADLRO hearing officer, to impose up to the maximum period of revocation during the administrative hearing process. 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 201, § 4 at p. 866. The amendment added subsection (d)(6) which states: "The [D]irector shall conduct the hearing and have authority to: . . . (6) Impose up to the maximum license
 revocation period as specified under section 291E-41(b)[.]" HRS
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 291E-38(d)(6) (2007). HRS § 291E-38(d)(6) does not limit the
 
circumstances under which the Director, acting through an ADLRO
 hearing officer, is authorized to impose up to the maximum period
 of revocation. We conclude that pursuant to HRS § 291E-38, the
 hearing officer was authorized to increase Urie's period of
 revocation to two years.
 
We reject Urie's argument that because HRS § 291E-41
 
(2007) provides for an increased maximum period of revocation for
 a repeat offender, the hearing officer could not rely upon Urie's
 status as repeat offender to increase his revocation period. It
 is Urie's status as a repeat offender that subjects him to the
 increased two-year revocation period. The Legislature
 specifically authorized the increased revocation period for
 repeat offenders. We see no reason why the hearing officer could
 not rely on Urie's status as a repeat offender to impose the
 increased revocation period.
 
In any event, the record demonstrates that the hearing
 
officer relied upon more than Urie's mere status as a repeat
 offender. The hearing officer cited both (1) Urie's dangerous
 conduct at the time of his arrest ("traveling intoxicated at a
 high rate of speed on a week night and could have caused more
 than a few accidents") and (2) the short time between his arrest
 and his prior alcohol enforcement contact as support for her
 decision to increase Urie's revocation period.
 
C.
 
Finally, Urie argues that the Director's failure to
 
promulgate rules establishing criteria for an ADLRO hearing
 officer to increase the revocation period violates due process. 
We disagree. Here, the hearing officer provided a written
 justification for her decision to increase Urie's revocation
 period, and her decision was supported by the record. We
 conclude that Urie's due process rights were not violated.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
The March 9, 2009, Judgment of the district court is
 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 28, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Earle A. Partington
for Petitioner-Appellant Chief Judge 
Rebecca A. CopelandDeputy Solicitor Generalfor Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge 
Acting Associate Judge
 
6
 