 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--– 
NO. 28431 
STATE OF HAWAI
'I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
vs. 
ROBERT JOHN McKNIGHT, JR., also known as atropical_knight,
Defendant-Appellee.
 
AND
 
NO. 28901
 
STATE OF HAWAI
'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
vs.
 
ROBERT JOHN McKNIGHT, JR., also known as atropical_knight,
Defendant-Appellant.
 
NOS. 28431 & 28901
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 06-1-0352(1))
 
JANUARY 31, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND FOLEY AND FUJISE, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Robert John McKnight, Jr. (McKnight), who was 37 years
 
old, met and chatted over the internet with "Chyla," who stated
 
that she was a 15-year-old girl. 
Their internet chats involved
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
McKnight's "teaching" "Chyla" about sex and discussing various 
sexual acts which McKnight would be willing to perform with "Chyla." On two occasions, McKnight used a web camera to show himself masturbating during chats with "Chyla." Unbeknownst to McKnight, "Chyla" was actually Special Agent Vincente Domingo (Agent Domingo), acting in an undercover capacity as a member of the Hawai' i Internet Crimes Against Children Task Force. 
McKnight arranged to meet "Chyla" in person. He
 
purchased a ticket for "Chyla" to fly from Honolulu to Maui and
 agreed to pick her up at the Kahului Airport. McKnight drove his
 car to the Kahului Airport at the scheduled arrival time for
 "Chyla's" flight, and he was arrested. After his arrest,
 McKnight gave a statement to Agent Domingo about McKnight's
 communications with "Chyla." Agent Domingo then prepared,
 obtained, and executed a search warrant for McKnight's residence. 
Over one hundred images of suspected child pornography were
 recovered from computer hard drives and floppy disks seized
 pursuant to the search warrant.
 
McKnight was charged with electronic enticement of a
 
child in the first degree (Count 1) and promoting child abuse in
 the third degree (Count 2). Count 2 was based on the child
 pornography evidence obtained pursuant to the search warrant.
 Prior to trial, the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit
 
1
Court)  granted McKnight's motions to suppress his statement to
Agent Domingo and the evidence seized pursuant to the search warrant. The State of Hawai' i (State) moved to sever Count 1 
from Count 2, so that it could proceed to trial on Count 1 and appeal the Circuit Court's suppression of evidence that was critical to Count 2. The Circuit Court granted the State's motion and severed the counts. After a trial on Count 1, the jury found McKnight guilty as charged of first-degree electronic enticement of a child. The Circuit Court sentenced McKnight to 
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided .
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
five years of probation, subject to the condition that he serve
 
one year in jail.
 
In these consolidated appeals, McKnight appeals from
 
the Circuit Court's "Judgment Guilty Conviction and Probation
 Sentence" (Judgment) in Appeal No. 28901, and the State appeals
 from the Circuit Court's "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law
 and Order Granting Defendant's Motion to Suppress Statement as
 Involuntary and Granting Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence
 Seized Pursuant to Invalid Warrant" (Suppression Order) in Appeal
 No. 28431. 
In McKnight's appeal, he argues: (1) the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion in permitting the jury to view the scenes
 of McKnight masturbating that were transmitted to "Chyla"; (2)
 the Circuit Court plainly erred in instructing the jury on the
 elements for the offense of first-degree electronic enticement of
 a child; and (3) there was insufficient evidence to support
 McKnight's conviction or indictment for first-degree electronic
 enticement of a child because the State failed to show that he
 used a computer or other electronic device to travel to the
 airport. 
In the State's appeal, it argues: (1) the Circuit Court
 
erred in concluding that the search warrant was invalid and
 suppressing evidence recovered pursuant to the search warrant on
 the ground that the judge issuing the warrant had misdated it;
 (2) the Circuit Court erred in suppressing McKnight's
 
inculpatory statements on the ground that McKnight had not
 validly waived his Miranda rights. 
For the reasons set forth below, we affirm McKnight's 
conviction for first-degree electronic enticement of a child. We vacate the Circuit Court's Suppression Order and remand the case for further proceedings. In vacating the Circuit Court's Suppression Order, we overrule our prior decision in State v. Endo, 83 Hawai' i 87, 924 P.2d 581 (App. 1996), where we held 
under similar circumstances that a misdated search warrant was 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
invalid. The Circuit Court relied upon Endo in suppressing the
 
search warrant evidence.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Agent Domingo, posing as 15-year-old girl named 
"Chyla," entered an internet chat room with the heading "Romance," using the screen name "Chyla808." McKnight, using the screen name "atropical_knight," contacted "Chyla," and they began chatting online. During their initial chat, "Chyla" stated that she was a 15-year-old girl who lived on O' ahu. McKnight stated 
that he was 37 years old and lived on Maui. Their chat conversation turned to sex. McKnight recounted the number of women he had sex with and asked "Chyla" if she was still a virgin. "Chyla" responded that she was a virgin and did not know much about sex. 
Between June 13, and July 5, 2006, McKnight and "Chyla"
 
communicated nine times through internet chats with the use of
 their computers, and three times over the telephone. For the
 telephone conversations, Special Agent Woletta Kim (Agent Kim)
 assumed the role of "Chyla" and used a voice modulator to sound
 like a fifteen-year-old girl. "Chyla" repeatedly advised
 McKnight that she was fifteen years old. The internet chats were
 sexual in nature, with McKnight "teaching" "Chyla" about sexual
 matters such as arousal, masturbation, and various sexual acts he
 would perform with her if she was willing. 
On two occasions, McKnight used his web camera to show
 
himself masturbating while chatting online with "Chyla." 
McKnight discussed "Chyla's" coming to visit him on Maui and the
 various sexual acts they could engage in with each other.
 
McKnight offered to pay for "Chyla" to fly from O' ahu 
to Maui, and "Chyla" accepted McKnight's invitation. "Chyla" explained that she told her mother that she would be staying with a friend and the friend's family on Maui. McKnight purchased a ticket for "Chyla" and agreed to pick her up at the Kahului Airport when she arrived on July 6th. McKnight told "Chyla" that 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
he would be driving a light blue Nissan Xterra and gave her his
 
license plate number. On July 6th, McKnight drove a Nissan
 Xterra, matching the description and license plate number he had
 given to "Chyla," to the Kahului Airport at the scheduled arrival
 time for "Chyla's" flight. McKnight was arrested at the airport
 when he got out of the vehicle by Agent Domingo, Agent Kim, and
 Maui police officers.
 
II.
 
A.
 
McKnight was transported to the police station in
 
Wailuku and placed in an interview room. Agent Domingo reviewed
 the Miranda rights with McKnight through the use of an advice-of­constitutional-rights form. Among other things, the form states,
 "You have a right to counsel (attorney) of your choice or to talk
 to anyone else you may want to"; "You also have a right to have
 an attorney present while I talk to you"; and "If you cannot
 afford to hire an attorney, the court will appoint one for you." 
When asked if he wanted an attorney, McKnight requested an
 attorney. Agent Domingo did not ask McKnight any further
 questions and left the room to confer with Agent Kim. Agent
 Domingo talked to Agent Kim about whether he could ask McKnight
 for a description of his residence because Agent Domingo planned
 to obtain a search warrant for the residence. The agents decided
 that asking for a description would be permissible because they
 did not view it as interrogation about the case. 
Agent Domingo re-entered the interview room a short
 
time after he had left. Upon Agent Domingo's re-entry, McKnight
 asked if he could call his mother. Agent Domingo refused this
 request, stating that the agents were still investigating the
 case. Agent Domingo was concerned that McKnight would signal his
 mother to dispose of his computer before Agent Domingo could
 obtain a search warrant.
2 McKnight then asked Agent Domingo what
 
was going to happen next. Agent Domingo replied that "we are
 
2
 It turned out that McKnight lived with his mother.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
going to do a search warrant on [your] residence." In response,
 
McKnight said that he changed his mind, that he did not realize
 the severity of the crime, and that he wanted to give a
 statement.
 
After McKnight said that he was willing to provide a
 
statement, Agent Domingo began recording the interview. During
 the beginning of the interview, McKnight asked if Agent Domingo
 would allow McKnight to call his mother after the interview was
 over. They discussed this subject as follows:
 
[McKnight]:  . . . Now, will -- after this is done,
will you allow me to call my mother?
 
[Agent Domingo]: Again, I am not going to promise you
anything. Okay? There's no promises or anything. If you
want to give a statement or not, that's strictly up to you.
Okay. Again, I know you stopped, you stopped us, okay, that
you said you changed your mind at this point, and -- but,
again, I am not going to -- I can't promise you anything.
There's no promises or guarantees, okay, at this stage.
 
[McKnight]: Okay.
 
[Agent Domingo]: Do you still want to talk to me?
 [McKnight]: Not unless I go let my mother know.
 [Agent Domingo]: Again, I can't promise you anything.
Like I told you, there's no promises or -- -- I can't give
-- say, okay, I'll -- I'll let you do this if you give me a
statement. There's nothing like that. There's no promises,
no guarantees. If you want to give me a statement, like you
told me that, you know, you changed your mind, because you
didn't realize the severity of the crime, then, fine. But,
again, I can't promise you anything. You've got to tell me
what you want to do, Robert.
 
[McKnight]: Go ahead.
 
[Agent Domingo]: What?
 [McKnight]: Go ahead.
 [Agent Domingo]: Go ahead, what?
 [McKnight]: Continue.
 [Agent Domingo]: You want to continue?
 [McKnight]: Yes.
 [Agent Domingo]: You sure now?
 [McKnight]: Yes.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Agent Domingo]: Again, I'm not promising you or
guaranteeing you anything.
 
[McKnight]: Yes.
 
[Agent Domingo]: You understand that? Are you sure?
 [McKnight]: Yes.
 
There was a lengthy pause after Agent Domingo asked
 
McKnight what he wanted to do before McKnight responded that he
 
wanted to "[g]o ahead" with the interview. Agent Domingo
 reviewed with McKnight the circumstances regarding McKnight's
 initial request for an attorney and subsequent decision to
 provide a statement: 
[Agent Domingo]: Okay. Okay, Robert, I had read you
your constitutional rights, I showed you the constitutional
rights form earlier?
 
[McKnight]: It's that, yes.
 
[Agent Domingo]: And at that time you said you
understood it, that you wanted an attorney, is that correct,
when you first read it?
 
[McKnight]: When I first read it, yes.
 
[Agent Domingo]: Yes. Okay. We were packing up, you
decided that you changed your mind, you want to give a
statement now, is that correct?
 
[McKnight]: Yes.
 
[Agent Domingo]: Okay. You told me that it's because
 
you didn't understand the severity of the crime, is that
correct?
 
[McKnight]: Yes.
 
[Agent Domingo]: Okay. Did I force you in any way to
make a statement?
 
[McKnight]: Force me, no.
 [Agent Domingo]: Did I promise you or guarantee you
anything in return -­
[McKnight]: No.
 [Agent Domingo]: -- for a statement?
 [McKnight]: No.
 [Agent Domingo]: Is there any reason why you could
not make a statement?
 
[McKnight]: At this time, no.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Agent Domingo]: Were you threatened or coerced in
any way to make a statement?
 
[McKnight]: No.
 
[Agent Domingo]: Okay. Again, this statement
you are about to give, is that of your own freewill?
 
[McKnight]: Yes.
 [Agent Domingo]: You still want to make the
 
statement, is that correct?
 
[McKnight]: Yes.
 [Agent Domingo]: Okay. Again, Robert, it's strictly
up to you. It's your decision again, Robert, like I told
you, I'm not promising or guaranteeing you anything. You
 understand that?
 
[McKnight]: I understand.
 
Agent Domingo presented a second advice-of­
constitutional-rights form to McKnight and reviewed the form with
 
him. McKnight acknowledged understanding his rights, initialed
 the advice-of-rights portion of the form, answered "no" to the
 question "Do you want an attorney now?", and signed the form,
 thereby signifying the waiver of his rights, including his right
 to an attorney. During the interview, McKnight made
 incriminating statements about his relationship with "Chyla." 
Among other things, McKnight admitted to chatting with "Chyla"
 over the internet; that "Chyla" informed McKnight that she was 15
 years old; that using a web camera, McKnight twice sent images of
 himself masturbating to "Chyla"; that he purchased a plane ticket
 for "Chyla" to travel from Honolulu to Maui; that he went to the
 airport to pick up "Chyla"; and that during their online chats,
 McKnight discussed engaging in sexual acts with "Chyla" when she
 came to Maui.
 
B.
 
After taking McKnight's statement, Agent Domingo
 
prepared a search warrant to search McKnight's residence and car
 and an affidavit in support of the warrant. He presented the
 search warrant and accompanying affidavit to Judge Simone Polak
 on July 6, 2006, the same day that McKnight was arrested. The
 
8
              FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
warrant stated in pertinent part: "This warrant may be served
 
and the search made on or before July 16, 2006, a date not to
 exceed ten (10) days from the issuance of this search warrant 
. . . ." Agent Domingo's affidavit in support of the search
 warrant also stated in pertinent part: 
That your affiant commenced the actual physical
mechanics of preparing this affidavit and attached search
warrant at 1330 hours, on July 06, 2006 . . . .
 
. . . .
 
Therefore your affiant requests that this warrant
contain a direction that it shall be executed on or before
 
July 16, 2006, a date not to exceed ten (10) days from the
issuance of this search warrant . . . ."
 
Although the search warrant and the supporting
 
affidavit were submitted on July 6, 2006, and sought authority to
 
execute the warrant for a period of ten days until July 16, 2006,
 Judge Polak misdated the warrant as having been being signed by
 her on June 6, 2006. The ending portion of the search warrant,
 which was signed by Judge Polak, provided:
 
This warrant may be served and the search made on or
before    July 16, 2006 , a date not to exceed ten (10)
days from the issuance of this search warrant, between the
time(s) indicated below by (an) “X”(s):
 XX  6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
10:00
 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND, and dated this   6th day of
June , 2006, at Wailuku ,
County of Maui, State of Hawaii.
 [signature of Judge Polak]
JUDGE OF THE ABOVE-ENTITLED COURT
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
Judge Polak also misdated and signed Agent Domingo's affidavit as
 
having been "[s]ubscribed and sworn to before [her]" on the "
6th
 
day of June, 2006, at 7:50 P.M."
 
The search warrant was executed on July 6, 2006. From 
McKnight's residence, agents recovered, among other things,
 computer hard drives and floppy disks. Robert Jahier (Jahier), a
 computer forensic examiner for the Attorney General's Office, 
9
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
examined this evidence and found over one hundred "graphic files
 
of suspected child pornography."
 
III.
 
McKnight was indicted by a grand jury and charged with 
first-degree electronic enticement of a child, in violation of
 
3
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-756 (Supp. 2006)  (Count 1),
and third-degree promoting child abuse, in violation of HRS 
3 At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 707-756 (Supp. 2006)
provided, in pertinent part, as follows:
 
§707-756 Electronic enticement of a child in the first
 
degree. (1) Any person who, using a computer or any other
electronic device:
 
(a) 	Intentionally or knowingly communicates:
 
(i) 	With a minor known by the person to be under the
age of eighteen years;
 
(ii) 	With another person, in reckless disregard of
the risk that the other person is under the age
of eighteen years, and the other person is under
the age of eighteen years; or
 
(iii) With another person who represents that person
to be under the age of eighteen years; and
 
(b) 	With the intent to promote or facilitate the
commission of a felony:
 
(i) 	That is a murder in the first or second degree;
 
(ii) 	That is a class A felony; or
 (iii) That is an offense defined in section 846E-1;
 agrees to meet with the minor, or with another person who
represents that person to be a minor under the age of
eighteen years; and
 
(c) 	Intentionally or knowingly travels to the agreed upon
meeting place at the agreed upon meeting time;
 
is guilty of electronic enticement of a child in the first degree.
 
The current version of HRS § 707-756(1) (Supp. 2010) is the same except
that the "and" between subsections (1)(a) and 1(b) has been deleted and
subsection (1)(b)(iii) has been amended to read: "That is another covered
offense as defined in section 846E-1,". See 2008 Haw. Sess. Laws, Act 80 § 3,
 
at 228.
 
10
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
4
§ 707-752(1)(a) (Supp. 2010)  (Count 2).  McKnight filed a motion
 
to suppress his statement to Agent Domingo and a motion to
 
suppress the evidence seized pursuant to the search warrant. 
An
 
evidentiary hearing was held on McKnight's motions, and Agent
 Domingo and Jahier were the only witnesses who testified. 
The Circuit Court granted both motions to suppress and 
issued its Suppression Order on February 1, 2007. 
The Circuit 
Court suppressed McKnight's tape-recorded statement to Agent Domingo on the ground that "the State has not carried its burden of proof in showing that [McKnight's] waiver of his Miranda rights was voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently made." With respect to the search warrant evidence, the Circuit Court concluded that the search warrant, including the search for child pornography, was supported by probable cause. However, based on this court's decision in Endo, 83 Hawai' i 87, 924 P.2d 581, the 
Circuit Court ruled that because Judge Polak had misdated the search warrant as being issued on June 6, 2006, instead of July 6, 2006, the warrant became facially invalid on June 16, 2006, ten days after its erroneous issuance date. The Circuit Court suppressed the evidence recovered during the execution of the search warrant on July 6, 2006, on the ground that the evidence had been seized pursuant to an invalid warrant. 
The Circuit Court granted the State's motion to sever
 
Count 1 from Count 2. The State filed a notice of appeal from
 the Suppression Order, and it proceeded to trial on the Count 1
 charge of first-degree electronic enticement of a child. The
 jury returned a verdict of guilty as charged on Count 1, and the
 Circuit Court filed its Judgment regarding Count 1 on November
 14, 2007. McKnight appeals from that Judgment. 
4
 HRS § 707-752(1)(a) provides, in pertinent part, as follows:
 
[§707-752] Promoting child abuse in the third degree.
(1) A person commits the offense of promoting child abuse in the
third degree if, knowing or having reason to know its character
and content, the person possesses:
 
(a) Child pornography[.]
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
We first address McKnight's appeal of his conviction
 
for first-degree electronic enticement of a child. 
A.
 
During McKnight's chats with "Chyla," McKnight on two
 
occasions sent live images showing himself masturbating via his
 
web camera to "Chyla." Agent Domingo used a computer program to
 capture these images in video form. Over McKnight's objection,
 the State was permitted to introduce videos of McKnight
 masturbating for "Chyla" at trial. 
McKnight argues that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in permitting the jury to view the videos of McKnight
 masturbating. He claims that the videos of the masturbation
 scenes should have been excluded pursuant to Hawaii Rules of
 Evidence (HRE) Rule 403 (1993), which provides in pertinent part
 that "[a]lthough relevant, evidence may be excluded if its
 probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of
 unfair prejudice[.]" We disagree.
 
A trial court's evidentiary decisions based on HRE Rule 
403 require a judgment call and are reviewed for an abuse of discretion. State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 37, 960 P.2d 1227, 
1245 (1998). An abuse of discretion occurs when "the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or has disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." State v. Lee, 90 Hawai' i 130, 
134, 976 P.2d 444, 448 (1999) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
The video evidence of McKnight showing himself
 
masturbating for "Chyla" was extremely probative of his intent to
 promote or facilitate the commission of one of the predicate
 felonies necessary to prove first-degree electronic enticement of
 a child. The State prosecuted McKnight under the theory that he
 intended to promote or facilitate the commission of the predicate
 felony of first-degree sexual assault or third-degree sexual
 
12
  
  
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
assault of a minor who is at least fourteen years old but less
 
than sixteen years old.5
 
The videos of McKnight masturbating for "Chyla"
 
provided direct and compelling evidence of McKnight's intent to
 engage in sexual activity with "Chyla," a critical issue in the
 case. It provided clear and unambiguous evidence of McKnight's
 motives and desires regarding his relationship with "Chyla" and
 showed the extreme actions McKnight was willing to undertake in
 order to entice "Chyla." In denying McKnight's motion to exclude
 
5 To establish the offense of first-degree electronic enticement of a
child as charged against McKnight, the State was required to prove that
McKnight intended "to promote or facilitate the commission of a felony . . .
[t]hat is an offense defined in Section 846E-1." HRS § 707-756 (1) (b) (Supp.
2006). First-degree sexual assault of a minor who is at least fourteen years
old but less than sixteen years old, in violation of HRS § 707-730(1)(c)
(Supp. 2010), and third-degree sexual assault of such a minor, in violation of
HRS § 707-732(1)(c) (Supp. 2010), both qualify as felony offenses defined in
HRS § 846E-1.
 
HRS § 707-730(1)(c) provides:
 
§707-730 Sexual assault in the first degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of sexual assault in the first degree if:
 
. . . .
 
(c)	 The person knowingly engages in sexual penetration
with a person who is at least fourteen years old but
less than sixteen years old; provided that:
 
(i) 	The person is not less than five years older
than the minor; and
 
(ii) 	The person is not legally married to the
minor[.]
 
HRS § 707-732(1)(c) provides:
 
§707-732 Sexual assault in the third degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of sexual assault in the third degree if:
 
. . . .
 
(c) 	The person knowingly engages in sexual contact with a
person who is at least fourteen years old but less
than sixteen years old or causes the minor to have
sexual contact with the person; provided that:
 
(i) 	The person is not less than five years older
than the minor; and
 
(ii) 	The person is not legally married to the
minor[.]
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the masturbation videos, the Circuit Court cited the State's
 
position that the videos were the best evidence of what took
 place and found that the videos were part of the res gestae.
 
The probative value of the videos was heightened by
 
McKnight's defense of entrapment. In opening statement, McKnight
 suggested that he was induced by law enforcement to engage in the
 charged criminal conduct. McKnight referred to his chats with
 "Chyla" as taking place in an "anonymous fantasy land" and
 contended that this case would have stayed in "some electronic
 never, never land, but for the encouragement of the Attorney
 General's investigators[.]" The videos showing McKnight
 masturbating for "Chyla" served to refute McKnight's entrapment
 claim. It demonstrated that, motivated by his own sexual desire,
 McKnight's intent went beyond simply engaging in an anonymous
 fantasy and that he intended to engage in real-life sexual
 activity with a minor; that he was ready and willing to commit
 the charged offense; and that his criminal conduct was not simply
 the product of inducement or encouragement by law enforcement. 
McKnight argues that the masturbation videos were
 
unfairly prejudicial because the State had other means of proving
 McKnight's intent to have sex with "Chyla," such as the content
 of McKnight's chats with "Chyla" and Agent Domingo's testimony
 describing McKnight's masturbation. We are not persuaded. A
 picture, or in this case the videos, are worth a thousand words. 
The masturbation videos were the strongest evidence of McKnight's
 intent to engage in sexual activity with "Chyla." They provided 
an accurate depiction of McKnight's actual conduct and insight
 into McKnight's state of mind that could not be reproduced by
 other evidence. Indeed, McKnight does not dispute that the
 masturbation videos were the most effective means of proving
 McKnight's intent to engage in sexual activity with "Chyla." 
"Probative evidence always 'prejudices' the party
 
against whom it is offered since it tends to prove the case
 against that person." State v. Klafta, 73 Haw. 109, 115, 831
 
P.2d 512, 516 (1992). HRE Rule 403, however, is only concerned
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
with evidence that presents a danger of "unfair prejudice" or "an
 
undue tendency to suggest decision on an improper basis,
 commonly, though not necessarily, an emotional one." HRE Rule
 403 cmt. (emphasis added). In this case, any danger of unfair
 prejudice from the masturbation videos was significantly
 diminished by the manner in which the Circuit Court conducted the
 jury selection. During jury selection, the Circuit Court and
 defense counsel advised the potential jurors that the trial
 evidence would include graphic video containing nudity and sexual
 acts. Defense counsel was permitted to question the potential
 jurors about whether such evidence would make them uncomfortable
 or prevent them from fairly evaluating the evidence. Defense
 counsel also asked if anyone would be unable to follow the
 court's instructions on the law because they felt that the act of
 broadcasting oneself doing a sexual act was morally wrong. None
 of the prospective jurors indicated that viewing video of this
 nature would make them uncomfortable, render them unable to
 follow the court's instructions, or prevent them from being fair
 and impartial.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 
discretion (1) in determining that the probative value of the
 challenged masturbation videos was not substantially outweighed
 by the danger of unfair prejudice and (2) in admitting such
 evidence. See Phillips v. State, 604 S.E.2d 520, 528 (Ga. Ct.
 
App. 2004) (concluding that the trial court did not abuse its
 discretion in admitting video of defendant masturbating which was
 linked to the crime charged).
 
B. 
McKnight argues that the Circuit Court plainly erred in
 
instructing the jury on the elements for the offense of first-
degree electronic enticement of a child. McKnight asserts that
 the Circuit Court's instruction departs from the clear structure
 and plain language of HRS § 707-756(1), which defines the offense
 of first-degree electronic enticement of a child. In particular,
 McKnight reads HRS § 707-756(1) as requiring proof that a
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
defendant used a computer or electronic device to accomplish each
 
of the acts necessary to commit the offense, including traveling
 to the agreed upon meeting place at the agreed upon meeting time. 
We disagree with McKnight's construction of HRS § 707-756(1)
 because it conflicts with the Legislature's intent and would lead
 to absurd results, and we conclude that the Circuit Court's jury
 instruction was not improper. 
In construing a statute, "'our foremost obligation is 
to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the legislature, which is obtained primarily from the language contained in the statutes themselves.'" State v. Cornelio, 84 Hawai' i 476, 484, 
935 P.2d 1021, 1029 (1997). "'[W]e must read statutory language in the context of the entire statute and construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.'" Id. "In other words, 'the reason 
and spirit of the law, and the cause which induced the legislature to enact it, may be considered to discover its true meaning.'" Id. (block quote format and brackets omitted) 
(quoting HRS § 1-15(2) (2009)). In addition, "'the legislature is presumed not to intend an absurd result, and legislation will be construed to avoid, if possible, inconsistency, contradiction, and illogicality.'" Id.; see also HRS § 1-15(3) (2009) ("Every construction which leads to an absurdity shall be rejected."). 
"When jury instructions . . . are at issue on appeal, 
the standard of review is whether, when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v. Nichols, 111 
Hawai'i 327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006) (block quote format 
and citation omitted). 
1.
 
At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 707-756(1)
6
 
provided in pertinent part as follows:
 
6 Footnote 3, supra, notes the subsequent amendments made to HRS § 707­
756(1). 
16
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1) Any person who, using a computer or any other
electronic device:
 
(a) Intentionally or knowingly communicates:
 
.  .  .  .
 (iii) With another person who represents that
person to be under the age of eighteen
years; and
 
(b) 	With the intent to promote or facilitate the
commission of a felony:
 
(i) 	That is a murder in the first or second
 
degree;
 
(ii) 	That is a class A felony; or
 
(iii) That is an offense defined in section
846E-1;
 
agrees to meet with the minor, or with another person
who represents that person to be a minor under the age
of eighteen years; and
 
(c) 	Intentionally or knowingly travels to the agreed
upon meeting place at the agreed upon meeting
time;
 
is guilty of electronic enticement of a child in the first
degree.
 
The Circuit Court's instruction on the elements for
 
first-degree electronic enticement of a child provided in
 
relevant part as follows:7
 
In the indictment, defendant Robert McKnight is
charged with the offense of electronic enticement of a child
in the first degree.
 
A person commits the offense of electronic enticement
of a child in the first degree if he intentionally or
knowingly uses a computer or any other electronic device to
intentionally or knowingly communicate with another
person[,] who represents that person to be under the age of
18 years[,] with the intent to promote or facilitate the
commission of sexual assault in the first degree or sexual
assault in the third degree[,] and intentionally or
knowingly agrees to meet with another person who represents
that person to be a minor under the age of eighteen years[,]
and intentionally or knowingly travels to an agreed-upon
meeting place at an agreed-upon meeting time.
 
7 The quoted instruction is from the transcript of the Circuit Court's
oral instructions to the jury. The punctuation and numerals in brackets and
the paragraph formatting is based on the written jury instructions that the
record reflects was passed out to the jury. 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
There are five material elements of the offense of
 
electronic enticement of a child in the first degree, each
of which the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable
doubt.
 
The five elements are:
 
[1.]	 That on or about the 13th day of June, 2006[,]
to and including the 6th day of July, 2006, in
the County of Maui, State of Hawaii, defendant
intentionally or knowingly used a computer or
other electronic device; and
 
[2.]	 [T]hat the defendant intentionally or knowingly
used a computer or other electronic device to
communicate with another person[,] who
represented that person to be under the age of
18 years; and
 
[3.]	 [T]hat the defendant communicated with the other
person with the intent to promote or facilitate
the commission of sexual assault in the first
 degree or with the intent to promote or
facilitate the commission of sexual assault in
 the third degree[;] and
 
[4.]	 [T]hat the defendant intentionally or knowingly
agreed to meet with another person who
represented that person to be under the age of
18 years; and
 
[5.]	 That the defendant intentionally or knowingly
traveled to an agreed-upon meeting place at an
agreed-upon meeting time.
 
2.
 
McKnight construes HRS § 707-756(1) as requiring the
 
State to prove that he used a computer or other electronic device
 
(1) to communicate with another person who represented that he or
 she was under eighteen years old; (2) to agree to meet with such
 person; and (3) to travel to the agreed upon meeting place at the
 agreed upon meeting time. Based on this construction, he argues
 that the Circuit Court's jury instruction was erroneous because
 it did not require the State to prove that he used a computer or
 other electronic device to agree to meet with "Chyla" or to
 travel to the agreed upon meeting place.
 
We reject McKnight's interpretation of the statute
 
because it conflicts with the Legislature's intent and would lead
 to absurd results. The legislative history of HRS § 707-756
 demonstrates that the statute was prompted by the increased
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
opportunity created by the internet for criminal predators to
 
communicate with and commit crimes against children. The
 Legislature's intent in enacting the statute was to protect
 children by addressing the relatively new dangers created by the
 internet and the use of computers to communicate with minors for
 the purpose of committing crime. The report of the Senate
 Committee on Health and Human Services accompanying the original
 enactment of HRS § 707-756 provided as follows:
 
Your Committee finds that the use of the Internet to
 
entice children into meetings has become widespread.
Current laws do not specifically address using computers to
communicate with minors for purposes of committing crime.
This measure would close that loophole, and would allow sex
offenders to be investigated and prosecuted before they
commit a kidnapping or other crime. One method of
 investigation that has been successful in arresting sex
offenders before a child is hurt has been sting operations
in which the sex offender's intended victim is actually a
police officer posing as a minor in chat rooms or E-mail
communications. Once the sex offender agrees to meet the
child and goes to the meeting place, the offender is
arrested. However, the sex offender's defense to attempted
sexual assault is often the defense of impossibility because
the person posing as a child was not actually a child.
Therefore, it is important to criminalize the sex offender's
predatory computer behavior, so that the offender can be
prosecuted for what the offender has actually done, as
opposed to what the offender may have been trying to do.
 
Sen. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2867, in 2002 Senate Journal at 1384. 
The Conference Committee report accompanying this legislation
 also provided, in relevant part: "The purpose of this bill is to
 create new criminal offenses relating . . . to electronic
 enticement of a child. Your Committee on Conference finds that
 this measure addresses the problem of utilizing computer
 technology in committing crimes against children." Sen. Conf.
 Comm. Rep. No. 36, in 2002 Senate Journal at 957. 
Given the purpose of HRS § 707-756, construing the
 
statute as requiring proof that the defendant used a computer to
 travel to the agreed upon meeting place at the agreed upon
 meeting time would lead to absurd results. A computer is not a
 mode of transportation and is not typically used, or necessary,
 for travel to an agreed upon meeting place. McKnight argues that
 in some circumstances a computer could be "used" by a defendant
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to travel, such as where the defendant used a computer to
 
purchase an airline ticket over the internet so that the
 defendant could travel to the arranged meeting place. However,
 under McKnight's interpretation, if a criminal predator used a
 computer to communicate with a minor with the intent to
 facilitate a felony, and then drove or walked to the agreed upon
 meeting place, without using a computer, the statute would not be
 violated. 
The purpose of the statute is to protect children
 
against criminal predators who use the internet to communicate
 with children with felonious criminal intent. Consistent with
 that purpose, the requirement that the defendant travel to the
 agreed upon meeting place serves to distinguish persons who pose
 no physical danger to minors and have no intent to commit a
 felony against minors from those who do pose such a danger and
 possess such an intent. McKnight's interpretation of the statute
 would limit its application to atypical situations in which a
 computer was used by the defendant to travel to the meeting
 place. We conclude that limiting the statute in this fashion
 would be absurd and contrary to the Legislature's purpose in
 enacting the statute. 
For similar reasons, we reject McKnight's argument that
 
the statute requires proof that a defendant used a computer or
 electronic device to agree to meet with the minor or one
 representing to be a minor. The statute is ambiguous regarding
 whether the phrase "using a computer or any other electronic
 device" modifies the phrase "agrees to meet with the minor, or
 with another person [representing] to be a minor under the age of
 eighteen years" in subsection (b). Given the ultimate purpose of
 the statute to protect children, we conclude that the Legislature
 did not intend the statute to require that the agreement to meet
 be accomplished through the use of the computer or other
 electronic device. The statute already requires the State to
 prove that a defendant, "using a computer or any other electronic
 device," intentionally or knowingly communicated with a minor or
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
person representing to be a minor, with the intent to promote or
 
facilitate one of the specified felonies. A person who engaged
 in such acts with such intent would pose the same grave danger to
 children regardless of whether the arrangement to meet was
 accomplished through the use of a computer or other electronic
 device, or through some other means. Thus, construing the
 statute to condition its application on proof that the agreement
 to meet was arranged through the use of a computer or other
 electronic device would be unreasonable, illogical, and
 inconsistent with the Legislature's purpose in enacting the
 statute.
 
The Circuit Court's jury instruction was consistent
 
with our interpretation of HRS § 707-756. We therefore conclude
 that the Circuit Court did not err in instructing the jury on the
 elements for the charged offense of first-degree electronic
 enticement of a child. 
C.
 
McKnight's insufficiency of evidence claim is based on
 
his interpretation of HRS § 707-756 as requiring proof that he
 used a computer or other electronic device to travel to the
 agreed upon meeting place. McKnight argues that the State failed
 to introduce evidence, both before the grand jury and at trial,
 that he used a computer to travel to the agreed upon meeting
 place at the Kahului Airport. In light of our determination that
 HRS § 707-756 does not require proof that a defendant used a
 computer or other electronic device to travel to the agreed upon
 meeting place, we conclude that McKnight's insufficiency of
 evidence claim is without merit.
8
 
8 McKnight's claim that indictment should have been dismissed on
insufficiency of evidence grounds is also rendered moot by his subsequent
conviction after trial. See In re Doe, 102 Hawai' i 75, 78, 73 P.3d 29, 32
(2003) ("[A]bsent unusual circumstances, any defects in a pretrialdetermination of probable cause are rendered moot, or are without anyeffective remedy, which is much the same thing, by a subsequent conviction[.]"(footnote omitted)). 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
We now turn to the State's appeal of the Suppression
 
Order.
 
A.
 
The State argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
concluding that the search warrant was invalid because it had
 
been misdated by the issuing judge and in suppressing the
 evidence recovered pursuant to the warrant on that basis. We
 conclude that the misdating of the warrant does not require
 suppression of the search warrant evidence.
 
It is undisputed that the search warrant was prepared,
 
submitted, issued, and executed on July 6, 2006, the same day
 that McKnight was arrested. Although the search warrant was
 issued on July 6, 2006, it was misdated by the issuing judge as
 being issued on June 6, 2006. 
The Circuit Court concluded that the search warrant was
 
supported by probable cause. However, the Circuit Court further 
concluded that the misdating of the warrant rendered the warrant
 facially invalid ten days after June 6, 2006, which was before
 the warrant was actually issued or executed, and it suppressed
 evidence recovered pursuant to the warrant. In concluding that
 the search warrant for McKnight's residence was invalid and in
 suppressing the evidence obtained through the execution of the
 warrant, the Circuit Court relied upon this court's prior
 decision in Endo.
 
1.
 
In Endo, a police officer mistakenly typed in the date 
of April 14, 1992, on a search warrant he submitted for signature to a judge on May 14, 1992. This court concluded that this misdating rendered the warrant invalid since Hawai' i Rules of 
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 41(c) required that the warrant "'command the officer to search, within a specified period of time not to exceed 10 days[,]'" and the warrant itself commanded the officer to search "'for a period not to exceed ten (10) days from its issuance[.]'" Endo, 83 Hawai' i at 89, 92-94, 924 P.2d 
22
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
at 583, 586-88. In upholding the suppression of evidence
 
obtained pursuant to the search warrant, this court stated:
 
The cause of a search warrant being facially expired
when the search is executed may be the mistake of the
officer who applied for it, the judge who signed it, and/orthe officer who executed it. Does the Hawai' i Constitution 
excuse any of these mistakes? Balancing the uniqueness ofHawai'i's Constitution, the specificity requirements imposed
by HRPP Rule 41(c), the desire to motivate the officials whoprepare, sign, and execute search warrants not to prepare,sign, and execute facially expired search warrants, and thedesire and ability to avoid searches pursuant to faciallyexpired search warrants, against the State's desire to havethe judiciary validate searches pursuant to search warrantsthat are facially expired when the searches are made becausethe officers who applied for them, the judges who signedthem, and/or the officers who executed them made a mistake,we conclude that the Hawai' i Constitution does not permit
the validation of searches pursuant to search warrants thatare facially expired when the searches are made. 
Id. at 93-94, 924 P.2d at 587-88 (footnote omitted).
 
In support of our analysis, we cited State v. Lopez, 78 
Hawai'i 433, 896 P.2d 889 (1995). In Lopez, the Hawai' i Supreme 
Court declined to adopt the United States Supreme Court decision 
in Illinois v. Rodriguez, 497 U.S. 177 (1990), which held that the concept of apparent authority applied to a warrantless search based on consent. In Rodriguez, 479 U.S. at 179, 185-89, the United States Supreme Court determined that a warrantless search was valid when based on the consent of a third party whom the police reasonably believed had authority to consent to the search, but who in fact lacked actual authority to consent.
9 
Relying on the greater protection of individual privacy 
rights afforded under the Hawai' i Constitution than the United 
States Constitution, the Hawai' i Supreme Court rejected the 
apparent authority doctrine and held that actual rather than apparent authority to consent to search is required for a third party's consent to be valid. Lopez, 78 Hawai' i at 445-47, 896 
P.2d at 901-03. The Hawai' i Supreme Court reasoned that 
"regardless of whether the police acted in good faith, the 
9 The particular circumstances involved in Rodriguez was a third party's
consent to the warrantless entry by the police of the defendant's residence.
Rodriguez, 479 U.S. at 179-80.
 
23
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
individual's 'privacy' is still invaded when the police search
 
his or her personal belongings without permission." Id. at 446,
 
896 P.2d at 902. The Hawai' i Supreme Court concluded that 
[a]lthough we acknowledge that the Hawai' i exclusionary rule
serves the valuable purpose of deterring governmental
officials from circumventing the protections afforded by theHawai'i Constitution, we now pronounce that an equally
valuable purpose of the exclusionary rule under article I,section 7 [of the Hawai' i Constitution], is to protect the
privacy rights of our citizens. 
Id. (citation omitted).
 
2.
 
Lopez makes clear that evidence obtained pursuant to a 
search is subject to suppression under the Hawai' i exclusionary 
rule where the suppression of the evidence would serve to deter 
governmental misconduct or protect the privacy rights of our citizens. In this case, however, neither of these articulated purposes for the Hawai' i exclusionary rule would be furthered by 
suppressing the evidence seized pursuant to the search warrant. There is irrefutable evidence that the search warrant prepared by Agent Domingo was signed by the issuing judge on July 6, 2006, but that the judge misdated the warrant as being issued on June 6, 2006. The warrant was supported by probable cause. In other words, except for the judge's obvious clerical error in misdating the search warrant, there would be no basis for invalidating the warrant or suppressing the evidence seized. 
Physical evidence recovered pursuant to a search
 
warrant is generally highly reliable and probative. The
 exclusionary rule imposes a significant and weighty cost on the
 judicial process and society by requiring the courts to ignore
 reliable and trustworthy evidence that has a direct bearing on a
 defendant guilt. Where exclusion of the evidence is necessary to
 further other significant interests, such as deterring government
 misconduct or protecting privacy rights, the application of the
 exclusionary rule is justifiable.
 
In this case, however, there was no governmental
 
misconduct. Agent Domingo properly prepared a search warrant
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
supported by probable cause, which he submitted to a judge for
 
approval. Thus, suppression of the search warrant evidence would
 not serve to deter law enforcement or governmental misconduct. 
The suppression of the search warrant evidence would also not
 serve to protect the privacy rights of our citizens. Except for
 the clerical error by the issuing judge in the misdating of the
 warrant, the governmental agents had clearly established their
 entitlement to search McKnight's residence. Thus, suppression of
 the search warrant evidence under the circumstances of this case
 would only serve to benefit those who were validly subject to
 search, but by pure fortuity happened to draw an issuing judge
 who made a clerical error in signing the warrant.
 
Courts from other jurisdictions have concluded that a
 
clerical or scrivener's error does not justify invalidating the
 warrant and suppressing evidence obtained pursuant to the
 warrant. E.g., State v. Dalton, 887 P.2d 379 (Or. Ct. App.
 
1994); State v. Steffes, 887 P.2d 1196, 1210 (Mont. 1994). 
Under the circumstances of this case -- where a
 
government agent obtains a search warrant supported by probable
 cause, the only basis for challenging the warrant is its being
 misdated by the issuing judge, and the actual date of issuance
 can be established by irrefutable evidence -- we conclude that no
 valid purpose would be served by suppressing the search warrant
 evidence. We overrule Endo to the extent that it is inconsistent
 with our analysis in this case.
 
B.
 
The State argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
concluding that McKnight did not voluntarily, knowingly, and
 intelligently waive his Miranda rights and in suppressing his
 recorded statement to Agent Domingo on that basis.
10 We agree.
 
10 We note that the Circuit Court also concluded that Agent Domingo
violated HRS § 803-9(2) and (4) (1993) by failing to make "reasonable efforts"
to contact an attorney or McKnight's mother after McKnight's requests, but
that the statutory violations did not warrant suppression of McKnight's
statement because McKnight failed to meet his burden of showing a causal
(continued...)
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The appellate courts 
answer questions of constitutional law by exercising our own
independent judgment based on the facts of the case. . . .
Thus, we review questions of constitutional law under the
'right/wrong' standard. Accordingly, we review the circuit
court's ruling on a motion to suppress de novo to determine
 
whether the ruling was 'right or 'wrong.'" 
State v. Wallace, 105 Hawai' i 131, 137, 94 P.3d 1275, 1281 (2004) 
(internal citations, quotations, brackets, and ellipsis points
 
omitted). 
In addition, 
"waiver is a question that requires application of
constitutional principles to the facts as found."
Accomplishment of this task "requires us to examine the
entire record and make an independent determination of the
ultimate issue of voluntariness based upon that review and
the totality of circumstances surrounding the defendant’s
statement." Thus, we apply a de novo standard of appellate
review to the ultimate issue of the voluntariness of a
 confession. 
State v. Henderson, 80 Hawai' i 439, 441, 911 P.2d 74, 76 (1996) 
citations and brackets omitted).
 
The Circuit Court concluded that McKnight had not
 
validly waived his Miranda rights because under the
 
circumstances, McKnight had not initiated the discussion with
 Agent Domingo following McKnight's exercise of his 
Miranda rights
 
to an attorney. Among the circumstances cited by the Circuit
 Court were: (1) Agent Domingo's re-entering the room with the
 intention of questioning McKnight and without having made an
 effort to contact an attorney; (2) Agent Domingo's disregarding
 McKnight's request to call his mother; and (3) Agent Domingo's
 statement, in response to McKnight's question of what was going
 to happen next, that the agents were going to execute a search
 warrant, which the Circuit Court concluded was reasonably likely
 to elicit an incriminating response. As discussed below, we hold
 
10(...continued)
connection between the statutory violations and his statement. See State v.
 
Edwards, 96 Hawai' i 224, 253-54, 30 P.3d 238, 239-40 (2001); State v. Ababa, 
101 Hawai' i 209, 217-18, 65 P.3d 156, 164-65 (2003). McKnight does not
dispute or contest the Circuit Court's ruling that the statutory violations
did not warrant suppression of his statement, and we do not address this
issue. 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that the Circuit Court erred in concluding that McKnight had not
 
initiated the discussion with Agent Domingo and had not validly
 waived his Miranda rights. 
In Edwards v. Arizona, 451 U.S. 477 (1981), the United
 
States Supreme Court held that an accused who "expresse[s] his
 desire to deal with the police only through counsel, is not
 subject to further interrogation by the authorities until counsel
 has been made available to him, unless the accused himself
 initiates further communication, exchanges, or conversations with
 the police." Id. at 484-85 (emphasis added). After a defendant
 
initiates communication, the police may interrogate the defendant
 as long as the waiver of counsel was "knowing and intelligent and
 found to be so under the totality of the circumstances, including
 the necessary fact that the accused, not the police, reopened the
 dialogue with the authorities." Id. at 486 n.9 (emphasis added). 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has cited and applied the 
principles set forth in Edwards v. Arizona. See Henderson, 80 
Hawai'i at 441-42, 911 P.2d at 76-77 (1996) (concluding that the 
defendant's Miranda waiver was valid when he initiated dialogue after initially refusing to sign a waiver of his rights); see also State v. Hoey, 77 Hawai' i 17, 36, 881 P.2d 504, 523 (1994) 
(concluding that if upon a non-substantive clarification of an equivocal request for counsel, the defendant voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently waives the presence of counsel, then substantive questioning may continue). 
Here, the undisputed evidence shows that after
 
initially requesting an attorney, McKnight asked to call his
 mother, and when Agent Domingo denied that request, McKnight
 asked Agent Domingo what was going to happen next. By asking
 Agent Domingo what was going to happen next, McKnight initiated
 "further communication, exchanges, or conversations with [Agent
 Domingo,]" thereby authorizing Agent Domingo to revisit whether
 McKnight would be willing to waive his Miranda rights. See
 
Edwards v. Arizona, 451 U.S. at 485; Oregon v. Bradshaw, 462 U.S.
 1039, 1045-46 (1983) (holding that a defendant initiated further
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
conversation with police within the meaning of Edwards v. Arizona
 
by asking, "Well, what is going to happen to me now?" because
 this question "evinced a willingness and a desire for a
 generalized discussion about the investigation"). 
The circumstances cited by the Circuit Court do not
 
support its conclusion that McKnight did not initiate
 communication with Agent Domingo. The fact that Agent Domingo
 re-entered the interrogation room with the intent to ask McKnight
 questions about his residence has no bearing on whether McKnight
 initiated communication with Agent Domingo. Regardless of Agent
 Domingo's intent, it was McKnight who spoke first. Agent
 Domingo's undisclosed subjective intent to further question
 McKnight cannot serve to negate McKnight's act of initiating
 communication with Agent Domingo.
 
The same is true of Agent Domingo's failure to contact
 
an attorney for McKnight before re-entering the room and Agent
 Domingo's denial of McKnight's request to contact his mother. 
The record indicates that only a short time elapsed between the
 time Agent Domingo exited the interview room and when he re­entered. The failure of Agent Domingo to immediately contact an
 attorney for McKnight and the denial of McKnight's request to
 call his mother does not detract from McKnight's having initiated
 communication with Agent Domingo. 
Agent Domingo's response to McKnight's question about
 
what was going to happen next occurred after McKnight had already
 initiated conversation with Agent Domingo. Thus, Agent Domingo's
 response does not provide a basis for concluding that McKnight
 did not initiate communication with Agent Domingo. 
Our review of the record shows that after McKnight
 
initiated communication with Agent Domingo, McKnight voluntarily,
 knowingly, and intelligently waived his Miranda rights. Upon
 McKnight's advising Agent Domingo that McKnight had changed his
 mind and wanted to give a statement, Agent Domingo made clear to
 McKnight that Agent Domingo was making no promises and that it
 was strictly up to McKnight concerning what he wanted to do. 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Agent Domingo also re-presented and reviewed with McKnight an
 
advice-of-constitutional-rights form, which McKnight signed,
 thereby signifying the waiver of his rights, including his right
 to an attorney. In addition, during the recorded interview,
 McKnight acknowledged that he was making the statement of his own
 freewill, without any force, promises, threats, or coercion by
 Agent Domingo.
 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we: (1) affirm the Circuit
 
Court's Judgment with respect to the conviction and sentence for
 first-degree electronic enticement of a child charged in Count 1;
 (2) vacate the Circuit Court's Suppression Order; and (3) remand
 the case for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Albert Cook
 
Deputy Attorney General
for Plaintiff-Appellant/
Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Christopher Martin Dunn
for Defendant-Appellee
Benjamin E. Lowenthal
for Defendant-Appellant
 
29
 