NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29736
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI fI 
VICTORIA YI, Plaintiff-Appellee, v. JOSEPH W. SULLIVAN and JANET
FONG, Defendants-Appellants, and JOHN DOES 1-5; JANE DOES 1-5;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5 AND DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-1756)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Joseph W. Sullivan (Sullivan)
 
timely appealed from the February 13, 2009 "Final Judgment
 
Against Defendants Joseph W. Sullivan and Janet Fong" entered by
 
1
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  entering
judgment in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Victoria Yi (Yi) and
 
against Sullivan and Defendant Janet Fong (Fong).
 
On appeal, Sullivan argues that: (1) Judge Hifo should
 
have recused herself because she was partial towards Yi's
 
attorney based on "her personal relationship with him"; (2) the
 
evidence submitted by him was wrongfully disregarded; and (3)
 
Yi's attorney should have been disqualified due to a conflict of
 
interest based on his participation as a principal in the
 
underlying events at issue and because he had previously
 
represented defendants as a personal advisor in a separate
 
extortion action.
 
1
 The Honorable Eden E. Hifo presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
As a preliminary matter, we must consider the
 
procedural defects presented in this appeal. Sullivan filed his 
notice of appeal on March 31, 2009. While the notice of appeal 
purports to assert an appeal on behalf of both Sullivan and Fong, 
Sullivan alone signed the notice of appeal. Sullivan is not 
licensed to practice law in Hawai fi, and because he is proceeding 
on appeal pro se, his apparent attempt to assert an appeal on 
behalf of Fong is invalid. Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) §§ 605-2 and 605-14 (1993 and Supp. 2012), persons who are 
not licensed to practice law in Hawai fi "are not permitted to act 
as 'attorneys' and represent other natural persons in [t]heir causes." Oahu Plumbing & Sheet Metal, Ltd. v. Kona Constr., 
Inc., 60 Haw. 372, 377, 590 P.2d 570, 573 (1979). As such, Fong is not a party to this appeal. Thus, we consider the asserted 
points of on appeal only as they pertain to Sullivan. 
Sullivan's brief is in wholesale nonconformity with the 
requirements of the Hawai
fi Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
Rule 28(b).2 In general, "[t]he fact that appellant's brief 
flouts the requirements of HRAP Rule 28 is also grounds for 
dismissal." Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai fi 225, 230, 909 
P.2d 553, 558 (1995). However, "the policies of this court are 
2 Rule 28(b) establishes requirements for the Appellant's opening
brief, requiring "[a] concise statement of the points of error set forth in
separately numbered paragraphs." HRAP Rule 28(b)(3) requires that the
Appellant's Opening Brief contain:
 
A concise statement of the case, setting forth the nature of
the case, the course and disposition of proceedings in the
court or agency appealed from, and the facts material to
consideration of the questions and points presented, with
record references supporting each statement of fact or
mention of court or agency proceedings.
 
Rule 28(b)(4) additionally requires that each point state "(i) the
alleged error committed by the court or agency; (ii) where in the record the
alleged error occurred; and (iii) where in the record the alleged error was
objected to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to the court
or agency."
 
Rule 28(b)(5) requires that the opening brief contain "[a] brief,
separate section, entitled "Standards of Review," setting forth the standard
or standards to be applied in reviewing the respective judgments, decrees,
order or decisions of the court or agency alleged to be erroneous and
identifying the point of error to which it applies."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to permit litigants to appeal and to have their cases heard on 
the merits, where possible." O'Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu, 77 
Hawaifi 383, 386, 885 P.2d 361, 364 (1994). 
Moreover, Sullivan has failed to satisfy the
 
3
requirements of HRAP Rule 10(b),  which make it the appellant's
responsibility to include in the record on appeal transcripts of
 
the pertinent oral proceedings conducted by the trial court. The
 
only transcript that appears of record is that of the January 23,
 
2009 hearing, and that was provided by Yi. As will be seen, to
 
the extent missing transcripts are necessary to a review of
 
Sullivan's points, this defect will be fatal. See Bettencourt at
 
230, 909 P.2d at 558 ("[w]e . . . are unable to consider the
 merits of appellant's contention . . . because appellant failed
 
to include the transcript of the applicable hearing in the record
 
on appeal."); Tradewinds Hotel v. Cochran, 8 Haw. App. 256, 266­
67, 799 P.2d 60, 66-67 (1990).
 
After a careful review of the issues raised and
 
arguments made by the parties, the record, and the applicable
 
authority, we resolve Sullivan's points on appeal as follows.
 
1. Whether Judge Hifo Should Have Recused Herself.
 
With regard to his first point, Sullivan provides no
 
argument supporting his claim of bias. Points of error for which
 
no argument is provided may be deemed waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
 
2.	 Whether Evidence Presented by Sullivan Was
Erroneously Disregarded.
 
Sullivan next points to the Circuit Court's refusal to
 
consider "[s]tatements made by HPD and FBI" which, in his view,
 
3
 HRAP Rule 10(b) provides in pertinent part:
 
(1) Request to prepare transcript. (A) When to request. When
 
an appellant desires to raise any point on appeal that
requires consideration of the oral proceedings before the
court appealed from, the appellant shall file with the
appellate clerk, within 10 days after filing the notice of
appeal, a request or requests to prepare a reporter's
transcript of such parts of the proceedings as the appellant
deems necessary that are not already on file.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"show[ed] that the services to be performed . . . were of illegal
 
nature." In support, Sullivan argues that these statements were,
 
"comments by HPD Detective, Bart Canada, that [Yi], defendant
 
Sullivan and attorney Cowan, were in violation of the
 
U.S.Patriots Act. [sic] and could be tried for treason" and
 
statements by Sullivan that the same three persons were the
 
"target of an FBI investigation." The basis for the Circuit
 
Court's refusal to consider these statements was that they were
 
hearsay. Sullivan does not specifically identify where the
 
statements to which he refers can be found in the record. We
 
note that Sullivan provided similar statements in his declaration
 
in support of his motion for summary judgment. Sullivan also
 
provides no basis for his position that this ruling was in error. 
Our review of Sullivan's declaration reveals that his
 
averments regarding this subject, were not from his personal
 knowledge but from what "the FBI informed and advised me" and as
 
"advised by [Detective Bart Canada]." As such, it appears that
 
the Circuit Court's ruling that the same was "nothing but
 
hearsay," was not error. Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rules 801 and
 
802.
 
3 and 4.	 Whether Yi's Counsel Should Have Been
 
Disqualified.
 
Sullivan asserts that it was error for the Circuit
 
Court to allow attorney Stuart Cowan (Cowan) to represent Cowan's
 wife, Yi, in this proceeding. In Point of Error number three,
 
Sullivan argues that Cowan's active participation in the
 
transaction at issue should disqualify him from representing Yi. 
Yi correctly points out that the Hawai
fi Rules of 
Professional Conduct (HRPC) do "not preclude a lawyer from 
representing his or her spouse." Moreover, it does not appear 
that Sullivan moved, before the Circuit Court, to disqualify 
Cowan and Sullivan's argument on appeal is based upon his 
unsupported assertion that Cowan was "'in charge' of operations" 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with regard to the underlying events at issue. Because Sullivan
 
does not support his allegations with references to any evidence
 
in the record or to any legal authority in support of his
 
position, we also deem this point waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
 
In Point of Error number four, Sullivan asserts that
 
because Cowan "represented defendants Sullivan and Fong as
 
personal advisor when defendants were subjected to extortion by
 
another party," Cowan "should not have been allowed to represent
 
[Yi] against defendants; this was a violation of attorney-client
 
privilege." Sullivan goes on, in his argument section, to state
 
that "Because of attorney Cowan committing extortion, he again
 
should not have been allowed to represent" Yi. Once again, we
 
find no indication in the record that Sullivan moved for Cowan's
 
disqualification below and on appeal, Sullivan fails to identify
 
the evidence of these allegations upon which he relies. 
Similarly, we reject this argument as meritless.
 
5. Entry of Judgment in Yi's Favor.
 
Finally, we turn to Sullivan's arguments that the
 
Circuit Court should not have "overturned" a ruling by a
 
predecessor judge, ignored "many Federal s/Statutes" and "the
 
U.S. Department of State's letter" when it granted judgment in
 
Yi's favor.
 
A large part of Sullivan's argument on appeal appears
 
to be based on the mistaken belief that the previous denial of
 
Yi's motion for summary judgment precluded a later grant of
 
summary judgment in Yi's favor. While it is true that a contrary
 
ruling by a court of equal jurisdiction is not to be entered
 
lightly, as the Circuit Court noted, where cogent reasons appear,
 
a court may reconsider a prior decision in the case. Wong v.
 
City & County of Honolulu, 66 Haw. 389, 396, 665 P.2d 157, 162
 
(1983) ("Unless cogent reasons support the second court's action,
 
any modification of a prior ruling of another court of equal and
 
concurrent jurisdiction will be deemed an abuse of discretion.") 
No transcript of the proceedings held on Yi's November 6, 2008
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Motion for Partial Summary Judgment appears of record and the
 
order denying the motion does not state the reasons therefor. 
The Circuit Court found that there were cogent reasons to enter
 
judgment in Yi's favor. On the record before us, it is
 
impossible to determine if Sullivan's assertions regarding the
 
previous judge's comments and reasons for denying Yi's motion for
 
summary judgment have any basis. 
Similarly, Sullivan has not shown this court that he
 
brought the federal statutes and letter from the State Department
 
to the Circuit Court's attention nor does our review of the
 
record reveal that he did so. More importantly, Sullivan does
 
not now argue how those statutes or letter were relevant to his
 
motion for summary judgment.
 
Consequently, Sullivan's challenge to the entry of
 
judgment in Yi's favor is without merit.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the February 13,
 
2009 Final Judgment of Circuit Court of the First Circuit.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai fi, May 17, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Joseph W. Sullivan
Defendant-Appellant, pro se.
 
Chief Judge
 
Stuart M. Cowan,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
6
 