 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29340
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
BONNIE MACLEOD KAKINAMI, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
AARON K.H. KAKINAMI, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 06-1-0040)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Aaron K.H. Kakinami (Aaron),
 
appeals from the following orders of the Family Court of the
 
Fifth Circuit (Family Court): (1) the Supplemental Divorce Decree
 
re Division of Assets and Debts after Entry of Bifurcated Divorce
 
Judgment, entered on October 7, 2008 (Supplemental Decree); (2)
 
the Order Denying Defendant's Motion for Pre-Decree Relief,
 
entered on September 24, 2008; and (3) the Order on Plaintiff's
 
Motion to Compel Defendant to List Marital Residence for Sale,
 
entered on February 3, 2009.1/
 
On appeal, Aaron raises the following points of error:
 
(1) the Family Court erred when it awarded Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Bonnie MacLeod Kakinami (Bonnie) certain inheritance-funded
 
accounts as Marital Separate Property; (2) the Family Court erred
 
when it failed to find that Bonnie dissipated marital assets
 
1/
 The Honorable Calvin K. Murashige presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
during the pendency of the divorce; and (3) the Family Court
 
erred when it entered an order purportedly modifying property
 
distribution after Aaron's Notice of Appeal divested the Family
 
Court of jurisdiction. 
Upon a thorough review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having duly considered the issues
 
and arguments raised on appeal, as well as any authorities
 
relevant thereto, we resolve Aaron's contentions as follows:
 
(1) With the first point of error, Aaron challenges
 
Findings of Fact (FOFs) 58, 60-63, 68, 76, 77, 80, 83, and 84,
 
and Conclusions of Law (COLs) 2, 3, 8, 9, 11, and 12. Summarily
 
stated, Aaron alleges that the Family Court clearly erred in
 
entering these FOFs, which found that, with limited exceptions
 
(the $60,000 gifts and their appreciation and the CalPlans
 
Limited Partnership), Bonnie's investment accounts were funded by
 
inheritances received by Bonnie after the parties married, titled
 
by Bonnie in her own name, expressly classified by Bonnie as her
 
separate assets, and maintained by sources other than one or both
 
of the spouses. Based on its assessment of the credibility of
 
the evidence presented (FOF 9), the Family Court concluded that
 
Bonnie met her burden of proof in establishing that the accounts
 
identified in FOF 8 were Marital Separate Property.
 
The challenged FOFs are supported by substantial
 
evidence in the record, including Bonnie's testimony that when
 
she received the inheritances, they were transferred into
 
accounts titled solely in her name, the accounts were always kept
 
separate, and neither she nor Aaron contributed any funds to
 
them. Bonnie further testified that she expressly regarded the
 
accounts as her separate property, that Aaron referred to them as
 
"[h]er inheritance," and the accounts had "grown and shrunk" over
 
the years through interest and dividends, not through marital
 
efforts. In addition, Bonnie testified that the accounts were
 
maintained by a third-party account manager who had longstanding
 
2  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
ties with Bonnie's family and acted as an investment advisor. He 
kept Bonnie informed as to the status of the accounts, made 
recommendations on investments, and obtained her consent. Bonnie 
always accepted his recommendations and never independently 
researched or investigated them. She testified, "At no time, for 
example, did I make any of the decisions about what should be 
bought or where it should go. . . . [W]hatever [the account 
manager's] recommendation was, I went with it." Although Aaron 
offered conflicting testimony, the Family Court found Bonnie's 
evidence to be more credible. Such a credibility determination 
lies in the sole province of the Family Court. Schiller v. 
Schiller, 120 Hawai' i 283, 305, 205 P.3d 548, 570 (App. 2009) 
("It is axiomatic that reconciling conflicting testimony is 
beyond the scope of appellate review.") (internal quotation marks 
and citation omitted). 
The Family Court found that: (1) Bonnie acquired the
 
funds via inheritance during the parties' marriage; (2) Bonnie
 
expressly classified them as her separate property; and (3) the
 
funds were maintained by sources other than Bonnie or Aaron and
 
were not funded with marital income or property. These findings
 
were supported by substantial evidence in the record. As a
 
result, we conclude that the court did not err in determining the
 
funds to be Marital Separate Property.
 
On appeal, Aaron argues that, even if the subject
 
inheritance accounts were properly categorized as Marital
 
Separate Property, the Family Court abused its discretion when it
 
failed to deviate from an equal division of the parties' Marital
 
Partnership Property, in light of the substantial amount of
 
Marital Separate Property.2/ Aaron correctly states that this
 
court has recognized the Family Court's wide discretion to divide
 and distribute the estate of the parties in a just and equitable
 
2/
 It does not appear that Aaron made this argument in the
proceedings before the Family Court. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
manner, which includes the authority to award Marital Separate 
Property to a non-owning spouse. See Schiller, 120 Hawai' i at 
310-12, 205 P.3d at 575-77. We are not, however, persuaded that the Family Court abused its discretion by failing to do so in 
this case. Aaron argues that both parties worked hard to build 
their marital partnership assets, so Aaron should reap some 
benefit from the inheritance that Bonnie received during the 
marriage, even if it is Marital Separate Property. The mere 
existence of such an inheritance does not, without more, mandate 
deviation from the Marital Partnership model.
3/ We conclude that 
the Family Court did not abuse its discretion by failing to 
either award part of Bonnie's Marital Separate Property to Aaron 
or to award Aaron more than one-half of the parties' Marital 
Partnership Property. 
(2) Aaron argues that the Family Court erred in 
failing to find that Bonnie dissipated marital assets in 
contemplation of divorce. A reduction of the marital estate 
during divorce does not necessarily constitute dissipation. 
Rather, dissipation occurs when, "during the time of the divorce, 
a party's action or inaction caused a reduction of the dollar 
value of the marital estate under such circumstances that he or 
she equitably should be charged with having received the dollar 
value of the reduction." Higashi v. Higashi, 106 Hawai' i 228, 
3/
 In his Reply Brief, Aaron argues that the Family Court erred in
COL 4 when it concluded that: "There are no valid and relevant considerations 
sufficient for the court to deviate from the division of the $60,000inheritance." First, we note that Aaron does not challenge COL 4 in hispoints of error. On this basis alone, the argument may be disregarded. See 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 28(b)(4). Nor does Aaron point to
where in the record that he argued that this or any part of Bonnie'sinheritance warranted a deviation from the 50:50 division of Marital Partnership Property, which included one-half of the appreciation on the$60,000 account that the court concluded was a gift to the marital estate. It appears that, in the Family Court proceedings, Aaron argued only that Bonnie'sinheritances should be treated as marital partnership property, not that herinheritances constituted grounds for deviating from the partnership principlesin dividing the parties' partnership assets equally. We further note that, inhis points of error, Aaron does not challenge COL 10 stating: "MSP is awarded100% to the owner-spouse and 0% to the non-owner spouse"; nor does it appearthat Aaron raised this issue below. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
241, 103 P.3d 388, 401 (App. 2004). Dissipation is a factual 
determination. See Schiller, 120 Hawai' i at 304-05, 205 P.3d at 
569-70 (treating dissipation as question of fact); Ahlo v. Ahlo, 1 Haw. App. 324, 329, 619 P.2d 112, 117 (1980). 
Here, the Family Court found that Bonnie expended 
certain funds for "ordinary and customary household and living 
expenses," including her son's tuition, room, and board; various 
airfares; fees for three different attorneys and for three legal 
matters; and household expenses incident to purchasing and 
setting up a new home. At trial, Bonnie testified as to various 
reasons for her expenditures during the divorce. She testified 
that Aaron ceased making material contributions to the household 
expenses, and that she used the funds to cover those expenses. 
She testified that she utilized some of the funds for her living 
expenses, taxes, and her sons' private school and college 
expenses. She also traveled between Kaua' i and Honolulu a number 
of times for medical treatment. She went on several vacations, just as she and Aaron had done during the marriage. She paid for 
attorneys' fees in connection with the divorce, a criminal 
complaint that Aaron initiated, and Aaron's first appeal. 
Finally, she testified that her separate accounts had "grown and 
shrunk" over the years due to market forces. 
Although Aaron submitted testimony and evidence that 
could give rise to an inference of dissipation, the Family Court 
was entitled to weigh the conflicting evidence and make a 
credibility determination. CSEA v. Doe, 98 Hawai' i 58, 65, 41 
P.3d 720, 727 (App. 2001). The Family Court's finding that Bonnie used the funds for ordinary and customary living expenses 
was supported by substantial evidence. 
Aaron also argues that the Family Court failed to make
 
adequate findings on the alleged dissipation of marital assets. 
A trial court's findings are adequate if "they are sufficiently
 
comprehensive and pertinent to the issues to provide a basis for
 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
decision." Wilart Associates v. Kapiolani Plaza, Ltd., 7 Haw.
 
App. 354, 361, 766 P.2d 1207, 1211 (1988) (internal quotation
 
marks and citation omitted). Conclusory or ultimate findings are
 
insufficient if not supported by the requisite subsidiary
 
findings. Id. However, the trial court is only required to
 
"make brief, definite, pertinent findings and conclusions upon
 the contested matters; there is no necessity for over-elaboration
 
of detail or particularization of facts." Doe v. Roe, 5 Haw.
 
App. 558, 565, 705 P.2d 535, 542 (1985) (internal quotation marks
 and citation omitted). The court does not need to make negative
 
findings of fact. Id. at 566, 705 P.2d at 542-43. 
Here, the FOFs explain the Family Court's conclusion, 
initially set forth in the court's September 24, 2008 Order 
Denying Defendant's Motion for Pre-Decree Relief, that no 
dissipation occurred. The court found that Bonnie "expended 
certain funds during the divorce proceedings." It further found 
that "[t]he funds were used to pay the usual and customary 
household and living expenses, e.g., son's tuition, room, board, 
airfare from California to Kaua' i, Plaintiff's airfares, 
attorney's fees for three different attorneys (divorce attorney, 
criminal defense attorney, and appellate attorney) for three 
legal matters initiated by Plaintiff, as well as Plaintiff's 
deposit on her new house and for the cost of setting up a new 
household." It thus specifically found that Bonnie "did not 
withdraw marital funds in contemplation of divorce." In sum, the 
findings were "brief, definite, [and] pertinent" as to the 
contested issue. Doe, 5 Haw. App. at 565, 705 P.2d at 542.
4/ 
4/
 Aaron also asserts, in conjunction with his contention that Bonnie
dissipated assets, that the Family Court violated due process by denying his
request to lengthen the trial beyond six hours. His arguments in this regard
are wholly conclusory, and he cites no authorities for support. See HRAP Rule
 
28(b)(7) (requiring argument section to contain "citations to the
authorities."). We may therefore deem this point waived. Id. In addition,
Aaron fails to identify any testimony, evidence, or arguments that he was
precluded from presenting to the Family Court. 
6  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(3) Lastly, Aaron contends that the Family Court 
lacked jurisdiction to enter the February 3, 2009 Post-Decree 
Order requiring him to make an equalization payment to Bonnie on 
the grounds that the order modified the Supplemental Decree. 
Generally, once a party files a notice of appeal, the lower court 
is divested of jurisdiction to proceed further on the matter. 
Lowther v. Lowther, 99 Hawai' i 569, 578, 57 P.3d 494, 503 (App. 
2002). However, the Family Court retains jurisdiction to enforce its judgments and decrees. Id.; Richter v. Richter, 108 Hawai' i 
504, 506-07, 122 P.3d 284, 286-87 (App. 2005). 
Here, the Supplemental Decree effectively mandated the 
parties to perform certain obligations. Aaron was required to buy out Bonnie's share of the marital residence. He failed to do 
so and remained indebted to Bonnie for her share of the marital 
property. In the decree, the Family Court reserved jurisdiction 
"over the parties and their property to enforce and implement the 
provisions of this decree." When Aaron failed to perform his 
obligation under the decree, the Family Court had jurisdiction to 
enforce compliance. The court was merely enforcing specific 
provisions of the decree, and did not materially alter the 
outcome of property distribution. See, e.g., Carroll v. 
Nagatori-Carroll, 90 Hawai' i 376, 978 P.2d 814 (1999); Cain v. 
Cain, 59 Haw. 32, 575 P.2d 468 (1978). 
Aaron argues that, the Family Court materially altered
 
the decree when, in its Post-Decree Order, the Family Court
 
ordered Aaron to offset his share of the marital property against
 
the debt. This arguably differed from the Supplemental Decree,
 
which did not require Aaron to offset Bonnie's share but merely
 
permitted him to do so. However, the decree granted Aaron the
 
opportunity to select various means of buying out Bonnie's share. 
When Aaron failed to effect any of those means, the Family Court
 
necessarily mandated a form of payment. The Family Court had
 
previously ordered Aaron to deposit Bonnie's share of the equity
 
7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
into escrow, including in the Bifurcated Divorce Decree, and he
 
failed to comply. The setoff was thus necessary to enforce
 
Bonnie's award of her share of the marital residence.
 
Aaron in effect argues that because the Supplemental
 
Decree did not require him to set off his share or sell the
 
residence, it did not require him to do anything at all. This
 
runs contrary to the plain import of the property distribution
 
provisions. Although the decree did not set a specific deadline
 
for Aaron to buy out Bonnie's share of the equity, it clearly
 
required him to do so, whatever the means of payment. We
 
conclude that the Family Court did not modify the decree by
 
imposing a deadline; it merely enforced an obligation that had
 
been set forth in both the Bifurcated Divorce Decree and the
 
Supplemental Decree. Accordingly, the Family Court had
 
jurisdiction to issue the February 3, 2009 Post-Decree Order.
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Family Court's October
 
7, 2008 Supplemental Divorce Decree re Division of Assets and
 
Debts after Entry of Bifurcated Divorce Judgment, the September
 
24, 2008 Order Denying Defendant's Motion for Pre-Decree Relief,
 
and the February 3, 2009 Order on Plaintiff's Motion to Compel
 
Defendant to List Marital Residence for Sale.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 11, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Peter Van Name Esser 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Robert M. Harris Marianita Lopezfor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8 