NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29368
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CRISPIN G. BANTOY, Claimant-Appellant,
v.
 
ARAKAKI MECHANICAL LLC, and
HAWAII EMPLOYERS' MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, INC.,
Employer/Insurance Carrier-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2005-396 (2-02-15248))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard, and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
In this workers' compensation case, Claimant-Appellant
 
Crispin G. Bantoy (Bantoy or Claimant) asserts that he suffered a
 
work-related injury to his back as a result of lifting heavy
 steel sound insulation panels or "noise panels." Employer-
Appellee Arakaki Mechanical, LLC (Arakaki) and Insurance Carrier-
Appellee Hawaii Employers' Mutual Insurance Company, Inc. (HEMIC)
 (collectively, the "Employer") denied Bantoy's claim for workers'
 compensation benefits and the Director of the Department of Labor
 and Industrial Relations (Director) ruled in favor of the
 Employer. Bantoy appealed the Director's decision to the Labor
 and Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB), which, on 
August 21, 2008, issued an "Order Granting [the Employer's]
 Motion for Summary Judgment" (Summary Judgment Order). Bantoy
 appeals from the LIRAB's Summary Judgment Order. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bantoy described his back injury as occurring during
 
the installation of noise panels, which was work he had been
 
assigned by Arakaki to perform between October 2, 2002, and
 October 4, 2002. However, Bantoy initially identified the date
 of the accident as September 24, 2002, and later as September 27,
 2002, dates on which he had performed work that did not require
 him to lift or install heavy panels. 
The central issue in this case is whether the LIRAB
 
abused its discretion in denying Bantoy's request to amend the
 date of the injury identified in the LIRAB's Pretrial Order from
 September 27, 2002, to October 4, 2002. Bantoy sought to amend
 the date of the injury to October 4, 2002, a date Bantoy was
 assigned to install noise panels, to match Bantoy's description
 of how the injury occurred. The LIRAB denied Bantoy's request to
 amend the Pretrial Order. The LIRAB then granted the Employer's
 motion for summary judgment on the ground that it was undisputed
 that no accident occurred on September 27, 2002. 
We conclude that the LIRAB abused its discretion in
 
denying Bantoy's request to amend the Pretrial Order to reflect a
 date for the injury that corresponded with Bantoy's description
 of how his injury occurred. Accordingly, we vacate the Summary
 Judgment Order and remand the case for further proceedings. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A.
 
Bantoy worked for Arakaki as a welder. According to 
Bantoy, his job often required him to lift and work with heavy metallic panels. During the times relevant to this appeal, Bantoy worked for Arakaki at two different job sites on Maui. From about September 23, 2002 to September 27, 2002, Bantoy worked on a "pipe job" that did not involve lifting of heavy panels for Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar Company at Puunene Sugar Mill. From October 2, 2002, to October 4, 2002, Bantoy worked on a job for Maui Electric Company, Ltd. (Maui Electric) at the Maui Electric Plant in Ma
'alaea. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The work for Maui Electric required Bantoy and his co­
workers to install steel sound insulation panels. Bantoy claimed
 
that the panels weighed 400 to 500 pounds each and that the
 installation required the workers to lift the heavy panels and
 carry them a distance of twenty feet before installing them. 
According to Bantoy, he suffered a lower back injury from lifting
 the 400 to 500 pound panels at the Maui Electric job site. 
Bantoy performed the installation work on October 2, 3, and 4,
 2002. Bantoy asserts that he stopped working on October 4, 2002,
 because he thought he had aggravated a pre-existing back injury
 and needed to see his doctor for the pain he was experiencing. 
After working five hours on the morning of October 4,
 
2002, which was a Friday, Bantoy asked to leave work early. 
Bantoy took a flight home to Oahu from Maui and went to see his
 treating physician, Charlie Sonido, M.D., in the afternoon on
 October 4, 2002. Bantoy complained to Dr. Sonido of low back
 pain during his October 4, 2002, visit. Bantoy also saw Dr.
 Sonido on October 8, and 10, 2002. Dr. Sonido's notes regarding
 the October 10, 2002, visit indicate that Bantoy reported
 experiencing low back pain on September 27, 2002, when he and
 four others lifted a panel board weighing 400 pounds. 
Bantoy had previously injured his lower back on August
 
9, 2000, while working for Arakaki. Dr. Sonido had treated
 Bantoy for the August 2000 lower-back injury. Dr. Sonido's notes
 for the October 4, 2002, visit indicate that Bantoy had
 exacerbated his pre-existing lower back injury, and Dr. Sonido's
 notes for the October 8, 2002, visit reflect an apportionment of
 Bantoy's condition as 90 percent for the "new" injury and 10
 percent for the "old" injury. Dr. Sonido signed a Disability
 Certificate for Bantoy for the period October 7, 2002 to 
October 14, 2002, because Bantoy was "totally incapacitated"
 during that time, and Dr. Sonido authorized Bantoy to return to
 "light" work on October 15, 2002. Bantoy returned to work at the
 Maui Electric job site on October 15, 2002. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B.
 
On November 1, 2002, Bantoy filled out a Form WC-1,
 
"Employer's Report of Industrial Injury," which described how the
 
accident occurred as "lifting noise panel" and what the employee
 was doing when injured as "installing panel." On this WC-1, the
 "DATE OF INJURY/ILLNESS" section was left blank and the "DATE
 INJURY/ILLNESS REPORTED" was scratched out. The incomplete WC-1,
 signed by Bantoy, was sent to HEMIC by Akira Watanabe, the
 insurance agent for Arakaki. Sometime after Watanabe sent the
 form to HEMIC, an injury date of September 24, 2002, and an
 injury report date of November 1, 2002, was filled in. It is
 unclear who filled in the date of injury. 
On November 26, 2002, Derrick Arakaki, Arakaki's owner,

 
faxed a letter to a claims specialist for HEMIC which attached
 Bantoy's time sheet for September 24, 2002. The letter indicated
 that this time sheet showed that Bantoy was working at the
 Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar Company job site, and "not at Maui
 
Electric that Bantoy has on his WC-1."1 The Employer denied
 
Bantoy's workers' compensation claim pending further
 investigation.
 
On April 4, 2003, Kimberly Likewise (Likewise), a HEMIC 
representative, took a recorded statement from Bantoy. Bantoy explained that he had been injured while working for Maui Electric at Ma
'alaea while "carry[ing] the silencer door, about 
four hundred pounds, . . . about ten pieces of that." Bantoy stated that the "silencer door" was used "[f]or the wall, for make the wall so no more noise." Bantoy indicated that after he finished carrying the heavy silencer doors, Bantoy felt pain and asked the foreperson around noon if Bantoy could go home. Bantoy did not tell the foreperson why he wanted to leave early because 
1 The time sheet attached to the letter was for September
24, 2002, but the letter erroneously referred to the date of the
attached time sheet as "11-24-2002." In addition, the WC-1
filled out by Bantoy did not refer to Maui Electric or the
location at which Bantoy's alleged injury occurred. 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
he was in a hurry to catch a plane home. According to Bantoy,
 
after returning home, he went to see Dr. Sonida and missed work
 for a week because of his injury. 
During the interview, Likewise asked Bantoy if the
 
injury occurred on September 24, 2002, and Bantoy responded
 "yes." In response to Likewise's asking if this was a Tuesday,
 Bantoy also replied in the affirmative.
2
 
[Likewise]: Okay; I'm gonna ask about this injury,
yeah? It occurred on September 24, 2002,is that correct? 
Mr. Bantoy: Yes, ma'am. 
[Likewise]: Okay. Do you remember what day of theweek that was? If you don't, that's fine. 
[Bantoy'sattorney]: Do you remember what day? 
Mr. Bantoy: [UNINTELLIGIBLE] 
[Likewise]: So it was a Tuesday? 
Mr. Bantoy: Yes, Tuesday, ma'am. 
[Likewise]: Tuesday? Did it happen in the morning -­oh, no, the afternoon? The afternoon,huh? 
Mr. Bantoy: Yes, ma'am. 
At HEMIC's request, Bantoy underwent an independent
 
medical examination conducted by Dr. John Endicott, M.D., on
 
March 6, 2003. Dr. Endicott's report describes how the "subject
 injury of 9/24/02 occurred" as follows: "[Bantoy] and three other
 co-workers were required to lift some extremely heavy
 soundproofing panels . . . . They had to lift them through to
 the inside of the structure and hang them. [Bantoy] reports that
 he had increasing pain over the next two days, and then had
 severe pain in which he had to call in, and missed work for one
 week. He returned to see Dr. Sonido on 10/4/02." Dr. Endicott 
2 September 24, 2002, was a Tuesday.
 
5
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
diagnosed Bantoy as having "[c]hronic discogenic low back pain,"
 
which had been aggravated. Dr. Endicott further opined:
 
It appears that [Bantoy] has aggravated his underlying disc
condition with the injury on 9/24/02. He now has more
 persistent left radicular symptoms, positive nerve tension
signs, diffuse weakness, no atrophy, and history of bladder
control problems. Given the significance of the disc
herniation noted on the CT scan from August 2001, it appears
that he may have sustained further herniation of the disc
and further compression of the thecal sac. This needs to be
 clarified. 
The prognosis would be guarded at present . . . .
 The etiology of his current symptoms appears to be related
to the aggravation from 9/24/02 and the worsening of
symptoms.
 
On November 12, 2004, Bantoy completed a Form WC-5,
 
"Employee's Claim for Workers' Compensation Benefits." The WC-5
 
described how the accident occurred as "lifting noise panel
 wieghing [sic] 400 to 500 lbs. with 3 co-workers." It identified
 the "Date of Accident" and "Date Disability Began" as 
September 24, 2002.
 
C.
 
A hearing on Bantoy's claim was held before the
 
Disability Compensation Division of the Department of Labor and
 Industrial Relations (DCD-DLIR) on July 26, 2005. At the
 
hearing, Arakaki established through its time sheets that Bantoy
 
was not working at the Maui Electric job site, where he claimed
 to have been injured, on September 24, 2002. Bantoy was emphatic
 that his injury occurred on a Friday and was certain that it
 occurred while he was working at the Maui Electric job site. 
Bantoy requested that the date of the injury be changed to
 September 27, 2002, which was a Friday.
3 By letter dated 
August 24, 2005, to the DCD-DLIR hearings officer, Arakaki
 established through its time sheets that on September 27, 2002, 
3 September 24, 2002, the date listed on Bantoy's WC-5 as
the date of the accident was a Tuesday. September 27, 2002, was
a Friday. October 4, 2002, the date Bantoy subsequently sought
to identify as the date of the accident before the LIRAB, was
also a Friday.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Bantoy was working at the Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar Company job
 
site, and not at the Maui Electric job site. 
In a decision dated September 20, 2005, the Director
 
found that Arakaki's time sheets established that Bantoy could
 not have suffered a work-related injury on September 27, 2002,
 because he was not at the Maui Electric job site on that date. 
On that basis, the Director denied Bantoy's claim for
 compensation. 
D.
 
Bantoy appealed the Director's decision to the LIRAB.
 
In his Initial Conference Statement to the LIRAB, Bantoy asserted
 that he had been injured "on or about September 27, 2002," as a
 result of "lifting and hanging metallic panels that weighted
 about 400-500 pounds" with three co-workers. Bantoy identified
 the issues as:
 
1.	 What is the date of accident.
 
2.	 Did Claimant incur a work related injury on September
27, 2002.
 
3.	 Did Claimant incur a work related [sic] at Maui
Electric on or about September 27, 2002.
 
The LIRAB issued a Pretrial Order on December 14, 2005, which
 
stated that "[t]he sole issue to be determined is whether
 Claimant sustained a personal injury on September 27, 2002,
 arising out of and in the course of employment." (Emphasis
 added.) 
On October 6, 2006, five days prior to the then-

scheduled trial before the LIRAB, Bantoy filed a "Motion to Amend
 Date of Injury in Conformance with Evidence" (Motion to Amend). 
In the Motion to Amend, Bantoy asked, pursuant to Hawaii
 
4
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 12-47-22 (1994),  to change the date
4 HAR § 12-47-22(c) provides:
 
(c) The pretrial order shall control the
subsequent course of the appeal, unless modified by the
[LIRAB] at the trial or prior thereto to prevent
manifest injustice. The pretrial order shall supersede
 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of injury in the Pretrial Order to October 4, 2002, "to prevent
 
manifest injustice." Bantoy argued that HEMIC knew that his
 
claim was for injuries sustained while installing noise panels;
 
that HEMIC "[u]pon information and belief" was responsible for
 inserting September 24, 2002, as the date of injury on the WC-1;
 that HEMIC continued to use the "wrong" date for the injury even
 after learning the date was wrong; and that the date of injury
 must be corrected in conformance with the evidence to avoid
 manifest injustice in the case. 
Although the trial had originally been scheduled for
 
October 11, 2006, the LIRAB set the hearing on Bantoy's Motion to
 Amend for November 16, 2006, thus effectively continuing the
 trial. On November 20, 2006, the LIRAB filed an "Order Denying
 Motion to Amend Date of Injury" (Order Denying Motion to Amend),
 which denied Bantoy's Motion to Amend. 
The LIRAB subsequently issued amended pretrial orders
 
which continued the trial date, first to October 30, 2007, and
 then to August 25, 2008, but did not change the issue to be
 determined. On August 12, 2008, the Employer filed a Motion for
 Summary Judgment (Summary Judgment Motion), arguing that there
 was no issue of material fact as to whether an injury occurred on
 September 27, 2002, because Bantoy's filings "clearly state that
 no injury occurred on September 27, 2002." On August 21, 2008,
 the LIRAB granted the Employer's Summary Judgment Motion "on the
 grounds that the December 14, 2005, Pretrial Order identifies an
 accident date of September 27, 2002, and the parties are both in
 accord that no accident occurred on that date." 
II. DISCUSSION
 
A.
 
On appeal, Bantoy asserts:
 
The [LIRAB] abused its discretion by granting summary
judgment in violation of the law as there remains issues of
 
the pleadings where there is any conflict and shall
supplement the pleadings in all other respects.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
material fact remaining in this case as follows:
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A.	 The Hawaii Administrative Rules, Section 12-47­
22(c), states that:
 
[t]he pretrial order shall control the
subsequent course of the appeal, unless modified
by the board at the trial or prior thereto to
prevent manifest injustice.
 
B.	 An issue of material facts exists as the claim
 is presumed to be a compensable claim based on
Section 386-85, Hawaii Revised Statutes, as
amended.
 
C.	 An issue of material facts remain as to whether
 the trier of facts would deny compensability if
it finds that HEMIC was solely responsible for
the wrong date and wrongfully perpetuated the
use of the wrong date.
 
D.	 An issue of material facts remains as to whether
 the trier of facts would deny compensability, if
it found that the wrong date inserted in the
Pretrial-Order, was placed by the [LIRAB]
officer as a place holder until the correct date
was found after further discovery.
 
B.
 
We conclude that the decisive issue presented by this
 
appeal is whether the LIRAB abused its discretion in denying
 
Bantoy's Motion to Amend which sought to amend the date of the
 injury in the Pretrial Order to October 4, 2002, to conform with
 Bantoy's description of how he was injured. We hold that the
 LIRAB abused its discretion in denying Bantoy's Motion to Amend.
 
The record demonstrates that the Employer had clear 
notice that Bantoy was claiming workers' compensation benefits for a back injury he sustained as the result of lifting heavy noise panels and that he was engaged in installing noise panels while working on a job for Maui Electric at the Maui Electric Plant in Ma
'alaea. There does not appear to be any dispute that 
Bantoy was engaged in lifting and installing noise panels between October 2 and 4, 2002, while performing his job as a welder for Arakaki. The record also contains ample evidence that after October 4, 2002, Bantoy was suffering from an injury to his back. 
Hawai
'i's workers' compensation law establishes a 
presumption that an employee's claim for compensation is for a covered work injury which the employer has the burden of 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rebutting. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 386-85(1) (1993)
 
provides that "[i]n any proceeding for the enforcement of a claim
 for compensation under this chapter it shall be presumed, in the
 absence of substantial evidence to the contrary . . . [t]hat the
 claim is for a covered work injury[.]" The Supreme Court of
 Hawai
'i has determined that 
HRS § 386-85(1) creates a presumption in favor of the
claimant that the subject injury is causally related to the
employment activity. . . . [T]his presumption imposes upon
the employer both the heavy burden of persuasion and the
burden of going forward with the evidence. The claimant
 must prevail if the employer fails to adduce substantial
evidence that the injury is unrelated to employment. The
 term "substantial evidence" signifies a high quantum of
evidence which, at the minimum, must be "relevant and
credible evidence of a quality and quantity sufficient to
justify a conclusion by a reasonable man that an injury or
death is not work connected." 
The statute nowhere requires . . . some preliminary
showing that the injury occurred "in the course of
employment" before the presumption will be triggered.
Rather, HRS § 386-85 clearly dictates that coverage will be
presumed at the outset, subject to being rebutted by
substantial evidence to the contrary.
 
Flor v. Holguin, 94 Hawai 'i 70, 79, 9 P.3d 382, 391 (2000) 
(citations omitted) (quoting Chung v. Animal Clinic, Inc., 63 
Haw. 642, 650-51, 636 P.2d 721, 726-27 (1981)). 
Moreover, although HAR § 12-47-22 sets out certain
 
pretrial procedures and HAR § 12-47-22(c) states that a pretrial
 order "shall control the subsequent course of the appeal," HAR 
§ 12-47-22(c) also importantly provides that the LIRAB may modify
 a pretrial order "at the trial or prior thereto to prevent
 manifest injustice." (Emphasis added.) Thus, while ensuring an
 orderly process is important and within the LIRAB's discretion,
 the LIRAB may, even during trial, modify pretrial orders in
 consideration of the substantive rights of the parties. 
Under the circumstances of this case, we conclude that

 
the LIRAB abused its discretion in denying Bantoy's Motion to
 Amend which sought to amend the Pretrial Order to change the date
 of injury to October 4, 2002. Granted, Bantoy initially asserted
 an incorrect injury date and did not seek to amend the LIRAB's
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pretrial Order until five days before the originally-scheduled 
trial date. However, a trial continuance was already apparent by
 the time the LIRAB ruled on the Motion to Amend, and the LIRAB's
 granting of the motion would not have unfairly prejudiced the
 Employer. The LIRAB's denial of Bantoy's Motion to Amend was
 improper, especially when viewed in light of the statutory
 presumption that a workers' compensation claim is for a covered
 work injury. The amendment requested by Bantoy was necessary to
 conform the date of the alleged injury with the long-standing and
 consistent substance of Bantoy's claim -- that he was injured as
 the result of lifting heavy panels on a job for Maui Electric. 
Based on Bantoy's consistent description of how he was
 
injured, it was clear that the date of injury identified in the
 Pretrial Order was wrong. There was no dispute that on September
 27, 2002, the date of injury listed in the Pretrial Order, Bantoy
 had not been engaged in lifting heavy panels, had not been
 working on a Maui Electric job, and had not sustained an injury. 
Thus, it was a foregone conclusion that the LIRAB's denial of
 Bantoy's motion to amend the injury date identified in the
 Pretrial Order would result in the denial of Bantoy's claim. 
The LIRAB erred in basing its denial of Bantoy's claim
 
for benefits on the date of the injury identified in the Pretrial
 Order, which Bantoy advised the LIRAB was wrong, rather than on
 the substance of Bantoy's claim of how the injury occurred. The
 effect of the LIRAB's denial of Bantoy's Motion to Amend was to
 deny Bantoy a fair hearing on the merits of his claim that he
 sustained a compensable back injury while working for Arakaki. 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the LIRAB's 
August 21, 2008, Summary Judgment Order, and we remand the case
 
for further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 23, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Alex M. Sonson 
for Claimant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Jeffrey H.K. SiaDiane W. Wong(Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto,
Sia & Nakamura)
for Employer/Insurance
Carrier-Appellees Associate Judge
Associate Judge 
13

 