NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28563
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
JANE DOE, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOHN DOE, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-UCCJEA NO. 03-1-0011)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant John Doe (John) appeals from the
 
"Order Re: Defendant's Motion[s] for Post-Decree Relief filed on
 
8/24/06 & 9/25/06" and the "Order Denying Motion For Post-Decree
 
[Relief] Filed 4/16/07,"1 both filed on April 23, 2007 in the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit2 (family court). Both orders
 
denied John's requests to reinstate visitation with his two
 
children, which visitation had been suspended because of abuse
 
allegations. 
John's brief does not adhere to Hawai» i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). In particular, the 
1
 A note added by the family court to the order corrected the date of
the motion to "3/27/07."
 
2
 The Honorable Christine Kuriyama presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
brief does not set forth concise points of error or point to
 
where in the record the error occurred or where John objected or
 
brought the error to the family court's attention. HRAP
 
28(b)(4)(i)-(iii). While John appears to object to findings of
 
fact and evidentiary rulings by the family court, he has not
 
quoted the grounds urged for rejecting evidence or the finding or
 
conclusion. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(A) & (C). As best as can be
 
discerned, John's contentions are as follows:
 
(1) The family court erroneously denied his request to
 
reinstate visitation with his Daughter and Son (collectively,
 
Children). John alleges that the family court erred by
 
conditioning visitation with Children upon his compliance with
 
court orders that he communicate with Children's therapists and
 
sign waivers allowing his therapist to talk to Children's
 
therapists. Further, John claims the family court erred by
 
ordering him to continue therapy.
 
(2) The family court's finding of fact that John
 
abused Children was erroneous. John claims the family court
 
erred in admitting into evidence Dr. Tsushima's Letter reporting
 
Daughter's claim of abuse because such evidence was hearsay. 
John alleges that his constitutional rights were violated by the
 
family court's "closed door" session, in which the court
 
temporarily suspended visitation with Daughter based on her abuse
 
claims.
 
(3) The family court erred by not dividing the
 
December 22, 2005 hearing into separate hearings to address
 
issues of releasing the Parenting Coordinator, obtaining
 
appropriate tax forms, and determining visitation plans for each
 
child. John claims the family court improperly excluded fourteen
 
exhibits at the hearing. He also claims the family court erred
 
in excluding his only witness.
 
John argues that the orders stemming from the 
December 22, 2006 hearing should be dismissed under Hawai» i 
Family Court Rule (HFCR) 41(b) because Plaintiff-Appellee Jane 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Doe (Jane) "failed to prosecute" by not drafting an order
 
regarding the hearing by the ten-day deadline given and because
 
the family court did not file the order until four months after
 
the hearing.
 
(4) The family court erred in making findings that
 
Jane is not interfering with John's visitation and that Jane was
 
credible. John disputes the family court's conclusion that
 
visitation would be forced if granted.
 
(5) The family court erred by "failing to recognize
 
[Jane's] complete renunciation of parenting responsibilities
 
under the doctrine of Parens Patri[a]e." John protests the
 
family court's rejection of his parental alienation theory. He
 
argues that the family court erred by not ordering an
 
investigation into abuse-by-parental-alienation and medical
 
neglect by Jane.
 
(6) The family court's conclusion that Parenting
 
Coordinator be allowed to withdraw because of her "safety and
 
non-payment" was wrong.
 
(7) The family court erred in "refusing to rule that
 
[Jane] has failed to properly execute required tax documents
 
under IRS Code Sec[tion] 152."
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 
John's appeal is without merit.
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
 
reason.
 
Doe v. Doe , 120 Hawai» i 149, 165, 202 P.3d 610, 626 (App. 2009) 
(quoting Fisher v. Fisher , 111 Hawai» i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 
(2006)). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Moreover, the family court is given much leeway in its 
examination of the reports concerning a child's care, custody, 
and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if supported by 
the record and not clearly erroneous, must stand on appeal." In 
re Doe, 95 Hawai» i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) (internal 
quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Re: Defendant's
 
Motion[s] for Post-Decree Relief filed on 8/24/06 & 9/25/06" and
 the "Order Denying Motion For Post-Decree [Relief] Filed
 
[3/27/07]," both filed on April 23, 2007 in the Family Court of
 
the First Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, January 12, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
John Doe,
Defendant-Appellant pro se. 
Paul A. Tomar 
Lynne Jenkins McGivern
(Ashford & Wriston)
Michele J. Woods 
(Arnold & Porter LLP)Elizabeth S. Liu 
(Domestic Violence Legal
Empowerment and Appeals
Project)
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 