NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  NO. 29800
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
GREGORY KANAHELE, SR., Individually and as Next
Friend of GREGORY KANAHELE, JR., a minor,
and TRISHALYNN KANAHELE, a minor,
Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
v.
 
JAMES HAN, Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and
 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-0597)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee James Han (Han)
 
appeals from the "Final Judgment in Favor of Plaintiff Gregory
 
Kanahele, Jr., a minor, and Against Defendant James Han and
 
Gregory Kanahele, Sr. and in Favor of Defendant James Han and
 
Against Plaintiff Trishalynn Kanahele, a minor, and Gregory
 
Kanahele, Sr." (Final Judgment) filed on April 24, 2009 in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).1
 
Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellants Gregory Kanahele, Sr.
 (Gregory Sr.), Individually and as Next Friend of Gregory
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Kanahele, Jr. (Gregory Jr.), a minor, and Trishalynn Kanahele
 
(Trishalynn), a minor, (collectively, the Kanaheles) cross-appeal
 
from the Final Judgment.
 
On appeal, Han contends the circuit court erred in
 
denying his August 6, 2008 Motion to Determine Covered Loss
 
Deductible (CLD Motion) because the court misinterpreted Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 431:10C-301.5 (2005 Repl.).
 
On cross-appeal, the Kanaheles contend the circuit
 
court abused its discretion when it denied the Kanaheles'
 
(1) March 5, 2008 "Motion and Memorandum for Mistrial 
and/or New Trial Based on Rule 7 and 59" (March 5 Motion for New 
Trial), in which the Kanaheles argued that the court should not 
have issued a supplemental instruction to the jury that it had to 
change its verdict to comply with Hawai 'i law and award an amount 
of general damages; 
(2) April 3, 2008 Motion for New Trial (April 3 Motion
 
for New Trial), in which the Kanaheles argued that the verdict
 was inconsistent because there was sufficient evidence to award
 
damages for pain and suffering; and 
(3) April 3 Motion for New Trial, in which the
 
Kanaheles argued that the jury's finding that Gregory Jr. was 45%
 
at fault and Gregory Sr. was 10% at fault went against the great
 
weight of the evidence.
2
 
A. APPEAL
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 
Han's point of error has no merit.
 
2
 The Kanaheles' Opening Brief in their cross-appeal does not comply
with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) because they
fail to cite where in the record the alleged errors occurred and were objected
to. Counsel for the Kanaheles are warned that future violations of HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) may result in sanctions against them. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Han asserts that under the plain meaning of HRS
 
§ 431:10C-301.5, the CLD can be determined at any time. Section
 
431:10C-301.5 provides: 
Whenever a person effects a recovery for bodily injury,
whether by suit, arbitration, or settlement, and it is
determined that the person is entitled to recover damages,
the judgment, settlement, or award shall be reduced by
$5,000 or the amount of personal injury protection benefits
incurred, whichever is greater, up to the maximum limit.
The covered loss deductible shall not include benefits paid
or incurred under any optional additional coverage or
benefits paid under any public assistance program.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Because Han was attempting to amend the amount awarded 
in the judgment, he was bound by Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) 59(e) to file any motion to alter or amend a judgment no 
later than 10 days after entry of the judgment. The First 
Judgment was filed on June 30, 2008. Han filed his CLD Motion on 
August 6, 2008 -- 37 days later -– and thus his motion was not 
timely filed. 
The circuit court did not err when it denied Han's CLD
 
Motion where the motion was not timely filed as a motion to amend
 
a judgment under HRCP 59(e).
 
B. CROSS-APPEAL
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve the
 
Kanaheles' points of error as follows:
 
(1) The Kanaheles contend that when the jury awarded
 
3
$12,280.41  in special damages and zero general damages,  the
3
 In Dunbar v. Thompson, 79 Hawai' i 306, 901 P.2d 1285 (App. 1995),
this court defined general and special damages as follows: 
General damages encompass all the damages which naturally
and necessarily result from a legal wrong done. Such damages
follow by implication of law upon proof of a wrong and include
such items as physical or mental pain and suffering,
inconvenience, and loss of enjoyment which cannot be measured
definitively in monetary terms. Special damages are the natural
 
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court should have ordered a new trial rather than giving
 
the jury a supplemental instruction to come back with an award in
 
some amount in general damages.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held that "[w]here a 
defendant's liability to a personal injury plaintiff is 
established, a jury verdict which awards the plaintiff special 
damages but no general damages for pain and suffering is 
generally regarded as improper." Dunbar v. Thompson, 79 Hawai 'i 
306, 315, 901 P.2d 1285, 1294 (App. 1995). The supreme court reasoned that where the jury awarded special damages for the 
plaintiff's medical expenses, it was inconsistent to not award 
even a small amount in general damages for pain and suffering
4 
because both types of damage were dependent on the same set of facts. Id. at 315, 901 P.2d at 1294. 
It is a "well-settled principle in this jurisdiction 
that the proper amount of damages to be awarded is within the 
exclusive province of the jury, since jurors are the sole judges 
of all disputed questions of fact." Kato v. Funari, 118 Hawai
'i 
375, 381, 191 P.3d 1052, 1058 (2008) (internal quotation marks, citation, brackets and ellipsis omitted). 
The Kanaheles argue that precisely because the
 
determination of the amount of the award for damages is the
 
exclusive province of the jury, the circuit court erred in
 
instructing the jurors to change the amount to a figure other
 
than zero. To support this argument, the Kanaheles cite to Walsh
 
3(...continued)
but not the necessary result of an alleged wrong and depend on the
circumstances peculiar to the infliction of each particular
injury. Special damages are often considered to be synonymous
with pecuniary loss and include such items as medical and hospital
expenses, loss of earnings, and diminished capacity to work.
 
Id. at 315, 901 P.2d at 1294 (internal quotation marks, citations, and
ellipsis omitted).
4
 HRS § 663-8.5(b) (1993) provides that "[p]ain and suffering is one
type of noneconomic damage and means the actual physical pain and suffering
that is the proximate result of a physical injury sustained by a person."
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
v. Chan, 80 Hawai 'i 188, 193-94, 907 P.2d 774, 779-80 (App.), 
rev'd in part on other grounds, 80 Hawai 'i 212, 908 P.2d 1198 
(1995).
 
In Walsh, where the verdict awarding special damages
 
and zero general damages had already been entered, this court
 
explained that 
the "zero" general damages award is either: (1) inconsistent
with the special damages award; (2) in disregard of the
proper instructions of the trial court; (3) against the
great weight of the evidence; or (4) the result of an
improper compromise by jurors unconvinced of liability but
willing to compromise their positions in return for a
limitation of damages to actual out-of-pocket losses.
 
80 Hawai 'i at 194, 907 P.2d at 780. 
In the instant case, the circuit court saw that the
 
general damages award was inconsistent with the special damages
 
award. "When an ambiguous or improper verdict is returned by the
 
jury, the court should permit the jury to correct the mistake
 
before it is discharged." Dias v. Vanek, 67 Haw. 114, 117, 679
 
P.2d 133, 135 (1984). 
The circuit court gave the following instruction to the
 
jury before giving it the supplemental jury verdict form:
 
As it now stands, your answer to question number 11 on the
special verdict form regarding special and general damages
of Gregory Kanahele, Jr. is inconsistent under the law of
this State. That is because where you have found personal
injury, and have accordingly awarded special damages to a
party, the law reasons that there must also be some degree
of compensable general damages to that party. The degree
and amount of such compensable general damages is for you to
decide. 
To assist you in making your decision, it may be
helpful to you to consider again the instructions on damages
already provided to you by the Court.
 
You are going to be provided with a supplemental
special verdict form that has just question number 11 on it,
because that's the only remaining issue. You've already
answered the other questions and made your decisions on
those questions.
 
The jury returned a Supplemental Special Verdict of
 
special damages of $12,280.41 and general damages of $1.00.
 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth
 
Circuit has held that 

5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
when the jury is still available, resubmitting an
inconsistent verdict best comports with the fair and
efficient administration of justice. Allowing the jury to
correct its own mistakes conserves judicial resources and
the time and convenience of citizen jurors, as well as those
of the parties. It also allows for a resolution of the case
 according to the intent of the original fact-finder, while
that body is still present and able to resolve the matter.
 
Duk v. MGM Grand Hotel, Inc., 320 F.3d 1052, 1058 (9th Cir. 
2003). Concerning the ability of the jurors to deliberate in 
accordance with the intent of the instructions of the court to 
revisit an issue, the Ninth Circuit went on to note: "[W]e 
presume that citizen jurors will properly perform the duties 
entrusted them and will not construe resubmission as an 
invitation to subvert the law and contort findings of fact in 
favor of a desired result." Id.; see also Myers v. South Seas 
Corp., 76 Hawai 'i 161, 165, 871 P.2d 1231, 1235 (1994) ("As a 
rule, juries are presumed to be reasonable and follow all of the 
trial court's instructions."). 
We conclude it was within the circuit court's authority
 
to provide a supplemental jury instruction and verdict form to
 
correct the inconsistency in the verdict. We also conclude it
 
was within the province of the jury to decide the amount to award
 
Gregory Jr. in general damages.
 
(2) The Kanaheles contend the evidence showed that
 
Gregory Jr. experienced pain and suffering and, thus, the verdict
 
of general damages of only $1.00 was inconsistent with the
 
evidence and not supported by the substantial evidence presented.
 
The Kanaheles argue that "[i]t is the law in Hawaii 
that the Jury must give an award for pain and suffering if 
evidence of pain and suffering is provided at trial." Again, our 
courts have held that where there is a special damages award, 
there is the presumption of some degree of pain and suffering, 
which is reflected in a general damages award. Dunbar, 79 
Hawai'i at 315, 901 P.2d at 1294. The jury, as required by law, 
did come back with a general damages award for pain and 
suffering. This court is not in a position to determine if the 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
award of $1.00 is inconsistent with the evidence. The Kanaheles 
failed to provide transcripts of Gregory Sr., Gregory Jr., and 
Trishalynn's testimonies in which these witnesses might have 
testified as to Gregory Jr.'s injuries and his accompanying pain 
and suffering. The videotaped deposition of the physician who 
repaired Gregory Jr.'s facial wounds was entered into evidence 
and is provided in the record, but without the transcripts of the 
other relevant trial testimonies, we have an insufficient basis 
on which to conclude that the jury's award was inconsistent with 
the evidence. Lepere v. United Pub. Workers, Local 646, AFL-CIO, 
77 Hawai 'i 471, 474, 887 P.2d 1029, 1032 (1995). 
(3) The Kanaheles contend the jury went against the
 
weight of the evidence in finding Gregory Sr. 10% liable when he
 was not present at the scene and could not have prevented the
 
accident even if he had been present. They also contend the jury
 
went against the weight of the evidence in finding Gregory Jr.
 
45% liable.
 
Under HRS § 635-56 (1993), the circuit court may grant
 
a new trial "when [the verdict] appears to be so manifestly
 
against the weight of the evidence as to indicate bias,
 
prejudice, passion, or misunderstanding of the charge of the
 
court on the part of the jury." Kanahele asserts that "the jury
 
was acting under some improper motive, bias, prejudice or
 
passion," but does not cite to any evidence other than the
 
original general damage award of zero.
 
Aside from claiming that "[t]here was little evidence
 
presented at trial" that Gregory Sr. had any liability for the
 
accident, the Kanaheles cite to no place in the record to support
 
their claim. Regarding Gregory Jr.'s liability, again they do
 
not cite to the record, but merely state that "[t]he great weight
 
of the evidence . . . showed that . . . Han's negligence was the
 
cause of Gregory Kanahele, Jr.'s injuries." HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)
 
requires the appellant to file a brief in which "each point [of
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
error] shall state . . . where in the record the alleged error
 
occurred". 
Furthermore, the Kanaheles neglected to provide the
 
transcripts of Gregory Sr., Gregory Jr., or Trishalynn's
 
testimonies, which would likely have provided evidence as to
 
alleged liability. 
The burden is upon appellant in an appeal to show
error by reference to matters in the record, and he has the
responsibility of providing an adequate transcript.
Moreover, if the appellant wishes to urge that a finding or
conclusion is unsupported by the evidence, he must include a
transcript of all the evidence relevant to such finding or
conclusion. 
. . . . 
The law is clear in this jurisdiction that the

appellant has the burden of furnishing the appellate court
with a sufficient record to positively show the alleged
 error. An appellant must include in the record all of the
evidence on which the lower court might have based its
findings and if this is not done, the lower court must be
affirmed.
 
Union Bldg. Materials Corp. v. Kakaako Corp., 5 Haw. App. 146,
 
151-52, 682 P.2d 82, 87 (1984) (citations omitted; emphasis
 
added).
 
A review of Han's testimony (provided in the partial
 
transcript of February 27, 2008) suggests evidence on which the
 
jury could have based its decision to hold Gregory Sr. 10%
 
liable. The testimony indicates that Gregory Jr. was riding his
 
scooter to school for the very first time. Han testified that he
 
thought Gregory Sr. should have been with Gregory Jr. that
 
morning or at least have taken him on a practice run earlier. 
Han also testified that immediately after the accident Gregory
 
Jr.'s sister said, "I told him not to go."
 
Because the Kanaheles did not provide the necessary
 
transcripts, it is not possible for this court to determine
 
whether their evidence manifestly outweighs the evidence produced
 
by Han on the issue of liability. Hoopii v. City & County of
 
Honolulu, 53 Haw. 564, 565, 498 P.2d 630, 631 (1972) ("The
 appellate standard for granting a new trial is that one party's
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence manifestly outweighs that introduced by the other
 
party.").
 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in not
 
granting the Kanaheles' motions for a new trial.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Final Judgment in Favor
 
of Plaintiff Gregory Kanahele, Jr., a minor, and Against
 Defendant James Han and Gregory Kanahele, Sr. and in Favor of
 
Defendant James Han and Against Plaintiff Trishalynn Kanahele, a
 
minor, and Gregory Kanahele, Sr." filed on April 24, 2009 in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 7, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
James T. Wong
for Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee. 
Richard Turbin 
Rai Saint Chu Presiding Judge 
Janice D. Heidt (Turbin Chu)for Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellants. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
9
 