NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28558
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DON INOUYE, individually and as a shareholder of
DA COMPANY INTERNATIONAL, INC., Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
GEORGE CRAIG HUGHES, DA COMPANY INTERNATIONAL, INC.,
a Hawaii corporation, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-1922)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Don Inouye (Inouye) appeals from
 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (Circuit Court's) May
 
18, 2007 Final Judgment, entered against Inouye and in favor of
 
Defendant-Appellee George Craig Hughes (Hughes) after a non-jury
 
trial.1
 
This case arises out of a dispute between Inouye and
 
Hughes concerning the ownership and management of a Waikiki beach
 
concession stand. Inouye contends he owned fifty percent of the
 
concession business. Hughes claims that the concession was at
 
all relevant times wholly owned and operated by his company HSI
 
Manufacturing, Inc., dba Prime Time Sports (PTS), and that Inouye
 
acted solely as an employee of PTS. Hughes also claims that Da
 
Company, Inc., a corporation formed by Inouye, was merely a
 
vehicle to divide the profits from concession business pursuant
 
to an agreement between Hughes and Inouye that they would split
 
those profits evenly, after PTS was reimbursed for payroll and
 
other expenses.
 
The parties had a falling out in early 2005, when
 
Inouye asserted and Hughes denied that Inouye owned half of the
 
1
 The Honorable Victoria S. Marks presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concession business. Hughes withdrew the funds in Da Company's
 
checking account. Inouye left the business and demanded an
 
accounting and a resolution of his ownership claim. According to
 
the Circuit Court's post-trial findings of fact, Hughes then
 
discovered that Inouye had diverted jet ski and parasail business
 
away from Hughes's concession to another company, Beautiful Day
 
Tours (BDT), that was owned by Inouye. Hughes also discovered
 
that Inouye had failed to reimburse PTS for "borrowed labor" used
 
at the concession, which resulted in the profits of the
 
concession business being inflated.
 
After an apparently failed mediation, in October 2005,
 
Inouye filed a ten-count complaint, seeking relief for:
 
(1) Conversion of cash and other assets belonging to
 
Da Company;
 
(2) Theft of corporate opportunity;
 
(3) Breach of Hughes's alleged fiduciary duty to
 
Inouye as a co-owner of Da Company;
 
(4) An accounting of Da Company's financial records;
 
(5) Unjust enrichment;
 
(6) Derivative claims, as a shareholder of Da Company;
 
(7) Judicial dissolution of Da Company;
 
(8) Misrepresentation related to the mediation wherein
 
the parties allegedly reached a tentative agreement, which was
 followed by Hughes's claim to a bonding company alleging that
 
Inouye had embezzled money;
 
(9) Defamation relating to Hughes's published claim of
 
embezzlement by Inouye; and
 
(10) Punitive damages.
 Following completion of the trial, on May 1, 2007, the
 
Circuit Court entered its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law,
 and Order in favor of Hughes and against Inouye on Counts I-III,
 
V, VI, and VIII-X. Regarding Count IV (accounting), the court
 
concluded that Inouye owed Hughes $3,832.04. Regarding Count
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
VII, the court ordered that Da Company, Inc. be dissolved. The
 
Circuit Court also awarded Hughes attorney's fees in the amount
 
of $26,439.50 and costs totaling $3,022.94. On May 23, 2007,
 
Inouye timely filed an appeal from the Circuit Court's May 18,
 2007 Final Judgment. 
On appeal, Inouye alleges that the Circuit Court made
 
"numerous" factual and legal errors in its decision. More
 
specifically, Inouye raises five points of error on appeal:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred when it found that Inouye
 
had no ownership interest in the concession business, and that
 
the concession business was always owned and operated by PTS. 
Inouye also alleges error in the court's finding that all of
 
Inouye's actions regarding the concession business were done in
 
his capacity as an employee of PTS;
 
(2) The Circuit Court erred when it concluded that
 
Inouye should have helped himself to Da Company books and assets
 
once Inouye learned that his ownership in the concession was
 
being disputed;
 
(3) The Circuit Court erred when it found that Inouye
 
failed to properly reimburse PTS for borrowed employee expenses;
 
(4) The Circuit Court erred when it found that Inouye
 
diverted jet ski and parasail revenues from PTS to his own
 
company, BDT; and
 
(5) The Circuit Court erred as a matter of law when it
 
awarded Hughes attorney's fees pursuant to Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 607-14.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Inouye's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Inouye contends that the Circuit Court's finding
 
that he had no interest in the Waikiki concession business was
 
clearly erroneous and against the clear weight of evidence. As
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Inouye admits, the Circuit Court's findings are "consistent with
 
and supported by Hughes's written and oral testimony." Hughes
 
testified, inter alia, that: (a) Inouye and Hughes never had a
 
deal or understanding that they were partners; (b) at all
 
relevant times, Inouye was solely acting as an employee of PTS;
 
(c) the sole purpose of Da Company was to allow Inouye to share
 
in the profits from the concession; and (d) the concession was
 
always a PTS concession, which was manned and controlled by PTS
 
employees. 
Although Hughes's testimony contradicts testimony by 
Inouye and other witnesses called by Inouye, it nonetheless 
provides substantial evidence to support the Circuit Court's 
findings because such evidence could enable a person of 
reasonable caution to support the Circuit Court's finding. See, 
e.g., Beneficial Hawai 'i, Inc. v. Kida, 96 Hawai 'i 289, 305, 30 
P.3d 895, 911 (2001). It is well-established that "the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given their 
testimony are within the province of the trier of fact and, 
generally, will not be disturbed on appeal." See, e.g., 
Tamashiro v. Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai 'i 86, 92, 34 P.3d 
16, 22 (2001). Upon review of the entire record, we conclude 
that the Circuit Court's findings concerning the ownership of the 
concession business were not clearly erroneous. 
(2) In Inouye's second point of error, he takes out of
 
context the Circuit Court's last sentence of its fourth
 
conclusion of law. The Circuit Court's third and fourth
 
conclusions of law state:
 
3.	 Inouye's conversion claim (Count I) is dismissed. He
 
claimed that Hughes took certain items (e.g.,
refrigerator, flat screen television) which belonged
to him as well as certain unidentified books and
 records belonging to Da Company. He also claimed that
 Hughes took monies belonging to Da Company.
2
2 This allegation will be addressed in
connection with Count IV re: accounting.
 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
4.	 Inouye failed to prove the [sic] Hughes or someone at
his direction or PTS took the television or documents
 that belonged to anyone other than PTS. At most,
someone received a refrigerator from PTS Stand I at
the Hale Koa Hotel. Moreover, with respect to the
storage room at the Waikiki Shores, Inouye had the
keys and Hughes never deprived him of access to the
 room.
 
Inouye claims that the final sentence above, along with
 
Hughes's testimony that upon discovering that his ownership
 
interest was disputed, Inouye "had three months to remove
 
whatever he thought Da Company owned," amounts to a legal
 
conclusion that Inouye should have "helped himself" to Da Company
 
assets. This skewed view of the Circuit Court's conclusion is
 
without merit. The Circuit Court was merely explaining why
 
Inouye's conversion claim failed. In its fourth conclusion of
 
law, the Circuit Court simply concluded that Hughes did not
 
convert assets of Da Company by affirmatively removing them from
 
the storage room, nor did he convert such assets by depriving
 
Inouye of access to them. 
(3) Inouye contends that the Circuit Court clearly
 
erred when it found that Inouye did not sufficiently reimburse
 
PTS for borrowed labor utilized at the concession stand. 
Although conflicting evidence was presented by Inouye, the
 
Circuit Court's finding is sufficiently supported by the record
 
on appeal.
 
In his direct testimony, Hughes described the
 
circumstances surrounding Inouye's failure to reimburse PTS for
 
borrowed labor used at the Waikiki Shores concession. Hughes
 
testified that the concession business had not been sufficiently
 
reimbursed for employee hours, and that Inouye's compensation was
 
unjustly inflated as a result. Hughes averred that PTS was
 
under-reimbursed by approximately $18,000.00. 
Hughes's testimony provides substantial evidence to
 
support the Circuit Court's finding that Inouye did not properly
 
reimburse PTS for employee expenses. Upon review of the entire
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record, this court is not left with a definite and firm 
conviction that a mistake has been made. See Kida, 96 Hawai 'i at 
305, 30 P.3d at 911. Inouye concedes that the finding was supported by Hughes's testimony, but argues that the finding was 
against the clear weight of the evidence. Because the task of 
weighing conflicting evidence and the relative credibility of the 
witnesses is within the province of the trial court, and the 
court's finding is supported by substantial evidence, we conclude 
that the Circuit Court did not clearly err in its finding that 
Inouye insufficiently reimbursed PTS. 
(4) Inouye contends that the Circuit Court clearly
 
erred when it found that Inouye had improperly diverted jet ski
 
and parasail business away from PTS and to his own company, BDT. 
The Circuit Court's finding is supported by substantial evidence
 
presented to the court. Hughes testified, inter alia, that,
 
following the Hale Koa Hotel's request to send military jet ski
 
and parasail business to that hotel, all civilian parasail and
 
jet ski business was supposed to be sent to the Waikiki Shore
 
concession, and that Hughes instructed PTS employees to direct
 
such business accordingly. Hughes further testified that,
 
instead of sending civilian jet ski and parasail business to
 
PTS's concession, Inouye directed such business to BDT. Although
 
conflicting with Inouye's testimony, Hughes's testimony
 
sufficiently supports the Circuit Court's finding, which we
 
conclude is not clearly erroneous.
 
(5) Inouye argues that the Circuit Court erred, as a
 
matter of law, when it awarded attorney's fees to Hughes pursuant
 
to HRS § 607-14 because this suit is not an action in assumpsit. 
In the first instance, we note that Inouye wrongly urges this
 
court to review the award of attorney's fees de novo, rather than
 
using the abuse of discretion standard. See, e.g., Sierra Club
 
v. Dep't of Transp. of the State of Hawai
'i, 120 Hawai 'i 181, 197, 
202 P.3d 1226, 1242 (2009) ("The trial court's grant or denial of 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attorney's fees and costs is reviewed under the abuse of
 
discretion standard.") (internal quotation marks, citations, and
 
brackets omitted). Nevertheless, we conclude that the Circuit
 
Court abused its discretion in granting attorney's fees to Hughes
 
in this case.
 
In TSA Int'l, Ltd. v. Shimizu Corp., 92 Hawai 'i 243, 
263, 990 P.2d 713, 733 (1999) (citations omitted) (emphasis 
added), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court set forth the following general 
principles related to the recovery of attorneys' fees: 
Generally, under the "American Rule," each party is
responsible for paying for his or her own litigation
expenses. A notable exception to the "American Rule,"
however, is the rule that attorneys' fees may be awarded to
the prevailing party where such an award is provided for by
statute, stipulation, or agreement.
 
In the present case, the statutory exception to the
 
"American Rule" relied on by the Circuit Court is HRS § 607-14
 
(Supp. 2006) (emphasis added), which provides in relevant part:
 
§ 607-14. Attorneys' fees in actions in the nature of
assumpsit, etc.  In all the courts, in all actions in the
nature of assumpsit and in all actions on a promissory note
or other contract in writing that provides for an attorney's
fee, there shall be taxed as attorneys' fees, to be paid by
the losing party and to be included in the sum for which
execution may issue, a fee that the court determines to be
reasonable; provided that the attorney representing the
prevailing party shall submit to the court an affidavit
stating the amount of time the attorney spent on the action
and the amount of time the attorney is likely to spend to
obtain a final written judgment, or, if the fee is not based
on an hourly rate, the amount of the agreed upon fee. The
 court shall then tax attorneys' fees, which the court
determines to be reasonable, to be paid by the losing party;
provided that this amount shall not exceed twenty-five per
cent of the judgment.
 
As the supreme court has often stated:
 
'Assumpsit' is a common law form of action which allows for
the recovery of damages for non-performance of a contract,
either express or implied, written or [oral], as well as
quasi contractual obligations.
 
Kahala Royal Corp. v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 113 
Hawai'i 251, 281, 151 P.3d 732, 762 (2007) (citations omitted). 
7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In Kahala Royal, the court explained:
 
In ascertaining the nature of the proceedings on
appeal, this court has looked to the essential character of
 
the underlying action in the circuit court.
The character of the action should be determined from
 
the facts and issues raised in the complaint, the nature of
the entire grievance, and the relief sought. Where there is
 doubt as to whether an action is in assumpsit or in tort,
there is a presumption that the suit is in assumpsit.
Further, a plaintiff's prayer for attorney fees is a
significant indication that the action is in assumpsit.
In addition, the manner in which the plaintiff has
characterized the action may also be accorded some weight.
 
Id. (citations, brackets, elipses, and internal quotation marks
 
omitted; format altered).
 
In the case at bar, Inouye did not seek to collect
 
money damages based on breach of contract. Instead, Inouye
 
alleged that Hughes converted Inouye's property and moneys,
 
usurped Inouye's corporate opportunity, breached a fiduciary duty
 
owed to Inouye as a business partner, unjustly enriched himself
 
at Inouye's expense, made actionable misrepresentations, and
 
defamed Inouye. These causes of action sound in tort and
 
restitution.2 In addition, Inouye raised "derivative claims" on
 
behalf of Da Company, sought an accounting of the parties'
 respective interests in the business, and sought punitive damages
 
and a dissolution of Da Company. The Circuit Court rejected
 
Inouye's claims, and instead adopted Hughes's view that the
 
parties' relationship was merely that of an employer-employee. 
Nevertheless, based on the factual allegations and issues raised
 
in the complaint, the essential character of this action is that
 
Hughes wrongly took property, money, and business opportunities
 
that belonged to Inouye. Inouye did not assert claims for breach
 
2
 See generally R ESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 222A (Conversion), § 525
et seq. (Misrepresentation), § 558 et seq. (Defamation) (1965); TSA Int'l Ltd.
v. Shimizu Corp., 92 Hawai' i at 264, 990 P.2d at 734 (breach of fiduciary duty
sounds in tort); Meridian Mortg., Inc. v. First Hawaiian Bank, 109 Hawai' i 35,
47, 122 P.3d 1133, 1145 (App. 2005) (discussing tort of interference withprospective business advantage); Durette v. Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105Hawai'i 490, 502-04, 100 P.3d 60, 72-74 (2004) (distinguishing a claim for
unjust enrichment, based on principles of restitution, from claims sounding incontract or tort). 
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of a contract, express or implied. The mere fact that Inouye's
 
claims relate to a contractual or quasi-contractual relationship
 
between the parties does not render the dispute between the
 
parties to be in the nature of assumpsit. Accordingly, we
 
conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in granting
 
an award of attorney's fees to Hughes pursuant to HRS § 607-14.
 
For the foregoing reasons, the Circuit Court's May 18,
 
2007 Final Judgment is affirmed in part and reversed in part. 
The Circuit Court's award of attorney's fees to Hughes in the
 
amount of $26,439.50 is reversed. In all other respects, the
 
Circuit Court's May 18, 2007 Final Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 29, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Seth M. Reiss 
for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
Richard E. Wilson for Defendant-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
9 