 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29961
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
GERALD VILLANUEVA, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 09-1-0018 (Cr. No. 05-1-0946))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Gerald Villanueva (Villanueva)
 
appeals from the Order Denying Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or
 
Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from Custody (Order)
 
filed on July 14, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(circuit court).1
 
In the underlying criminal case, Villanueva entered a
 
guilty plea to Forgery in the Second Degree, Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes § 708-852 (Supp. 2009). The circuit court sentenced
 
Villanueva to five years of imprisonment with a mandatory minimum
 
of one year and eight months as a repeat offender. Villanueva
 
did not file a direct appeal from his conviction.
 
On May 13, 2009, pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40, Villanueva filed a Petition for Post­
2
Conviction Relief  (First Petition), alleging three grounds.  
Villanueva alleged that the Hawai 'i Paroling Authority (HPA) and 
its Chairman, Albert Tufono, (collectively, Tufono) violated Villanueva's rights to be free from cruel and unusual punishment, 
to a fair hearing, and to equal protection and due process under 
the United States and Hawai
'i Constitutions. 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 
2
 A Petition for Post-Conviction Relief is also known as a Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from Custody.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The circuit court deemed the First Petition a non­
conforming petition and ordered Villanueva to file a conforming
 
petition within thirty days. On May 20, 2009, Villanueva filed a
 
conforming Petition for Post-Conviction Relief (Second Petition). 
In his Second Petition, Villanueva referenced the three grounds
 
and facts stated in his First Petition as grounds for relief in
 
the Second Petition. Villanueva also alleged a fourth ground: 
the increase in his punishment violated the ex post facto
 
prohibition of the United States Constitution.
 
On June 2, 2009, Villanueva filed an Amendment to the
 
Second Petition. The Amendment set forth the same grounds for
 
relief as the First Petition, but included additional supporting
 
facts. In the Amendment, Villanueva stated the following three
 
grounds for relief:
 
A.	 Ground One - [Tufono] violated my 8th Amendment rights
to the U.S. Constitution and Hawaii Constitution to
 cruel and unusual punishment inflicted, and the 14
Amend U.S. Const. Due Process.
 
Supporting Facts: On May 25, I was sentenced to 5 years with
a mandatory of 20 months by Judge Dexter Del Rosario,
First Circuit Court. I have also seen the Parole
 Board to set a minimum sentence. The board members
 stated that I had an escape in 2001 to CR. 01-1-0217
that they cannot program me to a minimum facility.
Means, that they cannot send me to a minimum facility
because of my escape to do any program. This includes
 "work furlough." So the board members recommended
 that I do the clean and sober in Halawa Correction
 Facility, and do cognitive skills and parenting. This
 is my recommended program that was originally set by
HPA, members.
 
The Parole Board Members set my minimum sentence of
punishment to 30 months. After completing my sentence
of 30 months, I have seen the Parole Board for parole
consideration. On Nov. 2007 my parole denied. I have
 completed all my recommended program and met all the
criteria for parole.
 
I have produced my certificate for the Salvation Army
level II [sic] in-house treatment, cognitive skills
and parenting. I have completed all of my recommended
 programs. [Tufono] added: "I want you to do work
furlough and I will see you in one year." I have
 waited patiently for one year to go to a minimum
facility, but [Tufono] did not send me. My next
parole consideration is on Aug. 2008. After
 completing my punishment of one year sentence, I said
to [Tufono] "you did not send me to a minimum facility
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to do work furlough." He stated: "We will try this
again, I will see you in 6 months." My concern now
is, doing 6 more months for nothing. So I asked: 
[Tufono] what if, I am not in work furlough in 6
months, he stated that "I will parole you." My next
parole consideration will be Feb. 2009. After
 completing my 6 months sentence of punishment [Tufono]
denied my parole and punish me to 9 more months of
punishment. My next parole consideration will be Nov.
2009. I will be doing a total of 57 months from what
was suppose[d] to originally be 30 months. This is a
 violation of my 8th Amendment right to cruel and
unusual punishment and by punishing me to multiple and
excessive minimum sentence.
 
B.	 Ground two - [Tufono] violated my 6th Amendment rights
to be an impartial decision maker and to have a fair
hearing under Article I, section 14, State
Constitution and the 14 Amend, U.S. Const. Due Process
and Equal Protection of the laws.
 
Supporting Facts: [I] was denied a fair hearing, that is
guaranteed under Article I, section 14 State
Constitution and 6th Amendment U.S. Constitution. 
[Tufono] violated a similar form of my 6th Amendment
rights by not giving me a fair hearing by an impartial
parole Board member. 
C.	 Ground three - [Tufono] violated my 14 Amendment right
to the U.S. Constitution and Article I, section 5
State Constitution.
 
Supporting Facts:  [Tufono] violated my 14 Amendment U.S.
Constitution and Article I, section 5 State
Constitution that is guaranteed a right, nor shall any
state deprive any person of life, liberty, or pursuit
of happiness, or property, without due process of law;
nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the
equal protection of the laws; that is guaranteed a
right under State and Federal Constitution. I have
 seen inmates go home with high misconduct and without
doing any programs. What is good for one inmate is
good for another inmate is also good for Villanueva of
equal rights protection and Due Process of law under
14 Amendment U.S. Constitution and Article I, section
5, State Constitution.
 
Apprendi vs. New Jersey (2000)
State of Hawai' i vs. Miti Maugaotega Jr. 
The 14 Amendment right protect petitioner Villanueva of
Equal Rights what was good for Apprendi is good for Miti
Maugaotega Jr. is good for Villanueva under the 14 Amendment
Equal Rights protection of the laws, United States Supreme
Court and the Supreme Court of Hawaii upholds this law to
all convicted felons in the United States and Hawaii.
 
(Emphasis in original.)
 
On appeal, Villanueva states ten "Questions Presented
 
for Review" and several incoherent reasons for granting his
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeal. In his tenth Question Presented, Villanueva requests
 
this court "[t]o review all grounds and supporting facts on Rule
 
40 HRPP."
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve
 
Villanueva's points of error as follows:
 
(1) To the extent that Villanueva's Questions 
Presented one through nine, grounds, and supporting facts on 
appeal were not made in the Second Petition, they are denied. 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4). 
(2) Villanueva is not entitled to parole after
 
expiration of his thirty-month minimum sentence. The maximum
 
sentence of five years for Forgery in the Second Degree does not
 
constitute cruel and unusual punishment because it is not so
 
disproportionate to the conduct proscribed and of such duration
 
as to "shock the conscience of reasonable persons or to outrage
 
the moral sense of the community." State v. Kumukau, 71 Haw.
 
218, 227, 787 P.2d 682, 687 (1990) (internal quotation marks and
 citation omitted).
 
(2) Villanueva's claim that he was denied a fair
 
hearing is conclusory and without any supporting facts as to how
 
his hearing was unfair or how Tufono was not impartial. 
Therefore, the claim is without merit.
 
(3) Villanueva's claim that he was treated differently
 
than other similarly situated inmates by being denied parole
 
while other inmates who had committed high misconduct were
 
paroled is unsupported by any specific facts such as specific
 
inmate names and records of similarly situated inmates. 
Therefore, his claim is conclusory and without merit. Villanueva
 
was not sentenced to an extended term, but rather to a mandatory
 
minimum sentence as a repeat offender. Therefore, the holdings
 
in Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 120 S. Ct. 2348 (2000),
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and State v. Maugaotega, 115 Hawai 'i 432, 168 P.3d 562 (2007), do 
not apply. See Loher v. State, 118 Hawai 'i 522, 534 n.8, 193 
P.3d 438, 450 n.8 (App. 2008), cert. dismissed, No. 27844, 2009 
WL 2386283 (Hawai 'i Aug. 5, 2009), (citing Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 
490, 120 S. Ct. at 2362-63). 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order Denying Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
 from Custody filed on July 14, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 31, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Gerald Villanueva,
Petitioner-Appellant pro se. 
Diane K. Taira and 
Darcy H. Kishida,Deputy Attorneys General,for Respondent-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
5
 