  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29623
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BEN BALDADO, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 06-1-0196K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ben Baldado (Baldado) was convicted
 
of second degree murder, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) § 707-701.5 (1993). The victim of the alleged murder was
 Jonah Mettler (Mettler). Mettler was last seen alive on August
 26, 2003. On November 14, 2003, Mettler's body was found wrapped
 in a black material, under a mattress box spring, at a beach. He
 had three gunshots wounds to the head.
 
Baldado was found guilty after a jury trial and was
 
sentenced to life imprisonment with the possibility of parole,
 subject to a mandatory minimum term of ten years. He appeals
 from the Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the Third
 Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
1/
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided over the proceedings
relevant to this appeal.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Baldado argues that his conviction must be 
vacated because the Circuit Court erred in: (1) allowing an 
alternate juror to replace a pregnant juror who became sick after the jury began deliberating, in violation of Hawai
'i Rules of 
2
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 24(c) (2000);  and (2) admitting into
evidence recorded statements he made to a police detective who
 died before trial, in violation of his constitutional right of
 confrontation. For the reasons discussed below, we affirm
 Baldado's conviction. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 A.
 
The following evidence was adduced at trial. Baldado
 
and Mettler knew each other, and they met and spoke at Mettler's
 house on the night of August 25, 2003. Mettler disappeared on
 August 26, 2003. Before leaving home early that morning, Mettler
 told his girlfriend that he had to take Baldado somewhere. 
According to the girlfriend, Mettler was using and selling "ice,"
 and he constantly had drugs and money on him.
 
Baldado had been incarcerated in July 2003. Baldado's
 
fellow inmates testified that Baldado said he was going to kill
 Mettler by shooting him when Baldado was released from
 incarceration. Baldado made arrangements with one inmate to
 purchase guns, and the inmate's sister testified that she had 
provided a rifle, wrapped in a towel, to Baldado. Other
 witnesses testified that shortly before Mettler disappeared,
 Baldado said he was going to shoot Mettler; Baldado was seen in
 possession of a rifle wrapped in a towel or blanket; and that
 
2/
 HRPP Rule 24(c) provides, in relevant part:
 
Alternate jurors.  The court may direct that not more than 4
jurors in addition to the regular jury be called and impaneled to
sit as alternate jurors who shall, in the order in which they are
called, replace jurors who, prior to the time the jury retires to
consider its verdict, become or are found to be unable or
disqualified to perform their duties. An alternate juror who does
not replace a regular juror shall be discharged when the jury
retires to consider its verdict. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Baldado said he would be coming into possession of drugs and
 
money.
 
After Mettler disappeared, his family began looking for
 
him. Mettler's Toyota truck was missing and someone was using
 the cell phone that Mettler's girlfriend had given to Mettler.
 Mettler's mother was able to retrieve messages left on that
 phone, which included several left for "Ben." On September 1,
 2003, Mettler's mother, father, and brother saw Mettler's truck
 on the road heading toward Kawaihae. They followed the truck
 until it stopped. Mettler's mother called the police and
 Mettler's father and brother went to the truck. Baldado was the
 driver and sole occupant of the truck, and he eventually admitted
 that the truck belonged to Mettler. Baldado also had the cell
 phone that Mettler's girlfriend had given to Mettler.
 
When the police arrived, Baldado said that the truck's
 
owner had gone to Oahu to pick up drugs and that Baldado was
 watching the truck for the owner. Baldado agreed to give the
 truck to Mettler's parents, and he was not arrested at that time. 
Witnesses testified that between the time of Mettler's
 
disappearance and the recovery of Mettler's truck by his family,
 they had seen Baldado in possession of the truck. Two witnesses
 observed blood in the back of the truck. Baldado told one
 witness that he had recently caught a pig and told the other
 witness that the blood was from fishing. After Mettler's
 disappearance, Baldado attempted to use or permitted others to
 use Mettler's VISA card; attempted to cash a check purportedly
 signed by Mettler, which the credit union refused to cash due to
 concerns about the signature; and used a check purportedly signed
 by Mettler to pay for a stereo system for a Toyota truck he said
 he had just purchased.
 
On November 14, 2003, Mettler's body was found by 
beach goers under a mattress box spring, wrapped in a black
 material used for plants, near a surf spot. An autopsy indicated
 that Mettler died of three gunshot wounds to the head. A rolled
 towel with electrical tape around it was found near the body. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
According to a forensic science expert, the towel had been over
 
the muzzle of the firearm when the shots were fired and had
 served to muffle the sound of the gunshots. The towel had blood
 on one side, soot from the muzzle of a gun on the other, and
 holes which indicated three shots had been fired. Baldado's
 fingerprints matched those found on the underside of the
 electrical tape.
 
B.
 
Between September 19, 2003 and November 20, 2003, 
Baldado gave numerous recorded statements to the police that were admitted at trial. Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) 
introduced Miranda-rights waivers signed by Baldado in connection with these recorded statements. Transcripts of these recorded statements were also introduced at trial. Detective William Souther (Detective Souther) participated in or witnessed all of the recorded statements introduced at trial, but arrived after the interview had begun for one of the statements. Detective Souther conducted the first several interviews and Detective Wayne Keala Young (Detective Young) conducted the last three interviews. Detective Souther monitored the last two interviews conducted by Detective Young from an adjoining equipment room from which Detective Souther could see into the interview room and hear the audio of the interview. Detective Young died in 2004, before Baldado was brought to trial. 
During both the interviews conducted by Detective
 
Souther and the interviews conducted by Detective Young, Baldado
 said that he had been present when a person named "Pat" shot
 Mettler. However, Baldado gave conflicting details on how
 Mettler had been shot and what Baldado had done after the
 shooting. Detective Souther was not able to find any person
 named "Pat" as described by Baldado.
 
Prior to trial, the Circuit Court held a hearing on the
 
motion of the State to determine the voluntariness of the
 statements Baldado had made to the police. The Circuit Court
 ruled that Baldado's recorded statements, including the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
statements made to Detective Young that were introduced at trial,
 
were voluntary. In support of its ruling, the Circuit Court
 cited the evidence presented by the State, which included
 Detective Souther's testimony, as well as its own observation and
 review of the video and audio taped interview statements.
 
II.
 
A.
 
After the State rested, Baldado decided not to put on
 
any evidence. After closing arguments, the Circuit Court advised
 the three alternate jurors:
 
At this time I am going to excuse you, but not
discharge you. What that means is that you folks will not
be coming back to court to deliberate unless for some reason
one of the remaining twelve jurors is unable to complete
deliberation. 
After discussing how the notebooks of the alternate and
 
deliberating jurors would be handled, the Circuit Court stated:
 
With that, please keep an open mind in this case until
you begin deliberations. Do not discuss this case with
 
anyone except when you are together as a group and do not
allow anyone to discuss the case with you. Please do not
 talk to the defendant, the lawyers, or any of the witnesses,
and do not investigate the case in any way. Also do not
 read or listen to any media accounts of this case if there
are any. Your decision in this case must be based
 exclusively on the evidence that you have received in this
courtroom and on the Court's jury instructions.
 
With that, you are excused. And you will return to
the jury room tomorrow morning.
 
The jury began its deliberations on Friday, October 31,
 
2008. At 2:01 p.m., the Circuit Court filed Jury Question No. 1,
 
which stated: "We request Detective William G. Souther 1st
 testimony on 10/15/08." A short time later, the Circuit Court
 filed a written response, which stated: "You are to rely upon
 your memories of the evidence. If you are interested in a
 specific portion of testimony, however, please narrow your
 request and it will be considered."
 
Later that afternoon, at 2:47 p.m., the Circuit Court
 
filed Jury Question No. 2, which stated: "We are requesting Det.
 William G. Souther testimony regarding visit to plumeria farm on
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
9/10/03. We believe testimony was given on 10/15/08." The
 
Circuit Court determined that the requested testimony was
 actually given on October 16, 2008. The parties disputed what
 portion of the testimony should be read back to the jury, and the
 Circuit Court reserved ruling until the court reporter could
 prepare a transcript of the testimony. The Circuit Court called
 the jurors into court and informed them that it had located the
 requested testimony, but that it "will take us some time to put
 that together in a form that can be read back to you." Because
 the jury's trial schedule had been Tuesday through Friday and the
 following Tuesday was a holiday, the Circuit Court gave the jury
 the option of resuming deliberations on the following Monday or
 Wednesday. The record indicates that the jury did not resume
 deliberations until the following Wednesday, November 5, 2008.
 
After reviewing the transcripts of Detective Souther's
 
testimony, the Circuit Court determined that the transcripts were
 not clear and that it would be difficult to comply with the
 jury's request in a non-prejudicial manner. Accordingly, on
 November 5, 2008, at 10:22 a.m., the Circuit Court filed its
 response to Jury Question No. 2 as follows: "The Court and the
 parties have evaluated your request in an attempt to isolate the
 testimony sought. The Court has ruled that you should rely upon
 your memories of the evidence."
 
Later that day, at 2:47 p.m., the Circuit Court filed 
Jury Question No. 3, which stated: "We as the jury can not come
 to a unanimous decision, what do we do now?" At 3:20 p.m., the
 
Circuit Court reconvened to address the jury on Jury Question No.
 
3. The Circuit Court noted that while the trial had consumed
 
about five-weeks, the jury had only been deliberating for "about
 a day and a half total time." The Circuit Court asked the jury
 to continue to deliberate and read back the following
 instruction:
 
A verdict must represent the considered judgment of
each juror. And in order to return a verdict, it is
necessary that each juror agree thereto. In other words,
your verdict must be unanimous. Each of you must decide the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
case for yourself. But it is your duty to consult with one
another and to deliberate with a view to reaching an
agreement if you can do so without violating your individual
judgment.
 
In the course of your deliberations, do not hesitate
to reexamine your own views and change your opinion if
convinced it is erroneous. But do not surrender your honest
belief as to the weight or effect of evidence for the mere
purpose of returning a verdict. With that, I'm going to ask
that you return to deliberation.
 
On Thursday, November 6, 2008, at 10:32 a.m., the
 
Circuit Court filed Jury Question No. 4, which stated: "Can we
 
get all 11 copies of the transcript from the videos. Audio
 quality on the video is bad." The Circuit Court filed its
 response at 11:55 a.m. that day. The Circuit Court granted the
 jury's request and instructed the jurors that they were to review
 the transcripts only in conjunction with their review of the
 video and audio recordings. 
B.
 
On Friday, November 7, 2008, at 11:17 a.m., the Circuit
 
Court filed Jury Question No. 5, which stated: "Juror #3 who is
 pregnant has been in pain & is concerned about not having any
 movement of the child over the past 24 hours. She has contacted
 her doctor & they have suggested she go into emergency room at
 K.K.C. We request an alternate juror." Baldado objected to
 
replacing Juror # 3 with an alternate juror, arguing that the
 replacement would violating HRPP Rule 24. Juror #3 was taken to
 the hospital. The Circuit Court advised the remaining jurors
 that they could not deliberate without a full twelve-member jury. 
The Circuit Court excused the jury at 1:19 p.m. and directed them
 to return on Wednesday, November 12, 2008. 
In the meantime, on Monday, November 10, 2008, the
 
Circuit Court held a hearing to question the three alternate
 jurors to determine whether they were "still qualified to sit as
 a juror in [the] case." The first alternate juror, who 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
eventually was substituted for Juror #3, was questioned by the
 
Circuit Court as follows:
 
THE COURT: I am going to remind you that you are
still under oath as a juror.
 
You were asked to come back to court today because it
may be necessary for the Court to seat an alternate juror on
Wednesday. So you've been asked to come back to court today
so that we can talk with you to determine whether or not you
are still qualified to sit as a juror in this case. Okay?
 
[ALTERNATE JUROR]: Yes.
 
THE COURT: Okay. So I'm going to be asking you some
questions to aid us in that decision. All right?
 
[ALTERNATE JUROR]: Yes.
 THE COURT: Okay. Have you read or heard anything
about this case since being excused?
 
[ALTERNATE JUROR]: No.
 THE COURT: Have you discussed this case with anyone?
 [ALTERNATE JUROR]: No.
 THE COURT: If you are seated on Wednesday, there will
be a requirement that jury deliberations begin anew. So,
your fellow jurors have deliberated for several days. Would
 you be able to hold your fellow jurors to the requirement
that they start all over with you?
 
[ALTERNATE JUROR]: Yeah. Yes.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Have you formed any opinions about
this case?
 
[ALTERNATE JUROR]: Nothing.
 THE COURT: So do you believe that you could sit with
your fellow jurors and discuss this case, and then form an
opinion about it?
 
[ALTERNATE JUROR]: Yeah.
 
In response to Baldado's request, the Circuit Court
 
asked the following additional questions: 
THE COURT: [Alternate Juror], during the jury
selection process there were questions asked -- and I can't
remember if it was asked specifically of you, but it was
asked of other jurors -- whether they would be able to hold
to their opinions if convinced that their opinion was
correct. Do you believe that you could still do that?
 
[ALTERNATE JUROR]: Oh, yes.
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you also believe that you could
listen to the opinions of other jurors, and if convinced
that your opinion was in error, change your opinion?
 
[ALTERNATE JUROR]: No problem with that.
 
THE COURT: Okay. You can do both?
 [ALTERNATE JUROR]: Yes.
 THE COURT: And this is just sort of a follow-up to
one of the questions. If you had a question about -- that
you wanted to review a piece of evidence, for example, that
was introduced, and the rest of the jurors said, 'Oh, we
already talked about that,' would you still be able to say,
'Well, I haven't been able to look at that, and it's
important to me that I be able to evaluate that evidence'?
Do you think you could stand up for yourself for that?
 
[ALTERNATE JUROR]: Oh yeah. Yes.
 
The Circuit Court asked the parties if anything else was
 
requested, and both sides responded no.
 
On Wednesday, November 12, 2008, after receiving
 
information about Juror #3's medical condition from her doctor,
 Baldado and the State agreed that Juror #3 needed to be excused. 
Baldado, however, maintained his objection to replacing Juror #3
 with an alternate juror based on HRPP Rule 24(c). The Circuit
 Court overruled Baldado's objection. The Circuit Court called in
 the jury and instructed the jury as follows:
 
The Court has thanked and excused juror number 3 from
further jury service in this case, and it has now become
necessary to seat an alternate juror.
 
Once we seat an alternate juror, the jury is to begin
jury deliberations again. You are instructed to disregard
your prior deliberations and to start your deliberations
anew; in other words, you are to start your consideration of
the evidence and the law as if previous deliberations have
not occurred. We will be directing you to go back to the
jury deliberation room to select a foreperson and to start
over.
 
Is there anyone who cannot follow these instructions?
The record will reflect no response.
 
The Circuit Court then called in the first alternate
 
juror, seated him on the jury, and then further instructed the
 
jury as follows:
 
[Alternate Juror], this Court has now seated you as
juror number 3 in this case.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
As I stated a moment ago, ladies and gentlemen of the
jury, an alternate juror has now been seated as a juror. In
 
addition to the instructions that you were previously
provided in this case, you are now instructed to disregard
your prior deliberations in this case and to start your
deliberations anew. In other words, you are to start your
consideration of the evidence and law of this case as if
 previous deliberations have not occurred.
 
The Circuit Court then reread portions of the
 
previously-given jury instructions that directed the jurors to
 
elect a foreperson upon retiring to the jury room; advised the
 jurors that they "may take such time as you feel necessary for
 your deliberations"; and instructed them about completing the
 verdict form, communicating with the court, limiting their
 consideration to evidence presented in the case, and following
 certain rules while not deliberating. The Circuit Court then
 excused the jury "to resume deliberations." Baldado's counsel
 brought to the Circuit Court's attention that it had used the
 term "resume deliberations" when excusing the jury. The Circuit
 Court recalled the jury and again emphasized to the jury that it
 was to begin deliberations anew, stating: 
It was pointed out to me that as I was instructing you
to leave the courtroom, I used the word 'resume' jury
deliberation, when, in fact, what you should be doing is
'beginning' deliberation anew. So that there is no
 misunderstanding, you are to start over. So if I misled
 anybody with the words that I used when I excused you
before, you are now excused to begin deliberations.
 
The jury exited the courtroom to begin deliberations at
 
approximately 9:31 a.m.
 
Later that day, at 2:58 p.m., the Circuit Court
 
reconvened and informed Baldado and the State that the jury had
 reached a verdict. The jury found Baldado guilty as charged of
 second degree murder. The Circuit Court subsequently entered its
 Judgment on January 8, 2009, and this appeal followed. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Baldado argues that allowing an alternate juror to
 
replace a pregnant juror who became sick (Juror #3) after the
 jury began deliberating violated HRPP Rule 24(c) and did not
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
constitute harmless error. HRPP Rule 24(c) provides in pertinent
 
part that "alternate jurors . . . shall . . . replace jurors who,
 prior to the time the jury retires to consider its verdict,
 become or are found to be unable or disqualified to perform their
 duties. An alternate juror who does not replace a regular juror
 shall be discharged when the jury retires to consider its
 verdict." We agree that the substitution of the alternate juror
 for Juror #3 violated HRPP Rule 24(c) because the substitution
 took place after the jury had already "retire[d] to consider its
 verdict." We conclude, however, that this violation was harmless
 beyond a reasonable doubt. 
A.
 
In State v. Wideman, 69 Haw. 268, 739 P.2d 931 (1987), 
the Hawai
'i Supreme Court applied the harmless error analysis to 
a violation HRPP Rule 24(c). In Wideman, the trial court substituted an alternate juror for a juror who was unable to continue deliberations because of illness, over the defendant's objection that the ill juror should have been allowed to return when able. Id. at 269, 739 P.2d at 931-32. The jury had 
indicated to the court that it was deadlocked both before and after the substitution. Id. at 269, 739 P.2d at 932. 
In holding that the substitution violated HRPP Rule
 
24(c), the supreme court explained:
 
When an alternate juror is called to replace a juror
after the jury had been deliberating, the alternate juror is
subject to potential undue pressure from the original jury
members to reach a conclusion they may have agreed upon
during their prior deliberations. See U.S. v. Lamb, 529
 
F.2d 1153, 1156 (9th Cir.1975). Because the trial judge did
not instruct the new jury to begin its deliberations anew,
the probability of undue pressure was further enhanced. Cf.
id.
 
Id. at 269, 739 P.2d at 932. The court rejected the State's
 
claim that the violation of HRPP Rule 24(c) was harmless error,
 stating:
 
In view of the conflicting testimony between Wideman
and the victim, the jury being deadlocked during much of its
deliberations, and the lack of an instruction to the new
jury to begin its deliberations anew, we cannot say the HRPP 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rule 24(c) violation was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
State v. Domingo, 69 Haw. 68, 733 P.2d 690 (1987).
 
Id.
 
B.
 
Baldado's case is distinguishable from Wideman. Unlike
 
in Wideman, the Circuit Court took great pains to ensure that
 
both the alternate juror and the original jurors understood, and
 would comply with, the requirement that the jury must begin its
 deliberations anew after the alternate juror was substituted. 
The alternate juror assured the Circuit Court and the parties
 "under oath as a juror" that he would be able to hold his fellow
 jurors to the requirement that they begin deliberations anew. 
The Circuit Court emphasized to the original jurors the
 importance of their obligation to disregard their prior
 deliberations and to start deliberating anew by stating these
 instructions both immediately before and after replacing Juror #3
 with the alternate juror. When questioned by the Circuit Court,
 none of the original jurors indicated that they could not follow
 the Circuit Court's instructions. The Circuit Court further
 emphasized the importance of the jurors' beginning their
 deliberations anew by recalling the jurors and repeating this
 requirement to avoid any possibility that its excusing them to
 "resume deliberations" might be misconstrued. 
"[J]urors are presumed to follow the court's 
instructions[.]" State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai
'i 405, 415-16, 16 
P.3d 246, 256-57 (2001). We conclude that the Circuit Court's repeated instructions served to remove any reasonable possibility that the jurors would not begin their deliberations anew or that the alternate juror would be subject or would succumb to potential undue pressure from the original jurors to reach conclusions they had already agreed upon during their prior deliberations. 
Moreover, unlike in Wideman, there was no conflict
 
between the State's case and the defense's case, since Baldado
 rested without presenting evidence. While the jury expressed its
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inability to reach a unanimous verdict early in the
 
deliberations, it appeared to move forward and requested
 additional copies of the transcripts of Baldado's recorded
 statements after the Circuit Court instructed the jury to
 continue its deliberations. Baldado's jury did not indicate it
 was deadlocked both before and after the substitution of the
 alternate juror or appear to be deadlocked during much of its
 deliberations as was the case in Wideman. We also note that the
 jury's deliberations were sporadic before the alternate juror was
 substituted. The jury spent much of this time awaiting guidance
 from the Circuit Court on the availability of trial transcripts;
 in recess due to weekends, holidays, and an agreed-upon day off;
 and unable to deliberate due to the unavailability of Juror #3. 
Under the circumstances of this case, we conclude that the
 violation of HRPP Rule 24(c) was harmless and did not affect
 Baldado's substantial rights.
 
II.
 
Relying on Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36 (2004),
 
Baldado argues that the Circuit Court violated his constitutional
 right to confront witnesses at trial by admitting recorded
 statements Baldado made to Detective Young, who died before
 trial. In particular, Baldado argues that Detective Young's
 testimony was necessary to establish that Baldado's recorded
 statements were voluntary and that Detective Young's death
 precluded the State from establishing the voluntariness of
 Baldado's statements. We conclude that Baldado's reliance on
 Crawford is misplaced and that his arguments are without merit.
 
In Crawford, the United States Supreme Court held that
 
under the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment,
 testimonial hearsay is inadmissible unless the declarant is
 unavailable and the defendant has had a prior opportunity to
 cross-examine the declarant. Crawford, 541 U.S. at 59. In
 
explaining the limits of its holding, the Supreme Court stated
 that the Confrontation Clause "does not bar the use of
 testimonial statements for purposes other than establishing the
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
truth of the matter asserted." Id. at 59 n.9 (citing Tennessee
 
v. Street, 471 U.S. 409 (1985)).3
 
With respect to Baldado's recorded statements, it is
 
Baldado, not Detective Young, who is the relevant "declarant" and
 
whose statements are being offered for their truth. The
 questions or statements of Detective Young are not hearsay
 because they are not offered for their truth, but only to provide
 context for Baldado's statements. See United States v.
 
Hendricks, 395 F.3d 173, 183-84 (3rd Cir. 2005) (holding that the
 statements of a confidential informant made in recorded
 conversations with a defendant, which place the defendant's
 statements into context, are not hearsay and are admissible);
 Turner v. Commonwealth, 248 S.W.3d 543. 545-46 (Ky. 2008) (same). 
Thus, Detective Young's unavailability due to his death does not
 bar the admission of the recorded statements Baldado made in
 interviews conducted by Detective Young.
 
The same basic analysis also applies to Baldado's
 
arguments regarding the voluntariness of his statements. The
 statements made by Detective Young in advising Baldado of his
 Miranda rights were not offered for the truth of the matter
 asserted, but rather were simply offered to show that the
 statements were made. See Washington v. State, 568 P.2d 301,
 
308-09 (Okla. Crim. App. 1977) (concluding that Miranda warning
 was not hearsay because it was not offered to prove the truth of
 the matter asserted); State v. McClain, 551 P.2d 806, 807-08
 
3/
 In Tennessee v. Street, the Supreme Court held that the defendant's
 
rights under the Confrontation Clause were not violated by the introduction of
an accomplice's confession for the nonhearsay purpose of rebutting the
defendant's claim that the defendant's confession was the coerced imitation 
of the accomplice's confession. Street, 471 U.S. at 411-14. At trial, a
sheriff was permitted to read to the jury the confession of the accomplice,
who did not testify. Id. at 411-12, 416. The Court noted that the
 
accomplice's confession was not hearsay because it was not offered to prove
the truth of the accomplice's assertions, but to show that the defendant's
confession included different details than the accomplice's confession and
thus had not been a coerced imitation of the accomplice's confession. Id. at
 
413-14. The Court concluded that "[t]he nonhearsay aspect of [the
accomplice's] confession -- not to prove what happened at the murder scene but
to prove what happened when [defendant] confessed -- raises no Confrontation
Clause concerns. Id. at 414. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Kan. 1976) (same). For example, Detective Young's statement to
 
Baldado that Baldado had the right to remain silent was not
 offered to prove that Baldado had that right, but only to show
 that Detective Young had informed Baldado of that right, for
 purposes of evaluating whether Baldado had validly waived his
 rights. Because Detective Young's statements to Baldado in
 obtaining Baldado's waiver of Miranda rights were not hearsay,
 the introduction of evidence regarding Detective Young's advice­of-rights statements do not implicate Baldado's confrontation
 rights and were not barred by Crawford. 
We also reject Baldado's related argument that
 
Detective Young's death precluded the State from establishing
 that the statements Baldado made to Detective Young were
 voluntary. The State introduced ample evidence to support the
 Circuit Court's finding that Baldado's recorded statements
 admitted at trial, which were made during interviews by Detective
 Young, were voluntary. This included the waiver of rights forms
 signed by Baldado and the testimony of Detective Souther who
 participated in or monitored Detective Young's interviews. For
 the one interview that began before Detective Souther's arrival,
 Detective Souther testified that he reviewed the videotape of the
 advice of rights administered by Detective Young, which appeared
 to show that Baldado understood his rights, and also recognized
 Detective Young's handwriting on the advice-of-rights form. In
 addition, the Circuit Court reviewed the recorded statements
 themselves in concluding that Baldado's statements were
 voluntary. 
If Baldado's argument were accepted, the prosecution
 
would never be permitted to admit a defendant's recorded
 statements if the officer conducting the interview subsequently
 died or otherwise was unavailable to testify at trial, even if
 other evidence establishing the voluntariness of the statements 
was available. Baldado cites no authority to support this
 proposition. We also reject Baldado's claim that Detective
 Young's death prevented Baldado from offering evidence to show
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that his statements were involuntary. Baldado was free to
 
present his own testimony to support such a claim. 
CONCLUSION 
We affirm the Judgment entered by the Circuit Court. DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 30, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Vaughan S. Winborne Jr.
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Linda L. Walton Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
16
 