 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29905

IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
WELLS FARGO BANK, N.A., AS TRUSTEE FOR OPTION
ONE MORTGAGE LOAN TRUST 2007-CPI ASSET-BACKED

CERTIFICATES, SERIES 2007-CPI, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CAROL JEAN HIMALAYA-FIDELE, Defendant-Appellant
and JOHN AND MARY DOES 1-10, Defendants

APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

(CIVIL NO. 08-1-1478)

SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Carol Jean Himalaya-Fidele

(Appellant) appeals from a Judgment entered by the Circuit Court

of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) on June 8, 2009, and

challenges the Circuit Court's Order Granting a Motion for

Summary Judgment and for Writ of Ejectment, in favor of

Plaintiff-Appellee Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as Trustee for Option

One Mortgage Loan Trust 2007-CP1 Asset-Backed Certificates,

Series 2007-CP1 (Wells Fargo).1

On appeal, Appellant generally contends that the party 
who conducted the non-judicial foreclosure sale of Appellant's 
property, located at 1565 Ahihi Street, Honolulu, Hawai' i, 96819 
(Property), had no statutory or contractual right to foreclose; 
1/

The Honorable Karen N. Blondin presided.

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and therefore, the transfer of title to the Property to Wells

Fargo was void.

Appellant raises three points of error on appeal:

1. The Circuit Court erred in granting summary

judgment in favor of Wells Fargo and ordering ejectment because

genuine issues of material fact were in dispute and Wells Fargo

was not entitled to judgment as a matter of law; 
 
2. The Circuit Court lacked subject matter

jurisdiction because Wells Fargo violated Hawaii Revised Statutes

(HRS) § 667-5 (1993), and therefore lacked standing to bring a

motion for ejectment; and

3. The Circuit Court failed to make sufficient 
findings in violation of Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 52(a). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to

the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Appellant's points

of error as follows:

Appellant contends that Wells Fargo lacked standing to

eject her because the underlying non-judicial foreclosure sale,

from which Wells Fargo derives its interest in the Property, is

void for failure to comply with HRS § 667-5 because Mortgage

Electronic Registration System, Inc. (MERS) was not the real

party-in-interest. This argument is without merit. 
 
The plain language of HRS § 667-5 provides that "the

mortgagee, or the mortgagee's successor in interest, or any

person authorized by the power to act in the premises, may . . .

give notice of the . . . intention to foreclose the mortgage and

of the sale of the mortgaged property." HRS § 667-5. Moreover,
 
pursuant to HRS § 667-7 (1993), "[t]he true intent and meaning of

section 667-5 is that . . . the affidavit contemplated by section

667-5 may lawfully be made by any person duly authorized to act

for the mortgagee, and in such capacity conducting the

2

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
foreclosure." Acts to be done by a mortgagee pursuant to a non-
judicial foreclosure are not required to be done personally, and 
may be performed by an attorney or a business agent. HRS § 667-7 
(1993) ("[T]he affidavit contemplated by section 667-5 may 
lawfully be made by any person duly authorized to act for the 
mortgagee, and in such capacity conducting the foreclosure."); 
Wailuku Sugar Co. v. Dean, 8 Haw. 108, 108-09 (1890); Lee v. HSBC 
Bank USA, 121 Hawai' i 287, 292, 218 P.3d 775, 780 (2009) ("A 
mortgagee, or an entity acting on its behalf, cannot, however, proceed with a nonjudicial foreclosure under a power of sale 
clause in the mortgage unless it complies with . . . HRS § 667­
5[.]"); see also Citicorp Mort., Inc. v. Bartolome, 94 Hawai' i 
422, 434, 16 P.3d 827, 839 (App. 2000) (holding, inter alia, that 
"even if Fannie Mae owned the loan prior to the foreclosure sale, 
there was no jurisdictional problem, because HRCP Rule 17(a) 
specifically allows for ratification of an action by the real 
party in interest. Fannie Mae expressly ratified the foreclosure 
action by CMI in an August 12, 1998 affidavit.") 
Here, Appellant's mortgage names MERS as mortgagee and

specifically grants and conveys to MERS "and to the successors

and assigns of MERS, with power of sale[.]" Although all
 
statutorily required notices were caused to be filed by MERS, and

the public sale was conducted by MERS, on May 9, 2008, an

Amendment of Mortgagee's Affidavit of Foreclosure Sale Under

Power of Sale (Amended Affidavit of Sale) sale was recorded in

the Bureau of Conveyances, listing Wells Fargo as the Mortgagee. 
 
The Amended Affidavit of Sale indicates that Appellant's mortgage

in favor of MERS was "assigned to Wells Fargo . . . by assignment

dated February 28, 2008, recorded as aforesaid as Document No.

2008-037028[.]" The Amended Affidavit of Sale further indicates

that the affiant "has represented and acted on behalf of [MERS],

solely as nominee and Wells Fargo . . . in the matters set forth

herein[,]" i.e., the non-judicial foreclosure proceedings. 
 
3

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Moreover, the Amended Affidavit of Sale states that "[i]n all

other respects said Mortgagee's Affidavit of Foreclosure Sale

Under Power of Sale is hereby ratified and confirmed." The

required acts under HRS § 667-5 were done by a person properly

acting for the mortgagee and therefore the provisions of the

statute are satisfied. Wells Fargo ratified the actions taken by

MERS in its Amended Affidavit of Sale, which expressly states

that the original Affidavit of Sale "is hereby ratified and

confirmed." Accordingly, even if Wells Fargo possessed the sole

authority to invoke the power of sale, it expressly ratified

MER's actions in doing so.

Appellant's argument that HRCP Rule 17(a) does not 
apply here is inapposite. This Court previously considered this 
issue in Citicorp by noting that "even if [the assignee] owned 
the loan prior to the foreclosure sale, there was no 
jurisdictional problem, because HRCP Rule 17(a) specifically 
allows for ratification of an action by the real party in 
interest." Citicorp, 94 Hawai' i at 434, 16 P.3d at 839. 
Appellant also argues that the sale to Wells Fargo was 
void because an alleged first mortgagee, American General 
Financial Services of Hawaii, Inc. (AGFS), was not given notice 
of the non-judicial foreclosure. Pursuant to HRS § 667-5, 
specifically governing non-judicial foreclosures, notice of the 
intent to foreclose and of the sale of the mortgaged property 
must be given by (1) publication of the notice for three weeks in 
a newspaper having general circulation in the county in which the 
mortgaged property lies, (2) filing notices with the State of 
Hawai'i Director of Taxation, (3) posting the notice on the 
premises of the mortgaged property, and (4) giving "such notices and do all such acts as are authorized or required by the power 
4

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contained in the mortgage."2 See HRS § 667-5. The non-judicial
 
foreclosure statute does not include a requirement that notice be

given to senior lienholders.3

In an affidavit dated April 29, 2008, counsel for MER 
attested that, in compliance with HRS §§ 667-5 through 667-10 and 
"a mortgage dated November 14, 2006, recorded in the Bureau of 
Conveyances as Document No. 2007-023057," affiant (1) forwarded a 
Notice of Intent to foreclose "to all parties who have recorded 
encumbrances, liens and/or other claims" against the Property, to 
MERS, the State of Hawai' i Department of Taxation, and to 
Appellant, (2) caused to be posted on the Property a Notice of Intent, (3) appropriately published the Notice of Intent in the 
Honolulu Star-Bulletin, and (4) that a Notice of Intent was 
recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances on February 29, 2008, as 
Document No. 2008-030379. Based on the uncontroverted evidence 
in the record, it appears that the notice requirements of HRS 
§ 667-5 were complied with, and therefore, AGFS was given 
whatever notice it was due. 
We note, also, that HRS § 667-6 (1993) provides a

mechanism for mortgage creditors to request a notice of

foreclosure, and provides, in relevant part:

Whenever a mortgage creditor having a mortgage lien on
certain premises desires notice that another mortgage
creditor having a mortgage lien on the same premises intends
to foreclose the mortgage and sell the mortgaged property

2/

The power of sale clause in Appellant's mortgage with MERS only
appears to require that additional notices be given to Appellant and to the
Lender under the mortgage. As noted above, notice was given to both Appellant
and MERS. The mortgage does not appear to require any further notice to any
additional parties.

3/

Indeed, the rights of a senior lienholder would not be
extinguished by the foreclosure by a junior lienholder. See, e.g.,
HRS § 667-3. This is, in effect, acknowledged in the Affidavit of Sale which
provides that the property is sold "without covenant or warranty, express or
implied, as to title, possession or encumbrances[.]" Nothing in the record or
in the Affidavit of Sale attempts to sell the Property "free and clear" of all
mortgages, liens, and encumbrances. Therefore, the non-judicial foreclosure
sale did not effect a termination of AGFS's first mortgage lien on the
Property, nor did Wells Fargo request that either the Circuit Court or this
Court find such a termination. 
 
5

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
pursuant to a power of sale under section 667-5, the

mortgage creditor may submit a written request to the
mortgagee foreclosing or who may foreclose the mortgage by
power of sale, to receive notice of the mortgagee's intention to foreclose the
mortgage under power of sale. This request for notice may be submitted any
time after the recordation or filing of the subject mortgage at the bureau of
conveyances or the land court, but must be submitted prior to the completion
of the publication of the mortgagee's notice of intention to foreclose the
mortgage and of the sale of the mortgaged property. This request shall be
signed by the mortgage creditor, or its authorized representative, desiring to
receive notice, specifying the name and address of the person to whom the
notice is to be mailed. The mortgagee receiving the request shall thereafter
give notice to all mortgage creditors who have timely submitted their request.
The notice shall be sent by mail or otherwise communicated to the mortgage
creditors, not less than seven calendar days prior to the date of sale.

(Emphasis added.) There is no evidence in the record that AGFS

submitted a written request for notice to either MERS or Wells

Fargo. Accordingly, it appears from the record that the
 
statutory notice requirements have been satisfied.

Appellant claims that the mortgage executed in favor of

AGFS contains a "Request for Notice of Default and Foreclosure

Under Superior Mortgages or Deeds of Trust" that was intended to

preserve HRS § 667-6 rights of that mortgage holder to notice of

any non-judicial foreclosure sale. The request for notice in the
 
mortgage document states that the "Mortgagor and Lender request

the holder of any mortgage . . . or other encumbrance with a lien

which has priority over this Mortgage to give notice to Lender

. . . of any default under the superior encumbrance and of any

sale or other foreclosure action." While the request appears to

be directed to those creditors with liens which have "priority

over" AGFS's mortgage, even if it is intended to apply equally to

junior lienholders, the request does not appear to comply with

HRS § 667-6. HRS § 667-6 requires that a written request be
 
submitted "to the mortgagee foreclosing or who may foreclose,"

not merely attached to a previously recorded mortgage document. 
 
It does not appear from the record that a request for notice was

submitted or otherwise communicated to either MERS or Wells

Fargo. Moreover, HRS § 667-6 requires that the request be signed
 
"by the mortgage creditor, or its authorized representative,

6

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
desiring to receive notice[.]" The copy of the request for
 
notice contained in the mortgage document, as well as the

mortgage document itself, does not appear to contain the

signature of such an authorized AGFS representative.

Accordingly, it does not appear that the request found in the

mortgage document was "intended to preserve" any rights or

entitlements to notice pursuant to HRS § 667-6.

Appellant's contention that, because MERS had no

contractual or statutory authority to conduct the foreclosure

sale, Wells Fargo failed to assert and prove any legally-
protected interest necessary to establish its standing;

therefore, the Circuit Court lacked subject matter jurisdiction

to act on the merits of Wells Fargo's motion for summary judgment

or to enforce ejectment in this case. This argument is without
 
merit. 
 
The circuit courts have jurisdiction over "[c]ivil

actions and proceedings[.]" HRS § 603-21.5 (Supp. 2007). A

complaint for ejectment is a civil action or proceeding within

the meaning of HRS § 603-21.5. As discussed above, the actions
 
taken by MERS to conduct the non-judicial foreclosure sale were

properly ratified by Wells Fargo. Accordingly, Wells Fargo had
 
standing to bring the ejectment suit against Appellant. 
 
Therefore, the Circuit Court properly exercised subject matter

jurisdiction over the ejectment proceeding.

Finally, we reject Appellant's contention that the

Circuit Court erred because it failed to make sufficient findings

of fact and conclusions of law. Under HRCP Rule 52(a),

"[f]indings of fact and conclusions of law are unnecessary on

decisions of motions under Rule[] . . . 56[.]" A Circuit Court

need not issue findings of fact for cases disposed of on summary

judgment "because disputed issues of fact cannot be resolved on

summary judgment." Dalton v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 51 Haw.

400, 404 n.2, 462 P.2d 199, 203 n.2 (1969); see also Provident
 
7

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Funding Assocs., L.P. v. Vimahi, No. 29797 (App. Nov. 10, 2010)

(SDO) (holding that the circuit court was not required to issue
findings of fact and conclusions of law pursuant to HRCP Rule

52(a) where it disposed of an action for ejectment via a motion
for summary judgment). Here, the Circuit Court disposed of thi
case via a motion for summary judgment, pursuant to HRCP Rule 5
and therefore, the Circuit Court was not required to issue any
findings of fact or conclusions of law. 
 



s
 
6,


For these reasons, the Circuit Court's June 8, 2009

Judgment is affirmed.

DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 30, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin
Long H. VuFrederick J. Arensmeyer(Dubin Law Offices)for Defendant-Appellant Associate Judge Presiding Judge 
Lester K.M. Leu 
Gary Y. OkudaKaryn A. Doi(Leu & Okuda)for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
8

