FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
BENJAMIN PAUL KEKONA and TAMAE M. KEKONA,
Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellants, v.
MICHAEL BORNEMANN, M.D., Defendant-Appellant,
and PAZ FENG ABASTILLAS, also known as PAZ A.
RICHTER; ROBERT A. SMITH, personally; ROBERT A.
SMITH, Attorney at Law, a Law Corporation;
STANDARD MANAGEMENT, INC.; U.S. BANCORP MORTGAGE
COMPANY, an Oregon company; JOHN DOES 1-10;
JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
NO. 29036
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 93-3974)
 
MAY 31, 2013
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Michael Bornemann, M.D. (Bornemann)
 
appeals from the Final Judgment, filed on February 5, 2008, in
 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
 
As discussed below, this suit arises out of a claim
 
that two properties were fraudulently transferred to Bornemann
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and that Bornemann conspired to commit a fraudulent transfer of
 
those properties. A jury found, by clear and convincing
 
evidence, that one fraudulent transfer had occurred and that
 
Bornemann had conspired to commit the fraudulent transfer. 
Judgment was entered unwinding the transfer and awarding
 
compensatory and punitive damages against Bornemann. Bornemann
 
raises several issues on appeal. For the reasons set forth in
 
this Opinion, we conclude that further proceedings are necessary
 
to determine an appropriate remedy and that the punitive damages
 
awarded were excessive, but that Bornemann's other contentions
 
are without merit or constitute harmless error.
 
I.	 BACKGROUND
 
The history of this case is more fully stated in Kekona
 
v. Abastillas, 111 Hawai' i 203, 140 P.3d 436 (App. 2006) (Kekona 
I) and Kekona v. Abastillas, 113 Hawai' i 174, 150 P.3d 823 (2006) 
(Kekona II). 
In 1993, Benjamin P. Kekona and Tamae M. Kekona
 
(Kekonas) obtained a judgment (1993 Judgment) of $191,628.27
 
against Paz Feng Abastillas (Abastillas) and Robert A. Smith
 (Smith). After the 1993 Judgment was entered, two properties, a
 residence in Kaneohe (Kaneohe Property) and an apartment at
 Honolulu Park Place (HPP Property) were transferred to Bornemann.
 Standard Management, Inc. (SMI), which was wholly owned by
 
Abastillas, and Robert A. Smith, Attorney at Law, A Law
 
Corporation (RASCORP), which was wholly owned by Smith, had
 
jointly owned the Kaneohe property, which was transferred to
 
Abastillas and then tranferred to Bornemann. The HPP Property,
 
which was owned by Abastillas, was transferred directly from her
 
to Bornemann.
 
On October 13, 1993, the Kekonas sued SMI, RASCORP,
 
Abastillas, Smith, and Bornemann, alleging that the transfer of
 
the two properties constituted an unlawful attempt by judgment
 
debtors to avoid claims by judgment creditors. The Kekonas
 
2
  
 
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alleged fraudulent transfer, violation of Hawai' i's Racketeer 
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law, conspiracy to 
fraudulently transfer, and notary misconduct. 
A jury returned verdicts against SMI, RASCORP,
 
Abastillas, Smith, and Bornemann for fraudulent transfers and
 
conspiracy to commit fraudulent transfers and awarded special
 
damages, general damages, and punitive damages in varying amounts
 
against all of the defendants. The jury awarded the Kekonas
 
$250,000 in punitive damages against Bornemann. The Circuit
 
Court, however, found that the punitive damages award against
 
Bornemann was excessive and ordered it reduced to $75,000.1
 
The Kekonas elected to proceed to a new trial on
 
punitive damages against Bornemann.2 On November 2, 2000, a jury
 
imposed $594,000 in punitive damages against Bornemann. 
Bornemann appealed.
 
On June 8, 2006, this court (the ICA) held, inter alia,
 
that there was no evidence to support the jury's award of
 $100,000 in general damages caused by the conspiracy to
 
fraudulently transfer the Kaneohe property or $100,000 in general
 
damages caused by the conspiracy to fraudulently transfer the HPP
 
property and vacated the general damages award against
 
Abastillas, Smith, and Bornemann.
3 The court otherwise
 
affirmed, including the award of punitive damages.
 
Upon review of Bornemann's application for writ of 
certiorari, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that the ICA gravely 
erred by holding that the Kekonas only needed to prove a 
fraudulent transfer by a preponderance of the evidence. The 
supreme court vacated "the ICA's opinion to the extent that it 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda Nishimura presided over the first trial.
 
2
 The Honorable Victoria Marks presided over the retrial of punitive
damages against Bornemann.
 
3
 Benjamin Kekona died on July 3, 2002 while the first appeal was
pending.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) affirms Bornemann's liability for conspiracy to fraudulently 
transfer the Kaneohe and HPP properties, (2) affirms the 
$594,000.00 punitive damages award, and (3) affirms the circuit 
court's cancellation of the various deeds transferring the 
Kaneohe and HPP properties." Kekona II, 113 Hawai' i at 183, 150 
P.3d at 832. The supreme court ordered the case to be remanded for a new trial as to "(a) whether the Kekonas can demonstrate 
that the transfers were fraudulent by clear and convincing 
evidence, (b) whether the Kekonas can demonstrate, by clear and 
convincing evidence, that Bornemann conspired to fraudulently 
transfer the Kaneohe and HPP properties, and (c) the appropriate 
remedies to be assessed against Bornemann, if any." Id. 
On January 3, 2008, after another jury trial, the jury
 
returned a special verdict form as follows:
 
47-186 KAMEHAMEHA HIGHWAY, KANEOHE, HAWAI' I 
Question No. 1.
 
Did the Plaintiffs prove by clear and convincing
evidence that the transfer of the Kaneohe
 property by Abastillas/Smith to Defendant
Bornemann was done with the actual intent to
 hinder, delay or defraud the Plaintiffs Kekonas?
 
Yes __X__ No ___
 If you answered "Yes" to Question No. 1, then go
to Question No. 2. If you answered "No" to
Question No. 1, then go to Question No. 3
 
Question No. 2.
 
Did Defendant Bornemann prove by a preponderance
of the evidence that he took the Kaneohe
 property in good faith and for reasonably
equivalent value?
 
Yes ____ No __X__
 
Go to Question No. 3.
 
Question No. 3.
 
Did Plaintiffs prove by clear and convincing
evidence that Abastillas/Smith made the transfer 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the Kaneohe property to Defendant Bornemann
without receiving a reasonably equivalent value
in exchange?
 
Yes __X__ No ___
 If you answered "Yes" to Question No. 3, then go
to Question No. 3A and 3B. If you answered "No"
to Question 3, then go to Question No. 4.
 
Question No. 3A.
 
Did Plaintiffs prove by clear and convincing
evidence that Abastillas intended to incur, or
believed or reasonably should have believed that
she would incur, debts beyond her ability to pay
as they became due.
 
Yes __X__ No ___
 
Go to Question 3B.
 
Question No. 3B.
 
Did Plaintiffs prove by clear and convincing
evidence that Smith intended to incur, or
believed or reasonably should have believed that
he would incur, debts beyond his ability to pay
as they became due.
 
Yes ___ No__X__
 
Go to Question 4.
 
1809 HONOLULU PARK PLACE
 Question No. 4.
 
Did the Plaintiffs prove by clear and convincing
evidence that the transfer of 1809 Honolulu Park
 Place by Abastillas to Defendant Bornemann was
done with the actual intent to hinder, delay or
defraud the Plaintiffs Kekonas?
 
Yes __X__ No ___
 If you answered "Yes" to Question No. 4, then go
to Question No. 5. If you answered "No" to
Question No. 4, then go to No. 6.
 
Question No. 5.
 
Did Defendant Bornemann prove by a preponderance
of the evidence that he took 1809 Honolulu Park 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Place in good faith and for reasonably
equivalent value?
 
Yes __X__ No ___
 
Go to Question No. 6.
 
Question No. 6.
 
Did Plaintiffs prove by clear and convincing
evidence that Abastillas made the transfer of
 1809 Honolulu Park Place to Defendant Bornemann
 without receiving a reasonably equivalent value
in exchange?
 
Yes ___ No __X__
 
If you answered "Yes" to Question No. 6, then go
to Question No. 6A. If you answered "No" to
Question No. 6, then go to Question No. 7.
 
. . . .
 
CONSPIRACY
 Question No. 7.
 
Did the Plaintiffs prove by clear and convincing
evidence that Defendant Bornemann conspired with
one or more other person(s) to harm the
Plaintiffs by taking part in the fraudulent
transfer of the Kaneohe property?
 
Yes __X__ No ___
 
Go to Question 8.
 
Question No. 8.
 
Did the Plaintiffs prove by clear and convincing
evidence that Defendant Bornemann conspired with
one or more person(s) to harm the Plaintiffs by
taking part in the fraudulent transfer of 1809
Honolulu Park Place?
 
Yes ___ No __X__
 
If you answered "Yes" to either Question No. 7
or 8, then go to Question No. 9. If you
answered "No" to both Question No. 7 and 8, then
go to Question No. 11.
 
Question No. 9.
 
Did the Plaintiffs prove by clear and convincing
evidence that the conspiracy to fraudulently 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
transfer either property was the legal cause of
damages to the Plaintiffs?
 
Yes __X__ No ___
 If you answered "Yes" to Question No. 9, then go
to Question No. 10. If you answered "No" to
Question No. 9, then go to Question No. 11
 
Question No. 10.
 
What is the amount of Plaintiffs damages?
 
$253,075.29
 
Go to Question No. 11
 
Question No. 11.
 
Did plaintiffs prove by clear and convincing
evidence that punitive damages should be awarded
against Defendant Bornemann?
 
Yes __X__ No ___
 If you answered "Yes" to Question No. 11, then
go to Question No. 12. If you answered "No" to
Question No. 11, then sign and date the verdict
form and notify the court.
 
Question No. 12.
 
What is the amount of punitive damages that you
award against the defendant?
 
$1,642,857.13
 
Thereafter, Bornemann filed a Motion to Amend Judgment,
 
arguing, inter alia, that the compensatory damages exceeded the
 
remand instructions by the supreme court in Kekona II, that the
 
punitive damages failed to apportion which portion of the
 
attorney's fees incurred by the Kekonas were attributable to
 
himself, Abastillas, Smith, SMI, and RASCORP, and that the
 
punitive damages award was grossly excessive and, therefore,
 
violated his due process rights. The Circuit Court entered final
 
judgment and denied Bornemann's motion. Bornemann timely filed
 
this appeal.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. POINTS OF ERROR ON APPEAL
 
On appeal, Bornemann contends: (1) the Circuit Court
 
improperly allowed numerous documents and statements regarding
 
Abastillas and Smith into evidence; (2) Bornemann's motion for a
 
directed verdict on the count of constructive fraud under HRS
 
§ 651C-4(a)(2) should have been granted because there was no
 
evidence offered at trial that Abastillas and Smith intended to
 
incur debt beyond their ability to pay; (3) the Circuit Court
 
improperly instructed the jury on the intent required to impose
 
punitive damages and erroneously refused his proposed jury
 
instruction D-7; (4) the Kekonas received a double recovery of
 
$253,000 in damages; and (5) the punitive damages award was
 
excessive and unconstitutional. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
The appellate court applies "two different standards of
 
review in addressing evidentiary issues. Evidentiary rulings are
 
reviewed for abuse of discretion, unless application of the rule
 
admits of only one correct result, in which case review is under
 
the right/wrong standard." State v. Ortiz, 91 Hawai' i 181, 189, 
981 P.2d 1127, 1135 (1999) (citations and internal quotation
 marks omitted).
 
In Nelson v. University of Hawai' i, the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court stated: 
HRCP Rule 50 was recently amended and no longer refers
to motions for directed verdict or for JNOV. HRCP Rule 50 (2000). The new rule, consistent with theFederal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) Rule 50 (asamended in 1991), refers to motions for "judgment as amatter of law," and motions made after trial arereferred to as "renewed motions for judgment as amatter of law." . . . [T]he change in terminology inthe 1993 amendment to HRCP Rule 50 was not intended to result in a substantive change of existing Hawai' i 
law. 
97 Hawai' i 376, 393 n.14, 38 P.3d 95, 111 n.14 (2001) (citations 
omitted). 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
It is well settled that a trial court's rulings on
[motions for judgment as a matter of law] are reviewed
de novo.
 
Nelson, 97 Hawai' i at 393, 38 P.3d at 112 (citations omitted). 
When reviewing a motion for judgment as a matter of 
law, "the evidence and the inferences which may be fairly drawn 
therefrom must be considered in the light most favorable to the 
nonmoving party and [the] motion may be granted only where there 
can be but one reasonable conclusion as to the proper judgment." 
Kramer v. Ellett, 108 Hawai' i 426, 430, 121 P.3d 406, 410 (2005) 
(citations omitted). 
"The standard of review for a trial court's issuance or 
refusal of a jury instruction is whether, when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially 
insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." Moyle v. 
Y & Y Hyup Shin, Corp., 118 Hawai' i 385, 391, 191 P.3d 1062, 1068 
(2008) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
"An award or denial of punitive damages is within the 
sound discretion of the trier of fact. Absent a clear abuse of 
discretion, we will not reverse a trier of fact's decision to 
grant or deny punitive damages." Udac v. Takata Corp., 121 
Hawai'i 143, 149, 214 P.3d 1133, 1139 (App. 2009) (citation, 
internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. Challenged "Documents and Statements"
 
Bornemann asserts that "[b]ecause of the number of
 
objections to documents and testimony involving Smith and
 Abastillas at this remand trial, Dr. Bornemann 'will be unable to
 
designate each instance in his brief.'" Bornemann argues that
 
the Circuit Court admitted "countless documents from the 1999
 
trial . . . as well as countless statements through trial
 
witnesses, under various improper and inapplicable exceptions to
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the hearsay rule described in [Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)]
 
Rules 803(a)(2)(C)("co-conspirator")[,] Rule 803(b)(3) ("mental,
 
emotional or physical condition"), Rule 803(b)(8) ("public
 
records") and Rule 803(b)(14) ("affecting an interest in
 
property")." 
Bornemann cites Roxas v. Marcos, 89 Hawai' i 91, 136, 
969 P.2d 1209, 1254 (1998), in which the appellant stated that 
she was unable to designate each instance where an error occurred 
because the circuit court's ruling opened the door to a 
tremendous amount of hearsay. Bornemann's reliance upon Roxas to 
excuse his failure to comply with Rule 28 of the Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) is misplaced. 
In Roxas, the appellant complained "that the circuit
 
court's ruling opened the door to a tremendous amount of hearsay
 
testimony, so great that she was unable to designate each
 
instance in her brief." Id. (internal quotations marks
 
omitted). However, the court noted that the appellant did
 expressly identify eight "blatant and prejudicial" examples where
 
the circuit court erred. Id. Yet, the court in Roxas did not
 
address any of the eight specific examples identified by the
 appellant in its opinion because the primary point of error was
 
whether "the circuit court erred in its preliminary
 
determination, made pursuant to HRE Rules 104(a) and
 
803(a)(2)(c), [] that the Marcoses were members of conspiracies
 
to take and dispose of Roxas's property, as well as to arrest,
 
detain, and torture Roxas." Id. The court held that
 
"plaintiffs-appellees' proffer to the circuit court was
 sufficient to justify its preliminary determination of the
 
existence of conspiracies, and this court cannot hold that it was
 
clearly erroneous." Id. at 138, 969 P.2d at 1256. Contrary to 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bornemann's interpretation, the court in Roxas did not excuse the
 
appellant's failure to specifically identify each alleged error. 
Despite Bornemann's claim that he is unable to cite
 
specific errors, in his points of error he notes that he moved to
 
strike numerous exhibits "based on hearsay and relevance,
 
including Nos. 5, 6, 7, 20, 35, 72, 81, 126-141, 146, 147, and
 
190." Bornemann also refers to some parts of the testimony of
 
Robert Bright (Bright) regarding Abastillas and states that his
 
"renewed hearsay, relevancy, and Rule 403 objections were
 
overruled." He also refers generally to testimony by Bill
 
Carroll (Carroll) regarding Smith but does not point to where in
 
the record he objected or what those objections were. Bornemann
 
claims, generally, that the Circuit Court erred because Smith and
 
Abastillas were neither parties nor witnesses at the 2007 remand
 
trial and this bad character evidence by Bright, Carroll and
 
others was inadmissible under HRE Rules 404 and 608, irrelevant
 
under HRE Rule 402, and more prejudicial than probative under HRE
 
Rule 403.
 
With respect to testimony by Bright, Bornemann merely
 
states that his renewed hearsay, relevancy, and HRE Rule 403
 
objections were overruled. He does not point to where in the
 
record he objected based upon HRE Rule 404 and 608. Therefore,
 
objections to Bright's testimony based upon HRE Rules 404 and 608
 
are waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). In his argument section,
 
Bornemann does not reference any particular portion of Bright's
 
testimony and provides no specific argument relating to relevancy
 
or why Bright's testimony is more prejudicial than probative. 
Therefore, Bornemann's objections to Bright's testimony based
 
upon hearsay and HRE Rules 402 and 403 are waived. HRAP Rule
 
28(b)(7).
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In his argument, Bornemann does not reference any
 
particular portion of Carroll's testimony and does not provide
 
any specific argument regarding why the testimony should be
 
excluded under HRE Rules 402, 403, 404, and 608. Therefore, the
 
point of error is also waived under HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
 
Lastly, none of the exhibits cited by Bornemann are
 
specifically mentioned in his argument section and he does not
 
provide any specific argument as to why the exhibits should be
 
excluded due to lack of relevance or hearsay. Therefore, the
 
point of error is waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). Any other
 
purported error not specifically mentioned, cited, or argued by
 
Bornemann in the opening brief, because of his failure to
 
designate such instance of error in his brief, is waived. HRAP
 
Rule 28(b)(4) and (b)(7).4
 
B. Sufficiency of Evidence of Fraudulent Transfer
 Bornemann claims that the circuit court erred by
 
denying his motion for a directed verdict on claims for
 constructive fraud under HRS §§ 651C-4(a)(2)(A) and (B) (1993). 
HRS § 651C-4 provides two theories of recovery for
 
fraudulent transfer. Under HRS § 651C-4(a)(1), a transfer is
 
fraudulent if it is made "[w]ith actual intent to hinder, delay,
 
or defraud any creditor of the debtor[.]" In contrast, HRS
 
§ 651C-4(a)(2) has no intent requirement. Instead, a transfer is
 
fraudulent if it is made without "receiving a reasonably
 
equivalent value in exchange for the transfer" and the debtor
 
(A) Was engaged or was about to engage in a business
or a transaction for which the remaining assets of the
debtor were unreasonably small in relation to the
business or transaction; or
 
4
 As we do not address the merits of Bornemann's evidentiary
contentions, he is free to raise such objections upon a retrial of the
punitive damages, if one is conducted.
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(B) Intended to incur, or believed or reasonably
should have believed that the debtor would incur,
debts beyond the debtor's ability to pay as they
became due.
 
See HRS §§ 651C-4(a)(2)(A) and (B). 
Bornemann contends that the December 2007 trial focused
 
solely on whether there was an "actual intent to hinder, delay,
 
or defraud" under HRS § 651C-4(a)(1). Although the Kekonas state
 
in their answering brief that there is "overwhelming" evidence of
 
constructive fraud under HRS § 651C-4(a)(2), the evidence they
 
cite relates to fraudulent transfer under HRS § 651C-4(a)(1). 
Furthermore, a review of the record reveals that no evidence was
 
presented regarding whether (1) the remaining assets of
 
Abastillas or Smith "were unreasonably small in relation to the
 
business or transaction" as required by HRS § 651C-4(a)(2)(A); or
 
(2) Abastillas or Smith "[i]ntended to incur, or believed or
 
reasonably should have believed that [they] would incur, debts
 
beyond [their] ability to pay as they became due" as required by
 
HRS § 651C-4(a)(2)(B).
 
Thus, there was no legally sufficient evidentiary basis
 
for a reasonable jury to find there was a constructive fraudulent
 
transfer under HRS §§ 651C-4(2)(A) or (B). Accordingly, the
 
Circuit Court erred in denying Bornemann's motion for judgment as
 
a matter of law. However, the Circuit Court's error had no
 
effect on the outcome of the case because the jury found there
 
was clear and convincing evidence of fraudulent transfer under
 
HRS § 651C-4(a)(1). On appeal, Bornemann has not challenged the
 
jury's finding of fraudulent transfer under HRS § 651C-4(a)(1). 
In addition, Bornemann has not alleged any harm from the denial
 
of his motion for judgment as a matter of law. Therefore, we
 
conclude that the Circuit Court's error was harmless.
 
13
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C. Double Recovery
 
After the December 2007 jury trial, the jury in its
 
special verdict form awarded the Kekonas $253,075.29 in damages
 against Bornemann. Subsequently, in its February 4, 2008 Order
 
Granting the Kekonas' Renewed Motion for Cancellation of Deeds,
 
the Circuit Court "declared cancelled and void" the deeds
 
pertaining to the fraudulent transfer of the Kaneohe property. 
Bornemann presents numerous arguments for why the Circuit Court
 
erred in allowing both compensatory damages and the cancellation
 
of the fraudulent transfer of the Kaneohe property: 
First, this Court found that no separate conspiracy
damages occurred in this case, and no new evidence of
such damages was tendered at the remand trial.
Second, the Supreme Court clearly affirmed the ICA's
ruling in 2006, and Judge Marks exceeded her authority
and the scope of its remand when she allowed [the
Kekonas] to retry this issue. Third, regardless,
applying the same analysis to the current judgment,
this Court should find that [the Kekonas] have proved
no separate damages for conspiracy. Fourth, while HRS
 Section 651C-7 provides for "[a]ny other relief the
circumstances may require," the language is controlled
by HRS Section 651C-8(b), which limits any judgment to
"the value of the asset transferred [or] the amount
necessary to satisfy the creditor's claim, whichever
is less." Fifth, since the [May 1993 judgment]
provides for interest, and [the Kekonas] proffered no
evidence that the $444,000 balance cannot be satisfied
by the [Kaneohe property], these "interest damages"
constitute a double recovery. 
Bornemann's first two arguments are without merit. 
In the June 8, 2006 Memorandum Opinion (2006 Memorandum Opinion),
 
the ICA found "[t]here is no evidence supporting the jury's award
 
of (1) $100,000 general damages caused by the conspiracy to
 
fraudulently transfer the Kaneohe property and (2) $100,000
 
general damages caused by the conspiracy to fraudulently transfer
 
the HPP property." In their September 26, 2006 opinion, the
 
supreme court found that Bornemann was without standing to argue
 
"that the general damages awarded were not authorized" because
 
this court had already vacated the conspiracy damages. 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The supreme court further concluded that the ICA
 
gravely erred by holding that a plaintiff need only prove a
 
fraudulent transfer by a preponderance of the evidence. Thus,
 
the court vacated the ICA's 2006 Memorandum Opinion to the extent
 
that it 
(1) affirms "Bornemann's" liability for conspiracy to
fraudulently transfer the Kaneohe and HPP properties,
(2) affirms the $594,000.00 punitive damages award,
and (3) affirms the circuit court's cancellation of
the various deeds transferring the Kaneohe and HPP
properties. 
The supreme court remanded the case to the Circuit
 
Court for a new trial in order to determine
 
(a) whether the Kekonas can demonstrate that the
transfers were fraudulent by "clear and convincing
evidence," (b) whether the Kekonas can demonstrate by,
"clear and convincing evidence," that Bornemann
conspired to fraudulently transfer the Kaneohe and HPP
properties, and (c) the appropriate remedies to be
assessed against Bornemann, if any. 
Although the supreme court did not directly address the
 
ICA's finding on conspiracy damages because of standing, it
 
explicitly found that a new trial was necessary in order to
 
determine "the appropriate remedies to be assessed against
 
Bornemann, if any." Therefore, the Circuit Court did not err in
 
retrying the issue of conspiracy damages at the December 2007
 
trial. 
Bornemann's third argument concerns whether the Kekonas
 
proved separate damages for conspiracy to fraudulently transfer
 
the Kaneohe property. The undisputed evidence is that the
 
accumulated interest from the 1993 Judgment in the amount of
 
$191,000 is $253,075.29. The jury awarded $253,075.29 against
 
Bornemann for his participation in the conspiracy to fraudulently
 
transfer the Kaneohe property. Thus, because of Bornemann
 
conspiring to fraudulently transfer the Kaneohe property, the
 
Kekonas were unable to collect on their original judgment, which
 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
resulted in the accumulation of $253,075.29 in interest on that
 
judgment. However, as the ICA concluded in its 2006 Memorandum
 
Opinion, the damages necessary to compensate for the "conspiracy"
 
are the same damages as are necessary to compensate the Kekonas
 
for the fraudulent transfer and, although the amount of interest
 
on the original $191,000 increased, no other damages were proven. 
As discussed further below, setting aside for the moment the
 
issue of punitive damages, the Kekonas are entitled to a remedy
 
that fully compensates them for the harm they suffered as a
 
result of Bornemann's wrongful conduct. However, they are not
 
entitled to collect that amount more than once.
 
Bornemann's fourth and fifth arguments are related.
 
Bornemann argues that HRS § 651C-8(b) limits any fraudulent
 
transfer judgment to the value of the asset transferred or the
 
amount necessary to satisfy the creditor's claim, whichever is
 
less. Bornemann notes that the 1993 Judgment was for
 
approximately $191,000 and the accumulated interest on that
 
judgment was roughly $253,000, making a total of approximately
 
$444,000. Since the current equity in the Kaneohe property is
 
purportedly at least $950,000, Bornemann argues, the Circuit
 
Court's cancellation of the fraudulent transfer of the Kaneohe
 
property provides "twice the equity necessary to fund the [May
 
1993] judgment." Thus, Bornemann argues that the compensatory
 
damages award constituted "double recovery" because there was no
 
evidence that the liquidation of the Kaneohe property would not
 
satisfy the 1993 Judgment plus the interest.
 
With respect to compensatory damages for a fraudulent
 
transfer, and/or compensatory damages for a conspiracy to commit
 
a fraudulent transfer (which in this case results in a unified
 
amount of damages), although not entirely correct (with respect
 
to the equity in the Kaneohe property), Bornemann's point is well
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
taken. The Kekonas are entitled to a variety of means to secure
 
a full recovery of their losses from Bornemann and/or the asset
 
fraudulently transferred to him, but only once, not twice. See
 
generally HRS §§ 651C-7 & 651C-8 and 37 Am. Jur. 2d Fraudulent
 Conveyances and Tranfers §§ 142-172 (2001) (discussing remedies
 
for fraudulent conveyances and transfers). 
Under HRS Chapter 651C, the statutory remedies for
 
fraudulent transfers reflect and codify the variety of legal and
 
equitable remedies available under the common law. HRS § 651C-7
 
(1993) provides:
 
§ 651C-7 Remedies of creditors.  (a) In any action
for relief against a transfer or obligation under this
chapter, a creditor, subject to the limitations provided in
section 651C-8, may obtain:
 
(1) 	Avoidance of the transfer or obligation to the
extent necessary to satisfy the creditor's
claim;
 
(2) 	An attachment or other provisional remedy
against the asset transferred or other property
of the transferee in accordance with the
 procedure prescribed by chapter 651;
 
(3) 	Subject to applicable principles of equity and
in accordance with applicable civil rules of
procedure:
 
(A) 	An injunction against further disposition
by the debtor or a transferee, or both, of
the asset transferred or of other
 property;
 
(B) 	Appointment of a receiver to take charge
of the asset transferred or of other
 property of the transferee; or
 
(C) 	Any other relief the circumstances may
require.
 
(b) If a creditor has obtained a judgment on a claim
against the debtor, the creditor may, if the court so
orders, levy execution on the asset transferred or its
proceeds.
 
17
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The relevant limitations in HRS § 651C-8 are as
 
follows:
 
§ 651C-8 Defenses, liability, and protection of
transferee. 
. . .
 
(b) Except as otherwise provided in this section, to
the extent a transfer is voidable in an action by a creditor
under section 651C-7(a)(1), the creditor may recover
judgment for the value of the asset transferred, as adjusted
under subsection (c), or the amount necessary to satisfy the
creditor's claim, whichever is less....
 
(c) If the judgment under subsection (b) is based
upon the value of the asset transferred, the judgment must
be for an amount equal to the value of the asset at the time
of the transfer, subject to adjustment as the equities may
require.
 
. . . . 
Thus, Hawai' i's statutory scheme allows the Kekonas to 
avoid the transfer of the Kaneohe property to the extent 
necessary to satisfy their claim (§ 651C-7(a)(1)), attach the 
property for execution (§ 651C-7(a)(2)), obtain an injunction 
against disposition, receiver for the property, or other 
equitable relief (§ 651C-7(a)(3)), and levy execution on the 
Kaneohe property (or its proceeds) (§651C-7(b)), or the Kekonas 
may recover a judgment for the value of the asset transferred or 
the amount they are due, whichever is less (§ 651C-8(b)). If the 
value of the asset transferred were less than the amount due to 
the Kekonas, then HRS § 651C-8(c) would limit the judgment to the 
value of the asset at the time of the transfer, subject to any 
equitable adjustments that might be required by the court under 
the circumstances of the case. 
In addition, HRS § 651C-10 (1993) allows the Kekonas to
 
seek any other legal or equitable remedies that are not
 
supplanted by the fraudulent transfers statute, providing: 
§ 651C-10 Supplement of provisions.  Unless displaced
by the provisions of this chapter, the principles of law and
equity, including the law merchant and the law relating to
principal and agent, estoppel, laches, fraud, 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
misrepresentation, duress, coercion, mistake, insolvency,
or other validating or invalidating cause, supplement its
provisions.
 
Taken as a whole, this statutory scheme provides the 
Kekonas with any number of ways to recover what is due to them, 
but it does not allow them to be compensated more than once. 
Clearly (and again setting aside the issue of punitive damages 
for the moment), the Kekonas can set aside the transfer of the 
Kaneohe property to the extent necessary to satisfy the amount of 
the original judgment plus the statutory interest, which is an 
additional amount of damages due to them (whether construed as 
damages for the fraudulent transfer or the conspiracy to commit 
the fraudulent transfer). The Kekonas can execute on the 
property without voiding the transfer. The Kekonas can attach 
and execute on other property of Bornemann in the amount due to 
them. The Kekonas can obtain a money judgment against Bornemann. 
Nothing in the Hawai' i statute requires the Kekonas to elect one 
remedy over another. The statute does not, however, allow them recovery of both the asset transferred (regardless of its value) 
and, in addition, a judgment in the full amount of their damages. 
Thus, although the Kekonas are entitled to relief
 
against Bornemann for the amount of the original underlying
 
judgment against Smith and Abastillas plus the statutory interest
 
awarded by the jury as damages, further proceedings are necessary
 
to fashion an appropriate form or forms of remedy, executed in a
 
manner that their recovery does not exceed the sums due to them. 
D. Jury Instructions
 Bornemann contends that the Circuit Court erred by
 
giving a standard jury instruction on punitive damages geared
 toward negligence cases because it was not applicable to the
 
intentional tort of conspiracy. Bornemann argues that the
 
instruction "authorized the jury to award such damages solely
 
19
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
based on intentional conduct." Bornemann also contends that the
 
Circuit Court "improperly refused to instruct the jury on the
 
crucial distinction between the intent necessary to establish
 
liability for conspiracy and the intent necessary to warrant
 
punitive damages." Bornemann claims that "the intent needed to
 
impose punitive damages is not the same kind of intent used to
 
show a conspiracy to violate the Uniform Fraudulent Transfer
 
Act." Instead, Bornemann states that the Circuit Court should
 
have cautioned the jury "that something more than the intent
 
necessary to show conspiracy was necessary for punitive damages." 
Hawai'i precedent on punitive damages is generally as
follows: 
[Actions] of tort punitive damages may, under certain
circumstances, be awarded in addition to such sum as
the plaintiff may be found entitled to purely by way
of compensation for his injuries and suffering. Such
 damages may be awarded in cases where the defendant
"has acted wantonly or oppressively or with such
malice as implies a spirit of mischief or criminal
indifference to civil obligations"; or where there has
been "some wilful misconduct or that entire want of
 care which would raise the presumption of a conscious
indifference to consequences". In such cases a
reckless indifference to the rights of others is
equivalent to an intentional violation of them.
 
Bright v. Quinn, 20 Haw. 504, 511-12 (1911) (citations
omitted).
 
Kaopuiki v. Kealoha, 104 Hawai' i 241, 256, 87 P.3d 910, 925 (App. 
2003). The court in Kaopuiki went on to state: 
Succinctly stated, 
[the] proper measure of punitive damages is (1) the
degree of intentional, willful, wanton, oppressive,
malicious or grossly negligent conduct that formed the
basis for [the] prior award of damages against [the
tortfeasor] and (2) the amount of money required to
punish [the tortfeasor] considering [his or her]
financial condition.
 
Instruction No. 8.12, Hawai' i Civil Jury Instructions,
1999 edition; Kang, 59 Haw. at 660-61, 587 P.2d at 291. 
Id. at 258, 87 P.3d at 927 (footnote omitted) (emphasis added).
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Kang v. Harrington, 59 Haw. 652, 653, 587 P.2d 285,
 
287 (1978), the appellant W. Dewey Harrington (Harrington)
 
appealed from a judgment that found him "culpable of fraud with
 
respect to a certain rental agreement." In a non-jury trial, the
 
plaintiff was awarded $1,800 in compensatory damages and $20,000
 
in punitive damages because the circuit court held that
 
Harrington committed fraud in attempting to obtain a perpetual or
 
long-term rental agreement. Id. at 653, 655, 587 P.2d at 287,
 
288. After the court held that there was sufficient evidence
 
that Harrington committed fraud, it addressed Harrington's claims
 
that punitive damages were not warranted. Id. at 659-60, 587
 
P.2d at 290-91. The court in Kang stated:
 
But even the finding of fraud of appellant on appellee
will not necessarily result in an award of punitive damages.
Punitive damages are in no way compensatory and are not
available as a matter of right. An award of punitive
damages is purely incidental to the cause of action. They
may be awarded by the grace and gratuity of the law. They
also act as a means of punishment to the wrongdoer and as an
example and deterrent to others. Sebastian v. Wood, 246
Iowa 94, 66 N.W.2d 841 (1954). Punitive damages may be
awarded only in cases where the wrongdoer "'has acted
wantonly or oppressively or with such malice as implies a
spirit of mischief or criminal indifference to civil
obligations'; or where there has been 'some wilful
misconduct or that entire want of care which would raise the
 presumption of a conscious indifference to consequences.'"
(Citations omitted). Bright v. Quinn, 20 Haw. 504, 512
(1911). 
Id. at 660-61, 587 P.2d at 291. 
In discussing the award of punitive damages, the Kang
 
court stated:
 
Clearly, in the instant case, appellant did not act in
good faith intending to benefit either appellee or society
as in Ress. Rather, as in Anderson and Howell, appellant
acted intentionally and for his own benefit in defrauding
appellee.
The evidence indicates that, similar to the fraud in
 
Anderson, appellant embarked upon a fraudulent scheme
designed to acquire a long-term right to appellee's
property. Appellant intentionally made the misstatement
that his letter of intent was for the 3052 Hibiscus Drive
 property instead of the agreed upon 2927 Hibiscus Place
property and that the $400 was for the first month's rent
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
rather than as a security deposit. He also intentionally
inserted the perpetual option provision into the rental
contract even though the parties only agreed to a one-year
option and obtained Dolly Won's signature by hurriedly
showing the document to her and stating that he was in a
rush. Appellant further sought to fraudulently perfect his
claim to a perpetual option by making numerous improvements
to the property without acquiring appellee's consent and
preparing a fraudulent wall plan of the improvements and
letter of approval.
Thus, we find that even ignoring appellant's fraud on
the court, appellant's fraudulent conduct with respect to
appellee did rise to the level of oppressiveness, wantonness
and malice sufficient to support an award of punitive
damages.
 
Id. at 662, 587 P.2d at 292.
 
The court in Kang cited the same evidence of intent to
 
defraud as it used to affirm the award of punitive damages. 
In this case, the jury was instructed on punitive
 
damages as follows:
 
If you find that the plaintiffs have proved with clear
and convincing evidence that the defendant conspired
to fraudulently transfer either property, then you may
consider whether you should also award punitive
damages. The purposes of punitive damages are to
punish the wrongdoer and to serve as an example or
warning to the wrongdoer and others not to engage in
such conduct. 
You may award punitive damages against the defendant
only if plaintiffs have proved by clear and convincing
evidence that the defendant acted intentionally,
willfully, wantonly, or oppressively. Punitive
 damages may not be awarded for mere inadvertence,
mistake or errors of judgment.
 
The proper measure of punitive damages is (1) the
degree of intentional, willful, wanton, oppressive or
malicious conduct; (2) the amount of money required to
punish the defendant considering his financial
condition without considering the value of either
Honolulu Park Place or the Kaneohe property; and (3)
the reasonable and necessary expense of litigation
including attorneys fees, expert witness fees, and the
inconvenience and time involved in preparing for
trial. In determining the degree of the defendant's
conduct, you must analyze the defendant's state of
mind at the time he committed the conduct. You may 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
award punitive damages even if no special damages have
been awarded. Any punitive damages you award must be
reasonable.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
As demonstrated by Kang and Kaopuiki, the Circuit
 
Court's instruction in this case was an accurate statement of the
 
law and the instruction would be the same whether the underlying
 
cause of action was based upon a negligent or intentional tort. 
The jury instruction clearly stated that the jury "may
 
consider" whether to impose punitive damages if it found by clear
 
and convincing evidence that Bornemann conspired to fraudulently
 
transfer the Kaneohe or HPP property. Contrary to Bornemann's
 
claim, it did not invite the jury to impose punitive damages
 
merely because the jury found that Bornemann conspired to
 
fraudulently transfer the Kaneohe property. The Circuit Court
 
did not err in instructing the jury on punitive damages.
 
Bornemann also claims "the court improperly included 
language on attorney's fees, despite Plaintiff's failure to 
apportion those fees among the seven defendants in this case, or 
limit it to the trial on remand." Bornemann's point of error is 
without merit "[b]ecause punitive damages are designed to punish 
the wrongdoer, and not to compensate the injured party, they can 
neither be apportioned nor subject to contribution among joint 
tortfeasors." Ozaki v. AOAO of Discovery Bay, 87 Hawai' i 273, 
290, 954 P.2d 652, 669 (App. 1998) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted), aff'd in part and overruled in part on 
other grounds by Ozaki v. AOAO of Discovery Bay, 87 Hawai' i 265, 
954 P.2d 644 (1998). The jury did not award the Kekonas' attorney's fees. The jury was instructed that it may consider 
the Kekonas' attorney's fees when determining the proper amount 
of punitive damages. 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Bornemann also contends that the Circuit Court
 
erroneously rejected his proposed jury instruction D-7, "which
 
noted that he could not be assessed damages for conspiracy solely
 
because of [the other] Defendants' misconduct." Bornemann claims
 
that his proposed jury instruction was an accurate statement of
 
the law and was crucial to his defense. 
Bornemann's proposed jury instruction D-7 stated:
 
If you find that the Plaintiffs presented clear and
convincing evidence that Paz Feng Abastillas or Robert
A. Smith violated the Uniform Fraudulent Transfer Act
 [fraudulently transferred property], but cannot find
that the Plaintiffs have proved with clear and
convincing evidence that the Defendant conspired with
them, then the Plaintiffs cannot be awarded damages of
any kind. In other words, you cannot award damages to
the Plaintiffs unless you find clear and convincing
evidence that the Defendant conspired with Abastillas
and Smith to violate the UFTA [fraudulently transfer
either or both properties].
 
The record does not state whether Bornemann or the
 
court made changes to the proposed jury instruction before it was
 
refused over Bornemann's objection.5
 
Regardless, Bornemann's proposed jury instruction D-7
 
is not an accurate statement of the law. Plaintiffs claimed that
 
Bornemann, Abastillas, and Smith conspired to commit a fraudulent
 
transfer of property. It is true that Plaintiffs could not be
 
awarded damages against Bornemann if they found that he did not
 
conspire with another to commit a fraudulent transfer of
 
property. However, the jury was not required to find that
 
"Defendant conspired with them," in order to award damages
 
against Bornemann. As the Circuit Court instructed the jury,
 
"[a] conspiracy is an agreement by two or more persons to commit
 
a wrongful act." The jury was not required to find that
 
Bornemann conspired with "them" (both Abastillas and Smith). A
 
5
 Strikeouts and words in brackets were handwritten changes to the
typewritten proposed jury instruction as reflected in the record on appeal.
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
finding that Bornemann conspired with Abastillas or Smith is
 
sufficient to find that Bornemann was part of a conspiracy. 
When the jury instructions are considered as a whole,
 
they accurately and sufficiently state the substantial principle
 
of conspiracy, the elements of conspiracy, and the burden of
 
proof required for the jury to find that Bornemann conspired to
 
commit a fraudulent transfer. Moreover, the jury was instructed
 
that mere association with other persons who were allegedly or
 
actually part of a conspiracy does not prove that a person is
 
also part of that conspiracy. Therefore, Bornemann's complaint
 
that the jury instructions allowed for a finding that he was part
 
of a conspiracy merely by associating with Abastillas and/or
 
Smith is without merit. The Circuit Court's refusal to include
 
Bornemann's proposed jury instruction D-7 was also not
 
prejudicial to Bornemann. 
E. Punitive Damages
 Bornemann argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying his Motion for Remittitur because, inter alia, the jury's
 
punitive damages award in the amount of $1,642,857.13 was so
 
excessive that it violated his due process rights under the
 
Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has stated that the "Due Process
 
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment prohibits a State from
 
imposing a grossly excessive punishment on a tortfeasor." BMW of
 
N. Am. Inc. v. Gore, 517 U.S. 559, 562 (1996) (citations and
 internal quotation marks omitted). A grossly excessive punitive
 
damages award "furthers no legitimate purpose and constitutes an
 
arbitrary deprivation of property." State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
 
Co. v. Campbell, 538 U.S. 408, 417 (2003) (citation omitted). 
The U.S. Supreme Court has instructed courts reviewing the
 
constitutionality of a punitive damages award to weigh (1) the
 
degree of reprehensibility of the defendant's misconduct, (2) the
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disparity between the actual or potential harm suffered by the
 
plaintiff and the punitive damages award, and (3) the difference
 
between the punitive damages awarded by the jury and the civil
 
penalties authorized or imposed in comparable cases. Gore, 517
 
U.S. at 574-75. 
"[T]he most important indicium of the reasonableness of
 
a punitive damages award is the degree of reprehensibility of the
 defendant's conduct." Id. In order to determine the
 
reprehensibility of a defendant, courts must analyze whether (1)
 the harm caused was physical as opposed to economic; (2) the
 
tortious conduct evinced an indifference to or a reckless
 
disregard of the health or safety of others; (3) the target of
 
the conduct had financial vulnerability; (4) the conduct involved
 
repeated actions or was an isolated incident; and (5) the harm
 
was the result of intentional malice, trickery, or deceit, or
 
mere accident. Id. at 576-77. In addition, the U.S. Supreme
 
Court instructed that:
 
[t]he existence of any one of these factors weighing
in favor of a plaintiff may not be sufficient to
sustain a punitive damages award; and the absence of
all of them renders any award suspect. It should be
 presumed a plaintiff has been made whole for his
injuries by compensatory damages, so punitive damages
should only be awarded if the defendant's culpability,
after having paid compensatory damages, is so
reprehensible as to warrant the imposition of further
sanctions to achieve punishment or deterrence. 
Campbell, 538 U.S. at 419 (citation omitted).
 
In this case, the majority of the above-referenced
 
factors associated with particularly reprehensible conduct are
 
not present. The harm inflicted by Bornemann's conduct on the
 
Kekonas was purely economic in nature; the conspiracy to
 
fraudulently transfer the Kaneohe property resulted in the
 
Kekonas' inability to collect on their original 1993 Judgment and
 
not any physical harm. Bornemann's conduct evinced no
 
indifference to or reckless disregard for the health and safety
 
26
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of others. Further, there is no evidence that the Kekonas were
 
particularly financially vulnerable. 
Regarding the fourth factor, the Kekonas argue that
 
Bornemann "participated fully in numerous incidents of wrongdoing
 
between 1993 and 2008." The jury found that Bornemann conspired
 
to fraudulently transfer the Kaneohe Property. The conduct that
 
Bornemann was held accountable for was solely his participation
 
in that transfer and not for any action. Thus, Bornemann's
 
conduct was the result of a single incident and not repeated
 
actions. Finally, pertaining to the fifth factor, the Kekonas'
 
financial harm was the direct result of Bornemann's intentional
 
conduct because there was ample evidence that Bornemann intended
 
that the fraudulent transfer of the Kaneohe property take place.
 
Thus, weighing the factors together, Bornemann's
 
conduct was sufficient to give rise to tort liability and some
 
award of punitive damages based on his intentional conduct, but
 
his actions did not rise to the high degree of reprehensibility
 
necessary to warrant $1,642,857.13 in punitive damages. 
When considering the disparity between the actual harm
 
suffered by the plaintiff and the punitive damages award, the
 
U.S. Supreme Court has stated that the proper inquiry is "whether
 
there is a reasonable relationship between the punitive damages
 
award and the harm likely to result from the defendant's conduct
 
as well as the harm that actually has occurred." Gore, 517 U.S.
 
at 581 (citations, internal quotation marks and emphasis in
 original omitted). "[C]ourts must ensure that the measure of
 
punishment is both reasonable and proportionate to the amount of
 
harm to the plaintiff and to the general damages recovered." 
Campbell, 538 U.S. at 426.
 
The Supreme Court has declined "to impose a bright-line
 
ratio which a punitive damages award cannot exceed." Id. at 425. 
However, the Supreme Court has instructed that "few awards
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exceeding a single-digit ratio between punitive and compensatory
 
damages, to a significant degree, will satisfy due process." Id. 
Here, the remedies available to the Kekonas and the
 
compensatory damages awarded in this case were considerable. 
Because of Bornemann's participation in the conspiracy to
 
fraudulently transfer the Kaneohe Property, the Kekonas were
 
unable to collect on their 1993 Judgment, which resulted in
 
damages in the amount of $253,075.29, equal to the accumulated
 
interest. Thus, the Kekonas were awarded $253,075.29 in
 
compensatory damages, and were also provided with remedies to
 
collect on the 1993 Judgment against Bornemann's assets as
 
discussed above. In light of the circumstances of this case, an
 
award of punitive damages of approximately six and one-half times
 
the interest-based damages is unreasonable and disproportionate
 
to the actual harm done to the Kekonas from Bornemann's conduct. 
Therefore, this factor weighs against the Kekonas.
 
Neither party has identified another Hawai' i state 
court case that has dealt with punitive damages related to a 
conspiracy to fraudulently transfer, and we have found none. In 
the case at bar, however, it appears that the judgment debtors, 
Smith and Abastillas, who were most directly culpable for seeking 
to avoid their liability to the Kekonas, were assessed just 
$250,000 in punitive damages. In a comparable case adjudicated 
in the United States District Court for the District of Hawai' i, 
but involving a much larger judgment debt, the District Court awarded $250,000 in punitive damages, but only against the 
judgment debtor. 
In Valvanis v. Milgroom, No. 06-00144, 2009 WL 1561575,
 
at *1 (D. Haw. June 1, 2009), Plaintiffs Mary, John, and George
 
Valvanis (Plaintiffs) alleged that Defendants Robert B. Milgroom
 
(Milgroom) and Nada Martl (Martl) "engaged in a scheme to hide
 
and shield assets from Milgroom's creditors, including
 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Plaintiffs." Plaintiffs had previously obtained a judgment 
against Milgroom "totaling almost $4 million." Id. at *2. After 
the Plaintiffs were unable to collect on their judgment, they 
filed a complaint against Valvanis and Martl for, inter alia, 
fraudulent transfer under the Hawai' i Uniform Fraudulent Transfer 
Act and civil conspiracy to defraud. Id. at *6. In their 
complaint, Plaintiffs alleged that "Milgroom and Martl sought to 
evade Milgroom's creditors by using Milgroom's money to purchase 
real property located in Honolulu, Hawai' i" and then transferred 
the property to Martl. Id. at *1. On June 1, 2009, in separate 
orders, the District Court entered default judgment against 
Milgroom and Martl on Plaintiff's claims for fraudulent transfer 
and conspiracy to defraud. Id. at *18; Valvanis v. Milgroom, No. 
06-00144, 2009 WL 1561571, at *14 (D. Haw. June 1, 2009). 
The District Court awarded $250,000 in punitive damages
 
against Milgroom. Valvanis, No. 06-00144, 2009 WL 1561575 at
 
*18. The court emphasized that Milgroom "engaged in a willful,
 
elaborate scheme to hide his assets and frustrate his creditors'
 
attempts to collect on his debts" and "was willing to take
 
extreme steps to hide his assets and prevent his creditors from
 
tracking down these transfers. Id. at *17, 18. In addition,
 
Milgroom "flout[ed] court orders and rules" in order to prevent
 Plaintiffs from collecting on their judgment when he "refused to
 
produce any documents or certify his interrogatory responses, and
 
then launched a series of frivolous arguments meant only to
 
delay[.]" Id. at 18. Thus, the District Court found that
 
"awarding punitive damages is necessary to punish Milgroom for
 his outrageous conduct and to deter both Milgroom and others from
 
similar conduct in the future." Id. Punitive damages were not
 
awarded against Martl. 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In the 2006 Memorandum Opinion, the ICA declined to
 
disturb a punitive damages award of $594,000 against Bornemann. 
However, that award was based on conspiracy to fraudulently
 
transfer the HPP Property, as well as the Kaneohe Property, which
 
represents multiple acts of misconduct, as well as the shielding
 
of assets of greater value from the Kekonas' judgment. Here, we
 
are of the opinion that, although Bornemann's conduct did rise to
 
the level of oppressiveness, wantonness, and malice sufficient to
 
support an award of punitive damages, the amount of punitive
 
damages awarded violated Bornemann's due process rights. Based
 
on Bornemann's conduct, and in light of all of the circumstances
 
of this case, including the punitive damages awarded against
 
Smith and Abastillas, and considering the punitive damages
 
awarded under similar circumstances, we find that punitive
 
damages in the amount of $250,000 is sufficient to punish
 
Bornemann. However, "[t]o allow the appellate court to order
 
straight out the reduction or increase of the amount of the
 
verdict would serve to substitute the judgment of the appellate
 
court for the jury." Kang, 59 Haw. at 664 n.3, 587 P.2d at 293
 
n.3. "This would violate the Seventh Amendment of the United
 
States Constitution and Article I, Section 8 of the Hawaii State
 
Constitution protecting the right to trial by jury in certain
 
cases." Id. Therefore, upon remand, the Circuit Court shall
 
provide the Kekonas with the option of submitting remittitur as
 to $1,392,857.10 in punitive damages or proceed with a new jury
 
trial to determine the amount of punitive damages that should be
 
awarded against Bornemann. 
30
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, the Circuit Court's February
 
5, 2008 Final Judgment is vacated and remanded for further
 
proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Peter Van Name Esser
 
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Fred Paul Benco
 
for Plaintiffs-Appellees/
Cross-Appellants
 
31
 