NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28358
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
PILA'A 400 LLC, Appellant-Appellant, v.
BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES and DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND
 
NATURAL RESOURCES, STATE OF HAWAI' I, Appellees-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-0103)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
  
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge and Circuit Judge Lee, with
Circuit Judge Wilson, concurring separately, in place of
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ., recused)
 
In this secondary appeal arising out of the imposition 
of penalties against a landowner for damage to a bay, a beach and 
a coral reef, Appellant-Appellant Pila
'a 400, LLC (Pila' a) appeals 
from the December 29, 2006 Final Judgment of the Circuit Court of 
1
the Fifth Circuit (circuit court)  in favor of Appellees-
Appellees Board of Land and Natural Resources (Board) and Department of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR), State of 
Hawai'i. 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. Background
 
Pila'a owns2 a 383-acre parcel of rural land, 
(Property), located on the north shore of Kaua' i. Pila' a 
purchased the Property from Pflueger Properties, a limited 
partnership, on January 23, 2001.3 
The Property is situated on a hillside sloping down to 
Pila'a beach, bay, and reef, which lie within the State Land Use 
Conservation District (Conservation District). It is "a level to gently sloping plateau extending from Kuhio Highway and Koolau 
Road toward the ocean. The plateau is broken by four gulches 
which extend to the shoreline. The plateau above and between the 
gulches naturally drains water and sediment along natural 
contours that form distinct geographic drainage areas." A thin 
4
strip of Conservation District land,  175 to 250 feet wide, runs
2 Pila'a obtained the Property from Pflueger Properties by way of
warranty deed executed on January 23, 2001, by James H. Pflueger, Manager of
Pflueger Properties. 
3 Pila'a and Pflueger Properties are both managed by James Pflueger
(Pflueger) and share the same mailing address. Prior to Pila' a moving for an
order declaring Pila' a the landowner of the Property and dismissing Pflueger
Properties and Pflueger from this case, the DLNR repeatedly misidentified thelandowner of the Property, at the time of the November 26, 2001 mudslide, as
Pflueger Properties and/or Pflueger. 
4 The DLNR is responsible for managing, administering and exercising
control over all of the public land in the state, including beaches and
submerged land. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 26-15(b) (2009) provides
now, as it did at the time of the events at issue here,
 
The [DLNR] shall manage and administer the public lands of
the State and minerals thereon and all water and coastal
 areas of the State except the commercial harbor areas of the
State, including the soil conservation function, the forests
and forest reserves, aquatic life, wildlife resources, state
parks, including historic sites, and all activities thereon
and therein including, but not limited to, boating, ocean
recreation, and costal areas programs.
 
HRS § 171-3(a) (2011) provides now, as it did at the time of the events at
issue here, 
The department of land and natural resources shall be headed
by an executive board to be known as the board of land and
natural resources. The department shall manage, administer,
and exercise control over public lands, the water resources,
ocean waters, navigable streams, coastal areas (excluding
commercial harbor areas), and minerals and all other
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
along the seaward edge of the Property. Pila' a Beach is a white 
sand beach approximately fifty to a hundred feet wide and is 
bisected by Pila' a Stream. 
Pila'a Bay contains a well-developed fringing reef. 
Wave action over the reef flushes the inner reef area, creating 
an environment favorable to marine life. Prior to November 26, 
2001, the reef was one of the "few remaining high value coral 
reef flats in the state that had largely escaped encroachment 
from development and stress from improper land practices" and is 
"an extremely valuable resource" with a wide range of reef 
habitats, abundant marine life, and diverse and almost fourteen 
percent coral cover. 
Unpermitted work on the Property, including land and
 
stream alterations, dates back to the early-to-mid 1990s.
 
On November 26, 2001, a rainstorm caused a portion of 
the Property to slump cross Pila' a Beach, enter Pila' a Bay, and 
cover Pila' a reef. The source of the sediment was outside the 
Conservation District. 
On January 28, 2002, pursuant to HRS ch. 183C, the DLNR 
issued a Notice and Order (the First Notice and Order) to 
Pflueger Properties for "illegal work conducted within the 
Conservation District at Pila' a[,] Kilauea, Kauai, Hawaii." The 
First Notice and Order continued, 
We have determined that:
 
1)	 
The subject property, identified as tax map key
5-1-004:008 is in the Conservation District and
 
is classified as Limited Subzone;
 
2)	 
The following uses were conducted on the subject
premises: grading, grubbing, cutting, and
culvert construction;
 
4(...continued)
interests therein and exercise such powers of disposition
thereof as may be authorized by law. 
The department shall
also manage and administer the state parks, historical
sites, forests, forest reserves, aquatic life, aquatic life
sanctuaries, public fishing areas, boating, ocean
recreation, coastal programs, wildlife, wildlife
sanctuaries, game management areas, public hunting areas,
natural area reserves, and other functions assigned by law. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3)	 These uses were not authorized by the Department
of Land and Natural Resources.
 
YOU ARE HEREBY ORDERED TO CEASE any further activity on the
subject premises. 
Should you fail to cease such illegal
activity immediately, you will be subject to fines up to
$2,000 per day pursuant to Chapter 13-5, [Hawaii
Administrative Rules (HAR)], in addition to administrative
costs incurred by the Department and damages to State land.
 
On June 20, 2002, following a June 13, 2002 site
 
inspection, the DLNR issued a second Notice and Order (the Second
 
Notice and Order) to Pflueger Properties, James Pflueger,
 
Trustee, for "Illegal Activity in the Conservation District; Tax
 
Map Key: 5-1-004:008," ordering Pflueger to submit a remedial
 
Best Management Practices Plan for the affected conservation
 
areas.5 Some time thereafter, but before August 22, 2002, a plan
 
5 The Second Notice and Order included a summary description of the
site inspection:
 
The site inspection was initiated at the mauka extent of the
property adjacent to Kuhio Highway. The inspection group
proceeded through the center of the property to the edge of
a bluff overlooking Pilaa Bay. The distance from the edge
of the bluff to the shoreline is approximately 300 yards.
This was the most heavily disturbed area of the parcel.
Unauthorized work in this area included the clearing of
vegetation and excavation and filling of massive quantities
of soil. Several swales or gullies were either filled or
partially filled. Within the shoreline area in the
 Conservation District, a massive vertical bench was cut into
the hillside and remains unprotected from erosion.
Evidently, this was done to construct a new dirt road to
provide access to the shoreline from the upper portions of
the property. This road now serves as a conduit for water
 and sediments, which end up in the sea almost unimpeded. A
 large metal drain was installed at the base of the vertical
bench, which concentrates and directs mud and water
underneath the road to the sandy beach. A small valley that
terminates near the beach was filled with large quantities
of excavated soil. This area remains partially unvegetated.
This latter action resulted in the diversion of a small
 stream, which originates from a spring several meters up the
valley. This fill area is a serious source of sediments
 transported to the nearshore waters during periods of
rainfall.
 
The Second Notice and Order also memorialized future remedial
 
action upon which the parties present, including Pflueger, agreed, and warned, 
While these actions will come far short of addressing the
long-term environmental impacts that will be difficult if
not impossible to mitigate, due to the wholesale
modification of the natural environment at Pilaa Bay, there
(continued...)
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
was submitted and remedial work implemented immediately
 
thereafter.
 
On August 22, 2003, a public meeting was held before 
the Board, during which the DLNR presented a report that analyzed 
the environmental impacts of the sediment flow onto Pila' a beach, 
bay, and reef; discussed the nature and extent of the damage to natural resources; and recommended penalties of $12,000 for 
failing to obtain approvals for road construction, grading, 
filling, and storm drain construction in six instances within the 
conservation district, $38,500 for administrative costs, and 
$5,830,000 for damage to Pila' a beach, bay, and reef. Before the 
close of the meeting, Pila' a requested a contested case hearing.
6 
Seven days later, counsel for James Pflueger, Pflueger 
Properties, and Pila' a 400, LLC, supplemented this request, by 
giving notice that they 
contest the specific facts and issues presented by the DLNR
Staff Report (and its appendices) that includes but is not
limited to, the following:
 
5(...continued)
is a need for immediate physical intervention to slow down
runoff and sediments. 
The landowner is reminded that these
 
interim remedial actions in no way whatsoever, cures,
exonerates or pardons the unauthorized despoliation of
conservation values at Pilaa by the landowner. The matter
 of the unauthorized work at Pilaa Bay will be presented to
the [Board] at a future date, time and place to be
announced. In addition to fines and penalties for damages
to State land, the landowner should be made aware of the
possibility of the imposition of the requirement to conduct
complete land restoration and long term monitoring to assess
the recovery of the marine environment.
 
With this in mind, the Department hereby ORDERS the
 
landowner to submit a remedial Best Management Practices
Plan for the affected conservation areas within five (5)
working days of the date of this letter. Upon approval of
the plan by the Department, such practices shall be
implemented immediately under the supervision of DLNR
personnel.
 
6
 As a transcript of the public hearing does not appear in the
record, Pila' a's oral request for a contested case hearing is not before us.
The Board found that Pila' a's oral request made at the public hearing was
"regarding BLNR's finding of coral reef damage and recommended damages of$5,842,000." The circuit court found that Pila' a "orally requested a
contested case hearing as to the fine measured by damages only." The circuit court's finding is not challenged in this appeal. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
•	 the statutory legal authority
 
•	 the responsible parties
 
•	 the scope and extent of the alleged damage to
the reef flat and near-shore marine environment at Pila' a 
•	 the amount of alleged damage that was directly
caused by the Petitioners' grading activities as
opposed to other causal factors
 
•	 the specific dates(s) when the alleged damage
occurred
 
•	 evidence regarding assessment of the damages to
the reef flat and near-shore marine environment
 and the alleged causes
 
•	 the amount of penalties proposed by the DLNR
staff
 
•	 the statutory authority for and the method used
by the DLNR to calculate penalties for the
alleged damage to the reef flat and near-shore
marine environment
 
•	 all factual and legal issues addressed in the
DLNR staff report dated August 22, 2003
 
•	 DLNR staff recommendation items nos. 2, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8 and 9 as described in the DLNR staff report
and 
•	 any and all finds [sic] of fact and conclusions
of law that may arise during the course of the
contested case proceeding. 
On September 2, 2003, the DLNR sent a letter to "James
 
Pflueger, Pflueger Properties," describing the events at the
 
August 22, 2003 Board hearing and stating that the Board found: 
1.	 The landowner (James Pflueger) violated the provisions
of Chapter 183C Hawaii Revised Statutes, and Chapter
13-5, Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR), by failing to
obtain the appropriate approvals for road
construction, grading, filling, and storm drain
construction in four (4) instances within the
conservation district and is fined a penalty of
$8,000;
 
2.	 The Landowner (James Pflueger) shall be assessed
$38,500 for administrative costs associated with the
subject violations to be paid within sixty (60) days
of the BLNR's action;
 
3.	 Mr. Pflueger shall implement a remediation plan for
the Conservation District land areas, subject to
detailed plan review by the DLNR as each project
element is implemented. Mr. Pflueger shall provide
the DLNR with engineering progress reports after the
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
first, second, and third year of the Board's decision
on this matter to ensure that the remediation work is
 being implemented and is effective. The DLNR may
require modifications to the remediation work if it
determines that the measures are not timely or
effective;
 
4.	 That in the event of failure of the Landowner (James
Pflueger) to comply with any conditions, he shall be
fined an additional $2000 per day until the order is
complied with; and
 
5.	 That in the event of failure of the Landowner (James
Pflueger) to comply with any order herein, the matter
shall be turned over to the Attorney General for
disposition, including all administrative costs.
 
The letter also acknowledged Pflueger's request for a contested
 
case hearing regarding "other items included in the
 
recommendation to the Board." Pila' a paid the $8,000 fine and 
$38,500 in costs. A Notice of Contested Case Hearing was
 published on October 3, 2003 and received by Pila' a. It 
provided, 
The Board of Land and Natural Resources (BLNR) State of
Hawaii, will conduct a contested case hearing on DLNR File
No. KA-04-02 regarding an enforcement action involving the
alleged damages to State land(s) and natural resources due
to excessive sedimentation at Pilaa, District of Hanalei,
Island of Kauai, seaward of TMK: 5-1-4:8 (por.). The
 hearing will be held pursuant to Chapters 91 and 183C,
Hawaii Revised Statutes, and Chapters 13-1 and 13-5, Hawaii
Administrative Rules (HAR). 
A contested case hearing began on July 20, 2004 before 
Michael W. Gibson, Esq., the appointed Hearing Officer (Hearing 
Officer), who conducted a site visit, took testimony, received 
exhibits, and heard arguments during several days of hearings. 
Hearing Officer entered his Proposed Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law, and Recommendation on December 22, 2004, 
which recommended that Pila' a should be assessed a penalty of 
$2,315,000 and administrative costs in the amount of $69,996.93.7 
7
 Hearing Officer also made the following recommendation:
 
It is recommended that the $2,325,000 penalty be held in
trust and applied to implement the Conceptual RemediationPlans whose estimated cost is three to five million dollars and to monitor the Pila' a Bay reef for five years. This 
will assure that the penalty is used to restore Pila' a Bay.
(continued...)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Both parties filed exceptions.
 
The Board heard oral arguments on March 29, 2005, and 
issued its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and 
Order on June 30, 2005 (Board Order), which concluded that Pila' a 
should be assessed $3,963,000 in damages to be paid to the State of Hawai' i special land and development fund as well as 
$69,996.93 for DLNR's administrative costs.
8 The Board 
7(...continued)
If the construction costs of the Conceptual Remediation
Plans exceed $2,000,000, Pila' a LLC should pay the balance
of the construction costs if the construction and monitoringcosts are less than the balance of the penalty not used tofund the Conceptual Remediation Plans and monitor Pila' a Bay
for five years, then the balance of the penalty should beretained by the State of Hawaii. 
The "Conceptual Remediation Plans" were approved by the DLNR and were designed
to ensure the Property was stable and no further runoff would occur. 
It
 
included removal of a trail in Gulch 2 and restoration of the stream to its
 previous location and configuration, extensive landscaping in Gulch 2,
stabilization, filling and restoration of the shoreline cut, re-vegetation of
the shoreline and removal of the rock berm in Gulch 2.
 
8 In reaching this conclusion, the Board noted,
 
12. The value of Pila' a beach, bay and reef includes
use value, option value, commodity value, existence value,bequest value, cultural values, including value toindigenous people, and intrinsic value. Economic and use (market) values alone cannot and do not capture the fullvalue of Pila' a. Economic valuation alone understates the 
true social loss from natural resource damage. The intrinsic value of Pila' a is recognized by the Hawai' i 
constitution and state laws, including section 183C-1, HRS.The BLNR holds Pila' a and all state property in trust for
the people of Hawai' i and for future generations. 
13. Given the elements of value discussed above and 
in consideration of all the facts and evidence, includingbut not limited to the range of values stated in scholarlypapers for reefs, the probable costs of restoration ofPila'a bay and reef and beach, the value of the coral
destroyed, and the intrinsic value of Pila' a Bay and reef,
and the costs of monitoring for 10 yeas beginning in 2005,the BLNR rejects the Hearing Officer's recommendation ofdamages. Under the circumstances of this case, the HearingOfficer's recommendation as to the amount of damages is toolenient to reflect the BLNR's duty to protect this valuablenatural resource under constitutional and statutory law.Therefore, the BLNR concludes that monitoring as describedin Exhibit 2 should be done for a period of 10 yearsbeginning in 2005 and that the State land (includingsubmerged lands) was damaged in the sum of $3,333,000 (ThreeMillion Three Hundred Thirty-three Thousand Dollars). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
determined that 
2. The violation was placement of any solid
material on land in the form of dumping or allowing to
be put on conservation land (including submerged land)
of a large unknown amount of dirt and sediment. The
 "illegal activity" that was conducted on conservation
land (including submerged land) was dumping or
allowing to be dumped a large unknown quantity of dirt
and mud without a permit as required by HAR §§ 13-5-24
and 13-5-30(b).
[9]
 
9	 HAR, Title 13 Department of Land and Natural Resources, subchapter
3 Identified Uses and Required Permits, section 24 (effective December 12,
1994 as amended December 5, 2011, with non-substantive changes) provides, in
pertinent part, 
§13-5-24 Identified land uses in the resource subzone. 
(a) In addition to the land uses identified in this
 
section, all identified land uses and their associated
permit or site plan approval requirements listed for the
protective and limited subzones also apply to the resource
subzone, unless otherwise noted.
 
(b) If a proposed use is not presented below or in
section 13-5-22 or 13-5-23, an applicant may request a
temporary variance, petition the land use commission for a
land use district boundary change, or initiate an
administrative rule change to have the proposed use added to
the identified land uses.
 
(c) Identified land uses in the resource subszone and
 
their required permits (if applicable), are listed below:
 
(1)	 Identified land uses beginning with letter (A)
require no permit from the department or board;
 
(2)	 Identified land uses beginning with letter (B)
require a site plan approval by the department;
 
(3)	 Identified land uses beginning with letter (C)
require a departmental permit; and 
(4)	 Identified land uses beginning with letter (D)
require a board permit, and where indicated, a
management plan.
 
HAR § 13-5-30 provides, in pertinent part,
 
Permits, generally. (a) 
Land uses requiring comprehensive
review by the board are processed as board permits,
management plans, or comprehensive management plans, and
temporary variances. 
Departmental permits and emergency
permits are processed by the department and approved by the
chairperson. Site plans are processed by the department and
approved by the chairperson or a designated representative.
If there is any question regarding the type of permit
required for a land use, an applicant may write to the
department to seek a determination on the type of permit
needed for a particular action.
 
(continued...)
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(Footnote added.) The Board found that Pila' a conducted "massive 
and unauthorized grading, filling, and other site work on the 
Property." The Board also found that unauthorized work by Pila' a 
or its predecessors in the conservation district included a "vertical cut ranging in elevation from 40 to 60 feet," 
construction of a road, and construction of a 30-inch culvert 
designed to drain water from the Property that ran under the road 
and onto state property in the Conservation District, i.e., 
Pila'a Beach, approximately 20-40 feet from the water's edge. As 
to the event in question, the Board found, 
6. On November 26, 2001, there was a rainfall in
the area. While heavy, the rainfall event was not
unprecedented or even particularly unusual. (Exhibit 2,
page 42).
 
7. On November 26, 2001, and as a result of the
work described above, rain and erosion caused a portion ofthe recently graded and filled hillside on the Property toslump downhill from the Property, across Pila' a Beach and 
into Pila' a Bay. (Exhibit 1, page 10). Additional 
sedimentation events occurred in December 2001 and early2002, in each case resulting in mudflow from the Propertyinto the conservation district. (Exhibit 1, page 5). 
8. The erosion resulted in large gullies on the
Property. The Hearing Officer determined that a
contemporary videotape accurately depicts the gullies. The
 size of the gullies shows that a substantial amount of
sediment moved from the Property into the conservation
district. (Exhibit 12; Exhibit 1, page 11; and Exhibit 25
are photographs that accurately depict the gullies).
 
9(...continued)
(b) Unless provided in this chapter, land uses shall
not be undertaken in the conservation district. The
 department shall regulate land uses in the conservation
district by issuing one or more of the following approvals:
 
(1) Departmental permit (see section 13-5-33);
 
(2) Board permit (see section 13-5-34);
 
(3) Emergency permit (see section 13-5-35);
 
(4) Temporary variance (see section 13-5-36);
 
(5) Site plan approval (see section 13-5-38); or
 
(6) Management plan or comprehensive management plan
(see section 13-5-39).
 
(Effective December 12, 1994, amended December 5, 2011 in ways not relevant to
this appeal).
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
12. Mudflows from Pila' a 400's Property into the
conservation district occurred because Pila' a 400 or its 
predecessor, managers, or agents failed to obtain permits
for the work and failed to implement adequate sediment andwater pollution controls. 
Pila'a appealed the Board Order to the circuit court on July 27, 
2005. 
On March 9, 2006, the United States Environmental 
Protection Agency, and the Department of Health, State of Hawai' i 
(DOH), filed a complaint with the United States District Court 
for the District of Hawai' i against "James H. Pflueger; Pflueger 
Properties; and Pila' a 400, LLC," alleging violations of the 
Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C § 1251 et. seq., the Rivers and Harbors 
Act of 1899, 33 U.S.C. § 407 and the Hawai' i Water Pollution Act, 
HRS ch. 342D. See, CV 06-00140-SPK-BMK. The complaint sought 
civil fines, remedial action, injunctive relief, and costs. On 
June 16, 2006, Magistrate Judge Barry M. Kurren entered an order 
approving entry of the consent decree (Consent Decree) resolving 
the matter. The Consent Decree included an agreement that the 
defendants would pay monetary civil penalties to the federal and 
state governments and take extensive remedial actions, without an 
admission of liability. 
By motions filed on July 24 and August 17, 2006, Pila' a 
sought summary judgment, judicial notice and dismissal, or remand 
to present new evidence, in light of the Consent Decree. A 
hearing on the motions was held on September 28, 2006, and both 
motions were denied through an October 23, 2006 order (Circuit 
Court Order). 
The circuit court issued its Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Order on December 4, 2006, affirming the
 
Board Order. Final judgment was entered on December 29, 2006. 
This appeal followed on January 9, 2007.
 
II. Issues on Appeal
 
Pila'a raises seven points of error on appeal, none of 
which comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP)Rule 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
28(b)(4).10 Pila'a argues that 
10
 HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) (2006) provided,
 
Within 40 days after the filing of the record on appeal, the
appellant shall file an opening brief, containing the
following sections in order here indicated:
 
. . . .
 (4)	 A concise statement of the points of error set forth
in separately numbered paragraphs. Each point shall
state: (i) the alleged error committed by the court or
agency; (ii) where in the record the alleged error
occurred; and (iii) where in the record the alleged
error was objected to or the manner in which the
alleged error was brought to the attention of the
court or agency. Where applicable, each point shall
also include the following:
 
(A)	 when the point involves the admission or
rejection of evidence, a quotation of the
grounds urged for the objection and the full
substance of the evidence admitted or rejected;
(B) 	when the point involves a jury instruction, a
quotation of the instruction, given, refused, or
modified, together with the objection urged at
the trial;
 
(C)	 when the point involves a finding or conclusion
of the court or agency, a quotation of the
finding or conclusion urged as error;
 
(D)	 when the point involves a ruling upon the report
of a master, a quotation of the objection to the
report.
 
Points not presented in accordance with this section will be
disregarded, except that the appellate court, at its option,
may notice a plain error not presented. Lengthy parts of the
transcripts that are material to the points presented may be
included in the appendix instead of being quoted in the
point. 
For example, in Pila' a's point of error "A," it alleges that the
Board Order exceeded the Board's authority and jurisdiction and provides
record cites to the circuit court's Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, andOrder, and the Board's Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision andOrder, but does not provide a record citation for where the alleged error wasobjected to or otherwise brought to the attention of the court or agency.Furthermore, as the citations provided are to specific pages within thecircuit court and Board's findings of fact and conclusions of lawrespectively, it suggests that either findings or conclusions are beingchallenged, yet no quotations of the specific findings or conclusions havebeen provided. 
(continued...)
 
12
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) affirmation of the Board Order was error inasmuch
as the Board Order, 
(a) exceeded the statutory authority and
jurisdiction of the agency under HRS § 183C-3(7)
because the subject grading activity occurred
outside of the conservation district;
 
(b) violated HRS § 91-9(b), and Pila' a's due 
process rights insofar as Pila' a did not receive 
notice of the nature of the land use violation; (c) violated HRS § 91-3 and HRS § 183C-3(3), as
the DLNR and the Board failed to adopt rules for
calculating and assessing environmental damages to
state land;
 
(d) violated HRS § 91-12, as it did not include
express findings supporting the damage award;
 
10(...continued)
Although 
it is well settled that failure to comply with HRAP Rule
28(b)(4) is alone sufficient to affirm the circuit court'sjudgment[,] Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United Agri Prods., 86Hawai'i 214, 235, 948 P.2d 1055, 1076 (1997); O'Connor v. 
Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawai' i 383, 385, 885 P.2d 361, 363
(1994); see also Schefke v. Reliable Collection Agency,
Ltd., 96 Hawai' i 408, 420, 32 P.3d 52, 64 (2001)
(recognizing that non-compliance with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)"offers sufficient grounds for the dismissal of theappeal")[,] [the Hawai' i Supreme Court] has consistently
adhered to the policy of affording litigants the opportunity"to have their cases heard on the merits, where possible."O'Connor, 77 Hawai' i at 386, 885 P.2d at 364 (citations
omitted). Inasmuch as Hawai' i constitutionally recognizes
the significance of conserving and protecting Hawai' i's 
natural beauty and all natural resources for present andfuture generations, the seawall and its effect on Kaua' i's 
coastline and neighboring properties is of great importanceto the people of Hawai' i. Haw. Const. art. XI, § 1.
Accordingly, because the issues raised in the instant caseare of great importance, we address the merits of the issuesraised by the Planning Department and Planning Commission,notwithstanding the technical violation of HRAP Rule28(b)(4). 
Morgan v. Planning Dept., County of Kauai, 104 Hawai' i 173, 180-81, 86 P.3d
982, 989-90 (2004). However, while we choose to reach the merits of thiscase, the failure to properly designate specific findings of fact aschallenged in this appeal leaves us no choice but to take those findings asestablished fact. Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Board of Water Supply, 97 
Hawai'i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002) (unchallenged findings of fact are
binding on the appellate court). 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(e) found Pila' a responsible for the illegal
activity of its predecessors-in-interest; and 
(f) violated HRS § 91-11, "by rejecting the
Hearing Officer's recommendation and not issuing a
'proposal for decision'"; and 
(2) the October 23, 2006 Circuit Court Order was in
error "since the federal Consent Decree acts as a full and fair resolution of the State of Hawai' i's claims 
against [Pila' a] arising from [Pila' a 's] unpermitted
construction activities at the [Property] under the
doctrine of res judicata." 
III. Standard of Review
 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon
its review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal.
The standard of review is one in which [the appellate] court
must determine whether the circuit court was right or wrong
in its decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS
§ 91-14(g) (1993) to the agency's decision.
 
United Pub. Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO, v. Hanneman, 106
 
Hawai'i 359, 363, 105 P.3d 236, 240 (2005) (brackets and 
citations omitted). Pursuant to HRS § 91-14(g), an agency's
 
conclusions of law are reviewed de novo, Camara v. Agsalud, 67
 
Haw. 212, 216, 685 P.2d 794, 797 (1984), while an agency's
 
factual findings are reviewed for clear error, HRS § 91-14(g)(5).
 
In order to preserve the function of administrative agencies
in discharging their delegated duties and the function of
this court in reviewing agency determinations, a presumption
of validity is accorded to decisions of administrative
bodies acting within their sphere of expertise and one
seeking to upset the order bears the heavy burden of making
a convincing showing that it is invalid because it is unjust
and unreasonable in its consequences.
 
In re Application of Hawaii Electric Light Co., 60 Haw. 625, 630,
 
594 P.2d 612, 617 (1979) (quotation marks and citations omitted).
 
IV. Discussion
 
A.	 The Board Order did not exceed the statutory authority and
jurisdiction of the Board under HRS § 183C-3(7).
 
Pila'a argues that the circuit court should not have 
affirmed the Board Order, because the Board lacked jurisdiction
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
over land use activities conducted outside of the Conservation
 
District defined in HRS Chapter 183C.11
 
The powers and duties of the Board and the DLNR, with
 
respect to Conservation District lands, are set forth in HRS
 
§ 183C-3 (2011) which states, in pertinent part, that the Board
 
and the DLNR shall "[a]dopt rules, in compliance with chapter 91
 
which shall have the force and effect of law;" and "[e]stablish
 
and enforce land use regulations on conservation district lands
 
including the collection of fines for violations of land use and
 
terms and conditions of permits issued by the department." In
 
accordance with this directive, the Board adopted HAR § 13-5­
30(b), which specifies that "[u]nless provided for in this
 
chapter, land uses shall not be undertaken in the [C]onservation
 
[D]istrict." "Land use" is defined in HRS § 183C-2 (2011)12 as:
 
(1)	 The placement or erection of any solid material on
land;
 
11
 The Conservation District is defined as "those lands within the
 
various counties of the State bounded by the conservation district line, as
established under provisions of Act 187, Session Laws of Hawaii 1961, and Act
205, Session Laws of Hawaii 1963, or future amendments thereto." HRS § 183C­2; see also, HAR § 13-5-2.
 
12 Similarly, the definition of "Land use" within the HAR consists of
the following: 
(1)	 The placement or erection of any solid material on
land if that material remains on the land more than
 thirty days, or which causes a permanent change in the
land area on which it occurs;
 
(2)	 The grading, removing, harvesting, dredging, mining or
extraction of any material or natural resource on
land;
 
(3)	 The subdivision of land; or
 
(4)	 The construction, reconstruction, demolition, or
alteration of any structure, building, or facility on
land.
 
For purposes of this chapter, harvesting and removing does
not include the taking of aquatic life or wildlife that is
regulated by state fishing and hunting laws nor the
gathering or natural resources for personal, non-commercial
use or pursuant to Article 12, Section 7 of the Hawaii State
Constitution or section 7-1, HRS, relating to certain
traditional and customary Hawaiian practices.
 
HAR § 13-5-2.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2)	 The grading, removing, harvesting, dredging, mining,
or extraction of any material or natural resource on
land;
 
(3)	 The subdivision of land; or
 
(4)	 The construction, reconstruction, demolition, or
alteration of any structure, building, or facility on
land.
 
The Board found that the unauthorized grading activity 
included "a massive vertical cut ranging in elevation from 40 to 
60 feet in height within the conservation district" and that 
"Pila'a . . . also constructed an unauthorized 30 inch pipe or 
culvert to drain water from the Property. The culvert ran under the road and onto state property in the conservation district." 
(Emphasis added.) 
It is also undisputed that on November 26, 2001, 
sediment from the Property flowed into and onto Pila' a beach, 
bay, and reef, which lie within the Conservation District. In addition, in its January 28, 2002 First Notice and Order, the 
DLNR notified Pila' a that unauthorized work had been conducted in 
the Conservation District. The Board concluded that "[d]umping soil onto conservation land falls within the definition of 'land 
use' in HRS § 183C-2[,]" i.e., the "placement or erection of any 
solid material on land." Nothing in the plain language of HRS § 
183C(2) or HAR § 13-5-2 requires that the soil or other material 
placed on conservation district land originate from Conservation 
District land as well. 
Although its basis is not entirely clear, Pila' a seems 
to argue that because "the Board found four land use violations 
and Appellant paid the assessed fine for those four unauthorized 
land uses" the Board could not consider the dumping of mud onto 
Conservation District land--which the evidence showed flowed at 
least in part along and/or through the unauthorized road and 
culvert--nor the damage caused by the dumping of mud. Pila' a 
cites no authority for this proposition. 
More importantly, Pila' a had reason to know that damage 
to the beach, bay and reef caused by the mud flow from the 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Property was unquestionably of concern and the reason for DLNR's 
enforcement action.13 To the extent Pila' a argues that it was 
unaware damage caused by soil runoff was at issue, we conclude that argument is unsupported by the record. 
We agree with the circuit court that the Board had 
jurisdiction over Pila' a's actions in this case. 
B.	 The Board did not fail to give proper notice.
 
Pila'a argues that the Board failed to provide proper 
notice as required by HRS § 91-9(b). Specifically, Pila' a 
maintains that the notice of contested case hearing failed to include "the particular sections of the statutes and rules 
involved" and an "explicit statement" of the issues involved.
14 
Pursuant to HRS § 91-9(b) (1993), notice of a contested
 
case hearing shall include, the following:
 
(1)	 The date, time, place, and nature of hearing;
 
(2)	 The legal authority under which the hearing is to be
held;
 
(3)	 The particular sections of the statutes and rules
involved;
 
(4)	 An explicit statement in plain language of the issues
involved and the facts alleged by the agency in
support thereof; provided that if the agency is unable
 
13 For example, in its Second Notice and Order, it was stated with
regard to the unauthorized work,
 
Within the shoreline area in the Conservation District, a
massive vertical bench was cut into the hillside and remains
 unprotected from erosion. Evidently, this was done to
construct a new dirt road to provide access to the shoreline
from the upper portions of the property. This road now
 serves as a conduit for water and sediments, which end up in
the sea almost unimpeded. A large metal drain was installed
at the base of the vertical bench, which concentrates and
directs mud and water underneath the road to the sandy
beach. A small valley that terminates near the beach was
filled with large quantities of excavated soil. This area
 remains partially unvegetated. This latter action resulted
 in the diversion of a small stream, which originates from a
spring several meters up the valley. This fill area is a
 serious source of sediments transported to the nearshore
waters during periods of rainfall.
 
14
 Pila'a also argues that the notice failed to inform it that it was
entitled to retain counsel and could appeal. However, Pila' a acknowledges
that it was represented by counsel throughout these proceedings. 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to state such issues and facts in detail at the time
 
the notice is served, the initial notice may be
limited to a statement of the issues involved, and
thereafter upon application a bill of particulars
shall be furnished;
 
(5)	 The fact that any party may retain counsel if the
party so desires and the fact that an individual may
appear on the individual's own behalf, or a member of
a partnership may represent the partnership, or an
officer or authorized employee of a corporation or
trust or association may represent the corporation,
trust or association.
 
It is true, as Pila' a argues, that the notice of 
contested case hearing did not cite to "particular sections" of 
the statutes and rules, but only to the HRS and HAR chapters. 
However, Pila' a does not point to, nor do we find, in the record 
that Pila' a challenged the notice on this basis before or during 
the contested case hearing. Yet, in its written supplement to 
its oral request for a contested case hearing, more than a month 
before the October 3, 2003 public notice, Pila' a challenged "the 
statutory legal authority" and "the statutory authority for and the method used by the DLNR to calculate penalties for the 
alleged damage to the reef flat and near-shore marine 
environment" but did not do so on the basis that it did not know 
which specific provisions were being relied upon. Thus, Pila' a 
has failed to preserve this challenge to the notice. 
Pila'a's argument that the notice was deficient because 
it did not contain an explicit statement of the issues involved is also unpersuasive. The notice did contain an explicit 
statement of the essential issue, that is, "the alleged damage to 
State land(s) and natural resources due to excessive 
sedimentation" from Pila' a's land. Nothing more was required by 
HRS § 91-9(b). See Application of Hawaii Elec. Light Co., Inc., 
67 Haw. 425, 430, 690 P.2d 274, 278 (1984) ("The nature and 
complexity of rate-making proceedings make it impractical to 
adopt a particularistic standard of issue identification. Each 
item and calculation used in arriving at the proposed rate 
schedule is an inherent and integral part of the proceeding. The 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
utility should expect that all items relative to the stated
 
general issues are subject to PUC review."). 
Moreover, it is clear, on this record, that Pila' a was 
"aware of the general issues" and "sufficiently apprised of the 
nature of the proceeding," as the circuit court concluded, well 
before the contested case hearing. Most notably, Pila' a's 
written request for a hearing specifically stated that, "[t]he matter being considered by the [Board] concerns alleged damage to 
the reef flat and near-shore marine environment stemming from 
grading activities in the conservative [sic] district which 
allegedly resulted in discharges of sediment following a severe 
rainstorm on the night of November 26, 2001, December 2001, and 
early 2002" and included an eleven-point list of matters 
contested by Pila' a. As Pila' a itself identified the matters to 
be considered in the contested case hearing as including the statutory basis for the assessment of damage, it cannot claim to 
be surprised by a hearing that involved DLNR's arguments 
regarding the basis for the assessment. It was the Hearing 
Officer's decision to accept or reject the DLNR's argument. 
Application of Hawaii Elec. Light Co., Inc., 67 Haw. at 430, 690 
P.2d at 278 ("The PUC's exercise of judgment in declining to 
accept the methodology used by any of the parties in the case 
does not mandate particularized notice of its plan to do so.") 
C. The Board Order did not violate HRS §§ 91-3 or 183C-3(3).
 
Pila'a claims that the Board failed to adopt rules 
establishing a reasonable and just methodology for assessing 
environmental damages under HRS § 91-3 and HRS § 183C-3(3). 
HRS § 183C-3(3) states that the Board and the DLNR
 
shall "[a]dopt rules, in compliance with chapter 91 which shall
 
have the force and effect of law." HRS § 91-3 (Supp. 2011)
 
provides the procedure for the adoption, amendment, or repeal of
 
rules. As such, while the Board and the DLNR have the authority
 
to adopt rules in accord with chapter 91, neither HRS § 183C-3(3)
 
nor HRS § 91-3 required the Board or the DLNR to engage in
 
rulemaking in this case. 
19
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Securities & Exchange Comm'n v. Chenery Corp., 332
 
U.S. 194 (1947), the court was asked to review a decision by the
 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) approving amendments to
 
a registered corporation's reorganization plan. To the argument
 
that the SEC was wrong in adjudicating the application rather
 
than promulgating a rule on the subject, the court responded, 
It is true that our prior decision explicitly
recognized the possibility that the Commission might have
promulgated a general rule dealing with this problem under
its statutory rule-making powers, in which case the issue
for our consideration would have been entirely different
from that which did confront us. 318 U.S. at pages 92, 93,
63 S. Ct. at pages 461, 462, 87 L. Ed. 626. But we did not
 mean to imply thereby that the failure of the Commission to
anticipate this problem and to promulgate a general rule
withdrew all power from that agency to perform its statutory
duty in this case. To hold that the Commission had no
 alternative in this proceeding but to approve the proposed
transaction, while formulating any general rules it might
desire for use in future cases of this nature, would be to
stultify the administrative process. That we refuse to do.
 
Since the Commission, unlike a court, does have the
ability to make new law prospectively through the exercise
of its rule-making powers, it has less reason to rely upon
ad hoc adjudication to formulate new standards of conduct
within the framework of the Holding Company Act. The
 function of filling in the interstices of the Act should be
performed, as much as possible, through this quasi-
legislative promulgation of rules to be applied in the
future. But any rigid requirement to that effect would make
the administrative process inflexible and incapable of
dealing with many of the specialized problems which arise.
See Report of the Attorney General's Committee on
Administrative Procedure in Government Agencies, S. Doc.
No. 8, 77th Cong., 1st Sess., p. 29. Not every principle
essential to the effective administration of a statute can
 or should be cast immediately into the mold of a general
rule. Some principles must await their own development,
while others must be adjusted to meet particular,
unforeseeable situations. In performing its important
functions in these respects, therefore, an administrative
agency must be equipped to act either by general rule or by
individual order. To insist upon one form of action to the
exclusion of the other is to exalt form over necessity.
 
In other words, problems may arise in a case which the
administrative agency could not reasonably foresee, problems
which must be solved despite the absence of a relevant
general rule. Or the agency may not have had sufficient
experience with a particular problem to warrant rigidifying
its tentative judgment into a hard and fast rule. Or the
 problem may be so specialized and varying in nature as to be
impossible of capture within the boundaries of a general
rule. In those situations, the agency must retain power to
deal with the problems on a case-to-case basis if the
administrative process is to be effective. There is thus a
 very definite place for the case-by-case evolution of
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statutory standards. And the choice made between proceeding
by general rule or by individual, ad hoc litigation is one
that lies primarily in the informed discretion of the
administrative agency. See Columbia Broadcasting System v.
United States, 316 U.S. 407, 421, 62 S. Ct. 1194, 1202, 86
L. Ed. 1563.
 
Chenery, 332 U.S. at 201-03. See also Application of Hawaiian 
Elec. Co., Inc., 81 Hawai' i 459, 918 P.2d 561 (1996) called into 
doubt on jurisdictional grounds by Peterson v. Hawaii Elec. Light 
Co., Inc., 85 Hawai' i 322, 944 P.2d 1265 (1997) (Public Utilities 
Commission did not err in approving placement of power lines by adjudication rather than rule making). 
Hawaii Prince Hotel v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 89 
Hawai'i 381, 974 P.2d 21 (1999) also does not support Pila' a's 
argument. Hawaii Prince involved an appeal from a real property 
tax assessment for a golf course. Revised Ordinances of Honolulu 
(ROH) 1990 § 8-7.4 listed several factors to be considered in 
assessing the value of golf course property for property tax 
purposes including: "rental income, cost of development, sales 
price [collectively "base assessment"] and, the effect of the 
value of the golf course on the value of the surrounding lands 
["imparted value"]." Id., at 384 n.9, 974 P.2d at 24 n.9. 
The court upheld the City appraiser's base assessment,
 
which utilized cost and market data approaches, id., at 389-91,
 
974 P.2d at 29-31, yet rejected the City appraiser's imparted
 
value, which he claimed to have determined utilizing standards
 
"in his head." Id., at 391-93, 974 P.2d at 31-33. The court
 
found the City appraiser's methodology for imparted value to be
 arbitrary and erroneous, resulting in a lack of uniformity and
 
inequality in golf course assessments, id., at 391-92, 974 P.2d
 
at 31-32, and within the definition of a rule under HRS § 91-1(4) 
15
(1993)  inasmuch as the methodology was admittedly based on the
15
 HRS § 91-1(4) defines a rule as an:
 
[A]gency statement of general or particular applicability
and future effect that implements, interprets, or prescribes
law or policy, or describes the organization, procedure, or
(continued...)
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
City appraiser's interpretation of the ROH § 8-7.4 factors, id.,
 
at 392-93, 974 P.2d 32-33; therefore, the court ordered the City
 
to reassess the property after promulgating a rule establishing a
 
methodology for ascertaining imparted value, noting that
 
otherwise
 
the affected public cannot fairly anticipate or address the
procedure as there is no specific provision in the statute
or regulations which describe[s] the determination process.
The public and interested parties are without any firm
knowledge of the factors that the agency would deem relevant
and influential in its ultimate decision. The public has
been afforded no meaningful opportunity to shape these
criteria that affect their interest.
 
Id. at 393, 974 P.2d at 33 (quoting Aluli v. Lewin, 73 Haw. 56,
 
60, 828 P.2d 802, 804, reconsideration denied, 73 Haw. 625, 831
 
P.2d 935 (1992)). 
Here, the circumstances are recognizably different. 
Assessing damage to Conservation District lands, which "contain
 
important natural resources essential to the preservation of the
 
State's fragile natural ecosystems and the sustainability of the
 
State's water supply[,]" HRS § 183C-1 (2011), is a complex
 
undertaking involving numerous and variable components, often
 
unique to a particular situation. Due to the infinitely diverse
 
nature of the lands and resources, and the myriad of ways damage
 
may occur on such lands and resources, measuring value and value
 
lost must be on a case-by-case basis, especially when of the
 
magnitude under the circumstances presented here. Devising and
 
imposing a single formulaic methodology for assessing penalties
 
would be impracticable. See N.L.R.B. v. Bell Aerospace Co., 416
 
U.S. 267, 294 (1974) (deciding the NLRB could decide whether
 persons were "managerial employees" by adjudication rather than
 
rulemaking, as "adjudication is especially appropriate in the
 
instant context . . . '(t)here must be tens of thousands of
 
manufacturing, wholesale and retail units which employ buyers,
 
15(...continued)
practice requirements of any agency. 
The term does not
 
include regulations concerning only the internal management
of an agency and not affecting the private rights of or
procedures available to the public[.]
 
22
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and hundreds of thousands of the latter.' . . . Moreover, duties
 
of buyers vary widely depending on the company or industry. It
 
is doubtful whether any generalized standard could be framed
 
which would have more than marginal utility.") 
In line with such considerations, HRS § 183C-7 broadly 
provided for "damages to state land" to be included as part of 
the fine for chapter 183C violations. Contrary to Pila' a's 
claims, there is no support in the record that the assessment was admittedly subjective or based on subjective standards. 
Moreover, alleged concerns over public awareness are unfounded 
inasmuch as the affected parties were involved in this assessment 
process. 
That other agencies, guided by different statutory
 
provisions, have implemented extensive rules for environmental
 
matters or the fact that Florida has passed a statute setting a
 
value for reefs does not change this analysis. 
D. The Board Order did not violate HRS § 91-12.
 
Pila'a claims that the Board failed to make its 
findings reasonably clear as HRS § 91-12 required. 
HRS § 91-12 (1993) requires that "[e]very decision and 
order adverse to a party to the proceeding, rendered by an agency 
in a contested case, shall be in writing or stated in the record 
and shall be accompanied by separate findings of fact and 
conclusions of law." As interpreted by the Hawai' i Supreme 
Court: 
All that is required [by § 91-12] is that the agency
incorporate its findings in its decision. In so doing,
however, the agency must make its findings reasonably clear.
The parties and the court should not be left to guess, with
respect to any material question of fact, or to any group of
minor matters that may have cumulative significance, the
precise finding of the agency.
 
Rife v. Akiba, 81 Hawai' i 84, 87, 912 P.2d 581, 584 (App. 1996) 
(quoting In re Terminal Transp. Inc., 54 Haw. 134, 139, 504 P.2d 
1214, 1217 (1972)). 
Here, after methodically enumerating eighteen findings
 
of fact pertaining to damages, the Board Order concluded:
 
23
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Given the elements of value discussed above and in
 
consideration of all the facts and evidence, including but
not limited to the range of values stated in scholarly
papers for reefs, the probable costs of restoration of
Pila'a bay and reef and beach, the value of the coral
destroyed, and the intrinsic value of Pila' a Bay and reef,
and the costs of monitoring for 10 years beginning in 2005,
the BLNR rejects the Hearing Officer's recommendation of
damages. Under the circumstances of this case, the Hearing
Officer's recommendation as to the amount of damages is too
lenient to reflect the [Board's] duty to protect this
valuable natural resource under constitutional and statutory
law. Therefore, the [Board] concludes that monitoring as
described in Exhibit 2 should be done for a period of 10
years beginning in 2005 and that the State land (including
submerged lands) was damaged in the sum of $3,333,000 (Three
Million Three Hundred Thirty-three Thousand Dollars). . . .
Pila'a 400 is obligated to pay the total damages of
$3,963,000.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Despite Pila' a's claim that the Board Order, or the 
findings contained therein on the issue of environmental damage
 
assessment, did not meet the requirements of HRS § 91-12,
 
Pila'a's argument does not support its claim, e.g., that the 
Board's findings are unclear. Instead, Pila' a appears to be 
making, inter alia, a sufficiency of the evidence argument,
 
questioning the "basis for each of the five elements of value
 
used in the [Board's] damage assessment." As Pila' a did not 
specifically challenge any of the Board's findings of fact as a
 point on appeal, we reject this argument. To the extent Pila' a 
challenges the Board's legal conclusions, we address them as
 follows.
 
1. Probable Costs of Restoration.
 
Pila'a argues that the inclusion of an explicit 
provision providing for restoration costs in HRS § 183C-7(b) as
 amended in 2003 is compelling support for their argument that the
 
provision had prospective application only and consequently the
 
Board lacked the authority to order such costs prior to the 2003
 
amendment. However, the legislative history behind the 2003
 
amendment reveals otherwise. 
HRS § 183C-7(b) (2003) provides, in pertinent part:
 
Any person violating this chapter or any rule adopted
in accordance with this chapter shall be fined not more than
$2,000 per violation in addition to administrative costs and
 
24
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
costs associated with land or habitat restoration, or both,
if required, and damages to state land. [Emphasis added].
 
The committee reports accompanying the bill amending HRS § 183C­
7(b) each begin with the statement that the purpose is to clarify
 
the powers of the DLNR. S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 155, in 2003
 
Senate Journal, at 1092 ("The purpose of this measure is to
 
clarify that the Board of Land and Natural Resources may impose
 
fines for each violation within a Conservation district where
 
multiple violations occur, in addition to costs associated with
 
land or habitat restoration where necessary."); S. Stand. Comm.
 
Rep. No. 618, in 2003 Senate Journal, at 1287 ("The purpose of
 
this measure is to clarify that the Department of Land and
 
Natural Resources may impose fines for each violation, require
 
payment of restorative costs, and provide verbal notification to
 
violators."); H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1027, in 2003 House
 
Journal, at 1494 ("The purpose of this bill is to clarify that
 
the Department of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR) may impose
 
fines for each violation, require payment of restorative costs,
 
and provide verbal notification to violators of the conservation
 
district statute."). Inasmuch as to clarify is "to free of
 
confusion" or "to make understandable," M ERRIAM-WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE
 
DICTIONARY 228 (11th ed. 2003), clarifying the DLNR's powers
 
connotes explaining a matter that was already present; in other
 
words, making explicit, powers that were previously implicit. 
2. Use of the Florida Statute. 
Pila'a argues that the Board's use of the "value of the 
coral destroyed" was not supported by the record and to the extent the Board relied on the measure contained in a Florida 
statute, it erred. The only finding including a dollar amount 
the Board made regarding the value of the reef was Finding V.D.12 
which stated, 
12. The State of Florida passed a statute reasonably
valuing reefs at $1000 per square meter. (Exhibit 1, page
51).
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We note that this finding does not apply the Florida 
measure to this case, but merely acknowledges its existence. 
Moreover, Pila' a does not provide any authority or persuasive 
argument showing that the Board was required to specify a dollar amount for the value of the coral destroyed or a methodology for 
determination of the value of coral damaged. 
The Florida statute referenced, Fla. Stat. § 253.04,
 
states, in pertinent part:
 
(3) The Department of Environmental Protection is
authorized to develop by rule a schedule for the assessment
of civil penalties for damage to coral reefs in state
waters. The highest penalty shall not exceed $1,000 per
square meter of reef area damaged. The schedule may include
additional penalties for aggravating circumstances, not to
exceed $250,000 per occurrence.
 
Prior to the contested case hearing, in response to
 
Pila'a's motion to exclude the Florida statute as a measure of 
damages to Hawai' i state land, Hearing Officer entered Minute 
Order No. 8, which ordered:
 
Florida Statute § 253:04 shall not be applied in the
contested case. However, [t]he Department of Land and
Natural Resources is not prohibited from presenting evidence
concerning the methodology used by the Florida statute if
the evidence is relevant to the issues presented during the
contested case hearing.
 
Accordingly, the DLNR submitted Exhibit 1, which included the
 
following discussion on page 51:
 
The State of Florida can charge up to $1,000/square meter
for damages to its coral reefs, which are also held in trust
for the people of Florida. Florida has imposed fines for
damages to coral reefs from ship groundings. Many of these
cases have resulted in out of court settlements. In a
 recent shipping damage case, Great Lakes Docks and Dredging
has agreed to pay $1,000,000 for damages to sea grass and
other resources in the Florida Keys National Marine
Sanctuary. A large pipe was accidentally dragged over a sea
floor destroying almost 196,764 square feet (+ 22,000 square
meters) of sea grass beds.
 
Thus, while it is true that Minute Order No. 8
 
precluded the application of the Florida statute in this case, it
 
specifically permitted evidence of the methodology used by the
 
statute if the evidence was relevant.
 
26
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Pila'a seems to imply that the Florida statute was 
irrelevant because it was a civil penalty statute without any 
basis in value or not representing a methodology for determining 
damage to state land; however, this does not change the fact that 
the method used in determining civil penalties for damage to 
coral reefs in Florida pursuant to the statute may have been 
relevant and useful in arriving at a method for assessing damages 
to coral reefs in Hawai' i in this case, especially considering 
the unprecedented nature of this case in Hawai' i. 
3. Intrinsic value.
 
Pila'a also complains that the Board failed to find a 
numeric value based on this factor, there was no testimony 
regarding this value or how this value was diminished and, as 
Dr. John Dixon (Dr. Dixon) testified, it is a value "by its very 
nature . . . impossible to give a monetary value to." The Board 
made the following finding pertaining to "intrinsic value": 
Indirect and non-use values are related to human use 
or knowledge. However, based upon the provision of the
Hawaii State Constitution, reef and natural resources,including Pila' a beach, bay and reef, have value beyond that
which can be measured by human use and price alone. (Dixontranscript 8/13/04, p. 141-142). 
As such, in considering various elements of value, the
 
Board included the value recognized by Article XI, Section 1 of
 
the Hawai' i State Constitution, referred to as intrinsic value: 
For the benefit of present and future generations, the
State and its political subdivisions shall conserve and
protect Hawaii's natural beauty and all natural resources,
including land, water, air, minerals and energy sources, and
shall promote the development and utilization of these
resources in a manner consistent with their conservation and
 in furtherance of the self-sufficiency of the State.
 
All public natural resources are held in trust by the
State for the benefit of the people.
 
Although Pila' a correctly notes Dr. Dixon's testimony 
regarding the impossibility of assigning a monetary value to 
intrinsic value or the inappropriateness of economic analysis, 
Pila'a fails to acknowledge Dr. Dixon's own statement that 
"[j]ust because a value cannot be measured or easily calculated, does not mean it does not exist." 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
As for the lack of an exact amount attributed to the 
intrinsic value of Pila' a, once again, Pila' a does not provide any 
authority or persuasive argument showing such was required. 
4. Costs of monitoring.
 
Pila'a argues that the Board improperly based 
monitoring costs on reef damage occurring during the 1990's,
 
prior to the November 26, 2001 land slide, failed to find that
 
monitoring costs were a proper component of damages under HRS
 
§ 183C-7, and exceeded its authority by imposing the equitable
 
relief of monitoring for 10 years. 
The Board made the following finding pertaining to the
 
"costs of monitoring":
 
Long term monitoring of the reef community at Pila' a 
will be required. (Exhibit 1, page 50). The cost of 
monitoring the reef at Pila' a is approximately $63,000 per 
year. Although the Hearing Officer recommended thatmonitoring occur for 5 years, taking into consideration thatthe amount of time for Pila' a beach, bay and reef to fully
recover is unknown, and taking into consideration that somereef damage (although not the reef damage at issue in thiscase) occurred in the 1990's, the BLNR concludes thatmonitoring should occur for 10 years. 
Holding Pila' a accountable for the costs associated 
with monitoring the recovery of the resources Pila' a was 
responsible for damaging reasonably falls under the Board's broad 
authority to assess "damages to state land." HRS § 183C-7(b). 
As noted by the DLNR in its report to the Board, 
labeled Exhibit 1, in order to remedy the degradation at Pila' a, 
besides controlling the source of the sediment and removing the sediment, long-term monitoring was required to assess the rate 
and type of reef recovery. Monitoring costs were necessary 
because "[t]here is no conclusive evidence of when, if ever, the 
area will return to its pre mudflow conditions." As such, the 
Board's consideration of this cost of the damage to the reef was 
reasonably within its authority to assess damages.
16 
16
 Damages are "compensation for loss or injury," and loss is an
"undesirable outcome of a risk." B LACK'S LAW DICTIONARY  445, 1029 (9th ed.
2009).
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As for the Board's reference to the reef damage from 
the 1990's, the Board was not assessing monitoring costs for 
damages not at issue in this case, as Pila' a suggests. Rather, 
when read in context, it is clear that it was considering the longstanding effects of prior damage to the bay in deciding how 
long monitoring should last for the damage caused in this case. 
Finally, although Pila' a characterizes the Board's 
award as equitable relief, the Board in fact assessed a dollar 
amount and did not require any action by Pila' a.
17 
We conclude that the Board Order did not violate HRS
 
§ 91-12.
 
E.	 The Board Order did not find Pila' a responsible for the
illegal activity of its predecessors. 
Pila'a claims that the Board had no authority to 
penalize Pila' a for land use violations occurring before Pila' a's 
ownership of the Property. 
The land use violation at issue occurred on 
November 26, 2001, when Pila' a owned the Property. Pila' a 
acknowledged as much in its motion to "Exclude Land or Habitat 
Restoration," where it argued that the 2003 amendment to HRS § 
183C-7 did not apply in this case: "In this case the alleged 
violations occurred from 2001 to late 2002." 
Moreover, even if Pila' a's predecessors' pre-2001 
illegal activities resulted in the land use violation, Pila' a was 
in control of the Property before the November 26, 2001 mudslide and subsequent run-off that caused the damage to the beach, bay 
and reef. Consequently, the Board found, 
As the owner of the Property on November 26, 2001,
thereafter, Pila' a 400 was responsible to assure that there
was no unpermitted dumping onto conservation land, including
submerged lands. As the owner of the Property onNovember 26, 2001, and thereafter, Pila' a 400 was 
responsible to the State for the condition of the Propertyand for the consequences of any illegal activity on the 
17
 "Equitable remedy" has been defined this way: "A remedy, usu. a
nonmonetary one such as an injunction or specific performance, obtained when
available legal remedies, usu. monetary damages, cannot adequately redress the
injury." B
LACK'S LAW DICTIONARY , 1408 (9th ed. 2009).
 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Property by its predecessors that resulted in damage to the
State land (including submerged land) after it acquired theProperty. As between Pila' a 400 and its predecessors,
liability is a matter of agreement between them. 
As discussed in section A supra, the Board had authority to 
penalize Pila' a for the November 26, 2001 land use violation. 
Therefore, we reject Pila' a's argument. 
F. The Board Order did not violate HRS § 91-11.
 
Pila'a claims that the Board's categorical rejection of 
the Hearing Officer's recommendation and failure to issue a
 
"proposal for decision" was a violation of HRS § 91-11.
 
HRS § 91-11, which stands unchanged since its enactment
 
in 1961, provides:
 
Whenever in a contested case the officials of the
 
agency who are to render the final decision have not heard
and examined all of the evidence, the decision, if adverse
to a party to the proceeding other than the agency itself,
shall not be made until a proposal for decision containing a
statement of reasons and including determination of each
issue of fact or law necessary to the proposed decision has
been served upon the parties, and an opportunity has been
afforded to each party adversely affected to file exceptions
and present argument to the officials who are to render the
decision, who shall personally consider the whole record or
such portions thereof as may be cited by the parties.
 
In this case, Hearing Officer's Proposed Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Recommendation reasonably fulfilled
 
the "proposal for decision" requirement of HRS § 91-11. White v.
 
Board of Education, 54 Haw. 10, 11-14, 501 P.2d 358, 360-362
 (1972). 
As in White, "the hearing officer's report had been
 
treated by all of the parties as the Board's 'proposal for
 decision' and accordingly exceptions were filed thereto, and a
 
hearing was held before the Board in connection therewith." 
Id., at 13, 501 P.2d at 361.  The White court went on to note,
 
To require the Board to serve the teacher with the draft of
its decision and to grant the teacher another opportunity to
file exceptions and present arguments would add little
towards meeting the requirement that the agency consider the
record or at least 'such portions thereof' cited by the
teacher which it had already done and on the other hand
would greatly increase the complexity of administrative
decision making.
2 As stated in Comment to Section 11 of The
 
Revised Model State Administrative Procedure Act, Fourth
Tentative Draft (1961), "[t]he purpose of this section is to
make certain that those persons who are responsible for the
 
30
 ____________________ 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
decision shall have mastered the record, either by hearing
the evidence, or reading the record or at the very least
receiving briefs and hearing oral argument. It is intended
 to preclude signing on the dotted line."
 
It would appear that the objective of this particular
provision of § 91-11 was fully accomplished and we cannot
see what more could have been done. Thus we hold that under
 the record of this case the service of the hearing officer's
report reasonably fulfilled the requirement that a "party
adversely affected" be served with the proposed decision.
 
2If such were the requirement, it would mean that a
proposal of the decision must be served every time a change
or amendment is made to every draft of a decision until a
decision is ready to be filed without a change whatsoever.
 
White, 54 Haw. at 13-14, 501 P.2d at 361-62.
 
That the Board ultimately rejected Hearing Officer's
 
recommendation is of no consequence inasmuch as the Board was not
 
bound by the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of
 
Hearing Officer. Id., at 15-16, 501 P.2d 362-63.
 
G.	 This action was not barred by the Consent Decree under the
doctrine of res judicata.
 
Pila'a claims that the October 23, 2006 Circuit Court 
Order denying Pila  'a's motions, which sought summary judgment, 
judicial notice and dismissal, or remand to present new evidence,
 
was in error since the June 16, 2006 Consent Decree barred the
 
State of Hawai' i's claims against Pila' a under the doctrine of res 
judicata.
 
The doctrine of res judicata essentially provides that
"[t]he judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction is a
bar to a new action in any court between the same parties or
their privies concerning the same subject matter, and
precludes the relitigation, not only of the issues which
were actually litigated in the first action, but also of all
grounds of claim or defense which might have been properly
litigated in the first action but were not litigated or
decided." 
Estate Bernice P. Bishop,  36 Haw. 403, 416
 
(1943). In the application of the doctrine, three basic
questions must ordinarily be answered in the affirmative:
(1) Was the issue decided in the prior action identical with
the issue presented in the present action? (2) Was there a
final judgment on the merits in the prior action? (3) Was
the party against whom the doctrine is asserted a party or
in privity with a party to the previous adjudication?
Morneau v. Stark Enterprises Ltd., 56 Haw. 420, 424, 539
P.2d 472, 475 (1975).
 
31
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Silver v. Queen's Hospital, 63 Haw. 430, 435-436, 629 P.2d 1116,
 
1121 (1981). Taking the last question first, we conclude that
 
this action and the federal action did not involve the same
 
parties or their privies. DOH was not a party to this action,
 
and the DLNR was not a party to the federal action. It is true
 
that,
 
[t]he concept of privity has moved from the
conventional and narrowly defined meaning of mutual or
successive relationship[s] to the same rights of property to
merely a word used to say that the relationship between the
one who is a party of record and another is close enough to
include that other with the res ajudicata. This comports
with modern case law, which recognizes that the
determination of who are privies requires careful
examination into the circumstances in each case as it
 arises.
 
Adequate representation of the interests of the party,
and proper protection to the rights of the person sought tobe bound are major considerations in privity analysis.Moreover, since res judicata is an affirmative defense under[Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure] Rule 8(c), the party
asserting the defense has the burden of proving adequaterepresentation of the interests and proper protection of therights of the nonparty in the prior action. 
In re Dowsett Trust, 7 Haw. App. 640, 646, 791 P.2d 398, 402-03
 
(1990) (citations, quotation marks, and footnote omitted)
 
(observing that close family relationships, without more, is
 
insufficient to create privity).
 
The DLNR and the DOH are separate departments within
 
the state's executive branch, with different statutory mandates,
 
compare HRS § 26-15 with HRS § 26-13, and without authority to
 
enforce the laws defining the other department's jurisdiction. 
"They represent distinct interests." Jones v. Securities &
 
Exchange Commission, 115 F.3d 1173, 1180 (4th Cir. 1997). 
In Jones, the question was whether disciplinary action
 
taken by the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD)
 against Jones, a stockbroker, barred a later administrative
 
proceeding brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission
 
(SEC) against Jones for the same conduct. In analyzing Jones's
 
argument that the NASD and SEC were the same parties for res
 
judicata purposes, the Fourth Circuit observed that the roles of
 
32
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the NASD and SEC were different, the latter serving as a reviewer
 
of the former's action and in any event was an adjudicator, not a
 
party. Moreover, 
[e]ven though for purposes of res judicata the
identity of parties may be satisfied by persons in privity
with parties, the privity requirement assumes that the
person in privity is "so identified in interest with a party
to former litigation that he represents precisely the same
legal right in respect to the subject matter involved."
Nash County Bd. of Educ. v. Biltmore Co., 640 F.2d 484, 493
(4th Cir. 1981) (quoting Jefferson Sch. of Soc. Science v.
Subversive Activities Control Bd., 331 F.2d 76, 83 (D.C.
Cir. 1963)). "[P]rivity attaches only to those parties whose
interests in a given lawsuit are deemed to be 'aligned.'"
Comite de Apoyo a los Trabajadores Agricolas v. U.S. Dep't.
of Labor, 995 F.2d 510, 514 (4th Cir. 1993). In the case
 before us, NASD's interest in prosecuting a disciplinary
action does not represent the same legal right that the SEC
has in reviewing it.
 
Jones, 115 F.3d at 1180-81. See also, Iles v. Commonwealth, 320
 
S.W.3d 107 (Ky. App. 2010) (Lawsuit brought by Department of
 
Highways (DOH) under "Junkyard Act" did not bar subsequent suit
 
by Energy and Environment Cabinet (EEC) enforcing different
 
statute prohibiting dumping of waste without a permit as the EEC
 
could not have been a party to the first lawsuit where only the
 
DOH had the authority to enforce the Junkyard Act, thus the two
 
suits had no identity of parties or causes of action.). 
Nor were the causes of action in the federal action 
identical to those in the instant case. The June 16, 2006 
Consent Decree resolved violations of the federal Clean Water and 
Rivers and Harbors Acts and the Hawai' i Water Pollution Act. The 
current administrative action arose from alleged violations of statutes protecting state lands within the Conservation District. 
In addition to the obvious distinction between each agency's area 
of responsibility, water pollution and conservation land 
preservation, the state agencies were given different enforcement 
mechanisms. For example, the Water Pollution Act provides for 
civil, administrative, and criminal penalties. The Conservation 
District provisions are limited to fines and recovery of damages. 
As in Jones, while both agencies have regulatory roles, the 
legislative decision to separate the protection of water and land 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
into two different agencies was a reflection of those agencies'
 
distinct interests.
 
Finally, while the June 16, 2006 Consent Decree is
 
final, it cannot be said it was a determination of the merits. 
The consent decree states that it was being entered "without the
 
adjudication or admission of any issue of fact or law except as
 
provided in Section I [regarding Jurisdiction and Venue][.]"
 
As such, it cannot be said that the DOH and DLNR are
 
sufficiently aligned to be considered in privity and the June 16,
 
2006 Consent Decree did not bar the adjudication of the case
 
before us.
 
VI. Conclusion
 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit's
 
December 29, 2006 Final Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, December 21, 2012. 
Wesley H.H. Ching and
Kathleen M. Douglas,for Appellant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
David M. Louie,Attorney General,(Russell A. Suzuki and DianeErickson, Deputy AttorneysGeneral, with him on thebriefs)for Appellee-Appellee, Boardof Land and Natural Resources. 
Acting Associate Judge 
William J. Wynhoff,Deputy Attorney General,for Appellee-Appellee,Department of Land and NaturalResources. 
34
 