FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
---o0o-- 
 
KEE SUN KIM,
Claimant/Appellant-Appellee, Cross-Appellee,
vs.
 
LIBERTY MUTUAL FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY,
Respondent/Appellee-Appellant, Cross-Appellee,
and
 
J.P. SCHMIDT, Insurance Commissioner,
Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs,
Appellee-Appellee, Cross-Appellant. 
NO. 28315
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-0994)
 
December 23, 2010
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, FOLEY, AND FUJISE, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Kee Sun Kim (Kim) was injured in a motor vehicle
 
accident in which her vehicle was rear-ended by another vehicle. 
At the time of the accident, Kim's vehicle was insured by Liberty
 Mutual Fire Insurance Company (Liberty Mutual). Liberty Mutual
 paid for medical treatments incurred by Kim during the first
 three and a half months following the accident, including
 acupuncture treatments. Liberty Mutual then refused to pay a
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
claim by Kim's medical provider for acupuncture treatments that
 
Kim received more than three and a half months after the accident
 on the ground that such treatments were no longer warranted.
 
Kim filed with the Insurance Commissioner, Department 
of Commerce and Consumer Affairs, a request for review of Liberty Mutual's refusal to pay Kim's medical provider for the acupuncture treatments. In Wilson v. AIG Hawaii Ins. Co. , 89 
Hawai» i 45, 968 P.2d 647 (1998), the Hawai» i Supreme Court 
previously held that Wilson, an insured claimant, who on behalf of her medical provider had sued the insurer to enforce the provider's claim for unpaid medical expenses, was not a real party in interest who could bring such a suit. Id.  at 47-51, 968 
P.2d at 649-53. Relying on Wilson v. AIG , the Insurance 
Commissioner determined that Kim was not a real party in interest 
and could not pursue her administrative action against Liberty Mutual. 
Kim appealed the Insurance Commissioner's decision to 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court),
1/ which 
overturned the Insurance Commissioner's decision. The circuit court concluded that the Hawai» i Legislature had overruled Wilson 
v. AIG by virtue of the Legislature's 2006 enactment of Act 198,
 
2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 198, at 840-41 (Act 198), and the
 legislative history accompanying Act 198, and that Kim qualified
 as a real party in interest. 
In this appeal, we must determine the impact that Act
 
198 and its legislative history have on Wilson v. AIG 's real­
party-in-interest analysis. We conclude that the Legislature,
 
through Act 198 and its accompanying legislative history, has
 clarified its intent and the nature of an insured claimant's
 interest in enforcing his or her medical provider's claim for
 payment, such that Kim qualifies as a real party in interest. 
Accordingly, we hold that Kim is a real party in interest and is
 
entitled to pursue her administrative action which challenged
 
1
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided .
 
2
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Liberty Mutual's refusal to pay Kim's medical provider for the
 
acupuncture treatments provided to Kim. 
I.
 
After Kim's involvement in the motor vehicle accident,
 
her treating physicians prescribed treatments that included
 acupuncture therapy. About a week after the accident, Kim began
 receiving acupuncture treatments from Dr. Chai's Health Center
 Inc. (Health Center). After initially paying the Health Center's
 billings for such treatments, Liberty Mutual denied a claim
 submitted by the Health Center for several acupuncture treatments
 provided to Kim more than three and a half months after the
 accident. Liberty Mutual explained that its denial of the Health
 Center's claim was based on a medical records review that was
 
conducted by Clifford K.H. Lau, M.D., approximately three and a
 half months after the accident. Dr. Lau opined that, as of the
 date of his records review, "passive modalities" such as
 acupuncture and massage were no longer warranted. Liberty Mutual
 had not sought mutual agreement from Kim prior to selecting Dr.
 Lau to conduct the records review.
 
Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ÿÿ 431-10C-212
 
(2005),
2/ Kim filed a request for an administrative hearing with
 
2
 HRS ÿÿ 431:10C-212 provides:
 
(a) If a claimant or provider of services objects to the
denial of benefits by an insurer or self-insurer pursuant to
section 431:10C-304(3)(B) and desires an administrative hearing
thereupon, the claimant or provider of services shall file with
the commissioner, within sixty days after the date of denial of
the claim, the following:
 
(1) 	Two copies of the denial; 
(2) 	A written request for review; and 
(3)	 A written statement setting forth specific reasons for
the objections. 
(b) The commissioner has jurisdiction to review any denial
of personal injury protection benefits.
 
(c) 	
The commissioner shall:
 
(continued...)
 
3
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Insurance Commissioner to seek review of Liberty Mutual's
 
refusal to pay the billing statement submitted by the Health
 Center. Both Kim and Liberty Mutual filed motions for summary
 judgment. Citing Wilson v. AIG , a hearings officer recommended
 
that the Insurance Commissioner grant Liberty Mutual's motion for
 summary judgment. The hearings officer concluded that: 1) Kim
 was not a real party in interest who could pursue an action
 against Liberty Mutual for payment of Kim's medical provider's
 billing statement; and 2) Liberty Mutual did not need to obtain
 mutual consent from Kim before selecting Dr. Lau to conduct a
 
3/
records review under HRS ÿÿ 431:10C-308.5 (2005 & Supp. 2009).
2(...continued)
(1)	 Conduct a hearing in conformity with chapter 91 to
review the denial of benefits; 
(2)	 Have all the powers to conduct a hearing as set forth
in section 92-16; and 
(3)	 Affirm the denial or reject the denial and order the
payment of benefits as the facts may warrant, after
granting an opportunity for hearing to the insurer and
claimant. 
(d) The commissioner may assess the cost of the hearing
upon either or both of the parties.
 
(e) Either party may appeal the final order of the
commissioner in the manner provided for by chapter 91.
 
3 HRS ÿÿ 431:10C-308.5(b), the subsection of HRS ÿÿ 431:10C-308.5 relevant
to the "mutual consent" issue, provides in pertinent part:
 
(b) The charges and frequency of treatment for services
specified in section 431:10C-103.5(a) . . . shall not exceed the
charges and frequency of treatment permissible under the workers'
compensation supplemental medical fee schedule. Charges for
independent medical examinations, including record reviews,
physical examinations, history taking, and reports, to be
conducted by a licensed Hawaii provider unless the insured
consents to an out-of-state provider, shall not exceed the charges
permissible under the appropriate codes in the workers'
compensation supplemental medical fee schedule. . . . The
 
independent medical examiner shall be selected by mutual agreement
between the insurer and claimant; provided that if no agreement is
reached, the selection may be submitted to the commissioner,
arbitration or circuit court. The independent medical examiner
shall be of the same specialty as the provider whose treatment is
being reviewed, unless otherwise agreed by the insurer and
claimant. . . . The commissioner may adopt administrative rules
relating to fees or frequency of treatment for injuries covered by
(continued...)
 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Insurance Commissioner issued a Final Order which adopted the
 
hearings officer's recommended decision and granted Liberty
 Mutual's motion for summary judgment.
 
Kim appealed the Insurance Commissioner's Final Order
 
to the circuit court. The circuit court "reversed" the Insurance
 Commissioner's rulings and remanded the case to the Insurance
 Commissioner pursuant to the Judgment the circuit court issued on
 November 17, 2006. The circuit court determined that (1) Kim has
 standing and is a real party in interest who could challenge
 Liberty Mutual's denial of no-fault or personal injury protection
 (PIP) benefits,
4/ namely, Liberty Mutual's denial of payments
 
requested by Kim's medical provider for treatments rendered; and
 (2) under HRS ÿÿ 431:10C-308.5(b), Liberty Mutual was required to
 
obtain the mutual consent of Kim before having a doctor conduct a
 records review of Kim's medical records.
 
II.
 
Liberty Mutual appealed and the Insurance Commissioner
 
cross-appealed to this court from the circuit court's Judgment. 
Liberty Mutual and the Insurance Commissioner are aligned
 together and assert many of the same arguments in attacking the
 circuit court's decision. Thus, this appeal pits Liberty Mutual
 and the Insurance Commissioner against Kim.
 
On appeal, Liberty Mutual and the Insurance
 
Commissioner argue that the circuit court erred by ruling that
 (1) Kim is a real party in interest who could challenge Liberty 
3(...continued)
personal injury protection benefits. If adopted, these
administrative rules shall prevail to the extent that they are
inconsistent with the workers' compensation supplemental medical
fee schedule.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
4
 In 1997, the Hawai »i Legislature substituted the term "personal injury
protection benefits" for the term "no-fault benefits." Iaea v. TIG Ins. Co. ,
104 Hawai »i 375, 378 n.3, 90 P.3d 267, 270 n.3 (App. 2004); 1997 Haw. Sess.
Laws Act 251, ÿÿÿÿ 2, 34, 40-42 at 514, 533, 538-41. We will use these terms 
interchangeably in this opinion. 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Mutual's denial of the PIP benefits requested by Kim's medical
 
provider for treatments rendered; and (2) mutual consent between
 Kim and Liberty Mutual was required in order for Liberty Mutual
 to have a doctor conduct a records review under HRS ÿÿ 431:10C­308.5(b).
 
With respect to the second issue, while this appeal was 
pending, the Hawai» i Supreme Court decided Gillan v. Government 
Employees Ins. Co., 119 Hawai» i 109, 194 P.3d 1071 (2008). 
Gillan resolves the second issue through its holding that a 
records review does not constitute an "independent medical examination" within the meaning of HRS ÿÿ 431:10C-308.5(b) and, therefore, an insurer is not required to obtain the insured claimant's mutual consent to conduct a record review. Id. at 
111, 123, 194 P.3d at 1073, 1085. In light of Gillan, the 
circuit court erred in ruling that Liberty Mutual was required to obtain the mutual consent of Kim before it could hire Dr. Lau to conduct a records review. We now turn to the first issue -­whether the circuit court properly concluded that Kim is a real party in interest. 
III.
 
Liberty Mutual and the Insurance Commissioner argue 
that Kim is not a real party in interest and cannot challenge Liberty Mutual's refusal to pay the billing statement submitted by the Health Center for acupuncture treatments provided to Kim. They rely on the Hawai» i Supreme Court's 1998 decision in Wilson 
v. AIG.
 
A.
 
In Wilson v. AIG , the Hawai» i Supreme Court held that 
an insured claimant who brought suit to obtain payments from her 
no-fault insurer for her physician's unpaid bill was not a "real party in interest" under District Court Rules of Civil Procedure 
6
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(DCRCP) Rule 17(a).5/ Wilson v. AIG, 89 Hawai» i at 47-51, 968 
P.2d at 649-53. Wilson was injured while she was passenger in a 
vehicle insured under a no-fault policy. Id.  at 45, 968 P.2d at
 
647. She was diagnosed as suffering from a herniated disc and
 
underwent surgery performed by Dr. Bernard Robinson, M.D. Id.
 
The insurer refused to pay Dr. Robinson's bill for the surgery
 based upon a peer review organization report which concluded that
 the treatment and services provided by Dr. Robinson were not
 appropriate or reasonable. Id. at 45-46, 968 P.2d at 647-48. 
5  DCRCP Rule 17(a) (1996) now provides, as it did at the time Wilson v.
AIG was decided, in relevant part as follows:
 
(a)
 Real Party in Interest. Every action shall be
prosecuted in the name of the real party in interest; except that
(1) . . . a party authorized by statute may sue in such party's
own name without joining with such party the party for whose
benefit the action is brought, and (2) this requirement shall not
be mandatory when a subrogee is a real party in interest. No
 action shall be dismissed on the ground that it is not prosecuted
in the name of the real party in interest until a reasonable time
has been allowed after objection for ratification of commencement
of the action by, or joinder or substitution of, the real party in
interest; and such ratification, joinder, or substitution shall
have the same effect as if the action had been commenced in the
 
name of the real party in interest.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
The Hawai
»i Administrative Rules (HAR) applicable to hearings before the
Insurance Commissioner do not include a specific real-party-in-interest rulethat corresponds to DCRCP Rule 17(a). HAR ÿÿ 16-201-1 (1990), however,
provides that when the rules applicable to such hearings are "silent on amatter, the [Insurance Commissioner] or hearings officer may refer to theHawaii Rules of Civil Procedure [(HRCP)]for guidance." The real-party-in­interest provision set forth in HRCP Rule 17(a) is in material respects thesame as DCRCP Rule 17(a). HRCP Rule 17(a) provides in relevant part asfollows: 
(a) Real Party in Interest. Every action shall be
prosecuted in the name of the real party in interest. . . . [A]
party authorized by statute may sue in its own name without
joining with it the party for whose benefit the action is brought.
 No action shall be dismissed on the ground that it is not
prosecuted in the name of the real party in interest until a
reasonable time has been allowed after objection for ratification
of commencement of the action by, or joinder or substitution of,
the real party in interest; and such ratification, joinder, or
substitution shall have the same effect as if the action had been
 
commenced in the name of the real party in interest.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
7
  
   
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Wilson sued the insurer in district court pursuant to
 
HRS ÿÿ 431:10C-308.6(f) (1993),
6/ which provided in relevant part
 
that "[a]ny insured  or provider may . . . seek an administrative
 
hearing, arbitration, or court review of a denial of no-fault
 
benefits based, in whole or in part, upon a peer review
 
organization determination." Id.  at 46; 968 P.2d at 648. Wilson
 
sought to require the insurer to pay for the surgery. Id.
 
Reversing the opinion issued by the Intermediate Court 
of Appeals (ICA), the Hawai» i Supreme Court held that Wilson was 
not a real party in interest and thus could not file suit to obtain a judgment for monies owed to Dr. Robinson for medical services rendered. Id.  at 47-51, 968 P.2d at 649-53. The 
supreme court noted that according to the ICA, DCRCP Rule 17(a) 
provides that a person qualifies as a real party in interest when a statute gives him or her the right to bring suit. Id.  at 48, 
968 P.2d at 650. The supreme court, however, imposed a further requirement that to qualify as a real party in interest, a "party must also have a legal right under substantive law to enforce the claim in question." Id. 
The supreme court acknowledged that "HRS ÿÿ 431:10C[-]
 
308.6(f) expressly allows 'any insured' the right to seek court
 review of a . . . denial of no-fault benefits [based upon a peer
 review organization determination]." Id. Accordingly, Wilson
 
satisfied the requirement of DCRCP Rule 17(a) that she qualify as
 a party authorized by statute to sue. The supreme court stated
 that "[t]he question thus becomes whether the substantive law
 permits Wilson to enforce her claim against [the insurer]." Id.
 
The supreme court noted that Wilson admitted that "she is
 
'effectively bringing the action for the benefit of her primary
 treating physician.'" Id. The supreme court concluded that 
6
 HRS ÿÿ 431:10C-308.6 (1993), the provision in issue inWilson v. AIG,
 
was repealed in 1997. 1997 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 251, ÿÿ 59 at 551.
 
8
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"[a]s expressed, Wilson's claim is not a claim for relief that
 
she is entitled to enforce against [the insurer]." Id.
 
The supreme court reached this conclusion by analyzing
 
several provisions of the no-fault law. The supreme court found
 that the only benefit payments that an insurer was required to
 pay directly to an injured insured under the no-fault law were
 for wage losses and other necessary non-medical expenses incurred
 as a result of the injury. Id.  at 48-49, 968 P.2d at 650-51. On
 
the other hand, the no-fault law required that an insurer make
 payment of the insured's medical expenses directly to the medical
 provider. Id.  at 49, 968 P.2d at 651. It also prohibited a
 
medical provider from billing or attempting to collect from the
 insured the cost of medical services rendered. Id.
   
The supreme court stated:
 
Viewing [the provisions of the no-fault law] in pari
 
materia, it is clear that the no-fault law does not allow an
insured to enforce a claim for unpaid medical expenses
against an insurer on behalf of his or her provider. The
 
no-fault statutory scheme strongly suggests that the
provider, not the insured, is entitled to pursue payment
from the insurer for the cost of unreimbursed medical
 
services to the insured. Accordingly, we hold that Wilson
is not a real party in interest with respect to her claim
against [the insurer] for no-fault benefits to satisfy her
provider's unpaid bill.
 
Id. at 49-50, 968 P.2d at 651-52 (footnote and citation omitted).
 
The supreme court then went on to address two reasons 
the ICA had relied upon in reaching the contrary conclusion that
 
Wilson was a real party in interest. The supreme court addressed
 the ICA's first reason as follows: 
The ICA, nevertheless, concluded that Wilson was a
real party in interest for the following reasons. First, in
the ICA's view, "the insured has a continuing personal
interest in causing the insurer to pay the insured's
provider." According to the ICA, "the [peer review
organization's] decision that the past treatment and/or
services were inappropriate and unreasonable may not be the
end of the insured's relationship with the provider. The
 
insured may want the provider to continue treatment and/or
services to the insured and to be motivated to provide the
best treatment and/or services possible." The ICA further
 
stated that "nonpayment to the provider of all or some of
the provider's bill for past treatment and/or services would
tend to inhibit the insured's realization of these
 legitimate decisions." 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The concern outlined by the ICA that "the no-fault
insured has a continuing personal interest in causing the
insurer to pay the insured's provider" simply does not
provide an adequate basis to confer "real party in interest"
status on a no-fault insured who has received unreimbursed
 
medical services. Although an insured may have a "personal
interest" in payment of past medical services to his or her
provider, the law does not view this interest as a legally
cognizable interest. As discussed above, the no-fault laws
completely insulate an insured from the billing/payment
process. Therefore, the altruistic concern for the
preservation of the integrity of the therapeutic
relationship between physician and patient does not supply
the statutory basis to permit an insured to assist an unpaid
provider in collecting payment for medical expenses.
 
Id. at 50, 968 P.2d at 652 (citations and brackets in original
 
omitted) (emphasis added). 
The ICA's second reason for concluding that Wilson was
 
a real party in interest was that the peer review organization's
 
denial of no-fault benefits may jeopardize an insured's right to
 
assert tort liability, which is contingent on the insured
 reaching the statutory medical-rehabilitative expense threshold
 for suing in tort. Id.  The supreme court concluded that while
 
the need to satisfy the tort threshold would make an insured a
 
real party in interest, Wilson had not claimed that her suit was
 necessary to reach the tort threshold. Id.  The supreme court
 stated:
 
In this case, Wilson's admitted purpose in filing her
lawsuit was to recover no-fault benefits against [the
insurer] on behalf of Dr. Robinson. Wilson has not claimed
 
that she filed suit to preserve a potential tort claim.
Accordingly,[] although the ICA's tort threshold rationale
may provide the basis for a claim that another plaintiff may
pursue, it is not a claim articulated by Wilson and cannot
accord her the status of a real part[y] in interest.
Because Wilson is not a real part in interest with respect
to the claim she has advanced in this case, we thus reject
the ICA's reasons in support of its conclusion.
 
Id. at 50-51, 968 P.2d at 652-53.
 
In this case, there is no dispute that Kim exceeded the
 
tort threshold without considering the amounts billed by the
 
Health Center that Liberty Mutual denied. Thus, Kim cannot rely
 upon the "tort threshold rationale" to establish her status as a
 real party in interest. 
10
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
After 
Wilson v. AIG  was decided, the 2006 Legislature
 
amended the no-fault law by enacting Act 198. The conference
 
committee report accompanying Act 198 reveals that Act 198 was
 enacted to address two Hawai» i Supreme Court decisions, Wilson v. 
AIG and Orthopedic Associates of Hawaii, Inc. v. Hawaiian Ins. &
 
Guar. Co. Ltd., 109 Hawai» i 185, 124 P.3d 930 (2005).
7/ In the 
conference committee report accompanying Act 198, the conference
 
committee discussed Wilson v. AIG  and expressed its clear intent
 
to overrule Wilson v. AIG . The conference committee report
 
stated in relevant part as follows:
 
Your Committee on Conference believes that changes to
the law are necessary to streamline the onerous process
required by the Supreme Court [(referring to Orthopedic
Assoc.)] and to clarify the legislative intent that
treatment denials and payment disputes should be treated
differently. Your Committee on Conference further believes
 
that an insured or claimant should not be denied the
 opportunity to contest an insurer's decision to dispute a
provider's charges. In Wilson v. AIG Hawaii Ins. Co. , 89
Hawaii 45 (1998), the Court held that the statutory scheme
insulating claimants from personal liability for unpaid
portions of medical bills reflected a legislative intent not
to permit insureds to contest payment disputes,
notwithstanding statutory language permitting any insured to
contest such disputes. The law should provide a claimant
with the ability to submit a dispute to the commission,
arbitration, or a court, reflecting the legislative intent
to allow claimants to contest fee disputes. Patients have a
 direct interest in proper payment to their doctors to
maintain appropriate treatment and patient-doctor
relationships. Your Committee on Conference finds that it
 
7 Orthopedic Assoc. construed a provision of the no-fault law, HRS
ÿÿ 431:10C-304(3)(B) (1993), as requiring insurers to issue formal denial
notices even where the insurer did not dispute the treatment provided but only
the billing codes or billing amounts. Orthopedic Assoc. , 109 Hawai
»i at 195­
96, 124 P.3d at 940-41. The conference committee report accompanying Act 198
stated that the conference committee found 
that, as a result of the Court's ruling in Orthopedic Assoc. of
Hawaii, insurers are required to issue denial notices in the
thousands, in triplicate, each month for billing discrepancies,
even though the amount disputed may be as little as one dollar.
The issuance of these denial notices has not only significantly
increased the amount of paperwork required of insurers, but has
also created a great deal of stress and concern for the insureds
who are confused as to whether and why their treatments have been
denied.
 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 128, 2006 Senate Journal, at 966. 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
is necessary to permit claimants to contest fee disputes to
maintain the pool of doctors willing to treat accident
patients, as many doctors have stopped accepting accident
patients because of the Wilson [v. AIG] case, making needed
medical treatment unavailable to many patients. 
Accordingly, claimants, insurers, and providers should be
statutorily afforded real party in interest status and
standing to contest all fee disputes.
 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 128, 2006 Senate Journal, at 966 (emphasis
 
added). 
Act 198 amended HRS ÿÿ 431:10C-308.5(e) as follows, with
 
the deletions shown in brackets and the new material underlined:
 
(e) In the event of a dispute between the provider
and the insurer over the amount of a charge or the correct
fee or procedure code to be used under the workers'
compensation supplemental medical fee schedule, the insurer
shall:
 
(1)	 Pay all undisputed charges within thirty days
after the insurer has received reasonable proof
of the fact and amount of benefits accrued and
 demand for payment thereof; and
 
(2)	 Negotiate in good faith with the provider on the
disputed charges for a period up to sixty days
after the insurer has received reasonable proof
of the fact and amount of benefits accrued and
 
demand for payment thereof.
 
If the provider and the insurer are unable to resolve the
dispute[,] after a period of sixty days pursuant to
paragraph (2), the provider, insurer, or claimant may submit
the dispute to the commissioner, arbitration, or court of
competent jurisdiction. The parties shall include
documentation of the efforts of the insurer and the provider
to reach a negotiated resolution of the dispute. This
 
section shall not be subject to the requirements of section
431:10C-304(3) with respect to all disputes about the amount
of a charge or the correct fee and procedure code to be used
under the workers' compensation supplemental medical fee
schedule. An insurer who disputes the amount of a charge or
the correct fee or procedure code under this section shall
not be deemed to have denied a claim for benefits under
 section 431:10C-304(3); provided that the insurer shall pay
what the insurer believes is the amount owed and shall
 furnish a written explanation of any adjustments to the
provider and to the claimant at no charge, if requested. The
provider, claimant, or insurer may submit any dispute
involving the amount of a charge or the correct fee or
procedure code to the commissioner, to arbitration, or to a
court of competent jurisdiction.
 
2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 198, ÿÿ2 at 840-41.
 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C.
 
The pivotal issue in this appeal is whether Act 198 
and its legislative history have undermined Wilson v. AIG 's real­
party-in-interest analysis. In concluding that Act 198 overruled
 
Wilson v. AIG , the circuit court stated:
 
In the end, it comes down to whether Act 198
legislatively overrules Wilson [v. AIG] . And I believe it
 
does, by its own legislative history. Wilson [v. AIG]
itself was also a case in which the insurance company had
completely denied coverage of the appellant's MRI
[8/].
Given that the Legislature was expressly attempting to
modify the holding in Wilson [v. AIG] , it seems unlikely
that they would have intended this amendment to apply to a
fee dispute and not to a complete denial of coverage.
Indeed, section 431:10C-212 has long provided that a
claimant may seek review with the Commissioner where he or
she, quote, objects to the denial of benefits by an insurer,
end quote.
 
The holding in Wilson [v. AIG]  was based on the
 
Court's determination that, quote: The no fault statutory
scheme strongly suggests that the provider, not the insured,
is entitled to pursue payment from the insurer for the cost
of unreimbursed medical services, end quote.
 
The Legislature's recent amendment and the
accompanying committee report make it clear that the Wilson
[v. AIG] Court's analysis was contrary to legislative
intent. The committee report also makes it clear that in
the view of the Legislature a claimant does have a direct
legally cognizable interest in ensuring proper payment to
their doctors, quote: To maintain appropriate treatment and
doctor/patient relationships. End quote.
 
The Court is essentially asked to continue to rely on
Wilson [v. AIG]  even in the face of a statutory amendment
which was expressly intended to in part overrule Wilson [v.
AIG]. And I don't believe the Court should therefore
 
continue to rely on Wilson [v. AIG] , especially since the
statutory amendment changes the statutory scheme on that
essential issue and therefore leads the Court to believe
 
that there is not only standing but real party in interest
as a matter of new law.
 
(Underscoring added.)
 
D.
 
We conclude that Act 198, and especially its
 
accompanying legislative history, have undermined basic
 
assumptions on which Wilson v. AIG 's real-party-in-interest
 
8 As previously noted, Wilson v. AIG actually involved the insurer's
denial of payment of a physician's bill for surgery performed on the insured
to repair a herniated disc. 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
analysis was based. Act 198 and its legislative history have
 
clarified the Legislature's intent and its view of the
 substantive interests that insured claimants have in seeking
 recovery of amounts billed by their medical provider for
 treatments rendered which the insurer refuses to pay. Based on
 the clarification provided by Act 198 and its legislative
 history, we conclude that Kim qualifies as a real party in
 interest in her administrative action against Liberty Mutual. 
1.
 
The Hawai» i Legislature has the power to establish and 
enact substantive law. See Haw. Const. Art. III, ÿÿ 1 ("The 
legislative power of the State shall be vested in a legislature . . . . Such power shall extend to all rightful subjects of 
legislation not inconsistent with this constitution or the Constitution of the United States."); Bissen v. Fujii , 51 Haw. 
636, 638, 466 P.2d 429, 431 (1970) (stating that "[t]he legislative power has been defined as the power to enact laws and to declare what the law shall be" and that "once the legislature has acted, it is not for [the courts] to evaluate the wisdom of legislative action"); State v. Johnson, 188 P.3d 912, 916 (Idaho 2008) ("Legislation is a constitutional exercise of the Legislature's power to enact substantive law and that legislation is to be given due deference and respect." (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citation omitted)); see also Ross v. Stouffer Hotel Co., 76 Hawai» i 454, 467, 879 P.2d 1037, 1050 
(1994) (Klein, J., concurring and dissenting) (stating that "'[t]he Court's function in the application and interpretation of 
. . . laws must be carefully limited to avoid encroaching on the power of [the legislature] to determine policies and make laws to carry them out.'" (citation omitted; brackets in original)). 
The Hawai» i Supreme Court has relied upon the 
Legislature's clear expression of its intent in a subsequent 
enactment to modify the court's original view of the 
Legislature's intent. State v. Wilson , 75 Haw. 68, 77-78, 856 
P.2d 1240, 1245-46 (1993) (supreme court changed from its 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
original view that a first driving-under-the-influence-of­
intoxicating-liquor offense was a constitutionally serious
 offense entitling the defendant to a jury trial to concluding
 that such offense was a constitutionally petty offense, to which
 no right to jury trial attached, based on the Legislature's clear
 expression in a subsequent enactment that the court's original
 view was wrong); cf.  Mollena v. Fireman's Fund Ins. Co. of
 
Hawaii, Inc., 72 Haw. 314, 324-25, 816 P.2d 968, 973 (1991)
 (relying on subsequent legislative amendment to clarify
 Legislature's original intent regarding statute's meaning).
 
Wilson v. AIG 's real-party-in-interest analysis was 
premised in significant part on the supreme court's view, based on inferences it drew from the statutory scheme, that the 
Legislature did not intend that the insured claimant be allowed to pursue payment from the insurer for amounts billed by a medical provider for services rendered. See  Wilson v. AIG , 89 
Hawai» i at 49-50, 968 P.2d at 651-52. The supreme court in 
Wilson v. AIG  stated that "[t]he no-fault statutory scheme 
strongly suggests that the provider, not the insured, is entitled to pursue payment from the insurer for the cost of unreimbursed medical services to the insured." Id. at 50, 968 P.2d at 652. However, in enacting Act 198, the Legislature clearly expressed its view that the Wilson v. AIG court's interpretation of the Legislature's intent was wrong and that the Legislature intended to allow insured claimants to contest this type of fee dispute. See Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 128, 2006 Senate Journal, at 966. 
Wilson v. AIG's real-party-in-interest analysis was
 
also premised on its view of the relative insignificance of the
 
insured's substantive interest in causing the insurer to pay the
 insured's medical provider for treatments provided. The Wilson
 
v. AIG court described that interest as an "altruistic concern." 
Wilson v. AIG , 89 Hawai» i at 50, 968 P.2d at 652. However, in 
enacting Act 198, the Legislature strongly expressed its view 
that the insured's ability to contest the insurer's refusal to 
pay medical bills submitted by the insured's medical provider was 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
crucial to the insured's substantive interests and not simply and
 
altruistic concern. The Legislature found that the ability of an
 insured claimant to contest such fee disputes was necessary to
 ensure that insured claimants would have doctors willing to treat
 them. The conference committee report stated: "Your Committee on
 Conference finds that it is necessary to permit claimants to
 contest fee disputes to maintain the pool of doctors willing to
 treat accident patients, as many doctors have stopped accepting
 accident patients because of the Wilson [v. AIG]  case, making
 
needed medical treatment unavailable to many patients." Conf.
 Comm. Rep. No. 128, 2006 Senate Journal, at 966. 
We conclude that because Act 198 and its legislative
 
history have undermined Wilson v. AIG 's real-party-in-interest
 
analysis, Wilson v. AIG  does not control the decision in this
 
case. Based on the Legislature's clear expression of its intent
 
and its clarification of the nature of an insured claimant's
 interest in seeking recovery of amounts billed by his or her
 medical provider, we conclude that Kim is a real party in
 interest and is entitled to pursue her administrative action
 against Liberty Mutual to recover fees billed by the Health
 Center. 
2. 
Liberty Mutual contends that the amendments to HRS 
ÿÿ 431:10C-308.5(e) effected by Act 198 do not apply to Kim's
 situation. Liberty Mutual distinguishes between situations in
 which (1) an insurer denies all payment for medical treatment
 rendered because it contends that the treatment was not
 
reasonable or appropriate (Kim's situation); and (2) an insurer
 agrees that the medical treatment was reasonable and appropriate
 and only disputes the amount of the charge or whether the correct
 fee or procedural code was used. Liberty Mutual argues that Act
 198 only applies and affords real-party-in-interest status to an
 
insured claimant raising a fee dispute in the latter situation. 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Kim, on the other hand, argues that the legislative
 
history of Act 198 "evinces the Legislature's grave concerns with
 
Wilson [v. AIG] , and its impact on an insured's ability to
 
content the [insurer's] denial of benefits." Wilson v. AIG
 
involved a situation like Kim's in which the insurer denied all
 payment based on a determination that the treatment was not
 reasonable or appropriate. Kim in effect argues that given the
 Legislature's expressed concerns with Wilson v. AIG  and the
 
Legislature's expressed intent to allow insured claimants to
 contest fee disputes to ensure the availability of doctors for
 treatment of accident patients, the Legislature must have
 intended Act 198 to cover Kim's situation in which the insurer
 denies all payment for treatments rendered. 
In deciding this appeal, we need not resolve the
 
dispute between Liberty Mutual and Kim over the scope of the fee
 
disputes encompassed by Act 198's amendment to HRS ÿÿ 431:10C­308.5(e). For purposes of our decision, what matters is the
 Legislature's expression of its intent and its clarification of
 the insured claimant's interest in contesting fee disputes that
 are embodied in the Legislature's enactment in Act 198, and not
 the precise reach of Act 198. Through Act 198 and its
 accompanying legislative history, the Legislature has clearly
 spoken in terms that have undermined Wilson v. AIG 's real-party­
in-interest analysis. Accordingly, Wilson v. AIG cannot be
 
relied upon to preclude Kim from pursuing her claim before the
 Insurance Commissioner.
 
IV.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the portion of the
 
circuit court's Judgment that: (1) ruled that Kim has standing
 
and is a real party in interest who is entitled to challenge
 Liberty Mutual's denial of personal injury protection benefits,
 namely, Liberty Mutual's refusal to pay the billing statement
 
submitted by the Health Center for acupuncture treatments
 
provided to Kim; and (2) remanded the case to the Insurance
 
Commissioner. We vacate the portion of the circuit court's
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Judgment that ruled that Liberty Mutual was required to obtain
 
Kim's mutual consent in order to submit Kim's medical records to
 a doctor for a records review. We remand the case to the circuit
 court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
Melvin Y. Agena
(Law Offices of Melvin Y. Agena)
(Andrew A. Agard (The Andrew A.
Agard Law Office) with him
on the brief)
for Claimant/Appellant-Appellee,
Cross-Appellee
 
James H. Monma
 
(Randall Y.S. Chung with him
on the brief)
(Matsui Chung)
for Respondent/Appellee-
Appellant, Cross-Appellee
 
David A. Webber
 
(Deborah Day Emerson with him
on the brief)
Deputies Attorney General
for Appellee-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant
 
18
 