NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29283
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
GEORGE SALAMACK, Plaintiff/Cross-Defendant-Appellee,
v.
 
ERIKO SALAMACK, Defendant/Cross-Plaintiff-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 06-1-0007)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant/Cross-Plaintiff-Appellant Eriko Salamack
 
(Eriko) appeals from the Divorce Judgment entered on July 9, 2008
 
1
in the Family Court of the Second Circuit  (family court).  The
 
Divorce Judgment dissolved Eriko's marriage to Plaintiff/ Cross­
Defendant-Appellee George Salamack (George).

 
2
Eriko's points on appeal  focus on decisions of the
family court impacting the division of property.3 Inasmuch as
 
several of the thirteen points Eriko raises are subsets of
 related overarching issues, we address the subsets under the
 
1
 The Honorable Keith E. Tanaka presided.
 
2
 Eriko's counsel is cautioned that every point of error must have a
record reference.
3
 Custody and visitation issues had been settled prior to trial.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
related issue of which they are a part. Eriko contends the
 
following:
 
(1) The family court erred in its April 4, 2007 Order
 
Re Hearing for Contempt and Rule 37 Sanctions (Contempt/Sanctions
 
Order) when it
 
(a) authorized Hawai 'i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 
37(b)(2) sanctions for Eriko's failure to advance litigation fees 
and expenses ordered by the court pursuant to Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 580-9 (2006 Repl.); 
(b) imposed HFCR Rule 37 sanctions against Eriko by
 
finding civil contempt without clear and convincing evidence; and
 
(c) awarded George attorney's fees and costs to
 
conduct discovery pursuant to the October 6, 2006 "Order Re
 
Motion for Advancement of Fees and Costs (Filed July 7, 2006)";
 
the May 1, 2007 "Order Awarding Attorney's Fees and Costs to
 
Plaintiff"; and the February 11, 2008 "Order Awarding Attorney's
 
Fees and Costs to Plaintiff" because Eriko had complied with
 
George's discovery request.
 
(2) The family court abused its discretion when it
 
precluded Eriko's rebuttal witness from testifying pursuant to
 
the HFCR Rule 37(b)(2)(B) sanctions, essentially imposing
 
dismissal sanctions and denying her constitutional right to a
 
fair trial.
 
(3) The family court abused its discretion regarding
 
the appraisal of the Rainbow International Montessori School
 
(Rainbow School) Tokyo property (Rainbow Tokyo property) when the
 
court:
 
(a) failed to consider Eriko's past asset and debt
 
statements, which were in evidence and showed the Rainbow Tokyo
 
property had a net value of zero;
 
(b) admitted the Rainbow Tokyo property appraisal
 
report where there was insufficient evidence to derive the
 
appraised value because the appraiser's methods were unscientific
 
and inaccurate;
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(c) admitted the appraisal report into evidence where 
no foundation had been laid for the English summary and the
 
report contained only a partial English translation; and
 
(d) admitted the appraisal report into evidence when
 
it was prejudicial because it was a valuation of property no
 
longer owned by Rainbow School and the only evidence that should
 
have been considered was Eriko's asset and debt statements
 
showing a value of zero.
 
(4) The family court erred in finding in Finding of
 
Fact (FOF) 154 that there was no credible evidence to
 
substantiate loans from Kouichi Kotani (Kotani) and Mari Morimura
 
(Morimura) or the obligation of Eriko and George (the parties) to
 
repay the alleged loans.
 
(5) The family court failed to consider Eriko's
 
parents' testimonies that money they gave the parties was
 
intended as a gift, to be returned upon divorce; failed to make
 
any findings regarding alleged loans and donative intent; and
 
failed to consider Japanese custom, and thus, FOF 152 is clearly
 
erroneous.
 
(6) The family court abused its discretion in allowing
 
Eriko's father's gift for the purchase of the Maui residence to
 
be subject to equitable distribution because the warranty deed
 
showed the property titled solely under Eriko's name.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Eriko's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) HFCR Rule 37 Sanctions for HRS § 580-9 Violation
 
The family court did not err in its Contempt/Sanctions
 
Order when it authorized HFCR Rule 37(b)(2) sanctions for Eriko's
 
failure to advance litigation fees ordered under HRS § 580-9. 
Without citing to any applicable authority, Eriko maintains that
 
because the October 6, 2006 "Order Re Motion for Advancement of
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Fees and Costs (Filed July 7, 2006)" (Advancement of Fees and
 
4
Costs Order) was made pursuant to HRS § 580-9,  rather than under
an HFCR Rule 37(a) discovery order, non-compliance with the order
 
cannot be sanctioned under HFCR Rule 37(b).
 
It is a "well settled principle that violation of a 
court order or injunction may always be addressed as civil 
contempt of court." LeMay v. Leander
, 92 Hawai 'i 614, 623, 994 
P.2d 546, 555 (2000); see also Black's Law Dictionary 360 (9th ed. 2009) (Civil contempt is "[t]he failure to obey a court order 
that was issued for another party's benefit."). 
HFCR Rule 37(b)(2) specifically provides that a court
 
may impose sanctions when a party fails to comply with an order
 
entered under HFCR Rule 26(f). Pursuant to HFCR Rule 26(f), the
 
family court may enter an order for matters such as "the
 
allocation of expenses, as are necessary for the proper
 
management of discovery." The family court allocated expenses of
 
discovery as provided under HFCR Rule 26(f) when it ordered Eriko
 
to advance fees and costs pursuant to HRS § 580-9 and properly
 
sanctioned her under HFCR 37(b) for non-compliance. The family
 
court, in its discretion, had the power to impose sanctions,
 
regardless of whether the violation was in response to an order
 
under HRS § 580-9 or under HFCR Rule 37(a).
 
The family court did not err in imposing HFCR Rule 37
 
sanctions, even though it did not make a specific, written
 
finding that Eriko "did not diligently attempt to comply in a
 
reasonable manner by clear and convincing evidence." Our courts
 
4
 HRS § 580-9 provides:
 
§580-9 Temporary support, etc.  After the filing of a
complaint for divorce or separation the court may make such orders
relative to the personal liberty and support of either spouse
pending the complaint as the court may deem fair and reasonable
and may enforce the orders by summary process. The court may also
compel either spouse to advance reasonable amounts for the
compensation of witnesses and other expenses of the trial,
including attorney's fees, to be incurred by the other spouse and
may from time to time amend and revise the orders.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
apply the following test to determine a successful claim of civil
 
contempt: "[A] movant must establish that: (1) the order with
 
which the contemnor failed to comply is clear and unambiguous;
 
(2) the proof of non-compliance is clear and convincing; and (3) 
the contemnor has not diligently attempted to comply in a 
reasonable manner." Matsuura v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., 
102 Hawai 'i 149, 160, 73 P.3d 687, 698 (2003) (quoting LeMay, 92 
Hawai'i at 625, 994 P.2d at 557). Additionally, "a court must 
find, based on evidence, that defendant not only refused to pay but also that [defendant] has the ability to make the ordered 
payments." In re Adam, 105 Hawai
'i 507, 519, 100 P.3d 77, 89 
(App. 2004). 
The family court held two evidentiary hearings and 
found that Eriko failed to comply with the Advancement of Fees and Costs Order, had the present ability to comply with the 
order, and was engaging in "contumacious conduct." Evidence 
produced was sufficient to show that the family court based its 
findings on clear and convincing evidence and did not err when it 
found Eriko in civil contempt. "It is well-settled that an 
appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the 
province of the trier of fact." Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai
'i 
41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
The family court did not err in awarding George 
attorney's fees and costs to conduct discovery pursuant to the 
Advancement of Fees and Costs Order; the May 1, 2007 Attorney's 
Fees Order; and the February 11, 2008 Attorney's Fees Order when 
it found that Eriko did not comply with George's discovery 
request. Eriko fails to make any argument regarding the May 1, 
2007 Attorney's Fees Order and the February 11, 2008 Attorney's 
Fees Order. "Points not argued may be deemed waived," and 
therefore, we do not address them. Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7). Her argument regarding her 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
compliance with the Advancement of Fees and Costs Order was made
 
and addressed earlier in this section.
 
(2) Preclusion of Eriko's Rebuttal Witness and Exhibit
 
The family court did not abuse its discretion when it
 
precluded Eriko's rebuttal witness from testifying pursuant to
 
the Contempt/Sanctions Order. The family court ordered that
 
Eriko "shall not be allowed to support or oppose at trial
 
[George's] presentation regarding [the two Japanese
 
corporations]" and she "is prohibited from introducing any
 
evidence respecting . . . valuation or income [regarding the
 
corporations]."
 
"Within the bounds of its discretion, the circuit court 
has the flexibility to fashion an appropriate sanction based on 
the facts of the case." Stender v. Vincent, 92 Hawai 'i 355, 365, 
992 P.2d 50, 60 (2000). Although the family court has "the power to level the ultimate sanction of dismissal," Weinberg v. 
Dickson-Weinberg, 123 Hawai
'i 68, 75, 229 P.3d 1133, 1140 (2010) 
(quoting Richardson v. Sport Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 76 Hawai 'i 
494, 507, 880 P.2d 169, 182 (1994)), "the sanction chosen must be 
commensurate with the offense. . . . A deliberate and 
contumacious disregard of the court's authority will justify 
application of this severest of sanctions, as will bad faith, 
willful disregard or gross indifference to an order of the court, 
or conduct which evinces deliberate callousness." Weinberg, 123 
Hawai'i at 75-76, 229 P.3d at 1140-41 (emphases omitted) (quoting 
Weinberg v. Dickson-Weinberg, 121 Hawai 'i 401, 437, 220 P.3d 264, 
300 (App. 2009)). 
In spite of the sanctions that were imposed, the family
 
court gave Eriko numerous opportunities to provide evidence to
 support her testimony regarding the valuation of the Rainbow
 
Tokyo property. She chose not to provide any documentation.
 
Furthermore, precluding her expert witness was not
 
comparable to a dismissal sanction. See W.H. Shipman, Ltd. v.
 
Hawaiian Holiday Macadamia Nut Co., 8 Haw. App. 354, 361, 802
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.2d 1203, 1207 (1990) (holding that the lower court abused its 
discretion in imposing sanctions when defendants' failure to 
abide by deadlines was inadvertent and sanctions precluded 
defendant from offering any evidence in the case). The instant 
case is distinguishable because the striking of one expert 
witness does not have the same harsh result as striking the 
entire body of evidence in a case. See also Glover v. Grace Pac. 
Corp., 86 Hawai 'i 154, 164, 948 P.2d 575, 585 (App. 1997) 
(holding that Glover's failure to produce relevant evidence of 
economic loss by the discovery cutoff date was not equivalent to 
a dismissal of Glover's suit and, therefore, the court's sanction 
to preclude him from submitting the documents was not an abuse of 
discretion). 
Aside from HFCR 37(b) sanctions that appropriately
 
precluded Eriko from providing certain testimony, the testimony
 
was precluded due to her failure to comply with the deadlines
 
provided in Pretrial Order No. 1 filed March 28, 2008 because she
 
waited until June 16, 2008 (three days before trial), to submit
 
her Motion to Add Expert Witness and Exhibit for Rebuttal.
 
In light of the evidence in the record, we hold that 
the family court did not abuse its discretion in precluding 
Eriko's rebuttal expert witness's testimony and evidence. The 
sanction was commensurate with the offense, as she showed "[a] 
deliberate and contumacious disregard of the court's authority" 
as well as "bad faith, willful disregard or gross indifference to 
an order of the court." Weinberg, 123 Hawai 'i at 76, 229 P.3d at 
1141. 
(3) Appraisal Report
 
The family court did not abuse its discretion in
 
admitting the appraisal report of the Rainbow Tokyo property,
 which was a vacant lot and the major asset of Rainbow School.
 
Eriko contends the family court should have relied on
 
her past asset and debt statements, which showed the Rainbow
 
Tokyo property had a net value of zero. The family court found
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
her trial testimony regarding the sale of the Rainbow Tokyo 
property to not be credible. "It is well-settled that an 
appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the 
province of the trier of fact." Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i at 46, 137 
P.3d at 360 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Alternatively, Eriko contends there was insufficient 
evidence to derive the appraised value of the Rainbow Tokyo property, alleging that the appraiser used an unscientific method 
and deviated too much from the governmental land value standards. 
Noboru Ochi was certified as an expert in real estate appraisal 
and testified extensively as to the methodology he used to create 
the appraisal report. The family court did not abuse its 
discretion when it found that Mr. Ochi's testimony was credible 
and the value was reasonable. Again, "[g]enerally, the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given their 
testimony are within the province of the trial court and, 
generally, will not be disturbed on appeal." Bank of Hawaii v. 
Kunimoto, 91 Hawai
'i 372, 390-91, 984 P.2d 1198, 1216-17 (1999). 
Eriko incorrectly cites to Hawaii Rules of Evidence
 
(HRE) Rule 1006 to support her contention that the underlying
 document must be translated into English. Rule 1006 provides
 
that "[t]he contents of voluminous writings, recordings, or
 
photographs which cannot conveniently be examined in court may be
 
presented in the form of a . . . summary . . . . The originals 
. . . shall be made available for examination[.]" This rule
 
regarding voluminous records does not apply to the question of
 
the need to translate documents. Additionally, even if it did
 
apply, the evidence and the appraisal meet the rule's
 
requirements. The appraisal and an English translation in the
 
form of a summary of the appraisal were admitted into evidence. 
Eriko and her counsel are both fluent in Japanese, so the
 
document was "available for examination." Furthermore, the
 
family court allowed Eriko to conduct at length voir dire and
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
cross-examination of Mr. Ochi, in spite of the sanction that
 
could be enforced to preclude Eriko from "oppos[ing] at trial
 
[George's] presentation regarding: (a) the value of [Rainbow]."
 
Eriko contends the appraisal value of the Rainbow Tokyo
 
property was inapplicable to computing the value of Rainbow
 
School because Rainbow School no longer owned the property. 
Eriko makes this argument in spite of the fact that she had sold
 
the property in contravention of a restraining order. Eriko
 
points to no authority to support her contention that the
 
appraisal value of the Rainbow Tokyo property, sold in violation
 
of a court order, cannot be included in the valuation of Rainbow
 
School.
 
(4) Alleged loans from Kotani and Morimura
 
Eriko's contention that FOF 154 was clearly erroneous 
because the family court found no evidence to substantiate the 
alleged loans from Kotani and Morimura is without merit. The 
family court determined that "[n]o credible evidence was 
presented to substantiate such a loan." As previously stated, 
"[i]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon 
issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight 
of evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Fisher, 
111 Hawai 'i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360 (internal quotation marks and 
citation omitted). FOF 154 is not erroneous. 
(5) Donative Intent
 
Eriko's contention that the alleged gift from her 
parents to assist in the purchase of the Maui residential 
property was given with the expectation that the money would be 
paid back to her parents upon divorce "under Japanese custom" is 
also without merit. Eriko's father and mother testified at 
trial, giving conflicting testimony regarding the expectation of 
repayment. Once again, "it is within the province of the trier 
of fact to weigh the evidence and to assess the credibility of 
the witnesses, and [the appellate court] will refrain from 
interfering in those determinations. LeMay, 92 Hawai 'i at 626, 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
994 P.2d at 558. In light of the evidence in the record, we hold
 
that the family court considered the testimony of Eriko's parents
 
and did not abuse its discretion in concluding that "there [was]
 
no legal obligation by [Eriko] or the parties for repayment of
 
any sums to [Eriko's] parents." FOF 152 is not erroneous.
 
Eriko contends that her father's money was a gift made 
to her alone based on the fact that the warranty deed is in her 
name only. Although it appears she is suggesting that the entire 
property is hers because of the warranty deed and would fall 
under separate marital property, she did not make that argument 
at trial. We do not consider Eriko's contention because "[a]s a 
general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at trial, 
that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal[.]" 
Chung v. McCabe Hamilton & Renny Co., 109 Hawai 'i 520, 537, 128 
P.3d 833, 850 (2006) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
(6) Miscellaneous.
 
Any other points, issues, and arguments raised by Eriko
 
are without merit, waived, or disregarded for failure to comply
 
with HRAP Rule 28(b).
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Divorce Judgment entered
 
on July 9, 2008 in the Family Court of the Second Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 30, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Junsuke Otsuka 
(Otsuka & Associates)for Defendant/Cross-Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Robert M. Harris and Edward R. Lebb and Associate Judge 
Paula S. Nakata (Law Offices of Edward R. Lebb)for Plaintiff/Cross­Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge 
10
 