 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29998
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KEVIN ANTHONY, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-2349)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Kevin Anthony (Anthony) by indictment with 
first-degree criminal property damage (Count 1); first-degree unauthorized entry into a motor vehicle (Count 2); unauthorized control of a propelled vehicle (Count 3); unauthorized possession of confidential personal information (Count 4); second-degree theft (Count 5); first-degree assault against a law enforcement officer (Count 6); and first-degree terroristic threatening (Count 7). A jury found Anthony guilty as charged on all counts. 
The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)
1
 
sentenced Anthony to ten years of imprisonment on Count 1 and
 five years of imprisonment on Counts 2 through 7. The Circuit
 Court ran the terms of imprisonment on Counts 2 through 7
 concurrent with each other but consecutive to the term of
 imprisonment on Count 1. Anthony appeals from the Judgment of
 
1/ The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) filed by the Circuit Court on
 
July 15, 2009. 
On appeal, Anthony argues: (1) the Circuit Court
 
committed plain error in instructing the jury on the elements of
 first-degree criminal property damage; (2) the Circuit Court
 committed plain error in failing to give the jury a specific
 unanimity instruction as to Counts 1, 5, and 7; and (3) the
 Circuit Court erred in admitting the testimony of two witnesses
 that their property, which had been taken in uncharged thefts,
 was later found in the stolen car that Anthony was driving. We
 affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Harry Goldstein (Goldstein) was provided with a
 
company-owned gold Toyota Tacoma truck to drive. On November 1,
 2007, Goldstein drove the Toyota Tacoma truck home and locked the
 truck. Sometime during that evening, the truck was stolen, and
 Goldstein reported the theft to the police. According to
 Goldstein, the Toyota Tacoma truck was in "great shape" when it
 was stolen -- the door locks were not damaged and the interior
 was clean. Goldstein did not know Anthony and did not give
 Anthony permission to operate the Toyota Tacoma truck.
 
On December 11, 2007, Samuel Hutcheson, II (Samuel), 
and his wife, Que-Doan Hutcheson (Que-Doan), were visiting O' ahu 
on vacation and rented a white Chevy Trailblazer. That morning, the Hutchesons drove the Trailblazer to Kualoa Beach Park, arriving between 11:00 and 11:30, and parked the car facing the beach. They left various personal belongings in the car, including a Louis Vuitton purse, a red bag, a duffle bag, other bags, a GPS system, a PalmPilot, two cellular telephones, identification, credit cards, and other items. Samuel placed these belongings "underneath the back passenger seat," covered them with towels, and locked the car before he and Que-Doan walked to the beach to take pictures. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As the Hutchesons returned from the beach, Samuel from
 
a distance saw a gold Toyota Tacoma truck parked right next to
 
his rental car, but facing in the opposite direction so that the
 driver's door of each vehicle was next to each other. The doors
 of both vehicles were open, and Samuel saw a man throwing items
 from his Trailblazer into the Toyota Tacoma truck. Samuel
 started running towards the two vehicles and yelled at the man. 
The man got in the truck, "pealed out" of the parking lot, and
 left the park. Samuel only saw one man in the Toyota Tacoma
 truck. Samuel did not see the Toyota Tacoma truck stop and pick
 up anyone on the way out of the park.
 
Samuel "flagged someone down" and used that person's
 
cell phone to call 911. He provided a description of the vehicle
 that had driven away as a "gold Toyota Tacoma" and its license
 plate number to the 911 operator. Samuel also provided a
 description of the suspect to the 911 operator and later to
 police detectives as a Caucasian male, about 6' 1" tall and
 weighing about 185 pounds, who was not clean shaven and "maybe"
 had a goatee that was "dark brownish" in color. The following
 day, Samuel was shown a photographic lineup and selected a
 photograph of someone other than Anthony. Samuel was not asked
 to identify Anthony at trial. Que-Doan did not see the person
 who was in their rental car.
 
At about 11:57 a.m., Honolulu Police Department (HPD)
 
Officers Quentin Apilando (Officer Apilando) and Dayle Morita
 (Officer Morita) received a call from HPD dispatch. The call
 reported that a vehicle had just been broken into at Kualoa Beach
 Park and that the suspect, driving a gold Toyota Tacoma truck,
 had fled the scene. When the officers received the call, they
 were on duty, in plain clothes, in an unmarked Toyota 4Runner. 
The officers were in the area of "Kam Highway and Haiku Road,"
 which was a little over seven miles and a fifteen minute drive
 from Kualoa Beach Park. Officer Morita was driving. The
 officers got onto Kahekili Highway headed northbound in an
 attempt to intercept the fleeing suspect. When they "got to the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
area of Ahuimanu Road," they spotted a gold Toyota Tacoma truck
 
traveling in the opposite direction. After the Toyota Tacoma
 truck passed them, Officer Morita made a U-turn and began
 traveling southbound about four cars behind the Toyota Tacoma
 truck. Officer Apilando informed dispatch that they had possibly
 observed the suspect vehicle and asked for backup to assist in 
stopping the vehicle.
 
HPD Patrol Officers Celso Bautista (Officer Bautista)
 
and Nolan Empron (Officer Empron) responded to the call for
 backup and notified Officers Apilando and Morita that they were
 close by. Officers Bautista and Empron were each in their own
 subsidized police cars heading northbound. They were therefore
 headed toward the suspect vehicle and Officers Apilando and
 Morita from the opposite direction. 
Officers Bautista and Empron both activated the siren
 
and blue flashing lights on their cars, causing vehicles
 traveling in both the northbound and southbound direction to pull
 over to the side of the road. The gold Toyota Tacoma truck also
 pulled over. Officers Empron and Bautista were driving very
 slowly, about five miles per hour. Officer Bautista's car stayed
 in his lane, but Officer Empron straddled the center line so that
 he could look for the gold Toyota Tacoma truck.
 
Officer Morita, traveling in the same direction as the
 
gold Toyota Tacoma truck, saw the truck pull over. Officer
 Morita activated his car's flashing blue light, which was on the
 visor, and the car's siren. Officer Morita stopped his car
 behind and to the left side of the gold Toyota Tacoma truck. 
Officer Apilando got out of the car and approached the driver's
 door of the gold Toyota Tacoma truck. Anthony looked at Officer
 Apilando who displayed his badge and yelled, "Police, get out of
 the vehicle." Anthony immediately turned, reversed the truck,
 and then drove forward, pulling out of the line of stopped
 traffic.
 
Anthony drove the truck at "an accelerated speed"
 
toward Officers Bautista and Empron. Officer Apilando pursued
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the truck on foot. The truck headed straight for Officer
 
Bautista and collided with Officer Bautista's vehicle. Officer
 Bautista testified that it was too late to move, so he "step[ped]
 on [the] brake and just waited for the impact." The impact
 caused the airbags in Officer Bautista's car to deploy, and
 Officer Bautista was briefly knocked unconscious. Anthony put
 the truck into reverse, separated from Officer Bautista's car,
 then drove forward, ramming Officer Bautista's car a second time.
 
Anthony again put the truck into reverse. As this
 
occurred, Officer Apilando was able to open the truck's passenger
 door and enter the truck. Anthony drove the truck forward and
 collided with Officer Bautista's car a third time. After the
 third collision, Officer Apilando was able to remove Anthony from
 the truck, and they both fell out the driver's side door. With
 the assistance of Officer Morita, Officer Apilando handcuffed
 Anthony, who struggled with the officers. After Anthony was
 handcuffed and allowed to sit up, he said to Officer Morita,
 "Sorry, but I never like get arrested." Anthony was arrested at
 about 12:10 or 12:12 p.m. A police report prepared in Anthony's
 case listed him as 5'10" and 220 pounds.
 
Officers Bautista, Empron, and Apilando testified that
 
Anthony could have avoided colliding with Officer Bautista's car
 because there was room for Anthony to pass on the shoulder of the
 road next to Officer Bautista's car. HPD Officer Val Chun
 (Officer Chun), a traffic accident investigator, testified that
 he examined the Toyota Tacoma truck that Anthony had been driving
 and opined that the brakes and accelerator were working properly
 at the time of the collisions. Officer Chun found that the truck
 had a broken tie rod, which affected the ability to steer the
 truck. Officer Chun opined that the tie rod had been broken
 during the collisions, but was unable to say whether it broke
 after the first, second, or third collision with Officer
 Bautista's car.
 
The police recovered various items from the Toyota
 
Tacoma truck. The Hutchesons identified various items found in
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Toyota Tacoma truck as their belongings, including a Louis
 
Vuitton purse and a large red bag on the floor of the front
 passenger seat, identifications with social security numbers, and
 credit cards. Travis Abe (Abe) testified that several items
 found in the Toyota Tacoma truck had been taken in a theft he
 reported on December 11, 2007, including his electric shaver,
 glasses, work identification documents, receipts, pants, and
 other items. Brandon Tawata (Tawata) identified a backpack and
 its contents that were found in the Toyota Tacoma truck as items
 that had been stolen from him.
 
II.
 
Anthony testified in his own defense at trial. 
According to Anthony, on the morning of December 11, 2007, he was
 looking for work. Anthony rode his bicycle to Iwilei to look for
 construction work. He found no jobs there but a person named
 "Mike", with whom Anthony had previously worked, told him there
 might be janitorial work at a game room on King Street. Anthony
 and Mike went to the game room but were told that there was no
 work available.
 
While Anthony was "hanging out" at the game room, Mike
 
introduced Anthony to a person named "Slim." Anthony had never
 seen Slim before and did not know Slim's last name. Anthony
 described Slim as a "real light-skinned" African-American with a
 goatee. Anthony testified that Slim offered to pay Anthony $50
 to drive Slim to Waiâhole Valley to pick up a car that Slim said
 he had bought in that area. Anthony agreed and they left the
 game room and got into a gold Toyota Tacoma truck.
 
Slim drove to another game room, double parked, and
 
told Anthony to "jump in the driver's seat" in case the truck had
 to be moved. Anthony did not notice anything unusual about the
 truck's locks or the truck's ignition. When Slim returned from
 the game room, Anthony drove to Don Quijote's where Slim went to
 buy food. Slim returned to the truck and told Anthony to drive
 to Waiâhole. On the way, they stopped at Anthony's house because 
Anthony wanted to get his diving equipment so he could go diving. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Anthony got his diving equipment, changed into shorts and a tank
 
top, and put his diving gear into the truck. In the meantime,
 Slim got back into the driver's seat and Anthony was in the
 passenger seat as they headed to Waiâhole.
 
According to Anthony, Slim stopped at the Waiâhole
 
Valley Store, but Slim was not able to contact the person from
 whom he was supposed to pick up the car. After waiting at the
 store for a few minutes, they proceeded on to Kualoa Beach Park. 
As Slim turned into the first parking lot at Kualoa Beach Park,
 Anthony jumped out of the truck and went down to the beach "to
 check out the conditions of the ocean." Slim indicated that he
 was going to drive the truck to the bathroom. After being down
 at the water for five to ten minutes, Anthony walked back to the
 parking lot. Anthony testified that he saw Slim "tearing out of
 the park." Slim did not turn back into the parking lot and went
 past Anthony, so Anthony had to jog over to Slim. Anthony hopped
 into the bed of the truck rather than the passenger seat because
 Slim told him, "Oh, you know what, we got to go. My friend is
 back at Waiahole Valley, he's waiting for us."
 
Anthony testified that Slim drove to the Waiâhole
 
Valley Store. Anthony left the truck and went to urinate behind
 the store. When Anthony returned, Slim was taking car keys from
 "a big Hawaiian guy." Slim told Anthony to drive the Toyota
 Tacoma truck back to the game room on King Street, and Slim would
 meet him there. When Anthony got back in the truck, he noticed a
 Louis Vuitton purse and a bag on the floor near the front
 passenger seat that had not previously been there, but did not
 think anything of it.
 
Anthony testified that on the way back, he noticed cars
 
on both sides of the road pulling over as police vehicles with
 their strobe lights and sirens on were coming towards him. 
Anthony also pulled over. Anthony stated that he heard a "bam"
 from someone striking his window and saw a guy waving and
 screaming at him. The man did not have anything identifying
 himself as a police officer that Anthony could see. Anthony
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
testified that his "instinct took over" and he "started to try to
 
flee[,] to take off." Anthony "pulled out at a kind of high rate
 of speed" and "stomped on the gas[,]" heading southbound. As he
 pulled out, he saw two police cars coming towards him, one in
 each lane. Anthony "veer[ed] all the way left" and one of the
 police cars smashed into him.
 
Anthony saw the man who had hit Anthony's window
 
chasing him on foot, so he put the Toyota Tacoma truck into
 reverse and then went forward to get away from the man. Anthony
 stated that he tried to turn but went straight back into the
 officer's car. Anthony could not explain why he was trying to
 get away from the man when "the police [were] right there." 
Anthony eventually noticed a police officer outside the truck
 pointing a gun at him. Anthony froze, put up his hands, and was
 removed from the truck.
 
Anthony denied knowing that the Toyota Tacoma truck was 
stolen and denied taking anything from the Hutchesons' rental car. Anthony admitted that he had lived in Montana during the 1990s, but denied bringing any Montana license plates with him, denied noticing that the Toyota Tacoma truck had Montana license plates, and denied seeing a Hawai' i license plate that was later 
found in the truck. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Anthony was charged in Count 1 with first-degree
 
criminal property damage, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) § 708-820(1)(a) (Supp. 2011).
2 Anthony did not object to
 
the Circuit Court's instruction on the material elements for
 first-degree criminal property damage. On appeal, Anthony argues
 
2/ HRS § 708-820(1)(a) provides, in relevant part, as follows: 
(1) A person commits the offense of criminal property
damage in the first degree if by means other than fire:
 
(a)	 The person intentionally or knowingly damages property
and thereby recklessly places another person in danger
of death or bodily injury[.] 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that the Circuit Court committed plain error in giving that
 
instruction. We disagree.
 
The standard of review for jury instructions is 
"whether, when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v. Valentine, 93 Hawai' i 199, 204, 998 P.2d 
479, 484 (2000) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). The Circuit Court gave the jury the following instruction on first-degree criminal property damage: 
In count one of the indictment, the defendant, Kevin
Anthony, is charged with the offense of criminal property
damage in the first degree. A person commits the offense of
criminal property damage in the first degree if he
intentionally or knowingly damages property and, thereby,
recklessly places another person in danger of death or
bodily injury.
 
There are four material elements to the offense of
 
criminal property damage in the first degree, each of which
the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
These four elements are[:]
 
[O]ne, that the defendant damaged property; and
 [T]wo, that the defendant acted intentionally or
knowingly as to element one; and
 
[T]hree, that the defendant's conduct placed Celso
Bautista in danger of death or bodily injury; and
 
[F]our, that the defendant acted recklessly as to
element three.
 
(Format changed; emphasis added.)
 
Anthony argues that this instruction was prejudicially
 
insufficient because it "failed to clearly and unequivocally
 
instruct the jury that the conduct that intentionally or
 knowingly damaged property had to be the same conduct that
 recklessly placed [Officer] Bautista in danger of death or bodily
 injury." Anthony contends that, based on the Circuit Court's
 instruction, the jury could have found Anthony guilty of Count 1
 if he "(1) engaged in conduct wherein he intentionally or
 knowingly damaged property; and (2) engaged in 
separate and
 
distinct conduct wherein he recklessly placed [Officer] Bautista
 in danger of death or bodily injury." In support of this
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hypothesis, Anthony notes that the State introduced evidence of
 
property damage done to the lock on the Hutchesons' rental car,
 which was unrelated to placing Officer Bautista in danger of
 death or bodily injury.
 
We conclude that Anthony's strained and unnatural
 
reading of the Circuit Court's instruction is without merit. 
When viewed and considered as a whole, the Circuit Court's
 instruction provided the necessary link between the defendant's
 conduct in damaging property and in placing another person in
 danger of death or bodily injury. The instruction provides that
 "[a] person commits the offense of criminal property damage in
 the first degree if he intentionally or knowingly damages
 property and, thereby, recklessly places another person in danger
 of death or bodily injury." (Emphasis added). Given this
 introduction and when read in context, it is clear that the
 defendant's conduct in damaging property required to establish
 element one is the same conduct of the defendant that must have
 placed Officer Bautista in danger of death or bodily injury in
 order to satisfy element three. 
Moreover, the only evidence introduced by the State
 
that Officer Bautista had been placed in danger of death or
 bodily injury was the evidence of Anthony's intentional ramming
 of Officer Bautista's vehicle with the Toyota Tacoma truck. The
 State did not argue that some other property damage besides the
 damage caused by Anthony's conduct in ramming Officer Bautista's
 car had placed Officer Bautista in danger of death or bodily
 injury. Under these circumstances, we conclude that the Circuit
 Court's instruction on the elements for first-degree criminal
 property damage was not prejudicially insufficient, erroneous,
 inconsistent, or misleading.
 
II.
 
Anthony contends that the Circuit Court committed plain
 
error by failing to give the jury a specific unanimity
 instruction as to the offenses of first-degree criminal property
 damage (Count 1), first-degree assault against a law enforcement 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
officer (Count 6), and first-degree terroristic threatening
 
(Count 7). We disagree.
 
Anthony notes that the State presented evidence that 
Anthony drove the Toyota Tacoma truck and engaged in three separate and distinct collisions with Officer Bautista's car. Anthony argues that because the Circuit Court did not give the jury a specific unanimity instruction, "the jury may not have unanimously agreed as to which of these three acts provided the basis for finding Anthony guilty of Count 1." Anthony further argues that because these acts also provided the basis for Counts 6 and 7, "the jury may not have unanimously agreed as to the basis for convict[ing] Anthony of those offenses." In support of his argument, Anthony cites State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai' i 1, 928 
P.2d 843 (1996). We conclude that Arceo is inapposite. 
In the absence of an election by the prosecution, two 
conditions must converge before an Arceo specific unanimity instruction is necessary: "(1) at trial, the prosecution adduces proof of two or more separate and distinct culpable acts; and (2) the prosecution seeks to submit to the jury that only one offense was committed." Valentine, 93 Hawai' i at 208, 998 P.2d at 488. 
Therefore, an Arceo specific unanimity instruction "is not required if the conduct element of an offense is proved by the prosecution to have been a series of acts constituting a continuous course of conduct and the offense is statutorily defined in such a manner as to not preclude it from being a 'continuous offense.'" State v. Rapoza, 95 Hawai' i 321, 329-30, 
22 P.3d 968, 976-77 (2001); see also Valentine, 93 Hawai' i at 
208-09, 998 P.2d at 488-89 (concluding that a specific unanimity instruction was not required where the charge was based on "a single incident of culpable conduct"). 
Here, the State presented evidence at trial that
 
Anthony's three collisions with Officer Bautista's car was part
 of a series of acts constituting a continuous course of conduct. 
In addition, the offenses charged in Counts 1, 6, and 7 are not
 statutorily defined in such a manner as to preclude them from
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
being continuous offenses. Accordingly, no specific unanimity 
instruction was required. See Valentine, 93 Hawai' i at 202, 208­
09, 998 P.2d at 482, 488-89 (holding that a specific unanimity instruction was not required regarding a charge of attempted prohibited possession of a firearm because the defendant's acts of (1) reaching for, (2) clasping of, and (3) tugging on a police officer's firearm constituted a "single episode"); State v. Rapoza, 95 Hawai' i at 329-30, 22 P.3d at 976-77 (holding that a 
specific unanimity instruction was not required because multiple discharges of a firearm in the direction of the three complainants was a single continuous offense as to each complainant). 
We also note that there was overwhelming evidence that
 
Anthony intentionally and knowingly drove the Toyota Tacoma truck
 into Officer Bautista's car with respect to each of the three
 collisions. We conclude that there is no reasonable possibility
 that a juror might have found that Anthony intentionally and
 knowingly drove the Toyota Tacoma truck into Officer Bautista's
 car for one collision but not the other two. Therefore, even
 assuming arguendo that a specific unanimity instruction was
 required, the failure to give such an instruction was harmless
 error. 
III.
 
Anthony argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
permitting Abe and Tawata to testify that their property, which
 had been taken in uncharged thefts, was later found in the Toyota
 Tacoma truck that Anthony was driving. We conclude that the
 Circuit Court erred in admitting this evidence, but that such
 error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
The admissibility of evidence requires different 
standards of review depending on the particular rule of evidence at issue. State v. Duncan, 101 Hawai' i 269, 273-74, 67 P.3d 768, 
772-73 (2003). "With respect to [Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)] Rule 403, 'which requires a 'judgment call' on the part of the trial court,' the appropriate standard of review on appeal is 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
abuse of discretion." Id. at 274, 57 P.3d at 773 (brackets and
 
citation omitted). 
Abe testified that he was notified by the police that
 
some of his belongings had been found in the Toyota Tacoma truck
 
that Anthony had been driving. Abe was shown pictures of items
 recovered from the Toyota Tacoma truck and identified various
 items as his property, including an electric shaver, glasses,
 work identification documents, receipts, and pants. Abe
 explained that these items had been stolen from his truck and
 that he had reported the thefts on December 11, 2007. Abe
 testified that he did not know anyone named "Kevin Anthony" or
 "Slim." The State introduced into evidence photographs of the
 items found in the Toyota Tacoma truck that Abe identified as
 belonging to him. While Abe was testifying, Anthony did not
 object to Abe's testimony or the introduction of the photographs. 
However, after Abe completed his testimony, Anthony 
moved to strike Abe's testimony on the ground that it was
 irrelevant. Anthony acknowledged that he had previously agreed
 to the admission of the photographs, but stated that he now
 realized that Abe's testimony was irrelevant because the charges
 against Anthony did not include any complaint by Abe. The State
 argued that Abe's testimony was relevant because: (1) the
 presence of other people's possessions, including
 identifications, in the Toyota Tacoma truck would tend to refute
 Anthony's defense that he did not know the truck had been stolen;
 and (2) the testimony would eliminate Abe as a person who stole
 the truck. The Circuit Court overruled Anthony's objection and
 allowed Abe's testimony to stand.
 
The State later called Tawata to testify. Before
 
Tawata testified, Anthony objected on the ground of relevance,
 which the Circuit Court overruled. Tawata testified that
 sometime prior to December 11, 2007, his backpack had been stolen
 from his vehicle. Tawata identified his stolen backpack and its
 contents in photographs he was shown of items recovered from the 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Toyota Tacoma truck. Tawata testified that he did not know
 
anyone named "Kevin Anthony" or "Slim."
 
On appeal, the State argues that the testimony of Abe
 
and Tawata was relevant to refute Anthony's claim that he
 honestly believed that "Slim" was the owner of the Toyota Tacoma
 truck and had given Anthony valid authorization to drive the
 truck. The State asserts that Abe's and Tawata's testimony "was
 relevant to show that, if [Anthony] had seen and investigated Abe
 and Tawata's property, he would have been alerted to the fact
 that Slim, who purportedly gave permission to Defendant to
 operate the truck, was not authorized to permit Defendant to
 operate the truck[.]"
 
Evidence that other people's belongings were in the
 
Toyota Tacoma truck, especially Abe's identification documents,
 may have been relevant to refute Anthony's defense if these items
 were in plain view and would reasonably have alerted Anthony that
 the truck had been stolen. However, the State did not introduce
 evidence that Abe's identification documents were in plain view. 
The State also did not present evidence that, or otherwise
 explain how, the other personal items identified by Abe and
 Tawata would have served to reasonably alert someone that the
 truck had been stolen. Under these circumstances, we conclude
 that the minimal probative value of the evidence was
 substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice
 flowing from Abe's and Tawata's testimony regarding uncharged
 thefts, see HRE Rule 403 (1993), and that the Circuit Court erred
 in admitting testimony of the uncharged thefts.
3
 
We conclude, however, that the Circuit Court's error in
 
admitting such testimony was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
With respect to Count 1 (first-degree criminal property damage),
 Count 6 (first-degree assault against a law enforcement officer),
 
3/ Under the circumstances of this case, the State's contention that
Abe's and Tawata's testimony was relevant and admissible to show that they had
not stolen the truck or authorized Anthony to drive it is without merit.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Count 7 (first-degree terroristic threatening), which all
 
arose out of Anthony's repeated ramming of Officer Bautista's
 car, the evidence against Anthony was overwhelming. Anthony
 admitted that he initially pulled over in response to hearing the
 police sirens and seeing the blue strobe lights emanating from
 the cars of Officers Empron and Bautista. In addition, after
 Anthony had pulled over, Officer Morita activated his visor
 strobe light and siren and pulled up behind the Toyota Tacoma
 truck. 
Officers Morita and Apilando both testified that
 
despite Officer Apilando identifying himself as "police" and
 displaying his badge, Anthony attempted to flee. Anthony pulled
 away at a high rate of speed and drove straight into Officer
 Bautista's car, which Anthony knew was a police vehicle. Anthony
 then reversed, rammed into Officer Bautista's car a second time,
 reversed again, and rammed into Officer Bautista's car a third
 time before he was finally subdued. Although Anthony claimed
 that he was trying to get away from the guy chasing him on foot,
 he could not explain why he had to engage in such extreme
 measures to elude this person when he knew the police were right
 there. After being arrested, Anthony apologized and said to
 Officer Morita, "Sorry, but I never like get arrested."
 
The Circuit Court's error in admitting Abe and Tawata's
 
testimony regarding the uncharged thefts was clearly harmless
 beyond a reasonable doubt as to Counts 1, 6, and 7. We also
 conclude that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt as
 to Counts 2, 3, 4, and 5, which related to Anthony's unauthorized
 control of the Toyota Tacoma truck and the break-in and theft
 from the Hutchesons' car. The State presented compelling
 evidence regarding Anthony's guilt on these counts. There was
 undisputed evidence that the Toyota Tacoma truck had been stolen;
 that a single individual driving the Toyota Tacoma truck had
 broken into the Hutchesons' car and stolen their possessions; and
 that a short time after the break-in, Anthony was driving the
 Toyota Tacoma truck as its sole occupant, with items stolen from
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Hutchesons in plain view on the front passenger side of the
 
truck. There was also overwhelming evidence that Anthony engaged
 in extreme measures, including ramming a police car three times,
 in an attempt to flee from the police, which demonstrated his
 consciousness of guilt with respect to his operation of the
 Toyota Tacoma truck, his possession of the truck's contents, and
 his prior conduct. 
Anthony's defense in the face of this compelling
 
evidence was that a person named "Slim," whom Anthony had never
 met before and whose last name he did not know, had given Anthony
 authorization to drive the Toyota Tacoma truck and was solely
 responsible for the theft from the Hutchesons' car and the other
 stolen items found in the truck. The State presented strong
 evidence refuting Anthony's defense. Contrary to Anthony's
 version, Samuel Hutcheson testified that he did not see the
 Toyota Tacoma truck, which "pealed out" of the parking lot, stop
 to pick anyone up. The short time frame from the HPD dispatch
 call to when Anthony was spotted driving the Toyota Tacoma truck
 also serves to contradict Anthony's claim that "Slim" stopped at
 the Waiâhole Valley Store and that Anthony went behind the store
 to urinate before getting into the truck and heading back to the
 game room on King Street. Moreover, Anthony could not explain
 why he did not think anything of the presence of the Hutchesons'
 Louis Vuitton purse and large red bag on the front passenger side
 of the truck, especially since according to his version, those
 items were not previously in the truck. He also did not explain
 why "Slim," a person whom he had never met before, would choose
 to break into a car and steal items while Anthony was along for
 the ride.
 
In addition, Anthony's defense served to mitigate and
 
minimize the risk of prejudice from Abe's and Tawata's testimony 
with respect to Counts 2, 3, 4, and 5. Abe's and Tawata's
 testimony was consistent with Anthony's defense that "Slim" had
 been in possession of the Toyota Tacoma truck and was responsible
 for the stolen items found in the truck. Considering all the
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence presented, we conclude that there is no reasonable
 
possibility that the error in admitting Abe's and Tawata's
 testimony might have contributed to the jury's guilty verdicts on
 any of the counts. 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Judgment of 
the Circuit Court. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 17, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Craig W. Jerome
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
17
 