NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29960
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
LARRY W.K. YIP, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(Case No. 1DTC-08-046548)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Larry W.K. Yip (Yip) appeals from 
the June 29, 2009 amended judgment of conviction on one count of 
excessive speeding in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
ยง 291C-105(a)(1) (2007 & Supp. 2009) entered in the District 
Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (district court).1 
On appeal, Yip argues that: (1) the district court 
erred in receiving the speed check card into evidence under the 
business record exception to the hearsay rule; (2) there was 
insufficient foundation laid for admission of the speed check 
card as a business record exception; and (3) the admission of the 
speed check card violated Yip's right to confrontation. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we conclude that 
based upon State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai 'i 354, 227 P.3d 520 
(2010), Officer Russell Maeshiro's (Officer Maeshiro) testimony regarding the speed at which Yip was driving, which was based 
upon the officer's speedometer, was inadmissible because the 
State failed to establish a proper foundation to show that the 
1   The Honorable Faye M. Koyanagi presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
speedometer had been properly calibrated and was therefore
 
accurate.2
 
Yip was tried with a co-defendant (Co-Defendant) for
 
the offense of excessive speeding on November 3, 2008.
 
Officer Maeshiro testified that on November 3, 2008, he
 
cited Co-Defendant and Yip. He observed Yip tailgating Co-
Defendant and both were traveling fast. He paced them and
 
determined, based on his speedometer, that they were traveling 85
 
miles per hour in a 45 miles per hour zone. Yip objected to the
 
testimony of the speed. In laying the foundation for the speed
 
check card, no evidence was presented as to the manufacturer's
 
requirements for the training of the person conducting the speed
 
check or the manner in which the speed check was to be performed.
 
The district court overruled the objection.
 
The Co-Defendant testified that she had asked Yip to
 
follow her home because it was late and she was tired. She had
 
checked her speedometer before she was stopped and she was
 
traveling 55 miles per hour. Yip testified that he was following
 
Co-Defendant on his motorcycle and he was traveling at 55 miles
 
per hour.
 
A determination of the admissibility of evidence under 
an exception to the hearsay rule is reviewed under the 
right/wrong standard of review. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai 'i at 362, 
227 P.3d at 528. 
To establish a foundation for the speed check results,
 
Fitzwater requires the following:
 
Thus, in order for the results of speed checks to be
admissible, the State must establish: (1) how and when the
speed check was performed, including whether it was
performed in the manner specified by the manufacturer of the
equipment used to perform the check, and (2) the identity
and qualifications of the person performing the check,
including whether that person had whatever training the
manufacturer recommends in order to competently perform it.
 
2   Based upon our decision to vacate and remand as a result of the inadmissibility of the 
speed check card, we do not address Yip's other issues. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id., at 376-77, 227 P.3d at 542-43. The State did not satisfy
 
these requirements. The State failed to adduce any evidence
 
relating to the manufacturer's requirements for the testing or
 
the training of the person performing the test and therefore the
 
district court erred in admitting the speed check card into
 
evidence over the objections of defense counsel.
 
However, Yip testified that he was driving at 55 miles
 
per hour and Officer Maeshiro testified that the area had a speed
 
limit of 45 miles per hour As in Fitzwater, there was sufficient
 
evidence to convict Yip of noncompliance with the speed limit in
 
violation of HRS ยง 291C-102(a)(1) (2007). See Id., at 378, 227
 
P.3d at 544.
 
Therefore, we vacate the June 29, 2009 amended judgment
 
entered by the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
 Division and remand for entry of a judgment that Yip violated HRS
 
ยง 291C-102(a)(1), in accordance with the applicable statutes
 
governing non-criminal traffic infractions.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 23, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
John N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
 
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu, Associate Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
3
 