 Associate Judge Alexa D.M. Fujise, a member of the panel on this1/
appeal, is currently unavailable to sign but agrees to the order.NO. 28583
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JENARO TORRES, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CRIMINAL NO. 05-1-2556)
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION
TO CORRECT FOOTNOTE AND AMENDING OPINION
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise, and Leonard, JJ.)1/
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) filed a
"Motion for Reconsideration To Correct Inaccuracy in Published
Opinion" (Motion for Reconsideration) on December 23, 2009. 
Specifically, the State requests that we correct a factual
inaccuracy in footnote 15 on page 52 of our published opinion
which states: 
 15/ We note that the State only argues that the circuit
court did not err in admitting the time-frame testimony; it
does not contend that any error in admitting such testimony
should be viewed as harmless.
The State argues that footnote 15 is factually inaccurate because
the State did argue during oral argument that any error in
admitting Agent Robbins's time-frame testimony should be viewed
as harmless.  The State requests that footnote 15 be omitted or
edited to accurately reflect the arguments it made at oral
argument.
In its brief on appeal, the State only argued that the
circuit court did not err in admitting Agent Robbins's time-frame
testimony and did not contend that any error in admitting such
testimony was harmless.  However, upon reviewing a recording of
the oral argument, we agree with the State that it did assert2during oral argument that any error in admitting Agent Robbins's
time-frame testimony was harmless.  Therefore,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the State's Motion for
Reconsideration is granted and that the Opinion of this court,
filed on December 15, 2009, is hereby amended so that footnote 15
on page 52 shall be modified read as follows, with the deleted
text in brackets and the new material underscored:
15/ We note that in its brief on appeal, the State only
[argues] argued that the circuit court did not err in admitting
the time-frame testimony and [; it does] did not contend that any
error in admitting such testimony should be viewed as harmless. 
During oral argument, the State argued that any error in admitting
Agent Robbins's time-frame testimony was harmless.
The clerk of the court is directed to incorporate the
foregoing changes in the original opinion and take all necessary
steps to notify the publishing agencies of these changes. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 4, 2010.
On the motion:
Deirdre Marie-Iha
Deputy Solicitor General Chief Judge
Department of the Attorney
  General
for Plaintiff-Appellee
Associate Judge