NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29963
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DUSTIN KAMAKI JIMENEZ, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-1008)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Dustin Kamaki Jimenez (Jimenez) 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) 
filed in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1/ The prosecution of Jimenez by Plaintiff-Appellee State 
of Hawai' i (State) stemmed from the shooting death of Dillon 
Ching (Dillon). A jury found Jimenez guilty as charged of (1) second-degree murder (Count 1); (2) carrying or use of a firearm in the commission of a separate felony (Count 2); (3) place to keep a pistol or revolver (Count 3); (4) first-degree terroristic threatening (Count 5); and (5) first-degree reckless endangering (Count 6).
2/   
1/ The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
 
2/ Jimenez was also originally charged in Count 4 with being a person
under indictment for a felony who possessed ammunition, but the State moved
for a nolle prosequi of that count, without prejudice, which the Circuit Court
granted.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After the jury's verdicts were entered, Jimenez filed a
 
motion for a new trial. Jimenez's new trial motion was based on
 
a claim of newly discovered evidence, namely, the testimony of a
 witness, Tony Bumphus (Bumphus), who had not been called at
 trial. Jimenez contended that Bumphus's testimony would support
 Jimenez's justification defenses of the use of force in self-
defense and the defense of others and Jimenez's claim of extreme
 mental or emotional disturbance. After holding an evidentiary
 hearing, the Circuit Court denied Jimenez's motion for a new
 trial. The Circuit Court sentenced Jimenez to concurrent terms
 of imprisonment of life with the possibility of parole on Count
 1; twenty years on Count 2; ten years on Count 3; and five years
 on Counts 5 and 6. The Circuit Court also imposed mandatory
 minimum terms for use of a firearm of fifteen years on Count 1
 and three years on Counts 5 and 6.
 
On appeal, Jimenez only challenges the Circuit Court's
 
denial of his motion for a new trial. Jimenez argues that the
 Circuit Court erred in ruling that he failed to prove that: (1)
 the defense could not have discovered Bumphus's testimony through
 the exercise of due diligence before or at trial; and (2) the
 proffered evidence was of such a nature as would probably change
 the result of a later trial. For the reasons discussed below, we
 hold that the Circuit Court did not err in denying Jimenez's
 motion for a new trial.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 A.
 
Dillon was shot twice in a lot adjacent to his
 
residence in the midst of a melee involving two groups that had
 begun before Dillon arrived home. He died en route to the
 hospital. Dillon lived on the North Shore in a residence (the
 Ching residence) with his father, his wife Desiree Ching
 (Desiree), his son, and his two brothers, Billy Jack Ching (Billy
 Jack) and T.Y. Ching (T.Y.). The Ching residence was near a
 beach known as Log Cabins.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On the night in question, Billy Jack, T.Y., Blake
 
Wabinga-Akui (Blake), Blake's brother Brandon Wabinga (Brandon),
 
and other friends were drinking at the Ching residence. Dillon,
 Desiree, and their son were not at home. A group of about twenty
 to thirty people, including Jimenez, were drinking on the beach
 at Log Cabins. Blake and T.Y. went to Log Cabins to "check
 things out because it looked like a party." When Blake and T.Y.
 returned to the Ching residence, they were angry because they
 felt the people at Log Cabins had mistreated them, and Blake
 wanted to fight.
 
Blake was in an empty lot adjacent to the Ching
 
residence when he saw Wesley Tamanaha (Wesley), who was with the
 group drinking at Log Cabins, walking from the beach. Blake and
 Wesley exchanged words and Blake punched Wesley. Wesley fell to
 the ground and started yelling out for his "boys." Wesley got
 up, and Blake hit Wesley again. A group of people came from the
 beach towards the Ching residence and started throwing beer
 bottles at Blake. Once the group of people from the beach
 started throwing bottles, Brandon went to retrieve an aluminum
 bat. The group from the beach began fighting with the people
 from the Ching residence. Dillon, Desiree, and their son
 returned home while the fighting was underway.
 
According to Desiree, Jimenez was standing in the
 
middle of the street near the empty lot adjacent to the Ching
 residence. She heard Jimenez yelling and a gunshot, and she saw
 Jimenez holding a gun. Dillon was standing next to Brandon in
 the empty lot. Dillon did not have anything in his hands. 
Jimenez faced Dillon, pointed the gun in Dillon's direction, and
 said, "[W]hat, you want to act, fucker? You want to act?" As
 Jimenez said these words, he fired two shots at Dillon. Jimenez
 was five to six feet from Desiree and fifteen to twenty feet from
 Dillon when he fired the shots. Desiree did not see Dillon make
 any move toward Jimenez or pick anything up before Jimenez fired
 the shots. After the two shots were fired, Desiree saw that 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dillon was bleeding. Dillon walked toward Desiree and fell to
 
the ground as he reached her.
 
According to Brandon, after retrieving the bat, he
 
swung the bat at four or five people who were in front of him to
 keep them at bay, but did not hit anyone. Brandon heard gunshots
 and threw the bat away to avoid being shot. Brandon saw Jimenez
 holding a gun in the middle of the street "talking shit, saying
 stuff about Wahiawa[.]" Brandon was in the empty lot when Dillon
 approached him and asked what was going on. Dillon did not have
 anything in his hands. Jimenez turned and pointed the gun in
 their direction, at which point Brandon ran back toward the Ching
 residence. Brandon heard two or three more shots after he ran. 
Brandon then saw Dillon on the ground and bleeding. 
Dillon was taken by ambulance to Wahiawâ General
 
Hospital, and passed away en route. An autopsy was performed,
 which revealed that Dillon had two gunshot wounds to his right
 chest, one of which was fatal. According to the medical
 examiner, the angle of the non-fatal gunshot wound indicated that
 Dillon "would have had to like duck when [the bullet] entered"
 and was consistent with Dillon being at a slightly crouched
 angle. The fatal gunshot wound was at an even more acute angle,
 indicating that Dillon was "bent at a 90-degree angle" when the
 bullet entered his body. Dillon "bled to death from injuries to
 his lung as a result of the gunshot wound to the chest." 
At trial, numerous individuals who had been drinking at
 
the Ching residence and on the beach at Log Cabins on the night
 in question were called as witnesses. Several witnesses
 testified that Dillon did not have anything in his hands that
 night, and none of the witnesses testified to seeing Dillon with
 a bat in his hands.
 
B.
 
Jimenez testified in his own defense at trial. Jimenez
 
did not dispute that he had shot and killed Dillon. Jimenez's
 defense was based on his claim that he shot Dillon in self­
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defense, in the defense of others, or as the result of extreme
 
mental or emotional disturbance (EMED). 
Jimenez testified that on the night in question he saw
 
a group of his friends at California Market in Wahiawâ and they
 decided to go to the North Shore to drink beer. Jimenez ended up
 joining and drinking with a group of twenty to thirty people,
 which included his friends, at the beach. Jimenez was carrying a
 firearm, a nine millimeter handgun.
 
During that evening, Jimenez went to the aid of his
 
friend Wesley, who was being assaulted by Blake. Jimenez threw a
 bottle at Blake to get Blake off of Wesley. Jimenez testified
 that Blake was "calling us out" to fight. People from the beach
 were throwing bottles, and "[e]verybody just started fighting 
. . . . [j]ust rushing each other, throwing fist." Jimenez
 walked toward the empty lot and estimated that about fifteen
 people were fighting.
 
According to Jimenez, he saw two people carrying bats. 
One of them was Brandon, but Jimenez did not know who the other
 person was. The situation was chaotic and scary, and Jimenez
 "was kind of jumpy" and his "heart was pumping." Jimenez pulled
 out his gun and fired it into the air to "scare everybody off"
 and "break 'em up." Jimenez saw Brandon with the bat in the
 empty lot and told Brandon to "[p]ut down the fucking bat."
 
Jimenez testified that he next "seen like one flash,
 
somebody running towards -- towards me" from his left side. 
Jimenez turned and fired. Jimenez testified that he "just
 reacted" and fired in a split second without thinking what he
 wanted to do. Jimenez estimated that the person was six to eight
 feet away when Jimenez shot. Jimenez did not testify that he
 fired the gun at the person because he saw the person carrying a
 bat. Rather, Jimenez stated, "I thought he had one bat. I
 thought that was the other guy with the bat. I wasn't sure." 
Jimenez asserted that he did not have the chance to look at the
 guy's face before he shot and that he fired the gun because he
 "was just scared that [the guy] had one bat and, you know, he
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
probably going to bash my head in[.]" After Jimenez fired his
 
gun, Jimenez ran to his car, picked up his friend Kyle, and left
 the scene. Jimenez testified that he told Kyle, "I think I shot
 somebody because I thought they had one bat."
 
On cross-examination, Jimenez maintained that he just
 
reacted, turned, and fired the gun when he saw someone running
 towards him "real fast." Jimenez acknowledged that he could have
 left prior to firing the shots; that he did not see any of his
 friends get hit with a bat; that he was never hit with a bottle
 or a bat; and that no one came close to hitting him with a bat. 
C.
 
The jury returned verdicts of guilty as charged on all
 
counts presented to them for deliberation (Counts 1, 2, 3, 5, and
 6), including for second-degree murder charged in Count 1.
 
II.
 
A.
 
After the entry of the guilty verdicts, Jimenez filed a
 
motion for a new trial based on newly discovered evidence. 
Jimenez asserted that the newly discovered testimony of Tony
 Bumphus, who purportedly had been a witness to the shooting,
 would support Jimenez's defenses of self-defense and the defense
 of others and his EMED claim and thus warranted a new trial.
 
The Circuit Court held an evidentiary hearing on
 
Jimenez's new trial motion. At the hearing, Jimenez testified
 that he had known Bumphus since childhood and described Bumphus
 as an "acquaintance." Jimenez stated that on the night of the
 shooting, he had not seen Bumphus at the Log Cabins area or
 around the scene of the assault. Jimenez testified that he did
 not include Bumphus on a list he provided to defense counsel of
 "persons who might have been present or might know something
 about the case" because Jimenez "didn't even know [Bumphus] was
 there." Jimenez also testified that he had not received
 information from anyone that Bumphus had been present at the
 beach or at the time of the shooting.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
During cross examination, Jimenez acknowledged that
 
Bumphus is "a big guy"; that he is tall; and that he could have
 
weighed about 280 to 300 pounds. Jimenez admitted that Bumphus
 was "hard to forget."
 
Bumphus testified that he had known Jimenez for about
 
ten years, described their relationship as close, and said they
 were friends. When asked about the shooting incident, Bumphus
 testified that he was at the beach with a lot of people,
 including Jimenez. He had been there for about thirty minutes
 when he heard a commotion. He ran over to investigate and saw a
 person he knew as "Wes" on the ground with two guys "backing off
 [Wes]." 
According to Bumphus, he challenged the two guys to
 
fight. Bottles were thrown at the two guys from the beach side
 and they retreated toward an empty lot. Bumphus walked toward
 the two guys and continued to challenge them, and he saw a guy
 with a bat in his hand. At that point, Bumphus noticed that
 Jimenez was standing right next to him. The guy with the bat was
 swearing at Bumphus, and Bumphus replied, "Fuck you, come, bring
 your bat." The guy with the bat was holding it as if he was
 getting ready to swing.
 
Bumphus testified that Jimenez ran and left the scene,
 
and he came back a few seconds later. When Jimenez returned,
 Bumphus heard a gunshot that Jimenez had fired. Jimenez was
 standing next to Bumphus, about two feet away, when Jimenez fired
 the shot. Bumphus testified to what happened next: 
That first shot is fired, he -- the guy with the baseball
bat didn't like -- didn't care about the shot. So then he
 started to walk up to us. He started walking to us, not
fast, wasn't running to us, but he was walking to us real
slowly. And then that's when I heard another shot.
 
Bumphus stated that he was sure that the guy still had the bat in
 
his hand as the guy was approaching them. Jimenez shot and the
 guy with the bat "got shot and fell back." Upon seeing the guy 
fall back, Bumphus ran to his car and left the scene. He did not
 attempt to contact Jimenez about the shooting, but approached
 Jimenez's lawyer after the trial.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On cross-examination, Bumphus stated that he was six
 
feet five inches tall and weighed about 260 pounds at the time of
 
the shooting incident.3/ Bumphus elaborated on his contacts with
 
Jimenez on the night of the shooting. Bumphus testified that he
 had seen Jimenez at a store in Wahiawâ and Jimenez told him about
 the beach party. Bumphus decided to go and followed Jimenez to
 the party. Bumphus testified that later, he and Jimenez went on
 a "beer run." Only Bumphus and Jimenez were in the car during
 the beer run and they talked to each other. Bumphus also
 testified that he and Jimenez talked to each other prior to the
 shooting while they were on the beach drinking. Bumphus stated
 that after the fighting broke out, he was standing next to
 Jimenez, with a distance of two feet between them, and Jimenez
 was aware of Bumphus's presence. Bumphus testified that the guy
 with bat was initially about fifteen feet from Bumphus and
 Jimenez, then slowly approached to about ten feet of them, and
 then approached a bit more slowly after Jimenez fired the first
 shot in the air. 
Bumphus admitted that he sat in the courtroom almost
 
every day during Jimenez's trial and heard witnesses' testimony. 
Bumphus acknowledged that he heard a few days after the shooting
 that Jimenez had been arrested and accused of murder. However,
 he did not contact anyone to let them know what he had seen until
 he approached Jimenez's attorney after the jury had rendered its
 guilty verdicts.
 
The Circuit Court orally denied Jimenez's motion for a
 
new trial. Citing State v. McNulty, 60 Haw. 259, 588 P.2d 438
 (1978), the Circuit Court stated that a motion for a new trial
 based on newly discovered evidence will only be granted if the
 defendant shows: 
one, the evidence has been discovered after trial; two, such
evidence could not have been discovered before or at trial
 through the exercise of due diligence; three, the evidence
is material to the issues and not cumulative or offered
 
3/ Jimenez testified at trial that Jimenez was about five feet four
 
inches tall and weighed about 150 pounds.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
solely for purposes of impeachment; and, four, the evidence
is of such a nature as would probably change the result of a
later trial.
 
The Circuit Court concluded that Jimenez had failed to prove the
 
second and fourth requirements. On June 25, 2009, the Circuit
 Court imposed sentence on Jimenez and entered its Judgment.
 
On July 22, 2009, the Circuit Court filed written
 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Motion by
 Defendant Jimenez for New Trial" (Order Denying New Trial
 Motion). The Order Denying New Trial Motion provides in
 pertinent part as follows:
 
[T]he Court being fully advised in the premises, and having
orally denied [Jimenez's motion for a new trial], makes the
following findings of fact:
 
. . . .
 
2. Assuming[,] arguendo, that what Mr. Bumphus said
on the witness stand [during the hearing on Jimenez's motion
for a new trial] concerning his contact with the defendant
on the night of the shooting is credible, then the
defendant's claim that he had no contact with Mr. Bumphus
that night is not credible.
 
3. The Court finds that the defendant has not
 
established that he was unaware of Mr. Bumphus' presence on
the night of the shooting. This being the case, due
diligence should have resulted in the discovery of the
evidence before or during the trial, especially in light of
the fact that Mr. Bumphus was present in court during some
of the trial proceedings.
 
4. Mr. Bumphus would be the only witness at trial
to place a bat in the hand of Dillon Ching just before he
[Dillon Ching] was shot. Given this, Mr. Bumphus' testimony
would neither be merely cumulative nor offered for
impeachment purposes.
 
6.
[sic] 
None of the individuals who testified at
 
the trial, and those individuals include the defendant,
indicated that Dillon Ching was holding a bat when he
[Dillon Ching] was shot.
 
7. None of them mentioned seeing Mr. Bumphus or
anyone resembling him at the beach up on the road during the
fight or standing next to the defendant when the fatal shots
were fired.
 
8. None of them placed Dillon Ching on the scene as
early in the sequence of events as Mr. Bumphus does.
 
9. None described him [Dillon Ching] as approaching
the defendant slowly, head on, five feet at a time and
carrying a bat as Mr. Bumphus does.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
10. Mr. Bumphus' testimony contradicts not only the
testimony of the State's witnesses, but also the testimony
of the defendant himself.
 
11. This is apart from questions that might be
raised concerning his [Mr. Bumphus] attending the trial and
hearing the testimony of other witnesses and why he waited
so long before coming forward.
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
1. A motion for new trial based on newly discovered
evidence will be granted only if all of the following
requirements have been satisfied: (1) the evidence has been
discovered after trial; (2) such evidence could not have
been discovered before or at trial through the exercise of
due diligence; (3) the evidence is material to the issues
and not cumulative or offered solely for purposes of
impeachment; and (4) the evidence is of such a nature as
would probably change the result of a later trial. State v.
 
McNulty, 60 Haw. 259 (1978).
 
. . . .
 
3. Based on [Findings of Fact (FOF)] no.'s 2 and 3,
the due diligence factor has not been proved.
 
. . . .
 5. Based on FOF no.'s 5 through 11, the Court is
not of the belief that the evidence being offered by the
defense is of a nature that would probably change the result
of the trial.
 
ORDER
 
IT IS THEREFORE HEREBY ORDERED that, the foregoing
 
motion is hereby denied.
 
(Brackets surrounding "Dillon Ching" in original.)
 
DISCUSSION
 
Jimenez argues that the Circuit Court erred in denying
 
his motion for a new trial, which was based on newly discovered
 
evidence. In particular, Jimenez argues that the Circuit Court
 erred in ruling that he failed to prove: (1) that the defense
 could not have discovered Bumphus's testimony through the
 exercise of due diligence before or at trial; and (2) the
 proffered evidence was of such a nature as would probably change
 the result of a later trial. 
10
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 33 (1977) 
provides in relevant part that "[t]he court on motion of a 
defendant may grant a new trial to him if required in the interest of justice." The Hawai' i Supreme Court has held that 
[a] motion for new trial based on newly discovered
evidence will be granted only if all of the following
requirements have been satisfied: (1) the evidence has been
discovered after trial; (2) such evidence could not have
been discovered before or at trial through the exercise of
due diligence; (3) the evidence is material to the issues
and not cumulative or offered solely for purposes of
impeachment; and (4) the evidence is of such a nature as
would probably change the result of a later trial.
 
McNulty, 60 Haw. at 267-68, 588 P.2d at 445 (1978), overruled on 
other grounds by Raines v. State, 79 Hawai' i 219, 900 P.2d 1286 
(1995). A criminal defendant bears the burden of proof on all these requirements. See United States v. Turner, 995 F.2d 1357, 
1364 (6th Cir. 1993) (analyzing Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure Rule 33, which in pertinent part was substantially similar to HRPP Rule 33). A decision on a motion for a new trial is within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be overturned on appeal absent a clear abuse of discretion. McNulty, 60 Haw. at 268, 588 P.2d at 445, overruled on other grounds by Raines, 79 Hawai' i 219, 900 P.2d 1286. 
Because Jimenez has the burden of proof on all four of
 
the McNulty requirements, we may affirm the Circuit Court's
 decision if we conclude that it did not abuse its discretion in
 ruling that Jimenez failed to meet his burden on either the
 second or fourth McNulty requirement. 
I .
 
We begin by evaluating the Circuit Court's ruling that
 
Jimenez failed to meet his burden of proving the fourth McNulty
 requirement. The Circuit Court ruled that Jimenez failed to
 prove that Bumphus's testimony (the new evidence proffered by
 Jimenez) was "of a nature that would probably change the result
 of the trial." We conclude that in making this ruling, the
 Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court found that Bumphus's testimony was
 
not only inconsistent with that of the numerous eye-witnesses who
 
testified at trial, but also contradicted Jimenez's testimony. 
These findings are supported by the record. Bumphus was the only
 person to say that Dillon had a bat in his hands before Jimenez
 shot him. At trial, several witnesses testified that Dillon had
 not been holding anything in his hands, and none of the trial
 witnesses, including Jimenez, testified that Dillon was holding a
 bat when he was shot. More importantly, the contrast and
 differences between Bumphus's testimony and Jimenez's testimony
 were so great that it appears unlikely that both could be found
 to be credible. 
Bumphus is a large individual, standing six feet five
 
inches tall and weighing about 260 pounds at the time of the
 charged offense -- someone who Jimenez acknowleged would be "hard
 to forget" if he were present. At the hearing on the new trial
 motion, Bumphus testified that he had known Jimenez for a long
 time and they were friends; that Jimenez had seen Bumphus in
 Wahiawâ and invited Bumphus to a beach party on the North Shore;
 that Bumphus had followed Jimenez to the party; that later
 Bumphus and Jimenez went together on a beer run in a car in which
 they were the only two occupants; that they talked to each other
 in the car and at the beach party; that Jimenez was standing next
 to Bumphus when a guy with a bat was swearing at them; that
 Jimenez ran away then returned seconds later and resumed standing
 next to Bumphus; and that with Bumphus standing next to Jimenez
 (about two feet away), Jimenez shot the guy with the bat as the
 guy was slowly approaching them. In sharp contrast, Jimenez
 testified at the hearing that while he had known Bumphus since
 childhood, he had not seen Bumphus at the Log Cabins beach or the
 scene of the shooting and "didn't even know [Bumphus] was there." 
As the Circuit Court found, "[a]ssuming[,] arguendo,
 
that what Mr. Bumphus said [during the hearing on Jimenez's 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
motion for a new trial] concerning his contact with the defendant
 
on the night of the shooting is credible, then the defendant's
 claim that he had no contact with Mr. Bumphus that night is not
 credible." The Circuit Court's finding highlights the striking
 conflict between the testimonies of Bumphus and Jimenez. It is
 difficult to see how Jimenez could fail to remember Bumphus's
 presence during the shooting incident if Bumphus's testimony
 regarding his close interaction with Jimenez that evening were
 true. 
In addition to the conflict over Bumphus's actual
 
presence at the scene of the shooting incident, Bumphus's version
 of the shooting was inconsistent with Jimenez's version. Bumphus
 testified that the guy who was shot was walking towards them
 "real slowly" when Jimenez fired the gun. Jimenez testified that
 he fired in a split-second reaction because he saw someone
 running towards him "real fast." 
Given the irreconcilable differences between Bumphus's
 
testimony and Jimenez's version of events as well as the
 inconsistency between Bumphus's testimony and that of the eye­witnesses who testified at trial, the Circuit Court did not abuse
 its discretion in concluding that Jimenez failed to prove the
 fourth McNulty requirement. The stark differences between the
 testimonies of Bumphus and Jimenez were so great that the
 testimony of one would have served to strongly impeach and cast
 severe doubt on the testimony of the other. The conflict between
 Bumphus's testimony and Jimenez's own version of events made it
 highly unlikely that Bumphus's testimony would change the result
 if a new trial were held. 
Moreover, any potential favorable value to Jimenez's
 
defense arising out of Bumphus's testimony that Dillon was
 carrying a bat when Jimenez shot him was effectively blunted by
 Jimenez's trial testimony. Jimenez testified at trial that he
 turned and fired in a split-second reaction, without thinking or 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
having a chance to look at the guy's face, when he saw someone
 
running towards him real fast from his left side. When Jimenez
 fired, he was not even sure that the guy approaching him was the
 same person he had previously seen with a bat. Jimenez did not
 testify that he saw the guy approaching him with a bat before he
 fired or that he based his decision to fire on seeing the guy
 running towards him carrying a bat. 
In light of Jimenez's trial testimony, Bumphus's
 
testimony that Dillon was carrying a bat immediately before
 Jimenez shot Dillon would not have substantially affected
 Jimenez's defenses or his EMED claim. Jimenez's testimony shows
 that he did not shoot because he saw Dillon carrying a bat, but
 rather that he fired without actually being aware of whether or
 not Dillon was carrying a bat. Thus, whether Dillon was actually
 carrying a bat, as Bumphus claimed in his testimony, would not
 have served to meaningfully advance Jimenez's defenses of self-
defense or the defense of others, or his EMED claim, because it
 was not a factor in Jimenez's decision to shoot.
 
II.
 
As noted, Jimenez was required to satisfy all four
 
McNulty requirements in order to be entitled to a new trial. 
Because we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 discretion in determining that Jimenez did not satisfy the fourth
 McNulty requirement (the proffered evidence was of such a nature
 as would probably change the result of a later trial), we need
 not address whether the Circuit Court erred in ruling that
 Jimenez also failed to satisfy the second McNulty requirement
 (Bumphus's testimony could not have been discovered by the
 defense through the exercise of due diligence before or at
 trial). 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
denying Jimenez's motion for a new trial. We affirm the June 25,
 
2009, Judgment of the Circuit Court.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, December 29, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Chester M. Kanai 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Loren J. Thomas Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
15
 