NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29192
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CHRISTOPHER J. YUEN, PLANNING DIRECTOR, COUNTY OF HAWAI' I,
Appellant-Appellee,
v.
 
BOARD OF APPEALS OF THE COUNTY OF HAWAI' I,
VALTA COOK, in his capacity as Chairperson of the
BOARD OF APPEALS OF THE COUNTY OF HAWAI' I, Appellee,
and
 
EDMUND JIN and EVA Y. LU,
Appellees-Appellants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-261K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
This secondary appeal arises from the decision of
 
Appellant-Appellee Christopher Yuen, County of Hawai' i Planning 
Director (Director) denying Appellees-Appellants Edmund Jin and
 
Eva Y. Lu's (Jin and Lu) application for a water variance in
 
order to subdivide property they own. After the Director denied
 
Jin and Lu's water variance application, they petitioned for
 
review by the Board of Appeals of the County of Hawai' i (Board). 
The Board ruled in favor of Jin and Lu, approving the variance. 
The Director appealed to the Circuit Court for the Third Circuit
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(circuit court).1 The circuit court, in turn, reversed the
 
Board, denied the water variance, and entered judgment in favor
 
of the Director. Jin and Lu filed a timely notice of appeal to
 
this court.
 
In their points of error raised in this appeal, Jin and 
Lu contend the circuit court erred by: (1) denying their motion 
to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction, because the Director's 
notice of appeal to the circuit court was untimely; (2) 
concluding that Rule 22-4 of the County of Hawai' i Planning 
Department's Rules of Practice and Procedure (Planning Department Rules) was valid and enforceable; and (3) holding that the 
subject property did not receive sixty inches of annual rainfall 
and that Jin and Lu failed in their burden of proof and 
persuasion before the Board. 
I.	 BACKGROUND
 
Jin and Lu are owners of a 35.9 acre lot located in 
South Kona, County of Hawai' i. Jin and Lu want to create a six-
lot subdivision and, because the property is outside the service 
limits of the County's water system, a variance is required from 
Section 23-84 of the Hawai' i County Code, part of the Subdivision 
Code, which sets out water supply requirements for a subdivision. Section 23-84 requires: 
Section 23-84. Water supply.
A subdivision to be laid out after December 21, 1996
shall be provided with water as follows:
(1) 	A water system meeting the minimum requirements of the
County department of water supply; and
(2) 	Water mains and fire hydrants installed to and within
the subdivision in accordance with the rules and
 regulations of the department of water supply, adopted
in conformity with article VIII of the Charter. 
Hawai'i County Code (HCC) § 23-84 (2005 Edition, as amended). 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In order to obtain a variance, Section 23-15 of the
 
County Code states:
 
Section 23-15. Grounds for variances.
 
No variance will be granted unless it is found that:
(a) 	There are special or unusual circumstances applying to
the subject real property which exist either to a
degree which deprives the owner or applicant of
substantial property rights that would otherwise be
available or to a degree which obviously interferes
with the best use or manner of development of that
property; and
(b)	 There are no other reasonable alternatives that would
 resolve the difficulty; and
(c)	 The variance will be consistent with the general
purpose of the district, the intent and purpose of
this chapter, and the County general plan and will not
be materially detrimental to the public welfare or
cause substantial, adverse impact to an area's
character or to adjoining properties.
 
HCC § 23-15.
 
Rule 22 of the Planning Department Rules, entitled
 
"Water Variance," provides the "criteria for the granting or
 
denial of variances from sec. 23-84 of the Subdivision Code" and
 
"applies to requests for subdivisions that propose to rely on
 
rain catchment for their water supply, on agriculturally-zoned
 
property." Planning Department Rules, Rule 22-1. More
 
specifically and the focus of this case, Rule 22-4 entitled
 
"Minimum rainfall" provides:
 
[A]ll lots to be served by catchment shall have an average
annual rainfall of not less than 60". The annual rainfall
 can be proven by rainfall records at comparable rain gauges,
or by the USGS rainfall map.
 
Jin and Lu propose that water for a subdivision on 
their property be supplied by private water catchment systems. 
To this end, Jin and Lu submitted an "Application for Variance 
from Subdivision Code" on December 21, 2006 to the County of 
Hawai'i Planning Department (Planning Department). Jin and Lu's 
application for variance stated, in part: 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Property runs from Mamalahoa Highway up to
approximately 1,760 feet in elevation and receives
approximately 60+ inches of rainfall annually and therefore
qualifies for a water variance under the Planning
Department's new Rule 22. As shown on the enclosed GIS map,
the 60" rainfall line apparently utilized by the Planning
Department in reviewing variance applications runs less than
50 feet mauka of the property boundary. Exhibit 5. The
 
attached photographs depict the nature and extent of
vegetation present on the property, demonstrating that it
receives more than adequate rainfall to support private
residential catchment water systems . . . . Given the
proximity of the 60-inch isohyet line to the owners'
Property, and because the location of the isohyet line is
only an approximation of rainfall patterns intended to
assist in large scale hydrogeological resource assessment,
it is reasonable to infer that the property receives
sufficient rainfall annually to allow effective use of
private residential catchment systems.
2
 
On February 12, 2007, the Director issued a letter
 
denying Jin and Lu's request for a variance. The letter
 
explained, in part, that the proposed catchment systems "would
 
not meet the intent and purpose of the Subdivision Code" and were
 
"not allowed pursuant to Planning Department Rule 22-Water
 
Variance, effective February 25, 2006." The letter further
 
stated that the "proposed 6-lot subdivision does not receive
 
minimum 60" annual rainfall and the applicant's request to allow
 
individual rainwater catchment systems for potable and emergency
 
[needs] is not allowed or eligible pursuant to Rule 22-Water
 
Variance which requires the proposed subdivision to receive
 
minimum 60" annual rainfall."
 
On March 14, 2007, Jin and Lu petitioned the Board for 
review of the Planning Department's decision. See Hawai' i County 
Charter, Section 6-4.2(h). After a contested case hearing, the Board issued its "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and 
2
 Isohyet is defined in the Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary as
"a line on a map or chart connecting areas of equal rainfall." MERRIAM­
WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY 664 (11th ed. 2003). In this case, a map in
the record shows an isohyet line, to the ocean-side (makai) of which there is
annual rainfall of not more than sixty inches and to the mountain-side (mauka)
of which there is at least sixty inches and up to eighty inches of rainfall. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Decision and Order Approving Variance Application" (Board
 
Decision) dated October 18, 2007. The Board Decision concluded
 
that:
 
(a) the Denial by the Planning Director was arbitrary
and capricious in that he failed to consider other evidence
regarding the amount of rainfall; 
(b) the Planning Director's reliance on only the
isohyet line and one rain gauge was arbitrary in that Rule
22 contemplates that there would be reliance on more than
one rain gauge, and that the isohyet line was within a
reasonable distance from Appellant's property.
 
The Board's conclusion of law (COL) 6 stated that "[t]he Planning
 
Director's interpretation and application of Rule 22 in the
 
context of this Application represented an unwarranted exercise
 
of discretion and/or an abuse of discretion."
 
The Director subsequently appealed the Board's Decision
 
to the circuit court. On January 2, 2008, Jin and Lu filed a
 
motion to dismiss the Director's appeal to the circuit court on
 
the grounds that the Director's notice of appeal was not timely
 
filed. Although the notice of appeal had been received by the
 
clerk of the circuit court on November 19, 2007, it was not file-
stamped until November 23, 2007. The circuit court denied the
 
motion to dismiss, stating that "the court is exercising its
 
administrative power to correct the record and finds that the
 
Notice of Appeal was timely filed."
 
On April 14, 2008, the circuit court issued its
 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order
 
Reversing the Board of Appeals' Decision and Order dated
 
October 18, 2007" (Circuit Court Decision). In the Circuit Court
 
Decision, it made the following COL's:
 
13.	 Based on the foregoing, Rule 22-4 is valid and enforceable
and the Director did not depart from Rule 22-4 in
contravention of the rule-making procedures of Chapter 91,
HRS, by using methods of measuring rainfall other than what
is provided for in Rule 22-4.
 
.  .  .
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
15.	 The Board's conclusion that "[t]he Planning Director's
interpretation and application of Rule 22 in the context of
this Application represented an unwarranted exercise of
discretion and/or an abuse of discretion" was clearly
erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and
substantive evidence on the whole record.
 
16.	 The Board's Decision and Order was affected by an error of
law and in violation of the statutory provision contained in
HRS § 91-10 in that the Board unlawfully shifted the burden
of proof to the Director when it rendered its Decision and
Order.
 
Jin and Lu filed a timely appeal to this court.
 
II.	 STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A.	 Jurisdiction
 
"The existence of jurisdiction is a question of law 
that we review de novo under the right/wrong standard." Captain 
Andy's Sailing, Inc., v. Dep't of Land & Natural Res., 113 
Hawai'i 184, 192, 150 P.3d 833, 841 (2006) (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted). 
B.	 Secondary Appeals
 
In this secondary appeal, reviewing the Circuit Court 
Decision which reviewed the Board Decision, we "must determine 
whether the circuit court was right or wrong in its decision, 
applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91-14(g) [(1993)] to 
the agency's decision." Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of 
Hawaii v. Sullivan, 87 Hawai' i 217, 229, 953 P.2d 1315, 1327 
(1998) (quoting Konno v. Cnty. of Hawai' i, 85 Hawai' i 61, 77, 937 
P.2d 397, 413 (1997)). Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 91-14(g) (1993) provides: 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may reverse or
modify the decision and order if the substantial rights of
the petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:
 
(1)	 In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2)	 In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
(3)	 Made upon unlawful procedure; or
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(4)	 Affected by other error of law; or
(5)	 Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
(6)	 Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion.
 
"Under HRS § 91-14(g), [the agency's] conclusions of 
law are reviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions 
regarding procedural defects are reviewable under subsection (3); 
findings of fact are reviewable under subsection (5); and an 
agency's exercise of discretion is reviewable under subsection 
(6)." Korean Buddhist Temple, 87 Hawai' i at 229, 953 P.2d at 
1327 (quoting Konno, 85 Hawai' i at 77, 937 P.2d at 413). 
"[An] agency's decision carries a presumption of 
validity and appellant has the heavy burden of making a convincing showing that the decision is invalid because it is 
unjust and unreasonable in its consequences." Korean Buddhist 
Temple, 87 Hawai' i at 229, 953 P.2d at 1327 (citation omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The Circuit Court Had Jurisdiction to Hear the Agency
Appeal
 
Jin and Lu contend that the circuit court did not have
 
jurisdiction and should have dismissed the Director's appeal to
 
that court because the Director's notice of appeal was file-
stamped on November 23, 2007, beyond the requisite appeal period
 
under HRS § 91-14.
 
HRS § 91-14(b) provides in relevant part that 
"proceedings for review shall be instituted in the circuit court 
. . . within thirty days after service of the certified copy of 
the final decision and order of the agency pursuant to rule of 
court . . . ." The Board Decision was mailed on October 19, 
2007. Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
6(e), because the Board Decision was served by mail, the
Director had an additional two days to file the notice of appeal. 
Thus, the time for filing the notice of appeal expired on
 
November 20, 2007.
 
The Director's notice of appeal was submitted to the
 
clerk of the circuit court on November 19, 2007, prior to the
 
appeal deadline, and a stamp on the document indicates it was
 
received by the circuit court's legal documents branch on that
 
date. 
However, the notice of appeal was not file-stamped by the
 
circuit court clerk until November 23, 2007.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has held that submission of a 
document to a circuit court clerk and the clerk's acceptance and date stamping of it as "received" constitutes a filing sufficient 
to satisfy jurisdictional requirements. See Doe v. Doe, 98 
Hawai'i 144, 151, 44 P.3d 1085, 1092 (2002) (holding that the 
family court had jurisdiction regarding a motion for new trial 
and reconsideration based on the date that the clerk accepted and 
date stamped the document as "received"). 
Here, the notice of appeal was received by the clerk of
 
the circuit court on November 19, 2007. Although the notice was
 
not file-stamped until November 23, 2007, the appeal was timely
 
because the date the circuit court clerk accepted the notice of
 
appeal and stamped it as received, November 19, 2007, constitutes
 
filing sufficient for jurisdictional purposes. Id. The circuit
 
court properly exercised jurisdiction over the Director's appeal.
 
3
 HRCP Rule 6(e) (2000) provides:
 
(e) Additional time after service by mail. Whenever a party
has the right or is required to do some act or take some
proceedings within a prescribed period after the service of
a notice or other paper upon him and the notice or paper is
served upon him by mail, 2 days shall be added to the
prescribed period.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B.	 The Circuit Court Was Right in Concluding that Rule 22­
4 is Valid and Enforceable
 
Jin and Lu make two arguments in asserting that Rule
 
22-4 is invalid or unenforceable. First, they argue that "Rule
 
22-4 is invalid or unenforceable because County planners changed
 
the standards to approve a water variance in violation of Chapter
 
91, HRS" by considering information beyond the "rainfall records
 
at comparable rain gauges" or "the USGS rainfall map" specified
 
in the rule. They also contend, however, that Rule 22-4 is
 
"unenforceable because a single rainfall measurement and isohyet
 
line are inadequate to provide reliable and valid rainfall data
 
under acceptable hydrological standards." In other words, Jin
 
and Lu's second argument is that the information relied upon by
 
the Planning Department was insufficient to deny their requested
 
variance.
 
Based on these arguments, Jin and Lu assert that the
 
circuit court erred by entering its COL 13 and COL 15, which
 
state:
 
13.	 Based on the foregoing, Rule 22-4 is valid and
enforceable and the Director did not depart from Rule
22-4 in contravention of the rule-making procedures of
Chapter 91, HRS, by using methods of measuring
rainfall other than what is provided for in Rule 22-4.
 
. . . 
15.	 The Board's conclusion that "[t]he Planning Director's
interpretation and application of Rule 22 in the context of
this Application represented an unwarranted exercise of
discretion and/or an abuse of discretion" was clearly
erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and
substantial evidence on the whole record.
 
(1) The Planning Department did not change the
standards under Rule 22-4
 
In asserting that the Planning Department deviated from
 
Rule 22-4, Jin and Lu point to testimony by Daryn Arai (Arai), an
 
employee of the Planning Department, that: (1) only a single rain
 
gauge, the Opihihale rain gauge, was used to measure rainfall
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
averages when the rule called for comparable rain gauges (i.e.
 
multiple gauges), (2) no USGS rainfall map was used, (3) the
 
isohyet line dividing the two rainfall areas was relied upon by
 
the Planning Department to make its decision even though isohyet
 
lines are not mentioned in Rule 22, and (4) the Planning
 
Department considered long term rainfall records in making its
 
decision, even though they were not mentioned in Rule 22.
 
Arai's testimony does not show deviation from Rule 22­
4
4. According to the plain language of Rule 22,  an applicant for
a water variance is not limited to proving annual rainfall by
 
rain gauges or the USGS rainfall map. Rather, under Rule 22-4,
 
the requirement of an average annual rainfall of not less than 60
 
inches "can be proven by rainfall records at comparable rain
 
gauges, or by the USGS rainfall map." (Emphasis added). This
 
language does not foreclose other sources of proof. Rule 22-14
 
does not provide that annual rainfall can only be proven by the
 
two referenced methods. The circuit court properly held that
 
Rule 22 does not prohibit other methods of showing the rainfall
 
requirement. 
Moreover, the Board appeared to reach the same
 
conclusion when it stated that the Director wrongfully "failed to
 
consider other evidence regarding the amount of rainfall[.]" The
 
Board's Decision contains no FOF or COL that support Jin and Lu's
 
contention that the Planning Department made "informal changes"
 
to Rule 22-4 by considering evidence other than the two methods
 
mentioned in Rule 22. Hence, neither the Board nor the Circuit
 
Court read Rule 22-4 as limiting the evidence to prove the sixty
 
inch annual rainfall requirement.
 
4
 "Where the statutory language is plain and unambiguous, the court's
sole duty is to give effect to its plain and obvious meaning." Unite Here!
Local 5 v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 123 Hawai' i 150, 177, 231 P.3d 423, 450
(2010) (citations and brackets omitted). 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2)	 Rule 22-4 was not unenforceable
 
Regarding Jin and Lu's argument that a single rainfall
 
gauge and the isohyet line are inadequate to provide reliable and
 
valid rainfall data, and hence Rule 22-4 is unenforceable, they
 
confuse the applicable burden of proof in this case. Pursuant to 
HRS § 91-10(5) (Supp. 2003), Jin and Lu had the burden to
 
establish that the sixty inch rainfall requirement under Rule 22­
4 was met. In the contested case before the Board, the Planning
 
Department did not need to disprove compliance with Rule 22-4. 
Therefore, Jin and Lu's argument about the single rainfall gauge
 
and reliance on the isohyet line is without merit. 
C.	 The Circuit Court Was Right That Jin and Lu Failed to
Meet Their Burden of Proof and Persuasion That There Is
 An Average Annual Rainfall of Not Less Than Sixty
Inches
 
Jin and Lu challenge the circuit court's COL 4 to the
 
extent that it states:
 
4.	 There is no evidence in the record that Jin and Lu's
 
property receives an average annual rainfall of not
less than sixty inches as required by Rule 22.
 
They also challenge the circuit court's COL 6, which states:
 
6.	 Based on the foregoing, Jin and Lu failed to meet
their burden of proof, including the burden of
producing evidence as well as the burden of persuasion
pursuant to HRS § 91-10(5), to affirmatively show that
the Director's decision was arbitrary, capricious, an
abuse of discretion, and/or violated law.
 
It is apparent from the Board's Decision that it
 
incorrectly placed the burden of proof on the Director, rather
 
than Jin and Lu. The Board's Decision stated that: 
a. the Denial by the Planning Director was arbitrary
and capricious in that he failed to consider other evidence
regarding the amount of rainfall; 
b. the Planning Director's reliance on only the
isohyet line and one rain gauge was arbitrary in that Rule
22 contemplates that there would be reliance on more than
one rain gauge, and that the isohyet line was within a
reasonable distance from Appellant's property.
 
11
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Board did not make any finding as to whether Jin and Lu had
 
met their burden of proof, but rather, it improperly focused on
 
the Director's basis for the denial.
 
Given the circuit court's ruling that they had the
 
burden of proof, Jin and Lu argue that there was credible and
 
sufficient circumstantial evidence produced at the hearing before
 
the Board that their property receives not less than sixty inches
 
of rainfall annually. They point to evidence that the isohyet
 
line (the point from which there was annual rainfall of between
 
60-80 inches annually) was only about 100 feet above (to the
 
mountain side or mauka of) the top portion of their property. 
They then point to Arai's testimony that, with respect to using
 
data from the Opihihale rain gauge, a 500 foot difference in
 
elevation would not substantially alter rainfall levels. Based
 
on this evidence, and also in challenging the reliability of the
 
isohyet lines, Jin and Lu summarize their argument as follows: 
1. Since the isohyet line was only about 100 feet
mauka of the subject property, and a 500 feet difference in
elevation would not substantially alter rainfall levels, the
60-80 inches of rainfall represented by the isohyet line
presumably could extend makai or west over the entire length
of the subject property since the entire makai-mauka
elevation of the subject property differs by only 472 feet
or thereabouts (1,278 feet to 1,750 feet elevation).
 
2. This would also mean that instead of simply
receiving 50 but no more than 60 inches of rainfall, the
subject property could receive more than 60 to 80 inches
annually. And this is consistent with Stephen Bowles'
testimony that isohyet lines represent only a general area
of rainfall, and that the isohyet line is inaccurate, and
that reliance on a map is arbitrary and capricious.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Jin and Lu's arguments fail to show affirmative proof
 
to meet their burden. The top portion of the property being
 
about 100 feet from the isohyet line does not establish the
 
required sixty inches of annual rainfall on the subject property. 
It is undisputed that the entire subject property is below (makai
 
of) the isohyet line. To obtain the variance allowing rainfall
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
catchment systems, "all lots" served by catchment must receive a
 
minimum of sixty inches of rainfall annually. See Section 23-84
 
Subdivision Code; Rule 22-4.
 
While Jin and Lu attack the methods and information
 
relied upon by the Director, they can point to no evidence in the
 record that affirmatively shows that the subject property
 
receives the requisite annual rainfall. As noted by the circuit
 
court, Jin and Lu's own expert witness testified that he does not
 
know whether the subject property receives an average annual
 
rainfall of not less than sixty inches and that he did not
 
conduct a study to determine if there would be adequate rainfall
 
for catchment.
 
The circuit court was therefore correct in its COL 4
 
and COL 6 that there was no evidence the property receives the
 
annual rainfall required under Rule 22-4 and that Jin and Lu
 
failed to meet their burden of proof.
 
Ultimately, because the Board failed to apply the
 
proper burden of proof, the Board Decision was in violation of
 
the statutory requirement that "the party initiating the
 
proceeding shall have the burden of proof[.]" HRS § 91-10(5). 
The Board Decision was also clearly erroneous in view of the
 
reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
 
record. See HRS § 91-14(g). Therefore, the Circuit Court
 
Decision was correct in reversing the Board Decision.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's
 
judgment entered on May 2, 2008.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 19, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Stuart H. Oda 
for Appellees-Appellants Chief Judge 
Amy G. SelfKatherine A. Garson Deputies Corporation Counselfor Appellant-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
14
 