   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29939
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MICHAEL C. TIERNEY, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CRIMINAL CASE NO. 1P108-06561)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Michael C. Tierney ("Tierney")
 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order
 
("Judgment") entered on November 18, 2008, in the District Court
 of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division ("district court").
1
 
Tierney was convicted of promoting a detrimental drug in the
 third degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS")
 § 712-1249 (1993).
2
 
On appeal, Tierney contends that the district court
 
erred in (1) finding him fit to proceed to trial, and (2)
 allowing him to proceed pro se.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
1
 The Honorable Russell Nagata presided over the trial and
sentencing.
 
2
 (1) A person commits the offense of promoting
a detrimental drug in the third degree if the person
knowingly possesses any marijuana or any Schedule V
substance in any amount.
 
(2) Promoting a detrimental drug in the third
degree is a petty misdemeanor.
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 712-1249 (1993).
     
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm the
 district court's Judgment and address Tierney's points of error
 as follows:
 
(1) The district court did not abuse its discretion
 
when it determined that Tierney was fit to proceed with trial.
3
 
The district court twice suspended proceedings for a physical and
 mental examination of Tierney under HRS chapter 704.
4
 
Although Tierney refused to cooperate and thus
 
prevented the court-appointed psychologist from completing the
 
5
evaluations,  Tierney had an extended colloquy with Judge Lee at
the August 19, 2008 hearing, which provided a reasonable basis
 for the district court's conclusion that Tierney was fit to
 proceed to trial. Tierney affirmed that he understood the
 charges against him, the maximum penalties associated with being
 found guilty of promoting a detrimental drug in the third degree,
 the State's burden of proof, that he had the right to remain
 silent at trial and that the district court could not infer guilt
 from his silence, and that he had a right to an attorney. 
Tierney further stated that his mind was clear, he was not under
 the influence of drugs, and he was making his decisions
 voluntarily. Based on all these factors, the district court
 concluded that Tierney was fit for trial. 
In light of the court-appointed psychologist's
 
observations that Tierney was being housed with the general
 prison population, that he had no psychiatric contacts in prison,
 and that according to an adult correctional officer with whom the
 
3
 The Honorable Lono J. Lee presided over the August 19, 2008
competency hearing, at which time Judge Lee found Tierney fit to proceed and
entered the Order Resuming Proceedings After Fitness Examination Under Chapter
704. 
4
 The Honorable Paula Devens presided over the June 20, 2008
proceedings, during which Tierney informed the court, for the second time,
that he wished to represent himself. Judge Devens ordered a one-panel
evaluation of Tierney's fitness. On July 18, 2008, Judge Lee presided over
the fitness hearing, and noted that Tierney had not cooperated with the
conduct of the evaluation. Judge Lee further suspended the proceedings to
complete Tierney's fitness assessment.
 
5
 The inability of the psychologist to complete the examination due
to Tierney's unwillingness to participate does not prevent the district court
from reaching its own conclusion. H
AW. REV. STAT. §§ 704-404(5) and 704-405(7).
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
psychologist communicated, Tierney was not a management problem
 
in prison; Tierney's age, education, and experience with the
 judicial system; the relative lack of complexity associated with
 the case and the charge; and the district court's conclusion that
 Tierney appeared to be of sound mind; the district court did not
 abuse its discretion in finding Tierney fit to proceed to trial.
 
(2) The district court did not plainly err in finding
 
that Tierney knowingly, intelligently and voluntarily waived his
 right to counsel.
6 State v. Dickson, 4 Haw. App. 614, 618, 673
 
P.2d 1036, 1041 (1983). As Tierney argued repeatedly to the
 district court, the constitution does not force a lawyer upon a
 defendant. Faretta v. California, 422 U.S. 806, 835-36 (1975)
 
(where the defendant "was literate, competent, and understanding,
 and . . . was voluntarily exercising his informed free will[,]"
 he should not be deprived of his "constitutional right to conduct
 his own defense").
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment filed on
 
November 18, 2008 in the District Court of the First Circuit,
 Honolulu Division, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 25, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Jack Schweigert,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
6
 Tierney argues that his waiver of counsel was invalid because he
was not fit to proceed to trial. We conclude above, however, that the
district court did not abuse its discretion in finding Tierney fit to proceed
to trial.
 
3
 