 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
WILLIAM D. HOSHIJO, Executive Director on Behalf
of the Complaint filed by Del M. Scotto, and the Civil
Rights Commission, State of Hawaii, Appellant-Appellee,
v. JANENE CARACAUS, Appellee-Appellant
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-1325)
 
and
 
LORETTA RAMOS, Executrix of the Estate of
Del M. Scotto, Appellant-Appellee, and JANENE CARACAUS,
Appellant-Appellant, v. LISA WONG, SARAH BANKS,
LESLIE ALAN UEOKA, and MARK G. VALENCIA, in their
official capacities as Commissioners of the HAWAII
CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR &
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, STATE OF HAWAII, WILLIAM D.
HOSHIJO, in his official capacity as Executive Director
of the HAWAII CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
& INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, STATE OF HAWAII, Appellees-Appellees
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0230)
 
NO. 29290
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
APRIL 27, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, FOLEY and LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This is a secondary appeal from the Circuit Court of
 
1
de novo review of a the First Circuit's (Circuit Court's)  
decision of the Hawai
'i Civil Rights Commission (HCRC).2 
Appellant-Appellant-Respondent Janene Caracaus (Caracaus) appeals 
pro se from the Circuit Court's July 2, 2008 Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law (FOFs/COLs), in which the Circuit Court (1) 
affirmed the HCRC's decision finding that Caracaus evicted 
Complainant Del M. Scotto (Scotto), now deceased, because of his 
disability caused by prostate cancer, and that her eviction of 
Scotto violated Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 515-3 (2005), and 
(2) awarded damages against Caracaus and in favor of Appellant-
Appellee Loretta Ramos, as Executrix of the Estate of Del M.
 
Scotto (Ramos), including $7,000 in special damages, $10,000 in
 
general damages, and $10,000 in punitive damages.
 
Caracaus raises several points of error on appeal, 
which are enumerated below. The threshold issue raised, however, 
is whether she was improperly denied a jury trial. We hold that, 
because the Hawai' i Supreme Court has held that a fundamental 
constitutional right to jury trial exists when a person is faced with substantial legal damages in a statutory discrimination 
action and, under the facts of this case and the applicable 
statutory provisions and rules Caracaus did not waive her right 
to a jury trial, the Circuit Court erred in rejecting Caracaus's 
demands for a jury trial. Accordingly, we vacate and remand for 
further proceedings. 
1/
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided.
 
2/
 Caracaus filed an appeal from the HCRC's decision in the First
Circuit. After Scotto's death, the executrix of his estate filed an appeal in
the Third Circuit. Thereafter, the parties stipulated to consolidate the
appeals in the case pending in the First Circuit.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. RELEVANT BACKGROUND3
 
A. Scotto's Eviction
 
Beginning in February of 2005, Scotto rented a room in
 
a Hilo house owned by Caracaus. During the period relevant to
 this case, Caracaus was mostly an absentee landlord because she
 
worked as a traveling nurse. Caracaus worked in Los Angeles from
 
about February to July 2005 and thereafter in Honolulu. She
 
stayed at the Hilo house one or two times a month.
 
In March of 2005, Scotto sought treatment in connection
 
with urinary frequency and discomfort. Testing revealed an
 
elevated level of PSA (prostate-specific antigen), indicating the
 
possibility of prostate cancer. After further medical
 
consultation in August of 2005, in early October of 2005, it was
 
confirmed that Scotto had prostate cancer. Because Caracaus was
 
a nurse, Scotto spoke with her about his condition and sought her
 
advice. Caracaus recommended that Scotto return to California,
 
where he apparently had family, because he would become weaker
 
and would need help.
 
Caracaus testified before the HCRC that Scotto was 
smoking marijuana at the house, as well as using alcohol, 
methadone, and morphine, that he was not keeping the place or 
doing work around the property, and that he was burdening other 
tenants with his laundry and chores. Although Scotto said that 
he had a California medical marijuana permit, Scotto did not get 
a Hawai'i permit until November 30, 2005. Caracaus said that she 
was concerned that Scotto was abusing prescription and illegal drugs, which affected his ability to care for himself. Caracaus 
3/
 The "Relevant Background" information is adapted from the Circuit
Court's FOFs/COLs and the HCRC's Final Decision and Order. Caracaus herein
 
challenges the Circuit Court's ruling that Caracaus waived her right to a jury
trial, thus challenging the Circuit Court's fact-finding role. Neither the
 prior findings of fact nor this court's summary of the background facts,
except as they describe the proceedings before the HCRC and the various
courts, are binding upon the finder of fact upon the remand of this case.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
also said that she was concerned that the discovery of illegal
 
drug use at her home might jeopardize her nursing license.
 
By letter dated October 16, 2005, Caracaus terminated
 
Scotto's tenancy, stating:
 
I have done a lot of thinking about your recent tests
and considering the fact that you will be needing further
treatment, I think it best that you return to California or
somewhere there will be someone to help you through whatever
treatment you decide on.
 
Of course, this is your decision but effective
December 1, I will have to rent the apartment to another
family. I appreciate all you have done for me and I like
you very much, but there is still quite a bit of work
needing to be done and I should not expect you to be able to
tackle this monumental job.
 
You must take my word for it that you will get weaker
and you will then be in a situation where you cannot do
anything. I have seen many cases of cancer in my experience
 as a nurse.
 
Steve the contractor and his wife and son will be
 
moving in on the first of December.
 
Upon reading the letter, Scotto was very upset and
 
stressed about being evicted and having to find another place to
 
live, especially after just being diagnosed with cancer. Scotto
 
vacated the premises. A few days after moving, Scotto fell and
 
broke his hip, resulting in a lengthy hospitalization. His
 
belongings were put in storage, apparently at Scotto's request,
 
by Steve Stagg, a contractor who did some work for Caracaus
 
(Stagg). Stagg later informed Scotto that Stagg had failed to
 
pay the storage fee and Scotto's belongings were confiscated. 
Scotto testified that his lost belongings had a value of between
 
$7,000 and $8,000.
 
B. The HCRC Proceedings
 On January 19, 2006, Scotto filed a Complaint with the
 
HCRC alleging that Caracaus terminated his tenancy at the Hilo
 house because of his disability. Initial attempts to serve
 
Caracaus with the Complaint, by mail sent to the Hilo house, were
 
unsuccessful. The Complaint was returned to the HCRC unclaimed. 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
It appears that Caracaus may have been living in Mexico at the
 
time, while attending medical school there. Although the record
 
contains no proof of service, and it appears that further
 
attempts to effect service of the Complaint and a proposed
 
conciliation agreement were ineffective, telephone contact was
 
made with Caracaus, a copy of the Complaint was "served" on a
 
tenant at the Hilo house, and Caracaus apparently became aware of
 
the HCRC proceedings. 
HCRC attorney Frank Kim (Kim), representing HCRC
 
Executive Director William D. Hoshijo (Executive Director), on
 
behalf of the complaint filed by Scotto, attested that, on or
 
about May 15, 2006, he sent a copy of a "Notice of Finding of
 
Reasonable Cause to Believe that Unlawful Discriminatory
 
Practices Have Been Committed" to Caracaus at the Hilo home
 
address, which was subsequently returned to him undelivered
 
because it was "not deliverable as addressed - unable to
 
forward." Kim later attested to his further attempts to serve
 
Caracaus at a San Ysidro, California post office box address,
 
including that the mail was returned as "refused." An Ex Parte
 
Motion for Order of Service of Notice by Publication was filed by
 
Kim, on behalf of the Executive Director, on July 17, 2006. It
 
appears, however, that no action was taken on the motion because
 
4
no order appears in the file;  nor does the file include any
proof of service by publication (or otherwise).
 
The Complaint was docketed on July 18, 2006, and, on
 
August 22, 2006, a scheduling order was filed by HCRC Hearings
 
Examiner Livia Wang (
Wang), setting the matter for hearing during
 
the week of January 8, 2007. Caracaus participated in the HCRC 
4/
 An unsigned copy of a proposed order, drafted for the Hearings
Examiner's signature, is attached to the motion.
 
5
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
proceedings, primarily (if not exclusively) by telephonic and
 
email communications.5
 
On or about October 10, 2006, it appears that Caracaus
 
called Wang's office and stated that Caracaus wanted to remove
 
the case to federal court. The record contains a document that
 
is identified in the index of the record on appeal as an email
 
6
from Wang to Caracaus, which is hand-dated October 12, 2006,  and
states:
 
Dear Ms. Caracaus:
 
In housing discrimination cases, both the complainant
(plaintiff) and the respondent (defendant) have the right to
take a case out of the administrative hearing process into a
court. 
This process is set out in Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) section 515-9(3) and in Hawaii Administrative Rules
(HAR) sections 12-46-20(a) and (b). I sent you copies of
these statutes and rules together with the docketing notice
on July 18, 2006.
 
According to this statute and these rules, the process
for a respondent is as follows. When the Executive Director
 finds that there is reasonable cause to believe that
 discrimination has occurred, it issues a Notice of Finding
Reasonable Cause and notifies the respondent that he or she
may elect to take the case to a court. (See, HAR section
12-46-14(a).) Within 20 days of receiving the Notice of
Finding Reasonable Cause, if a respondent wants to take the
case to court, he or she must request, in writing, that the
Executive Director issue a notice of right to sue. (See HAR
section 12-46-10(b)(3). Within 90 days after the Executive
Director issues the right to sue to the respondent, the
Executive Director will then file an action in court. (See
HAR section 12-46-20(a)(3).) This is how a respondent is
able to remove a case out of the administrative hearing
process into a court.
 
5/
 The record of the HCRC proceedings is incomplete. In some
 
instances, email communications are included without their attachments. In
 other instances, portions of emails are included, without the "heading" that
indicates the date, time, and identity of sender/recipient(s) and without the
complete series of connected emails or "email trail" that, from the appearance
and context of the message, must have existed. In addition, although Kim
attested to sending Caracaus a "Notice of Reasonable Cause" in his July 17,
2006 Supplemental Affidavit, and Wang later referenced Kim's averment, no such
Notice of Reasonable Cause appears in the record.
 
6/
 The date is handwritten at the top and one or more pages of the
"email," which appears to be part of an email trail, were not included in the
record. It is not clear whether or when this email was sent or, possibly,
whether it was a draft that was unsent.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
However, if a respondent decides to stay in the
administrative hearing process, and if I and the
Commissioners issue a decision against the respondent, the
respondent still has the right to appeal that decision to a
court, which is free to reverse the decision. Therefore, if
you decide to stay in the administrative hearing process,
you will still be able to have a court review the case if
there is a ruling against you. (See HRS section 368-16, HAR
section 12-46-39.)
 
Please contact me if you have any other questions.
 
Very truly yours,
 
Livia Wang
Hearings Examiner
 
Another email was sent to Caracaus the same day,
 
October 12, 2006, at 3:16 p.m., with a copy to Kim, stating,
 
inter alia:
 
This email is to follow up on our telephone
conversation of October 10, 2006 and your conversation with
my secretary, Cathy Simmons, later that day.
 
. . . .
 
I believe that it may be too late for you to remove
this case to a court. According to Hawaii Revised Statutes
section 515-9(3), you must make an election to file a court
action within 20 days of receiving the notice of finding
reasonable cause. According the [sic] Mr. Kim's
Supplemental Affidavit filed on July 17, 2006, the notice of
finding reasonable cause and election to file a court action
was sent to you by certified mail on or about June 30, 2006.
While this mail was refused and returned to Mr. Kim, the
refusal of the notice could be deemed to be a receipt.
However, if you still feel you have a right to remove this
case to a court, you must request, in writing, a notice of
right to sue to the Executive Director within 20 days of
reading this email. (See Hawaii Administrative Rules
sections 12-46-20(a)(3), (b)(3).) I do not know if the
 Executive Director will issue a right to sue to you at this
time. If you do not make such a request, the case will
continue to proceed though [sic] this administrative hearing
 process.
 
Prior to transmitting that email, at 11:34 a.m. on
 
October 12, 2006, Wang received an email from the Executive
 
Director's attorney stating, in relevant part:
 
I will oppose any attempt by Caracaus to take this
matter to court. Just more delay. She has intentionally
avoided and refused all mail and is solely responsible for
the consequences of her wilful actions . . . she alone bears
the penalty for her gamesmanship.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
File shows that final demand advising her of 20 day
period to request right to sue letter, was sent to her at
her [Hilo address] on May 31, 2006 by certified mail, rrr.
Enclosed was a separate letter from me re her options.
 
Mail was returned 'unclaimed' with new address - the
 
P.O. Box in San Ysidro.
 
Final Demand and my letter was re-mailed to her by
certified mail, rrr, on June 30, 2006 to San Ysidro P.O.
Box.
 
Caracaus called me on July 6 and confirmed the San
Ysidro address as her address. I informed her that I had
 sent some documents to her and that she should be getting
them shortly.
 
Notwithstanding our phone conversation on July 6, the
mail was returned 'refused' on July 19, 2006, not
'unclaimed', but 'refused.'
 
In point of fact, the only mail not returned was the
disclosure information sent per your scheduling conference
order.
 
This is not a case where respondent is truly ignorant
of the proceedings against them, but a case where the
respondent is wilfully ducking and avoiding all efforts to
communicate with them. As far as I am concerned, by her
participation to this point in these proceedings, she has
waived and is estopped from raising any procedural
complaints . . . re service, etc., etc.
 
At 6:00 p.m. on October 12, 2006, Wang received an
 
email from Caracaus, which was not copied to Kim, stating:
 
Dear Ms. Wang:
 
I am confused. Why would I ask for a right to sue letter
when I am the defendant and Mr. Scotto is the one suing me?
 
Sincerely,
 Janene Caracaus
 
On October 27, 2006, Wang emailed Caracaus, with a copy
 
to Kim:
 
Dear Ms. Caracaus:
 
I understand your desire to bring an action in court
to dismiss this case. However, I would like to inform you
that until you obtain a right to sue (as outlined in my
October 12, 2006 emails to you) and/or a order from a
federal or Hawaii state court directing the Hawaii Civil
Rights Commission to dismiss this case, the case remains
active under the jurisdiction of this commission.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Should you have any questions, please contact me.
 
Very truly yours,
 
Livia Wang
Hearings Examiner
 
Caracaus promptly responded: "I am actively pursuing 
that order." On October 28, 2006, Caracaus filed pro se, in the 
United States District Court for the District of Hawai' i, a 
request for removal of the HCRC case to the United States 
District Court for the District of Hawai' i, along with a request 
that the federal court dismiss the agency proceeding. On 
November 6, 2006, the federal court, inter alia, denied the 
motion to dismiss and remanded the case, stating that "[t]here is 
no provision for removal of an ongoing state administrative 
proceeding" and that Caracaus's attempt to have the federal court 
halt the HCRC proceeding "is barred by well-settled abstention 
doctrines." (Citations omitted.) 
After the conduct of discovery and various other pre-
hearing proceedings, on January 10, 11, and 12, 2007, a contested
 
case hearing was held. Thereafter, the parties filed written
 
closing arguments. Caracaus filed post-hearing motions, which
 
were denied. On March 13, 2007, Wang filed the Hearings
 
Examiner's Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Recommended
 
Order. Wang found that Caracaus "had both discriminatory and
 
legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons for terminating [Scotto's]
 
tenancy[.]" Wang concluded that the Executive Director was,
 
therefore, limited to declaratory and equitable relief. Wang
 
recommended that the HCRC order Caracaus to "cease and desist
 
from discriminating against all other tenants or individuals on
 
any protected basis, including disability" and direct Caracaus to
 
adopt and post at her rental unit(s) a written nondiscrimination
 
policy.
 
After considering the parties' exceptions to Wang's
 
recommendations and hearing oral argument, on June 22, 2007, the
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HCRC adopted the Hearings Examiner's Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law and Recommended Order. In a July 17, 2007
 
order, the HCRC rejected the Executive Director's motion for
 
reconsideration, but clarified that "in mixed motive cases where
 
there are discriminatory and nondiscriminatory reasons for an
 
adverse action, the Commission is not limited to granting
 
declaratory and injunctive relief and has the discretion under
 
HRS §§ 515-13 and 368-17 to award damages."
 
C. The Circuit Court Proceedings
 On July 18, 2007, Caracaus filed a notice of appeal in
 
the First Circuit Court, which was designated as Civil No. 07-1­1325-07. On July 23, 2007, Ramos filed a notice of appeal in the
 
Third Circuit Court, which was designated as Civil No. 07-1­
0230.
7 Although Caracaus's notice of appeal was filed in the
 
First Circuit Court prior to Ramos's notice of appeal being filed
 in the Third Circuit Court, the HCRC filed the record on appeal
 
in the Third Circuit Court on August 31, 2007. On August 31,
 
2007, the HCRC filed a motion to dismiss the appeal filed by
 
Caracaus in the First Circuit Court, arguing lack of jurisdiction
 
or improper venue based on the Hilo location of the rental
 
property. 
On September 12, 2007, the HCRC filed an ex parte
 
motion in the First Circuit Court proceeding seeking an extension
 of time to transmit the record in that case until after the
 
hearing on the motion to dismiss. HCRC stated that it wanted to
 
avoid having to transmit the record a second time, because the
 
record already had been transmitted once to another court, i.e.,
 
the Third Circuit Court. The ex parte motion was granted the
 
same day.
 
7/
 More specifically, Ramos's notice of appeal was submitted to the
First Circuit Court for ex officio filing in the Third Circuit, as permitted
by Rule 2.1 of the Rules of the Circuit Court of the State of Hawai' i. 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On the next day, September 13, 2007, the HCRC withdrew
 
its motion to dismiss the appeal filed by Caracaus in the First
 
Circuit Court.
 
By a stipulation and order entered in the Third Circuit
 
Court proceeding on October 19, 2007, the cases were consolidated
 
into a single proceeding in the First Circuit Court. On October
 
25, 2007, the clerk of the First Circuit Court received and
 
entered the Third Circuit Court file, including the record on
 
appeal. On October 30, 2007, a stipulation and order for
 
consolidation of the proceedings was entered in the First Circuit
 
Court. 
On November 28, 2007, the Circuit Court issued a
 
schedule for briefing and argument. The court heard argument on
 
May 13, 2008, and entered the FOFs/COLs on July 2, 2008.
 
In its FOFs/COLs, the Circuit Court began by addressing
 
Caracaus's claim that she had a right to a jury trial:
 
The first issue on appeal is whether Ms. Caracaus has
waived her right to jury trial. The record shows there has
 
been no timely demand, thereby constituting waiver.
 
The applicable statute is Section 519-9(3) [sic] of
Hawaii Revised Statutes regarding discrimination in real
property transactions. Section (3) was enacted in 1992 and
expressly disregarded Chapter 368 requirements ('Chapter 368
to the contrary notwithstanding . . .') which include
Section 368-12, enacted in 1989. 
Unlike Section 368-12, the
statutory procedure adopted in Section 519-9(3) [sic] allows
both the complainant and/or respondent to opt out of the
HCRC proceedings following a finding of reasonable cause by
going to circuit court. If either Respondent Caracaus or
Complainant Scotto had so elected, then was the time for
either of them to file a demand for jury trial because
failure to elect circuit court trial would result (as it did
here) in the HCRC having a contested case hearing and
issuing a decision from which appeal de novo to the circuit
court pursuant to HRS Section 94-14 (as it is here) would be
the only remaining avenue either or both could take.
 
Thus the Supreme Court decision in SCI Management
Corporation v. Sims, 101 Hawaii 438, 71 P.3d 389 (2003),
holding that 'a respondent who appeals a final order of the
HCRC, pursuant to HRS Section 386-16, is entitled to a jury
trial on any claims that form the basis for an award of
common law damages by the HCRC', id. at 442, was construing
Section 368-12 and arose in connection with allegations of
prohibited employment practices involving sexual harassment
and retaliation where respondents demanded jury trial
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
following determination of reasonable cause. The Hawaii
 
Supreme Court decision did not allow respondent employers to
opt out at that point but rather gave them the right to jury
trial as an election to administrative appeal pursuant to
Chapter 91 after an HCRC contested case hearing. SCI
 
Management Corporation is not applicable to Section 519-9(3)
[sic] which does allow respondents to opt out after the
determination of reasonable cause. But where there is such
 an option, the respondent must act timely, otherwise the
party 'waives his or her right to a jury trial.' Id. at 452
 
n.12. Likewise, failure to make timely demand of jury trial
constitutes election in favor of contested case hearing with
later Chapter 91 circuit court review de novo. Id. State
 
v. Hoshijo ex rel White, 102 Hawaii 307 (Sup. Ct. 2003)
(Chapter 91 appeal from HCRC final order is de novo review
in the circuit court).
 
In this case the record is clear and the court finds
 
that HCRC informed Ms. Caracaus of her right to trial
consistent with Section 519-9(3) [sic] after the
determination of reasonable cause, explained the procedure
to be followed and responded to Ms. Caracaus' intelligent
question as to how the law works with clear explanation and
instruction.
 
The Circuit Court continued by quoting, as the
 
"credible record on this issue", Caracaus's October 12, 2006 
inquiry asking why she would ask for a right to sue letter and
 
Wang's October 12, 2006 hand-dated "email" explaining the process
 
involved in housing discrimination cases. The Circuit Court then
 
concluded:
 
Thereafter, Ms. Caracaus did not take the requisite
action but instead unsuccessfully attempted removal to
federal court and dismissal by federal court of the HCRC
proceeding. United States District Court Judge Samuel P.
King denied both motions by order dated November 6, 2006.
On this record, this Court finds and concludes Ms. Caracaus
waived her right to jury trial. Thus, this Court proceeds
with de Hoshijo, novo review pursuant to Chapter 91 and State v.
 supra.
 
In its Chapter 91 review, the Circuit Court, inter
 
alia, rejected Caracaus's assertion of a legitimate motive, and
 
the HCRC's finding of a mixed motive, for Scotto's eviction. The
 
Circuit Court affirmed the relief granted by the HCRC. In
 
addition, the court awarded Ramos special damages in the amount
 
of $7,000, general damages in the amount of $10,000, and punitive
 
damages in the amount of $10,000, plus reasonable attorney's
 
fees.
 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Caracaus enumerates the following points of error on
 
her appeal to this court:8
 
1. Abuse of discretion because the court made a
 
determination that was unsupported by the evidence in the
record – willful, wonton [sic] and grossly negligent;
 
2. Abuse of discretion – did not address challenge
of constitutionality of HRS 515-3 and HAR 12-46-317 as
overbroad;
 
3. Abuse of discretion – awarding unproven damages
without jury trial;
 
4. Abuse of discretion - denying Caracaus a jury
trial;
 
5. Misinterpreted the law – the court did not
consider whether obedience to one law precludes prosecution
under another law; and
 
6. Abuse of Discretion - did not consider
 
deprivation of equal protection and due process.
 
(Format altered.)
 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
As explained in State v. Hoshijo ex rel. White, 102 
Hawai'i 307, 314-17, 76 P.3d 550, 557-60 (2003), appeals from the 
HCRC are subject to one standard of review at the circuit court 
level and another standard of review on appeal from the decision 
of the circuit court. The supreme court clarified that pursuant 
to the specific language of HRS § 368-16(a), which is concerned 
solely with the standard of review applicable to an HCRC 
decision, the circuit court must apply a de novo standard of 
review, as opposed to the HRS § 91-14(g) standards of review 
applied to most agency decisions. Id. at 316, 76 P.3d at 559. 
On appeal from a circuit court's de novo review of an HCRC 
decision, this court reviews the circuit court's findings of fact 
8/
 Caracaus's points of error do not comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). We have, nevertheless, attempted to
review the merits of the arguments presented. See Hous. Fin. & Dev. Corp. v. 
Ferguson, 91 Hawai' i 81, 85, 979 P.2d 1107, 1112 (1999). 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
under the clearly erroneous standard and the circuit court's
 
conclusion of law de novo. Id. at 317, 76 P.3d at 560.
 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
We begin, as the Circuit Court did, with the question
 
of whether Caracaus waived her right to a jury trial. As set
 
forth above, the Circuit Court concluded that Caracaus waived her
 
right to a jury trial by failing to make a timely demand. The
 
Circuit Court based its conclusion on: (1) the differences in
 
the HCRC procedures provided in HRS § 515-9(3) and HRS § 368-12; 
(2) the court's determination that those statutory differences 
render the Hawai' i Supreme Court decision in SCI Mgmt. Corp. v. 
Sims, 101 Hawai' i 438, 71 P.3d 389 (2003), inapplicable to this 
case; and (3) the court's determination that Caracaus failed to 
take the "requisite action" to opt out of the contested case 
hearing process. 
Article I, section 13 of the Hawai' i Constitution 
provides that "[i]n suits at common law where the value in 
controversy shall exceed five thousand dollars, the right of 
trial by jury shall be preserved." 
In SMI Mgmt. Corp., 101 Hawai' i 438, 71 P.3d 389, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court analyzed whether respondents in an HCRC 
proceeding were entitled to a jury trial on damages claims stemming from allegations of unlawful discriminatory practices 
including sexual harassment and retaliation in an employment 
context.
9 The supreme court explained that, where a statutory 
action provides traditional forms of legal relief, such as compensatory and punitive damages, the right to a jury trial 
pursuant to article I, section 13 of the Hawai' i Constitution is 
9/
 SMI Mgmt. Corp. was an action for declaratory and injunctive 
relief filed by employers who were respondents in a separate employment
discrimination action initiated before the HCRC. 101 Hawai' i at 441-42, 443,
71 P.3d 392-93, 94. Thus, the employer-respondents were the "plaintiffs" andthe employee-complainants were the "defendants" in the declaratory judgmentaction. For ease of comprehension, we refer to the parties by reference totheir roles in the underlying employment discrimination proceedings. 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
triggered. Id. at 446, 71 P.3d 397. With respect to
 
discrimination claims before the HCRC, the court stated:
 
HRS § 368-17(a) (1993) provided that the remedies
ordered by the HCRC or the court under HRS chapter 368 may
include compensatory and punitive damages and legal and
equitable relief, including, but not limited to . . .
payment to the complainant of damages for an injury or loss
caused by a violation of HRS chapters 368, 489, 515, or part
I of chapter 378, . . . including a reasonable attorney's
fee ... and other relief that the HCRC or the court deems
 appropriate. Thus, by its plain language, HRS chapter 368
empowers the HCRC to award legal forms of relief. Moreover,
in the proceedings before the HCRC from which the present
matter arises, the complainants and the executive director
claim legal relief in the form of monetary damages – i.e.,
$400,000.00 in alleged general damages, including but not
limited to emotional distress – for each complainant.
Consequently, we agree with the [employer-respondents] that
they are entitled to a jury trial with respect to the
complainants' allegations of sexual discrimination and
retaliation.
 
Id. at 446-47, 71 P.3d 397-98 (internal quotation marks, original
 
brackets, and footnote omitted).10
 
As stated by the supreme court, this constitutional
 
right to a jury trial arises under HRS Chapter 515, which
 
addresses discrimination in real property transactions, as well
 
as part I of Chapter 378, which addresses employment
 
discrimination, Chapter 489, which addresses discrimination in
 
public accommodations, and Chapter 368, which grants the HCRC or
 
the courts the power to award legal relief in the form of money
 
damages. The supreme court firmly rejected the complainants'
 
argument that good policy reasons exist for allowing complainants
 
to "opt out" of HCRC proceedings, but not respondents, stating:
 
10/
 The supreme court rejected the complainants' argument that the
"public rights" doctrine should be applied. SCI Mgmt. Corp., 101 Hawai' i at 
447-49, 71 P.3d at 398-400. Public rights, as opposed to private rights, may
be implicated when a statutory right is "so closely integrated into a publicregulatory scheme as to be a matter appropriate for agency resolution" withlimited involvement by the courts and no jury trial requirement. Id. at 447­
48, 71 P.3d at 398-99 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).Although not reaching the question of whether, in some circumstances, Hawai' i 
should adopt the public rights doctrine, the supreme court held, under HRSchapter 368, even though the State is a party to the proceedings before theHCRC, "the adjudication of private rights has clear primacy over theadjudication of public rights" when substantial monetary relief is sought onbehalf of complainants. Id. at 447, 449, 71 P.3d at 398, 400. 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Even if [such] unsubstantiated assumptions were correct,
however, such pecuniary concerns cannot in and of themselves
abrogate a party's fundamental right to a jury trial. . . .
If the legislature wishes to provide employees with greater
assistance in prosecuting claims of employment
discrimination, there is a variety of ways in which it may
do so without divesting employers of the constitutional
right to trial by jury.
 
SMI Mgmt. Corp., 101 Hawai' i at 450-51, 71 P.3d at 401-02 
(citations omitted).
 
The court then repeated its holding:
 
In sum, and to reiterate, we hold that, as HRS chapter
368 is currently written, a respondent before the HCRC is
entitled to a jury trial with respect to claims that seek
traditional forms of legal relief, including compensatory
and punitive damages, on behalf of complainants before the
HCRC. Accordingly, we further hold that, in the present
matter, the [respondent-employers] are entitled to a jury
trial with respect to the executive director's demand for
$400,000.00 in general damages, payable to each of the
complainants, based on the complainants' allegations of sex
discrimination and retaliation. 
Id. at 451, 71 P.3d at 402. 
Having unequivocally recognized the fundamental right
 
to a jury trial on discrimination claims seeking money damages,
 
the supreme court addressed the problem of how to implement it. 
The court began by considering whether respondents are entitled
 
to "opt out" of HCRC employment discrimination proceedings, as
 
complainants may pursuant to HRS § 368-12 and Hawaii
 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 12-46-20. The court answered this
 
question in the negative:
 
The foregoing does not require us to hold, however,
that the plaintiffs are entitled to 'opt out' of the
proceedings before the HCRC. 
Although trial by jury in civil cases is a
'fundamental' right in the State of Hawai' i, the right has
never been construed so broadly as to prohibit reasonable
conditions upon its exercise[.]
 
Moreover, in holding that a procedure for non-judicial
determinations prior to jury trial does not violate the
seventh amendment, the United States Supreme Court has
stated that the seventh amendment 'does not prescribe at
what stage of an action a trial by jury must, if demanded,
be had; or what conditions may be imposed upon the demand of
such a trial, consistently with preserving the right to it.' 
16
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Thus, with regard to mandatory arbitration programs that
afford a right to trial de novo, it has been held that 
the only purpose of the seventh amendment is to secure
the right of trial by jury before rights of person or
property are finally determined. All that is required
is that the right of appeal for the purpose of
presenting the issue to a jury must not be burdened by
the imposition of onerous conditions, restrictions or
regulations which would make the right practically
unavailable.
 
Thus, laws, practices, and procedures affecting the
right to trial by jury under article I, § 13 are valid as
long as they do not significantly burden or impair the right
to ultimately have a jury determine issues of fact.
 
SMI Mgmt. Corp., 101 Hawai' i at 451-52, 71 P.3d at 402-03 
(citations and brackets omitted; format altered; emphasis added). 
The supreme court declined to "rewrite" HRS Chapter 368
 
to create an "opt out" for respondents, as to do so would
 
conflict with the plain language of the statute. Id. at 452, 71
 
P.3d at 403. Instead, the court fashioned an alternative remedy
 for HCRC respondents:
 
[W]e hold that a respondent who appeals a final order of the
HCRC, pursuant to HRS § 368-16, is entitled to a jury trial
on any claims that form the basis for an award of common law
damages by the HCRC.
 
Id. The supreme court took this extraordinary step because it
 
concluded that its only other options were to declare the statute
 
to be unconstitutional or to engage in a revision better left to
 
the legislative branch. Id.11
 
In the case now before us, the Circuit Court considered
 
the supreme court's decision in SMI Mgmt. Corp., but decided that
 
it was inapplicable because, unlike HRS Chapter 368, HRS § 515-9
 
empowers the HCRC to notify all interested parties that an 
11/
 In dissent, Justice Acoba respectfully expressed his disagreement
with virtually every aspect of the majority's analysis, including the court's
recognition of the fundamental right to a jury trial on statutorydiscrimination claims and the court's remedy, which he described as anencroachment on the legislative and executive branches of government. 101Hawai'i at 453-66, 71 P.3d at 404-17. 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
election may be made to seek redress before a court, rather than
 
the HCRC. HRS § 515-9 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 515-9. Enforcement. The civil rights commission has
jurisdiction over the subject of real property transaction
practices and discrimination made unlawful by this chapter.
The commission has the following powers:
 
.  .  .  .
 (3) Chapter 368 to the contrary notwithstanding,
after a finding of reasonable cause, to notify the
complainant, respondent, or an aggrieved person on
whose behalf the complaint was filed, that an election
may be made to file a civil action in lieu of an
administrative hearing. The election must be made not
 later than twenty days after receipt by the electing
party of the notice. The electing party shall be
provided with a notice of right to sue which must be
exercised within ninety days of receipt of that notice
or one year after the filing of the complaint,
whichever is later. The commission will provide legal
representation to the complainant in the event of an
election by any party. After the filing of a civil
action, the parties may stipulate to have the matter
remanded for an administrative hearing[.]
 
We agree with the Circuit Court's assessment that the
 
clear intent of HRS § 515-9(3) is to allow either the complainant
 
or respondent (or other aggrieved person) to "opt out" of the
 
HCRC proceeding and to elect to have the claim resolved in a
 
civil action. By contrast, HRS § 368-12 only permits a
 
complainant to opt out of the HCRC proceedings.12 However, the
 
procedural rules adopted to implement HRS § 515-9(3) are
 potentially problematic, as manifested by the unique facts of
 
this case. HAR § 12-46-20 provides:
 
Notice of right to sue. (a) A notice of right to sue
shall authorize:
 
(1)	 A complainant alleging violations of chapters
368, 378, or 489, HRS, to bring a civil suit
pursuant to section 368-12, HRS, within ninety
days after receipt of the notice; 
12/
 HRS § 368-12 (1993) provides:
 
Notice of right to sue.  The commission may issue a
notice of right to sue upon written request of the
complainant. Within ninety days after receipt of a notice
of right to sue, the complainant may bring a civil action
under this chapter. The commission may intervene in a civil
action brought pursuant to this chapter if the case is of
general importance.
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2)	 A complainant alleging violations of chapter
515, HRS, issued such notice before a finding of
reasonable cause pursuant to section 515-9(2),
HRS, to bring a civil suit within ninety days of
receipt of the notice or one year after the
filing of the complaint, whichever is later; or
 
(3)	 The executive director to file a civil suit
 within ninety days of the receipt of the notice
of right to sue by a party filing a timely
notice of election to file civil action under
 subsection (b)(3) or one year after the filing
of the complaint, whichever is later.
 
(b) A request, in writing, may be made to the
executive director to issue a notice of right to sue:
 
(1) 	At any time after the filing of a complaint with
the commission, and no later than three days
after the conclusion of the scheduling
conference provided for in section 12-46-19, by
a complainant alleging violations of chapters
368, 378, or 489, HRS; 
(2) 	At any time after the filing of a complaint with
the commission but before a finding of
reasonable cause under section 515-9(2), HRS, by
a complainant alleging violations of chapter
515, HRS; or
 
(3) 	Within twenty days after receipt of the notice
of election to file a civil action under section
 515-9(3), HRS, by any party to a complaint
alleging violations of chapter 515, HRS.
 
(c) The commission's executive director shall issue
 
a notice of right to sue provided that the commission has
not:
 
(1) 	 Previously issued a notice;
 
(2) 	Entered into a conciliation agreement to which
the complainant is a party; or
 
(3) 	 Filed a civil action.
 
(d) The commission's executive director shall issue
 
a notice of right to sue:
 
(1) 	Upon dismissal of the complaint pursuant to
section 12-46-11; or
 
(2) 	 Where the commission has entered into a
 
conciliation agreement to which the complainant
is not a party pursuant to section 12-46-15(d).
 
Under this regulatory scheme, the Executive Director's
 
issuance of a notice of right to sue is the event that
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
potentially leads to a civil action in lieu of an administrative
 
hearing. The issuance of the notice of right to sue is not
 
automatic and, even if issued, does not give the respondent the
 
"authority" to remove the case from the agency proceeding. 
Under HAR § 12-46-20(d), the Executive Director must
 
issue a notice of right to sue if the complainant's complaint is
 dismissed or settled without the complainant's participation. 
Under HAR § 12-46-20(b)(2), a complainant may request,
 
in writing, a notice of right to sue before a finding of
 "reasonable cause."
 
Under HAR § 12-46-20(b)(3), any party, including a
 
respondent may request, in writing, a notice of right to sue
 
within twenty days after receipt of the notice of election to
 
file a civil action. HAR § 12-46-14 provides that the Executive
 
Director shall notify the parties of such an election in
 
conjunction with his determination that reasonable cause exists
 
"to believe that an unlawful discriminatory practice has occurred
 
or is occurring."
 
Although it is not expressly stated, HAR § 12-46-20(c)
 
appears to follow from a party's HAR § 12-46-20(b)(3) request for
 
a notice of right to sue. It requires the Executive Director to
 
issue a notice of right to sue if there is (1) no prior notice of
 
right to sue and (2) no conciliation agreement to which the
 
complainant is a party.
 
If a notice of right to sue is issued before a finding
 
of reasonable cause, a real property discrimination complainant
 
can file a civil suit. HAR § 12-46-20(a)(2).
 
If a notice of right to sue is issued after a timely
 
HAR § 12-46-20(b)(3) request, pursuant to HAR § 12-46-20(a)(3),
 
the Executive Director (only) is "authorized," but apparently not
 
required, to file a civil suit. At no point in this process is a
 
respondent authorized to simply "opt out" or remove the matter to
 
circuit court.
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, although it appears that the Executive Director
 
attempted to serve Caracaus with, inter alia, the Complaint and a
 
notice of finding reasonable cause, there is no indication in the
 
record that the Executive Director provided or attempted to
 
provide Caracaus with a notice of election to file a civil
 
action. As the notice of finding reasonable cause was not made
 
part of the record of the agency proceedings, it is not clear
 
whether it would have included a notice of election to file a
 
civil action. In any case, the Executive Director abandoned his
 
attempt to serve Caracaus by publication, which may be permitted
 
pursuant to HAR § 12-46-28, and, upon learning that Caracaus
 
wanted to "take this matter to court", the Executive Director
 
stated "by her participation to this point in these proceedings,
 
[Caracaus] has waived any rights and is estopped from raising any
 
procedural complaints . . . re service, etc." 
On October 12, 2006, the same day that Wang emailed
 
Caracaus concerning the procedure for a respondent to "remove" a
 
case out of the administrative hearing process, the Executive
 
Director took the position that "I will oppose any attempt by
 
Caracaus to take this matter to court." Wang also informed
 
Caracaus: "I believe that it may be too late for you to remove
 
this case to a court. . . . I do not know if the Executive
 
Director will issue a right to sue to you at this time." 
In sum, although Wang informed Caracaus of the process
 
by which Caracaus could request that the Executive Director issue
 
a notice of right to sue, which would then authorize the
 
Executive Director – not Caracaus – to initiate a civil action,
 
and Caracaus clearly failed to make such a request, Wang did so
 
only after the Executive Director abandoned his obligation to
 
provide her with the notice of election, at the same time as the
 
Executive Director was stating that he opposed removal to court
 
and that Caracaus had already waived her procedural rights, and
 
Wang was expressing her "belief" that it may be too late and the
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
right to sue may not be issued. Under these circumstances, we 
are left with the definite and firm conviction that the Circuit 
Court clearly erred in finding that Caracaus implicitly waived, 
during the HCRC proceedings, her right to a jury trial on the 
issue of money damages. Although reasonable conditions may be 
placed upon the fundamental right to a jury trial in civil cases, 
including rules and procedures affecting its exercise, the 
circumstances here, especially the Executive Director's 
opposition and declaration that Caracaus's procedural rights had 
been waived, made the right "practically unavailable" to Caracaus 
because there was no method to remove the case absent the 
Executive Director doing so, a course of action that he said he 
would actively oppose. See SMI Mgmt. Corp., 101 Hawai' i 451-52, 
71 P.3d at 402-03. 
Having concluded that Caracaus did not waive her right 
to a jury trial during the HCRC proceedings, we must consider whether it was waived thereafter, when Ramos appealed from the 
HCRC's decision declining to award damages against Caracaus. In 
SMI Mgmt. Corp., the supreme court held, inter alia, that "after 
the conclusion of the HCRC proceedings, the [respondents] are 
entitled to a jury trial with respect to any common law damage 
claims for which they are found to be liable by the HCRC." 101 
Hawai'i at 442, 71 P.3d at 393. 
The supreme court's decision contemplated a post-agency
 
jury trial only when the HCRC awards common law damages. Id. at
 
452, 71 P.3d at 503. In this case, however, the HCRC did not
 award any damages. Nevertheless, on review of Ramos's appeal,
 
the Circuit Court awarded compensatory and punitive damages in
 
the amount of $27,000 to Ramos and against Caracaus. The
 
overriding principle clearly enunciated in SMI Mgmt. Corp. is
 
that a fundamental constitutional right to a jury trial exists
 
when a person is faced with substantial legal damages in a
 
statutory discrimination action. We can conceive of no reasoned
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
basis for concluding that a person has a fundamental
 
constitutional right if the HCRC awards such damages, but no
 
fundamental constitutional right if a court awards such damages. 
Thus, we must conclude that Caracaus was entitled to a jury trial
 
with respect to Ramos's demand for substantial compensatory and
 
punitive damages in the Circuit Court. 
Finally, we must consider whether Caracaus waived her
 
right to a jury trial by failing to make a timely demand in the
 
Circuit Court. In a footnote in SMI Mgmt. Corp., the supreme
 
court stated that, to avoid waiving his or her right to a jury
 
trial, a respondent would have to file his or her request for a
 
jury trial within thirty days of receiving the HCRC's final
 
order. Id. at 452 n.12, 71 P.3d at 503 n.12. We need not
 
determine whether, because that issue was not before the court in
 the declaratory judgment action, this footnote might be
 
considered advisory, because the rationale for adopting a thirty­
days-from-the-HCRC-decision deadline for jury demand does not
 
apply when, as here, the HCRC did not award any damages.
 
Thus, we look to the rules governing appeals to the 
circuit courts to determine whether Caracaus failed to make a 
timely demand for a jury trial. See generally Lii v. Sida of 
Haw., Inc., 53 Haw. 353 (1972) (demand for jury trial must be made within the time period specified by the applicable rules; 
failure to do so constitutes a waiver). Rule 72 of the Hawai' i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) governs appeals to the circuit 
courts. HRCP Rule 72(g) provides: 
( g ) Trial by jury.  Where by law an appeal may be
tried before a jury, the case shall be tried without jury
unless any appellant or appellee shall have demanded trial
by jury in the manner and within the time provided in Rule
38.
 
Rule 72(g) appears to be applicable, as the supreme
 
court's decision in SMI Mgmt. Corp. constitutes "law" permitting
 
a trial before a jury on an appeal from an HCRC proceeding. 
23
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, we turn to HRCP Rule 38, which provides in relevant part
 
(emphasis added):
 
Rule 38. Jury Trial of Right.
 
(a) Right Preserved.  The right of trial by jury as
given by the Constitution or a statute of the State or the
United States shall be preserved to the parties inviolate.
 
(b) Demand.  Any party may demand a trial by jury of
any issue triable of right by a jury by (1) serving upon the
other parties a demand therefor in writing at any time after
the commencement of the action and not later than 10 days
after the service of the last pleading directed to such
issue, and (2) filing the demand as required by Rule 5(d).
Such demand may be indorsed upon a pleading of the party.
Where by statute a jury trial is allowed on appeal to the
circuit court from the prior determination of any court or
administrative body, a trial by jury may be had if demanded
in the notice of appeal, and if not demanded in the notice,
the appellee may have a trial by jury by filing a demand
within 10 days after the case is docketed in the circuit
court.
 
. . . .
 
(d) Waiver.  The failure of a party to serve and file
a demand as required by this rule and to file it as required
by Rule 5(d) constitutes a waiver by the party of trial by
jury. A demand for trial by jury made as herein provided may
not be withdrawn without the consent of the parties.
 
HRCP Rule 38(b) includes two different deadlines for a
 
jury trial demand. If the demand arises in a civil action, which
 
is initiated by a complaint, the jury demand is due within ten
 
days of the last pleading directed to the issue that is triable
 
to a jury. If the demand arises "[w]here by statute a jury trial
 
is allowed on appeal", the appellant must file a jury demand with
 
the notice of appeal and the appellee must file a jury demand
 
within ten days after the case is docketed. Because the jury
 
trial right in this case stems from a supreme court decision,
 
rather than an original civil proceeding or a statute, it does
 
not fit within either part of Rule 38(b).13 Thus, we consider
 
HRCP Rule 38(d), which deems failure to file a jury demand "as
 required by this rule and to file it as required by Rule 5(d)" to
 
13/
 Absent a supreme court decision overruling SMI Mgmt. Corp., it
 
appears that an amendment to the HRCP Rule 38 is warranted to address this
scenario.
 
24
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
constitute a waiver of trial by jury. No other part of HRCP Rule
 
38 squarely applies and it appears that Caracaus complied with
 
HRCP Rule 5(d), which requires filing with the court. Caracaus
 
requested a trial by jury more than once in the circuit court
 
proceedings, including: (1) in a September 25, 2007 "Statement of
 
the Case . . . " filed in the Third Circuit Court; (2) in a
 
September 4, 2007 "Opposition to Motion to Dismiss; Appellant's
 
Statement of the Case . . " filed in the First Circuit Court; and
 
(3) in a September 26, 2007 "Amended Statement of the Case . . ."
 
filed in the First Circuit Court.
 
In Lii, the Hawai' i Supreme Court discussed whether and 
how the constitutional right to a jury trial might be waived:
 
We consider the right to a jury trial to be inviolate
in the absence of an unequivocal and clear showing of a
waiver of such right either by express or implied conduct.
This court will indulge every reasonable presumption against
the waiver of such right. However, the mechanics
constituting a reasonable regulation of the manner of
exercising that right must be complied with for the right to
be preserved.
 
Lii, 53 Haw. at 355-56 (citations omitted).
 
We must "indulge every reasonable presumption against
 
the waiver" of Caracaus's right to a jury trial. Thus, we cannot
 
conclude that there was "an unequivocal and clear showing of
 
waiver of such right by express or implied conduct." Therefore,
 
we vacate the Circuit Court's FOFs/COLs and remand for a trial 
by jury.
 
In light of the foregoing, we need not address the
 
remaining issues raised by Caracaus on this appeal.
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's July 2, 2008
 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law are vacated and this case
 
is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings.
 
On the briefs:
 
JANENE CARACAUS
 
Appellant Pro Se
 
FRANCES E.H. LUM
 
Deputy Attorney General
Department of the Attorney
General
 
for Appellees WILLIAM D.
HOSHIJO and HAWAII CIVIL
 RIGHTS COMMISSION, STATE OF
HAWAII
 
M. NALANI FUJIMORI
 
RUSS S. AWAKUNI
 REBECCA E. QUINN
(Legal Aid Society of Hawaii)
for Appellee LORETTA RAMOS,
Executrix of the Estate of
 Del M. Scotto
 
26
 