NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29562
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI rI 
ANDRINA COCHRANE and RICHARD COCHRANE,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
BEN K. AZMAN, M.D., and BEN K. AZMAN, M.D., INC.,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 DOES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-0205(3))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
In an appeal arising out of allegations of medical
 
malpractice, Plaintiffs-Appellants Andrina Cochrane (Mrs.
 
Cochrane) and Richard Cochrane (Mr. Cochrane) (collectively, the
 Cochranes) appeal from the Judgment filed on July 30, 2008 in 
1
the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit  (circuit court).  The
 
circuit court entered judgment in favor of Defendants-Appellees
 Ben K. Azman, M.D. and Ben K. Azman, M.D., Inc. (collectively,
 Dr. Azman) and against the Cochranes.
 
On appeal, the Cochranes contend the circuit court

 
erred when it (1) failed, as a matter of law, to strike or
 exclude Dr. Azman's expert testimony on medical issues because
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the testimony lacked foundation; (2) failed, as a matter of law,
 
to instruct the jury that Dr. Azman (or a member of his staff)
 was negligent in failing to take and record Mrs. Cochrane's blood
 pressure at each of her office visits; (3) refused to instruct
 the jury, as a matter of law, that Dr. Azman was negligent when
 he failed to advise Mrs. Cochrane of her increased risk of stroke
 due to her family medical history; (4) failed to instruct the
 jury that Dr. Azman had a duty to warn Mrs. Cochrane of certain
 risks, specifically her significantly increased risk of stroke;
 and (5) failed to instruct the jury that Dr. Azman owed a
 fiduciary duty to his patient.
2
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On June 14, 2006, the Cochranes filed a complaint for
 
medical malpractice against Dr. Azman, alleging that medical
 services he provided to Mrs. Cochrane resulted in her personal
 injuries.
 
On August 8, 2006, Dr. Azman answered the complaint and
 
did not assert any counterclaims, cross-claims, or third-party
 claims.
 
The case proceeded to a three-week jury trial on the
 
merits, resulting in a jury verdict in favor of Dr. Azman and
 against the Cochranes.
 
On July 30, 2008, the circuit court entered the
 
Judgment in favor of Dr. Azman and against the Cochranes on all
 of the Cochranes' claims.
 
2 The Cochranes' opening brief fails to comply with Hawair i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) by failing to include in the
statement of the points of error "(ii) where in the record the alleged erroroccurred; and (iii) where in the record the alleged error was objected to orthe manner in which the alleged error was brought to the attention of thecourt or agency." In addition, the Cochranes fail to comply with HRAP28(b)(4)(B) by failing to provide, "when the point involves a juryinstruction, a quotation of the instruction, given, refused, or modified,together with the objection urged at trial." Where "lengthy parts of thetranscripts that are material to the points presented" are included in anappendix, as the Cochranes explain in their reply brief, that does not excusethem from providing in the points of error where in the record the instructionand objection are found. The Cochranes' counsel is warned the future non­compliance with HRAP 28(b)(4) may result in sanctions against them. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On August 8, 2008, the Cochranes filed (ex officio3 
with the appellate court clerk): (1) a Motion for New Trial 
pursuant to Hawai ri Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 59(a), 
and (2) a Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law pursuant to HRCP Rule 50(b). The circuit court held a hearing on November 7, 2008 on the two motions. 
On December 5, 2008, the circuit court, by way of a
 
telephone conference call with the parties, placed its ruling
 denying both motions on the record. On December 23, 2008, the
 circuit court entered an "Order Denying Plaintiffs' Motion for
 New Trial, Filed August 8, 2008" and an "Order Denying
 Plaintiffs' Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law, Filed
 August 8, 2008."
 
On December 24, 2008, the Cochranes filed a motion
 
pursuant to HRAP Rule 4(a)(4) to extend the 30-day time period
 for filing a notice of appeal. Dr. Azman filed a statement of no
 opposition to the motion. On December 26, 2008, the circuit
 court granted the motion, based on "excusable neglect," and
 extended the time "within which to file a notice of appeal in
 this case, through and including January 7, 2008 [sic]."
 
4
On January 2, 2009,  the Cochranes filed their Notice
of Appeal.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Admission of Expert Testimony
 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 702 sets forth the
 
requirements for qualification of an expert witness:
 
Rule 702 Testimony by experts.  If scientific,
technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the
trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a
 fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by
knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education may
testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise. In
 determining the issue of assistance to the trier of fact,
the court may consider the trustworthiness and validity of
 
3
 The ex officio filing date of any document prevails over the file-
stamped date to the extent that the dates differ from each other. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 606-1(b) (1993); HRS § 606-8 (1993); Rules of theCircuit Courts of the State of Hawair i Rule 2.1; HRAP Rule 25.
4
 January 2, 2009 is the ex officio filing date.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the scientific technique or mode of analysis employed by the
proffered expert.
 
"[W]hether a witness qualifies as an expert is a matter addressed
 
to the sound discretion of the trial court, and such
 determination will not be overturned unless there is a clear
 abuse of discretion." Larsen v. State Sav. & Loan Ass'n, 64 Haw.
 
302, 304, 640 P.2d 286, 288 (1982). "In applying [HRE Rule 702],
 the trial court must determine whether the expert's testimony is
 (1) relevant, and (2) reliable." Ass'n of Apt. Owners of Wailea 
Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai
ri 97, 117, 58 P.3d 608, 628 
(2002). "The trial court's relevancy decision under HRE 702 is reviewed de novo[.]" State v. Keaweehu, 110 Hawai
ri 129, 137, 
129 P.3d 1157, 1165 (App. 2006). "The trial court's determination as to reliability is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." Ass'n of Apt. Owners of Wailea Elua, 100 
Hawai
ri at 117, 58 P.3d at 628. 
B. Jury Instructions
 
"The standard of review for a trial court's issuance or 
refusal of a jury instruction is whether, when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." Stanford 
Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai
ri 286, 297, 141 
P.3d 459, 470 (2006) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). "Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial." Nelson v. Univ. of Hawaii, 97 Hawai
ri 376, 386, 38 P.3d 95, 105 
(2001) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Generally, instructions that are found to be an erroneous articulation of the law raise a presumption that they were harmful. Turner v. Willis, 59 Haw. 319, 326, 582 P.2d 710, 715 
(1978). The presumption can be overcome if it "affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial." Id. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The boundaries of the trial judge's discretion in
 
informing the jury of the law applicable to the current case are
 
defined "by the obligation to give sufficient instructions and
 the opposing imperative against cumulative instructions." Tittle
 
v. Hurlbutt, 53 Haw. 526, 530, 497 P.2d 1354, 1357 (1972). The
 court's refusal to give an instruction relevant under the
 evidence that correctly states the law is prejudicial error if
 the point has not been adequately and fully covered by other
 instructions. Sherry v. Asing, 56 Haw. 135, 144, 531 P.2d 648,
 
655 (1975).
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 THE CIRCUIT COURT DID NOT ERR WHEN IT ALLOWED
 
DR. AZMAN AND HIS EXPERT WITNESS, DR. ROSSI, TO
TESTIFY REGARDING THE APPLICABLE STANDARD OF CARE.
 
In Hawai
ri medical malpractice actions, the plaintiff 
carries the burden of proving, through expert medical testimony, 
that (1) a defendant doctor failed to follow the applicable standard of care, (2) the breach was a legal cause of injury to the plaintiff, and (3) the plaintiff was injured. Craft v. 
Peebles, 78 Hawai
ri 287, 297-98, 893 P.2d 138, 148-49 (1995); 
Hawairi Civil Jury Instruction 14.1. To establish the standard 
of care, testimony of an expert is needed because "a jury generally lacks the requisite special knowledge, technical training, and background to be able to determine the applicable standard without the assistance of an expert." Craft, 78 Hawai
ri 
at 298, 893 P.2d at 149 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
At trial, Dr. Azman testified that he followed the
 
applicable standard of care when he did not take Mrs. Cochrane's
 blood pressure on a regular basis. His opinion was based on his
 medical training, reading, medical education, and consultations
 with fellow physicians, but he could not cite to a particular
 treatise, article, medical journal, seminar, or discussion with
 any colleague to support his opinion.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Dr. Rossi, Dr. Azman's expert witness and a
 
neurologist, acknowledged during his voir dire that he had served
 
as an expert witness on several occasions, but it was the first
 time he had testified as to standard of care. He stated that his
 opinion on the applicable standard of care was based on his
 expertise and experience in the medical field, "including any
 interactions with primary care physicians, general practitioners,
 other doctors who have served in primary care settings." He also
 testified that he based his opinions on "reasonable medical
 probability." Dr. Rossi stated that Dr. Azman acted within the
 standard of care in treating Mrs. Cochrane on November 19, 2003. 
He disagreed with the Cochranes' expert that Joint National
 Committee reports (JNC reports) established a standard of care. 
He stated that those were guidelines and recommendations "and not
 meant to supplant the physician's judgment." He acknowledged
 that the JNC reports recommended that in a primary care setting,
 the "blood pressure should be taken frequently, if not at every
 visit." He went on to state "[b]ut I do not read them or
 interpret them to require that there be a blood pressure done at
 each and every occasion."
 
The Cochranes agree that Drs. Azman and Rossi were
 
"educated and licensed medical professionals, qualified to
 express expert medical opinions." However, the Cochranes
 maintain that "the testimony [Drs. Azman and Rossi] gave with
 respect to the applicable standard of care and whether it had
 been met was unreliable because it was entirely without support." 
(Emphases in original.) They maintain that the testimony was
 without foundation and therefore, inadmissible, because the
 witnesses could not cite to any specific "medical school
 coursework, consultations with colleagues, or any source, not
 merely peer-reviewed journals" for the proposition that a doctor
 need not take a patient's blood pressure at every doctor's visit. 
(Emphasis in original.)
 
The Cochranes argue that the testimony Dr. Azman gave
 
on his own behalf regarding the standard of care in taking a
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
patient's blood pressure was "conclusory and entirely without
 
foundation." They argue that Dr. Rossi "purported to testify
 based on his training, education and experience including
 discussions with other physicians[,] . . . [y]et when challenged,
 . . . was unable [to] provide support for his opinions." 
Finally, they claim that Drs. Azman and Rossi only "testified in
 generalities and, when pressed, were unable to substantiate their
 stated opinions by reference to authoritative sources." Thus,
 they argue, such testimony is lacking foundation and is "classic
 'ipse dixit,'" which is "regularly and properly rejected by the
 courts."
 
In response, Dr. Azman argues that he and Dr. Rossi
 
were qualified to give standard of care testimony and opinion
 testimony and their testimony was reliable and admissible even in
 the absence of supporting written medical authority.
 
"Once the basic requisite qualifications are 
established, the extent of an expert's knowledge of subject matter goes to the weight rather than the admissibility of the testimony." Udac v. Takata Corp., 121 Hawai
ri 143, 153, 214 P.3d 
1133, 1143 (App. 2009), cert. rejected, 2010 WL 219307 (Jan. 21, 2010) (emphasis added) (quoting Estate of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 Hawai
ri 332, 352, 152 P.3d 504, 524 (2007)). "It is 
settled law in Hawaii that questions concerning the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence are for the jury alone to decide." Cafarella v. Char, 1 Haw. App. 142, 144, 615 
P.2d 763, 766 (1980). See HRE Rule 1102 (stating that juries 
"are the exclusive judges of all questions of fact and the credibility of witnesses"). We decline to pass upon the jury's determination regarding the weight of expert testimony. 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion by 
admitting Dr. Azman's and Dr. Rossi's respective testimonies regarding the applicable standard of care. In so holding, we note that under HRE Rule 702, "expert testimony should be liberally admitted at trial." Ditto v. McCurdy, 86 Hawai
ri 93, 
107-08, 947 P.2d 961, 975-76 (App.), rev'd in part on other 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
grounds, 86 Hawai ri 84, 947 P.2d 952 (1997). Furthermore, 
"extensive cross-examination of the expert so as to elicit his or 
her assumptions and test his or her data is a more practical truth-seeking method than the exclusion of relevant opinion testimony." Ditto, 86 Hawai
ri at 109, 947 P.2d at 977 (internal 
quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted).
B.	 THE CIRCUIT COURT DID NOT ERR BY FAILING TO GIVE
 
JURY INSTRUCTIONS ON THE FOLLOWING POINTS: (1) IT
WAS NEGLIGENT FOR DR. AZMAN (OR A MEMBER OF HIS
STAFF) TO NOT TAKE AND RECORD MRS. COCHRANE'S
BLOOD PRESSURE AT EACH OFFICE VISIT, (2) IT WAS
NEGLIGENT FOR DR. AZMAN TO NOT ADVISE MRS.
 COCHRANE OF THE INCREASED RISK OF STROKE DUE TO
 HER FAMILY MEDICAL HISTORY, AND (3) DR. AZMAN HAD
A DUTY TO WARN MRS. COCHRANE OF CERTAIN RISKS,
SPECIFICALLY HER SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASED RISK OF
 STROKE.
 
The Cochranes contend Dr. Azman breached the applicable
 
standard of care, which is to take a patient's blood pressure at
 
every office visit. They argue that Dr. Rossi "equivocated" when
 testifying on the applicable standard of care, and Dr. Azman's
 own testimony on the subject was conclusory and should have been
 excluded. Therefore, argue the Cochranes, their expert's
 testimony stands uncontradicted and establishes that Dr. Azman
 breached his duty of care when he did not take Mrs. Cochrane's
 blood pressure, and the jury should have been so instructed.
 
The Cochranes' proposed instruction necessarily assumes
 
that their expert's opinion regarding the applicable standard of
 care was more credible than Dr. Azman's expert's opinion. The
 applicable standard of care was an issue in controversy at trial. 
"The rule is that a trial court should not give an instruction
 which assumes an issue in controversy, the reason being that such
 an instruction invades the province of the jury in determining
 the facts." Kometani v. Heath, 50 Haw. 89, 92, 431 P.2d 931, 934
 
(1967). As we have already discussed, "questions concerning the
 credibility of witnesses are . . . for the jury alone to decide." 
Cafarella, 1 Haw. App. at 144, 615 P.2d at 766. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
This analysis holds true for the circuit court's
 
failure to give jury instructions on subpoints (2) and (3) above,
 
for those were also issues in controversy to be decided by the
 jury.
 
C.	 THE CIRCUIT COURT DID NOT ERR IN FAILING TO
 
INSTRUCT THE JURY THAT DR. AZMAN OWED A FIDUCIARY
 DUTY TO MRS. COCHRANE.
 
A prerequisite to any negligence action, such as this 
case, "is the existence of a duty owed by the defendant to the 
plaintiff that requires the defendant to conform to a certain standard of conduct for the protection of the plaintiff against unreasonable risks." McKenzie v. Hawai
ri Permanente Med. Group, 
Inc., 98 Hawai ri 296, 298, 47 P.3d 1209, 1211 (2002). "Fiduciary 
duty" is defined as "[a] duty of utmost good faith, trust, confidence, and candor owed by a fiduciary to . . . the beneficiary." Black's Law Dictionary 545 (8th ed. 2004). 
The Cochranes argue that the circuit court should have
 
given their proposed "jury instruction on the fiduciary
 relationship between a doctor and his patient and the duty that
 arises therefrom." Dr. Azman argues that "[t]o date, Hawaii law
 has not recognized a separate cause of action for breach of
 fiduciary duty asserted in the context of alleged medical
 negligence or malpractice." Furthermore, he points to "[o]ther
 jurisdictions [that] have rejected a separate cause of action for
 breach of fiduciary duty where the claim is duplicative of
 negligence or malpractice claims."
 
Hawai
ri courts have not addressed a claim of breach of 
fiduciary duty by a doctor to his patient in the context of alleged medical negligence. In Neade v. Portes, 739 N.E.2d 496 (Ill. 2000), Therese Neade, as Independent Administrator of the Estate of Anthony Robert Neade (Anthony), Deceased, claimed that Portes, Anthony's doctor, had committed breach of fiduciary duty and medical negligence while treating Anthony. Id. at 503. The 
Illinois Supreme Court held that it "need not recognize a new cause of action for breach of fiduciary duty when a traditional 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
medical negligence claim sufficiently addresse[d] the same
 
alleged misconduct." Id. The court noted that "[t]o sustain an
 
action for medical negligence, plaintiff must show: (1) the
 standard of care in the medical community by which the
 physician's treatment was measured; (2) that the physician
 deviated from the standard of care; and (3) that the resulting
 injury was proximately caused by the deviation from the standard
 of care." Id. at 502. Similarly, in claiming a breach of
 
fiduciary duty, the plaintiff had to show that (1) a fiduciary
 duty existed, (2) the fiduciary duty had been breached, and (3)
 such breach proximately caused the injury to plaintiff. Id. 
Applying that analysis to the facts of this case, we
 
hold that the circuit court did not err when it denied to give
 the Cochranes' jury instruction regarding fiduciary duty. The
 Cochranes' claims were adequately addressed by the jury
 instructions regarding medical negligence.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The Judgment filed on July 30, 2008 in the Circuit
 
Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
ri, February 22, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
John S. Edmunds 
Ronald J. VergaJoy S. Omonaka(Edmunds Verga & Omonaka)James KruegerCynthia K. Wong(Krueger & Wong)for Plaintiffs-Appellants. 
Presiding Judge 
John S. Nishimoto Patricia T. Fujii(Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto,
Sia & Nakamura)
for Defendants-Appellees. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10

 