  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29128
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
LORRIE-ANN YOON CHIN WONG, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CHRISTOPHER DAVID DEY, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DIVORCE NO. 02-1-3163)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Christopher David Dey (Dey) appeals
 
from the March 19, 2008 order of the Family Court of the First
 
Circuit (Family Court) regarding the Motion and Affidavit for
 
Post-Decree Relief filed by Plaintiff-Appellee Lorrie-Ann Yoon
 
Chin Wong (Wong) and the April 17, 2008 order of the Family Court
 
denying his Motion for Reconsideration.1
 
On appeal, Dey contends that the Family Court erred
 
when it: (1) "found that no exceptional circumstances existed
 
permitting deviation under the [Child Support Guidelines],
 
despite an unusually high income that resulted in a computation
 
greater than the reasonable needs of the child based on the
 
applicable standard of living, and other expenses not included in
 
1
 The Honorable Kenneth E. Enright presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the support obligation"; and (2) "failed to make the necessary
 
findings regarding [Wong]'s actual or hypothetical child support
 
expenses, and [Wong] failed to introduce sufficient evidence of
 
either of these crucial findings." Dey challenges twenty-six
 
findings of fact and eleven conclusions of law by the Family
 
Court.
 
As explained below, we vacate part of the March 19,
 
2008 and April 17, 2008 orders and remand for further proceedings
 
consistent with this opinion.2
 
I. Case Background
 
Dey and Wong were divorced pursuant to a divorce decree
 
(decree) filed on May 14, 2003. Under the terms of the decree,
 if the parties live in the same geographical area, physical
 
custody of the couple's son (Child) was to be shared. Dey was
 
ordered to pay Wong $300 per month in child support for Child and
 
in separate provisions under the decree, was ordered to pay other
 
expenses, including (1) preschool, private school and education-
related expenses; (2) medical, dental, drug and vision insurance
 
and other health care costs; and (3) all travel costs for Dey's
 
visitation with Child (hereinafter, "Other Payments").
 
Subsequently, Dey remarried, obtained a new job with a
 
significant increase in income, relocated, and fathered two more
 
minor children. As a result of Dey's relocation, Wong was
 
awarded sole physical custody of Child, pursuant to the terms of
 
the decree. 
On October 19, 2007, Wong filed a Motion and Affidavit
 
for Post-Decree Relief seeking modification of child support. 
Asserting a material change of circumstances due to Dey's
 
increased income, Wong requested that child support be modified
 
2
 This Court did not rely on assertions by Wong related to matters not
included in the record on appeal. Any contentions made in the briefs
regarding settlement discussions since the filing of this appeal were not
considered.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to $4,220 per month, the amount computed under the 2004 Child
 
Support Guidelines (Guidelines).3 In response, Dey acknowledged
 
that he had increased income, but argued for two exceptional
 circumstances permitting deviation from the Guidelines. First,
 
he argued that the Other Payments justified a downward-deviation
 
from the Guidelines' computation. Second, he argued that the
 
Guidelines' computation exceeded the reasonable needs of the
 
Child, based on the appropriate standard of living. 
After hearings on January 2 and 31, 2008, the Family
 
Court granted Wong's motion. Finding that no exceptional
 
circumstances existed to deviate from the Guidelines, the Family
 
Court ordered Dey to pay child support in the amount of $4,220
 
per month and ordered Dey to also continue making the Other
 
Payments. On March 31, 2008, Dey moved for reconsideration,
 
which the Family Court denied. 
II.	 No Exceptional Circumstances For Support Exceeding the Needs
of Child
 
The Family Court did not err in rejecting Dey's
 
argument that the Guidelines' computation exceeded the reasonable
 needs of Child warranting a downward departure from the
 
Guidelines.
 
In reviewing the Family Court's order modifying Dey's
 
child support obligation, we apply the following standards of
 
review:
 
Findings of fact are reviewed under the clearly
erroneous standard. Child Support Enforcement Agency v. 
Carlin, 96 Hawai' i 373, 378-79, 31 P.3d 230, 235-36 (App.
2001). A finding of fact is clearly erroneous if: (1) the
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding; or(2) despite substantial evidence in support of the finding,
the appellate court is nonetheless left with the definite
and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Id.
 
3
 These Guidelines are established by the Family Court, pursuant to
HRS § 576D-7 (2006 Repl.).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We review the trial court's [conclusions of law]
de novo under the right/wrong standard. Raines
 v. State, 79 Hawai' i 219, 222, 900 P.2d 1286,
1289 (1995). "Under this . . . standard, we
examine the facts and answer the questionwithout being required to give any weight to the
trial court's answer to it." State v. Miller,
4 Haw. App. 603, 606, 671 P.2d 1037, 1040
(1983). See also Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki 
Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 119, 839 P.2d
10, 28, reconsideration denied, 74 Haw. 650, 843P.2d 144 (1992). Thus, a [conclusion of law]"is not binding upon the appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness." State 
v. Bowe, 77 Hawai' i 51, 53, 881 P.2d 538, 540
(1994) (citation omitted). 
Chun v. Board of Trustees of Employees' Retirement Sys., 92
Hawai'i 432, 438-39, 992 P.2d 127, 133-34 (2000). A conclusion of 
law which is supported by the trial court's findings of fact whichreflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be
overturned. Nani Koolau Company v. K & M Construction Inc.,
5 Haw. App. 137, 141, 681 P.2d 580, 585 (1984). 
Matsunaga v. Matsunaga, 99 Hawai' i 157, 161-62, 53 P.3d 296, 300­
01 (App. 2002). 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-52.5 (2006 Repl.)
 
provides: "When the court establishes or modifies the amount of
 
child support required to be paid by a parent, the court shall
 
use the guidelines established under section 576D-7, except when
 
exceptional circumstances warrant departure." "The question [of]
 
whether the circumstances constitute 'exceptional circumstances'
 
is a question of law." Ching v. Ching, 7 Haw. App. 221, 224, 751
 
P.2d 93, 96 (1988). According to the Guidelines, an exceptional
 circumstance includes circumstances "[w]here the amount of child
 
support as calculated by the [Guidelines] for the subject
 
child(ren) exceeds the reasonable needs of the child(ren) based
 
on the child(ren)'s appropriate standard of living, which will be
 
determined on a case-by-case basis[.]" As the party arguing for
 
this exceptional circumstance to apply, Dey had the burden to
 
prove that the Guidelines' computation exceeded the Child's
 
reasonable needs at the appropriate standard of living and to
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prove the amount of that excess. See Matsunaga, 99 Hawai' i at 
167, 53 P.3d at 306. Dey did not meet his burden. 
In evaluating this alleged exceptional circumstance,
 
the following relevant considerations apply in determining the
 
Child's appropriate standard of living: "(a) the parents' prior
 
financial situation; (b) the custodial parent's current financial
 
situation; and (c) the noncustodial parent's current financial
 
situation[.]" Richardson v. Richardson, 8 Haw. App. 446, 458,
 
808 P.2d 1279, 1287 (1991). Here, the Family Court gave proper
 consideration to the above factors in determining the Child's
 
appropriate standard of living. The Family Court also gave
 
proper consideration toward ensuring "at a minimum, that the
 
child for whom support is sought benefits from the income and
 
resources of the obligor parent on an equitable basis in
 
comparison with any other minor child of the obligor parent[.]"
 
HRS § 576D-7(b)(3). To this end, the Family Court noted the
 
standard of living of Dey's two other minor children, as
 
testified to by Dey, and properly aimed to ensure that at a
 
minimum, Child benefits from Dey's wealth on an equitable basis
 
with Dey's other minor children.
 
III. Findings of Fact
 
On appeal, Dey challenges numerous findings of fact,
 
asserting that: 
First, the court failed to make the necessary findings
that [Wong] tendered sufficient and credible evidence of
actual or hypothetical reasonable needs of [Child] in this
 case.
 
Second, the court erred when it ruled that
hypothetical expenses cannot be determined until after the
moving party obtains and spends the higher monthly payments.
 
Third, the court erred when it struck [Wong]'s table
of actual and hypothetical expenses but then proceeded to
use it to find that "the hypothetical expenses represent
Mother's best estimate as to how she could use the increase
 in [Child]'s child support."
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fourth, [Wong] failed to introduce any credible
evidence of either actual or hypothetical reasonable needs
of [Child] in this case.
 
Fifth, the court makes numerous findings not supported
by the evidence, including [Child]'s expenses for taxes,
security deposits, rent increases, and inflation, the
location and nature of [Dey's] in-laws' real estate, [Dey's]
expenses, and expenses incurred by [Dey] on behalf of his
other children.
 
These points rely on the faulty assumption that it was
 
Wong's burden to establish Child's reasonable needs at the
 
appropriate standard of living. As the party seeking to
 
establish the exceptional circumstance that the support exceeded
 
Child's reasonable needs, it was Dey's burden to prove the
 
exceptional circumstances. Dey's arguments challenging the
 
Family Court's findings related to Child's reasonable needs are
 
thus misplaced.4
 
IV. Exceptional Circumstances Regarding Other Payments for Child
 
The Family Court ordered that, in addition to paying
 
the $4,220 as calculated under the Guidelines, Dey must also
 continue paying the Other Payments that he had previously agreed
 
to pay that are set forth in the decree. Dey contends that
 
because he is obligated under the decree to pay the Other
 
Payments for Child, those Other Payments constitute exceptional
 
circumstances allowing for a credit in his favor from the $4,220
 
child support computation.
 
The Guidelines provide that an exceptional circumstance
 
includes: "Payments made by the obligor to or for the benefit of
 
the subject child(ren), or the subject child(ren)'s other parent,
 
where they are obligated to be made by law, including payment for
 
extraordinary medical needs[.]" (Emphasis added). Here, the
 
Family Court concluded however that:
 
4
 To the extent Dey challenges findings unrelated to the reasonable
needs of Child, he failed to argue those points and they are thus deemed
waived. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Father should not be given a credit for private school
tuition, since he agreed to pay for [Child]'s private school
expenses in the parties' original Uncontested Decree filed
May 14, 2003. Father's standard of living will not be
diminished if he does not get a credit, while [Child]'s
surely will, if father does get a credit.
 
Moreover, the Family Court concluded that "Father's payments for
 
[Child]'s private school tuition, health care costs, and travel
 
expenses associated with visitation, were based on the terms of
 
the parties' Uncontested Divorce Decree filed May 14, 2003 which
 
did not indicate that such payments would constitute a cap on
 
future child support."
 
We agree with Dey that the Family Court applied an 
incorrect legal standard in determining whether Dey was entitled 
to a credit for the Other Payments as exceptional circumstances. 
As an initial matter, notwithstanding that the Other Payments 
were part of an agreement by the parties, they were incorporated 
into the decree issued by the Family Court. Therefore, they 
constituted payments that Dey was obligated to make by law, 
subject to further order of the Family Court. See Matsunaga, 99 
Hawai'i at 163-64, 53 P.3d at 302-03. In our view, however, this 
does not end the inquiry whether the Other Payments are 
exceptional circumstances warranting a credit for Dey. Rather, 
each category of the Other Payments should be considered 
separately. 
A.	 Private School Expenses
 With respect to private school expenses (PEX), the
 
Guidelines further provide that:
 
The private education expenses of the subject child(ren) are
5
considered as an expense to be paid from the SOLA  portion
of child support, and they are not an exceptional
circumstance justifying greater-than-Guidelines child
 
5
 According to the Guidelines, SOLA stands for "standard of living
allowance," which is included in a child support award "[w]hen income is
sufficient to cover the basic needs of the parents and the child(ren), the
child(ren) shall share in the parents' additional income so that the
child(ren) can benefit from the parent's higher standard of living."
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support, unless such expenses are so extraordinary that SOLA
cannot adequately cover them, or if the child has been in
private school with the agreement of the parties prior to
separation.
 
This Court has interpreted this provision to mean that:
 
(1) when with the agreement of the parties the child has not
been in private school since prior to separation, then PCS
and SOLA include PEX unless and to the extent such expenses
are so extraordinary that PCS and SOLA cannot adequately
cover the child's living expenses including PEX; or (2) when
with the agreement of the parties the child has been in
private school since prior to separation, then PCS and SOLA
do not include PEX and PEX is a separate item.
 
Mark v. Mark, 9 Haw. App. 184, 196, 828 P.2d 1291, 1298 (1992). 
The record in this case indicates that Child was not enrolled in
 
private school at the time the decree was entered. Therefore,
 
under the norms of the Guidelines, PEX was to be paid from "the
 
SOLA portion of child support" and was not a separate item. In
 
other words, in this case, the norms under the Guidelines provide
 
that PEX be paid from the $4,220.
 
"[T]he party seeking an order requiring the
 
non-custodial parent to pay more or less than the [Guidelines']
 
norm for the total of the child's living expenses including PEX
 
has the burden of proving exceptional circumstances." Id. 
Accordingly, it was Wong's burden to prove that the PEX are so
 extraordinary that the standard of living allowance included in
 
her child support award cannot adequately cover it. There is no
 
indication in the record that Wong was held to this burden by the
 
Family Court on this issue. Therefore, remand is appropriate to
 
first determine whether Wong can meet her burden to prove PEX as
 
an exceptional circumstance. If Wong meets her burden to show
 
there is an exceptional circumstance as to PEX, the Family Court
 
will then need to determine: whether Wong should receive more
 
than the Guidelines indicate; and, if so, how much more. See
 
Mack v. Mack, 7 Haw. App. 171, 180, 749 P.2d 478, 483 (1988).
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. Health Care Costs
 
Under the Guidelines' norms, an award of child support
 
includes the cost of medical and dental insurance. In this case,
 additionally, the decree requires that: "[Dey] shall maintain
 
medical, dental, drug, and vision insurance coverage for [Child]. 
Any uninsured and extraordinary health care expenses for [Child],
 
including orthodontic expenses, shall also be paid by [Dey]." 
Further, this provision "shall be subject to further order of the
 
Court."
 
Because Dey is obligated by the decree to pay the
 
health insurance and other expenses set forth above, these
 
payments constitute exceptional circumstances to the extent they
 
exceed the medical and dental insurance that are part of the
 
standard calculation under the Guidelines.
 
Therefore, there being exceptional circumstances
 
regarding Dey's obligation to pay health care expenses under the
 
decree, on remand the Family Court should determine: whether Dey
 
should pay less than the Guidelines indicate; and, if so, how
 
much less. Mack, 7 Haw. App. at 180, 749 P.2d at 483. If the
 
Family Court determines that Dey should get a credit in this
 regard, such credit should not include payments for medical and
 
dental insurance provided as part of the standard child support
 
calculation under the Guidelines.
 
C. Travel Expenses For Visitation
 With regard to the travel expenses for Child's
 
visitation with Dey, the Family Court did not err in refusing to
 credit Dey for his payment of such expenses. The Guidelines
 
explicitly provide that "[t]he need to pay transportation
 
expenses relating to visitation is not an exceptional
 
circumstance." See also Tomas v. Tomas, 7 Haw. App. 345, 350,
 
764 P.2d 1250, 1254 (1988) (a father's obligation pursuant to the
 divorce decree to pay one-half of children's visitation
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
transportation expenses was not an exceptional circumstance
 
warranting departure from Guidelines). Thus, notwithstanding
 
that Dey is obligated under the decree to pay for the travel
 
visitation expenses, they are not exceptional circumstances that
 
would allow a credit to him.
 
V. Conclusion
 
Based on the discussion above, the orders filed on
 
March 19, 2008 and April 17, 2008 in the Family Court of the
 
First Circuit are vacated with respect to: (a) whether there are
 
exceptional circumstances regarding PEX, whether Wong should
 
receive more for PEX and, if so, how much; and (b) whether Dey
 
should get a credit for the health care expenses he is obligated
 
to pay under the decree and, if so, how much. The case is
 
remanded to the Family Court for further proceedings on these
 
issues consistent with this opinion. In all other respects, the
 
orders filed on March 19, 2008 and April 17, 2008 are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 20, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Peter Van Name Esser 
P. Gregory Frey
(Coates & Frey)
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge
Geoffrey HamiltonJennifer L.C. Chan for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
10
 