NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  The Honorable Eden E. Hifo presided.1
  On April 22, 2002, a First Amended Complaint was filed in the circuit2
court in Civil No. 01-1-3487 by State of Hawai# i, ex rel, Bruce R. Knapp, Qui
Tam Plaintiff, (Knapp) and Perry, on behalf of herself and all others
similarly situated, Class Plaintiff.  The circuit court dismissed the
complaint and entered a final judgment on September 17, 2003.  Perry appealed,
and on May 31, 2006, the Hawai #i Supreme Court affirmed the circuit court's
final judgment.  Hereinafter, the proceedings in Civil No. 01-1-3487 and the
subsequent appeal will be referred to as "the first action."NO. 28493
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
BEVERLY JEAN PERRY, on behalf of herself
and all others similarly situated,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
THE AES CORPORATION, AES HAWAII, INC.,
HAWAIIAN ELECTRIC COMPANY, INC.,
HAWAIIAN ELECTRIC INDUSTRIES, INC.,
Defendants-Appellees
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-2122)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant Beverly Jean Perry (Perry), on
behalf of herself and all others similarly situated, (Plaintiffs)
appeals from the "Final Judgment in Favor of Defendants The AES
Corporation, AES Hawaii, Inc., Hawaiian Electric Company, Inc.,
and Hawaiian Electric Industries, Inc. and Against Plaintiff
Beverly Jean Perry, on Behalf of Herself and All Others Similarly
Situated as to All Claims" filed on March 22, 2007 in the Circuit
Court of the First Circuit1 (circuit court).
On appeal, Plaintiffs contend the circuit court erred
when it dismissed Plaintiffs' complaint on grounds of res
judicata because the subject matter of the first action2 was
different than the subject matter in the instant action (currentNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2action); in the first action, no final judgment on the merits for
res judicata purposes had been entered; Plaintiffs were not a
party in the first action, thus the two actions did not involve
the same parties; and Defendants Hawaiian Electric Company, Inc.
(HECO), Hawaiian Electric Industries, Inc. (HEI), The AES
Corporation (AES), and AES Hawaii, Inc. (AES-HI) (collectively,
Defendants) were judicially estopped from raising res judicata
because such argument required Defendants to take inconsistent
positions in the first action and the current action.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
Plaintiffs' appeal is without merit.
Res judicata , or claim preclusion, is a doctrine "that
limit[s] a litigant to one opportunity to litigate aspects
of the case to prevent inconsistent results and multiplicity
of suits and to promote finality and judicial economy."
Bremer v. Weeks , 104 Hawai# i 43, 53, 85 P.3d 150, 160 (2004)
(citation and footnote omitted).  Res judicata "prohibits a
party from relitigating a previously adjudicated cause of
action."  Id. (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted).  In addition,
the judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction is a
bar to a new action in any court between the same
parties or their privies concerning the same subject
matter, and precludes the relitigation, not only of
the issues which were actually litigated in the first
action, but also of all grounds of claim  and defense
which might have been properly litigated in the first
action but were not litigated or decided. 
Id. at [53], 85 P.3d at [160] (citation, brackets, and some
emphases omitted) (some emphases added). 
Tortorello v. Tortorello, 113 Hawai #i 432, 439, 153 P.3d 1117,
1124 (2007).
The facts giving rise to the action in the current case
arise out of the same transaction as the first case.  In the
first case, the Hawai #i Supreme Court, in its May 31, 2006
Summary Disposition Order, described the case as "aris[ing] out
of the alleged misconduct between a regulated public utility
supplying electricity and an independent electric power producer
that resulted in the construction of an 'unnecessary' and
'costly' electricity generating plant."  In the current action,NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  Judicial estoppel means that 3
a party will not be permitted to maintain inconsistent positions
or to take a position in regard to a matter which is directly
contrary to, or inconsistent with, one previously assumed by him,
at least where he had, or was chargeable with, full knowledge of
the facts, and another will be prejudiced by his action.
Rosa v. CWJ Contractors, Ltd., 4 Haw. App. 210, 218, 664 P.2d 745, 751 (1983)
(quoting 28 Am. Jur. 2d Estoppel and Waiver ยง 68, at 694-95 (1966)).
3Plaintiffs allege that the case arises from "a complex scheme
involving unfair acts and deceptive practices of the Defendants,
whereby AES-[HI], a non-utility, generates and sells all its
electrical power to HECO in violation of state law."  The
"complex scheme" described by Plaintiffs in their opening brief
encompasses all the specific transactions involved in the first
action.
Plaintiffs' claim that dismissal based on statute of
limitations is not a judgment on the merits is without merit. 
See Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm, Inc., 514 U.S. 211, 228 (1995)
("The rules of finality, both statutory and judge made, treat a
dismissal on statute-of-limitations grounds the same way they
treat a dismissal for failure to state a claim, for failure to
prove substantive liability, or failure to prosecute:  as a
judgment on the merits.")  
Perry was a named party in the first action.  
Therefore, she is a party for res judicata purposes.  Black's Law
Dictionary 1154 (8th ed. 2004) defines a "party" as:
One by or against whom a lawsuit is brought.  For purposes
of res judicata, a party to a lawsuit is a person who has
been named as a party and has a right to control the lawsuit
either personally or, if not fully competent, through
someone appointed to protect the person's interests.
It does not appear that any of the Defendants attempted
to maintain a position in the case that is inconsistent with
their positions taken in the first action; therefore, judicial
estoppel is inapplicable.3
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Final Judgment in Favor
of Defendants The AES Corporation, AES Hawaii, Inc., Hawaiian
Electric Company, Inc., and Hawaiian Electric Industries, Inc.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4and Against Plaintiff Beverly Jean Perry, on Behalf of Herself
and All Others Similarly Situated as to All Claims" filed on
March 22, 2007 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 26, 2010.
On the briefs:
Lloyd Y. Asato
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
James Kawashima
Gregory Y.P. Tom
(Kawashima Lorusso & Tom)
for Defendants-Appellees
Hawaiian Electric Company, 
Inc. and Hawaiian Electric 
Industries, Inc.Presiding Judge
Peter W. Olson
(Cades Schutte LLP)
Rick Richmond
Russell Archer
(Kirkland & Ellis)
for Defendants-Appellees
The AES Corporation and
AES Hawaii, Inc.Associate Judge
Associate Judge