NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29838
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
RALPH KALEO NAITO, Individually, and as
Conservator and Guardian of GENEVIEVE FERNANDEZ NAITO,
Plaintiff-Appellee
v.
 
SYDNEY ANTONE NAITO, PAT LELIA MULVEY, RAND E. MULVEY, JR.,
EDNA MAY NAITO, MATALIMA JANICE NAITO,
Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-2387)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
This appeal arises out of an inter-familial dispute
 
involving pro se Defendants-Appellants Sydney Antone Naito, Pat
 
Lelia Mulvey, Rand E. Mulvey, Jr., Edna May Naito, and Matalima
 
Janice Naito (collectively, Appellants) and Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Ralph Kaleo Naito (Kaleo), Individually, and as Conservator and
 
Guardian of Genevieve Fernandez Naito (Genevieve). Appellants
 
appeal from the "Notice of Entry of Partial Final Judgment
 
Revesting Title to Genevieve Fernandez Naito" filed June 15,
 
1
2009 pursuant to the "Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for HRCP
1
 The partial final judgment filed June 15, 2009 rescinded the
quitclaim deed in question. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 641-1(a) (Supp.
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
54(b), Filed March 9, 2009" filed April 21, 2009, both entered in
 
2
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
Appellants contend:
 
(1)
 the circuit court erred in ruling that their
 
proposed exhibits were not properly authenticated and therefore
 
not admissible;
 
(2) that Appellee's evidence was improperly admitted;
 
and
 
(3) the circuit court erred in issuing a finding of
 
fact that Genevieve was incapacitated when she executed the
 
quitclaim deed on December 19, 2005.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude this
 
appeal is without merit.
 
(1) The circuit court stated, "[e]ven though it's not
 
admissible, I read every single word that you guys submitted. So
 
don't worry about it. I took everything into consideration." 
The circuit court informed Appellants again that "many of
 
[Appellants' exhibits] are not admissible, but I considered them
 
anyway. And that would be over the objection of plaintiff, I'm
 
sure. But I considered them." The record in this case refutes
 
1(...continued)
2012) authorizes appeals "in civil matters from all final judgments, orders,
or decrees[.]" Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 58 requires that
"[e]very judgment shall be set forth on a separate document." As such, theHawai'i Supreme Court has held that "[a]n appeal may be taken . . . only after
the orders have been reduced to a judgment and the judgment has been enteredin favor and against the appropriate parties pursuant to HRCP [Rule] 58[.]"
Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming & Wright, 76 Hawai' i 115, 119, 869 P.2d 1334,
1338 (1994). Although Appellants filed their notice of appeal prior to entryof the partial final judgment, Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP)
Rule 4(a)(2) authorizes a premature notice of appeal that a party files afterthe announcement of an adjudication but prior to entry of the correspondingjudgment. 
2
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellants' "assertion that the Circuit Court erred by not
 
considering their arguments and exhibits."
 
(2) Appellants argue that Kaleo was wrongfully allowed
 
to present evidence without having personal knowledge, "in
 
violation of the rules of the Court (HRS [ยง] 626-0001-602)."
 
(Appellants appear to be citing to Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)
 
Rule 602 (1993) "Lack of personal knowledge.") HRE Rule 602
 
states in part: "[a] witness may not testify to a matter unless
 
evidence is introduced sufficient to support a finding that the
 
witness has personal knowledge of the matter." 
The facts in Kaleo's Declaration are in dispute. 
However, Appellants' mere assertion that the claims, beliefs, and
 
denials in the Declaration "had no basis" does not disqualify the
 
Declaration. The commentary to HRE Rule 602 defines personal
 
knowledge as meaning "the witness perceived the event about which
 
he testifies and that he has a present recollection of that
 
perception." The commentary further states that "[i]f under the
 
circumstances proved, reasonable men could differ as to whether
 
the witness did or did not have adequate opportunity to observe,
 
then the testimony of the witness should come in[.]" HRE Rule
 
602, Commentary, quoting McCormick on Evidence, ยง 10 (6th ed.
 
2009). Kaleo, the son and Conservator and Guardian for
 
Genevieve, was in a position where it could be reasonably
 
inferred that he had the personal knowledge and competence to
 
make the Declaration in dispute. 
(3) Appellants take issue with the Declaration
 
provided by Jon P. Cooney, M.D. (Dr. Cooney), which stated
 
Genevieve was incompetent as of December 5, 2005. Dr. Cooney, an
 
internal medicine, psychiatry, and geriatrics physician, examined
 
Genevieve on December 5, 2005. Dr. Cooney's Declaration dated
 
September 4, 2008, stated that he diagnosed her with dementia and
 
opined that she was "not competent to make informed decisions
 
about her person[,]" and that "her incapacitation rendered her
 
unable to meet essential requirements for physical health,
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
safety, and self-care, even with appropriate technological
 
assistance." Dr. Cooney also stated in his Declaration that
 
"[m]y opinions have not changed since December 5, 2005. 
[Genevieve] has continuously been unable and not competent to
 
make informed decisions regarding her person."
 
The circuit court's conclusion of law that Genevieve 
was "incompetent and incapacitated when the deed was executed" 
was not clearly erroneous. "[A] [conclusion of law] that 
presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under the 
clearly erroneous standard because the court's conclusions are 
dependent upon the facts and circumstances of each individual 
case." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the Employees' Ret. Sys. of the 
State of Hawai' i, 106 Hawai' i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). 
Appellants argue that the notarized date on the
 
quitclaim deed is erroneous because on December 19, 2005
 
Genevieve was in the hospital. Genevieve's hospital stay did not
 
preclude her from having signed the deed during that time.
 
Appellants' strongest evidence calling the validity of
 
the deed into question are the logs from the notary, which do not
 
show an entry for Genevieve on December 19, 2005 (or December 5,
 
2005, December 6, 2005, or any other date).
 
Appellee contends that the deed itself is clear and
 
unambiguous on its face, and that there is no evidence to suggest
 
that it might have been executed on any date other than December
 
19, 2005. Appellee notes that the date appears three times on
 
the deed. "A deed apparently valid upon its face carries with it
 
a presumption of validity." Chun Chew Pang v. Chun Chew Kee, 49
 
Haw. 62, 71, 412 P.2d 326, 332 (1966) (internal quotation marks
 omitted).
 
Appellants argue that the date of execution of the deed
 
was December 6, 2005 and Genevieve was not incapacitated at the
 
date of execution. The deed on its face, is clear that it was
 
executed on December 19, 2005, not on December 6, 2005. The logs
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
from the notary do not support the December 6, 2005 date asserted
 
by Appellants any more than they refute the December 19, 2005
 
date.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Notice of Entry of
 
Partial Final Judgment Revesting Title to Genevieve Fernandez
 Naito" filed June 15, 2009 pursuant to the "Order Granting
 
Plaintiff's Motion for HRCP 54(b), Filed March 9, 2009" filed
 
April 21, 2009, both entered in the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 21, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Sydney Antone Naito,
Pat Lelia Mulvey,Rand E. Mulvey, Jr.,Edna May Naito,Matalima Janice Naito,Defendants-Appellants pro se. 
Presiding Judge 
Judy Y. LeeRegan M. IwaoKimberly J. Koide(Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel)for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 