 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29688
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
HENRY POMROY, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(North and South Hilo Division)
(Report No. C06030300 (3P207-738))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Henry Pomroy (Pomroy) was charged
 
with third-degree assault, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 707-712(1)(a) (1993).1 After a jury-waived
 
trial, he was found guilty as charged. The District Court of the
 
2
Third Circuit (District Court)  sentenced Pomroy to one year of
probation subject to the condition that he serve ninety days of
 imprisonment. 
On appeal, Pomroy contends: (1) the District Court
 
3
engaged in a defective Tachibana colloquy  in obtaining Pomroy's
1 HRS § 707-712(1)(a) provides: "(1) A person commits the offense of
assault in the third degree if the person: (a) Intentionally, knowingly, or
recklessly causes bodily injury to another person[.]" (Formatting altered.)
As used in HRS 707-712(1)(a), the term "bodily injury" means "physical pain,
illness, or any impairment of physical condition." HRS § 707-700 (1993)
 
2
 The Honorable Barbara T. Takase presided.
 
3
 Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai' i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995).   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on-the-record waiver of his right to testify; (2) there was
 
insufficient evidence to support his conviction; and (3) his
 trial counsel failed to provide effective assistance. We affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The complaining witness, Clark Lukens (Lukens), was
 
disabled and required crutches to walk. Pomroy and Lukens
 resided in the same apartment building, and Lukens was a member
 of the apartment's board. 
Lukens testified that on the day of the charged
 
offense, Pomroy approached Lukens while he was talking to another
 board member in the yard. According to Lukens, Pomroy was
 "extremely aggravated and aggressive." Pomroy screamed at
 Lukens, came within two inches of Lukens's face, and bumped
 Lukens with his chest. Pomroy accused Lukens of attempting to
 get Pomroy evicted from the building. Lukens walked away from
 Pomroy and talked to the landscaper for the apartment. After
 Lukens lost sight of Pomroy, Lukens felt it was a safe time to
 return to his apartment, which was on the seventh floor. 
Lukens walked to the elevator in the lobby of the
 
apartment building. As Lukens stepped into the elevator and
 pushed the button for the seventh floor, Pomroy suddenly appeared
 and entered the elevator. Pomroy and Lukens were alone in the
 elevator. 
Lukens testified that the instant the elevator doors
 
closed, Pomroy attacked him. Pomroy pushed Lukens into a corner
 and repeatedly struck Lukens about the throat, neck, and top of
 the shoulders. Pomroy used his forearms and elbows to strike
 Lukens. Lukens testified that "for the whole seven floors,
 [Pomroy] just pounded me." During this time, Pomroy told Lukens
 that "he was gonna kick [Lukens's] ass, he was gonna beat the F’n
 shit outta [Lukens], he was gonna teach [Lukens] manners." 
When the elevator doors opened on the seventh floor,
 
Pomroy immediately stopped hitting Lukens and backed away.
 
Lukens's wife was waiting at the elevator and helped Lukens off. 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lukens called the police. Lukens testified that on a scale of
 
zero to ten, with zero representing no pain and ten representing
 the most severe pain, the pain he experienced from Pomroy's
 attack was a seven or eight.  Lukens asserted that he did not do
 
anything to provoke Pomroy. He also stated that he did not want
 
to get into a physical confrontation with Pomroy, because "[o]n
 crutches I'm not much good in fighting." 
Lukens's wife testified that she went to the elevator
 
on the seventh floor after receiving a call asking if her husband
 was okay. While waiting for the elevator, she could hear Pomroy
 screaming and yelling. When the elevator doors started opening,
 she saw Pomroy "jump away" from her husband. Pomroy appeared
 "hepped up" and aggressive, while her husband appeared "[s]haken
 up quite a bit." Lukens's wife helped her husband out of the
 
elevator and back to their apartment. She stated that Lukens
 
complained of pain to his chest and neck. 
Robert Robbins (Robbins), the landscaper for the
 
apartment building, testified that on the day of the charged
 offense, Pomroy confronted Robbins in the yard. Pomroy was angry
 and upset, and he complained about people cutting down trees. 
According to Robbins, Lukens approached them and told Pomroy to
 leave Robbins alone. Pomroy and Lukens argued from a distance
 and then both walked away. Robbins saw Lukens enter the foyer to
 the apartment building and then saw Pomroy enter the foyer. 
Hawai'i County Police Officer Malia Bohol (Officer 
Bohol) testified that she was assigned to an assault investigation and took a statement from Pomroy. Officer Bohol stated that she advised Pomroy of his constitutional rights. Pomroy waived his rights and agreed to make a statement. Pomroy told Officer Bohol that he heard a chainsaw, and went outside to see what was happening. While outside, he met up with the gardener and Lukens, and Lukens told the person using the chainsaw to turn it off. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pomroy discussed whether anything had happened between
 
himself and Lukens in the elevator. According to Officer Bohol,
 
Pomroy told her that:
 
[O]n his way back up to his residence he road [sic] in the
elevator with Mr. Lukens and he did not put his hands on Mr.
Lukens in any way. And that Mr. Lukens stated to him,
quote, "Make your move." And he stated when he got out of
the elevator nobody was there. But a female party asked him
to assist her in getting back into her apartment because she
locked herself out.
 
II.
 
At the conclusion of Officer Bohol's testimony,
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) rested its case. The 
defense also indicated that it planned to rest. However, before
 
the defense rested, the District Court engaged in the following
 colloquy with Pomroy:
 
[Prosecutor]: State rests.
 
[Defense Counsel]: We'll rest too, Your Honor.
 THE COURT: Alright. Mr. Pomroy, before your attorney
does that, let me advise you. You have the right to testify
on your own behalf. That decision is yours and yours alone.
If you choose to testify you will be subject to cross-
examination by the State. If you choose not to testify, I
cannot hold that against you. But the only evidence I will
have is what the State has presented, unless you have other
witnesses; you understand that?
 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, ma'am.
 
THE COURT: Alright. Is it your choice to testify or
not?
 
THE DEFENDANT: I think I have already said what has
happened, yeah. I don't have to testify.
 
THE COURT: Alright. I don't know what you mean by
"I've already said" because -­
THE DEFENDANT: In my report, when I made it two years ago,
what had happened. That's pretty much what it is.
 
THE COURT: So you're talking about what the officer
testified to? Because you understand the police report is
not in evidence. You understand that?
 
THE DEFENDANT: I don't understand what you're saying.
 
(Discussion between Counsel and Defendant)
 THE COURT: Alright.
 THE DEFENDANT: I don't need any testimony I guess.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Your choice not to testify?
 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, ma'am.
 THE COURT: Alright. And, Mr. [Defense Counsel],
you're going to rest then?
 
[Defense Counsel]: Yes, your Honor.
 
III.
 
After hearing closing argument, the District Court
 
found Pomroy guilty as charged. In support of its verdict, the
 
District Court found that Lukens's testimony was credible and
 that it was corroborated by the testimony of his wife. The
 District Court also concluded that the charged offense of third-
degree assault could be proven by the testimony of a witness and
 did not require independent physical evidence of external
 injuries or require that the victim seek medical attention or go
 to the hospital. 
Pomroy filed a motion for a new trial. Relying on 
Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai' i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995), Pomroy 
argued that the District Court violated his right to testify by failing to advise him of that right at the beginning of trial and failing to adequately advise him of that right at the close of trial. After obtaining a transcript of the District Court's 
Tachibana colloquy with Pomroy just prior to the close of trial, 
the State argued that Pomroy's motion should be denied. The District Court denied Pomroy's motion for new trial and sentenced Pomroy. The District Court filed its Judgment of Conviction and Sentence on February 17, 2009, nunc pro tunc to February 9, 2009, and this appeal followed. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Pomroy argues that the District Court violated his
 
right to testify by engaging in a defective Tachibana colloquy in
 obtaining Pomroy's waiver of his right to testify. We disagree.
 
A.
 
In Tachibana, the Hawai' i Supreme Court adopted the 
"colloquy approach" instead of the "demand rule" or "post-trial 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
challenge approach" to address the issue of whether a defendant's
 
right to personally decide whether to testify has been violated.
 Id. at 231-36, 900 P.2d 1298-1303. The supreme court recognized
 that the colloquy approach increased the undesirable risks that
 the trial court could influence the defendant's decision on
 whether to testify and could improperly intrude on the attorney-
client relation protected by the Sixth Amendment. Id. at 235,
 
900 P.2d at 1302. The supreme court, however, concluded that the
 colloquy approach was the best way to safeguard the defendant's
 right to decide whether to exercise his or her right to testify. 
The supreme court held "that in order to protect the 
right to testify under the Hawai' i Constitution, trial courts 
must advise criminal defendants of their right to testify and must obtain an on-the-record waiver of that right in every case in which the defendant does not testify." Id. at 236, 900 P.2d 
at 1303 (footnote omitted). To minimize the unfavorable risks presented by the colloquy approach, the supreme court directed the trial courts to conduct the colloquy as follows: 
In conducting the colloquy, the trial court must be
careful not to influence the defendant's decision whether or
 
not to testify and should limit the colloquy to advising the
defendant that he or she has a right to testify, that if he
or she wants to testify that no one can prevent him or her
from doing so, and that if he or she testifies the
prosecution will be allowed to cross-examine him or her. In
 connection with the privilege against self-incrimination,
the defendant should also be advised that he or she has a
 right not to testify and that if he or she does not testify
then the jury can be instructed about that right. 
Id. at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7 (formatting altered and
 
brackets and citation omitted; emphasis added).
 
After determining the required colloquy, the supreme
 
court turned to the question of the timing of the colloquy. Id.
 
at 236-37, 900 P.2d at 1303-04. The supreme court noted that in
 a jury trial, there is some potential for prejudice if the
 colloquy is not conducted until after the defendant rests. Id.
 
at 237, 900 P.2d at 1304. The supreme court concluded that "the
 ideal time to conduct the colloquy is immediately prior to the 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
close of the defendant's case. Therefore, whenever possible, the
 
trial court should conduct the colloquy at that time." Id. 
The supreme court then addressed the implications of
 
the trial court's failure to conduct the colloquy at the "ideal"
 time:
 
If the trial court is unable to conduct the colloquy
at that time, however, such failure will not necessarily
constitute reversible error. If a colloquy is thereafter
conducted and the defendant's waiver of his or her right to
testify appears on the record, such waiver will be deemed
valid unless the defendant can prove otherwise by a
preponderance of the evidence. See Ibuos, 75 Haw. at 121,
857 P.2d at 578 ("[W]here it appears from the record that a
defendant has waived a constitutional right, the defendant
carries the burden of proof to show otherwise by a
preponderance of the evidence."). 
Similarly, if a defendant
asserts his or her right to testify during a colloquy
conducted after the defense has rested and the trial is
 reopened to allow the defendant to testify, the defendant's
right to testify will be considered satisfied unless the
defendant can demonstrate that he or she was actually
prejudiced by the fact that the testimony was given after
the defense had already rested.
 
Id. at 237, 900 P.2d at 1304 (brackets in original; emphasis
 
added).
 
In a footnote (footnote 9), the supreme court
 
recommended that in addition to the colloquy conducted
 immediately prior to the close of the defendant's case, the trial
 court should also warn the defendant about his or her right to
 testify prior to the start of trial. The supreme court stated: 
Furthermore, although the ultimate colloquy should be
conducted after all evidence other than the defendant's
 
testimony has been received, it would behoove the trial
court, prior to the start of trial, to (1) inform the
defendant of his or her personal right to testify or not to
testify and (2) alert the defendant that, if he or she has
not testified by the end of the trial, the court will
briefly question him or her to ensure that the decision not
to testify is the defendant's own decision. Such an early
warning would reduce the possibility that the trial court's
colloquy could have any inadvertent effect on either the
defendant's right not to testify or the attorney-client
relationship.
 
Id. at 237 n.9, 900 P.2d at 1304 n.9.
 
B.
 
In State v. Lewis, 94 Hawai' i 292, 12 P.3d 1233 (2000), 
the supreme court prospectively mandated that the advisement it 
7
  4 The supreme court stated:
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
recommended in footnote 9 of the Tachibana decision be given at
 
the beginning of trial. The supreme court stated:
 
[W]e believe there is a salutary effect to be obtained in
all cases from a trial court addressing a defendant as
suggested in footnote 9. Tachibana suggested that this
prior-to-trial advisement should be implemented. However,
as reflected in this case, not all trial courts are
following this advice. Therefore, we now mandate that, in
trials beginning after the date of this opinion, such advice
shall be imparted by the trial courts to defendants, that
is, the trial courts "prior to the start of trial, [shall]
(1) inform the defendant of his or her personal right to
testify or not to testify and (2) alert the defendant that,
if he or she has not testified by the end of the trial, the
court will briefly question him or her to ensure that the
decision not to testify is the defendant's own decision."
 
Lewis, 94 Hawai' i at 297, 12 P.3d at 1238 (brackets around 
"shall" in original) (quoting Tachibana, 79 Hawai' i at 237 n.9, 
900 P.2d at 1304 n.9).
 
The supreme court concluded that the prior-to-trial
 
advisement was only "incidental" to the "'ultimate colloquy'"
 
required by Tachibana. Lewis, 94 Hawai' i at 297, 12 P.3d at 
1238. Therefore, instead of applying a harmless beyond a
 reasonable doubt standard to a violation of the prior-to-trial
 advisement requirement, the supreme court imposed the less
 stringent "actual prejudice" standard that it had applied to the
 failure to give the ultimate Tachibana colloquy at the ideal time
 -- immediately prior to the close of the defendant's case. 
Lewis, 94 Hawai' i at 297, 12 P.3d at 1238.
4 In other words, the 
supreme court treated the failure to give the prior-to-trial
 advisement the same as the failure to give the ultimate Tachibana
 advisement at the "ideal" time, and it imposed an "actual
 
Because we view this prior-to-trial advisement as incidental to
the "ultimate colloquy," [
Tachibana, 79 Hawai' i at 237 n.9, 900
P.2d at 1304 n.9], any claim of prejudice resulting from thefailure of the trial court to give it must meet the same"actual[ ] prejudice[ ]" standard applied to violations of thecolloquy requirement. Id. at 237, 900 P.2d at 1304. 
Lewis, 94 Hawai' i at 297, 12 P.3d at 1238 (brackets after "actual" and
"prejudice" in original). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
prejudice" standard of review for both, citing to its analysis of 
the timing of the colloquy in Tachibana. Lewis, 94 Hawai' i at 
297, 12 P.3d at 1238. 
C.
 
We reject Pomroy's contention that the District Court's 
Tachibana colloquy was defective. In conformity with Tachibana, the District Court, immediately prior to the close of Pomroy's case, engaged him in a colloquy which advised Pomroy that he had a right to testify; that the decision on whether to testify was solely Pomroy's decision; that if Pomroy chose to testify, he would be subject to cross-examination; and that the District Court could not hold Pomroy's failure to testify against him. See Tachibana, 79 Hawai' i at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7. The 
District Court also obtained an on-the-record waiver by Pomroy of his right to testify. See id. at 236, 900 P.2d at 1303. 
The Tachibana colloquy serves the limited purpose of
 
ensuring that the defendant understands that he or she has the
 right to testify and that the ultimate decision on whether to
 testify is for the defendant to make. In conducting the
 Tachibana colloquy, the trial court is not required to advise the
 defendant on whether the decision to testify is a sound one from
 the standpoint of trial strategy, or how the decision may affect
 the outcome of the case. The trial court is also not required to
 explain the rules of evidence to the defendant or the impact that
 a defendant's testimony may have on the trier of fact in light of
 the evidence presented in the case. Indeed, in Tachibana, the
 supreme court explicitly directed the trial court to confine the
 colloquy to the specified inquiries so that the trial court would
 not influence the defendant's decision on whether or not to
 testify. Id. at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7.
 Pomroy argues that in conducting the Tachibana
 
colloquy, the District Court had the duty to explain the
 difference between the evidentiary effect of the officer's trial
 testimony regarding Pomroy's statement and the police report
 regarding information Pomroy provided to the police, which had
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not been admitted in evidence. We disagree. In conducting the
 
Tachibana colloquy, the District Court was only required to
 determine whether Pomroy knowingly and voluntarily decided to
 waive his right to testify, and not whether Pomroy's decision was
 intelligent or advisable as a matter of trial strategy. Any
 confusion held by Pomroy over the evidentiary difference between
 the officer's trial testimony regarding Pomroy's statement and
 the police report was for Pomroy's counsel to explain, and the
 record indicates that Pomroy's counsel did discuss this issue
 with Pomroy. The record does not support Pomroy's claim that the
 District Court's Tachibana colloquy was defective.
 
The District Court failed to give Pomroy the prior-to­
trial advisement mandated by Lewis. However, in order to overturn his conviction based on this Lewis error, Pomroy is required to demonstrate that he suffered actual prejudice as a result of the error. Lewis, 94 Hawai' i at 297, 12 P.3d at 1238 
(citing Tachibana, 79 Hawai' i at 237, 900 P.2d at 1304). Here, 
we have already concluded that the District Court properly conducted a Tachibana colloquy immediately prior to the close of the defense case and that Pomroy made an on-the-record waiver of his right to testify pursuant to that colloquy. Pomroy has provided no basis for this court to conclude that the District Court's failure to provide the Lewis advisement prior to trial resulted in actual prejudice to him. Accordingly, Pomroy is not entitled to having his conviction overturned based on the District Court's Lewis error.
5 
5
 We note that the State concedes that Pomroy is entitled to have his
conviction overturned based on the Lewis error. However, the Hawai' i Supreme
Court has held that "appellate courts have an independent duty 'first to
ascertain that the confession of error is supported by the record andwell-founded in law and second to determine that such error is properlypreserved and prejudicial.'" State v. Veikoso, 102 Hawai' i 219, 221-22, 74
P.3d 575, 577-78 (2003) (citation omitted). In other words, the State'sconcession of error "is not binding upon an appellate court[.]" State v. 
Hoang, 93 Hawai' i 333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000) (internal quotation marks
and citation omitted). In conceding error, the State applied the wrongstandard of review to the Lewis error. The State applied a harmless beyond areasonable doubt standard of review, whereas the correct standard requiresPomroy to demonstrate actual prejudice. We conclude that the State's concession of error was not well taken. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
Pomroy argues that there was insufficient evidence to
 
support his conviction. In particular, Pomroy claims that the
 
evidence was insufficient because the police officers did not
 observe physical evidence, such as bruising or redness, to
 support Lukens's testimony that Pomroy had struck Lukens
 repeatedly. We disagree.
 
In evaluating the sufficiency of the evidence, we view 
the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution. State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981). "The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." State v. Richie, 
88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) (block quote format 
and citation omitted). We give "full play to the right of the fact finder to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact." State v. Yabusaki, 58 Haw. 
404, 411, 570 P.2d 844, 848 (1977) (block quote format and citation omitted). 
The third-degree assault charge against Pomroy required
 
proof that he caused "bodily injury" to Lukens. The term "bodily
 injury" means "physical pain, illness, or any impairment of
 physical condition." Therefore, to prove that Lukens sustained 
bodily injury, the State was only required to show that he
 suffered physical pain as the result of Pomroy's alleged attack. 
It was not required to show that bruising, redness, or other
 marks were observed on Lukens's body. Lukens testified that
 Pomroy repeatedly struck him in the chest, neck, and upper
 shoulders, and that Lukens experienced pain as a result of
 Pomroy's attack. The District Court found Lukens's testimony
 credible. Lukens's wife also testified that Lukens complained of
 pain to his chest and neck. 
We conclude that it was within the province of the
 
District Court to determine that Lukens's testimony was credible. 
The record does not support Pomroy's claim that Lukens's
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testimony was "incredible on its face." We further conclude
 
that, when viewed in the light most favorable to the State, there
 was substantial evidence to show that Pomroy committed third-
degree assault against Lukens, including that Lukens suffered
 physical pain and thus sustained bodily injury, as required for
 third-degree assault. 
III.
 
Pomroy contends that his trial counsel failed to
 
provide effective assistance. In pertinent part, Pomroy contends
 that his trial counsel: (1) failed to apprehend the State's
 burden in presenting evidence; (2) failed to produce witnesses to
 impeach the State's non-police witnesses; and (3) gave Pomroy
 faulty advice regarding whether to testify. 
The defendant has the burden of establishing 
ineffective assistance of counsel, and must demonstrate: "1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." Richie, 88 
Hawai'i at 39, 960 P.2d at 1247 (block quote format and citation 
omitted). We conclude that Pomroy failed to meet his burden of establishing that his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance. 
In closing argument, Pomroy's counsel argued that he
 
"did not believe" that a court could accept only portions of a
 witness's testimony, but should either believe all of the
 witness's testimony or none of it. Pomroy contends that this
 statement shows that his counsel failed to apprehend the State's
 burden in presenting evidence. We conclude that counsel's
 statement in closing argument does not support a claim of
 ineffective assistance. Counsel was arguing that if the District
 Court disbelieved certain portions of the testimony of a witness
 called by the State, the District Court should disregard all of 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the witness's testimony. That is a legitimate argument and does
 
not demonstrate ineffective assistance. 
Pomroy argues that trial counsel should have called 
witnesses to impeach the credibility of the State's non-police witnesses. "The decision whether to call witnesses in a criminal trial is normally a matter within the judgment of counsel and, accordingly, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." State v. Onishi, 64 Haw. 62, 64, 636 P.2d 742, 744 
(1981). In addition, "[i]neffective assistance of counsel claims based on the failure to obtain witnesses must be supported by affidavits or sworn statements describing the testimony of the proffered witnesses." Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 39, 960 P.2d at 
1247. Pomroy did not present affidavits or sworn statements in this case regarding the witnesses he contends trial counsel should have called. Accordingly, the claim of ineffective assistance for failure to call witnesses must fail.
6 
Finally, Pomroy contends that his trial counsel gave 
him faulty advice regarding whether to testify at trial. The record does not contain the substance of the advice or the reasons for the advice that trial counsel gave to Pomroy regarding whether to testify. Thus, the record is not sufficiently developed for us to evaluate this claim. We deny Pomroy's ineffective assistance of counsel claim on this ground, without prejudice to Pomroy's raising it in a subsequent proceeding under Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 40 (2006). 
See State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 592–93 (1993). 
6
 Because Pomroy did not obtain new counsel until after sentencing, our
denial of this claim is without prejudice to Pomroy's raising it in a Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 40 (2006) proceeding. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION
 
We affirm the District Court's Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, December 26, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Steven D. Strauss Chief Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate Judge (Law Offices of Steven D. Strauss)
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Roland J. Talon Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
East Hawai' i Unit 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
14
 