FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--–

 
IN THE MATTER OF THE ARBITRATION BETWEEN
 
UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFL-CIO,
Petitioner-Appellant,
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION;
HAWAI'I GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION,
AFSCME, LOCAL 152, AFL-CIO (2007-007),
Respondents-Appellees.
 
NO. 28627 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SP NO. 07-1-0061)
 
DECEMBER 30, 2010
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD, and FUJISE, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
This appeal addresses whether tripartite arbitration
 
must be ordered to resolve disputes involving two unions 
claiming that their employees are entitled to various temporary
 
work assignments. Petitioner-Appellant United Public Workers,
 
AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO Union (UPW) appeals from the Circuit
   
 
 
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Court of the First Circuit's (Circuit Court) Final Judgment filed
 
June 29, 2007.1/
 
The Circuit Court denied UPW's request to compel a
 
consolidated three-way, or tripartite, arbitration. On appeal,
 UPW contends that the Circuit Court erred by: (1) misconstruing
 
well-established precedent favoring three-way or tripartite
 
arbitration of jurisdictional claims; (2) misinterpreting and
 
misapplying Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 658A-10, concerning
 
the need to consolidate purportedly ongoing multi-party disputes;
 
(3) abusing its discretion by failing to order tripartite
 
arbitration where there are purportedly conflicting bipartite
 
arbitration awards; and (4) failing to refer the dispute, which
 
UPW charactered as a dispute over arbitrability, to an
 
arbitrator. For reasons discussed below, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's judgment.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
UPW and Respondent-Appellee Hawaii Government Employees
 
Association, AFSCME, Local 152, AFL-CIO Union (HGEA) represent
 
different bargaining units of state employees. UPW is the
 
exclusive bargaining representative of blue collar non-
supervisory state employees in bargaining unit 1, as set forth in
 
HRS § 89-6(a)(1). HGEA is the exclusive bargaining
 
representative of blue-collar supervisory state employees in
 
bargaining unit 2, as set forth in HRS § 89-6(a)(2). Both
 
unions' collective bargaining agreements contain broad
 
arbitration provisions, including grievance procedures.
 
The underlying disputes concern temporary work
 
assignments. Temporary work assignments arise when an employee
 
is absent due to sickness, injury, annual leave, training, or
 
other reasons. The state employer selects another employee to
 
temporarily fill the vacant position. Such assignments provide
 
1/
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
 
2  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
valuable on-the-job training and may lead to promotional
 
opportunities. Both UPW and HGEA allege their employees are
 
entitled to temporary assignments of bargaining unit 2
 
supervisory positions.
 
A. UPW Grievance: Hunter Arbitration Award
 On June 27, 1996, UPW filed a grievance on behalf of a
 
bargaining unit 1 employee, William Kapuwai. The grievance
 
alleged that the state Department of Transportation (DOT)
 
violated past policy and practice by granting an HGEA employee
 
temporary assignments of the Highway Maintenance Supervisor F-2­
05 position (no. 01235), a bargaining unit 2 position in the
 
Windward Landscaping Crew. UPW alleged that, historically, the
 
DOT had granted temporary assignments of F-1 and F-2 supervisory
 
positions to non-supervisory employees in its bargaining unit. 
Following bipartite arbitration, Arbitrator Keith Hunter issued
 
an award in UPW's favor. He determined that the DOT was bound,
 
pursuant to its past practice and collective bargaining
 
agreement, to grant temporary assignments of the F-2-05
 
supervisory position to UPW employees. The Circuit Court later
 
confirmed the award. 
B. Petition for Declaratory Ruling from HLRB
 On October 20, 1997, the State filed a petition for a 
declaratory ruling with the Hawaii Labor Relations Board (HLRB). 
The State sought a determination regarding the policy of granting 
bargaining unit 2 positions to UPW employees without first 
considering whether HGEA employees were available. Specifically, 
the State sought to finally resolve whether such a policy is 
inconsistent with its management rights under HRS §§ 89-6, 89­
9(d), and 89-13. HGEA and the counties of Honolulu, Hawai
'i, 
Kaua'i, and Maui intervened in the proceeding. However, the HLRB 
dismissed the petition, finding there was "no actual controversy between the parties at this stage." HGEA appealed the dismissal 
to the Circuit Court, which determined the dispute was not moot 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and remanded it for further proceedings. The Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court affirmed that result. Lingle v. Haw. Gov't Emps. Ass'n 
Local 152, 107 Hawai 'i 178, 187, 111 P.3d 587, 596 (2005). On 
remand, the HLRB suspended the proceeding and ordered the parties 
to "engage in collective bargaining to attempt to resolve this 
dispute." It appears that, as of the date of this Opinion, the 
proceeding remains suspended. 
C.	 HGEA Grievance: Uesato Arbitration Award
 On December 30, 2003, HGEA filed a grievance against
 
the DOT on behalf of a bargaining unit 2 employee, Rodney
 Kekaualua. The grievance disputed temporary assignments of the
 
Highway Construction & Maintenance Supervisor II F1-10 position
 
(no. 01349), a bargaining unit 2 position in the Hilo-Hamakua
 
Roadway Maintenance Unit, to a UPW employee. HGEA alleged that
 
the DOT violated its collective bargaining agreement by failing
 
to first consider whether HGEA employees were available to fill
 
that position. After bipartite arbitration, Arbitrator Philip
 
Uesato issued an award in favor of HGEA. He determined that the
 
DOT's alleged past practice of granting temporary assignments of
 
the F1-10 position to UPW employees was not binding on HGEA. 
However, he carefully limited the prospective relief and merely
 
"cautioned" the DOT to cease employing temporary assignment
 
seniority lists established under the UPW agreement. The Circuit
 
Court of the Third Circuit confirmed the award.
 
D.	 UPW's Class Action Grievance; Motion to Compel
Consolidated Arbitration
 
On January 30, 2007, UPW filed a class action grievance
 
alleging continued violations of the DOT's past policy and
 
practice of offering temporary assignments of F-1 and F-2
 
supervisory positions to UPW employees. In the grievance, UPW
 
referenced the "longstanding multi-party controversy" over
 
temporary assignments. 
4  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On February 15, 2007, UPW filed with the Circuit Court
 
a motion to compel consolidated tripartite arbitration between
 
UPW, HGEA, and the DOT. HGEA and the DOT both opposed the motion
 
asserting, inter alia, that the HLRB was the proper forum for
 
resolving the dispute. On June 1, 2007, the Circuit Court denied
 
the motion on the ground that "there are no separate arbitration
 
proceedings to consolidate." Judgment was entered on June 29,
 
2007. UPW filed a timely notice of appeal on June 29, 2007 and
 
an amended notice of appeal on July 2, 2007.
 
II.	 POINTS OF ERROR
 
UPW raises the following points of error on appeal:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred by misinterpreting and
 
misapplying HRS § 658A-10; 
(2) The Circuit Court erred by failing to refer the
 
dispute, which UPW charactered as a dispute over arbitrability,
 to an arbitrator;
 
(3) The Circuit Court erred by misconstruing federal
 
case law favoring tripartite arbitration of jurisdictional
 
claims; and 
(4) The Circuit Court abused its discretion by failing
 
to order tripartite arbitration where there are conflicting
 
bipartite arbitration awards.
 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A trial court's decision whether or not to compel 
arbitration is a question of law. Koolau Radiology, Inc. v. 
Queen's Med. Ctr., 73 Haw. 433, 439, 834 P.2d 1294, 1298 (1992). 
Accordingly, we review that decision de novo, "using the same 
standard employed by the trial court and based upon the same 
evidentiary materials 'as were before [it] in determination of 
the motion.'" Id. at 440, 834 P.2d at 1298 (quoting Feliciano v. 
Waikiki Deep Water, Inc., 69 Haw. 605, 607, 752 P.2d 1076, 1078 (1988)); accord Yogi v. Haw. Med. Serv. Ass'n, 124 Hawai
'i 172, 
174, 238 P.3d 699, 701 (App. 2010). 
5   
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The decision to consolidate arbitration proceedings is
 
discretionary. HRS § 658A-10(a) (2001) ("[T]he court may order
 
consolidation . . .") (emphasis added); see Baseden v. State, 174
 
P.3d 233, 238 (Alaska 2008) (interpreting identical provision);
 
Parker v. McCaw, 24 Cal. Rptr. 3d 55, 63 (Cal. Ct. App. 2005)
 
(same); Biber P'ship, P.C. v. Diamond Hill Joint Venture, LLC,
 
960 A.2d 774, 777 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2008) (same); Unif.
 
Arbitration Act, § 10, comment 3 (2009). Accordingly, we review
 
the Circuit Court's refusal to grant consolidation under the
 
abuse of discretion standard. An abuse of discretion occurs when
 
the trial court "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or
 
disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
 
substantial detriment of a party litigant." Amfac, Inc. v.
 
Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26
 (1992).
 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
As a threshold matter, both HGEA and the DOT contend
 
that this court lacks jurisdiction over the appeal. HRS § 658A­
28(a)(1) (2001) expressly authorizes appeal from orders "denying
 
a motion to compel arbitration." However, the appellees argue
 
that UPW's motion was essentially a motion to consolidate, which
 
is not immediately appealable.
 
HRS § 658A-7 (2001) governs motions to compel
 
arbitration. UPW's motion to compel consolidated arbitration was
 made pursuant to that section, among others. HGEA admits it was
 
not engaged in arbitration proceedings at the time of the motion. 
Indeed, it argues that a court cannot order consolidated
 
arbitration unless there are multiple pending arbitrations. 
Consolidation is therefore contingent upon the court first
 
compelling arbitration. Because HGEA had no arbitration pending,
 
the core purpose of UPW's motion was to compel arbitration. That
 
it sought a particular form of arbitration – consolidated
 
tripartite arbitration – does not disturb the substance of the
 
6   
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
motion. We reject the assertion that the order was solely a
 
denial of a motion for consolidation.2/ Accordingly, this court
 
has jurisdiction over UPW's appeal.
 
A.	 Denial of Consolidation
 
UPW argues that the Circuit Court erred by interpreting
 
HRS § 658A-10 to require separate, pending arbitration
 proceedings. It maintains that consolidation is appropriate,
 
even absent pending arbitrations, where there are separate
 
agreements to arbitrate among the parties. We disagree.
 
Prior to Hawai
'i's enactment of the Uniform Arbitration 
Act, our courts lacked authority to consolidate separate 
arbitration proceedings where the parties' agreements were silent 
as to consolidation. See, e.g., Bateman Constr., Inc. v. 
Haitsuka Bros., Ltd., 77 Hawai 'i 481, 486-87, 889 P.2d 58, 63-64 
(1995). The Uniform Arbitration Act sought to avoid the 
inefficiencies, complexities, and jurisdictional conflicts 
resulting when "common issues of law or fact [are] resolved in 
multiple fora." Unif. Arb. Act, § 10, comment 1. It therefore 
provided a default rule empowering courts to consolidate separate 
arbitrations. Id. This rule was codified at HRS § 658A-10 
(emphasis added): 
Consolidation of separate arbitration proceedings.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), upon
motion of a party to an agreement to arbitrate or to an
arbitration proceeding, the court may order consolidation of
separate arbitration proceedings as to all or some of the
claims if:
 
(1) 	There are separate agreements to arbitrate or
separate arbitration proceedings between the
same persons or one of them is a party to a
separate agreement to arbitrate or a separate
arbitration proceeding with a third person;
(2) 	The claims subject to the agreements to
arbitrate arise in substantial part from the
same transaction or series of related
 transactions;
 
2/
 The appellees further argue that the order was not appealable
because it was not a "final judgment" pursuant to HRS §§ 658A-28(a)(6) or
658A-25(a). However, § 658A-28(a) provides appeals from orders denying a
motion to compel arbitration or from final judgments entered pursuant to that
chapter. The order need not satisfy both criteria to be appealable.
 
7      
     
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(3) 	The existence of a common issue of law or fact
 
creates the possibility of conflicting decisions
in the separate arbitration proceedings; and
(4) 	Prejudice resulting from a failure to
consolidate is not outweighed by the risk of
undue delay or prejudice to the rights of or
hardship to parties opposing consolidation.
(b) The court may order consolidation of separate
arbitration proceedings as to some claims and allow other
claims to be resolved in separate arbitration proceedings.
(c) The court may not order consolidation of the
claims of a party to an agreement to arbitrate if the
agreement prohibits consolidation.
 
UPW argues that the disjunctive "or" in subsection
 
(a)(1) authorizes consolidation where there are separate
 
agreements to arbitrate between the same persons or with a third
 
person, even if there are no separate arbitration proceedings
 
pending. However, this argument ignores the plain language of
 
the provision. 
HRS § 658A-10 authorizes consolidation of separate
 
arbitration proceedings when certain conditions are met. Those
 
conditions are designed to enable consolidation when there is an
 
adequate nexus and closely-related issues between multiple
 
proceedings. Thus, HRS § 658A-10(a)(1) sets forth a necessary,
 
but not sufficient, condition. Where there are no separate
 
proceedings to consolidate, a fundamental prerequisite is not
 
met, and this provision is inapplicable.3/
 
3/
 The commentary to section 10 of the Uniform Arbitration Act
confirms this interpretation. Comment 5 notes that "[w]hether consolidation
is ordered or denied, the arbitrations will likely continue -- either
separately or in a consolidated proceeding." Unif. Arb. Act, § 10, comment 5.
As a result, appeal is not available as it would merely "delay the arbitration
process." Id. If this section contemplated initiating a new consolidated
proceeding where none existed before, the fundamental character of the
provision, including its appealability, arguably would be altered. The
 commentary further notes that under subsection (a)(4), undue delay or hardship
may result "where, for example, one or more separate arbitration proceedings
have already progressed to the hearing stage." Id. at comment 3. The
 
provision does not contemplate consolidating proceedings after they have
already been concluded.
 
In addition, the language of subsection (a)(1) regarding
"agreements to arbitrate" was intended to cover separate arbitration
proceedings involving third-party beneficiaries or guaranties that incorporate
the arbitration provisions of the underlying contract. Id. at comment 4. In
 
(continued...)
 
8   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
UPW cites to a number of cases for the proposition that
 
"[c]ourts have found consolidation consistent with state laws
 
advancing the use of arbitration in the context of multiparty
 
disputes." However, all of those cases involved multiple pending
 
arbitrations. New England Energy Inc. v. Keystone Shipping Co.,
 
855 F.2d 1, 3 (1st Cir. 1988) (applying Massachusetts arbitration
 
law to consolidate pending proceedings); Rio Energy Int'l, Inc.
 
v. Hilton Oil Trans., 776 F. Supp. 120, 121-22 (S.D.N.Y. 1991)
 
(affirming consolidation of pending proceedings involving common
 
questions of law and fact); Cable Belt Conveyors, Inc. v. Alumina
 
Partners of Jam., 669 F. Supp. 577, 577-79 (S.D.N.Y. 1987)
 
(same); Slutsky-Peltz Plumbing & Heating Co., Inc. v. Vincennes
 
Cmty. Sch. Corp., 556 N.E.2d 344, 345, 347 (Ind. Ct. App. 1990)
 
(same); Grover-Dimond Assocs. v. Am. Arb. Ass'n, 211 N.W.2d 787,
 
788, 790 (Minn. 1973) (affirming joint arbitration where owner
 
brought related grievances against architect and contractor);
 
Exber, Inc. v. Sletten Constr. Co., 558 P.2d 517, 519-20 (Nev.
 
1976) (affirming consolidation of pending proceedings between
 
multiple parties); Symphony Fabrics Corp. v. Bernson Silk Mills,
 
Inc., 190 N.E.2d 418, 419 (N.Y. 1963) (same); Sullivan Cnty. v.
 
Edward L. Nezelek, Inc., 366 N.E.2d 72, 73 (N.Y. 1977) (same);
 
Children's Hosp. of Phila. v. Am. Arb. Ass'n, 331 A.2d 848, 849­
50 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1974) (same); Plaza Dev. Servs. v. Joe Harden
 
Builder, Inc., 365 S.E.2d 231, 232-33 (S.C. Ct. App. 1988)
 
(same). UPW has not cited, and we have not found, any cases
 
interpreting the Uniform Arbitration Act to allow consolidation
 
of arbitration proceedings where only one proceeding is pending.
 
We therefore conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 
err in declining to order consolidated arbitration.
 
3/(...continued)
such cases, third-party beneficiaries or signatories to guaranties may invoke

the appropriate arbitration agreement. Id.; see, e.g., Compania Espanola de
Petroleos, S.A. v. Nereus Shipping, S.A., 527 F.2d 966 (2d Cir. 1975).
 
9      
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.	 Tripartite Arbitration Arguments
 
UPW contends that the Circuit Court erred in failing to
 
compel tripartite arbitration, arguing that the Circuit Court
 improperly ignored the body of federal case law concerning
 
tripartite arbitration for this type of labor dispute. We
 
conclude, however, that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
declining to compel arbitration at the request of a nonsignatory
 
to the relevant arbitration agreement and in the wake of
 
confirmed bipartite arbitration awards.
 
1.	 Applicable Hawai
'i Law 
UPW urges us to apply federal common law regarding 
tripartite arbitration. That body of law is not binding on this court. Indeed, all parties agree that Hawai
'i collective 
bargaining law (HRS Chapter 89) and the Hawai 'i Uniform 
Arbitration Act (HRS Chapter 658A) govern the present dispute. 
Thus, we first look to Hawai 'i law on this issue. 
HRS Chapter 658A provides a statutory mechanism for
 
compelling arbitration. Under HRS § 658A-7,4/ if the court finds
 
4/
 HRS § 658A-7 provides:
 
Motion to compel or stay arbitration. (a) On motion
 
of a person showing an agreement to arbitrate and alleging
another person's refusal to arbitrate pursuant to the
agreement:
(1)	 If the refusing party does not appear or does
not oppose the motion, the court shall order the
parties to arbitrate; and
(2)	 If the refusing party opposes the motion, the
court shall proceed summarily to decide the
issue and order the parties to arbitrate unless
it finds that there is no enforceable agreement
to arbitrate.
 
(b) On motion of a person alleging that an
arbitration proceeding has been initiated or threatened but
that there is no agreement to arbitrate, the court shall
proceed summarily to decide the issue. If the court finds
that there is an enforceable agreement to arbitrate, it
shall order the parties to arbitrate.
(c) If the court finds that there is no enforceable
 
agreement, it shall not, pursuant to subsection (a) or (b),
order the parties to arbitrate.
(d) 	The court shall not refuse to order arbitration
 
because the claim subject to arbitration lacks merit or
(continued...)
 
10  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that "there is an enforceable agreement to arbitrate, it shall
 
order the parties to arbitrate." HRS § 658A-7(b).
 
When faced with a motion to compel arbitration, the 
court must generally inquire into: (1) whether there is a valid 
agreement to arbitrate; and (2) whether the dispute falls within 
the scope of that agreement. Koolau Radiology, Inc., 73 Haw. at 
445, 834 P.2d at 1300. When agreements reserve questions of arbitrability for the arbitrator, as they do here,
5/ the court 
may only consider the first prong. Bateman Constr., Inc., 77 
Hawai'i at 485-86, 889 P.2d at 62-63; see also Bronster v. United 
Public Workers Local 646, 90 Hawai 'i 9, 14-15, 975 P.2d 766, 771­
72 (1999). 
4/(...continued)
grounds for the claim have not been established.

(e) If a proceeding involving a claim referable to
arbitration under an alleged agreement to arbitrate is
pending in court, a motion under this section shall be made
in that court. Otherwise a motion under this section shall
 be made in any court as provided in section 658A-27.
(f) If a party makes a motion to the court to order
arbitration, the court on just terms shall stay any judicial
proceeding that involves a claim alleged to be subject to
the arbitration until the court renders a final decision
 under this section.
 
(g) If the court orders arbitration, the court on
just terms shall stay any judicial proceeding that involves
a claim subject to the arbitration. If a claim subject to
the arbitration is severable, the court may limit the stay
to that claim.
 
5/
 UPW's collective bargaining agreement provides: 
In the event the Employer disputes the arbitrability
of a grievance the Arbitrator shall determine whether the
grievance is arbitrable prior to or after hearing the merits
of the grievance. If the Arbitrator decides the grievance
is not arbitrable, the grievance shall be referred back to
the parties without decision or recommendation on its
merits.
 
Similarly, HGEA's collective bargaining agreement provides:
 
If the Employer disputes the arbitrability of any
grievance, the Arbitrator shall first determine whether the
Arbitrator has jurisdiction to act; and if the Arbitrator
finds that the Arbitrator has no such power, the grievance
shall be referred back to the parties without decision or
recommendation on its merits. 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
UPW argues that whether it may compel arbitration 
between HGEA and the DOT is a question of arbitrability, properly 
reserved for the arbitrator under both agreements. This argument 
confuses two separate issues. One is a question of 
arbitrability, i.e., whether the underlying dispute falls within 
the scope of HGEA's arbitration agreement. See Univ. of Haw. 
Prof'l Assembly v. Univ. of Haw., 66 Haw. 207, 210, 659 P.2d 717, 
719 (1983). This proposition presupposes, however, that UPW has 
standing to invoke HGEA's agreement. Under Koolau, we must first 
determine whether UPW may invoke an arbitration agreement to 
which it is not a party. Koolau Radiology, Inc, 73 Haw. at 445, 
834 P.2d at 1300; see Bronster, 90 Hawai 'i at 15, 975 P.2d at 772 
("[N]o agreement can divest the court of the authority to address 
the first [Koolau prong]."). 
Although public policy favors arbitration as a means of 
resolving disputes, arbitration is ultimately a matter of 
contract. Sher v. Cella, 114 Hawai 'i 263, 267, 160 P.3d 1250, 
1254 (App. 2007). "[A] party cannot be required to submit to arbitration any dispute which he has not agreed so to submit." 
Id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). To warrant 
compelling arbitration, there must be "an underlying agreement 
between the parties," i.e., the party seeking to compel 
arbitration and the opposing party. Luke v. Gentry Realty, Ltd., 
105 Hawai
'i 241, 247, 96 P.3d 261, 267 (2004) (emphasis added; 
internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Here, 
indisputably, HGEA and the DOT have a valid agreement to 
arbitrate disputes that arise between the state employer and HGEA 
employees. The agreement does not contemplate arbitration for 
disputes with UPW, a nonsignatory. 
Generally, parties who are not signatories to an 
arbitration agreement may not compel the signatories to 
arbitrate. Sher, 114 Hawai 'i at 267, 160 P.3d at 1254; Luke, 105 
Hawai'i at 247, 96 P.3d at 267. A few limited exceptions exist. 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A nonsignatory agent may invoke an arbitration agreement in two
 
circumstances:
 
First, when the signatory to a written agreement containing
an arbitration clause must rely on the terms of the written
agreement in asserting its claims against the nonsignatory.
Second, when the signatory to the contract containing a[n]
arbitration clause raises allegations of substantially
interdependent and concerted misconduct by both the
nonsignatory and one or more of the signatories to the
contract.
 
Luke, 105 Hawai 'i at 248, 96 P.3d at 268 (citation omitted). UPW 
does not fit within either of those exceptions. 
Moreover, even if we view the situation in the reverse
 
-- as UPW seeking to compel HGEA, a nonsignatory, to arbitrate
 
under UPW's agreement -- we reach the same result. Though the
 
court in Luke did not address possible exceptions to that rule,
 
it pointed to a Second Circuit case recognizing five exceptions
 
under which a court may bind nonsignatories to arbitration
 
agreements. Id. at 248 n.11, 96 P.3d at 268 n.11. The exceptions
 
fall under the following theories: "1) incorporation by
 
reference; 2) assumption; 3) agency; 4) veil-piercing/alter ego;
 
and 5) estoppel." Thomson-CSF, S.A. v. Am. Arb. Ass'n, 64 F.3d
 
773, 776 (2d Cir. 1995). None of them is applicable here.
 
Under applicable Hawai 'i law, the Circuit Court did not 
err in refusing to compel tripartite arbitration. 
2. Federal Case Law
 
UPW does not point to any state courts that have 
adopted the federal approach, and we have discovered none. 
Moreover, as discussed above, the Uniform Arbitration Act 
provides ample mechanisms for compelling tripartite arbitration 
via consolidation when separate proceedings are pending. HRS §§ 
658A-7, 658A-10. There is no gap in relevant state law that 
would require resort to federal common law. See Price v. 
Obayashi Haw. Corp., 81 Hawai 'i 171, 181, 914 P.2d 1364, 1374 
(1996) ("[W]here Hawai 'i case law and statutes are silent, this 
13  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court can look to parallel federal law for guidance."). 
Nevertheless, we have carefully considered UPW's arguments.
 
Federal courts have generally adopted a favorable
 
approach toward tripartite arbitration of jurisdictional disputes
 
between labor unions. "Jurisdictional disputes" arise when two
 
or more unions each claim to be entitled, under their respective
 
collective bargaining agreements, to the same work. Carey v.
 
Westinghouse Elec. Corp., 375 U.S. 261, 263 (1964). Tripartite
 arbitration may be appropriate as a means to avoid conflicting
 
awards that grant the same work to multiple unions. Retail,
 
Wholesale & Dep't Store Union, Local 390 v. Kroger Co., 927 F.2d
 
275, 278 (6th Cir. 1991) (Kroger II); Local No. 850, Int'l Ass'n
 
of Machinists & Aerospace Workers v. T.I.M.E.-DC, Inc., 705 F.2d
 
1275, 1276-77 (10th Cir. 1983). Tripartite arbitration is often
 
more "practicable, economical and convenient for the parties and
 
the arbitrator" because it avoids the inefficiencies of duplicate
 
proceedings. Columbia Broad. Sys., Inc. v. Am. Recording &
 
Broad. Ass'n, 414 F.2d 1326, 1329 (2d Cir. 1969) (citation
 omitted).
 
The arbitration awards at issue here did not concern 
the same work, but rather involved two different positions in 
different units and on different islands. The Hunter award 
concerned an F-2 position, no. 01235, in the Windward Landscaping 
Crew on O
'ahu. The Uesato award concerned an F1-10 position, no. 
01349, in the Hilo-Hamakua Roadway Maintenance Unit on Hawai 'i. 
Each award granted prospective relief for temporary assignments 
of those positions only. The Uesato award cautioned the DOT 
against utilizing UPW seniority lists in granting temporary 
assignments of bargaining unit 2 positions. However, it did not 
order the DOT to cease employing the lists. The awards are not 
strictly in conflict; it is possible for the DOT to fully comply 
14  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
with both.6/ The fundamental purpose of tripartite arbitration –
 
to avoid conflicting arbitration awards that lock the employer in
 
an impossible position – is not met here. See Kroger II, 927
 
F.2d at 278 ("[T]he mere possibility of exposure to inconsistent
 
liabilities" does not warrant tripartite arbitration); Columbia
 
Broad. Sys., Inc., 414 F.2d at 1329.
 
A second purpose of tripartite arbitration is to
 
finally resolve disputes that would otherwise remain perpetually
 
mired in a jurisdictional no man's land. See Transp.-Commc'n
 
Emps. Union v. Union Pac. R.R. Co., 385 U.S. 157, 161-62 (1966). 
Here, the State sought an alternative resolution: a petition for
 
a declaratory ruling now pending with the HLRB. The HLRB's
 
ruling, or further collective bargaining, could finally resolve
 
the controversy.
 
Finally, the federal case law on which UPW relies
 
simply does not support compelling tripartite arbitration in this
 
case. The United States Supreme Court laid the framework for
 
tripartite arbitration in Union Pacific. There, a telegraphers'
 
union referred its grievance over a jurisdictional dispute to the
 
Railroad Adjustment Board for arbitration pursuant to the Railway
 
Labor Act. 385 U.S. at 158. The clerks' union, which claimed it
 
was entitled to the same work assignments, declined to
 
participate pursuant to a policy of the Railway Labor Executives'
 
Association. Id. at 158-59, 159 n.2. The Supreme Court granted
 
certiorari "in order to settle doubts about whether the
 
Adjustment Board must exercise its exclusive jurisdiction to
 
6/
 UPW also highlights three previous awards concerning temporary
assignments of bargaining unit 2 positions to UPW employees. However, these
also are not in strict conflict as they resolved disputes over differentpositions in different units. The King award concerned the Bridge MaintenanceSupervisor F1-11 position, no. 22788, in the Bridge Maintenance Subunit onO'ahu. The Woo award concerned the General Maintenance and Repair Supervisor
position in the Grounds & General Services Subunit of the Maintenance Section
of the Airports Division. Finally, the Bryan award concerned the lead vehiclerepair supervisor position in the Automotive Equipment Services Division ofthe City & County Public Works Department. Each award limited prospectiverelief to the positions at issue. 
15  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
settle disputes like this in a single proceeding with all
 
disputant unions present." Id. at 160. It held that the
 
Adjustment Board was required to do so. Id.
 
The Railway Adjustment Board derived its authority from
 
a statutory mandate to "provide for the prompt and orderly
 settlement of all disputes." Id. at 162 (internal quotation
 
marks and citation omitted). It could not fulfill this mandate
 if limited to the "merry-go-round situation" of conflicting
 
bipartite claims. Id. The Court remanded the case to the Board
 
and directed it to grant the clerks' union a second opportunity
 to join the arbitration. Id. at 165-66. If the union again
 
declined, the Board was to enter a binding award resolving the
 entire dispute. Id. In rendering its decision, the Board was
 
directed to consider other contracts "between the railroad and
 any other union involved in the overall dispute." Id. at 166
 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
 
In the instant case, the arbitrator does not enjoy such
 
broad authority to finally settle all disputes. Rather, both
 agreements limit the arbitrator's authority to settling disputes
 
under each respective agreement. The precedential value of Union
 
Pacific is therefore slim. See Louisiana-Pac. Corp. v. Int'l
 
Bhd. of Elec. Workers Local Union 2294, 600 F.2d 219, 224 (9th
 
Cir. 1979) (noting that collective bargaining agreements often do
 
not grant arbitrators "the kind of expansive purview given to the
 
Railroad Adjustment Board").
 
Union Pacific paved the way for a trend in federal
 
common law favoring tripartite arbitration of jurisdictional
 
disputes. See, e.g., U.S. Postal Serv. v. Am. Postal Workers
 
Union, 893 F.2d 1117, 1121 (9th Cir. 1990) (noting trend). 
However, the circuits have not reached a consensus as to
 
precisely when such arbitration is appropriate. We have found no
 
cases extending tripartite arbitration so far as requested in
 
this case – against the will of the second union and the
 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
employer, and in the wake of confirmed bipartite arbitration
 
awards.
 
In determining when tripartite arbitration is
 
appropriate, federal courts have weighed two key concerns: 
preserving the finality of bipartite arbitration awards and
 
honoring the parties' arbitration agreements.
 
The federal circuit courts are divided over whether
 
they may compel tripartite arbitration despite the existence of
 
bipartite arbitration awards. A primary purpose of compelling
 
tripartite arbitration is to avoid the inefficiencies and
 
potential inconsistencies of duplicate proceedings. See Kroger
 
II, 927 F.2d at 280-82; Columbia Broad. Sys., Inc., 414 F.2d at
 1329. The value of arbitrating labor disputes often lies in
 
obtaining final, binding decisions. At least two circuits – the
 
Fifth and the Ninth – have held that tripartite arbitration is
 
not appropriate where final bipartite awards have already been
 
rendered. Louisiana-Pacific Corp., 600 F.2d at 226; U.S. Postal
 
Serv., 893 F.2d at 1121; Local 1351 Int'l Longshoremens Ass'n v.
 Sea-Land Serv. Inc., 214 F.3d 566, 572-73 (5th Cir. 2000). The
 
Sixth, Tenth, and Second Circuits have rejected that approach. 
Emery Air Freight, Corp. v. Int'l Bhd. of Teamsters, Local 295,
 
185 F.3d 85, 92 (2d Cir. 1999); Kroger II, 927 F.2d at 280;
 
T.I.M.E.-DC, Inc., 705 F.2d at 1277-78. However, on closer
 
examination, those cases are distinguishable.
 
UPW hinges its argument on the factors articulated in
 
Emery. There, the issue on appeal was whether the district court
 
had abused its discretion in denying the employer's request to
 
compel tripartite arbitration. Emery, 185 F.3d at 92. Although
 
both unions had obtained arbitration awards, neither had yet
 
confirmed them. Id. at 87-88. The Second Circuit affirmed the
 
denial, but declined to adopt a hardline rule according
 dispositive status to the existence of final bipartite awards. 
Id. at 91-92. It reasoned that circumstances may arise where the
 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
parties could not have anticipated a second arbitration or
 
conflicting awards. Id. at 92. In such cases, a blanket rule
 
would frustrate the objectives of all parties. Id. The court
 
instead adopted a "flexible, fact-based approach that affords
 
full play to the discretion and equitable instinct of the
 
district court." Id. It outlined a variety of factors for
 
consideration -- essentially a balancing test. Id. at 91. 
Relevant factors include the breadth of arbitration provisions,
 
the existence or likelihood of conflicting arbitration awards,
 
the compatibility of arbitration procedures between the two
 
agreements, the nature of relief granted, and the employer's
 
fault in failing to anticipate the jurisdictional conflict. Id. 
This approach is by no means widely adopted. We have
 
found no cases outside the Second Circuit expressly adopting the
 
Emery balancing test. Nonetheless, even if we were to apply it
 
in this case, we would find no reason to disturb the Circuit
 
Court's discretion. The arbitration provisions at issue do not
 
provide for jurisdictional disputes, and HGEA's agreement
 
outlines grievance procedures that were not invoked. The awards
 
were not entirely inconsistent, and the prospective relief was
 
limited so as to avoid placing the DOT in an impossible position. 
Moreover, the parties could have anticipated the dispute and
 
contracted around it.7/ Thus, the balance of factors weighs
 
against disturbing the Circuit Court's conclusion.
 
The Tenth Circuit addressed the issue of bipartite
 
awards in T.I.M.E.-DC. In that case, competing unions obtained
 conflicting arbitration awards regarding the same work
 
assignments. 705 F.2d at 1275-76. The employer was "in the
 
impossible position of having to comply with both awards
 
coextensively." Id. at 1276. When the first union instituted an
 
action to enforce its award, the district court ordered all
 
7/
 Indeed, they may still do so, as the HLRB ordered the parties to
engage in collective bargaining.
 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
parties to submit to tripartite arbitration. Id. The first
 
union appealed. Id. The Tenth Circuit affirmed on the basis
 
that the first union "effectively mooted the appeal" in its reply
 
brief by adopting the stance of the second union and employer
 
that tripartite arbitration was appropriate. Id. at 1278. Here,
 
by contrast, both HGEA and the DOT remain opposed to tripartite
 
arbitration. 
The Sixth Circuit considered the weight of bipartite

 
awards in a set of cases involving the same employer. It held
 
that "[b]efore tripartite arbitration may be ordered, the parties
 
involved first must have a duty to engage in separate bipartite
 
arbitration over the subject matter involved." United Indus.
 
Workers v. Kroger Co., 900 F.2d 944, 947 (6th Cir. 1990) (Kroger
 
I). In that case, however, the second union had not initiated
 
its grievance process. Id. at 946. The court did not address
 
the situation at bar, where the parties have concluded bipartite
 
arbitration and obtained binding awards. 
In Kroger II, the Sixth Circuit declined to rest its
 
decision simply on the existence of bipartite awards. Kroger II,
 
927 F.2d at 280. There, the bipartite awards were fundamentally
 inconsistent, as they mandated the employer to offer the same
 
work to both unions. Id. at 281. Because the employer could not
 
possibly comply with both awards, the court reasoned that the
 policy of according finality to arbitration awards would be
 
disserved "by blindly ordering enforcement of conflicting
 
arbitration awards rendered in separate proceedings, neither of
 
which had the ability to bind all interested parties." Id. at
 
280. Here, by contrast, the awards do not place the DOT in an
 
impossible position of having to select which award to comply
 
with to the exclusion of the other. And, unlike the employer in
 
Kroger II, the DOT remains firmly opposed to tripartite
 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8/The court in Kroger II also expressed dissatisfaction with the
Ninth Circuit's reasoning in Louisiana-Pacific.  927 F.2d at 280.  The Ninth
Circuit held that Union Pacific was inapplicable to a dispute akin to the one
at bar.  Louisiana-Pacific Corp., 600 F.2d at 224.  It reasoned that the
Railway Adjustment Board in Union Pacific enjoyed broad statutory authority to
resolve jurisdictional disputes, whereas collective bargaining agreements
rarely grant arbitrators that authority.  Id.  However, the court acknowledged
that the employer could have compelled tripartite arbitration while separate
arbitration proceedings were pending.  Id. at 225-26.  The Kroger II court
opined that this reasoning was contradictory.  927 F.2d at 280.  It alleged
that the "obvious thrust" of the Ninth Circuit's distinction between statutory
and contractual authority was that "a party should not be compelled to submit
to tripartite arbitration unless he has expressly assumed that obligation in
his contract."  Id.
Kroger II's criticism misses the mark.  The Ninth Circuit did not
take the position that tripartite arbitration is only available when specific
contractual provisions allow it.  Nor is that position a necessary step in the
Ninth Circuit's logic.  Rather, it merely recognized that where the agreements
do not specifically provide for tripartite arbitration, the parties may,
during the pendency of separate proceedings, seek a court order of
consolidation under applicable federal law.  Louisiana-Pacific Corp., 600 F.2d
at 225-26.  This is consistent with the view that the arbitrator usually does
not have contractual authority to order such arbitration.  It is also
consistent with the Ninth Circuit's deference to the parties' agreements
regarding the finality of arbitration awards.
20arbitration.  The court's concerns in Kroger II are therefore not
present here.8/
UPW relies particularly on Office & Prof'l Emps. Int'l
Union v. Sea-Land Serv., Inc., 210 F.3d 117 (2d Cir. 2000), for
the proposition that tripartite arbitration is appropriate where
bipartite awards have been issued.  There, competing unions both
claimed the same work assignments and obtained conflicting
arbitration awards.  Id. at 118.  The first union, OPEIU,
confirmed its arbitration award in a district court of New York. 
Id. at 119.  When the second union, ILA, sought to confirm its
arbitration award in a Texas court, the court instead ordered
both unions and their employer to participate in tripartite
arbitration.  Id. at 120-21.  After losing in tripartite
arbitration, OPEIU sought to enforce its original arbitration
award in the New York court pursuant to Rule 70 of the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure.  Id. at 121.  The New York court
declined to enforce the award.  Id.  On appeal, the sole issue
was whether the New York court had authority to declineFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
enforcement of the first arbitration award. Id. at 123-24. The
 
Second Circuit did not address whether the Texas order compelling
 
tripartite arbitration was appropriate. Id.; see Sea-Land Serv.
 
Inc., 214 F.3d at 572. UPW's reliance on this case is therefore
 misplaced.
 
A few months later, the Fifth Circuit addressed the
 
Texas order, squarely facing the issue that the Second Circuit
 
had sidestepped. Sea-Land Serv., Inc., 214 F.3d at 572. It
 
placed great weight upon the finality of the judgment confirming
 OPEIU's original arbitration award. Id. The Texas court's order
 
compelling tripartite arbitration undermined that finality,
 violating principles of collateral estoppel and res judicata. 
Id. The court concluded that compelling tripartite arbitration
 
"was inappropriate in the wake of the final judgment which OPEIU
 had obtained." Id. at 573. 
The Ninth Circuit also preserved the binding character
 
of arbitration awards in Louisiana-Pacific. There, two unions
 
obtained conflicting arbitration awards granting each back-pay
 
for the same work assignment. 600 F.2d at 220-21. The first
 
union confirmed its award, though the employer unsuccessfully
 
sought to compel tripartite arbitration. Id. at 221. When the
 
second union sought to confirm its award, the employer again
 sought tripartite arbitration and appealed the trial court's
 
denial. Id. at 221-22. The Ninth Circuit held that the employer
 
was bound by the final character of both awards, as it had agreed
 under its respective collective bargaining agreements. Id. at
 
225-26. Although requiring it to pay both unions for the same
 work was arguably harsh, it ultimately bore the risk of such a
 
scenario. Id. The employer could have anticipated the problem
 
by incorporating a pertinent contractual provision or by
 compelling tripartite arbitration before final awards were
 
rendered. Id.
 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Here, as in Louisiana-Pacific and Sea-Land, the 
parties' bargained-for expectations surrounding the finality of 
arbitration awards mitigate against compelling tripartite 
arbitration. Both unions obtained confirmation of their 
arbitration awards, converting them into enforceable judgments. 
See Mikelson v. United Servs. Auto. Ass'n, 122 Hawai 'i 393, 395, 
227 P.3d 559, 561 (App. 2010) (recognizing that confirmation of arbitration awards converts them into enforceable judgments). 
Such awards may only be vacated, modified, or corrected in 
accordance with chapter 658A. HRS § 658A-22 (2001). As a 
result, compelling tripartite arbitration would undermine the 
finality that all parties contracted for in their arbitration 
agreements. 
A related concern surrounds upholding the grievance
 
procedures embodied in the unions' collective bargaining
 
agreements. A number of courts have held that tripartite
 
arbitration may not be compelled absent a "contractual nexus," 
i.e., a contractual duty to engage in a bipartite arbitration
 
over the matter. Kroger I, 900 F.2d at 947; U.S. Postal Serv.,
 
893 F.2d at 1120. In Kroger I, the employer, concerned about the
 
possibility of conflicting arbitration awards, sought to compel a
 
second union to join in tripartite arbitration. 900 F.2d at 945­
46. Although the first union had invoked its arbitration
 
agreement by first following the contractual grievance procedure,
 neither the second union nor the employer had done so with
 
respect to the second union's contract. Id. Under the terms of
 
its collective bargaining agreement, the second union had only
 consented to arbitration where the four steps for processing a
 
grievance had first been followed. Id. at 947. Because those
 
steps had not been followed, the arbitration provision was not
 triggered and there was no contractual nexus for either bipartite
 
or tripartite arbitration. Id.; see also U.S. Postal Serv. v.
 
Nat'l Rural Letter Carriers' Ass'n, 959 F.2d 283, 285, 287 (D.C.
 
22 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Cir. 1991); Local 7-0018, Paper, Allied-Indus., Chem. & Energy
 
Workers (PACE) Int'l Union v. Wis. Gas Co., 410 F. Supp. 2d 769,
 
774 (E.D. Wis., 2006).
 
In Kroger II, Retail Union filed a grievance and
 
obtained an award in its favor. Kroger II, 927 F.2d at 276. The
 
Teamsters union subsequently obtained a conflicting award in its
 favor. Id. Both unions then sought to confirm their arbitration
 
awards. Id. at 277. Instead of confirming either award, the
 
court ordered tripartite arbitration. Id. On appeal, the Sixth
 
Circuit concluded that because the Teamsters had filed an
 arbitrable grievance, a contractual nexus was present. Id. at
 
279.
 
The Ninth Circuit took an arguably narrower approach to
 
the "contractual nexus" requirement in U.S. Postal Serv., 893
 F.2d 1117. There, one union initiated arbitration against the
 
employer. Id. at 1119. A second union sought to intervene, but
 
the arbitrator refused because no specific provision in the
 agreement permitted intervention. Id. In an action initiated by
 
the employer to compel tripartite arbitration, the court
 recognized that "[t]ripartite arbitration is, in effect, a
 
consolidation of two individual, consensual arbitrations." Id.
 
at 1120. By seeking to intervene, the second union consented to
 arbitration on the merits of the dispute. Id. The court
 
confirmed the holding of Louisiana-Pacific that parties must seek
 tripartite arbitration "before receiving conflicting awards." 
Id. at 1121.
 
Here, no grievance is pending between HGEA and the DOT. 
Unlike the arbitration awards in Kroger II, which were not
 
confirmed, both awards were confirmed in this case. As in Kroger
 
I, HGEA did not seek to invoke its arbitration agreement with
 
regard to UPW's class grievance. The contractual nexus was
 
lacking, and tripartite arbitration was not appropriate.
 
23 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Moreover, in Kroger II, the arbitration awards were
 
fundamentally inconsistent: each mandated assignment of the same
 
work to different unions. 927 F.2d at 281. Unlike Louisiana-
Pacific, the court could not possibly enforce both awards. Id. 
Yet absent tripartite arbitration, the union that "won the race"
 in obtaining the first award would prevail solely on that basis. 
Id. (discussing Tenth Circuit's T.I.M.E.-DC, Inc. case). The
 
court therefore took a broader approach than the Ninth Circuit by
 
compelling tripartite arbitration despite the existence of
 
bipartite awards. Id. at 281-82. Here, because the arbitration
 
awards are not mutually unenforceable, the concerns underlying
 Kroger II are not present.
 
Accordingly, we reject UPW's argument that the Circuit
 
Court erred in failing to apply the federal common law in this
 
case.
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
did not err in denying UPW's motion to compel tripartite
 
arbitration. We affirm the Circuit Court's June 29, 2007
 
Judgment.
 
On the briefs:
 Herbert R. Takahashi
 
Danny J. Vasconcellos
Rebecca L. Covert
 (Takahashi Vasconcellos &
Covert)
for Petitioner-Appellant
 
James E. Halvorson Claire W.S. Chinn Deputies Attorney Generalfor Respondent-AppelleeState of Hawai
'i, Department
of Transportation 
Debra A. Kagawa
for Respondent-AppelleeHawai
'i Government Employees
Association, AFSCME, Local 152, AFL-CIO 
24 