NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29648
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
VICTOR S. NAKATSU, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
PUNA DIVISION
 
(Case No. 3DTC-08-024727)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Victor S. Nakatsu (Nakatsu) appeals
 
from the January 30, 2009 Judgment of the District Court of the
 
1
Third Circuit, Puna Division (district court)  convicting Nakatsu
of Driving While License Suspended or Revoked in violation of
 
2
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 286-132 (2007)  and Driving
Without No Fault Insurance in violation of HRS § 431:10C-104
 
1
 The Honorable Barbara T. Takase presided.
 
2
 HRS § 286-132 provided then, as it does now,
 
Driving while license suspended or revoked. Except as
provided in section 291E-62, no resident or nonresident
whose driver's license, right, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle in this State has been canceled, suspended, or
revoked may drive any motor vehicle upon the highways of
this State while the license, right, or privilege remains
canceled, suspended, or revoked. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2005).3 For each conviction Nakatsu was sentenced to concurrent
 
30-day terms of incarceration, fees and assessments of $37 and
 
for Driving Without No Fault Insurance, his driver's license was
 
suspended for a year. Nakatsu's judgment was stayed pending this
 
appeal.
 
After a careful review of the matters raised by the
 
parties, the record in this case and the applicable legal
 
authority, we resolve Nakatsu's appeal as follows.
 
As his sole issue raised in his opening brief, Nakatsu 
challenges the district court's admission of State's Exhibit 1, a 
Certificate issued by the County of Hawai' i, Department of 
Finance, Vehicle Registration and Licensing Division, Driver License Section (Certificate) insofar as it attests that Nakatsu 
"was not exempted from license under [HRS] Section 286-105" 
because it is "misleading" to the extent HRS § 286-105 (2007) 
4
provides  for exemptions to the licensing requirement when
3 HRS § 431:10C-104 provided then, as it does now,
 
Conditions of operation and registration of motor vehicles.
(a) Except as provided in section 431:10C-105, no person
shall operate or use a motor vehicle upon any public street,
road, or highway of this State at any time unless such motor
vehicle is insured at all times under a motor vehicle
 insurance policy.
 
(b) Every owner of a motor vehicle used or operated at
any time upon any public street, road, or highway of this
State shall obtain a motor vehicle insurance policy upon
such vehicle which provides the coverage required by this
article and shall maintain the motor vehicle insurance
 policy at all times for the entire motor vehicle
registration period.
 
(c) Any person who violates the provisions of this
section shall be subject to the provisions of section
431:10C-117(a).
 
(d) The provisions of this article shall not apply to
any vehicle owned by or registered in the name of any agency
of the federal government, or to any antique motor vehicle
as defined in section 249-1.
 
4
 §286-105 What persons are exempt from license.
 
The following persons are exempt from license:
 
. . . .
 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"operating farm tractors, implements of husbandry and road
 
machines" and an "implement of husbandry" is not defined by
 
statute. 
However, assuming, arguendo, that the Certificate was
 
misleading, Nakatsu cites no authority, and we find none, that
 
supports his argument this was a valid objection to admission of
 
the document. The district court did not err in admitting the
 
Certificate into evidence.
 
Nakatsu's counsel also argues in the opening brief 
submitted by him that he is providing ineffective assistance of 
counsel on appeal as he "is incapable of properly asserting the 
'Hawaiian Sovereignty' Defenses of the Defendant, since he does 
not agree with the Defendant's political position[.]" However, 
counsel did not maintain that Nakatsu's Hawaiian Sovereignty 
claim is frivolous or "is so repugnant to the lawyer as to be 
likely to impair the client-lawyer relationship or the lawyer's 
ability to represent the client[,]" Hawai' i Rules of Professional 
Conduct (HRPC) Rule 6.2 cmt. [2], and argues instead that he cannot make Nakatsu's argument because he is court-appointed and 
is paid to represent Nakatsu by the State of Hawai' i. Counsel 
has failed to establish that he could not, consistent with the HRPC, assert these "defenses" on Nakatsu's behalf. 
As counsel himself recognizes, the source of his fee
 
cannot interfere with his obligation to zealously represent his
 
4(...continued)
(2)	 Any person while driving or operating any road
machine, farm tractor, or implement of husbandry
temporarily operated or moved on a highway; provided
that no person under the age of thirteen years shall
be permitted to drive or operate any such road
machine, farm tractor, or implement of husbandry on a
highway[.]
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
client, Nakatsu. HRPC Rule 1.8(f).5 Moreover, counsel does not
 
have the luxury of presenting only those arguments with which he
 
agrees.
 
Rule 3.1. MERITORIOUS CLAIMS AND CONTENTIONS.
 
A lawyer shall not bring or defend a proceeding, or
assert or controvert an issue therein, unless there is a
basis for doing so that is not frivolous, which includes a
good faith argument for an extension, modification, or
reversal of existing law. A lawyer for the defendant in a
criminal proceeding, or the respondent in a proceeding that
could result in incarceration, may nevertheless so defend
the proceeding as to require that every element of the case
be established.
 
COMMENT:
 
[1] The advocate has a duty to use legal procedure for
 
the fullest benefit of the client's cause, but also a duty
 
not to abuse legal procedure. The law, both procedural and
 substantive, establishes the limits within which an advocate
 may proceed. However, the law is not always clear and never
 is static. Accordingly, in determining the proper scope of
 advocacy, account must be taken of the law's ambiguities and
 potential for change.
 
[2] The filing of an action or defense or similar
 
action taken for a client is not frivolous merely because
 the facts have not first been fully substantiated or because
 the lawyer expects to develop vital evidence only by
 discovery. Such action is not frivolous even though the
 lawyer believes that the client's position ultimately will
 not prevail. The action is frivolous, however, if the client
 desires to have the action taken primarily for the purpose
 of harassing or maliciously injuring a person or if the
 lawyer is unable either to make a good faith argument on the
 merits of the action taken or to support the action taken by
 a good faith argument for an extension, modification or
 reversal of existing law.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
On March 17, 2011, this court ordered counsel to file a
 
supplemental brief presenting Nakatsu's "Hawaiian sovereignty
 
defenses" as alluded to in the opening brief. The order also
 
5
 HRPC Rule 1.8(f) provides,
 
(f) A lawyer shall not accept compensation for
representing a client from one other than the client unless:
 
(1) the client consents after consultation;
 
(2) there is no interference with the lawyer's
independence of professional judgment or with the
client-lawyer relationship; and
 
(3) information relating to representation of a
client is protected as required by Rule 1.6.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
provided the State with an opportunity to respond to the
 
supplemental brief.
 
In his supplemental brief, Nakatsu argues,
 
The Hawaiian sovereignty defense in this particular case
stems from the fact that the Appellant stated he was a
citizen of the Hawaiian Kingdom and not bound by the laws of
the State of Hawaii and that the vehicle was registered with
the Reinstated Hawaiian Kingdom. . . . The essence of
 [Nakatsu's] Hawaiian sovereignty defense assertion is that
the Kingdom of Hawaii exists as the only legal entity
capable of allowing him to drive.
 
Nakatsu did not establish below, nor does he argue on appeal,
 
that he did not operate his motor vehicle on a public road or
 
highway within the State of Hawai' i. 
However, as Nakatsu himself acknowledges, this court in
 
State v. Fergerstrom, 106 Hawai' i 43, 55, 101 P.3d 652, 664 
(App. 2004) held that
 
the State of Hawai' i has lawful jurisdiction over all
persons operating motor vehicles on public roads or highways
within the State of Hawai' i. Persons claiming to be
citizens of the Kingdom of Hawai' i and not of the State of 
Hawai'i are not exempt from the laws of the State of Hawai' i 
applicable to all persons (citizens and non-citizens)operating motor vehicles on public roads and highways withinthe State of Hawai' i. 
Therefore, the January 30, 2009 Judgment of the
 
District Court of the Third Circuit, Puna Division, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 16, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Vaughan S. Winborne, Jr.,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Dakota K. Frenz,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai
'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
5
 