NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29301 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
LLOYD JONES, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT

 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0034)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION

 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise, and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Lloyd Jones (Jones) appeals from 
the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence (Judgment) 
filed on July 10, 2008, in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit court).
1 Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) 
charged Jones by complaint with one count of second degree assault, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 702­711(1)(d) (Supp. 2009).
2 A jury found Jones guilty as charged. 
The circuit court sentenced Jones to five years of probation and ninety days of jail confinement, and it ordered him to pay restitution in the amount of $2,379.00. 
On appeal, Jones argues that the circuit court erred by
 
proceeding with the trial, even though Jones's trial counsel
 (defense counsel) stated that defense counsel was not prepared,
 because Jones himself stated that Jones did not want a
 
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
 
§ 707-711 Assault in the second 1
2 HRS Section 707-711(1)(d) provides:
 
degree. (1) A person

commits the offense of assault in the second degree if:
 
. . . 

(d)	 The person intentionally or knowingly causes bodily
injury to another person with a dangerous
instrument[.]
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
continuance. Jones further argues that defense counsel was
 
ineffective for failing to move for a continuance. 
Jones also asserts that defense counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance by: (1) failing to enforce Jones's rights
 under the speedy trial requirements of Hawaii Rules of Penal
 Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48 (2000); (2) failing to call witnesses at
 
trial who Jones claims could have exculpated him; (3) calling a
 
witness, Jones's wife, that was allegedly detrimental to Jones's
 defense; and (4) persuading Jones not to testify. Finally, Jones
 argues that the circuit court erred by: (1) failing on its own
 initiative to instruct the jury on the lesser included offense of
 third degree assault; and (2) failing to give Jones's proposed
 jury instruction on self-defense. 
We affirm Jones's conviction.
 
I. BACKGROUND 
A.
 
Jones was charged with using a dangerous instrument, 
namely, an "axe and/or pipe," to knowingly cause bodily injury to the complaining witness, John Evans (Evans). The charge stemmed 
from a February 17, 2007, altercation between Jones and Evans 
that took place in the Kapa
'a area on Kaua 'i. The State contended 
that Jones aggressively attacked Evans because Evans urinated near Jones's van, and during this altercation, Jones hit Evans with a small ax (hatchet) or a pipe. 
B.
 
On April 14, 2008, the parties appeared before the
 
circuit court for jury trial. Defense counsel stated that he was
 not ready to proceed to trial, but that his client wanted to
 proceed to trial.
3 Defense counsel stated the following reasons
 
for his unpreparedness: (1) defense counsel had received from the
 
3
 The apparent reason that Jones wanted to proceed to trial was that he
could not afford to take further time off from work and was under threat from
 
his supervisor that he would be fired if he did not "clear this matter up[.]"
Defense counsel stated, "because of [Jones's] job situation, [Jones] feels
compelled to go to trial despite the fact that I have told [Jones] repeatedly
that I do not feel ready to proceed."
 
2
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State that morning thirty-five pages of transcribed interview
 
statements of Jones, Evans, and a witness, Ray Balai (Balai), 
and needed time to "digest the statements and incorporate them
 into [his] case"; (2) an emergency room physician who treated
 
both Evans and Jones for injuries after the altercation was
 
unable to testify because he was on vacation; (3) defense counsel
 
was unable to serve subpoenas on pertinent defense witnesses
 
including Jones's wife and his step-son; (4) defense counsel
 wanted more time to consider issuing a subpoena for another
 doctor if the original emergency room physician was unavailable;
 and (5) defense counsel had not received pertinent medical
 records.
4 Defense counsel told the circuit court that he would
 
normally move to continue or dismiss the matter, but "because of
 my client's job circumstance, . . . [Jones] feels compelled to
 proceed today. And despite the fact that I have repeatedly
 advised [Jones] that I am not ready because of the late
 discovery, [Jones] wants to go to trial today."
 
The following exchange then occurred:
 
[Court]: [T]he problem in this case is that your
client doesn't want you to make a motion to continue, and I
think that's your concern. Is that correct?
 
[Defense counsel]: That's correct, your Honor.
 
[Court]: In spite of the fact that your client
doesn't want you to make the motion to continue, would you
still be willing to represent Mr. Jones in this case?
 
[Defense counsel]: Yes, your Honor.
 
[Court]: Mr. Jones, your attorney, [defense counsel],
has given the Court a number of reasons for the making of a
motion to continue. And the Court, taking those reasons
into account, would consider, favorably consider, granting
the oral motion made by [defense counsel], if it was made. 
4 The prosecutor represented that he had inherited the case from a
number of different deputies and that Jones also had been represented by prior
counsel. The prosecutor stated that his files indicated that discovery had
previously been provided to Jones, but was not sure of the content of what was
previously disclosed. The prosecutor did not dispute that Jones's current
defense counsel had just received the transcribed interview statements that
morning. Defense counsel noted that the date of transcription for the
interview statements was in May and June of 2007, whereas the prosecutor
stated his files indicated that the prior discovery had been provided in
February 2007. 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
But because you are the client and you get to make
decisions, to an extent, regarding how your case is managed
and/or presented, it is the Court's understanding that you
don't want your case continued in spite of all these reasons
given by [defense counsel]; is that correct?
 
[Jones]: That's correct.
 
[Court]: And [defense counsel] did raise some
employment issues that you may have regarding this
proceeding. So it is the Court's understanding that
[defense counsel] has discussed additional discovery that he
just received regarding statements made by you, Mr. Balai
and Mr. Evans that are in written form and for him to review
 that; that the emergency room doctor, Dr. Pakroy, is not
available, apparently he is off island, either on vacation
or just not available; that he hasn't been able to serve the
subpoena on [Jones's wife] and/or your child; and that Dr.
Evan Lee may or may not be available to testify in your
trial and he doesn't have medical records.
 
So, in spite of all of that, do you want your case
continued with the Court giving you a date later on to allow
[defense counsel] to address these five issues? Or do you
want your trial to proceed today?
 
[Jones]: I want my trial to proceed today.
 
[Court]: Okay. And do you understand [defense
counsel] wants to make that motion to continue, but because
he is not authorized, that he's not going to make that
motion; and in spite of not making that motion, even though
[defense counsel] believes that the motion should be made,
he is still willing to be your attorney in this case? Do
 you understand that?
 
[Jones]: Yes.
 
[Court]: Do you have any objections with [defense
counsel] continuing to be your attorney in spite of the fact
that he has told the Court that he believes a motion to
 continue should be made on your behalf, but he is not going
to do that because you are not authorizing it?
 
[Jones]: Right.
 
During a break in jury selection, an additional
 
exchange occurred outside the hearing of the jury, in which the
 
circuit court reiterated to Jones the circumstances surrounding
 Jones's request to proceed with the trial that day. Jones again
 confirmed that he wanted to proceed with the trial as scheduled.
 
C.
 
At trial, Evans testified that on February 18, 2007, he
 
went with about a dozen of his family and friends to a canal by
 the Kapa
'a library to go crabbing. Jones, along with his step­
4
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
son and wife, happened to also be in the same area with his van. 
Evans testified that he twice went to a corner of the canal area
 to urinate. Jones's step-son and wife testified that Evans
 
urinated on or in the vicinity of Jones's van, which Evans
 
denied. 
Evans testified that Jones told Evans that Evans was
 
"in his territory," to which Evans responded "Brah, you got a
 problem?" while walking away. Evans asserted that Jones then
 rushed Evans from behind, slammed Evans against a fence, and
 tried to gouge out Evans's eyes. During this struggle, Evans was
 struck in the back of his head and on his face with an object,
 but he did not know what the object was. Evans sustained a cut
 to his head, which required four staples to close, and cuts above
 his left eyebrow, to his right eyelid, and to his right cheek,
 which required stitches.
 
The State called two friends of Evans who were present
 
at the scene of the altercation. One witness, Balai, testified
 that he initially saw Jones's wife, Tracey Jones (Tracey),
 swinging a hatchet in the area of the altercation between Jones
 and Evans.  Balai then went to his truck and grabbed a broken
 
shovel handle. Upon returning, he saw Jones with the hatchet and
 
saw Jones hit Evans with the hatchet twice. Balai used the
 
shovel handle to block Jones from hitting Evans a third time with
 the hatchet, and then Balai grabbed the hatchet. The other
 witness, Lawyer Dabney (Dabney), testified that he also saw
 Tracey swinging a hatchet. Dabney ran back to his vehicle to
 find something to stop Tracey from hitting Jones with the
 hatchet, and returned with a tree branch. When he returned,
 Balai was already holding the hatchet, and Dabney saw Jones
 holding a piece of metal rebar. A police officer who arrived at
 the scene testified that upon his arrival, he witnessed Jones
 holding a metal stake or rebar, and Balai holding a shovel
 handle.
 
Jones's step-son, Calvin Bosworth (Bosworth), testified
 
that Evans was the first aggressor and that Balai was the one who
 
5
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was wielding the hatchet during the altercation, not Jones. 
Bosworth also testified that he did not think the hatchet
 
belonged to him, Tracey, or Jones. Tracey testified that Evans
 threatened to kill her several times, that she saw Balai hit
 Jones with a "club," and that she saw Evans hit Jones in the head
 with a liquor bottle. Tracey also testified that she did not
 hold the hatchet or "ax" until she saw it laying in the parking
 lot as she was looking for her phone. She assumed it was hers
 because her family used an ax to cut wood, and she put it back
 into her van. At the scene, Tracey told a police officer that
 "[t]he ax belongs to us. It is our ax[.]" Jones did not testify
 in his own defense.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Plain Error
 
The appellate court "will apply the plain error 
standard of review to correct errors which seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights." State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai
'i 325, 
330, 966 P.2d 637, 642 (1998). An appellate court's "power to deal with plain error is one to be exercised sparingly and with caution because the plain error rule represents a departure from a presupposition of the adversary system -- that a party must look to his or her counsel for protection and bear the cost of counsel's mistakes." State v. Randles, 112 Hawai
'i 192, 194, 145 
P.3d 735, 737 (App. 2006) (quoting State v. Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 515, 849 P.2d 58, 74-75 (1993)). 
B. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
 
When an ineffective assistance of counsel claim is
 
raised, the question is: "When viewed as a whole, was the
assistance provided to the defendant 'within the range of
competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases?'"
Additionally, the defendant has the burden of establishing
ineffective assistance of counsel and must meet the
 following two-part test: 1) that there were specific errors
or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment,
or diligence; and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted
in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a
potentially meritorious defense. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Janto, 92 Hawai 'i 19, 31, 986 P.2d 306, 318 (1999) 
(citation omitted and internal block quote format changed). 
C. Jury Instructions
 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading.
 
Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and
are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears
from the record as a whole that the error was not
 prejudicial.
 
Error is not to be viewed in isolation and considered
 
purely in the abstract. It must be examined in the light of
the entire proceedings and given the effect which the whole
record shows it to be entitled. In that context, the real
question becomes whether there is a reasonable possibility
that error may have contributed to conviction. 
If there is such a reasonable possibility in a
criminal case, then the error is not harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt, and the judgment of conviction on which it
may have been based must be set aside.
 
State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai 'i 289, 292-93, 119 P.3d 597, 600-01 
(2005) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets
 
omitted; internal block quote format changed).
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.
 
After Jones was advised of defense counsel's desire for
 
a continuance and the supporting reasons, Jones told the circuit
 court that "I want my trial to proceed today." Nevertheless, on
 appeal, Jones now contends that his conviction must be overturned
 because the circuit court honored his request to proceed to
 trial. Jones further argues that defense counsel provided
 ineffective assistance by failing to contravene Jones's wishes
 and request a continuance. We conclude that these arguments lack
 merit.
 
1.
 
In conformance with Jones's wishes, defense counsel did
 
not move to continue the trial. Accordingly, there was no
 continuance motion for the circuit court to rule upon. Jones's
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argument that the circuit court erred boils down to a claim that
 
the circuit court committed plain error in failing to sua sponte
 order a continuance.
 
It is difficult for a trial judge to know the extent to
 
which an attorney is competent and prepared to proceed to trial. 
Therefore, the trial judge must rely on counsel to move for a
 continuance if circumstances arise which preclude counsel from
 competently representing his or her client. There may be
 extraordinary circumstances in which a court's failure to order a
 trial continuance sua sponte may rise to the level of plain
 error. However, Jones has not shown, based on the record in this
 case, that the circuit court committed plain error.
 
In support of his argument, Jones cites case law which
 
states that a defendant has the exclusive right to decide whether
 to plead guilty, waive a jury, or testify in his or her own
 behalf. See, e.g., Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U.S. 72, 93 n.1
 
(1977) (Burger, J., concurring) ("Only such basic decisions as
 whether to plead guilty, waive a jury, or testify in one's own
 behalf are ultimately for the accused to make."); United States
 v. Moody, 977 F.2d 1425, 1430 (11th Cir. 1992). However, a
 defendant's exclusive province to decide these three issues does
 not mean that a defendant's wishes in other areas are not
 significant or should not be considered by counsel or the trial
 court.
 
In State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 960 P.2d 1227 
(1998), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court cited to the American Bar 
Association (ABA) Defense Function Standards in the context of addressing a defendant's ineffective assistance of counsel claim: 
The ABA Defense Function Standards provide useful guidance
in determining which decisions must be made by the defendant
and which decisions are the province of counsel:
 
Standard 4-5.2 Control and Direction of the Case.
 
(a) Certain decisions relating to the conduct of
the case are ultimately for the accused and others are
ultimately for defense counsel. The decisions which
 are to be made by the accused after full consultation
with counsel include:
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(i) what pleas to enter;
 
(ii) whether to accept a plea agreement;
 (iii) whether to waive a jury trial;
 (iv) whether to testify in his or her own
behalf; and
 
(v) whether to appeal.
 (b) Strategic and tactical decisions should be
made by defense counsel after consultation with the
client where feasible and appropriate. Such decisions
 include what witnesses to call, whether and how to
conduct cross-examination, what jurors to accept or
strike, what trial motions should be made, and what
evidence should be introduced.
 
American Bar Association, Standards for Criminal Justice -­Prosecution Function and Defense Function, Standard 4-5.2
(3d ed.1993) . . . .
 
Id. at 39, 960 P.2d at 1247 (emphasis added). Thus, the ABA
 
standards state that defense counsel should consult with the
 client where feasible and appropriate before making tactical
 decisions that are within the province of defense counsel. We
 also note that under the Hawai
'i Rules of Professional Conduct 
(HRPC), a lawyer is required to consult with his or her client
 concerning the objectives of representation and the means by
 which these objectives are to be pursued. See HRPC Rule 1.2(a).
5
 
In this case, it was appropriate for defense counsel 
to consider Jones's strong desire to proceed to trial and the
 consequences that a continuance would have on Jones's interests. 
The circuit court specifically asked defense counsel whether he
 
5 HRPC Rule 1.2 provides in relevant part:
 
Rule 1.2. SCOPE OF REPRESENTATION.
 
(a) A lawyer shall abide by a client's decisions concerning
the objectives of representation, subject to paragraphs (c), (d)
and (e), and shall consult with the client as to the means by
which the objectives are to be pursued. A lawyer shall abide by a
client's decision whether to accept an offer of settlement of a
matter. In a criminal case, the lawyer shall abide by the
client's decision, after consultation with the lawyer, as to a
plea to be entered, whether to waive jury trial, and whether the
client will testify.
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was willing to represent Jones in the case despite the matters
 
defense counsel described as affecting his preparedness. Defense
 counsel said yes. Defense counsel did not state that he was
 incompetent to proceed or move to withdraw from the case.
 
The record indicates that defense counsel was already
 
representing Jones at least as of February 25, 2008, when a
 hearing was held at which the State made an oral motion to
 continue the trial. At that hearing, the circuit court granted
 the State's oral motion. Trial was continued to April 14, 2008,
 and commenced on that date. Thus, prior to the eventual trial,
 it appears that defense counsel had been representing Jones for
 an adequate period of time to become familiar with the case. The
 record further shows that defense counsel received the interview
 statements in the morning, before jury selection. Opening
 
statements were not given and the State's case did not begin
 
until that afternoon, and defense counsel did not cross-examine
 Evans, the State's first witness, until the following day. 
Therefore, defense counsel had an opportunity to review the
 interview statements before opening statements and before having
 to cross-examine the State's first witness. Finally, during the
 trial, defense counsel did not state that matters had arisen
 which rendered him incompetent to represent Jones, nor did
 defense counsel ask for a continuance. Based on the existing
 record, we cannot say that the circuit court's failure to sua
 sponte continue the trial constituted plain error. 
Our conclusion is supported by the principles
 
underlying the invited error doctrine. Under that doctrine, "a
 defendant cannot by his own voluntary conduct invite error and
 then seek to profit thereby." Phillips v. State, 527 So. 2d 154,
 
156 (Ala. 1988); see also Jones v. State, 600 P.2d 247, 250 (Nev.
 1979) (stating that where the defendant participated in the
 alleged error, the defendant was estopped from raising any
 objection on appeal); Adkins v. State, 930 So. 2d 524, 538-40
 (Ala. Crim. App. 2001) ("When a competent defendant knowingly and
 voluntarily chooses a lawful course of action or defense
 
10
 6 In Phillips and Jones, the error was invited by the defendant's
counsel while in Adkins, the error was invited by the defendant himself.
 
7 The supreme court also noted in Nichols that "the general rule is
inapplicable where an invited error is so prejudicial as to be plain error or
to constitute ineffective assistance of counsel." Nichols, 111 Hawai' i at 339 
n.7, 141 P.3d at 986 n.7. 

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
strategy, counsel is essentially bound by that decision. If the 
defendant is prejudiced in some respect by his own decision, he should not later be heard to complain about those consequences by challenging the conduct of his counsel." (Citation omitted.)).
6 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court "has acknowledged that, as a general 
rule, invited errors are not reversible." State v. Nichols, 111 
Hawai'i 327, 339 n.7, 141 P.3d 974, 986 n.7 (2006).7 Even if an 
invited error does not preclude appellate review, the invited nature of the alleged error should factor into the plain error analysis. 
Here, Jones himself, after being apprised of defense 
counsel's situation and desires, told the circuit court that he wanted to proceed to trial. The fact that Jones himself insisted on proceeding to trial reinforces our view that the circuit court's failure to sua sponte order a continuance on the day of trial did not "seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings." See Sawyer, 88 
Hawai
'i at 330, 966 P.2d at 642. Vacating Jones's conviction 
because the circuit court failed to sua sponte order a continuance would not "serve the ends of justice," nor is it necessary to "prevent the denial of fundamental rights." Id. 
2.
 
Jones also contends that defense counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance by failing to request a continuance on the
 morning of trial to enable defense counsel to become better
 prepared for trial. We disagree. Based on the existing record,
 Jones has not met his burden of demonstrating his entitlement to
 relief on this ineffective assistance of counsel claim.
 
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Jones has not shown that competent counsel for a
 
criminal defendant in the situation facing Jones's defense
 
counsel would have moved for a continuance over Jones's objection
 or moved to withdraw from the case. Although defense counsel
 indicated that he wanted more time to prepare, lawyers often
 desire more time to prepare for trial. When questioned by the
 circuit court, defense counsel said he was willing to represent
 Jones in the case. Defense counsel did not say he was
 incompetent to represent Jones and did not move to withdraw. 
Jones has not demonstrated that defense counsel's level of
 preparedness was such that competent counsel for a criminal
 defendant, under the circumstances facing Jones's defense
 counsel, would have declined to proceed.
 
During trial, defense counsel did not revisit the need
 
for a continuance or note instances where his ability to cross-
examine witnesses or defend Jones was impaired. Jones does not
 point to portions of the trial transcript which indicate with any
 particularity that defense counsel's cross-examination of the
 State's witnesses was deficient. Nor does Jones demonstrate or
 explain how the absence of the emergency room physician or the
 
8
delayed production of medical records  substantially impaired
Jones's defense.9 Thus, Jones has failed to meet his burden,
 
based on the record before us, of showing that defense counsel's
 failure to move for a continuance to give defense counsel more
 time to prepare resulted in the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a meritorious defense.
 
8 The record shows that during a morning break in jury selection, the
State provided defense counsel with copies of the medical records defense
counsel claimed he had not received. 
9 Jones called his wife and step-son as witnesses at trial. Accordingly,
the concerns defense counsel raised about his inability to serve subpoenas on
Jones's wife and step-son were resolved.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B.
 
Jones argues that defense counsel was ineffective for
 
prejudicing Jones's rights under HRPP Rule 48.10 Jones contends
 
that defense counsel rendered ineffective assistance by failing
 
to move to dismiss the charge based on a violation of HRPP Rule
 48. Jones also contends that defense counsel was ineffective for
 (1) "possibl[y]" failing to object to the State's request for a
 continuance on February 25, 2008, and (2) failing to seek a
 continuance on the day of the eventual trial, because had defense
 counsel objected on February 25, 2008, or sought a continuance on
 the day of trial, the State would have been forced to dismiss the
 charge under HRPP Rule 48. Jones has not supplied this court
 with a sufficient record to evaluate these claims, as it is his
 burden to do, and we therefore reject them. 
Approximately 421 days elapsed between the time of

 
Jones's arrest and the date of trial. This appears in part
 attributable to the fact that Jones initially entered a no
 contest plea to a lesser charge, but later withdrew it. Although
 Jones asserts that the HRPP Rule 48 time limits had been violated
 
11
before his April 14, 2008, trial,  Jones fails to support this
assertion with references to matters in the record, specifically, 
10 HRPP Rule 48 in part provides:
 
. . . .
 
(b) By Court. Except in the case of traffic offenses that
are not punishable by imprisonment, the court shall, on motion of
the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or without prejudice in
its discretion, if trial is not commenced within six months:
 
(1) from the date of arrest if bail is set or from the
filing of the charge, whichever is sooner, on any offense based on
the same conduct or arising from the same criminal episode for
which the arrest or charge was made; . . . .
 
HRPP Rule 48 also sets forth numerous different categories of periods of time
that "shall be excluded in computing the time for trial commencement." HRPP
Rule 48(c); see also HRPP Rule 48(d).
 
11 The State disputes Jones's contention that the HRPP Rule 48 time
limits had been violated before the trial.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the transcripts of the hearings at which trial continuances were
 
granted. 
This court was presented with a similar situation in 
State v. Maddox, 116 Hawai 'i 445, 173 P.3d 592 (App. 2007). In 
Maddox, the defendant argued on appeal that his trial counsel was ineffective for failing to file a motion to dismiss the indictment pursuant to HRPP Rule 48 because the trial was not commenced within the time period required by HRPP Rule 48. Id. 
at 463, 173 P.3d at 610. The defendant "did not include as part of the record on appeal transcripts of hearings held on the State's motions to continue the trial that were granted by the circuit court." Id. We concluded that the defendant "failed to 
meet his burden of demonstrating 'error by reference to matters in the record.' Without the missing transcripts, [the defendant] cannot show that HRPP Rule 48 had been violated and thus cannot meet his burden of demonstrating that his counsel was ineffective for failing to file a HRPP Rule 48 motion to dismiss." Id. 
(quoting State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai
'i 333, 334, 3 P.3d 499, 500 
(2000)). Accordingly, we rejected the defendant's claim that his counsel provided ineffective assistance in failing to file an HRPP Rule 48 motion to dismiss the indictment. Id. 
Here, Jones has likewise failed to provide this court
 
with transcripts of the hearings at which the trial continuances
 were granted. Without the relevant transcripts, we are unable to
 determine whether there were non-excludable delays that exceeded
 the time limit set forth under HRPP Rule 48. Because Jones did
 not satisfy his threshold burden of showing that HRPP Rule 48 was
 violated, Jones's claim that his defense counsel provided
 ineffective assistance by not moving to dismiss on HRPP Rule 48
 grounds must fail. 
Jones's failure to provide this court with the relevant
 
transcripts is also fatal to his related claims that defense
 counsel's "possible failure" to object to the State's request for
 a continuance on February 25, 2008, and failure to seek a
 continuance on the day of trial constituted ineffective
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assistance because such conduct prejudiced Jones's HRPP Rule 48
 
rights. Without the relevant transcripts, we are unable to
 assess whether an objection by defense counsel would have
 rendered the continuance granted on February 25, 2008, non-
excludable or whether a request by defense counsel for a
 continuance on the day of trial would have led to an HRPP Rule 48
 violation. In addition, these claims are unpersuasive because
 they are based on speculation. We do not know whether the
 circuit court would have granted the continuance on February 25,
 2008, if defense counsel had objected. We also do not know how
 long a continuance the circuit court may have granted, if defense
 counsel had requested one on the day of trial, and thus we cannot
 say whether any continuance granted would have resulted in an
 HRPP Rule 48 violation. Accordingly, we reject Jones's
 ineffective assistance of counsel claims that are based on HRPP
 Rule 48.
12
 
C.
 
We also reject Jones's claims that defense counsel was
 
ineffective for: (1) neglecting to call exculpatory witnesses at
 trial; (2) calling as a witness Jones's wife, Tracey, who gave 
testimony detrimental to the defense, without defense counsel
 conducting an adequate prior investigation; and (3) persuading
 Jones to not testify. We conclude that Jones has not met his
 burden of establishing the ineffectiveness of defense counsel
 with respect to these claims based on the existing record.
 
Jones has not pointed to any reliable evidence in the 
record indicating to what the alleged exculpatory witnesses would have testified. See Richie, 88 Hawai
'i at 39, 960 P.2d at 1247 
("Ineffective assistance of counsel claims based on the failure to obtain witnesses must be supported by affidavits or sworn 
12 In its answering brief, the State argues that implicit in Jones's
ineffective assistance of counsel claim is the assumption that a dismissal
under HRPP Rule 48 would have been with prejudice. In light of our analysis,
we need not address whether Jones was required to show that any dismissal
under HRPP Rule 48 would have been with prejudice. 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statements describing the testimony of the proffered 
witnesses."); see also State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai 'i 462, 481, 
946 P.2d 32, 51 (1997) (concluding that a defendant's speculation about the potential testimony of uncalled witnesses is insufficient to support an ineffective assistance of counsel claim). Jones also has not demonstrated through evidence in the record that defense counsel provided ineffective assistance with respect to calling Tracey as a witness. Thus, his claims relating to the alleged exculpatory witnesses and Tracey are without merit. 
Jones's claim that defense counsel was ineffective for 
"persuading" Jones not to testify at trial is equally without merit. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated that since "the 
decision whether or not to testify is a highly tactical one that is 'ultimately committed to a defendant's own discretion,' an attorney's recommendation as to whether or not a defendant should testify will rarely qualify as an error reflecting a 'lack of judgment.'" Jones v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 330, 334, 902 P.2d 965, 
969 (1995) (quoting Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai 'i 226, 232, 900 
P.2d 1293, 1299 (1995)). The record indicates that Jones was given a Tachibana colloquy by the circuit court, and Jones does not challenge the adequacy of the circuit court's advisement. Thus, Jones carries a high burden in proving that defense counsel's advice on whether Jones should testify constitutes ineffective assistance. 
Jones has not met that burden here. The record does
 
not include an explanation by defense counsel of the advice he
 gave Jones on whether Jones should testify or the reasons for
 such advice. Jones has not demonstrated through evidence in the
 record that defense counsel provided ineffective assistance in
 advising Jones on whether to testify.
 
D.
 
With the exception of Jones's ineffective assistance of
 
counsel claims based on HRPP Rule 48, we deny Jones's ineffective
 assistance of counsel claims without prejudice to Jones raising
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
such claims at an HRPP Rule 40 proceeding. As to the claims
 
based on HRPP Rule 48, Jones had the opportunity based on the
 existing record to refer this court to matters that could
 possibly have supported his claims that defense counsel provided
 ineffective assistance, but Jones failed to do so. With respect
 to Jones's other claims of ineffective assistance, however, we
 conclude that Jones did not have a fair opportunity to develop
 the record to support his claims. We cannot say that with a more
 fully developed record, Jones would not be able to establish
 these claims. Accordingly, we deny without prejudice Jones's
 ineffective assistance of counsel claims that are not based on
 HRPP Rule 48. See State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 439-40, 864 P.2d
 
583, 592-93, 593 (1993).
 
E.
 
Jones argues that the circuit court erred by: (1)
 
allowing Jones to determine whether instructions on lesser
 included offenses should be given to the jury; and (2) failing to
 instruct the jury on lesser included offenses. We agree on both
 points. However, we conclude that the circuit court's ultimate
 error in failing to instruct the jury on lesser included offenses
 was harmless.
 
After the conclusion of the evidentiary portion of
 
trial, the circuit court noted that evidence had been presented
 that could suggest that Jones committed the lesser included
 offense of third degree assault, a misdemeanor, or third degree
 assault during a mutual affray, a petty misdemeanor. The circuit
 court then proceeded to give Jones himself the option of whether
 the jury would be instructed on the lesser included offenses. 
After a colloquy between the circuit court and Jones, Jones
 stated that he only wanted the circuit court to instruct the jury
 on the charged offense, second degree assault, and not on any
 lesser included offenses. Accordingly, the circuit court did not
 instruct the jury on lesser included offenses. 
The circuit court erred in allowing Jones to control
 
the decision on whether the circuit court would instruct the jury
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on lesser included offenses and in failing to instruct the jury 
on lesser included offenses. In State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai 'i 405, 
413, 16 P.3d 246, 254 (2001), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that 
"trial courts must instruct juries as to any included offenses when 'there is a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and convicting the defendant of the included offense . . . ." It further held that "trial courts are duty bound to instruct juries 'sua sponte . . . regarding lesser included offenses,' having a rational basis in the evidence." Id. at 415, 16 P.3d at 256 (citation and 
footnote omitted; ellipsis in original). 
Haanio went on to hold, however, that while the trial
 
court's failure to give appropriate included offense instructions
 constitutes error, "[s]uch error . . . is harmless when the jury
 convicts the defendant of the charged offense or of an included
 offense greater than the included offense erroneously omitted
 from the instructions." Id. at 415, 16 P.3d at 256. Here, the
 
jury convicted Jones of the charged offense of second degree
 assault. Thus, the circuit court's failure to instruct the jury
 on lesser included offenses was harmless error. See id. at 415­
16, 16 P.3d at 256-57. 
F.
 
Jones's argument that the circuit court erred in
 
failing to give his proposed jury instruction on self-defense is
 without merit. Jones's proposed jury instruction on self-defense
 consisted of language taken from this court's decision in State
 v. Lubong, 77 Hawai
'i 429, 433, 886 P.2d 766, 770 (App. 1994). 
Jones argues that his proposed instruction "more clearly" and in "layman's terms" identifies the factors the jury must consider in determining whether Jones's use of force was justified than the following language used by the circuit court in its self-defense instruction: 
The reasonableness of the defendant's belief that the
 
use of such protective force was immediately necessary
shall be determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable
person in the defendant's position under the
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
circumstances of which the defendant was aware or as
 
the defendant reasonably believed them to be.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held that the above-
quoted language from the circuit court's instruction is a correct 
statement of the law. State v. Augustin, 101 Hawai 'i 127, 127­
28, 63 P.3d 1097, 1097-98 (2002). Jones does not claim otherwise. We conclude that the circuit court did not err in failing to give the self-defense instruction proposed by Jones. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We affirm the circuit court's July 10, 2008, Judgment. 
With the exception of Jones's ineffective assistance of counsel
 claims based on HRPP Rule 48, our affirmance is without prejudice
 to Jones's raising his claims of ineffective assistance of
 counsel at a subsequent HRPP Rule 40 proceeding. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 5, 2010. 
On the briefs: Gregory H. Meyers
(Hempey & Meyers LLP)for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Lauren C. McDowell (Justin F. Kollar, on the briefs)Deputy Prosecuting AttorneysCounty of Kauaifor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
19
 