 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28856
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DAVID THOMPSON; GAIL THOMPSON; STEVEN THOMPSON, by and
through his father and next friend, DAVID THOMPSON, and
mother and next friend, GAIL THOMPSON, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. SAINT LOUIS SCHOOL; ALLEN DELONG; and WENDELL STASZKOW,
Defendants-Appellees and JOHN AND JANE DOES 1-10; DOE
PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; and
OTHER DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0311)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants David Thompson (David), Gail 
Thompson (Gail), and Steven Thompson (Steven) (collectively,
 
Appellants) appeal from the Final Judgment (Judgment) entered on
 
October 23, 2007, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(Circuit Court), in favor of Defendants-Appellees Saint Louis
 
School (St. Louis) and Wendell Staszkow (Staszkow) (collectively,
 Appellees).
1
 
Steven attended St. Louis until 2006 when he was
 
expelled. Appellants allege that Steven was wrongfully expelled
 
by Appellees. On appeal, Appellants contend that the Circuit
 
Court erred in granting Appellees' motion for summary judgment. 
1
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on the record in this case, we conclude that there are no
 
genuine issues as to any material fact and that Appellees were
 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. We affirm. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
St. Louis is a private boys' school of Catholic
 
Marianist affiliation. Steven began attending St. Louis from
 
seventh grade in the 2001-2002 school year. On July 1, 2004,
 
Staszkow became employed at St. Louis. On July 1, 2006, 
Staszkow became the principal and, accordingly, became
 
responsible for overseeing student discipline and other matters. 
While Steven attended St. Louis, he participated in St. Louis's
 
baseball, football, and wrestling programs. Steven also
 
repeatedly skipped classes and detention periods. In 2003, Keahi
 
Cambra (Cambra), a teacher at St. Louis, got into a physical
 
altercation with Steven during a basketball game. Thereafter,
 
Cambra sent a letter of apology to Gail and David. 
On September 7, 2005, Steven reportedly choked another
 
student and said, "This fucker’s going to die." For this
 
incident, Steven was put on a "Behavioral Contract." On January
 
18, 2006, Steven was sent out of class for being disrespectful
 
and insubordinate. On January 23, 2006, St. Louis's
 
Administrative Review Board decided that Steven violated his
 
Behavioral Contract and expelled him. On January 24, 2006, David
 
appealed his son's case to the principal. Father Allen DeLong
 
(Fr. DeLong) and Staszkow met with David and Gail and agreed that
 
Steven would be given another chance. They decided that any
 
further misconduct "no matter how minor" would be grounds for
 
expulsion. From January 2006 to the May 2, 2006 incident, Steven
 
continued to cut classes and failed to show up for detention. 
On the morning of May 2, 2006, Michael Miske (Miske), a
 
parent of a student attending St. Louis, threatened Ricksson
 
Pacarro (Pacarro), a student attending St. Louis and a friend of
 
Steven, after a traffic incident. Pacarro's grandmother, Yvonne
 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pacarro (Ms. Pacarro), called St. Louis and spoke with Staszkow
 
in concern for Pacarro’s safety. Miske returned to St. Louis
 
that afternoon and approached Pacarro. Steven stepped in and
 
asked what was going on. 
Steven testified to the following. Miske told Steven
 
to "go by the bushes so I can lick you too." Steven then told
 
Miske, "Try hit me." Miske threatened Steven again and Steven
 
again told Miske to try to hit him. A teacher then interrupted
 
and asked all the students to go into the classroom. 
Staszkow testified that Steven did not listen to the
 
teacher's instructions. According to Staszkow, when Staszkow
 
arrived at the scene, Steven and Miske were still threatening
 
each other. Staszkow stated that he instructed Steven to stop
 
swearing and threatening Miske, and to leave the scene. Steven
 
refused those instructions and continued to swear, shout, and
 
challenge Miske to a fight. Staszkow then walked between Steven
 
and Miske in order to stop a physical altercation. He asked
 
Miske to leave, and Miske left. Staszkow then spent three to
 
five minutes trying to get Steven to calm down and walk away. 
Steven testified that Staszkow arrived on the scene and
 
told him to "calm down." Steven stated that he tried to retrieve
 
his backpack, which was about 20 feet from where he was standing,
 
when Miske tried to charge him. After Miske's third attempt at
 
charging at Steven, Miske walked around Staszkow to charge him. 
Staszkow then positioned himself directly between Steven and
 
Miske. Steven went into the classroom while Staszkow continued
 
to speak to Miske. Steven did not deny that he refused to follow
 
Staszkow's instructions to stop swearing, stop threatening Miske,
 
and leave the scene. 
Steven was expelled on the same day, May 2, 2006,
 
immediately following the incident with Miske. Steven testified
 
that later that day, Miske continued to drive around the school
 
and threaten Steven. Steven testified that he called out his
 
3   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
cell phone number to Miske. Steven filed a police report against
 
Miske for terroristic threatening. Later that day, Miske and two
 
other adults chased Steven, who was on foot, with their vehicle
 
through Kalihi. The Honolulu Police Department and paramedics
 
were called to assist Steven. Steven also filed a police report
 
against Miske for reckless endangerment. On May 6, 2006, Steven
 
received a message from a friend who relayed a threat from Miske
 
to not press charges. Steven then filed a police report against
 
Miske for terroristic threatening in the first degree. On May
 
23, 2006, the District Court of the First Circuit granted
 
Appellants' Petition For Injunction Against Harassment against
 
Miske. 
After Steven’s expulsion, on February 16, 2007,
 
Appellants filed the complaint herein against Appellees and Fr.
 
DeLong, alleging: (1) retaliation; (2) violation of public
 
policy; (3) intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED);
 
(4) breach of an express contract; (5) breach of an implied
 
contract; (6) breach of the covenant of good faith and fair
 
dealing; (7) detrimental reliance; (8) loss of consortium; (9)
 
libel; and (10) slander. The complaint also sought punitive
 
damages.
 
On August 16, 2007, St. Louis and Staszkow filed a
 
motion for summary judgment on all claims. Appellants filed a
 
memorandum in opposition. A hearing was held on September 17,
 
2007. On October 1, 2007, the Circuit Court entered its order
 
granting Appellees' motion. On the same day, a stipulation to
 
dismiss all claims against Allen DeLong without prejudice was
 
filed. On October 23, 2007, the Circuit Court entered the
 
Judgment. Appellants timely filed a notice of appeal.
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Appellants raise a single point of error, i.e., that
 
the Circuit Court erred in granting Appellees' motion for summary
 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment because there was "ample evidence in the record to raise
 
a triable issue of material fact."
 
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Whether a trial court correctly granted or denied a 
motion for summary judgment is subject to de novo review. 
Blaisdell v. Dep't of Pub. Safety, 119 Hawai 'i 275, 282, 196 P.3d 
277, 284 (2008). "To create a genuine issue as to any material 
fact a question of fact presented under a conflict in the 
affidavits as to a particular matter must be of such a nature 
that it would affect the result." Richards v. Midkiff, 48 Haw. 
32, 39, 396 P.2d 49, 54 (1964) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted); see also Vidinha v. Miyaki, 112 Hawai
'i 336, 340, 
145 P.3d 879, 883 (App. 2006). IV. DISCUSSION
 Appellants assert that genuine issues of material fact
 
exist as to the reasons for Steven's expulsion. Viewing the
 
evidence and inferences therefrom in the light most favorable to
 
Appellants, which we must do, the record on appeal reflects that
 
the Circuit Court did not err in granting summary judgment to St.
 
Louis.
 
Appellants do not dispute Steven's lengthy history of
 
numerous, serious disciplinary infractions. Nor do they dispute
 
that four months before his expulsion, Steven would have been
 
expelled but for being given one more chance conditioned on the
 
consequence that any future violation, no matter how minor, would
 
result in immediate expulsion. Steven thereafter committed
 
multiple further infractions, including the incident involving
 
Miske.
 
According to an Individual Disciplinary Summary,
 
Steven's last infraction was "inappropriate behavior," the
 
details of which are as follows:
 
Student involved in an altercation or attempted
confrontation with another student's parent on the campus
even after he was told by an administrator his conduct was
totally inappropriate, student continued to be aggressive
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2They also assert that this claim is based on "the student
handbook's anti-retaliation provisions."  The handbook contains no such
provisions.  
6with this male parent.  Mr. Thompson was contacted and
informed that his son is being expelled.
Steven admits that he injected himself into a tense
situation and dared Mr. Miske to hit him.  He does not dispute
the school's evidence that he refused to follow repeated
instructions of school personnel. 
A.The Retaliation Claim
Appellants' retaliation claim is based on anti-
retaliation statutes concerning discriminatory employment
practices.2  Appellants have not identified any case in which
employment law statutes have been extended to a private school's
expulsion of a student.  Instead, Appellants cite EEOC v. Crown
Zellerbach Corp., 720 F.2d 1008, 1012 (9th Cir. 1983) for the
following proposition:
To establish a prima facie case of retaliation, an aggrieved
individual must show that (1) the individual has engaged in
statutorily protected expression; (2) the individual has
suffered an adverse action; and (3) there is a causal link
between the protected expression and the adverse action. 
See EEOC v. Crown Zellerbach Corp., 720 F.2d 1008, 1012 (9th
Cir. 1983).
Crown Zellerbach concerns unlawful employment practices
under the Civil Rights Act of 1964.  Id. at 1011-12.  The federal
statute prohibits retaliation where the plaintiff has opposed the
unlawful practices.  Id.  To support a claim of retaliation, the
plaintiff must have had a "reasonable belief" that the employer
engaged in unlawful practices in contravention of the Civil
Rights Act.  Id. at 1013. 
Appellants have alleged no facts concerning unlawful
practices related to statutorily-protected expression.  Crown  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Zellerbach is wholly inapplicable to a private school's alleged
 
retaliatory expulsion of a behaviorally-troubled student.3
 
Appellants' reliance on cases interpreting a Hawai 'i 
anti-retaliation statute is similarly misplaced. Gonsalves v. 
Nissan Motor Corp. in Hawai 'i, Ltd., 100 Hawai 'i 149, 58 P.3d 1196 
(2002); Aloha Islandair Inc. v. Tseu, 128 F.3d 1301 (9th Cir. 1997) (discussing state statute). HRS § 378-2 (1993) prohibits 
employers from discriminating on the basis of certain grounds. 
Gonsalves, 100 Hawai
'i at 162, 58 P.3d at 1209; Aloha Islandair, 
128 F.3d at 1302. Like its federal counterpart, the statute contains an anti-retaliation provision prohibiting employers from 
taking adverse action against an individual who has opposed 
discriminatory employment practices. HRS § 378-2(2); Gonsalves, 
100 Hawai
'i at 162, 58 P.3d at 1209; Aloha Islandair, 128 F.3d at 
1302. As Appellants have alleged no facts regarding unlawful practices under HRS § 378-2, these cases are inapplicable. 
Indeed, Appellants apparently contend that these
 
statutes should also apply to the alleged retaliatory expulsion
 
in this case. However, they have not cited, and we have not
 
found, any basis for extending the statutes far beyond their
 
express reach.
4
 
The Circuit Court did not err in entering summary
 
judgment against Appellants on the retaliation claim.
 
3 Appellants' reference to McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
 
U.S. 792 (1973), a case regarding unlawful racial discrimination under Title
VII of the Civil Rights Act, is also unavailing. There is no evidence
 
whatsoever regarding racial discrimination in this case.   
 

 4Even assuming a cause of action exists for retaliatory expulsion,
Appellants failed to adduce evidence of a retaliatory motive. The sole
 
evidence Appellants provided regarding retaliation -- Gail Thompson's hearsay
testimony -- is inadmissible. St. Louis proffered evidence regarding the
source of the alleged retaliation. An apology letter indicates that at a
basketball game in 2003, Cambra, who thereafter left St. Louis, had "push[ed],
elbow[ed], and play[ed] very roughly with Stev[en]." The bare fact of this
 prior incident is insufficient to raise an inference of retaliatory motive for
an expulsion that occurred three years later.
 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. Public Policy Claim
 
Appellants argue that St. Louis's expulsion of Steven
 
violated public policy because "expelling a student for
 protecting another student and his grandmother would frustrate
 
criminal code allowing defense of others and self."
 
Hawai
'i courts have recognized an affirmative claim for 
"violation of public policy" only in the context of the wrongful 
discharge of an employee. See Parnar v. Americana Hotels, Inc., 
65 Haw. 370, 380, 652 P.2d 625, 631 (1982) ("[A]n employer may be held liable in tort where his discharge of an employee violates a 
clear mandate of public policy."). A wrongful discharge claim 
may arise if an employee is terminated in contravention of a 
"clear mandate of public policy." Smith v. Chaney Brooks Realty, 
Inc., 10 Haw. App. 250, 256-57, 865 P.2d 170, 173 (App. 1994) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). In the discrete 
context of wrongful discharge, this court elaborated: 
In determining whether a clear mandate of public policy is
violated, courts should inquire whether the employer’s
conduct contravenes the letter or purpose of a
constitutional, statutory, or regulatory provision or
scheme. Prior judicial decisions may also establish the
relevant public policy. However, courts should proceed
cautiously if called upon to declare public policy absent
some prior legislative or judicial expression on the
subject.
 
Id. at 257, 865 P.2d at 173.
 
Hawai'i courts have not extended claims for violation 
of public policy beyond the employment law context and we decline 
to do so here. Moreover, even if Hawai 'i law recognized a public 
policy claim in the context of expulsion from a private school, Appellants would have had to demonstrate that Steven's expulsion 
contravened the letter or purpose of a constitutional, statutory, 
or regulatory provision or scheme. They failed to do so. Steven 
is not a criminal defendant. St. Louis's decision to expel 
Steven does not undermine the public policy providing a defense 
to criminal liability. The Circuit Court did not err in entering 
summary judgment against Appellants on the public policy claim. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C. Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
 
To satisfy the elements of IIED, a plaintiff must 
establish: "1) that the act allegedly causing the harm was intentional or reckless, 2) that the act was outrageous, and 3) 
that the act caused 4) extreme emotional distress to another.
" 
Young v. Allstate Ins. Co., 119 Hawai 'i 403, 429, 198 P.3d 666, 
692 (2008) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Appellants have failed to raise genuine issues of material fact 
as to the alleged outrageousness of St. Louis's actions. 
The court must determine the second element -- whether 
the defendant's actions were outrageous -- unless reasonable 
minds may differ. Id. An act is "outrageous" if it is "without 
just cause or excuse and beyond all bounds of decency." Id. 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). It must be "so 
extreme in degree as to . . . be regarded as atrocious, and 
utterly intolerable in a civilized community." R ESTATEMENT (SECOND) 
OF TORTS § 46 (1965) cmt. d. "[M]ere insults, indignities, 
threats, annoyances, petty oppressions, or other trivialities" 
are insufficient. Young, 119 Hawai 'i at 425, 198 P.3d at 688 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). An actor is not liable where he or she "has done no more than to insist upon his 
[or her] legal rights in a permissible way." Id. (quoting 
R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 46 at cmt. g). 
Appellants argue that the expulsion was outrageous
 
because it punished a victim, Steven, rewarded an aggressor,
 Miske, and was motivated by retaliation. However, the undisputed
 
facts in the record demonstrate that Steven was expelled for his
 
insubordinate and inappropriate behavior in conjunction with the
 
Miske incident, following multiple prior disciplinary
 
infractions, prior warning, and strict conditions for Steven's
 
continued attendance at St. Louis. We reject Appellants'
 
argument that there was evidence that St. Louis acted
 
outrageously, atrociously, or intolerably. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Circuit Court did not err in entering summary
 
judgment against Appellants on the IIED claim.
 
D.	 Breach of Express or Implied Contract, including the
Implied Covenant of Good Faith and Fair Dealing, and
Promissory Estoppel
 
Appellants base various express and implied breach of
 
contract claims on the agreement that St. Louis would provide
 
education in exchange for tuition. Appellants contend that the
 
information provided in St. Louis's student handbook constitutes
 
enforceable terms of their agreement. 
A number of jurisdictions have recognized a contractual
 
relationship between private schools and their students, even
 
absent an express written contract. See, e.g., Gorman v. St.
 
Raphael Acad., 853 A.2d 28, 34 (R.I. 2004) ("Numerous
 jurisdictions have held that a student and private university
 
relationship is essentially contractual in nature."). Courts may
 
loosely rely on student handbooks as a source of contractual
 
terms, precluding schools from acting in direct contravention of
 
handbook provisions. Id. ("That a student handbook can be a
 
source of the terms defining the reciprocal rights and
 obligations of a school and its students is also an idea fairly
 
well established in modern case law."); see also Wisch v. Sanford
 
School, Inc., 420 F. Supp. 1310, 1315-16 (D. Del. 1976); VanLoock
 
v. Curran, 489 So.2d 525, 529-30 (Ala. 1986); Driscoll v. Bd. of
 
Trustees of Milton Acad., 873 N.E.2d 1177, 1185-87 (Mass. Ct.
 
App. 2007); Allen v. Casper, 622 N.E.2d 367, 371 (Ohio Ct. App.
 
1993); Law v. William Marsh Rice Univ., 123 S.W.3d 786, 792-93
 
(Tex. Ct. App. 2003). In applying contract principles, however,
 
courts must be careful to avoid treading on private schools'
 
discretion, particularly with regard to disciplinary measures. 
Gorman, 853 A.2d at 34; see also Slaughter v. Brigham Young
 
Univ., 514 F.2d 622, 625-26 (10th Cir. 1975); Jones v. Howe
 
Military School, 604 F. Supp. 122, 125 (N.D. Ind. 1984);
 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11Napolitano v. Trustees of Princeton Univ., 453 A.2d 263, 272
(N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1982).
On appeal, Appellants fail to identify any express or
implied handbook provision that was violated by St. Louis.  The
St. Louis handbook specifically provides for expulsion from
school based on, inter alia, insubordination, including ignoring
or defying faculty or staff members after reasonable instructions
have been given.  Thus, even assuming recognition in Hawai# i of a
contract claim based on a student handbook, Appellants' express
and implied breach of contract claims are without merit.  
Appellants' argument that they brought forward
sufficient evidence in support of a claim for breach of the
covenant of good faith and fair dealing appears to be based on
the timing of Steven's expulsion, two weeks prior to the end of
11th grade.  However, in Steven's declaration, he states that he
would "get credit" for the school year, although his grades would
be negatively impacted by his inability to take finals or turn in
further assignments.  In addition, absent a showing that Steven's
expulsion was wrongful, there is no evidence that St. Louis acted
in bad faith.
Similarly, in what appears to be a promissory estoppel
claim, Appellants claim to have "detrimentally relied upon
Defendants' promises in committing to St. Louis based on [the]
student handbook prior to the expulsion."   Appellants have
failed to demonstrate any promises in the St. Louis student
handbook upon which they detrimentally relied.  This claim is
without merit.
The Circuit Court did not err in entering summary
judgment against Appellants on the contract and promissory
estoppel claims.
E.Libel and/or Slander
On appeal, Appellants fail to assert a cogent argument
as to their defamation claims.  Their sole contention is thatNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[b]y innuendo, Saint Louis published to[] many students that the 
plaintiff was a liar which was read to other students and 
published in a school letter." They provide no citations to the 
record and leave us guessing as to the evidentiary basis for 
their claims. As a result, we may deem this point waived. See 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) 
("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
Even if we reach the merits of Appellants' defamation
 
claims, we conclude that they failed to raise a genuine issue of
 material fact. 
A statement is defamatory if it "tends to harm the 
reputation of another as to lower him in the estimation of the 
community or to deter third persons from associating or dealing 
with him." Fong v. Merena, 66 Haw. 72, 74, 655 P.2d 875, 876 
(1982) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). If the publication, considered as a whole, "is susceptible of both an 
innocent and a defamatory meaning, it is for the jury to 
determine the sense in which it was understood." Cahill v. 
Hawaiian Paradise Park Corp., 56 Haw. 522, 527, 543 P.2d 1356, 1361 (1975). The threshold issues is thus whether, "as a matter 
of law, the statements at issue are reasonably susceptible of a 
defamatory meaning." Gold v. Harrison, 88 Hawai
'i 94, 101, 962 
P.2d 353, 360 (1998). 
Although defamatory material need not mention the
 
plaintiff by name, it must refer to the plaintiff by "clear
 implication." Yow v. Nat'l Enquirer, Inc., 550 F. Supp. 2d 1179,
 
1184 (E.D. Cal. 2008) (internal quotation marks and citation
 omitted). However, "[a] claimed implication is insufficient to
 
concern a defamation plaintiff when it is not consistent with the
 
plain language and the full import of a defendant's statement." 
Kaufman v. Islamic Soc. of Arlington, 291 S.W.3d 130, 145 (Tex.
 
Ct. App. 2009) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
12  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Appellants argue that "[b]y innuendo, St. Louis
 
published to[] many students that the plaintiff was a liar which
 
was read to other students and published in a school letter." 
The letter at issue is, presumably, a May 1, 2006 letter
 
addressed to parents and guardians of St. Louis students, signed
 
by Fr. DeLong. Even construing all inferences in Appellants'
 
favor, the letter does not accuse any particular individual of
 
lying. Instead, in a general exhortation to parents, the letter
 
discusses lying habits of "normal teenager[s]." 
The May 1, 2006 letter begins with the author's
 
personal anecdote that "[w]hen I was a teenager my parents didn't
 
know half the things I did." Where the letter employs a singular
 
noun, i.e., "teenager" and "young man," it does so only in the
 
abstract. It discusses the thoughts and motivations of an
 
average teenager to illustrate the general topic of deception. 
It does not include any factual references that might implicate a
 
particular person or incident.
 
The core of the letter concerns general advice to
 
parents. Fr. DeLong urges parents to adopt a less disciplinarian
 
approach when confronting their teenage sons about lying. He
 
encourages them to "share your own mistakes with your son" and
 
"create moments when 'confession' is possible." The references
 
to an abstract teenager therefore provide the foundation for a
 
more understanding, reflective approach toward instilling moral
 
principles. The letter makes no mention of Steven. Even under a
 
strained reading, the letter does not clearly implicate any
 
particular individual. The letter is not susceptible of any
 
defamatory meaning. See Cahill, 56 Haw. at 527, 543 P.2d at
 
1361.
 
The sole evidence purportedly linking the May 1, 2006
 
letter to Steven is the declaration of another St. Louis student
 stating that, on May 3, 2006, "Mr. Jenkins read letter [sic] by
 
Fr. DeLong and mentioned that it relates to an incident that
 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
happened yesterday involving a classmate which we all knew to be 
Steven Thompson." However, as the letter is dated May 1, 2006, 
and there is no evidence or allegation that it is wrongly dated, 
and the final incident leading to Steven's expulsion occurred on 
May 2, 2006, the student's declaration is insufficient to raise a 
genuine issue of material fact as to the letter's allegedly 
defamatory meaning. See Gold, 88 Hawai 'i at 102-03, 962 P.2d at 
361-62. Morever, there is no evidence in the record whatsoever identifying "Mr. Jenkins." The Circuit Court did not err in 
entering summary judgment against Appellants on libel claims. 
Similarly, as Appellants have presented no evidence
 
that Appellees slandered them, this claim necessarily fails as
 
well.
 
F. Loss of Consortium
 Loss of consortium claims are derivative, as they are 
based on the underlying claim of a spouse or child who has suffered injury. Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai
'i 226, 
241, 921 P.2d 146, 161 (1996); see also Doi v. Hawaiian Ins. & Guar. Co., Ltd., 6 Haw. App. 456, 463, 727 P.2d 884, 889 (1986). 
Such derivative claims are barred when the spouse or child's 
underlying claim of injury cannot be maintained. Brown, 82 
Hawai
'i at 241, 921 P.2d at 161. As Steven's underlying claims 
of injury have failed, Appellants' claim for loss of consortium 
is necessarily barred. 
G. Punitive Damages
 "[A] claim for punitive damages is not an independent 
tort, but is purely incidental to a separate cause of action.” Ross v. Stouffer Hotel Co. (Hawai
'i) Ltd., Inc., 76 Hawai 'i 454, 
466, 879 P.2d 1037, 1049 (1994). As Appellants' other claims have failed, their prayer for punitive damages also fails. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V.	 CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's October 23, 2007
 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 24, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Shawn A. Luiz 
for Plaintiffs-Appellants Presiding Judge 
James H. Ashford (Cades Schutte LLP)for Defendants-AppelleesSAINT LOUIS SCHOOL and WENDELL STASZKOW Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
15 