  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29287
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant, v.
KIRK MATTHEW LANKFORD, Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 07-1-0822)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Kirk Matthew
 
Lankford ("Lankford") appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence, filed July 31, 2008 ("Judgment") in the Circuit Court
 of the First Circuit ("Circuit Court").
1 Lankford was convicted
 
by a jury of Murder in the Second Degree in violation of section
 
2
707-701.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS"),  for his role in the
death of a young female Japanese national, Masumi Watanabe
 ("Watanabe"). Watanabe was last seen by witnesses getting into
 Lankford's work truck on the morning of April 12, 2007. Lankford
 was sentenced to incarceration for life with the possibility of
 parole. 
On appeal, Lankford contends that: (1) it was an abuse
 
of discretion and a denial of due process and compulsory process
 for the Circuit Court to preclude him from calling his accident
 reconstruction witness, Clyde Calhoun ("Calhoun"), on
 surrebuttal; (2) defense counsel's failure to call an accident
 
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 
2
 "Except as provided in section 707-701, a person commits the
offense of murder in the second degree if the person intentionally or
knowingly causes the death of another person." H AW. REV. STAT. § 707-701.5(1)
(1993). 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
reconstruction witness during Lankford's case-in-chief
 
constituted ineffective assistance of counsel; (3) the Circuit
 Court plainly erred by failing to instruct the jury regarding the
 definition of "crime;" (4) the jury instructions were
 prejudicially erroneous and misleading because they failed to
 specify that the state of mind elements applied to all elements
 of the omission alternative; (5) the Circuit Court's denial of
 his motion to continue was an abuse of discretion; (6) the
 Circuit Court abused its discretion by admitting photographs of
 his wife; (7) prosecutorial misconduct deprived him of his
 constitutional right to a fair trial; (8) the jury's verdicts
 unanimously finding him guilty by omission and commission were
 inconsistent; and (9) his conviction was not supported by
 substantial evidence. 
Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant State of Hawai' i 
("State") cross-appeals from the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Taking No Further Action on State’s Motion for Sanctions Against Donald L. Wilkerson for Failure to Provide Discovery ("Order Denying Sanctions"), filed September 10, 2008. The State contends that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in not sanctioning defense counsel for his "intentional, willful, and insistent refusal to comply with the court's orders regarding discovery." 
We affirm.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. Watanabe's Death 
On April 12, 2007, at approximately 9:15 a.m., 
Watanabe, a visitor from Japan, was dropped off at lower Pûpûkea 
Road in Pûpûkea, Hawai' i, by a relative with whom she was 
staying. Watanabe was dropped off at the same location almost every morning at approximately the same time so that she could get exercise by walking home. The walk home would usually take between 30-40 minutes. 
Lankford was a residential pest control treatment
 
technician with Hauoli Termite & Pest Control. That morning,
 after making a service call on one of his pest control treatment
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
customers, Lankford met Watanabe. It is undisputed that Watanabe
 
died during her encounter with Lankford. The State argued that
 Lankford murdered Watanabe, while Lankford contended that
 Watanabe died when she jumped out of his truck as he drove her
 around the Pûpûkea neighborhood, in search of her home. The
 following evidence was presented at trial:
 
B. The State's Case-In-Chief
 
Two witnesses testified at trial to seeing Watanabe on
 
Pûpûkea Road between 9:20-9:40 a.m. on April 12, 2007, with a man
 
resembling Lankford, who was standing next to a white work truck. 
One of the witnesses testified that the woman, who appeared
 "stressed" and "a little bit agonized," seemed to be waiving away
 a man who resembled Lankford, and to be saying the word "no." 
The other witness testified that she saw the name of Lankford's
 employer on the work truck, that the man was wearing coveralls,
 and that she saw the woman climb into the work truck from the
 driver's side. 
Another witness testified to seeing a man, whom he
 
subsequently identified as Lankford, digging a hole at the Kahana
 Fishpond later that evening at approximately midnight. When the
 witness questioned him, Lankford hurried to his truck and drove
 away. The license plate number recorded by the witness traced
 back to Lankford's work truck. 
Additional evidence included testimony from Watanabe's
 
mother, who explained that her daughter was extremely shy and
 unlikely to willingly get into a stranger's vehicle; photographs
 showing scratches on Lankford's hands shortly after his arrest,
 and expert testimony concluding that the scratches were
 consistent with fingernail marks; testimony that blood matching
 Watanabe's DNA profile was found in Lankford's work truck on the
 passenger door panel, the front of the passenger side of the
 truck, and the driver's side door; and a pair of glasses found in
 Lankford's work truck matching Watanabe's prescription, from
 which DNA matching Watanabe's profile was removed. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C. The Defense's Case-In-Chief
 
Prior to trial, Lankford had denied ever encountering
 
Watanabe. During his case-in-chief, however, Lankford admitted
 
that he had lied to the police, testifying that he accidently
 "kind of sideswipe[d]" Watanabe, who was walking alongside the
 road, with his truck after he had turned left from Aukauka Road
 onto Pûpûkea Road sometime after 9:20 a.m. on April 12, 2007
 ("First Incident").
 
Lankford testified that he did not report the accident
 
to his employer because he feared losing his job. Instead, he
 offered Watanabe "a ride to wherever she was going[,]" which she
 accepted. He had trouble communicating with her, however, as she
 did not appear to speak much English. 
Lankford testified that, after driving through the
 
neighborhood for a period of time, Watanabe became upset and
 began screaming. Lankford and Watanabe were yelling at each
 other, with Watanabe apparently not understanding Lankford, and
 Lankford trying to persuade Watanabe to calm down. 
Watanabe "got really quiet." A moment later, as
 
Lankford drove on Makana Road (lower Pûpûkea) at a speed of
 approximately 35-40 mph, Watanabe quickly opened the passenger
 door and dove out of the truck ("Second Incident"). Lankford
 turned the truck around to look for Watanabe and found her lying
 on the side of the road with her head "punctured" or "cracked
 . . . open" and "misshapened". Watanabe did not appear to be
 breathing and Lankford could not locate a pulse or heartbeat. 
Worried that he was going to lose his job, Lankford
 
placed Watanabe's body in the back of his work truck and drove to
 within view of his next scheduled job site, where he sat, crying
 and praying. Lankford concluded then to "try to make the whole
 situation go away[,]" placing Watanabe's head in a plastic bag
 and moving her body to the big compartment on the passenger's
 side of the truck cab, which he then closed down and locked. 
Lankford completed his second scheduled pest treatment
 
service of the morning, and proceeded to Foodland where he
 purchased items intended to facilitate his subsequent disposal of
 Watanabe's body. After completing his assignments for the day,
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
he returned to the office where he cleaned dried blood off the
 
back of his tailgate. Lankford completed his paperwork for the
 day, called customers for the next day, and headed home. 
Lankford took his personal vehicle, picked up his wife
 
and son, and, together, the family went to church for band
 practice. After band practice, Lankford dropped his wife and son
 off at home and went to Home Depot where he purchased a shovel,
 plastic bags, flashlight and duct tape. Lankford then returned
 to work where his truck with Watanabe's body was parked. He
 moved the body from his work truck to his personal truck, placed
 it inside another bag, taped up the bag, and placed the bag
 containing the body inside yet another bag, which he also taped.
 
Lankford attempted to bury Watanabe's body that night
 
at Kahana Bay. After being observed and then questioned by a
 witness as he began to dig a grave, however, he abandoned his
 plan and put Watanabe's body into the ocean near Kualoa Ranch. 
D. The State's Rebuttal Expert 
Whether and in what order the parties would present
 
testimony from expert accident reconstruction witnesses was
 
discussed repeatedly with the Circuit Court before and throughout
 the trial. On January 22, 2008, the Circuit Court found that
 Lankford had not complied with discovery deadlines, and that
 special circumstances required that each side be allowed to
 depose the other's accident reconstruction witness. Lankford's
 counsel objected, noting that he had not determined whether to
 present an accident reconstruction witness, having not determined
 yet whether to present a case at all. Counsel advised that he
 had instructed his witness, if contacted, not to speak to the
 
3
State,  and that if the Circuit Court ordered that depositions be
allowed, he would remove the witness from his witness list and
 present him, if at all, only on rebuttal. The Circuit Court
 warned Lankford that if he failed to notify the State of his
 witnesses, he would not be able to call them at trial. 
3
 Almost two months later, counsel clarified that he had been mistaken
previously, and that he had not instructed any witnesses, including Calhoun, not
to speak to the State.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The issue was raised again on February 15, 2008, at the
 
hearing on Lankford's motion to exclude the State's expert
 
witnesses. The Circuit Court denied the motion, noting that
 whether the State would offer an accident reconstruction expert
 witness depended on the specific defense that Lankford would
 offer, and whether he would be calling an accident reconstruction
 witness.
 
On March 19, 2008, during Lankford's case-in-chief, the
 
Circuit Court told Lankford to call his accident reconstruction
 witness the next day, warning that if Lankford delayed the
 presentation of his witnesses in order to gain a tactical
 advantage, he may lose the opportunity to call them. 
On March 20, 2008, as Lankford approached the end of
 
his case-in-chief, the Circuit Court and the parties discussed
 the remaining defense witnesses. Lankford's counsel advised that
 he wished to present Dr. James Navin, the defendant, and one
 other witness. When asked whether the accident reconstruction
 witness was going to testify, Lankford's counsel said, "It
 doesn't look like it." The Circuit Court said, "So these are
 your remaining witnesses[?]" and counsel responded, "Right." 
Later, the Circuit Court noted that there was one defense
 witness, in addition to Lankford himself, yet to be called. The
 Circuit Court observed that "[t]hrough previous discussions this
 morning, it's the Court's understanding that the accident
 reconstructionist, Mr. Calhoun, will not be called by the
 defense." Lankford's counsel noted that he also wished to recall
 Dr. Navin, but, with that addition, agreed that these were his
 remaining three witnesses. 
On April 3, 2008, after Lankford testified and
 
described how he had encountered Watanabe and how she died, the
 State informed the Circuit Court that it would call its accident
 reconstruction witness, Kenneth Baker ("Baker"), on rebuttal
 after the defense closed its case-in-chief. Defense counsel
 argued that, by permitting the State to present its
 reconstruction witness on rebuttal, while requiring the defense
 to offer its own reconstructionist during its case-in-chief, the
 Circuit Court was treating the parties differently:
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Defense counsel]: Judge, time has always been an
issue here, and now I have to plan for surrebuttal. How am
 
I to plan for surrebuttal -– these are the same arguments
that Mr. Carlisle merely had to bring up to the court and
the court granted them, and I have to beg for them.
 
THE COURT: We'll take that issue as it comes. You
 
should be –- well, you had your case-in-chief. I don't know
 what witnesses you're going to use for surrebuttal. We'll
 find out based on what the State presents. But if it's a
 witness you could have called in your case-in-chief, then
we'll have to look at that issue also.
 
[Defense counsel]: So witnesses then -– just for
clarification, witnesses that could have been called in the
case-in-chief and issues that could have been addressed in
 the case-in-chief through the same witness cannot be brought
up either in rebuttal or surrebuttal?
 
THE COURT: You're asking me for a generic ruling on
that. It depends on the facts, and we'll take it up as they
arise.
 
. . . .
 
THE COURT: The basic entirety of the defense's case
was raised beginning with your opening statement. The State
 
was not apprised of the exact defense.
 
[Defense counsel]: And I had no obligation. Why am I
continually attacked for not -– for merely following the
rules –­
THE COURT: Well, you're not being attacked. The
 
court is just stating that once the State understands what
position you're taking, then they have a right to rebut it.
Until that time, they don't know what to rebut. And they've
pretty much followed that once they understand what your
position was, they are seeking to rebut it. And I'll give
them that opportunity.
 
[Defense counsel]: And, judge, if that's the rule and
if that's what's going to be followed in this court, I ask
that I be given those same -– the same rules that would
apply to my surrebuttal that Mr. Carlisle has been harping
about for months with regards to his rebuttal. And now one
 day before his rebuttal and I'm not given the name of
witnesses other than two.
 
THE COURT: You know, I can't predict what witnesses
you might need to rebut or surrebut the State's case. But
 as it comes up, you can raise it, and we'll examine it. I'm
 not seeking to intentionally deny you an opportunity, but I
don't know what facts are in front of us so we'll have to
 wait.
 
Despite the Circuit Court's warning, and even though he called
 
other witnesses the following day, Lankford's counsel rested his
 case-in-chief without calling his accident reconstruction
 witness.
 
On rebuttal, Baker raised questions about Lankford's
 
explanation of both the First and Second Incidents. On cross­
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
examination, however, Baker conceded a variety of factors with
 
regard to his criticism of the Second Incident, such that the
 State agreed that Lankford's version was theoretically possible. 
E. Lankford's Motion To Allow Surrebuttal Witnesses
 
At a status conference on April 8, 2008, the State
 
advised that it had completed its rebuttal case, and Lankford's
 
counsel stated that he intended to call Calhoun and two others as
 surrebuttal witnesses. The Circuit Court then heard argument
 from the parties on Lankford's motion to allow surrebuttal
 witnesses. 
In his offer of proof, Lankford argued that Calhoun
 
would testify that it was possible for Watanabe to have jumped
 out of Lankford's work truck, as Lankford had testified. The
 Circuit Court denied the motion as to Calhoun, finding that
 Lankford had been given the opportunity to present his accident
 reconstruction witness during his case-in-chief, but that he had
 deliberately delayed calling the witness until surrebuttal in
 order to gain a tactical advantage.
4 The Circuit Court allowed
 
4
 THE COURT: That point, as to the accident
reconstructionist expert, Mr. Calhoun, both parties
were asked to prepare their experts well in advance of
this trial, and Mr. Calhoun was hired by the defense,
I guess, months ago . . . so clearly, the defense had
available to it an expert witness and had available to
it the opportunity to prepare the expert with regard
to testimony in the trial proceedings themselves here.
 
You at no time were prevented from calling Calhoun in
your case in chief. His testimony would have supported –­could have supported your client's, Mr. Lankford's testimony
on critical issues regarding:
 
1. As was brought out on cross-examination whether or
not he struck Ms. Watanabe in the manner defendant
 testified; and
 
2. Whether she received fatal injuries from either
the rock or ground from a speeding car as related by your
client.
 
So on these matters, it was well within your expert's
ability and your ability to call him in your case in chief
to establish those points. You failed to do so.
 
In that regard, the Court does not find it appropriate
to allow you a tactical advantage to not call a witness in
your case in chief so that you can have the last say, so to
speak, to rebut the State's introduction of its expert
testimony.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the defense to present Mark Hagadone as a surrebuttal witness on
 
an issue first raised on rebuttal, but disallowed a third
 proposed witness who had previously testified in the case and
 whose proposed testimony, the Circuit Court concluded, would be
 cumulative.
 
Lankford's counsel conceded that tactics governed his
 
decision not to call Calhoun. If he was mistaken in that
 decision, counsel argued, that reflected his own ineffectiveness,
 but should not prohibit Lankford from contesting Baker's
 credibility through the introduction of expert testimony. The
 Circuit Court concluded, however, that Calhoun's testimony did
 not so much rebut Baker's testimony as it supported Lankford's
 and, as such, should have been presented as part of Lankford's
 case-in-chief:
 
THE COURT: You know, the terminology of attacking the
credibility, basically Baker testified in one fashion, and
your expert, Calhoun, is testifying in a different manner.
He has a different opinion. His different opinions, again,
could have been introduced in your case in chief.
 
II.	 DISCUSSION
 
A.	 It Was Not An Abuse Of Discretion Or Denial Of
 
Lankford's Right To Compulsory Process For The Circuit
Court To Deny Lankford's Motion To Allow Surrebuttal
Witnesses 
1.	 Abuse of Discretion
 
Lankford contends that it was an abuse of discretion 
and a denial of his right to compulsory process under the sixth 
and fourteenth amendments to the United States Constitution and article I, §§ 5, 10 and 14 of the Hawai' i Constitution for the 
Circuit Court to deny his motion to allow surrebuttal witnesses. "[T]he introduction of evidence in rebuttal and in surrebuttal is a matter within the discretion of the trial court and the appellate courts will not interfere absent an abuse thereof." State v. Duncan, 101 Hawai' i 269, 274, 67 P.3d 768, 773 (2003) 
You had the clear opportunity to do so. You made the
 
tactical decision not to. The Court will not allow that
 
testimony.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(quoting Takayama v. Kaiser Found. Hosp., 82 Hawai' i 486, 495, 
923 P.2d 903, 912 (1996)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has followed three general 
rules regarding rebuttal evidence: 
First, as a general rule, a party is bound to give all
available evidence in support of an issue in the first
instance it is raised at trial and will not be permitted to
hold back evidence confirmatory of his or her case and then
offer it on rebuttal. Second, this general rule does not
necessarily apply where the evidence sought to be presented
on rebuttal is "negative of a potential defense," even if
the evidence is also confirmatory of an affirmative position
upon which the party seeking to present the evidence bears
the burden of proof. Third, although a plaintiff is not
required to call, during his or her case-in-chief, every
conceivable witness who might contradict a potential defense
witness, it is also generally true that
 
[a] party cannot, as a matter of right, offer in
rebuttal evidence which was proper or should have been
introduced in chief, even though it tends to
contradict the adverse party's evidence and, while the
court may in its discretion admit such evidence, it
may and generally should decline to admit the
evidence.
 
Takayama, 82 Hawai' i at 497, 923 P.2d at 914 (citations
omitted). 
Duncan, 101 Hawai' i at 276, 67 P.3d at 775 (quoting Nelson v. 
Univ. of Hawai� i, 97 Hawai' i 376, 384-85, 38 P.3d 95, 103-04 
(2001)); see also United States v. Mitan, 966 F.2d 1165, 1176
 
(7th Cir. 1992)(holding that there was no abuse of discretion
 when trial court excluded testimony of proposed defense witness
 offered on surrebuttal because witness was available to testify
 during defendant's case in chief and delay may have been
 strategic). 
Lankford contends that the Circuit Court's discretion
 
should be read more narrowly than the general rule outlined in
 Duncan because Duncan involved the admission of rebuttal
 testimony submitted by the State. The decision whether to allow
 a criminal defendant to submit surrebuttal testimony, Lankford
 argues, is infused with constitutional implications that require
 admission of the evidence that might reasonably be refused if
 offered by the State. Nothing in the cases referred to by
 Lankford, however, reflects a different level of discretion
 available for trial courts considering whether to allow
 rebuttal/surrebuttal testimony, or in the standard of review that
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
we apply to the trial court's decision on whether to allow such
 
testimony. Cf. State v. Altergott, 57 Haw. 492, 508, 559 P.2d
 
728, 738-39 (1977) (trial court did not abuse its discretion in
 refusing to allow a continuance so that the defense could locate
 one of its witnesses for recall).
 
Lankford elected not to call his reconstruction witness
 
during his case-in-chief despite repeated warnings.
5 The law
 
itself, however, made Lankford's plan to defer his reconstruction
 witness to surrebuttal a risky one. Trial judges have the
 authority to exercise reasonable control over the order in which
 witnesses are presented during trial. Haw. R. Evid. 611(a)
 (1993). 
In light of the trial sequence, the numerous warnings
 
afforded by the Circuit Court, and the fact that we must find an
 abuse of discretion before we may intervene, it was a reasonable
 exercise of the Circuit Court's discretion to require that
 Lankford call his accident reconstruction witness during his
 case-in-chief, and to deny his motion to present Calhoun as a
 surrebuttal witness. 
"An abuse of discretion occurs when the decisionmaker
 
exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of
 law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party." State
 
v. Vliet, 95 Hawai' i 94, 108, 19 P.3d 42, 56 (2001) (quoting In 
re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai' i 97, 183, 9 P.3d 409, 
495 (2000)) (internal quotation marks omitted). Since the trial court had broad authority to exercise reasonable control over the order in which witnesses were presented, since the State's accident reconstruction witness testified that it was possible for Watanabe to have jumped out of Lankford's truck, and since Lankford's offer of proof in support of the motion was limited to 
5
 We reiterate our earlier admonition that "[t]o the extent that
evidentiary issues are of concern to one or more parties, they should be
anticipated, raised, and settled during pretrial proceedings. It is very
risky to rest one's case in chief upon the expectation that relevant evidence
may be introduced via rebuttal or surrebuttal." Yorita v. Okumoto, 3 Haw.
App. 148, 156, n.10, 643 P.2d 820, 826, n.10 (1982).
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
6
bolstering of the Second Incident only,  the Circuit Court did
not abuse its discretion.
 
2. Right to Compulsory Process
 
The Circuit Court's decision did not violate Lankford's
 
right to compulsory process. 
Compulsory process "does not
 
guarantee the right to compel attendance and testimony of all
 
potential witnesses absolutely." State v. Mitake, 64 Haw. 217,
 
224, 638 P.2d 324, 329 (1981). 
The Circuit Court found that Lankford purposely delayed
 
calling his accident reconstruction witness in order to gain a
 tactical advantage. In an analogous circumstance, when a party
 willfully fails to comply with a trial court's instructions
 regarding discovery, a trial court's preclusion of witness
 testimony does not violate the Compulsory Process Clause. Taylor
 
v. Illinois, 484 U.S. 400, 415 (1988) (affirming exclusion of
 testimony of defense witness in trial for attempted murder when
 defendant had failed to timely disclose witness in order to gain
 a tactical advantage); see also Myers v. Frye, 401 F.2d 18, 21
 (7th Cir. 1968) (holding that denial of defendant's proposed
 surrebuttal testimony did not violate Sixth Amendment right to
 compulsory process because testimony was not excluded as a result
 of a broad arbitrary limitation). 
Compulsory process is critical to assuring a defendant
 
the right to a meaningful defense and a fair trial. In this
 case, however, Calhoun was not precluded from testifying; rather,
 he was precluded from testifying on surrebuttal.
 
B. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
 
Lankford argues that his counsel's failure to call
 
Calhoun during his case-in-chief deprived him of the defense that
 
the First and Second Incidents had occurred as he had testified. 
6
 We consider the offer of proof made by Lankford during the
April 8, 2008 hearing on his motion to allow surrebuttal witnesses rather than
his offer of proof placed on the record on April 10, 2008. Lankford's April
10th offer, made after the Circuit Court's ruling, did not present evidence or
arguments that could not have been offered during the initial motion to allow
surrebuttal witnesses. 
12
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore, Lankford contends that he was deprived of his 
constitutional right to effective assistance of counsel under the 6th and 14th amendments to the United States Constitution and article I, § 14 of the Hawai' i Constitution. 
The standard of review for claims of ineffective 
assistance of counsel on appeal is whether, "viewed as a whole, the assistance provided was within the range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases." Dan v. State, 76 
Hawai'i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994) (quoting State v. 
Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 348, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980)) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). "[An a]ppellant carries 
the burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel 
. . . . [and] must show that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment or diligence, and [that] these errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. Montalbo, 73 Haw. 130, 145, 828 
P.2d 1274, 1283 (1992) (internal quotation marks, citations, brackets and ellipses omitted) (holding that defendant failed to establish ineffective assistance when he failed to show what expert witness would have done to alter the court's decision). "Specific actions or omissions alleged to be error but which had an obvious tactical basis for benefitting the defendant's case will not be subject to further scrutiny." Briones v. State, 74 
Haw. 442, 462-63, 848 P.2d 966, 976 (1993). 
Whether Lankford's accident reconstruction witness
 
could be called on surrebuttal was a matter within the Circuit
 Court's discretion, and was a close issue as evidenced by the
 fact that as late as the day before the State closed its rebuttal
 case, the Circuit Court noted that the defense still needed to
 advise whether it would be calling surrebuttal witnesses. 
The record shows that defense counsel considered the 
matter and made a strategic decision to delay calling his accident reconstruction witness until surrebuttal in the hope of gaining the tactical advantage of having his witness be available to comment on the testimony of the State's witness. See State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 39-40, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247-48 (1998) 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
("[M]atters presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial 
strategy, 'will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight.'"); Dan, 76 Hawai' i at 430, 879 P.2d at 535 (defense 
counsel's failure to present expert testimony was not ineffective assistance of counsel as the relevant information had been introduced through another witness). In light of counsel's successful cross-examination of Baker, and the tactical basis for his decision, we can not conclude that counsel's decision to defer Calhoun until surrebuttal, even in the face of the Circuit Court's warnings, was outside the range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases. 
C. Jury Instructions Regarding Murder by Omission
 
Lankford was charged with murder in the second degree, 
which could be proved "by commission" or "by omission." In his 
third and fourth points of error, Lankford argues that the jury instructions regarding the "by omission" alternative were prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, and misleading because the Circuit Court failed to accurately define the term "crime," or to specify that the intentional or knowing state of mind applied to each element of the "by omission" charge. Lankford does not reference where in the record these errors were objected to or brought to the court's attention. Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(4)(iii). Consequently, we review for plain error. State v. Nichols, 111 
Hawai'i 327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006). 
Any prejudice associated with the Circuit Court's 
failure to define "crime" is made moot by the fact that the jury unanimously found Lankford guilty under both of the alternatives, and the State elected to proceed on the "by commission" alternative. "A case is moot where the question to be determined is abstract and does not rest on existing facts or rights." State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai' i 462, 474, 946 P.2d 32, 44 (1997) 
(because defendant's allegedly unlawfully obtained statement was never introduced into evidence the issue was moot). 
Lankford argues that the instructions related to the
 
"by omission" alternative remain critical despite the State's
 election, because "the jury's verdict may have been based solely
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
on a finding of guilt on the murder by omission alternative." 
The jury, however, affirmed that it had unanimously found that:
 
[T]he prosecution proved beyond a reasonable doubt that, on
or about the 12th day of April, 2007, in the City and County
of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, the Defendant, KIRK MATTHEW
LANKFORD, intentionally or knowingly caused the death of
Masumi Watanabe[.]
 
and
 
[T]he prosecution proved beyond a reasonable doubt that, on
or about the 12th day of April, 2007, in the City and County
of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, the Defendant, KIRK MATTHEW
LANKFORD, caused the death of Masumi Watanabe by
intentionally or knowingly failing to obtain or attempt to
obtain aid from law enforcement or medical personnel
although he could have done so without danger or peril to
any person, which is a duty imposed by law upon a person
present at the scene of a crime who knows that the person
against whom the crime was committed was suffering from
serious physical harm, intending or knowing that his failure
to perform this duty would result in the death of Masumi
Watanabe[.]
 
The jury's response does not allow the possibility that the 
jury’s verdict may have been based solely on the murder by omission alternative. As a result, any prejudice associated with the Circuit Court's failure to specify that the intentional or knowing state of mind applied to each element of the murder by omission charge was also made moot. See State v. Valentine, 93 
Hawai'i 199, 201-02, 210, 998 P.2d 479, 481-82, 490 (2000) 
(whether the jury instruction was incomplete was moot because defendant was convicted of a lesser included offense and re-prosecution was therefore barred). 
D. Denial of Lankford's Motion to Continue
 
"A motion for continuance is addressed to the sound
 
discretion of the trial court, and the court's ruling will not be
 
disturbed on appeal absent a showing of abuse of that
 discretion." State v. Lee, 9 Haw. App. 600, 603, 856 P.2d 1279,
 
1281 (1993).
 
Lankford first requested during jury voir dire that the
 
trial be continued because he needed additional time to prepare
 to cross-examine Dr. Kanthi DeAlwis. A week earlier, the State
 had advised that it was intending to present Dr. DeAlwis, a
 forensic pathologist, who would testify to conclusions that might
 be drawn from scratches on Lankford's hands during the State's
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
case-in-chief rather than on rebuttal as the State had originally
 
indicated. The Circuit Court denied Lankford's motion, noting
 that he had not shown any prejudice or that he would be unable to
 have his own expert witness reach a conclusion about the scratch
 marks before the State's case would be presented in several
 weeks. Three weeks later, Lankford renewed his motion, but the
 Circuit Court again denied the motion, noting that counsel had
 weeks to prepare for the issue.
 
Lankford did not demonstrate due diligence in analyzing
 
the photos or in preparing for cross examination, that
 substantial favorable evidence would have been tendered if he had
 more time to prepare, or that he was materially prejudiced by the
 denial of his motion. Consequently, any error was harmless
 beyond a reasonable doubt. Haw. R. Pen. P. 52(a); Haw. R. Evid.
 103(a). 
In addition, Lankford was not appreciably prejudiced
 
when his counsel was able to cross-examine the State's expert,
 and elicited the testimony of his own expert on the matter during
 the defense's case-in-chief, through which he was able to expose
 "discrepancies in [Dr. DeAlwis'] claims as to the age and stages
 of healing of the wounds, which were inconsistent with the wounds
 having been sustained on the date of the incident." 
"The trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly 
exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." State v. Plichta, 116 Hawai' i 200, 214, 172 P.3d 512, 
526 (2007) (quoting State v. Ganal, 81 Hawai' i 358, 373, 917 P.2d 
370, 385 (1996)) (internal quotation marks omitted). In denying Lankford's motion to continue, the Circuit Court did not clearly exceed the bounds of reason, or disregard rules or principles of law or practice, when counsel was afforded a month's notice of the need to advance his preparation to cross-examine Dr. DeAlwis. Neither did Lankford demonstrate that the decision caused him any substantial detriment. Consequently, the Circuit Court did not err in denying Lankford's motion to continue. 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E. Admission of Photographs of Lankford's Wife 
Lankford contends that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion and denied him due process by admitting photographs of
 
his wife into evidence "to establish the highly-prejudicial
 inference that [Lankford] had an affinity for small Asian women."
 Although we question the relevance of the evidence, we disagree
 that the inference was highly-prejudicial.
 
"The responsibility for maintaining the delicate
balance between probative value and prejudicial effect lies
largely within the discretion of the trial court." State v. 
Iaukea, 56 Haw. 343, 349, 537 P.2d 724, 729 (1975)
(citations omitted). Moreover, the "admission or rejectionof photographs is a matter within the discretion of thetrial court; consequently, unless there is a showing of anabuse of discretion, the trial court's ruling will not be
disturbed on appeal." State v. Edwards, 81 Hawai' i 293,
297, 916 P.2d 703, 707 (1996). 
State v. Brantley, 84 Hawai' i 112, 118, 929 P.2d 1362, 1368 (App. 
1996). 
The photographs of Lankford's wife were ruled to be
 
admissible to show that Lankford "had an association to Asians of
 
a slim build." "The test determining whether photographs may be
 shown to the jury is not whether they are necessary, but whether
 their probative value outweighs their possible prejudicial
 effect." State v. Apao, 59 Haw. 625, 639, 586 P.2d 250, 260
 
(1978) (quoting People v. Steger, 546 P.2d 665, 674 (1976)). 
The photographs in question tended to establish that
 
Watanabe and Lankford's wife shared similar features. The
 prosecution argued that this correlation went to motive, but did
 not persuasively explain the theory. Ultimately, given the
 evidence in the case, we find no particular probative value;
 nevertheless, we determine no prejudicial effect. 
The photographs of Lankford's wife were largely
 
irrelevant to any reasonable argument that the prosecution made
 or might have made. Lankford's "association to Asians of a slim
 build" had no relationship to anything that the prosecution
 needed to prove once Lankford admitted that Watanabe had been in
 his truck. Nevertheless, since Lankford had yet to admit to
 encountering Watanabe at the time that the prosecution presented
 the photographs, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
by admitting them.7
 
F.	 Prosecutorial Misconduct
 
Lankford contends that egregious misconduct of the
 
prosecutor deprived him of his constitutional right to a fair
 
trial, and should bar him from reprosecution. The bulk of the
 examples to which Lankford points were not objected to at trial.
 
"If defense counsel does not object at trial to
prosecutorial misconduct . . . [w]e may recognize plain
error" when the error committed affects substantial rights
of the defendant. State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 513,
78 P.3d 317, 326 (2003) (internal quotation marks and
citations omitted). In reviewing a prosecutor's commentsfor misconduct, the appellate court considers three factors:(1) the nature of the conduct, (2) "the promptness or lackof a curative instruction," and (3) "the strength or
weakness of the evidence against defendant." Id., at 515,
78 P.3d at 328 (2003) (quoting State v. Clark, 83 Hawai' i 
289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996) (internal quotation marks
omitted)). If the conduct was improper, the court then askswhether the misconduct was harmless beyond a reasonabledoubt, and if not, whether the misconduct was "so egregious
as to bar reprosecution." State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai' i 20,
26, 108 P.3d 974, 980 (2005). 
State v. Condon, No. 29676, 2010 WL 2624909, at *1 (Haw. Ct. App.
 
June 29, 2010).
 
1.	 Opening Statement; PowerPoint Slide Labeling
Location as "Abduction Site"
 
Lankford argues on appeal that prosecutorial misconduct
 
occurred at trial because the prosecutor utilized a PowerPoint
 
slide that labeled the location where Lankford first encountered
 Watanabe as the "abduction site" during the State's opening
 statement. Lankford did not object to the prosecution's use of
 the slide at trial. 
"Generally, an opening statement merely provides an
 
opportunity for counsel to advise and outline for the jury, the
 facts and questions in the matter before them. Thus, an
 attorney's opening statement is not an occasion for argument." 
State v. Valdivia, 95 Hawai' i 465, 480, 24 P.3d 661, 676 (2001) 
(internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted). In
 
7
 In addition, since there was no discernible prejudical effect
associated with admission of the photographs, any error was harmless, and could
not have contributed to Lankford's conviction. Haw. R. Pen. P. 52(a); State v. Pauline, 100 Hawai' i 356, 378, 60 P.3d 306, 328 (2002). 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Valdivia, the prosecutor improperly commented during his opening 
statement that the defendant had gone on a "rampage of terror" in which he "almost killed at least 100 people", and said that the defendant acted "like a dog" in staring at the victim. 95 Hawai'i at 481, 24 P.3d at 677. The Hawai' i Supreme Court, 
however, found that because the court had instructed the jury that statements made during opening statements were not evidence, the misconduct was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. 
Similarly, in this case, Lankford was not prejudiced by
 
the use of the label "abduction site." Applying the Valdivia
 factors: (1) there was enough evidence on which to base
 Lankford's conviction; (2) the jury was instructed that
 statements or remarks made by counsel are not evidence; and (3)
 there was no indication in the record that the jury did not
 adhere to these instructions. In addition, it was reasonable for
 the prosecutor to argue that Watanabe had been abducted since
 there was evidence that: (1) Watanabe looked distressed when she
 was talking with Lankford; and (2) Watanabe was shy and
 uncomfortable with strangers, and would not be likely to get into
 a stranger's truck.
 
2. Introduction Of Photographs Of Lankford's Wife
 
In addition to contending that the introduction of the
 
photographs of Lankford's wife were more prejudicial than
 probative, and hence amounted to an abuse of discretion, supra,
 Lankford also contends that introduction of the photos amounted
 to prosecutorial misconduct.
 
In view of the fact that the Circuit Court overruled
 
Lankford's objection to the proposed introduction of the
 photographs, and that we concluded above that the Circuit Court
 did not abuse its discretion in doing so, we do not find any
 misconduct on the part of the prosecutor in seeking to introduce
 the photos into evidence.
 
3. 
Appeal To Jurors' Emotions During Closing Argument
 
Lankford argues that the prosecutor committed
 
misconduct by improperly appealing to the jurors' emotions during
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
closing argument by: (1) showing them a photograph with a
 
silhouette of Lankford with a hole where his heart should have
 been, labeled "Absence of conscience"; (2) arguing that
 Lankford's treatment of Watanabe's body showed disrespect and a
 lack of empathy for her family; (3) using degrading and
 emotionally charged characterizations of Lankford as glib and
 superficially charming, manipulative, cold, calculating,
 narcissistic, grandiose, a control freak, disrespectful, and
 lacking empathy; and (4) telling the jurors not to reward
 Lankford for disposing of the body. Of these, Lankford only
 objected at trial to the "absence of conscience" label. 
"In closing argument to the jury, the prosecutor may 
argue all reasonable inferences from evidence in the record." State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i 405, 413, 984 P.2d 1231, 1239 (1999) 
(quoting ABA Prosecution Function Standard 3-5.8(a) (3d ed. 1993)) (internal quotation marks omitted); State v. Clark, 83 Hawai'i 289, 306, 926 P.2d 194, 211 (1996) (finding no 
prosecutorial misconduct when prosecutor called defendant's denial of guilt a "cockamamie story"). "The prosecutor should not intentionally misstate the evidence or mislead the jury as to the inferences it may draw . . . . Accordingly, the scope of argument must be consistent with the evidence and marked by the fairness that should characterize all of the prosecutor's conduct." Rogan, 91 Hawai' i at 413, 984 P.2d at 1239 (1999) 
(quoting ABA Prosecution Function Standard 3-5.8(a) (3d ed. 1993)) (internal quotation marks omitted) (finding prosecutorial misconduct when prosecutor made racially charged statements during closing argument). 
Although Lankford objected to the PowerPoint silhouette
 
labeled "Absence of conscience" during the pre-closing
 conference, he did not object to the prosecutor's related
 argument at the time that it was made to the jury.
8 The
 
8
 [Prosecutor]: Lack of empathy. [Watanabe] placed
in bait box, left in bait box for 12 hours, garbage
bag placed over her head, duct taped and stuffed into
garbage bags.
 
. . . . 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
silhouette was merely a visualization of the prosecutor's
 
assertion that Lankford had acted without conscience. As such,
 it was not error to allow the silhouette.
 
As to the other instances of alleged misconduct,
 
Lankford did not object at trial and there was evidence that
 Lankford had disrespected Watanabe's body and did in fact possess
 the negative character traits described by the prosecution. By
 Lankford's own account, he wrapped Watanabe's body in plastic and
 hid it for most of a day in a storage container in his truck, put
 Watanabe's body into the ocean, and then lied to police when he
 was questioned regarding her disappearance. Other evidence
 suggesting that Lankford murdered Watanabe includes: (1) the
 discovery of Watanabe's blood in Lankford's work truck; (2) the
 testimony of Watanabe's mother suggesting that Watanabe would not
 get into a stranger's car; and (3) the witness testimony
 suggesting that Watanabe appeared distressed when talking to
 Lankford. In sum, the prosecution's argument and
 characterizations were based on reasonable inferences from the
 evidence presented at trial.
 
4. Suggestion of Tailored Testimony
 
Lankford contends that the prosecutor committed
 
misconduct when he commented during the State's closing argument
 that Lankford had tailored his testimony after becoming aware of
 the evidence when it was presented during discovery and at trial. 
At trial, the State asserted the following during
 
closing argument:
 
Defendant admits that [Watanabe] was in the car
when he takes the witness stand. Did he admit that in
 
April of 2007? Why is he admitting it now? DNA,
glasses, eyewitnesses, oh, a little bit hard to deny
 
Okay. 
Essentially, it's hit and run when
somebody leaves after an incident. It's not hit, run,
bag and bury.
 
Appearance and demeanor, manner of testimony. It
 
would suggest to you that if you look at this, evaluate the
coldness and callousness of what he said, how he said and
what he did, it would suggest to you that in regards to his
behavior on April 12, 2007, an absence of conscience and any
recognition of empathy for the victim in this case,
including her loved ones.
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
it.
 
. . . He's got a new story, because he's got new
awareness of the evidence. Clearly tailoring from
what he said before, to the time he gets here and
tells you today from the witness stand.
 
"[I]t would be improper, under article I, section 14 of 
the Hawai' i Constitution, for the prosecution to make generic 
accusations during closing argument that a defendant tailored his 
testimony based solely on the defendant's exercise of his constitutional right to be present during the trial." State v. 
Mattson, 122 Hawai' i 312, 326, 226 P.3d 482, 496 (2010); State v. 
Walsh, 123 Hawai' i 284, 289-90, 231 P.3d 1001, 1006-07 (App. 
2010); see also Portuondo v. Agard, 529 U.S. 61, 80 (2000) (Ginsburg, J., dissenting). However, when "the prosecution refer[s] to specific evidence presented at trial in addition to . . . [the defendant's] presence at trial, it cannot be said that the prosecutor's remarks during closing argument constituted a 'generic accusation' that [defendant] tailored his testimony based solely on his presence at trial. [Under such] circumstances, . . . the prosecutor's comments [do] not violate [the defendant's] constitutional right to be present at trial under article I, section 14 of the Hawai' i Constitution." 
Mattson, 122 Hawai' i at 327, 226 P.3d at 497; Walsh, 123 Hawai' i 
at 289, 231 P.3d at 1006. 
The instant case is similar to Mattson in that the
 
prosecutor referenced specific evidence supporting his tailoring
 charge including Lankford's pre-trial statement to the police
 that he had never met Watanabe, which directly contradicted his
 trial testimony that she had died jumping out of his truck. 
Thus, the prosecutor's suggestion that Lankford tailored his
 testimony did not violate Lankford's constitutional rights.
 
G. Inconsistent Verdicts
 
Lankford contends that the verdicts of murder by
 
omission and murder by commission are factually inconsistent and
 
cannot be resolved to present a coherent view of the case. 
"When faced with a claim that verdicts are inconsistent, the
 court must search for a reasonable way to read the verdicts as
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
expressing a coherent view of the case[.]" Carr v. Strode, 79 
Hawai'i 475, 489, 904 P.2d 489, 503 (1995) (quoting Toner v. 
Lederle Laboratories, 828 F.2d 510, 512 (9th Cir. 1987)) (internal quotation marks omitted); see also State v. Yoshimoto, 64 Haw. 1, 2, 635 P.2d 560, 561 (1981) (holding that verdicts were not inconsistent when, based on the evidence, the jury could have found facts rendering verdicts consistent). 
To prove the charge of murder in the second degree by
 
commission, the State was required to prove that Lankford
 intentionally or knowingly committed an act that caused
 Watanabe's death. To prove murder by omission, the State needed
 to prove that Lankford murdered Watanabe by intentionally or
 knowingly failing to seek and obtain medical treatment for
 Watanabe in contravention of his duty to do so. See State v.
 
Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 249-54, 831 P.2d 924, 931-34 (1992). 
Lankford testified at trial that he struck Watanabe
 
with his work truck. The State's witnesses also testified that
 Watanabe's blood and glasses were found inside Lankford's work
 truck. 
The jury could reasonably have concluded that Lankford
 
intentionally hit Watanabe with his truck in order to inflict
 injuries upon her which turned out to be life threatening, but
 not immediately fatal. Alternatively, the jury could have
 concluded that Lankford attacked Watanabe while she was in his
 truck and inflicted life threatening, but not immediately fatal
 injuries upon her. There are a number of possible scenarios that
 the jury could have reasonably believed in order to find Lankford
 guilty of both murder by omission and commission. See People v.
 
Deacon, 473 N.E.2d 1354, 1360 (Ill. App. Ct. 1985) (holding that
 guilty verdicts of both murder and involuntary manslaughter were
 not legally inconsistent); State v. Fernandez, 604 A.2d 1308,
 1320 (Conn. App. Ct. 1992) (holding that guilty verdicts for
 assault in the first degree and attempted murder were not
 inconsistent because the jury could have found that defendant's
 intent changed during his attack on the victim). Therefore, the
 verdicts here were not inconsistent. 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
H. Substantial Evidence
 
Lankford argues that there was no substantial evidence 
to support his conviction for second degree murder. When 
reviewing the record for substantial evidence, the evidence presented at trial must be considered in the strongest light for the prosecution. Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 33, 960 P.2d at 1241. 
There was substantial evidence to support the jury's
 
verdict that Lankford committed murder by commission: (1)
 multiple eyewitnesses testified to seeing Watanabe get into
 Lankford's work truck on the morning she disappeared; (2)
 Watanabe's blood and glasses were found in Lankford's work truck; 
(3) a witness testified to seeing Lankford digging a hole in an isolated area on the night of Watanabe's disappearance; (4) after initially denying that he had ever seen Watanabe, Lankford admitted to his involvement in her death and to disposing of her body; and (5) Lankford admittedly prevented Watanabe's body from being examined. See State v. Torres, 122 Hawai' i 2, 14, 222 P.3d 
409, 421 (App. 2009) (finding substantial evidence for murder conviction even though victim's body was never found when victim was last seen with defendant, items belonging to victim were found in defendant's car, defendant had made self-incriminating statements to others, and weapons were found in defendant's car), aff'd, 2011 WL 1549526, *1 (Haw. April 15, 2011). 
I. Denial of Sanctions Against Defense Counsel
 
In its cross appeal, the State argues that it was an
 
abuse of discretion for the Circuit Court to deny the State's
 
motion for sanctions because defense counsel embarked on a course
 of conduct in which he refused to comply with the Circuit Court’s
 discovery orders. 
"A court has broad discretion in the decision to impose
 
discovery sanctions." Montalbo, 73 Haw. at 135, 828 P.2d at 1278 
(decision to lift sanctions was not an abuse of discretion). 
"[I]f a party has failed to comply with a discovery order, the
 court may 'order such party to permit the discovery, grant a
 continuance, or it may enter such other order as it deems just
 under the circumstances.'" Id. "[W]hile sanctions are designed
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to accomplish the purpose of discovery . . . it is clear that the 
imposition of sanctions should not encroach on a fair trial." State v. Ahlo, 79 Hawai' i 385, 399, 903 P.2d 690, 704 (App. 1995) 
(quoting People v. Rayford, 356 N.E.2d 1274, 1277 (1976)) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
"[W]hen a criminal defendant violates Rule 16 by 
failing to disclose to the prosecutor evidence intended to be used at trial, the trial court must consider the following: (1) whether the defendant was acting maliciously or in bad faith; (2) the extent of prejudice to the prosecution caused by the violation; (3) whether the prejudice could have been cured by measures less severe than excluding evidence; and (4) any other relevant circumstances." Ahlo, 79 Hawai' i at 400, 903 P.2d at 
705; State v. Inman, 121 Hawai' i 195, 199, 216 P.3d 121, 125 
(App. 2009) (holding that preclusion of witness testimony was abuse of discretion). 
The Circuit Court found that defense counsel had been
 
trying to protect his client's rights, and that the trial was
 very complex. In its conclusions of law, the Circuit Court held
 that defense counsel failed to comply with his discovery
 obligations, but did not identify any harm to the State. As a
 result, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 declining to sanction defense counsel. 
III. CONCLUSION
 
The Circuit Court's July 31, 2008 Judgment and
 
September 10, 2008 Order Denying Sanctions are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 13, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant/
Cross-Appellee Presiding Judge 
Donald L. Wilkerson,Cross-Appellee Associate Judge 
Donn Fudo,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, Associate Judge 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
City & County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant
 
26
 