FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
THE QUEEN EMMA FOUNDATION,
a Hawai 'i non-profit corporation,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
vs.
 
ANDRE STEPHEN TATIBOUET, and CORAL REEF DEVELOPMENT, LLC,
a Hawai 'i limited company,
Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
 
NO. 26764
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CIVIL NO. 03-1-1054)
 
July 29, 2010

 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, FOLEY, and FUJISE, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
In this appeal, we are called upon to determine whether
 
(1) an otherwise moot controversy may be kept alive by a dispute
 
over the award of attorneys' fees and costs; and (2) whether the
 underlying merits of a moot appeal must be addressed to determine
 whether the trial court's award of attorneys' fees and costs to
 the "prevailing party" was proper. We hold that (1) a dispute
 over the award of attorneys' fees and costs does not prolong the
 life of an otherwise moot controversy; and (2) while an appellate
 court does have jurisdiction to consider whether the award of
 attorneys' fees and costs was proper, the merits of the underlying
 moot controversy will not be considered in determining whether the
 recipient of the attorneys' fees and costs award was the
 "prevailing party."
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
This appeal stems from a complaint for declaratory
 
judgment filed in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
 
1
 by Plaintiff-Appellee The Queen Emma Foundation (The
court)
Foundation) against Defendants-Appellants Andre Stephen Tatibouet

 
(Tatibouet) and Coral Reef Development, LLC (Coral Reef
 
Development) (collectively referred to as "Defendants"). Through
 its complaint, The Foundation sought a judgment "declaring that
 Defendants are not entitled to convert the Coral Reef Hotel into a
 condominium . . . ." The Foundation's complaint and request for
 relief turned on the interpretation of a lease, referred to herein
 as "the Lot 30-A Amended Lease," which covered property owned by
 The Foundation on which the Coral Reef Hotel was situated. The
 Foundation was the "LESSOR" under the Lot 30-A Amended Lease and
 Tatibouet held the position of a "LESSEE." The circuit court
 granted The Foundation's complaint for declaratory judgment and
 also awarded attorneys' fees and costs in favor of The Foundation
 as the prevailing party in the total amount of $
534,708.73. 
The Defendants appealed these decisions. Tatibouet
 
subsequently paid the attorneys' fees and costs award plus accrued
 interest. Defendants filed an opening brief, arguing that the
 circuit court erred in granting declaratory relief to The
 Foundation. They also argued that the circuit court erred in
 awarding The Foundation attorney's fees and costs because The
 Foundation "should not be the prevailing party." 
Shortly after Defendants filed their opening brief,
 
Tatibouet filed for bankruptcy. Tatibouet's bankruptcy filing
 automatically stayed this appeal. The proceedings in this appeal
 were suspended for three years while Tatibouet's bankruptcy
 proceeding was being resolved. During the bankruptcy proceeding,
 Tatibouet assigned and conveyed his interest in the Lot 30-A
 Amended Lease to a third party. In addition, Coral Reef
 Development was administratively terminated by the Department of 
1
 The Honorable Victoria S. Marks presided .
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Commerce and Consumer Affairs (DCCA) for failure to file annual
 
reports and pay required fees. 
On March 5, 2008, this court ordered Tatibouet to file a
 
report on the status of his bankruptcy proceeding. On April 8,
 2008, Tatibouet responded that he received a discharge under the
 bankruptcy code in October 2007 and that a Final Decree had been
 entered. Tatibouet stated that as the result of the termination
 of his bankruptcy case, the automatic stay of this appeal was no
 longer in effect, and he requested that proceedings in this appeal
 be resumed. 
The Foundation subsequently filed a motion to dismiss on
 
the ground that this appeal is moot. The Foundation asserts that
 Tatibouet and Coral Reef Development no longer have an interest in
 the Lot 30-A Amended Lease or the Coral Reef Hotel, and they thus
 have no "'right' or ability to complete their leasehold
 condominiumization scheme," which forms the basis of the
 underlying dispute. The Foundation argues that for this court to
 render a decision on the circuit court's interpretation of the Lot
 30-A Amended Lease "would be the equivalent of an advisory opinion
 on an abstract point of law." 
In opposition, Defendants claim that this appeal is not
 
moot because (1) Tatibouet still has a direct financial stake in
 the appeal since he seeks to vacate the award of attorneys' fees
 and costs against him; and (2) Tatibouet may file a future action
 against The Foundation for breach of the Lot 30-A Amended Lease. 
Defendants also contend that we must address the underlying merits
 of this appeal, specifically, the proper interpretation of the Lot
 30-A Amended Lease, because they are attacking the award of
 attorneys' fees and costs on the ground that Tatibouet, and not
 The Foundation, should have been the prevailing party. 
For the reasons discussed below, we conclude that: (1)
 
the Defendants' claims challenging the merits of the circuit
 court's grant of declaratory relief are moot; (2) Tatibouet's
 interest in overturning the attorneys' fees and costs award and
 the possibility that he may seek to file a lawsuit for breach of
 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Lot 30-A Amended Lease do not save his claims challenging the
 
merits of the circuit court's grant of declaratory relief from
 being moot; and (3) without our reaching the merits of the circuit
 court's grant of declaratory relief, the circuit court's award of
 attorneys' fees should be affirmed.
 
I. BACKGROUND FACTS
 
A.
 
The subject hotel, formerly known as the Coral Reef
 
Hotel (Hotel), is located on a lot described as Lot 30-A in
 Waikiki. Lot 30-A was once part of a larger parcel described as
 Lot 30. In 1965, Lot 30 was owned by The Foundation's predecessor
 
2
 and was leased to Waikiki Development Company (WDC). 
 in titleWDC, in turn, subleased Lot 30 to a third party, and the sublease
 was thereafter assigned to additional parties in separate

 
transactions. In 1969, the Hotel was built, and in 1972,
 Tatibouet and others purchased the Hotel and a portion of the
 underlying leasehold of Lot 30 containing the Hotel. Lot 30 was
 later subdivided into two lots, with Lot 30-A being the lot
 containing the Hotel. 
In September and December 1975 and February 1976, an
 
amended lease for Lot 30-A, the Lot 30-A Amended Lease, was
 executed with the term of the lease running until 2050. The
 Foundation was the "LESSOR" and Tatibouet was one of the
 "SUBLESSEES" when the Lot 30-A Amended Lease was signed. Later in
 1976, Tatibouet and others acquired the position of the "LESSEE"
 under the Lot 30-A Amended Lease.
 
Article IX of the Lot 30-A Amended Lease provides in
 
pertinent part:
 
ARTICLE IX
 
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT
 
IT IS MUTUALLY COVENANTED AND AGREED by and between the
 
2
 In 1965, The Foundation's predecessor in title was The Queen's
Hospital, which was later renamed The Queen's Medical Center. For purposes of
simplicity, we will use "The Foundation" when referring to any of its
predecessors in title for Lot 30 or Lot 30-A. 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parties hereto that LESSEE may with the written approval of
LESSOR develop the demised premises into a residential or
commercial condominium upon the following terms and
conditions:
 
. . . .
 
2. Horizontal Property Regime. If LESSEE shall
 
decide to develop or convert the premises on Lot 30A into a
condominium development, then at LESSEE's request and
expense, LESSOR will join with LESSEE in executing a suitable
declaration submitting said premises to a Horizontal Property
Regime by Chapter 514, Hawaii Revised Statutes, as now or
hereafter amended, thereby creating condominium leasehold or
subleasehold estates in each of the units and all common
 elements of the project constructed thereon. Such
 declaration and all condominium documents shall be subject to
the written approval of the attorneys for LESSOR. The
 schedule of rents shall be subject to approval of LESSOR.
Such condominium documents will provide for an association of
unit owners who shall at all times maintain a responsible
corporate managing agent approved by LESSOR for the
management and operation of said project and for the
collection and payment when due on behalf of the holders of
the unit subleased, all rents, taxes and other charges
thereunder.
 
. . . .
 
Any proposed condominium subdivision shall be for a
period no longer than this lease and shall not be an
encumbrance upon the fee simple title.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
In 2003, Tatibouet moved forward with plans to convert
 
the Hotel into a condominium, and Coral Reef Development was
 
formed. Coral Reef Development was the proposed developer for
 converting the Hotel into a condominium, and Tatibouet planned to
 assign all of his interest in the Hotel to Coral Reef Development. 
In March of 2003, without seeking or obtaining The Foundation's
 approval for the condominium conversion, Defendants submitted a
 Preliminary Public Report and a Declaration of Condominium
 
3
Property Regime  of Coral Reef Condominium Project to the Hawaii
Real Estate Commission. On May 6, 2003, The Foundation learned of
 Tatibouet's plans to convert the Hotel into a condominium through
 a newspaper article. On May 10, 2003, condominium units were
 offered for sale to the public. 
3 Condominiums were previously referred to in the Hawaii Revised
Statutes as "horizontal property regimes," but the Hawai
'i Legislature changed
the terminology to "condominium property regime" in 1988. 1988 Haw. Sess.
 
Laws Act 65 § 2. 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On May 19, 2003, The Foundation filed its complaint for
 
declaratory judgment in the circuit court seeking a declaration
 
that Defendants were not entitled to convert the Hotel into a
 condominium. The dispute between the parties largely turned on
 the interpretation of Article IX of the Lot 30-A Amended Lease. 
The circuit court interpreted Article IX to mean "that 
[T]he Foundation would take steps to facilitate establishing a
 condominium provided that the condominium would not extend beyond
 the term of the lease and provided that the condominium would not
 encumber [T]he Foundation's fee simple title." The circuit court
 concluded that "[u]nder current law, a condominium cannot be
 created on Lot 30-A without encumbering [T]he Foundation's fee
 simple title."
4 Accordingly, the circuit court granted The
 
Foundation's complaint for declaratory judgment and ordered that
 
Defendant's [sic] are not entitled to convert the Coral
Reef Hotel into a condominium and that all offerings,
marketing, filings and submission to the Real Estate
Commission and the general public concerning such
purported conversion are not binding upon [T]he
Foundation and are of no effect.
 
The Foundation subsequently filed a motion for recovery
 
of its attorneys' fees and costs on the grounds that: (1) The
 
Foundation was the prevailing party; and (2) under the terms of
 the Lot 30-A Amended Lease and Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 607-14 (Supp. 2009), The Foundation was entitled to recover the
 attorneys' fees and costs it incurred. The circuit court granted
 The Foundation's motion but reduced the amount of attorney's fees
 it had requested. As part of its Final Judgment, the circuit
 court entered judgment in favor of The Foundation and jointly and
 severally against Defendants for attorneys' fees of $489,304.51
 and costs of $45,404.22, for a total of $534,708.73. Tatibouet 
4
 With respect to Coral Reef Development, the circuit court further
concluded that: (1) Tatibouet was required to obtain The Foundation's approval
and/or consent to assign his interest in Lot 30-A to another entity such as
Coral Reef Development; and (2) Tatibouet had not assigned any interest in Lot
30-A to Coral Reef Development, and Coral Reef Development was not the
"LESSEE" and did not have the rights of the "LESSEE" under the Lot 30-A
Amended Lease. 
6
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
paid the judgment for attorney's fees and costs plus accrued
 
interest.5
 
B.
 
Defendants filed a notice of appeal from the circuit
 
court's: (1) "Final Judgment"; (2) "Findings of Fact, Conclusions
 of Law and Order," which granted The Foundation's complaint for
 declaratory judgment; (3) "Order Granting The Queen Emma
 Foundation's Motion for Recovery of Attorney's Fees and Costs";
 (4) "Order Denying Defendants' Motion to Alter or Amend the
 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order"; and 5) "Order
 Denying Defendants Andre Stephen Tatibouet's and Coral Reef
 Development, LLC's Motion for Summary Judgment . . ." 
In their opening brief, Defendants argue that the
 
circuit court erred in granting The Foundation's complaint for
 declaratory judgment, and they challenge numerous findings of fact
 and conclusions of law issued by the circuit court in support of
 its decision. Defendants also argue that the circuit court erred
 in awarding attorney's fees and costs to The Foundation because
 The Foundation should not have been the prevailing party. In
 addition, Defendants assert that the circuit court erred in: (1)
 permitting the introduction of expert testimony on questions of
 law; (2) denying Defendants' motion to alter or amend the
 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order," which granted
 The Foundation's complaint for declaratory judgment; and (3)
 denying Defendants' motion for summary judgment. 
After Defendants filed their opening brief and before
 
The Foundation's answering brief was due, Tatibouet filed for
 bankruptcy, which automatically stayed this appeal. As a result
 of the automatic stay, this appeal lay dormant for three years.
6
 
As part of the bankruptcy proceeding, Taitbouet assigned and
 
5
 Tatibouet asserts that he paid the judgment for attorney's fees and
costs because he could not afford a supersedeas bond and because The
Foundation took the position that non-payment would constitute a breach of the
Lot 30-A Amended Lease.
 
6
 There is no indication that Tatibouet attempted to seek relief from
the bankruptcy stay to pursue this appeal. 
7
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conveyed his interest in the Lot 30-A Amended Lease to a third
 
party. In addition, on December 7, 2007, Coral Reef Development
 was administratively terminated by the DCCA for failure to file
 annual reports and pay required fees. This appeal resumed after
 Defendants notified this court in 2008 that a Final Decree had
 been entered in Tatibouet's bankruptcy proceeding. 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Mootness
 
Courts "may not decide moot questions or abstract 
propositions of law." Life of the Land v. Burns, 59 Haw. 244, 
250, 580 P.2d 405, 409 (1978) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). "It is axiomatic that mootness is an issue of subject matter jurisdiction. Whether a court possesses subject matter jurisdiction is a question of law reviewable de novo." Hamilton v. Lethem, 119 Hawai
'i 1, 4-5, 193 P.3d 839, 842-43 
(2008) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
B. Attorney's Fees and Costs
 
"The trial court's grant or denial of attorneys' fees 
and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai
'i 92, 105, 
176 P.3d 91, 104 (2008) (citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Mootness
 
We first address the argument raised by The Foundation
 
in its motion to dismiss this appeal and in its answering brief
 that the mootness doctrine bars our consideration of Defendants' 
claims. 
1. 
In general, "this court does not have jurisdiction to 
decide abstract propositions of law or moot cases." Lathrop v. 
Sakatani, 111 Hawai
'i 307, 312, 141 P.3d 480, 485 (2006) 
(citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). "A case is moot where the question to be determined is abstract and 
8
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
does not rest on existing facts or rights." In re Application of
 
Thomas, 73 Haw. 223, 226, 832 P.2d 253, 254 (1992).
 
A case is moot if it has lost its character as a
 
present, live controversy of the kind that must exist if
courts are to avoid advisory opinions on abstract
propositions of law. The rule is one of the prudential rules
of judicial self-governance founded in concern about the
proper -- and properly limited -- role of the courts in a
democratic society. We have said the suit must remain alive
 throughout the course of litigation to the moment of final
appellate disposition to escape the mootness bar. 
Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Group v. Lyman, 69 Haw. 81, 87, 734 P.2d
 
161, 165 (1987) (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets
 omitted). 
The mootness doctrine is said to encompass the
circumstances that destroy the justiciability of a suit
previously suitable for determination. Put another way, the
suit must remain alive throughout the course of litigation to
the moment of final appellate disposition. Its chief purpose
is to assure that the adversary system, once set in
operation, remains properly fueled. The doctrine seems
 appropriate where events subsequent to the judgment of the
trial court have so affected the relations between the
 parties that the two conditions for justiciability relevant
on appeal -- adverse interest and effective remedy -- have
been compromised.
 
Lathrop, 111 Hawai 'i at 312-13, 141 P.3d at 485-86 (citations and 
block quote format omitted).
 
The Foundation contends that Defendants' appeal has been
 
rendered moot by the transfer of Tatibouet's interest in the Lot
 
30-A Amended Lease and the Hotel to a third party during
 Tatibouet's bankruptcy proceeding and by the administrative
 termination of Coral Reef Development. In support of its motion
 to dismiss on mootness grounds, The Foundation submitted the
 following documents:
 
1. A "Notice of Payment Defaults and Other Material
 
Defaults" (Default Notice) filed on December 7, 2006, in
 Tatibouet's bankruptcy proceeding, which stated that as the result
 of Tatibouet's default on a loan agreement, "title to [the Hotel]
 and [Tatibouet's] interest in the ground lease thereto shall be
 conveyed" to a third party.
7
 
7 The Default Notice provided that the conveyance shall take place
"without the need of a further order" of the bankruptcy court, unless
(continued...)
 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2. An "Assignment of Lease" dated December 21, 2006, 
filed in the Office of the Assistant Registrar of the Land Court, 
State of Hawai 'i, in which Tatibouet assigned and conveyed his 
interest in the Lot 30-A Amended Lease to a third party. 
3. A "Certificate of Administrative Termination"
 
issued by the DCCA, dated December 7, 2007, which states that
 Coral Reef Development was administratively terminated for failure
 to file annual reports and pay required fees.
8
 
The Foundation argues that based on the events
 
established by these documents, "it is undisputed that
 [Defendants] have no current interest whatsoever" in the Lot 30-A
 Amended Lease and the Hotel. The Foundation accordingly asserts 
that Defendants "no longer have any putative 'right' or ability to
 complete their leasehold condominiumization scheme." In sum, The
 Foundation argues that the appeal is moot because a decision by
 this court on the circuit court's interpretation of the Lot 30-A
 Amended Lease "would equate to an advisory opinion on an abstract
 point of law." 
Defendants do not dispute that Tatibouet has assigned
 
and conveyed his interest in the Lot 30-A Amended Lease and the
 Hotel to a third-party. Nor do they dispute that Coral Reef
 Development has been administratively terminated. However,
 Defendants argue that the appeal is not moot because (1) Tatibouet
 has a direct financial stake in the appeal since he is challenging
 the circuit court's award of attorneys' fees and costs, and he is
 
7(...continued)
Tatibouet or the creditors committee filed a motion contesting the default and
the bankruptcy court entered an order finding that no material default had
occurred.
 
8
 Defendants acknowledge, and we agree, that "on motions related to
mootnesss, the appellate court may consider matters outside the record
. . . ." This proposition is supported by case authority. See, e.g.,
Anderson v. Cain, 27 Haw. 415, 419 (Haw. Terr. 1923) (concluding that facts
that do not appear on the record, but which show that an appeal has been
rendered moot, "may be proved by extrinsic evidence"); Iowa Mut. Ins. Co. v.
McCarthy, 572 N.W.2d 537, 540 n.1 (Iowa 1997); State ex rel. Nelson v. Russo,
729 N.E.2d 1181, 1182 (Ohio 2000). Defendants do not challenge the accuracy
of the documents submitted by The Foundation. We therefore consider these
 documents in determining whether the claims raised by Defendants in this
appeal are moot. 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
challenging the circuit court's award on the basis that The
 
Foundation should not have been the prevailing party; and (2)
 Tatibouet may file an action against The Foundation for breach of
 the Lot 30-A Amended Lease, which Tatibouet claims he cannot do
 unless the circuit court's judgment granting declaratory relief is
 vacated. 
2.
 
We conclude that events occurring after the circuit
 
court's entry of its Final Judgment have rendered Defendants'
 challenge to the circuit court's grant of declaratory relief moot. 
As noted, Tatibouet does not dispute that he has transferred his
 interest in the Lot 30-A Amended Lease and the Hotel and to a
 third party or that Coral Reef Development has been
 administratively terminated. Therefore, the controversy
 underlying The Foundation's complaint for declaratory judgment and
 the circuit court's grant of declaratory relief -- whether
 Defendants are entitled to convert the Hotel into a condominium
 under the Lot 30-A Amended Lease -- is no longer a present, live
 controversy. 
Because Defendants no longer have an interest in the Lot 
30-A Amended Lease, they do not have a present adverse interest vis-à-vis The Foundation with respect to the interpretation of the Lot 30-A Amended Lease. A decision by this court overturning the circuit court's grant of declaratory relief on the merits would not provide Defendants with an effective remedy regarding their dispute with the Foundation over their entitlement under the Lot 30-A Amended Lease to convert the Hotel into a condominium. Even if we were to adopt Defendants' interpretation of the Lot 30-A Amended Lease, they no longer have the ability to carry out their plans to convert the Hotel into a condominium. Thus, a decision by this court on the merits of the circuit court's interpretation of the Lot 30-A Amended Lease and the circuit court's grant of declaratory relief would be an advisory opinion on abstract propositions of law. See Lathrop, 111 Hawai
'i at 312, 141 P.3d at 
485 ("Courts will not consume time deciding abstract propositions of law or moot cases, and have no jurisdiction to do so." (quoting 
11
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wong v. Bd. of Regents, Univ. of Hawai 'i, 62 Haw. 391, 395, 616 
P.2d 201, 204 (1980)). 
3.
 
Tatibouet contends that his challenge to the circuit
 
court's grant of declaratory relief is not moot because he may
 
bring a damages claim against The Foundation for breach of the Lot
 30-A Amended Lease. Tatibouet asserts that unless the circuit
 court's declaratory judgment is vacated, his damages claim will be
 barred by "issue preclusion" arising from the circuit court's
 declaratory judgment.
9 We conclude that the possibility that
 
Tatibouet may file a damages claim is too speculative and remote
 to save his challenge to the circuit court's grant of declaratory
 judgment from being moot, especially since he may not have the
 right to bring such a claim by virtue of his bankruptcy
 proceeding. 
In their opposition to The Foundation's motion to
 
dismiss on mootness grounds, Defendants initially asserted that
 Tatibouet only assigned his interest in the Lot 30-A Amended Lease
 and did not assign or transfer the damages claim to anyone else. 
However, Defendants later filed an "errata" in which they advised
 this court that the assertion that Tatibouet did not assign or
 transfer his damages claim "may be incorrect." Defendants stated
 that their review of certain documents "indicates that claims
 'relating to the Real Property' (defined as the land under the
 [H]otel) may have been assigned." Defendants also stated that
 they were reviewing additional documents "to determine the nature
 and extent of any such assignment" and requested leave "to file a
 supplemental memorandum on the effect of any such assignment on
 the instant appeal." Defendants did not thereafter identify or 
9
 As the basis for his "issue preclusion" argument, Tatibouet cites
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 632-3 (1993), which provides:
 
Further relief upon judgment. Further relief based on a
 
declaratory judgment may be granted whenever necessary or proper,
after reasonable notice and hearing, against any adverse party
whose rights have been adjudicated by the judgment.
 
12
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
provide this court with any supplemental information on this
 
issue. 
In addition, as the result of Tatibouet's bankruptcy
 
filing, any damages claim that might be asserted may properly
 belong to Tatibouet's bankruptcy estate. Virtually all of a
 debtor's assets, including causes of action that belong to the
 debtor at the commencement of a bankruptcy case, vest in the
 bankruptcy estate upon the filing of a bankruptcy petition. 11
 U.S.C. § 541(a)(1) (2006); Turner v. Cook, 362 F.3d 1219, 1225-26
 (9th Cir. 2004) (concluding that when the debtor declared
 bankruptcy, all the debtor's legal or equitable interests in his
 property, including causes of action, "became the property of the
 bankruptcy estate and are represented by the bankruptcy trustee").
 
In support of its motion to dismiss, The Foundation
 
submitted the "Debtor's Schedules, Statement of Financial Affairs,
 and Amended Mailing Matrix" (Debtor's Schedules) filed by
 Tatibouet in his bankruptcy case.
10 The Debtor's Schedules filed
 
by Tatibouet did not identify an affirmative claim or cause of
 action against The Foundation for damages or breach of the 
Lot 30-A Amended Lease. In response to The Foundation's
 submissions, Defendants did not proffer evidence that the
 bankruptcy trustee had abandoned any such claim or cause of
 action.
11 If Tatibouet's purported cause of action for damages
 
against The Foundation was not scheduled or abandoned in
 
10
 As noted in footnote 8, supra, we may consider matters outside the 
record in determining whether a claim raised on appeal has been rendered moot.
In addition, we have the discretion, which we exercise here, to take judicialnotice of documents filed in Tatibouet's bankruptcy case. See Hawai' i Rules 
of Evidence Rule 201 (1993); Roxas v. Marcos, 89 Hawai' i 91, 111 n.9, 969 P.2d
1209, 1229 n.9 (1998) (stating that "[c]ourts . . . may, in appropriatecircumstances, take notice of proceedings in other courts, both within andwithout their judicial system[,] if those proceedings have a direct relationto the matter at issue" (citation omitted) (brackets in original)); Onaka v.Onaka, 112 Hawai' i 374, 386 n.15, 146 P.3d 89, 101 n.15 (2006) (taking
judicial notice on appeal of the record in a related bankruptcy case). 
11
 By order dated June 12, 2008, this court denied The Foundation's
motion to supplement the record with exhibits relating to The Foundation's
mootness argument, but ruled that we may consider such exhibits in deciding
The Foundation's motion to dismiss on mootness grounds. We also ruled that
 Defendants may submit relevant evidence responding to The Foundation's
exhibits.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Tatibouet's bankruptcy case, then it is still property of the
 
bankruptcy estate, and the bankruptcy trustee may reopen
 Tatibouet's bankruptcy case to administer this asset on behalf of
 the creditors. 11 U.S.C. §§ 350(b) and 554 (2006); Cusano v.
 Klein, 264 F.3d 936, 945-46 (9th Cir. 2001) (stating that "[i]f
 [the debtor] failed properly to schedule an asset, including a
 cause of action, that asset continues to belong to the bankruptcy
 estate and did not revert to [the debtor]"); In re Lopez, 283 B.R.
 22, 28 (B.A.P. 9th Cir. 2002) (granting a motion to reopen a case
 in which the debtor failed to disclose a cause of action in her
 schedules, noting that "property that is neither abandoned nor
 administered remains property of the estate even after the case is
 closed"). 
Tatibouet has not shown, in light of his bankruptcy
 
proceeding, that he has the right to bring a claim for damages
 against The Foundation for breach of the Lot 30-A Amended Lease. 
Given the speculative and remote nature of Tatibouet's purported
 damages claim, the possibility that Tatibouet may seek to assert a
 damages claim is insufficient to save his challenge to the circuit
 court's grant of declaratory judgment from being moot. 
4.
 
Tatibouet argues that his challenge to the circuit
 
court's award of attorney's fees and costs on the ground that he,
 and not The Foundation, should have been the prevailing party
 saves the underlying controversy over whether the Lot 30-A Amended
 Lease entitled Defendants to convert the Hotel into a condominium
 from being moot. We disagree. 
Hawai
'i has not addressed the specific question of 
whether a claim for attorneys' fees and costs keeps alive an otherwise moot controversy. However, courts from other jurisdictions that have considered this question, including the United States Supreme Court, have concluded that a dispute over attorney's fees and costs does not permit adjudication of an otherwise moot controversy. See, e.g., Lewis v. Continental Bank 
Corp., 494 U.S. 472, 480 (1990) (holding that an interest in attorneys' fees is not enough to create an Article III case or 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
controversy when the underlying case is moot); Center for
 
Biological Diversity v. Marina Point Development Co., 566 F.3d
 794, 805-06 (9th Cir. 2009) (lead opinion) (citing numerous cases
 in support of the proposition that when a matter becomes moot, an
 appellate court cannot review the merits of the underlying dispute
 to determine whether an attorneys' fees award was proper); Ott v.
 Boston Edison Co., 602 N.E.2d 566, 568 (Mass. 1992) ("A potential
 claim for attorneys' fees standing alone does not justify deciding
 a moot case."); Dept. of Education v. Rodarte, 127 F.Supp.2d 1103,
 1113-14 (D. Haw. 2000) (holding that the pending question
 regarding the propriety of an attorneys' fees and costs award for
 the prevailing party in an appeal from an administrative decision
 did not save the underlying dispute from being moot). 
We agree with these cases and conclude that Defendants'
 
appeal of the circuit court's award of attorneys' fees and costs
 does not save the underlying controversy over whether the Lot 30-A
 Amended Lease entitled Defendants to convert the Hotel into a
 condominium from being moot. Accordingly, we dismiss as moot
 Defendants' claims on appeal that challenge the circuit court's
 grant of declaratory judgment in favor of The Foundation. For the
 same reasons, we also dismiss as moot Defendants' claim on appeal
 that the circuit court erred in denying their motion for summary
 judgment.
 
B. Attorneys' Fees and Costs
 
The question then becomes how should we resolve
 
Defendants' appeal of the attorneys' fees costs award. We adopt
 the approach of the courts that have concluded that "[a]lthough a
 claim for attorney's fees does not preserve a case which has
 otherwise become moot on appeal, . . . the question of attorney's
 fees is ancillary to the underlying action and survives
 independently under the Court's equitable jurisdiction." United
 
States v. Ford, 650 F.2d 1141, 1144 (9th Cir. 1981); see Bishop v.
 Committee on Professional Ethics and Conduct of the Iowa State
 Bar, 686 F.2d 1278, 1290 (1982); Rodarte, 127 F.Supp.2d at 1115­17. Where the underlying controversy has become moot, "there is
 
no right to review or redetermine any of the issues in the
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
underlying action solely for the purpose of deciding the
 
attorney's fees question." Ford, 650 F.2d at 1144 n.1. Instead,
 
the question of attorney's fees and costs must be decided based on
 whether the recipient of the attorney's fees and costs award can
 be considered to be the prevailing party in the underlying action,
 "without regard to whether we think the [trial] court's decision
 on the underlying merits is correct." Bishop, 686 F.2d at 1290;
 
see Bagby v. Beal, 606 F.2d 411, 414-15 (3d. Cir. 1979). We have
 jurisdiction, under this approach, to decide Defendants' challenge
 to the circuit court's award of attorney's fees and costs.
 
The court in Rodarte confronted a situation analogous to 
the one we face in the instant appeal. Rodarte involved an 
administrative hearing decision in favor of a disabled student and her mother (collectively, the "student") and against the Hawai
'i 
State Department of Education (DOE) on a claim brought by the student under the Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act. Rodarte, 127 F.Supp.2d at 1104-08. The DOE appealed to the federal district court from the adverse administrative hearing decision, and the student sought attorney's fees and costs as the prevailing party in the administrative hearing. Id. at 1107. The 
district court found that the DOE's appeal of the administrative hearing decision was moot because the student had already received the compensatory education ordered by the hearing officer and had graduated from high school. Id. at 1111-12. At issue, then, was 
how the mootness of the DOE's appeal affected the attorneys' fees and costs analysis. In other words, whether the court was required, despite the mootness of the DOE's appeal, to decide if the student should have been the prevailing party. Id. at 1115. 
The court noted that as a general rule, an appellee is
 
no longer a "prevailing party" and must return attorneys' fees
 awarded when the appellee loses on the merits on appeal (i.e., "a
 favorable judgment on the merits in a lower proceeding is reversed
 on appeal"). Id. However, the court concluded that it was not
 
required to decide the merits of the moot appeal solely for the
 purpose of determining if the student should be the prevailing
 party with respect to the attorneys' fees award. Id. The court
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
asserted that it "can find no case stating that if an appeal is
 
moot, a court is nevertheless obliged to investigate the merits in
 order to determine who should have been the prevailing party for
 purposes of allocating attorneys' fees." Id. On the other hand,
 
the court cited several precedents supporting the view that when
 an appeal is moot, the court should not inquire into the
 correctness of the underlying decision, but should look to the
 outcome of the litigation in determining whether a party was the
 prevailing party. Id. at 1115-16. 
Based on its survey of the relevant precedents, the
 
court found that "it need not determine who the prevailing party
 would be in the instant case had the appeal not been moot. 
Instead it will simply analyze whether [the student] meets the
 test for a 'prevailing party' based on the outcome of the
 administrative hearing." Id. at 1116. The court concluded that
 
the student was the prevailing party in that the student succeeded
 on a significant issue in the litigation which modified the DOE's
 behavior in the student's favor. Id. at 1117. The court
 
therefore granted the student's motion for summary judgment for
 attorney's fees and costs. Id. 
As in Rodarte, we examine whether The Foundation was the 
"prevailing party" based on the outcome of the circuit court proceedings and without inquiring into the correctness of the circuit court's grant of declaratory judgment on the merits. In general, a prevailing party is a party who has "prevail[ed] on the disputed main issue, even though not to the extent of [the party's] original contention . . . ." Food Pantry, Ltd. v. 
Waikiki Business Plaza, Inc., 58 Haw. 606, 620, 575 P.2d 869, 879 (1978); see Kamaka, 117 Hawai
'i at 126, 176 P.3d at 125 (stating 
that "for purposes of HRS § 607-14 [(the statute cited by The Foundation in support of its request for attorneys' fees)], the party in whose favor judgment was entered is the prevailing party"). 
Here, based on the outcome of the circuit court
 
proceedings, it is clear that The Foundation was the prevailing
 party. The Foundation sought a declaratory judgment, based on its
 
17
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
interpretation of the Lot 30-A Amended Lease, that "Defendants are
 
not entitled to convert the Coral Reef Hotel into a condominium."
 The purpose of the litigation was to prevent Defendants from going
 forward with their plans to convert the Hotel into a condominium. 
The circuit court granted The Foundation's complaint for
 declaratory judgment, which effectively stopped Defendants from
 continuing with their plans. Viewing the outcome of the circuit
 court proceedings without considering the underlying merits of the
 circuit court's decision, we conclude that The Foundation was the
 prevailing party and affirm the circuit court's award of
 attorneys' fees and costs. See Rodarte, 127 F.Supp.2d at 1114-17;
 
Center For Biological Diversity, 566 F.3d at 805-06 (lead
 opinion).
12
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we dismiss as moot: (1)
 
Defendants' claims on appeal that challenge the circuit court's
 grant of declaratory judgment in favor of The Foundation; and (2)
 Defendants' claim on appeal that the circuit court erred in
 
12 We note that in Center for Biological Diversity, 566 F.3d at 804, the
permanent injunction granted to the appellees under the Endangered Species Act
(ESA) for the protection of bald eagles became moot on appeal when the bald
eagle was taken off the endangered species list. Both the concurring and
dissenting opinions questioned whether the mootness of the appeal and the
appellate court's decision to vacate the trial court's judgment under the ESA
also required that the trial court's award of attorneys' fees to appellees as
the prevailing party on the ESA claim be vacated. The concurring opinion,
feeling bound by existing precedent, answered the question in the negative and
joined the lead opinion in upholding the award of attorneys' fees under the
ESA without considering the merits of the underlying ESA claim. Id. at 807­
08. The dissent, which distinguished prior precedent, answered the question
in the affirmative. Id. at 808-10. 
Unlike in Center for Biological Diversity, the relief obtained by The
Foundation was not vitiated and undone by subsequent events. In addition, the
appellants in Center for Biological Diversity did not play a role in the case
becoming moot. Here, the case became moot because Tatibouet transferred his
interests in the Lot 30-A Amended Lease to a third party during his bankruptcy
proceeding. See generally U.S. Bancorp Mortgage Co. v. Bonner Mall
Partnership, 513 U.S. 18, 23-29 (1994) (holding that mootness created by the
parties' settlement did not warrant vacating the lower court's judgment and
concluding that whether the party seeking relief from the judgment below
caused the mootness by voluntary action was the principal condition considered
in determining whether vacatur was appropriate). In these respects, the
circumstances presented by this case are different from those presented in
Center for Biological Diversity.
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
denying their motion for summary judgment. We affirm the portion
 
of the circuit court's July 22, 2004, Final Judgment which entered
 judgment in favor of The Foundation and against Tatibouet and
 Coral Reef Development for attorneys' fees and costs. 
On the briefs:
 
Rosemary T. Fazio
Kevin W. Herring
Jill M. Hasegawa
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
James T. Bickerton
 
K. Bartlett Durand, Jr.
Terrence M. Lee
 Nadine Y. Ando
 (Bickerton Lee Dang &
Sullivan)
William Meheula
 (Winer Meheula & Devens)
for Defendants-Appellants
 
19
 