FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
---o0o--­
ROBERT E. KEOWN, Plaintiff-Appellant, v. TUDOR INSURANCE COMPANY,
a New Hampshire Corporation, Defendant-Appellee
 
NO. 29695
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0192)
 
DECEMBER 13, 2012
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FUJISE, J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Robert E. Keown (Keown) appeals
 
from the judgment entered February 10, 2009, in the Circuit Court
 
1
for the Fifth Circuit (circuit court)  granting summary judgment
in favor of Defendant-Appellee Tudor Insurance Company (Tudor).
 
I.
 
At all times relevant to this appeal, Keown was a real
 
estate agent and owner of a real estate brokerage firm (Bob Keown
 
Ltd., d/b/a Makai Properties) that he began in or around 1980 and
 
sold on May 18, 2005. 
Keown maintained a professional liability
 
insurance policy (policy) with Tudor from December 15, 2003
 through February 15, 2005. Keown was one of several unpaid
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
directors of the Koloa Early School (the School), a non-profit 
entity in Kauaf i. The School operated on land it subleased from 
Honpa Hongwanji Mission of Hawaif i (Honpa), a non-profit entity 
that operated a Buddhist temple and supervised the Koloa 
Hongwanji Mission (Koloa), an affiliated temple which occupied 
the land and buildings on the property leased by Honpa. 
In 2003, an opportunity to purchase the leased property
 
occupied by the School and Koloa (the property) arose and the
 
School agreed to jointly purchase the property with Honpa and
 
later subdivide it with Honpa. Honpa, rather than Koloa, was to
 
be the named co-purchaser alongside the School. As Keown
 
described his role in the transaction he "handled many of the
 
details" on behalf of both the School and Honpa, including
 
arranging for an appraisal and a survey of the property,
 
researching land division options, working with county officials,
 
preparing and submitting the Deposit Receipt Offer and Acceptance
 
(DROA) to the sellers, listing his real estate company as broker,
 
and being "the 'person on point' concerning the property
 
acquisition."
 
Keown prepared the draft DROA, which Honpa and the
 
School executed as joint purchasers in April 2003, without having
 
an agreement in place as to how the property would be divided. 
Despite the inability to reach agreement on co-tenancy structure
 
and division of the property, Honpa and the School agreed to
 
close the sale. The deed conveyed an undivided one-half interest
 
to the School and an undivided one-half interest to Honpa. 
Unbeknownst to Honpa or Koloa, Keown also recorded a mortgage for
 
himself as mortgagee of an undivided one-half interest in the
 
property to secure a $230,000 loan he made to the School to
 
finance its purchase of the school building and the land under
 
it. Following closing and recordation of the deed, efforts to
 
reach an agreement on division of the property remained
 
unsuccessful.
 
In January 2005, approximately one year after closing,
 
Honpa filed a complaint against the School and Keown seeking
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
partition of the property and making a claim against Keown for
 
negligence.
 
Honpa alleged that (1) the School had agreed that the
 
School would only obtain that portion of the property underlying
 
the school building and that Honpa would acquire the rest of the
 
property; (2) Keown, acting as "Principal Broker/Broker-in-
Charge" represented both Honpa and the School and drafted the
 
DROA for the property but told both buyers that the DROA was
 
"simply a formality" and the details of the division and
 
ownership of the property would be documented later; (3) as the
 
parties did not reach an agreement as to the property division,
 
the Warranty Deed recording the purchase stated that the 50%
 
undivided interests specified therein would not bind either
 
party; (4) Keown recorded a mortgage "which identifies Keown is
 
[sic] a mortgagee of an undivided one-half (½) interest" in the
 
property without disclosing this to Honpa; and (5) Keown breached
 
his duty of care to Honpa causing damage to Honpa by, among other
 
things, causing it to be in dispute with the School over the
 
ownership of the property.
 
In addition to a partition of the property, the
 
complaint sought monetary damages and attorneys' fees and costs.
 
In February 2005, Keown tendered the complaint to Tudor
 
through his attorney. Tudor responded with a rejection letter,
 
denying coverage based on exclusions contained in the policy. 
Tudor specifically relied on the following clauses in the
 
policy's enumerated exclusions and provisions of the Real Estate
 
Agents and Brokers Endorsement:
 
III. Exclusions
 
Coverage provided in this policy does not apply to any loss2
 
in connection with or arising out of or in any way
involving:
 
. . . .
 
2
 The policy defines "loss" to include "claim expenses," meaning
costs, charges, fees, and expenses incurred in defending an insured against
any claim or litigation.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
G.	 Actions against the Insured arising out of or
connected with the performance or failure to perform
services for any person or entity:
 
1.	 which is owned by, controlled by or in which any
Insured has any financial interest;
 
2.	 which owns, controls, or has any financial
interest in any Insured covered by this policy;
 
3.	 which is affiliated with any Insured through any
common ownership, control, or financial
interest; or
 
4.	 in which any Insured is a director, officer,
partner, manager, or principal stockholder.
 
. . . .
 
N.	 The Insured's Services and/or capacity as:
 1.	 a partner, principal, officer, director,
employee or trustee of a business enterprise not
named in the declarations;
 
. . . .
 
REAL ESTATE AGENTS AND BROKERS ENDORSEMENT
 
. . . .
 
B.	 This policy does not apply to:
 . . . .
 2.	 Any claim arising out of or connected with any
transaction in which the Insured has a direct or
 indirect beneficial ownership interest as a
buyer or seller of real property; however, this
exclusion does not apply to real property to
which the Insured has taken legal title solely
for immediate resale and has entered into a
 written contract to sell not later than ninety
(90) days after taking legal title.
 
Keown hired counsel to defend the lawsuit brought by
 
Honpa, which was eventually settled with all claims against Keown
 
dismissed with prejudice and Honpa agreeing to pay a portion of
 
Keown's litigation costs. In December 2007, after settling with
 
Honpa, Keown filed the instant complaint for declaratory relief
 
against Tudor. His complaint alleged that Tudor was obligated
 
under the policy to defend and indemnify Keown with respect to
 
the claims Honpa had asserted against him. The declaratory
 
judgment action was resolved on cross-motions for summary
 
judgment, with the circuit court entering an order in favor of
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Tudor on January 6, 2009. In relevant part, the circuit court
 
stated:
 
The court finds as a matter of law based on the
 
undisputed facts that the scope of the exclusionary clause
in Tudor's insurance policy is broad in scope and that it
encompasses the underlying lawsuit by [Honpa] against
[Keown].
 
The court further finds as a matter of law that based
 
on the undisputed facts alleged in the underlying complaint
that [Keown's] capacities as a director of [the School] and
as a professional realtor in the transaction which is the
subject of the underlying lawsuit are inextricably
intertwined and that the real estate malpractice claims
against [Keown] arose from his dual agency representation of
[Honpa] and [the School] in the transaction on which the
underlying suit was based.
 
On appeal, Keown raises the following points of error: 
The circuit court (1) did not properly apply Hawaif i law 
regarding the duty to defend; (2) erred in concluding that 
Keown's capacities as a School director and as a realtor were 
inextricably intertwined; (3) failed to construe the policy 
according to a layperson's reasonable expectations; and (4) erred 
in determining that Honpa's claims against Keown arose from his 
representation of both Honpa and the School in the transaction 
upon which the underlying suit was based. 
Based on the plain language of the policy and the
 
undisputed facts before it, we conclude that the circuit court
 
did not err when it ruled Tudor did not have a duty to defend
 
Keown in the underlying civil suit.
 
II.
 
Insurers in Hawaif i have a broad duty to defend under 
general liability policies.
 
The obligation to defend is broader than the duty to
pay claims and arises wherever there is the mere
potential for coverage. In other words, the duty to
defend rests primarily on the possibility that
 
coverage exists. This possibility may be remote but
if it exists, the insurer owes the insured a defense.
All doubts as to whether a duty to defend exists are
resolved against the insurer and in favor of the
insured.
 
Accordingly, in connection with the issue of its duty
to defend, [the insurer bears] the burden of proving that
there was no genuine issue of material fact with respect to
whether a possibility existed that [the insured] would incur
liability for a claim covered by the policies. In other
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
words, [the insurer] was required to prove that it would be
impossible for [the claimant] to prevail against [the
insured] in the underlying lawsuits on a claim covered by
the policies.
 
Dairy Rd. Partners v. Island Ins. Co., 92 Hawaif i 398, 412-13, 992 
P.2d 93, 107-08 (2000) (citations, internal quotation marks, 
brackets and ellipses omitted).
 
However,
 
[i]nsurance policies are subject to the general rules of
contract construction, the terms of the policy should be
interpreted according to their plain, ordinary, and accepted
sense in common speech unless it appears from the policy
that a different meaning is intended and the court must
respect the plain terms of the policy and not create
ambiguity where none exists.
 
First Ins. Co. of Hawaif i v. State, 66 Haw. 413, 423-24, 665 P.2d 
648, 655 (1983) (citation, internal quotation marks, brackets, 
and ellipses omitted). 
Exclusion G of the Tudor policy was very broadly
 
worded, providing that "[a]ctions against the insured arising out
 
of or connected with the performance or failure to perform
 
services for any person or entity" that was "controlled by" or
 
"in which any Insured is a director." It is undisputed that
 
Honpa's lawsuit was based on the real estate transaction in which
 
Keown, acting on behalf of both Honpa and the School, provided
 
real estate brokerage services in researching, participating in
 
negotiation meetings, arranging for an appraisal, and preparing
 
the DROA. It is also undisputed that Keown was a director on the
 
School's board and was the point person in shepherding the
 
transaction. Given the extensive nature of Keown's participation
 
in this real estate transaction in which he acted, at least in
 
part, on behalf of the entity for whom he also served as a board
 
director, there can be no question that the subsequent lawsuit
 
brought by Honpa was an action connected with or arising out of
 
services Keown performed for an entity which he helped control
 
and was a director.
 
Conversely, nothing in the record indicates that
 
Keown's activities as a real estate broker and agent for the co­
purchasers were either separate or distinct from his directorial
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
services for the School. That Keown received no compensation for
 
his services and donated costs further indicates that he was
 
acting as an interested director in the transaction and not
 
merely as a real estate broker working for his business. Under
 
these circumstances, the circuit court was correct in determining
 
that Keown's actions constituted the "performance [of] . . . 
services for any . . . entity . . . in which any Insured is a
 
director[.]" Because Keown's actions fell clearly within the
 
Tudor policy's exclusions and there was no possibility that
 
coverage existed, Tudor had no duty to defend Keown against the
 
underlying claim.
 
In addition to his role as a School director, Keown 
also had a financial interest in the subject property as a 
mortgagee. The underlying claim thus fell under a separate 
clause in Keown's policy that excludes "[a]ctions against the 
Insured arising out of or connected with the performance or 
failure to perform services for any person or entity . . . which 
is affiliated with any Insured through any common ownership, 
control or financial interest[.]" By securing his loan to the 
School with a mortgage on the School's undivided interest in the 
subject property, Keown obtained a common financial interest in 
the property of the Early School. See Owens v. Owens, 104 Hawaif i 
292, 295-96, 88 P.3d 664, 667-68 (App. 2004) (noting that a lender had a security interest in mortgagors' property by virtue 
of its promissory note and their signatures on the mortgage). 
This financial interest was closely connected to the underlying 
action against Keown, as Honpa's complaint was based in part on 
Keown's failure to disclose his mortgage and promissory note and 
prayed that this mortgage be removed from Honpa's interest in the 
property. 
As to Keown's point on appeal that giving effect to the
 
policy's exclusionary clauses is contrary to the reasonable
 
expectations of a layperson in Keown's position, we disagree. 
The policy's exclusions, while numerous, were neither unclear nor
 
unexpected. Exclusion G.4., denying coverage for services
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
performed for an entity "in which any Insured is a director," is
 
a type of common clause oftentimes referred to as a "business
 
enterprise" exclusion.3 In sum, that Keown's professional
 
insurance would not cover his personal business activities was
 neither unknowable nor unexpected under the circumstances of this
 
case.
 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, the Judgment entered on
 
February 10, 2009, in the Circuit Court for the Fifth Circuit is
 
affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 Evan R. Shirley and
Michel A. Okazaki,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
John H. Price,
Amanda J. Weston
 and
 James L. Wraith
 (Selvin Wraith Halman, LLP),
for Defendant-Appellee.
 
3
 We note that the "business enterprise" exclusion has two purposes:
(1) to prevent collusive suits in which liability coverage for negligence
arising from business activities could be used to shift the insured's non-
insured business losses onto the insurer; and (2) to prevent coverage in
circumstances where an insured so substantially intermingles non-insured
business actions with professional services that the insurer carries the
additional risk of having to cover an insured for claims relating to the
personal business conduct rather than solely from professional services. See
 
Jeffer v. Nat'l Union Fire Ins. Co., 703 A.2d 316, 322 (N.J. Super. Ct. App.
Div. 1997) (citing Niagara Fire Ins. Co. v. Pepicelli, Pepicelli, Watts &
Youngs, P.C., 821 F.2d 216, 221 (3d Cir. 1987)). The exclusion of coverage
for Honpa's claim against Keown furthers both of these purposes.
 
8
 