 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28569
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
STATE OF HAWAI» I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
GLEN MURRAY, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 03-1-1848)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai» i (State) appeals 
from an order issued by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(Circuit Court)1 dismissing, without prejudice, the indictment 
against Defendant-Appellee Glen Murray (Murray) for lack of jurisdiction. Murray was charged with second degree theft, in violation Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ÿÿÿÿ 708-830(2) and 708­831(1)(b) (1993), for obtaining workers' compensation benefits by 
deception. The Circuit Court dismissed the indictment on the ground that it lacked jurisdiction because the indictment involved a controversy and dispute arising under the Hawai» i 
workers' compensation law over which the Director of Labor and Industrial Relations (Director) has original jurisdiction. The Circuit Court ruled that it would only acquire jurisdiction over 
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided .
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the indictment if the Director opted to forego pursuing
 
administrative penalties for fraud available under the workers'
 compensation law.
 
On appeal, the State argues the Circuit Court erred in
 
dismissing the indictment for lack of jurisdiction because: (1)
 the Director does not have original jurisdiction over criminal
 prosecutions arising out of a claim for workers' compensation;
 and (2) the Circuit Court was wrong in finding that Murray's
 prosecution involved the same benefits that were determined in
 his workers' compensation case.
 
As discussed below, we conclude that the Director does 
not have original jurisdiction over Murray's criminal prosecution 
and that the Circuit Court therefore erred in dismissing the
 
indictment for lack of jurisdiction. We vacate the order
 dismissing the indictment and remand the case for further
 proceedings.
 
BACKGROUND
 
Murray was employed as a security guard by the State of 
Hawai» i, Department of Public Safety (DPS). He sought workers' 
compensation benefits for injuries to his right knee. The Director initially denied his claim. Murray appealed the Director's decision to the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB). Applying the presumption of compensability, the LIRAB reversed the Director's decision in part. Although finding that the medial meniscus tear in Murray's right knee was not work related, the LIRAB further found that the DPS had failed to overcome the presumption that the lateral meniscus tear in 
Murray's right knee was work related. 
Murray ended his employment with the DPS before the
 
LIRAB's decision. Pursuant to the LIRAB's decision, the DPS
 began paying Murray temporary total disability (TTD) benefits. 
After paying Murray TTD benefits for over two months, the DPS
 
stopped its payments when it learned that Murray was employed
 
full-time. A hearing was subsequently held before the Director
 
to discuss Murray's entitlement to TTD benefits. The Director
 
2
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not find that Murray was automatically ineligible for TTD
 
benefits by virtue of his full-time employment as a security
 guard for Guardsmark. The Director found that Murray was
 eligible for temporary partial disability (TPD) payments because
 his wages at Guardsmark were less than his DPS wages. 
The DPS appealed the Director's decision to the LIRAB
 
and moved for a stay of the benefits the Director awarded to
 Murray. The LIRAB granted the stay motion in part. It stayed
 temporary disability benefits only for periods during which
 Murray was employed on a full-time basis, but not for any other
 periods for which Murray provided documentation of disability. 
In the meantime, the State charged Murray by indictment
 
with second degree theft for obtaining workers' compensation
 
benefits, the value of which exceeded $300, by deception. The
 
charge was based on the State's contention that Murray had
 obtained TTD workers' compensation benefits by deception for
 about a two-month period during which he had been working full-
time as a security guard for Guardsmark. 
Murray moved to dismiss the indictment. On May 4, 
2007, the Circuit Court dismissed the indictment, without prejudice, pursuant to its "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order" (Order Dismissing Indictment). The Circuit Court concluded that pursuant to HRS ÿÿ 386-73, the Director has 
original jurisdiction over all controversies and disputes arising under the Hawai» i workers' compensation law, HRS Chapter 386. 
HRS ÿÿ 386-98 establishes criminal and administrative penalties for persons who engage in workers' compensation fraud, and it further provides that in lieu of criminal penalties, persons who commit workers' compensation fraud may be subject to administrative penalties.
2 
2
 The versions of HRS ÿÿÿÿ 386-73 and HRS ÿÿ 386-98 applicable to the
Circuit Court's Order Dismissing Indictment are HRS ÿÿ 386-73 (1993) and HRS ÿÿ
386-98 (Supp. 2005). For purposes of our analysis, there are no material
differences between the current versions of these statutes and the versions
 applicable to the Order Dismissing Indictment. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Circuit Court concluded that the Director had
 
original jurisdiction over the indictment because it involved a
 
controversy and dispute arising under the workers' compensation
 law. In support of this conclusion, the Circuit Court found that
 the workers' compensation benefits allegedly taken as described
 in the indictment were the same benefits determined in Murray's
 workers' compensation case. The Circuit Court reasoned that
 because the Director had original jurisdiction, the Director had
 the power to decide whether to seek administrative penalties for
 Murray's alleged workers' compensation fraud before the State
 could pursue a criminal prosecution. The Circuit Court concluded
 that because the State had failed to secure the Director's
 rejection of the pursuit of administrative penalties against
 
Murray, the State's criminal prosecution was premature. The
 Circuit Court ruled that until the Director opted to forego
 pursuing administrative penalties, the State could not pursue its
 criminal prosecution against Murray and the Circuit Court lacked
 jurisdiction over Murray's indictment. Accordingly, the Circuit
 Court dismissed the indictment without prejudice.
 
DISCUSSION
 
The State argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
dismissing the indictment for lack of jurisdiction. We agree. 
I.
 
We review the existence of jurisdiction, which is a
 
question of law, de novo under the right/wrong standard. Adams
 
v. State, 103 Hawai» i 214, 220, 81 P.3d 394, 400 (2003). We 
construe statues according to the following principles: 
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law
reviewable de novo. 
. . . When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is
to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. And we must read
 
statutory language in the context of the entire statute and
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.
 
Barnett v. State , 91 Hawai » i 20, 31, 979 P.2d 1046, 1057 (1999) 
(internal quotation marks, citations, brackets, and ellipses 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
points omitted; block quote format changed). "[A] rational, 
sensible and practicable interpretation of a statute is preferred to one which is unreasonable or impracticable." State v. 
Lobendahn, 71 Haw. 111, 112, 784 P.2d 872, 873 (1989) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). "[T]he legislature is presumed not to intend an absurd result, and legislation will be construed to avoid, if possible, inconsistency, contradiction, and illogicality." Keliipuleole v. 
Wilson, 85 Hawai» i 217, 222, 941 P.2d 300, 305 (1997) (internal 
quotation marks, citation, and some brackets omitted). 
II.
 
The following statutes are relevant to our analysis of
 
the Circuit Court's ruling that it lacked jurisdiction over the
 
State's criminal prosecution of Murray.
 
(1) HRS ÿÿ 603-21.5(a)(1) (Supp. 2010) provides that
 
"except as otherwise expressly provided by statute," the circuit
 courts shall have jurisdiction of "[c]riminal offenses cognizable
 under the laws of the State" that were committed within the
 circuit or transferred for trial pursuant to a change of venue
 from another circuit court.
 (2) Murray was charged with second degree theft, in
 
violation HRS ÿÿÿÿ 708-830(2) and 708-831(1)(b), which provide:
 
§ 708-830. Theft. A person commits theft if the person does
any of the following:
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 Property obtained or control exerted through
deception. A person obtains, or exerts control over,
the property of another by deception with intent to
deprive the other of the property.
 
. . . .
 
§ 708-831. Theft in the second degree. (1) A person commits
the offense of theft in the second degree if the person commits
theft:
 
. . . 
(b)	 Of property or services the value of which exceeds
$300[.] 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) HRS ÿÿ 386-73 pertains to the jurisdiction of the
 
Director over workers' compensation matters. HRS ÿÿ 386-73 (1993
 
& Supp. 2010) provides in relevant part: "Unless otherwise
 
provided, the director of labor and industrial relations shall
 have original jurisdiction over all controversies and disputes
 arising under this chapter." (Emphasis added.)
 
(4) HRS ÿÿ 386-98 provides for criminal and
 
administrative penalties for workers' compensation fraud. HRS 
ÿÿ 386-98 (a) and (b) (Supp. 2010)
3 set forth the types of conduct
 
3 HRS ÿÿ 386-98(a) and (b) provide: 
(a) A fraudulent insurance act, under this chapter, shall
include acts or omissions committed by any person who
intentionally or knowingly acts or omits to act so as to obtain
benefits, deny benefits, obtain benefits compensation for services
provided, or provides legal assistance or counsel to obtain
benefits or recovery through fraud or deceit by doing the
following:
 
(1)	 Presenting, or causing to be presented, any false
information on an application;
 
(2)	 Presenting, or causing to be presented, any false or
fraudulent claim for the payment of a loss;
 
(3)	 Presenting multiple claims for the same loss or
injury, including presenting multiple claims to more
than one insurer except when these multiple claims are
appropriate and each insurer is notified immediately
in writing of all other claims and insurers;
 
(4)	 Making, or causing to be made, any false or fraudulent
claim for payment or denial of a health care benefit;
 
(5)	 Submitting a claim for a health care benefit that was
not used by, or on behalf of, the claimant;
 
(6)	 Presenting multiple claims for payment of the same
health care benefit;
 
(7)	 Presenting for payment any undercharges for health
care benefits on behalf of a specific claimant unless
any known overcharges for health care benefits for
that claimant are presented for reconciliation at that
same time;
 
(8)	 Misrepresenting or concealing a material fact;
 
(9)	 Fabricating, altering, concealing, making a false
entry in, or destroying a document;
 
(continued...)
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that constitute criminal offenses. HRS ÿÿ 386-98(d) (Supp. 2010)
 
establishes the criminal penalties for the offenses set forth in
 HRS ÿÿ 386-98(a) and (b) as follows: 
(d) An offense under subsections (a) and (b) shall
constitute a:
 
(1)	 Class C felony if the value of the moneys obtained or
denied is not less than $2,000;
 
(2) 	Misdemeanor if the value of the moneys obtained or
denied is less than $2,000; or
 
(3)	 Petty misdemeanor if the providing of false
information did not cause any monetary loss.
 
Any person subject to a criminal penalty under this section
shall be ordered by a court to make restitution to an insurer or
 
any other person for any financial loss sustained by the insurer
or other person caused by the fraudulent act.
 
(Emphasis added.) HRS ÿÿ 386-98(e) (Supp. 2005)
4 and (f) (Supp.
 
3(...continued)
(10)	 Making, or causing to be made, any false or fraudulent
statements with regard to entitlements or benefits,
with the intent to discourage an injured employee from
claiming benefits or pursuing a workers' compensation
claim; or
 
(11)	 Making, or causing to be made, any false or fraudulent
statements or claims by, or on behalf of, a client
with regard to obtaining legal recovery or benefits.
 
(b) No employer shall wilfully make a false statement or
representation to avoid the impact of past adverse claims
experience through change of ownership, control, management, or
operation to directly obtain any workers' compensation insurance
policy.
 
4 HRS ÿÿ 386-98(e) (Supp. 2005) provided:
 
(e) In lieu of the criminal penalties set forth in
subsection (d), any person who violates subsections (a) and (b)
may be subject to the administrative penalties of restitution of
benefits or payments fraudulently received under this chapter,
whether received from an employer, insurer, or the special
compensation fund, to be made to the source from which the
compensation was received, and one or more of the following:
 
(1)	 A fine of not more than $10,000 for each violation;
 
(2)	 Suspension or termination of benefits in whole or in
part;
 
(3)	 Suspension or disqualification from providing medical
care or services, vocational rehabilitation services,
and all other services rendered for payment under this
chapter;
 
(continued...)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2010),5 in turn, provide for the imposition of administrative
 
penalties in lieu of the criminal penalties.
 
III.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in construing
 
these statutes as meaning that it lacked jurisdiction over the
 
indictment against Murray because the Director had original
 jurisdiction over criminal prosecutions arising out of a workers'
 compensation claim. Under HRS ÿÿ 603-21.5(a)(1), the circuit
 courts have jurisdiction over criminal offenses "except as
 otherwise expressly provided by statute." Thus, the Circuit
 Court had jurisdiction over the indictment in this case unless it
 was expressly divested of jurisdiction by another statute.
 
In concluding that it lacked jurisdiction, the Circuit
 
Court cited HRS ÿÿ 386-73, the general grant of original
 
jurisdiction to the Director over disputes and controversies
 arising under the workers' compensation law, and HRS ÿÿ 386-98, 
4(...continued)
(4)	 Suspension or termination of payments for medical,
vocational rehabilitation and all other services
 
rendered under this chapter;
 
(5)	 Recoupment by the insurer of all payments made for
medical care, medical services, vocational
rehabilitation services, and all other services
rendered for payment under this chapter; and
 
(6)	 Reimbursement of attorney's fees and costs of the
party or parties defrauded.
 
The current version of HRS ÿÿ 386-98(e) is the same except that the "and"
between subsections (e)(5) and (e)(6) has been replaced with an "or." See
 
2005 Haw. Sp. Sess. Laws Act 11, ÿÿ 11, at 820.
 
5  HRS ÿÿ 386-98(f) provides:
 
(f) With respect to the administrative penalties set forth
in subsection (e), no penalty shall be imposed except upon
consideration of a written complaint that specifically alleges a
violation of this section occurring within two years of the date
of said complaint. 
A copy of the complaint specifying the alleged
violation shall be served promptly upon the person charged. The
 director or board shall issue, where a penalty is ordered, a
written decision stating all findings following a hearing held not
fewer than twenty days after written notice to the person charged.
Any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal the decision under
sections 386-87 and 386-88.
 
8
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
which establishes criminal and administrative penalties for
 
workers' compensation fraud. 
Murray, however, was not charged with violating HRS 
ÿÿ 386-98, but was charged with second degree theft by deception under HRS ÿÿÿÿ 708-830(2) and 708-831(1)(b). Prosecutors have broad discretion in charging matters, including decisions on what charges to file. See State v. Radcliffe, 9 Haw. App. 628, 640, 
859 P.2d 925, 932 (1993); State v. Kuuku , 61 Haw. 79, 83, 595 
P.2d 291, 294 (1979) ("[W]here a single act violates more than one statute, the State may elect to proceed against the accused under either statute."). Because Murray was charged with theft under HRS ÿÿÿÿ 708-830(2) and 708-831(1)(b), and not a criminal offense under the workers' compensation law, Murray's prosecution 
did not constitute a controversy and dispute arising under the workers' compensation law. See Hough v. Pacific Ins. Co., 83 
Hawai» i 457, 465-66, 927 P.2d 858, 866-67 (1996) (holding that an 
employee's tort action alleging bad faith by a workers' compensation insurer in processing the employee's benefits claim did not arise under the workers' compensation law, and therefore, the Director did not have original jurisdiction over the bad faith tort action under HRS ÿÿ 386-73). 
Moreover, the grant of original jurisdiction to the 
Director under HRS ÿÿ 386-73 is subject to the proviso that such jurisdiction is conferred "unless otherwise provided." We conclude that it is clear that the Director's lack of original jurisdiction over criminal prosecutions is "otherwise provided." The powers and duties of the Director under the workers' 
compensation law do not include the power to institute criminal prosecutions or impose criminal sanctions. As the Circuit Court acknowledged, the Director lacks the authority to hear criminal proceedings. In Tauese v. State, Dep't of Labor & Indus. 
Relations, 
113 Hawai
» i 1, 27, 147 P.3d 785, 811 (2006), the 
Hawai» i Supreme Court cited with approval the assertion of the 
Department of Labor and Industrial Relations (DLIR) that "it 
'lacks jurisdiction in criminal proceedings.'" 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Indeed, HRS ÿÿ 386-98 itself acknowledges and provides
 
that the Director does not have jurisdiction over the criminal
 
offenses established by that section. HRS ÿÿ 386-98(d) states
 that "[a]ny person subject to a criminal penalty under this
 section shall be ordered by a court  to make restitution to an
 
insurer or any other person for any financial loss sustained by
 the insurer or other person caused by the fraudulent act." 
(Emphasis added.) By acknowledging and providing that criminal
 penalties under HRS ÿÿ 386-98 shall be imposed by a court, HRS 
ÿÿ 386-98 "otherwise provide[s]" that the Director does not have
 original jurisdiction over criminal prosecutions under that
 section.
 
Construing HRS ÿÿ 386-73 and HRS ÿÿ 386-98 as conferring
 
the Director with original jurisdiction over criminal
 
prosecutions that involve workers' compensation claims would also
 be illogical and lead to absurd results. The Director does not
 have the power or authority to preside over criminal proceedings. 
It would serve no purpose to grant the Director with original
 jurisdiction over criminal matters that the Director has no power
 to institute or adjudicate. Because the Director lacks the
 authority to preside over criminal cases, we conclude that the
 Legislature could not have intended that the Director have
 original jurisdiction over criminal prosecutions involving
 workers' compensation fraud.
6
 
IV.
 
In light of our determination that the Circuit Court
 
erred in dismissing the indictment for lack of jurisdiction, we
 
need not address the State's argument that the Circuit Court
 erred in finding that Murray's prosecution involved the same
 benefits determined in his workers' compensation case. The
 
6
 We note that in analogous circumstances, a New York court in Van Wie
 
v. Kirk, 675 N.Y.S.2d 469, 477 (N.Y. App. Div. 1998), concluded that there was
no merit to a criminal defendant's contention that his criminal fraud
 
prosecution involving his workers' compensation claim usurped the exclusive
jurisdiction of the Workers' Compensation Board and constituted a collateral
attack on the Board's decisions. 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Circuit Court made this finding in support of its conclusion that 
Murray's criminal prosecution involved a controversy and dispute
 arising under the workers' compensation law and therefore the
 Director had original jurisdiction over it. Because we conclude
 that the Director does not have original jurisdiction over
 criminal prosecutions, resolving the State's challenge to the
 Circuit Court's finding is not necessary to our analysis.
 
In any event, we note that in similar circumstances, 
the Hawai» i Supreme Court held that an administrative decision 
did not have res judicata or collateral estoppel effect on a criminal prosecution. See State v. Alvey, 67 Haw. 49, 678 P.2d 5 
(1984) (holding that administrative determination in prison disciplinary hearing did not have collateral estoppel or res 
judicata effect on subsequent criminal prosecution and did not prevent the State from litigating the same issue in a subsequent criminal prosecution). 
CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the Circuit Court's Order Dismissing
 
Indictment, and we remand the case for further proceeding
 consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, January 27, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Brandon K. Flores
 
for Defendant-Appellee Chief Judge
 
Marcus B. Sierra
 Deputy Attorney General
Department of the Attorney 
Associate Judge
General, State of Hawai
» i 
for Plaintiff-Appellant 
Associate Judge
 
11
 