NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29037
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
DEL MONTE FRESH PRODUCE (HAWAII), INC.;
EDWARD C. LITTLETON; STACIE SASAGAWA; TIM HO;
DIXON SUZUKI, and DEL MONTE FRESH PRODUCE COMPANY,
Appellants-Appellants,
v.
 
INTERNATIONAL LONGSHORE AND WAREHOUSE UNION,
LOCAL 142, AFL-CIO, (2006-074),
Union/Appellee-Appellee,
and
 
HAWAII LABOR RELATIONS BOARD,
Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0708)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Appellants-Appellants Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii),
 
Inc. (DMH); Edward C. Littleton; Stacie Sasagawa; Tim Ho; Dixon
 
Suzuki; and Del Monte Fresh Produce Company (collectively, Del
 
Monte) appeal from the Judgment filed on February 1, 2008 in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).  Pursuant to
 
the February 1, 2008 "Order Affirming Hawaii Labor Relations
 
Board Decision No. 464 Dated March 21, 2007," the circuit court
 
1
 The Honorable Sabrina S. McKenna presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entered judgment in favor of Union/Appellee-Appellee
 
International Longshore and Warehouse Union, Local 142, AFL-CIO
 
(ILWU or Union) and Appellee-Appellee Hawaii Labor Relations
 
Board (HLRB) and against Del Monte.
 
On appeal, Del Monte contends: 
(1) HLRB applied the improper standard for judging Del
 
Monte's December 6, 2006 Motion to Disqualify or for Recusal of
 Board Member (Disqualification Motion), HLRB erred in denying the
 
Disqualification Motion on the merits, and the circuit court
 
erred in affirming HLRB's ruling;
 
(2) HLRB erred in its definition of effects
 
bargaining, and the circuit court erred in affirming HLRB's
 
ruling; and
 
(3) HLRB erred in finding that Del Monte failed to
 
bargain in good faith, and the circuit court erred in affirming
 
HLRB's ruling.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that Del
 
Monte's appeal is without merit.
 
(1) Del Monte contends HLRB erred by failing to apply
 
the standard of whether there was any "appearance of impropriety"
 
in denying the Disqualification Motion and the circuit court
 
erred in affirming HLRB's ruling. Del Monte lists four specific
 
instances in which, Del Monte argues, HLRB panel Chair Brian
 
Nakamura (Chair Nakamura) displayed an "appearance of
 
impropriety." Del Monte argues that Chair Nakamura displayed an
 
appearance of impropriety by:
 
(a) displaying sympathy for ILWU -- Chair Nakamura
 
described DMH employees as "people who were extraordinarily proud
 
of doing their job to the best of their ability" and as "good
 
people, loyal workers who have devoted half their life to the
 
company";
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(b) speculating about the hardship of the employees --
Chair Nakamura speculated that employees had been misled by DMH
 
into purchasing cars, having babies, and getting married;
 
(c) characterizing the issue as ethical, not legal -­
Chair Nakamura stated that fairness is "the bottom line in this
 
case ethically"; and
 
(d) getting emotional -- Chair Nakamura apologized for
 
"getting emotional in my line of questioning" and stated that
 
"[i]n real life, when I use the court interrogation tone of
 
voice, my wife slaps me directly. I'd like to ask you to do so
 
if I ever do so again."
 
The proper test for disqualifying an administrative
 
adjudicator for bias or impartiality is whether "the
 
circumstances fairly give rise to an appearance of impropriety
 
and reasonably cast suspicion on [the adjudicator's]
 
impartiality." Sussel v. City & County of Honolulu Civil Service
 
Comm'n, 71 Haw. 101, 109, 784 P.2d 867, 871 (1989).
 
The test for appearance of impropriety is whether the
conduct would create in reasonable minds a perception that
the judge's ability to carry out judicial responsibilities
with integrity, impartiality and competence is impaired.
Therefore, the test for disqualification due to the
appearance of impropriety is an objective one, based not on
the beliefs of the petitioner or the judge, but on the
assessment of a reasonable impartial onlooker apprised of
all the facts.
 
Office of Disciplinary Counsel v. Au, 107 Hawai' i 327, 338, 113 
P.3d 203, 214 (2005) (internal quotation marks, citations, and
 
brackets in original omitted). In reasoning, adopted by this
 
court in State v. Lioen, 106 Hawai' i 123, 129, 102 P.3d 367, 373 
(App. 2004), the United States Supreme Court held that
 
opinions formed by the judge on the basis of facts
introduced or events occurring in the course of the current
proceedings, or of prior proceedings, do not constitute a
basis for a bias or partiality motion unless they display a
deep-seated favoritism or antagonism that would make fair
judgment impossible. Thus, judicial remarks during the
course of a trial that are critical or disapproving of, or
even hostile to, counsel, the parties, or their cases,
ordinarily do not support a bias or partiality challenge. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Liteky v. United States, 510 U.S. 540, 555, 114 S. Ct. 1147, 1157
 
(1994).
 
HLRB and the circuit court did not err because Chair
 
Nakamura's comments did not rise to the level of displaying deep-
seated favoritism or antagonism, give rise to an appearance of
 
impropriety, or reasonably cast suspicion on his impartiality. 
(2) Del Monte contends that HLRB's March 21, 2007
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order (the HLRB Order) 
is affected by an error of law because it sets forth per se
 
requirements for effects bargaining that are contrary to labor
 
law principles and the circuit court erred in affirming HLRB's
 
ruling. Del Monte argues that six of the eight factors in the
 
HLRB Order are not mandatory requirements of effects bargaining
 
and HLRB erred in listing them as per se requirements.
 
It is well-settled that decisions of an administrative 
agency are afforded a degree of deference on appeal. "[I]n 
deference to the administrative agency's expertise and experience 
in its particular field, the courts should not substitute their 
own judgment for that of the administrative agency where mixed 
questions of fact and law are presented." Camara v. Agsalud, 67 
Haw. 212, 216, 685 P.2d 794, 797 (1984). "Whether a party failed to bargain in good faith is a mixed question of fact and law, as 
it consists of the application of the legal standard under HRS 
§ 377-6(4) to the factual conduct of the parties." Del Monte 
Fresh Produce (Hawaii) v. Int'l Longshore & Warehouse Union, Local 142, AFL-CIO, 112 Hawai' i 489, 500, 146 P.3d 1066, 1077 
(2006) (Del Monte I) (citation omitted). 
The standard adopted by HLRB to determine whether an
 
employer has met its statutory duty to bargain in good faith is
 "whether the totality of the employer's conduct evinces a present
 
intention to find a basis for agreement and a sincere effort to
 
reach a common ground." Id. (internal quotation marks, citation,
 
and brackets omitted).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In finding that Del Monte engaged in bad faith
 
bargaining, HLRB held that
 
rational foundational prerequisites of information which
must be available, or the subjects of open good faith
exchange, in the course of effects bargaining accompanying a
closure should at least include: 1) why the closure is
taking place; 2) what, if anything, the Union, employees or
the employer could reasonably do to delay, forestall the
closure or mitigate the detrimental effects of the closure;
3) the reasons for positions taken in developing, modifying,
or rejecting offers of [sic] counter offers; 4) the
resources which might be available to effect compromise; 5)
the possible retention, redeployment or liquidation of
effected human or material resources; 6) what is necessary
to establish an open and meaningful avenue of communication
with decision makers; 7) steps that can be reasonably taken
to mitigate the detrimental effects of the pending
unemployment to employees, their dependent families or their
community; and 8) the precise timing of the closure. 
(Emphasis added.) Del Monte argues that HLRB erred in making
 
these eight factors per se requirements for effects bargaining
 
because doing so is contrary to principles of labor law.
 
Del Monte's argument is an inaccurate characterization
 
of HLRB's holding. Prior to outlining the eight above factors,
 
HLRB concluded that "based on its understanding of the totality
 
of the disclosed circumstances[,] . . . DEL MONTE failed to
 
bargain in good faith in violation of HRS § 377-6(4)." (Emphasis
 
added.) HLRB, after listing six points of conduct that evidenced
 
bad faith bargaining by Del Monte, stated:
 
[HLRB] does not conclude that any of the factors
discussed above, standing alone is necessarily dispositive
of this issue. But taken together, as representative of atotality of the circumstances presented before us the [HLRB]must conclude that the totality of an employer's conductduring the first phase of bargaining does not evince "apresent intention to find a basis . . . for agreement and asincere effort to reach a common ground." [Del Monte I, 112 Hawai'i at 500, 146 P.3d at 1077]. 
HLRB properly considered the "totality of the 
circumstances" in determining that Del Monte engaged in bad faith 
bargaining. See Del Monte I, 112 Hawai' i at 500-502, 146 P.3d at 
1077-79. 
(3) Del Monte contends it was erroneous for HLRB to
 
find that Del Monte bargained in bad faith and for the circuit
 court to affirm HLRB's ruling. Del Monte challenges the six
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
points of conduct that HRLB cited as evidence of Del Monte's bad
 
faith.
 
(a) Del Monte argues that HLRB clearly erred in
 
finding that Del Monte failed to inform ILWU about the company's
 
declining profits and productivity. HLRB found that "[t]he Union
 
was advised of only competitive pricing and lease expiration as
 
the initial reasons for closure; profitability and production
 
concerns, much less continuing and exacerbated profitability and
 
production concerns were never transmitted to the Union. " Del
 
Monte does not point to any evidence in the record to indicate
 
that it did in fact inform ILWU about its loss in profits. Del
 
Monte argues that because there is no evidence that the original
 
decision to shut down was based on the loss in profits, the loss
 
of profits was not relevant. To the contrary, DMH's loss in
 
profits was a major reason in the decision to accelerate the shut
 
down. Even if the initial decision was not influenced by a loss
 
in profits, the loss in profits did cause the acceleration and
 
was information highly relevant to effects bargaining.
 
(b) Del Monte argues that HLRB erred in finding that
 
ILWU was injured by Del Monte's lack of disclosure about the loss
 
in profits. HLRB held that because of the lack of information
 
from Del Monte, "the Union had no reason or ability to modify,
 
sweeten or invent new proposals in order to possibly extend the
 
life of the enterprise and its members' jobs. Any hope or
 
possibility of creative collaboration was lost within the
 
confines of spreadsheets which were totally unavailable." Del
 
Monte reasons that because ILWU never sought decision bargaining,
 
Del Monte had no obligation to bargain about the timing of the
 
closure. Del Monte's argument that ILWU was not prejudiced by
 
the lack of information because decision bargaining was not
 
mandatory is without merit. DMH's continuing loss in profits
 
concerned the effects of its decision to close because the
 
closure date was altered due to the loss in profits. The
 
National Labor Relations Board recently held:
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The extent of effects bargaining will vary depending
on circumstances. In Litton Business Systems, 286 NLRB 817,
819-20 (1987), the employer was not obligated to bargain
about an economically motivated decision to change its
printing processes, but was obligated to explore
alternatives to layoff, including retraining, transferring
employees, etc., to reduce the scope of the layoffs. In
 
First National Maintenance [v. N.L.R.B., 452 U.S. 666, 677
n.15 (1981)], the employer's termination of a contract with
a customer resulted in the elimination of jobs, and thus the
only meaningful effect to bargain was severance pay. In
 
Holmes & Narver, 309 NLRB 146, 147 (1992), the Board found
that the union could potentially offer many alternatives to
downsizing, including wage reduction, modified work rules,
nonpaid vacations, work reassignments, etc.
 
Racetrack Food Servs., Inc. & Casino Food Servs., Inc., Single
 
Emp'r, & Unite Here, Local 274, 353 NLRB No. 76, 2008 WL 5427721
 
at *26 (Dec. 31, 2008).
 
While it is true that Del Monte did not have a duty to
 
bargain about the closure itself, Del Monte did have a duty to
 
bargain about the effects of the closure. By not disclosing its
 
profit loss, Del Monte foreclosed any opportunity by ILWU to
 
mitigate the effects of that loss and possibly forestall
 
acceleration of the closure. 
(c) Del Monte challenges HLRB's finding that states
 
"the record is devoid of an instance of [Del Monte's] bargaining
 
team ever advising [ILWU] of the reasons for its rejections [of
 
ILWU's cost proposals]." In its opening brief, Del Monte states
 
that it had limited resources and this information was enough. 
This is not an adequate challenge to HLRB's findings.
 
(d) HLRB found that ILWU relied on Del Monte's
 
representation that the original closure date was December 2008. 
Del Monte does not challenge the fact that ILWU relied on this
 
representation, but instead argues that Del Monte did not hide
 
the closure date. While this particular instance may not in
 
itself show bad faith, it is a part of the totality of the
 
circumstances considered by HLRB. 
(e) Del Monte argues that HLRB erred by basing its
 
conclusion of bad faith on Del Monte's failure to fulfill
 
promises it made during its first announcement of the closure. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Del Monte does not argue that it did in fact fulfill these
 
promises, but instead argues that it did not have a duty to
 
bargain about these issues. Because HLRB used the proper
 
standard of totality of the circumstances, it was free to
 
consider this matter, which was certainly part of the totality of
 
circumstances.
 
(f) Del Monte argues that HLRB erred in finding that
 
the acceleration of the closure date prejudiced ILWU. Del Monte
 
reasons that it gave adequate notice of the decision to
 
accelerate. HLRB held that "[t]he closing date is not
 
necessarily . . . a subject of bargaining. But the information
 
establishes critical and foundational and operational
 
parameters." HLRB did not find that the decision to accelerate
 
was conducted in bad faith, but that the lack of information
 
about the decision to accelerate was a factor in the finding of
 
bad faith.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment filed on
 
February 1, 2008 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 21, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Christopher S. Yeh
(Marr Jones & Wang)for Appellants-Appellants. 
Herbert R. Takahashi 
Danny J. VasconcellosRebecca L. Covert (Takahashi Vasconcellos& Covert)for Union/Appellee-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
Valri Lei Kunimoto 
for Appellee-AppelleeHawaii Labor Relations Board. 
Associate Judge 
8
 