NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29752
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
PETER TIA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CR. NO. 07-1-1443)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Peter Tia (Tia) appeals from the
 
Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Amended Judgment)
 
entered on January 29, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit (circuit court).
1 Tia was convicted of Promoting a
 
Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1242 (Count I) and Promoting a
 Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree in violation of HRS § 712-1243
 (Count II). He was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of ten
 years for Count I and five years for Count II, with a mandatory
 minimum sentence of three years and four months, sentences to run
 concurrently with each other. The mandatory minimum period was
 ordered by the circuit court based upon its determination that
 Tia was a repeat offender pursuant to HRS § 706-606.5.
2
 
1 The Honorable Randall K.O. Lee presided.
 
2 HRS § 706-606.5 (1993 & Supp. 2006) provides, in pertinent part: 
§706-606.5 Sentencing of repeat offenders.  (1)
Notwithstanding section 706-669 and any other law to the contrary,
any person convicted of . . . any class B felony, or any of the
following class C felonies: . . . section 707-711 relating to
assault in the second degree . . . section 712-1243 relating to
promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree . . . and who has a
prior conviction or prior convictions for the following felonies,
including an attempt to commit the same: . . . a class B felony,
[or] any of the class C felony offenses enumerated above . . .
shall be sentenced to a mandatory minimum period of imprisonment
without possibility of parole during such period as follows:
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Tia contends that the circuit court erred in
 
sentencing him to the mandatory minimum period as a repeat
 
offender. The specific point of error raised by Tia on appeal is
 that the circuit court "erred when it held that [Tia] was
 sufficiently identified by the Prosecuting Attorney as the same
 person previously convicted in [Criminal No.] 96-0703 based on:
 1) the certified copies of the [Criminal No.] 96-0703 case file;
 and 2) the presentence diagnosis and report . . . which was the
 basis for the Circuit Court sentencing [Tia] as a repeat
 offender."
 
Upon a careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted, and upon due consideration of the arguments made by
 the parties, we hold that the circuit court did not err in
 sentencing Tia to the mandatory minimum period as a repeat
 offender.
 
2(...continued)
(a) One prior felony conviction:
. . .
 (iii) Where the instant conviction is for a class B felony-­
three years, four months;
. . .
 (2) Except as in subsection (3), a person shall not be
sentenced to a mandatory minimum period of imprisonment under this
section unless the instant felony offense was committed during
such period as follows:
. . .
 (d) Within ten years after a prior felony conviction where
the prior felony conviction was for a class B felony[.] 
On October 29, 1997, Tia was convicted of Assault in the First Degree (a
class B felony), Kidnapping (a class B felony) and Assault in the Second
Degree (an enumerated class C felony) in Cr. No. 96-0703. In the instant
 case, Tia was found guilty of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree
(a class B felony) and Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree (an
enumerated class C felony). The instant offenses were committed on August 1,
2007. Since the instant offenses included a class B felony (Promoting a
Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree) which was committed within ten years of
the previous conviction for another class B felony (kidnapping and assault in
the first degree), Tia's mandatory minimum sentence was three years, four
months under HRS 706-606.5(1)(a)(iii). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. Background
 
On May 22, 2008, a jury found Tia guilty as to both 
Count I and Count II. On October 3, 2008, Plaintiff-Appellee 
State of Hawai 'i (State) filed a Motion for Sentencing of Repeat 
Offender (Repeat Offender Motion). On January 27, 2009, a sentencing hearing was held which included addressing the Repeat Offender Motion. 
During the sentencing hearing, the circuit court stated
 
that it was in receipt of Tia's presentence diagnosis and report
 and asked the parties if they had any additions or corrections to
 the report. Both parties responded they had no additions or
 corrections. The circuit court therefore made the presentence
 diagnosis and report part of the record.
 
The State then sought to introduce certified documents
 
in a prior criminal matter, Criminal No. 96-0703. Defense
 counsel acknowledged that he had reviewed the documents but
 objected to the circuit court receiving the certified documents. 
Over defendant's objection, the circuit court received the
 certified copies in Criminal No. 96-0703 which included: a five
 count indictment of Peter Ray Ti'a; an Order Appointing Counsel;
 a Guilty Plea form entered on October 7, 1996; and a Judgment
 entered October 29, 1997 convicting Peter Ray Ti'a of Assault in
 the First Degree, Kidnapping, and three counts of Assault in the
 Second Degree.
 
The circuit court noted that the presentence diagnosis
 
and report indicated the same entries that were documented by the
 certified copies in Criminal No. 96-0703.
 
In addressing the Repeat Offender Motion, the following
 
exchange then ensued:
 
THE COURT: . . . I will hear you first, Mr. Fujioka,
on the motion in terms of the motion for repeat offender.
 
MR. FUJIOKA: Your Honor, the reason we objected [to
the court's receipt of the certified documents] is I have
never been –- I have reviewed the State's motion and I'm
 familiar with the repeat offender law. I have never been
 able to quite convince Mr. Tia that the repeat offender
statute applies to him.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
There has been that and a number of other disputes to
the point where I'm thinking –- I know he wants to appeal.
So I'm going to ask that substitute counsel be appointed for
that purpose.
 
THE COURT: Sure.

 
MR. FUJIOKA: I believe that I can proceed with
sentencing, Your Honor, as well as any other under the
circumstances. So I'm prepared to do that.
 
THE COURT: Okay. So any argument on the motion for
repeat offender? If you have any.
 
MR. FUJIOKA: In terms of whether the motion should be
 
granted or not?
 
THE COURT: Yes.
 
MR. FUJIOKA: I do not see any way around the Court
granting this motion. You have the first felony and the
second felony occurring within ten years of each other.
Because my understanding is that the first offense, it's the
date of conviction that controls –­
THE COURT: That's correct.
 
MR. FUJIOKA: –- as opposed to the date of offense.
 THE COURT: That's correct.
 MR. FUJIOKA: Whereas the second conviction, it's the
date of offense which the Court must consider.
 
THE COURT: Right.
 MR. FUJIOKA: And looking at that, those two dates,
they appear to fall within the ten years.
 
THE COURT: That's my reading of the statute. Okay.
Ms. Chun, anything you need to add?
 
MS. CHUN: Your Honor, I'm not sure if they are
stipulating to I.D. If I.D. is an issue, we are going to
need a brief continuance.
 
Mr. Pacarro does remember Mr. Tia, but he asked to
review the actual '96 file to make sure that that's the case
 that he convicted Mr. Tia of.
 
THE COURT: I will leave that up to you.
 
MS. CHUN: Then we are going to ask for a brief
continuance because I don't believe they are stipulating to
the identification of the defendant for that file.
 
We do have the certified documents. I didn't know
 
they were going to contest I.D. until this morning.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Is there a stipulation that Mr. Tia is the
same person in Criminal number 96-0703?
 
I believe there's case law, counsel, whereby since
there has been no objection to the contents of the
presentence diagnoses and report, that that's the same
person, is the same person that's been convicted of. But I
 will leave it up to you. It's not the Court's call. I will
 make a determination based on what evidence has been
 presented. I make no call in terms of what should be
 presented or not presented. It's up to you.
 
MS. CHUN:  Then we'll proceed today, Your Honor.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
The circuit court, relying on the representations of
 
both counsel, thereafter found that the information in the
 
presentence diagnosis and report was true and correct. The
 circuit court also found that the items reflected by the
 certified documents in Criminal No. 96-0703 are also documented
 in the presentence diagnosis report, proving that Tia is the same
 person in Criminal No. 96-0703. The circuit court therefore
 granted the Repeat Offender Motion.
 II.	 Discussion
 A.	 Standard of Proof and Standard of Review
 The only question Tia raises on appeal is whether he
 
was sufficiently identified as the same person who was previously
 convicted in Criminal No. 96-0703 based on the certified
 documents from Criminal No. 96-0703 and the presentence diagnosis
 and report in this case. Pursuant to HRS § 706-666(2) (1993),
 "[p]rior conviction may be proved by any evidence . . . that
 reasonably satisfies the court that the defendant was convicted."
 
"[B]ecause this standard asks the trial court to make a 
'judgment call,' on appeal its decision will be reviewed for abuse of discretion." State v. Heggland, 118 Hawai
'i 425, 444­
45, 193 P.3d 341, 360–61 (2008). 
B.	 Tia Did Not Raise A Good-Faith Challenge To The Prior
Conviction
 
Given that the presentence diagnosis and report
 
contained information informing the circuit court of the prior
 
conviction in Criminal No. 96-0703, it was incumbent on Tia to
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
raise a good-faith challenge if he contends that the reported
 
prior conviction was not against him. Heggland, 118 Hawai 'i at 
439-40, 193 P.3d at 355-56; State v. Sinagoga, 81 Hawai 'i 421, 
918 P.2d 228 (App. 1996).3
 
In Heggland, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court agreed with the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals that in Sinagoga, "a majority of
 [the ICA] established a procedure for determining whether a prior
 conviction 'was conceded by the defendant[.]'" 118 Hawai
'i at 
439, 193 P.3d at 355. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court then applied the 
procedure established in Sinagoga that:
 
[I]n ordinary sentencing situations, which includes
mandatory minimum sentencing under HRS § 706-606.5, after
the sentencing judge has been informed pursuant to a
presentence diagnosis and report or otherwise of a
defendant's prior conviction(s),
 
each conviction listed may be used against defendant
except those as to which the defendant timely responds
with a good faith challenge on the record that the
prior criminal conviction was . . . not against the
defendant.
 
Heggland, 118 Hawai 'i at 439-40, 193 P.3d at 355-56 (citing 
Sinagoga, 81 Hawai'i at 445, 918 P.2d at 252).
 
If a defendant contends a prior conviction was not
 
against him, "the defendant shall, prior to the sentencing,
 
respond with a good faith challenge on the record stating, as to
 each challenged conviction, the basis or bases for the
 challenge." Heggland, 118 Hawai
'i at 440, 193 P.3d at 356 
(citation omitted).
 
3 We note that Sinagoga has been limited by the Hawai' i Supreme Court's
decision in State v. Veikoso, 102 Hawai' i 219, 74 P.3d 575 (2003), in that the
procedure set out in Sinagoga applies in ordinary sentencing situations where
a defendant contends a prior conviction was either (a) uncounseled or (b) notagainst the defendant; but in light of Veikoso, the procedure adopted inSinagoga no longer applies where the defendant contends the prior convictionwas "otherwise invalidly entered." Here, because Tia argues the State failedto sufficiently identify him as the same person involved in Criminal No. 96­0703, he is in essence contending that the prior conviction was not againsthim. In this circumstance, the procedure established by Sinagoga
 is
applicable. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Given the requirements under Heggland and Sinagoga, Tia
 
failed to raise a good-faith challenge that the prior conviction
 
in Criminal No. 96-0703 was not against him. First, and
 significantly, Tia did not challenge or seek to change the
 information in his presentence diagnosis and report, which
 reflected the prior conviction in Criminal No. 96-0703. Second,
 Tia is simply incorrect in asserting on appeal that "the defense
 specifically informed the [circuit] court that the defense was
 objecting to I.D. via documents." While before the circuit
 court, and even currently on appeal, Tia has never directly or
 expressly asserted that he was not the same person convicted in
 Criminal No. 96-0703. He simply argues that the State had the
 obligation to sufficiently identify him in the prior conviction
 and that the documentation submitted was insufficient, even
 though he accepted the contents of the presentence diagnosis and
 report. Further, Tia's objection to the circuit court's receipt
 of the certified documents from Criminal No. 96-0703 was because
 his counsel has "never been able to quite convince Mr. Tia that
 the repeat offender statute applies to him." This is quite
 different than, and short of asserting, a good faith challenge
 that Tia was not the same person previously convicted in Criminal
 No. 96-0703. As defense counsel acknowledged regarding the
 Repeat Offender Motion, "I do not see any way around the Court
 granting this motion."
 
Given the above, Tia has failed to make a good-faith
 
challenge that the prior conviction was not against him and he
 has never provided any basis for such a challenge.
 
Based on the foregoing, the circuit court did not abuse
 
its discretion in concluding that Tia is the same person that was
 previously convicted in Criminal No. 96-0703 and the circuit
 court did not err in granting the Repeat Offender Motion.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We affirm the mandatory minimum sentence in the Amended
 
Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, July 29, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Venetia K. Carpenter-Asui
for Defendant-Appellant 
Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8

 