 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29447

IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KELLEY WOODRUFF, M.D.; and
HAWAII CHILDREN'S BLOOD AND CANCER GROUP,
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
v. 
HAWAI'I PACIFIC HEALTH; KAPI 'OLANI MEDICAL SPECIALISTS;
KAPI'OLANI MEDICAL CENTER FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN;
ROGER DRUE; FRANCES A. HALLONQUIST;
NEAL WINN, M.D.; and SHERREL HAMMAR, M.D.;
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
and 
DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP; and DENNIS M. WARREN, ESQ.,
Defendants-Appellees
and 
JOHN DOES 1-99; JANE DOES 1-99; DOE ENTITIES 1-20;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
 
(CIVIL NO. 02–1-0090)

MEMORANDUM OPINION

(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)

This case arises out of events surrounding the

termination of Kelley Woodruff, M.D. (Dr. Woodruff) from her

employment with Kapi 'olani Medical Specialists (KMS) and 
Kapi'olani Medical Center for Women and Children (KMCWC). 
Dr. Woodruff is a pediatric hematologist/oncologist. 
 
In 1999, Kapi 'olani Health (KH), the parent corporation 
for KMCWC and KMS, entered into a Corporate Integrity Agreement

(Integrity Agreement) with the federal government to ensure KH's 
 compliance with federal health care programs. The Integrity
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Agreement obligated KH to report any material deficiencies or

overpayments it discovered relating to its billing practices. KH

retained the accounting firm of Deloitte & Touche LLP (D&T) to

investigate certain billing practices, and it hired attorney

Dennis Warren (Warren) to assist in the investigation. Based on

the investigative findings, KH provided a voluntary disclosure

submission to the federal government which reported that Dr.

Woodruff had submitted "invalid claims to KH's Central Billing

Office for payment by third party payors." 
 
After the voluntary disclosure submission was provided,

Dr. Woodruff's employment with KMS and KMCWC was terminated. Dr.

Woodruff then joined with Robert W. Wilkinson, M.D. (Dr.

Wilkinson) in forming the Hawaii Children's Blood and Cancer

Group (HCBCG).

Dr. Woodruff and HCBCG (collectively, "Plaintiffs")

1
sued: (1) KH's successor, Hawai 'i Pacific Health (HPH),  KMS, 
KMCWC, and their employees Roger Drue (Drue), Frances A. Hallonquist (Hallonquist), Neal Winn, M.D. (Dr. Winn), and Sherrel Hammar, M.D. (Dr. Hammar) (collectively, "HPH Defendants"); (2) D&T; and (3) Warren. In their second amended complaint, Plaintiffs asserted fifteen counts, including counts alleging defamation, breach of Dr. Woodruff's employment contract, and anti-competitive and unfair practices. 
The HPH Defendants, D&T, and Warren (collectively,

"Defendants") filed multiple motions for summary judgment. 
 Through a series of orders, the Circuit Court of the First

2
Circuit (Circuit Court)  granted summary judgment in favor of
 
Defendants on all counts raised in Plaintiffs' second amended

complaint. 
 
1/ According to HPH, on December 20, 2001, KH merged with Straub Clinic &
Hospital and the Wilcox Health Systems to form HPH.

2/ The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided over the proceedings relevant to
this appeal.

2

 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Plaintiffs argue that the Circuit Court

committed various errors in granting summary judgment in favor of

Defendants. As explained below, we are not persuaded by the

arguments raised by Plaintiffs on appeal, and we therefore affirm

the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment in favor of

Defendants. 
 
The HPH Defendants also filed a notice of appeal from

the purported "deemed denial" of their motion for costs, which

they assert was caused by the Circuit Court's failure to rule on

their motion within ninety days. We hold that Plaintiffs' notice

of appeal divested the Circuit Court of jurisdiction to decide

the HPH Defendants' motion for costs. Therefore, the motion for

costs is still pending before the Circuit Court and there is no

ruling on the motion for costs for this court to review. 
 
BACKGROUND

I.

Dr. Woodruff is board certified in pediatric Hematology

and Oncology. In 1993, Dr. Woodruff entered into private
 
practice with Dr. Wilkinson, focusing on pediatric Hematology and

Oncology. Drs. Woodruff and Wilkinson utilized KMCWC, where they
 
both held medical staff privileges, in treating their patients. 
 
In 1995, KMCWC hired Dr. Wooodruff as the Medical

Director of its Pediatric Ambulatory Unit (PAU). The PAU Medical

Director was required to be a member of the faculty at the

John A. Burns School of Medicine (Burns Medical School), and

Dr. Woodruff also became an assistant professor at the Burns

Medical School. After assuming these new positions, Dr. Woodruff

continued to maintain her private practice with Dr. Wilkinson. 
 
In August of 1997, KMS hired Dr. Woodruff as a

physician in its Hematology/Oncology Division. KMS also hired

Dr. Wilkinson as the Medical Director of the Hematology/Oncology 
 Division. Dr. Woodruff treated patients in collaboration with

other members of the KMS Hematology/Oncology Division, which

included Darryl Glaser, M.D., Wade Kyono, M.D., and Desiree 
 
3

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Medeiros, M.D., and an oncology nurse practitioner, Diane

Fochtman (Nurse Fochtman), who was assigned to the PAU.

3
KH was the parent corporation for KMCWC and KMS. On

 
December 20, 2001, KH merged with Straub Clinic & Hospital and

the Wilcox Health Systems to form HPH. 
 
II.

In the mid-1990's, KH was the subject of an

investigation by the Office of the Inspector General of the

United States Department of Health and Human Services (OIG) into

violations for false billing claims. 
In August of 1999, as part
 
of a settlement agreement with the federal government, KH entered

into the Integrity Agreement with the OIG. The purpose of the
 
Integrity Agreement was to "ensure compliance by [KH's]

subsidiaries . . . , physicians with staff privileges, employees,

contractors and third parties . . . with the requirements of

Medicare, Medicaid and all other Federal health care programs[.]"

The Integrity Agreement required that KH retain an

independent review organization, which has:

expertise in the reimbursement and billing requirements of
the Federal health care programs, to review and audit on an
annual basis the billing policies, procedures and practices
of KH to verify that KH's submissions for reimbursement
comply with all applicable [standards] and to identify any
and all instances where claims fail to meet these standards.

(Emphasis added.) To comply with this requirement, KH retained
 
the D&T accounting firm.

The Integrity Agreement obligated KH to conduct

compliance training and education programs regarding proper

billing practices for its employees. KH was required to conduct
 
training that included a discussion of "the submission of

accurate bills for services rendered to Medicare and/or Medicaid

patients"; polices and procedures applicable to documentation of

medical records; the obligation of individuals involved in the

billing process to ensure accurate billings; reimbursement rules

3/ 
 KH was also the parent corporation for Kapi' olani Medical Center at 
Pali Momi, which is not involved in this litigation. 
4

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and statutes; legal sanctions for improper billings; and

"examples of proper and improper billing practices." 
 
The Integrity Agreement further obligated KH to self-
report any overpayments or material deficiencies it discovered. 
 KH was required to notify the payor of "any billing, coding or

other policies and/or practices that resulted in an overpayment"

within thirty days of discovering the overpayment and to take

remedial measures within sixty days of discovery. KH was also

required to notify the OIG within thirty days of discovering a

"material deficiency."
4 As part of its obligation to self-report

material deficiencies, KH was required to submit a report to the

OIG that included: (1) a complete description of the material

deficiency including relevant facts, the people involved, and any

legal authority on the matter; (2) the actions taken to correct

the material deficiency; and (3) any further plans to prevent the

reoccurrence of the material deficiency. 
 
The threshold imposed by the Integrity Agreement for KH

to self-report a material deficiency was low. KH's self-
reporting obligation was triggered if KH "has reason to believe

[conduct] may violate criminal, civil, or administrative law

related to any Federal health care program[,]" such as "Federal

health care program statutes, regulations, or directives issued

by relevant agencies . . . ." 
 
KH was subject to significant penalties if it failed to

comply with the Integrity Agreement, including exclusion from

participation in Federal health care programs.

4/ The Integrity Agreement defined "material deficiency," in relevant
part, as 
 
anything that involves: (i) a substantial overpayment or improper
payment relating to any Federal health care program; (ii) a
material violation of any Federal health care program statutes,
regulations, or directives issued by relevant regulatory agencies
. . . ; or (iii) the provision of items or services of a quality
that materially fails to meet professionally recognized standards
of health care. 
 
5

 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.

In 1998, KH's Central Billing Office (Billing Office)

assumed responsibility for billing claims submitted for KMS's

physician services. Generally, claims for KMS physician services
 
were submitted using Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA)

1500 forms, which physicians completed and submitted to the

Billing Office. According to this form, the signing physician
 
must certify that the services listed were (1) "medically

indicated and necessary for the health of the patient," and (2)

"were personally furnished by me or were furnished incident to my

professional service by my employee under my immediate personal

supervision, except as otherwise permitted by Medicare or CHAMPUS

regulations."
5

In March 1999, the Billing Office instituted a new

billing policy to clarify confusion over whether certain

procedures could be billed to a third party payor if performed 
 by a nurse practitioner. The new policy covered four invasive
 
procedures being performed in the pediatric Hematology/Oncology

Department: (1) "Chemotherapy into CNS [(Central Nervous

System)]"; (2) "Bone Marrow Aspiration"; (3) "Bone Marrow

Biopsy"; and (4) "Lumbar Puncture, Diagnostic." At that time, a
 
majority of these invasive procedures were being performed by

Nurse Fochtman, who was employed by KMCWC, and not by KMS. 
 Questions were raised concerning whether Nurse Fochtman's 
 
5/ The HCFA 1500 form further clarified that for services to be

considered "incident" to a physician's professional service, "1) they must be
rendered under the physician's immediate personal supervision by his/her
employee, 2) they must be an integral, although incidental part of a covered
physician's service, 3) they must be of kinds commonly furnished in
physician's offices, and 4) the services of nonphysicians must be included on
the physician's bills."

The HCFA 1500 form also included a disclaimer which stated, "[b]ecause
this form is used by various government and private health programs, seeseparate instructions issued by applicable programs." At the time relevant to this case, Hawai' i Medicaid officials had not published controlling rules or
directives that permitted a physician to bill for a procedure performed by anon-employee. 
6

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
performance of the invasive procedures could be billed by KMS

physicians. 
 
The new billing policy required that "patient charts

must contain evidence that a physician, not a [nurse

practitioner], personally performed the [invasive] [p]rocedures

in question in order for a claim to be submitted to a third party

payor." Meetings were held between the Billing Office and PAU

physicians, including Dr. Woodruff, where the new policy was

discussed. According to the HPH Defendants, these meetings made

clear to the physicians that the physicians could not bill third

party payors for the four invasive procedures if the procedures

were performed by Nurse Fochtman.

Apparently, there was resistence by Drs. Woodruff and

Wilkinson to the Billing Office's new policy and disagreement

over how it should be applied and interpreted. Both Drs.

Woodruff and Wilkinson reported their concerns regarding the new

billing policy to KH compliance officials. On February 11, 2001,
 
Dr. Wilkinson called KH's compliance hotline. The compliance
 
hotline report states:

Dr. Wilkinson stated charges for bone marrow and spinal taps
have been inconsistent in the Children's Blood and Cancer

Center. Dr. Wilkinson stated when a doctor performs these
Procedures, the patient is billed, however, when these
Procedures are performed by a nurse practitioner, the
patient is not billed, which is actually a discount (details
withheld). Dr. Wilkinson believes these discounts are

amounting to approximately $40,000 a year, and have been
occurring since 1997 (exact date unknown). Dr. Wilkinson

stated when he realized what was occurring, he felt it was
best to report the issue before the OIG found the department
to be inconsistent.

On February 21, 2001, Dr. Woodruff sent an email to KH

Compliance Officer Bob Ching. In her email, Dr. Woodruff
 
suggested that KMS hire Nurse Fochtman so that KMS physicians

could bill for Nurse Fochtman's performance of invasive

procedures. Dr. Woodruff stated, "[t]he problem is, is that when
 
[Nurse Fochtman] does these procedure [sic], the doctors cannot

charge for these services. We all understand that the doctors 
 
7

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
could charge for these services if she were an employee of the

doctors (KMS)." 
 
Dr. Woodruff also sent an email to Dr. Winn, KMS's

Chief Medical Officer, on April 5, 2001, suggesting that KMS hire

Nurse Fochtman in order to address the employment requirement.

Dr. Winn, however, determined that KMS's hiring of Nurse Fochtman

would not resolve the billing issue. Dr. Winn explained that
 
"[e]ven though the PAU was an outpatient kind of an arrangement,

it was still within the hospital confines, and so the feeling of

our compliance group and our [Billing Office] was that it

wouldn't be a billable service, even if [Nurse Fochtman] work[ed]

for [KMS]." 
 
III.

In May 2001, KH requested that D&T conduct an

investigation and audit concerning the billing practices of the

Hematology/Oncology Department. D&T's investigation focused on
 
the physician billing practices for the four invasive procedures. 
 Warren was also retained by KH to assist in the investigation.

As part of its investigation, D&T examined two separate

time periods: (1) February 1997 to September 1999 (the 1997

period); and (2) January 2000 to May 2001 (the 2000-01 period).

In its investigation, D&T reviewed patient files and resultant

billing claims submitted by KMS physicians; reviewed invasive

procedure schedule logs kept by Nurse Fochtman, which logged the

procedures she performed in the Hematology/Oncology Department;

and interviewed medical staff, including Dr. Woodruff, Dr.

Wilkinson, and Nurse Fochtman.

D&T created reports that summarized its findings

regarding each time period. The report relating to the 1997
 
period determined that claims for invasive procedures were billed

in error by Hematology/Oncology physicians where they were

documented as "[p]erformed by a [nurse practitioner] with either

no documented attending physician supervision and/or no physician

documentation[.]" This report found that these billings were in
 
error based on Medicare regulations, which the report found did

8


 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not permit the Hematology/Oncology physicians to bill for

invasive procedures performed by a nurse practitioner, whom they

did not employ, in the hospital setting of the PAU. The report
 
relating to the 2000-01 period determined that Nurse Fochtman

performed 314 invasive procedures from January 2000 through May

2001; Hematology/Oncology physicians submitted claims for 101 of

these 314 procedures; of the 101 claims submitted, 85 were

submitted by Dr. Woodruff; and that the 85 claims submitted by

Dr. Woodruff resulted in approximately $22,500 in billings.

After reviewing D&T's findings, Warren recommended to

KH that a self-disclosure be made to the OIG pursuant to the

Integrity Agreement. Warren prepared a Voluntary Disclosure
 
Submission (VDS) on behalf of KH and sent it to the OIG on

September 4, 2001.  The VDS incorporated and attached the D&T
 
reports. The VDS, in relevant part, reported that:
 
On March 10, 1999, KH's [Billing Office] issued a new
billing policy covering four (4) invasive procedures
("Procedures") performed in KMCWC's Pediatric
[Hematology/Oncology] Department. The policy established
that patient charts must contain evidence that a physician,
not an "advanced practice registered nurse" ("nurse
practitioner"), personally performed the Procedures in

question in order for a claim to be submitted to a third

party payor. . . .

. . . . 
 Because of his disagreement with this policy, [Dr.]
Wilkinson encouraged the physicians in his Department to
develop their own "interpretation" of the policy that would
allow the submission of claims when a nurse practitioner
performed the invasive aspect of the procedure in violation
of the March 10 policy. This action by the
[Hematology/Oncology] Division Director contributed to
[Hematology/Oncology] physicians, particularly [Dr.]
Woodruff, submitting invalid claims to KH's Central Billing
Office for payment by third party payors. . . .

. . . .
 Dr. Woodruff appears to have adopted an interpretation of
the new policy apparently designed to avoid compliance with
it and made no effort to verify the legitimacy of her
interpretation. For example, [Dr.] Woodruff states that she
would be allowed to bill for an invasive procedure performed
by a nurse practitioner if she ([Dr.] Woodruff) was present
during the invasive procedure; did not participate in the
invasive procedure itself; and merely labeled the resulting
specimen or checked medication. Under these circumstances, 
 
9

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
she would then make a chart entry saying that she
"participated in" the invasive procedure. . . .

. . . .

No current authority would allow these invasive Procedures
to be billed to third party payors if performed by a nurse
practitioner in the [Hematology/Oncology] Department
hospital setting.

(Footnotes omitted; format altered; certain emphasis added.) The

VDS identified approximately $65,000 in funds received from

various third party payors, including Medicaid, MedQuest

Programs, Medicare/TRIcare, and Private Payors, based on the

"invalid claims," which KH intended to reimburse.

The VDS also disclosed that Nurse Fochtman, who was

practicing as a nurse practitioner, only had a license as a

registered nurse. The VDS stated: 
 
Although this Disclosure document refers to nurse Dianne
Fochtman as the [Hematology/Oncology] "nurse practitioner,"
the current investigation discovered that she failed to
complete one or more requirements necessary to be licensed
in Hawaii in that license category. A nurse practitioner
is, under Hawaii law, a specialty category of an "advanced
practice registered nurse." As a result, Fochtman was
acting, during all or part of the time period covered by
this Disclosure, as a nurse practitioner when, in fact, she
was licensed only as a registered nurse.

In light of this discovery, KH has carefully reviewed the
issues of quality of care and patient health relating to
Fochtman's conduct and has concluded that no issue is

present regarding these issues.

In late August 2001, Warren conducted a compliance

training seminar on behalf of KH. In the training seminar,
 
Warren used a hypothetical scenario similar to the billing issues

discovered in the Hematology/Oncology Department. The scenario

did not mention Dr. Woodruff's or Dr. Wilkinson's name.
 IV.

KH offered to allow Dr. Woodruff to resign in lieu of 
 
termination. Dr. Woodruff did not resign. In January 2002, her
 
employment with KMS and KMCWC was terminated. Dr. Woodruff also

lost her position as an associate professor at the Burns Medical

School, which had been funded under her KMCWC employment. 
 
10

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In March 2002, the Chief Executive Officer of KMCWC

suspended Dr. Woodruff's medical staff privileges. In accordance

with KMCWC Medical Staff By-laws, the Medical Executive Committee

reviewed the decision to suspend Dr. Woodruff's medical staff

privileges. The Medical Executive Committee determined that the

suspension of Dr. Woodruff's staff privileges was unwarranted and

that the suspension should be lifted.

IV.

In January 2002, Dr. Woodruff filed her initial

complaint in this case. Dr. Woodruff was allowed to amend her

complaint twice, and HCBCG was added as a plaintiff in the second

amended complaint, which incorporated claims that HCBCG had

asserted in a separate lawsuit filed in federal court.

In their second amended complaint, Plaintiffs alleged

fifteen counts, including counts (1) seeking injunctive relief to

require the HPH Defendants to offer patients the option of

receiving team care that includes Dr. Woodruff; (2) asserting 
 anti-trust and unfair competition claims; (3) asserting

defamation; (4) asserting claims related to the termination of

Dr. Woodruff's employment with KMS and KMCWC; and (5) asserting

claims for tortious interference and intentional harm. The

fifteen courts were: "Injunctive Relief -- Restoration of Team

Care by KMS" (Count I); "Unlawful Combination Restraining Trade

and Price-Fixing, Violation of [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)]

§480-4(a)" (Count II); "Unlawful Attempt to Control Prices and

Refusals to Deal, Violation of [HRS] §§480-4(b), 6" (Count III);

"Unfair Competition, Violation of [HRS] §480-2" (Count IV);

"Monopolization of/Attempt to Monopolize Pediatric and Neonatal

Acute In-Hospital and Outpatient Care in Pediatric

Hematology/Oncology, Violation of [HRS] §480-9" (Count V);

"Monopolization of/Attempt to Monopolize the Practice of

Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Violation of HRS §480-9" (Count

VI); "Unlawful Publication of Misleading/Confusing Information,

Violation of Chap. HRS 481 A" (Count VII); "Violation of Right of

Due Process" (Count VIII); "Defamation" (Count IX); "Retaliatory

11

  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Discharge" (Count X); "Promissory Estoppel" (Count XI); "Breach

of Contract" (Count XII); "Breach of Implied Covenant of Good

Faith and Fair Dealing in the KMCWC Bylaws" (Count XIII);

"Tortious Interference with Economic Advantage" (Count XIV); and

"Prima Facie Tort" (Count XV). 
 
Plaintiffs asserted all counts of the second amended

complaint against the HPH Defendants. In the Circuit Court,
 
Plaintiffs clarified that they only sought relief against D&T and

Warren in Counts IX (Defamation), X (Retaliatory Discharge), and

XV (Prima Facie Tort).

Defendants filed multiple motions for summary judgment. 
 
Through a series of orders, the Circuit Court granted summary

judgment on all counts in favor of Defendants and against the

Plaintiffs.
6 Based on these orders, the Circuit Court entered

6/ The six orders issued by the Circuit Court which collectively granted
summary judgment in favor of Defendants on all counts are: 
 
(1) "Order Granting Defendant Deloitte & Touche LLP's Motion for Summary
Judgment as to Count IX (Defamation) of the Second Amended Complaint
Filed on February 17, 2005";

(2) "Order Granting Defendant Dennis Warren, Esq.'s Motion for Summary
Judgment (Filed April 13, 2006) and Substantive Joinders Thereto filedOn Behalf of Defendant Deloitte & Touche LLP and Defendants Hawai' i 
Pacific Health, Kapi' olani Medical Specialists, Kapi' olani Medical Center 
for Women and Children, Roger Drue, Frances A. Hallonquist, Neal Winn,M.D., and Sherrel Hammar, M.D."; 
(3) "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant Deloitte &
Touche LLP's Motion for Summary Judgment as to All Remaining Counts of
the Second Amended Complaint";

(4) "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendants Hawai' i 
Pacific Health, Kapi' olani Medical Specialists, Kapi' olani Medical Center 
for Women and Children, Roger Drue, Frances A. Hallonquist, Neal Winn,
M.D. and Sherrel Hammar, M.D.'s Motion for Partial Summary Judgment,
Filed on May 11, 2007";

(5) "Order Granting Defendants Hawai' i Pacific Health, Kapi' olani Medical 
Specialists, Kapi' olani Medical Center for Women and Children, Roger
Drue, Frances A. Hallonquist, Neal Winn, M.D. and Sherrel Hammar, M.D.'s
Motion for Partial Summary Judgment as to Counts VIII, XII, and XIV,Filed November 13, 2007"; and 
(6) "Order Granting Defendants Hawai' i Pacific Health, Kapi' olani 
Medical Specialists, Kapi' olani Medical Center for Women and 
Children, Roger Drue, Frances A. Hallonquist, Neal Winn, M.D. and
Sherrel Hammar, M.D.'s Motion for Summary Judgment as to All 
(continued...)

12

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
its "Final Judgment" in favor of Defendants on all counts of the

second amended complaint on October 6, 2008. 
 
V.

On appeal, Plaintiffs argue that the Circuit Court

committed various errors in granting summary judgment in favor of

Defendants. In their points of error on appeal, Plaintiffs

contend that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) determining that

Defendants held a qualified privilege for the alleged defamatory

statements they made, and that Defendants did not abuse any

qualified privilege they held; (2) determining that there was no

clear public policy mandate to support Dr. Woodruff's claim based

on Parnar v. Americana Hotels, Inc., 65 Haw. 370, 652 P.2d 625

(1982); (3) determining that Dr. Woodruff was an at-will

employee, no exception to the at-will doctrine applied, and no

modification had been made to KMS's and KMCWC's right to

terminate Dr. Woodruff's employment at will; (4) construing Dr.

Woodruff's bad faith claim in Count XIII; (5) interpreting Dr.

Woodruff's employment contract with KMS as not incorporating the

KMCWC Medical Staff By-laws and determining that the termination

of her employment did not adversely affect her privileges; (6)

determining that the HPH Defendants did not purposely intend to

interfere with Plaintiffs' economic advantage; and (7) "finding

no evidence HPH Defendants engaged in unfair competitive conduct,

or boycott or other exclusionary tactics, or monopolization or

attempted monopoly, or publishing information designed to mislead

patients and physicians seeking HCBCG." For the reasons

discussed below, we affirm the Circuit Court's Final Judgment

against Plaintiffs and in favor of Defendants. 
 
In their cross-appeal, the HPH Defendants challenge the

purported "deemed denial" of their motion for costs. The HPH

Defendants argue that: (1) the Circuit Court erred in not

granting the HPH Defendants' motion for costs as prevailing 
 
6/ (...continued)
Remaining Claims, filed February 15, 2008".

13

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
parties; and (2) the Circuit Court erred in failing to dispose of

the HPH Defendants' motion for costs within 90 days of the

motion's file date. We conclude that Plaintiffs' notice of

appeal divested the Circuit Court of jurisdiction to decide the

HPH Defendants' motion for costs. Because the Circuit Court was

divested of jurisdiction, the motion for costs was not deemed

denied, the motion is still pending in the Circuit Court, and

there is no ruling on that motion for this court to review. We

therefore dismiss the HPH Defendants' appeal from the purported

deemed denial of their motion for costs. 
 
DISCUSSION

I. PLAINTIFFS' APPEAL

A.

We review a trial court's grant or denial of summary 
judgment 
de novo, Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai 'i 48, 56, 109 
P.3d 689, 697 (2005), using the same standard applicable to the trial court. Iddings v. Mee–Lee, 82 Hawai
'i 1, 5, 919 P.2d 263, 
267 (1996). Summary judgment is proper "if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Hawai
'i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(c) (2000). The evidence and the inferences drawn from the evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Kamaka v. Goodsill 
Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai
'i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 
(2008). 
The party moving for summary judgment has the initial 
burden of producing evidence to support its motion and the ultimate burden of persuasion. Jou v. Dai-Tokyo Royal State Ins. 
Co., 116 Hawai
'i 159, 164, 172 P.3d 471, 476 (2007). 
Once the moving party has satisfied its initial burden
of showing the absence of a genuine issue of material fact
and its entitlement to a judgment as a matter of law, the
opposing party "may not rest upon the mere allegations or
denials of [the opposing party's] pleading" but must come
forward, through affidavit or other evidence, with "specific 
 
14

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial."
HRCP Rule 56(e). If the opposing party fails to respond in
this fashion, the moving party is entitled to summary
judgment as a matter of law. Hall v. State, 7 Haw. App.
274, 284, 756 P.2d 1048, 1055 (1988); see also HRCP 56(e).

Wittig v. Allianz, A.G., 112 Hawai 'i 195, 200, 145 P.3d 738, 743 
(App. 2006) (brackets in original). "A party opposing a motion 
for summary judgment cannot discharge his or her burden by alleging conclusions, 'nor is [that party] entitled to a trial on the basis of a hope that he [or she] can produce some evidence at that time.'" Henderson v. Prof'l Coatings Corp., 72 Haw. 387, 
401, 819 P.2d 84, 92 (1991) (quoting 10A Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Mary Kay Kane, Federal Practice and Procedure § 2727 (2d ed. 1983)). 
B.

At the outset, we note that Plaintiffs' opening brief 
is deficient in several respects. This includes: (1) Plaintiffs' failure to append a copy of the judgment and orders "relevant to any point on appeal," Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
Rule 28(b)(3) (2008); (2) Plaintiffs' failure, in their points of error, to state (a) "where in the record the alleged error occurred" and (b) where in the record the error was objected to or brought to the trial court's attention, HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) (2008); and (3) Plaintiffs' failure, as to certain points of error, to make any discernable argument, HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) (2008). In addition, although Plaintiffs challenge the Circuit Court's orders granting summary judgment, they failed to include transcripts of any of the hearings on the underlying motions for summary judgment in the record. HRAP Rule 10 (2009) imposes an obligation on the appellant to order transcripts of oral proceedings before the trial court when the appellant "desires to raise any point on appeal that requires consideration of [such] oral proceedings[.]" HRAP Rule 10(a)(1)(A); see Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai
'i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995) ("The 
burden is upon appellant in an appeal to show error by reference to matters in the record, and he or she has the responsibility of 
15

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
providing an adequate transcript." (internal quotation marks,

citation, and brackets omitted)).

Unless otherwise indicated, we will not consider any 
points of error for which Plaintiffs have failed to present discernable arguments. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not 
argued may be deemed waived."); Hawaii Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai
'i 438, 478–79, 164 P.3d 696, 736–37 (2007) 
(stating that "an appellate court is not obliged to address matters for which the appellant has failed to present discernable arguments"); Ala Moana Boat Owners' Ass'n v. State, 50 Haw. 156, 158, 434 P.2d 516, 518 (1967) (stating that "generalities and assertions amounting to mere conclusions of law" in a brief are insufficient to require the court's attention). Moreover, although we conclude that Plaintiffs' failure to include transcripts of the summary judgment hearings does not preclude us from reviewing the summary judgment orders, see Marn v. Reynolds, 44 Haw. 655, 663, 361 P.2d 383, 388 (1961) (noting that an appellate court may review an appeal where a missing transcript "is not necessary to the disposition of the appeal on the merits"), we will resolve any dispute over matters presented at the hearings that cannot be resolved due to the absence of the transcripts in favor of affirming the Circuit Court's rulings. See Bettencourt, 80 Hawai
'i at 230, 909 P.2d at 558 ("The law is 
clear in this jurisdiction that the appellant has the burden of furnishing the appellate court with a sufficient record to positively show the alleged error." (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). Subject to these conditions, we will address Plaintiffs' claims, for which Plaintiffs have presented discernable argument, on the merits, notwithstanding the deficiencies in their opening brief. 
C.

Plaintiffs argue that the Circuit Court erred in

granting summary judgment in favor of Defendants on Plaintiffs'

defamation claims. Plaintiffs' defamation claims against

Defendants arose from (1) D&T's billing investigation reports;

16

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2) Warren's preparation of the VDS, which used information
 
contained in D&T's reports and included the reports as

attachments, and his submission of the VDS on KH's behalf to the

OIG; (3) Warren's presentation at a compliance training seminar;

and (4) alleged statements made by KMS employees Drs. Winn and

Hammar. In granting summary judgment in favor of Defendants, the

Circuit Court ruled that Defendants had a qualified privilege

with respect to the alleged defamatory statements and that

Defendants had not abused their qualified privilege. We conclude

that Plaintiffs have not shown that the Circuit Court erred in

granting summary judgment in favor of Defendants. 
 
1. 
 
A plaintiff must establish the following four elements

to sustain a claim for defamation:

(a) a false and defamatory statement concerning another;
 
(b) an unprivileged publication to a third party;
 
(c) fault amounting at least to negligence on the part of
the publisher [actual malice where the plaintiff is a public
figure]; and

(d) either actionability of the statement irrespective of
special harm or the existence of special harm caused by the
publication. 
 
Gold v. Harrison, 88 Hawai 'i 94, 100, 962 P.2d 353, 359 (1998) 
(brackets in original) (quoting Dunlea v. Dappen, 83 Hawai 'i 28, 
36, 924 P.2d 196, 204 (1996)). 
Even if a statement is defamatory, the author of the

statement is protected by a qualified privilege when he or she

"reasonably acts in the discharge of some public or private duty,

legal, moral, or social, and where the publication concerns

subject matter in which the author has an interest and the

recipients of the publication a corresponding interest or duty."

Russell v. American Guild of Variety Artists, 53 Haw. 456, 460,

497 P.2d 40, 44 (1972). "In claiming such privilege, it is
 
essential that the author of the defamatory matter and the

recipients have a common interest and the communication is of a 
 
17

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
type reasonably deemed to protect or further that interest."

Vlasaty v. Pacific Club, 4 Haw. App. 556, 564, 670 P.2d 827, 832

(1983). 
 
A qualified privilege "is conditional and is lost if it

is abused." Id. at 564, 670 P.2d at 833. The qualified
 
privilege is lost if the holder abuses the privilege by "(1)

excessive publication, (2) use of the occasion for an improper

purpose, or (3) lack of belief or grounds for belief in the truth

of what is said." Kainz v. Lussier, 4 Haw. App. 400, 405, 667

P.2d 797, 802 (1983). The party claiming defamation has the
 
burden of proving that a qualified privilege was abused. See

Towse v. State, 64 Haw. 624, 632, 647 P.2d 696, 702 (1982). 
 
The threshold question of whether the qualified 
privilege exists is a question of law for the court to determine. Calleon v. Miyagi, 76 Hawai
'i 310, 319, 876 P.2d 1278, 1287 
(1994). If a privilege exists, the question of whether it has been abused is normally an issue for jury determination." Id. 
However, where no genuine issue of material fact is presented on whether the qualified privilege has been abused, summary judgment is appropriate. See Vlasaty, 4 Haw. App. at 564, 670 P.2d at 833 
(determining that there was no genuine issue of material fact on the issue of the abuse of the qualified privilege in upholding the trial court's grant of summary judgment against plaintiff on his defamation claim). 
2.

We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in

determining that Defendants were protected by a qualified

privilege. In conformity with KH's obligations under the
 
Integrity Agreement, including its obligation to retain an

independent review organization to audit its billing practices

and verify compliance with applicable standards, KH hired D&T to

conduct an investigation and audit concerning the billing

practices of the Hematology/Oncology Department. Pursuant to

this engagement, D&T prepared reports of its investigative

findings, which were used in preparing the VDS. KH also retained

18

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Warren as legal counsel to address potential billing compliance

issues in the Hematology/Oncology Department. Warren reviewed

the results of D&T's investigation; recommended that to ensure

compliance with the Integrity Agreement, KH make a self-
disclosure to the OIG; and prepared the VDS submitted to the OIG. 
 In furtherance of the training requirements imposed by the

Integrity Agreement, Warren also conducted, on behalf of KH, the

compliance training seminar on billing practices in late August

2001. 
 
KH's hiring of D&T and Warren to assist KH in complying

with its obligations under the Integrity Agreement regarding the

Hematology/Oncology Department's billing practices established a

duty owed by D&T and Warren to KH. KH, D&T, Warren, and the OIG
 
shared a common interest in ensuring KH's compliance with billing

requirements and the Integrity Agreement. D&T prepared reports
 
that were reasonably based on information obtained through their

extensive investigation, and Warren prepared the VDS based on

information contained in the D&T reports and his understanding of

the obligations imposed by the Integrity Agreement. Warren also

conducted the compliance training seminar as part of his duties

as retained legal counsel for KH, and he shared a common interest

with the physicians and other KH affiliated individuals attending

the training seminar in ensuring compliance with billing

requirements and the Integrity Agreement. The alleged defamatory
 
statements made by D&T and Warren were in furtherance of the

discharge of the duty they owed to KH and were protected by a

qualified privilege.

KH had a legal duty to comply with statutes, rules, and

directives that governed billing by its physicians and to comply

with the Integrity Agreement, which required it to disclose

"material deficiencies" in its billing practices. KH and the OIG

shared a common interest in ensuring KH's compliance in these

matters. The alleged defamatory statements made by KH (the

predecessor of HPH) in the VDS were in furtherance of its legal

duties and were protected by a qualified privilege. 
 
19

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Finally, the HPH Defendants had a duty to discuss the

results of the investigation into the Hematology/Oncology

Department's billing practices with others who worked for or with

the HPH Defendants and who shared a common interest with the HPH

Defendants in ensuring compliance with billing requirements and

the Integrity Agreement.
7 See Vlasaty, 4 Haw. App. at 563, 670

P.2d at 832. Statements made by the HPH Defendants in

furtherance of this duty were also protected by a qualified

privilege.

3.

Plaintiffs assert that the Circuit Court erred in

granting summary judgment on their defamation claims. They argue
 
that: (1) the qualified privilege did not apply because the VDS

and Warren's compliance training seminar disclosed more specific

details than required by the Integrity Agreement; and (2)

Defendants abused the privilege because they lacked sufficient

grounds for believing that what they were saying was true. 
 Plaintiffs' arguments are without merit.

Plaintiffs claim that under the Integrity Agreement,

Warren and the HPH Defendants were only required to report the

existence of a billing issue in the Hematology/Oncology

Department that resulted in overpayments and the amount of the

overpayments. Plaintiffs contend that because information

disclosed in the VDS went beyond the reporting obligations

imposed by the Integrity Agreement, Warren and the HPH Defendants

did not have a qualified privilege regarding the "accusatory

statements in the [VDS] against Dr. Woodruff."

We conclude that the premise of Plaintiffs' argument is

incorrect, and therefore, their argument fails. The Integrity
 
Agreement required KH to self-report any overpayments or material

deficiencies it discovered. In reporting a material deficiency,

the Integrity Agreement required KH to submit a report that

7/ The Integrity Agreement requires that in reporting a material
deficiency to the OIG, KH include "any further steps KH plans to take to
address such material deficiency and prevent it from recurring." 
 
20

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
included:

a. a complete description of the material deficiency,
including the relevant facts, persons involved, and legal
and program authorities; 
 
b. KH's actions to correct the material deficiency; and 
 
c. any further steps KH plans to take to address such
material deficiency and prevent it from recurring.

Therefore, contrary to Plaintiffs' assertion, the

Integrity Agreement required KH to submit more than a bare-boned

report of the existence of a billing issue that resulted in

overpayments and the amount of the overpayments. The information

in the VDS, including the information regarding Dr. Woodruff

"submitting invalid claims to KH's Central Billing Office for

payment by third party payors[,]" was required by the Integrity

Agreement. Accordingly, we reject Plaintiffs' argument that the
 
qualified privilege did not apply because the VDS disclosed

information that went beyond the requirements of the Integrity

Agreement.

We also reject Plaintiffs' argument that the qualified

privilege did not apply to Warren's compliance training seminar

because he used information that went beyond the requirements of

the Integrity Agreement. Plaintiffs contend that the

hypothetical scenario used by Warren in conducting his compliance

training seminar "clearly implicated" Drs. Woodruff and Wilkinson

as wrongdoers. However, Dr. Woodruff acknowledged that Warren
 
did not mention names, and she cannot remember whether Warren

used the word "fraud" or the specific words he used at the

training seminar. More importantly, the Integrity Agreement
 
required KH to provide compliance training that included a

discussion of proper billing practices, procedures for

documentation of medical records, the personal and legal

obligations of individuals to ensure the submission of accurate

bills, and examples of proper and improper billing practices.
8

8/ In addition, as noted, the Integrity Agreement required KH to include
in any report of a material deficiency "any further steps KH plans to take to
(continued...)

21

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Warren's compliance seminar and his use of hypothetical scenarios

fell squarely within the requirements of the Integrity Agreement. 
 Therefore, Plaintiffs' argument that the qualified privilege did

not apply to the information disclosed in the compliance seminar

is without merit.

4.

Plaintiffs argue that Warren and the HPH Defendants

abused the qualified privilege, and thereby lost it, because they

lacked sufficient grounds for believing what they were saying

about Dr. Woodruff's submitting invalid claims was true. We

disagree.

The information regarding Dr. Woodruff's submitting

invalid claims was based on a thorough investigation largely

conducted by D&T into the billing practices of the

Hematology/Oncology Department. Plaintiffs' disagreement with
 
the conclusions reached by the investigation does not demonstrate

that Warren and the HPH Defendants lacked sufficient grounds for

relying on D&T's investigation and other information uncovered in

forming the belief that Dr. Woodruff had submitted invalid

claims.

Plaintiffs refer to the requirement in the Integrity

Agreement that KH self-report material deficiencies if it has

"reason to believe" its conduct may have violated applicable

statutes, regulations, or program directives. They argue that
 
this low threshold of proof shows that Warren "knew the

accusations against [Dr. Woodruff] were gratuitous and not well

founded." We reject this argument. We fail to see how the

"reason to believe" standard for self-reporting serves to support

Plaintiffs' claim that Warren (or the HPH Defendants) lacked

grounds for believing the information in the VDS was true.

8/ (...continued)
address such material deficiency and prevent it from recurring." 
In its VDS,
KH stated that one of the corrective actions it planned to take was to hold
mandatory training for KMS physicians on billing practices and procedures to
prevent the recurrence of the problems identified in the VDS. Warren's

compliance training seminar was part of the corrective actions KH identified
in the VDS.

22

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs also suggest that the HPH Defendants had a

motive to falsely accuse Dr. Woodruff of invalid billing so that

they could cover up their improper billing on UB-92 forms9
 of
 
invasive procedures performed by Nurse Fochtman. It was

Plaintiffs' theory that the HPH Defendants conspired to falsely

accuse Dr. Woodruff, thereby damaging her credibility, because

they wanted to cover up the fact that Nurse Fochtman was not

properly licensed as a nurse practitioner and thus could not

perform the invasive procedures billed on the UB-92 forms. 
 However, the undisputed facts in the record do not support this

theory.

Indeed, in the VDS, KH itself voluntarily disclosed to

the OIG the issue concerning Nurse Fochtman's licensing. The VDS

stated:

Although this Disclosure document refers to nurse Dianne
Fochtman as the [Hematology/Oncology] "nurse practitioner,"
the current investigation discovered that she failed to
complete one or more requirements necessary to be licensed
in Hawaii in that license category. A nurse practitioner
is, under Hawaii law, a specialty category of an "advanced
practice registered nurse." As a result, Fochtman was
acting, during all or part of the time period covered by
this Disclosure, as a nurse practitioner when, in fact, she
was licensed only as a registered nurse.

In light of this discovery, KH has carefully reviewed the
issues of quality of care and patient health relating to
Fochtman's conduct and has concluded that no issue is

present regarding these issues.

KH's own disclosure of Nurse Fochtman's alleged licensing

deficiencies refutes any claim that the HPH Defendants were

motivated by the desire to cover up such alleged deficiencies.
10

9/ The VDS reported billings submitted on HCFA 1500 forms, which are used
to submit claims for physician services. See United States ex rel. Woodruff

v. Hawai' i Pacific Health, 560 F. Supp. 2d 988, 993 (D. Hawai' i 2008). UB-92 
forms are used by hospitals to request reimbursement from third party payors
"for technical charges, including room and board, equipment costs, nursingcosts, laboratory costs, and medical supplies[.]" Id. 
10/ 
 We note that Drs. Woodruff and Wilkinson filed a qui tam action in

federal district court against HPH, KMS, and KMCWC based in part on Drs.
Woodruff and Wilkinson's theory that the UB-92 forms were false because the
forms billed for Nurse Fochtman's performance of invasive procedures, even
though she was not a licensed nurse practitioner and thus not licensed to
(continued...)

23

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We conclude that Plaintiffs' unsupported speculation over the HPH

Defendants' motives failed to raise any genuine issue of material

fact regarding abuse of the qualified privilege and that the

Circuit Court properly ruled that Defendants had not abused the

privilege.

D.

In their second amended complaint, Plaintiffs alleged 
that the HPH Defendants breached Dr. Woodruff's employment contracts in terminating her. However, as the HPH Defendants argue and as the record shows, Dr. Woodruff was an at-will employee whose employment was subject to termination "for any reason or no reason." Shoppe v. Gucci America, Inc., 94 Hawai
'i 
368, 383, 14 P.3d 1049, 1064 (2000) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Under Hawai
'i law, "an employment contract of 
indefinite duration will generally be construed as giving rise to an at-will employment relationship and [is] therefore terminable at the will of either party for any reason or no reason." Id. 
Dr. Woodruff's employment with KMS and KMCWC was for an indefinite duration and therefore she was employed at will. In addition, Dr. Woodruff signed employment documents in which she specifically acknowledged her at-will employment status. 
On appeal, Plaintiffs do not challenge the Circuit

Court's determination that Dr. Woodruff's employment was at will. 
 Instead, they argue that the Circuit Court erred in granting

summary judgment because various exceptions to the at-will

10/ (...continued)
perform such procedures. See United States ex rel. Woodruff v. Hawai' i 
Pacific Health, 560 F. Supp. 2d 988, 998 (D. Haw. 2008), aff'd, 409 F. App'x
133, 2010 WL 5072191 (9th Cir. Dec. 13, 2010). The federal district court rejected this theory and granted summary judgment in favor of HPH, KMS, andKMCWC. The court held that Nurse Fochtman, who was a registered nurse, wasalso a properly licensed and board-certified nurse practitioner who wasqualified to perform the invasive procedures. Id. at 998-99. The court 
therefore held that the UB-92 forms were not facially false based on NurseFochtman's licensing status. Id. at 998-1000. The court stated that the VDS 
appeared to conflate the status of an advance practice registered nurse (APRN)with that of a nurse practitioner. Id. at 998 n.9. The court explained that
under Hawai' i law, the APRN title was not a license required to perform the
invasive procedures, but only a recognition granted by the nursing board. Id. 
at 998-1000. 
24

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
employment doctrine were applicable to Dr Woodruff's employment. 
 
The exceptions argued by Plaintiffs on appeal are: (1) the public

policy exception set forth in Parnar, 65 Haw. 370, 652 P.2d 625;

and (2) the exception set forth in Kinoshita v. Canadian Pacific

Airlines, Ltd., 68 Haw. 594, 724 P.2d 110 (1986). We conclude

that these exceptions did not undermine the Circuit Court's grant

of summary judgment.
11

In Parnar, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that there is 
a public policy exception to an employer's generally unlimited right to discharge an at-will employee, and that an employer may be held liable in tort, where the employer's "discharge of an employee violates a clear mandate of public policy." Parnar, 65 
Haw. at 380, 652 P.2d at 631. The court further stated: 
In determining whether a clear mandate of public policy is
violated, courts should inquire whether the employer's
conduct contravenes the letter or purpose of a
constitutional, statutory, or regulatory provision or
scheme. Prior judicial decisions may also establish the
relevant public policy. However, courts should proceed
cautiously if called upon to declare public policy absent
some prior legislative or judicial expression on the
subject.

Id. 
 
Plaintiffs argue that at-will terminations of medical 
specialists should not be permitted because they drive up the 
costs of health care, will adversely affect the availability of doctors in Hawai
'i, and may force doctors to abandon their 
patients. In essence, Plaintiffs argue that the at-will employment laws should not apply to medical specialists and that the Parnar exception should presumptively apply to the termination of medical specialists. Plaintiffs cite no authority to support their argument, and courts from other jurisdictions have concluded that physicians can be employed on an at-will 
11/ Plaintiffs also refer to the "permanent employment" and "additional
consideration" exceptions to the at-will doctrine. However, because
Plaintiffs fail to present discernable argument on how these exceptions would
apply to this case or why the Circuit Court erred in failing to apply them, we
decline to address these exceptions.

25

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
basis. See e.g., Lobel v. Maimonides Medd Ctr., 835 N.Y.S. 2d

28, 30 (N.Y. App. Div. 2007); Miranda v. Wesley Health Sys., LLC,

949 So. 2d 63, 67-68 (Miss. Ct. App. 2006). We conclude that

Plaintiffs have failed to identify "a constitutional, statutory,

or regulatory provision or scheme" that established a clear

mandate of public policy that was violated by Dr. Woodruff's at-
will termination. See Parnar, 65 Haw. at 380, 652 P.2d at 631. 
 
Therefore, Plaintiffs' Parnar claim fails as a matter of law. 
 
In Kinoshita, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court acknowledged an 
exception to the at-will doctrine where an employer's right to discharge an employee is "contractually modified and, thus, qualified by statements contained in employee policy manuals or handbooks issued by employers to their employees." Kinoshita, 68 
Haw. at 601, 724 P.2d at 115-16 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Under this exception, an employer will be bound by its statements of policy where such statements were circulated under circumstances that "created a situation instinct with an obligation" and "with an intention to create expectations and induce reliance by employees[.]" Id. at 603, 724 P.2d at 117 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
12 
In this case, however, Plaintiffs' Kinoshita claim is 
without merit because the HPH Defendants did not create an expectation or induce Dr. Woodruff's reliance on any belief that would conflict with her status as an at-will employee. Indeed, the HPH Defendants provided Dr. Woodruff with numerous documents, which Dr. Woodruff signed, that specifically stated that her employment was at will. For example, Dr. Woodruff's KMS employment application stated: "I understand that if I am employed, my employment is 'at will' and can be terminated at any time, either by myself or Kapi
'olani Health, with or without 
cause or reason, and with or without notice." Upon being hired by KMS, Dr. Woodruff signed an employment agreement, in which she acknowledged understanding that her "employment is on an 'at 
12/ In Kinoshita,  the employer had promulgated policies and procedures in
an effort to defeat attempts at unionization. Kinoshita
, 68 Haw. at 603, 724
P.2d at 117.

26

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
will' basis." Upon receiving KH's employee handbook, Dr.

Woodruff signed an acknowledgment form which stated: "All

Kapi
'olani Health employees are employed on an 'at will' basis." 
Under these circumstances, Plaintiffs do not have a viable

Kinoshita  claim. See Shoppe, 94 Hawai 'i at 385-86, 14 P.3d at 
1066-67.

E.

KMCWC has Medical Staff By-laws (By-laws), which govern

physicians who are given clinical privileges and permitted to

practice at KMCWC.
13 The By-laws include a provision that gives

a practitioner the right to a hearing when actions that will

adversely affect the practitioner's clinical privileges and

medical staff membership at KMCWC are recommended.
14

13/ 
 State of Hawai' i Department of Health rules for broad service
hospitals, such as KMCWC, require the hospital to establish "an organized
medical staff" responsible "for the quality of medical care provided topatients, and for the ethical conduct and professional practices of itsmembers." Hawai' i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 11-93-22 (1992). The medical 
staff, in turn, is required to develop and adopt by-laws and rules to, amongother things, "[e]stablish a framework for self government and a means ofaccountability to the governing body." HAR § 11-93-22. For purposes of theserules, "medical staff" 
means physicians, dentists, podiatrists and other individuals
licensed by the state, who are permitted by law and who have been
authorized by the governing body to provide patient care services
within the facility. All medical staff members and other

individuals who are permitted by law and by the hospital to
provide patient care services independently in the hospital shall
have delineated clinical privileges that allow them to provide
patient care services within the scope of their clinical
privileges.

HAR § 11-93-2 (1992).

14/ The By-laws provided, in relevant part, that: 
 
the right to a hearing shall be triggered when any one or more of
the following actions or recommended actions shall be deemed to
adversely affect a practitioner and constitute grounds for a
professional review action, as defined in Hawaii Revised Statutes
Section 671D-4:

. . . .

(d) Revocation of Medical Staff membership and/or privileges; 
 
(e) Involuntary decrease of clinical privileges . . . ;

(continued...)

27

 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Plaintiffs contend that the Circuit Court erred in

granting summary judgment on Dr. Woodruff's employment claims

because they assert that Dr. Woodruff's employment contract with

14/ (...continued)

. . . .

(g) Suspension of any clinical privileges; 
(h) Termination of all clinical privileges; [and] 
(i) Summary suspension or restriction of Medical Staff membership or
clinical privileges for more than fourteen (14) days[.]

As referenced in the By-laws, HRS § 671D-4 (1993 & Supp. 2012) provides the
following definitions, which state in relevant part:

"Adversely affecting" includes reducing, restricting,
suspending, revoking, denying, or failing to renew clinical
privileges or membership in a health care entity.

"Clinical privileges" includes privileges, membership on the
medical staff or panel, and the other circumstances pertaining to
the furnishing of medical care under which a physician or other
licensed health care practitioner is permitted to furnish such
care by a health care entity.

"Professional review action" means an action or

recommendation of a professional review body which is taken or
made in the conduct of professional review activity, which is
based on the competence or professional conduct of an individual
physician which conduct affects or could affect adversely the
health or welfare of a patient or patients, and adversely affects
the clinical privileges, or membership in a professional society
or provider panel, of the physician. This term includes a formal

decision of a professional review body not to take an action or
make a recommendation described in the previous sentence and also
includes professional review activities relating to a professional
review action. . . .

"Professional review activity" means an activity of a health
care entity with respect to an individual physician to do any of
the following:

(1)		To determine whether the physician may have clinical
privileges with respect to, or membership in, the
entity; 
 
(2)		To determine the scope or conditions of such
privileges or membership; or 
 
(3)		To change or modify such privileges or membership. 
 
"Professional review body" means a health care entity and
the governing body or any committee of a health care entity which
conducts professional review activity, and includes any committee
of the medical staff of such an entity when assisting the
governing body in a professional review activity.

28

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
KMS incorporated the By-laws and therefore entitled Dr. Woodruff

to a hearing before her employment was terminated. KMS's offer

of employment to Dr. Woodruff stated, in relevant part:

As a physician, you are expected to maintain, in good
standing, membership of KMCWC's Medical Staff with the
privileges necessary for you to perform your employment
duties and obligations to KMS. You will also be expected to
observe and comply with KMCWC's Medical Staff Bylaws and all
other rules, regulations, policies and procedures of KMCWC
as well as KMS. At all times you will be required to
maintain medical licensure and all appropriate drug licenses
. . . . Loss of membership on KMCWC's Medical Staff is
grounds for automatic and immediate termination of
employment with KMS as an employed physician.

Based on this provision, Plaintiffs argue that the By-laws were 
 
incorporated into Dr. Woodruff's employment agreement with KMS

and therefore she was entitled to a hearing before her employment

was terminated. Plaintiffs' argument that KMS was required to

provide Dr. Woodruff with a hearing before terminating her

employment is without merit.

The cited provision of KMS's offer of employment to Dr.

Woodruff imposes obligations on Dr. Woodruff with which she must

comply to assure her continued employment. Dr. Woodruff must

maintain her medical staff membership and clinical privileges

with KMCWC or she is subject to immediate termination. The cited

provision does not purport to impose additional obligations on

KMS. While the cited provision incorporates the terms of the By­
laws to the extent of conditioning Dr. Woodruff's employment on

her compliance with the By-laws, it does not require KMS's

compliance with the By-laws as a condition of the employment

agreement.

Even assuming arguendo that KMS's compliance with the

terms of the By-laws was part of its employment agreement with

Dr. Woodruff, the hearing requirement under the By-laws does not

apply to employment terminations, but only to adverse actions

relating to staff membership and clinical privileges. Thus, the
 
By-laws did not change the at-will nature of Dr. Woodruff's

employment or require that Dr. Woodruff receive a hearing before

her employment was terminated. In this regard, the distinction
 
29

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
between a physician's status as a medical staff member with

clinical privileges on the one hand, and an employee on the other

hand, is crucial. A physician can be a medical staff member and
 
have clinical privileges at KMCWC without being employed by KMS

or KMCWC. See HAR § 11-93-2 (definition of medical staff).
15

The By-laws do not list actions adverse to a physician's

employment as among the actions entitling a physician to a

hearing; the By-laws only provide a hearing for actions adverse

to a physician's KMCWC medical staff membership or clinical

privileges.

We agree with the Circuit Court's reasoning that the 
 
By-laws and any due process hearing requirement only applied to

clinical and membership privileges; that Plaintiffs' claims in

this case deal with employment termination, not claims relating

to Dr. Woodruff's clinical or membership privileges; and that the

By-laws did not provide for a review hearing with respect to Dr.

Woodruff's employment termination. Accordingly, we conclude that
 
Dr. Woodruff was not entitled to a hearing on the decision to

terminate her employment. See Bryant v. Glen Oaks Med. Ctr., 650

N.E.2d 622, 629-31 (Ill. App. Ct. 1995) (distinguishing between

medical staff membership and employment in holding that the

provisions of medical staff by-laws requiring a hearing for

actions adversely affecting medical staff membership or clinical

privileges were not implicated by the termination of a doctor

employed on an at will basis). 
 
Plaintiffs argue that the termination of Dr. Woodruff's

employment adversely affected her medical staff membership and 
 clinical privileges and therefore she was entitled a hearing on

that basis. We disagree. While the termination of Dr.

Woodruff's employment may have ended the increased access to

15/ In Bryant v. Glen Oaks Med. Ctr., 650 N.E.2d 622 (Ill. App. Ct.
1995), the court explained the distinction between the granting of medical
staff privileges and employment as follows: "Staff privileges reflect the
hospital's decision that a physician is qualified to practice in the facility,
but do not in and of themselves confer employment." 
Bryant
, 650 N.E.2d at 630
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted; format altered). 
 
30

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
hospital facilities she had as an employee, it did not affect the

access to and privileges at KMCWC she enjoyed as a medical staff

member. Indeed, Dr. Woodruff's termination letter made clear

that the termination of her employment "will not alter your

medical staff privileges at [KMCWC], or your ability to renew a

private practice." When KMCWC subsequently suspended Dr.
 
Woodruff's medical staff privileges, the Medical Executive

Committee reviewed the suspension as required by the By-laws. 
 The Medical Executive Committee disagreed with KMCWC and

determined that the suspension of Dr. Woodruff's privileges was

unwarranted and that the suspension should be lifted. Plaintiffs

do not object to the manner in which KMCWC's decision to suspend

Dr. Woodruff's medical staff privileges was reviewed under the

By-laws.

Our analysis also disposes of Plaintiffs' claim that

the HPH Defendants violated a duty of good faith and fair dealing

derived from the By-laws. This claim fails because the By-laws
 
did not apply to the termination of Dr. Woodruff's employment.

F.

Plaintiffs contend that the Circuit Court erred in

granting summary judgment on their tortious interference and

competition claims. However, Plaintiffs' entire argument in
 
support of their points of error consists of two paragraphs in

which they cite conflicting expert testimony about the extent of

HPH's market power and assert that the HPH Defendants' conduct

injured the public interest. Plaintiffs fail to place their
 
claims regarding the experts' testimony or injury to the public

interest in context, explain why their contentions show that the

Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment, or cite any

authority to support their claims. We therefore would be

justified in rejecting these claims of error on the ground that

Plaintiffs failed to provide discernable argument to support

them. 
 
In any event, it appears that Plaintiffs' argument

relates to their contention that the HPH Defendants engaged in

31

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
anticompetitive behavior by referring the vast majority of

patients who go to KMCWC's emergency department, and have no

specific pediatric hematology-oncology doctor, to a specialist at

KMS, instead of referring them to Plaintiffs. To establish a

claim for unlawful monopolization, the plaintiff must not only

show that the defendant possesses monopoly power in the relevant

market, but that it acquired or maintained that power through

anticompetitive conduct. See Verizon Communications Inc. v. Law
 
Offices of Curtis V. Trinko, LLP, 540 U.S. 398, 407 (2004). 
 Plaintiffs do not cite any authority and they fail to present any

argument to support the claim that the HPH Defendants' practice

of referring emergency room patients with no specific pediatric

hematology-oncology doctor to a specialist at KMS constituted

anticompetitive conduct. Plaintiffs' reference to the conflict

in the experts' opinion was relevant to the question of whether

HPH possessed monopoly power. It did not show that a genuine
 
issue of material fact existed on whether the HPH Defendants had

engaged in anticompetative conduct. Accordingly, Plaintiffs fail
 
to demonstrate that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary

judgment on their anticompetitive conduct claims.

II. 
THE HPH DEFENDANTS' CROSS-APPEAL

A.

In their cross-appeal, the HPH Defendants appeal from

the purported "deemed denial" of their motion for costs. 
The

facts relevant to the HPH Defendants' cross-appeal are as

follows.

After the Circuit Court entered its Final Judgment on

October 6, 2008, the HPH Defendants filed their "Notice of

Taxation of Costs" on October 13, 2008. On October 21, 2008,
 
Plaintiffs filed objections to the HPH Defendants' Notice of

Taxation of Costs. On October 30, 2008, Plaintiffs filed their

notice of appeal from the Final Judgment. On November 6, 2008,
 
the Clerk of the Circuit Court denied the HPH Defendants' request

for costs. On November 14, 2008, the HPH Defendants filed their

motion for costs, which requested that the Circuit Court review

32

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Clerk's denial of their request for costs. On April 13,
 
2008, the HPH Defendants filed their notice of appeal from the

Circuit Court's deemed denial of their motion for costs. In

their notice of appeal, the HPH Defendants asserted that the

Circuit Court had not disposed of their motion for costs and

therefore, the motion was deemed denied ninety days after it was

filed pursuant to HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) (2006).

HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) provides:

(3) TIME TO APPEAL AFFECTED BY POST-JUDGMENT MOTIONS.
If any party files a timely motion for judgment as a matter
of law, to amend findings or make additional findings, for a
new trial, to reconsider, alter or amend the judgment or
order, or for attorney's fees or costs, the time for filing
the notice of appeal is extended until 30 days after entry
of an order disposing of the motion; provided, that the
failure to dispose of any motion by order entered upon the
record within 90 days after the date the motion was filed
shall constitute a denial of the motion.

The notice of appeal shall be deemed to appeal the
disposition of all post-judgment motions that are timely
filed after entry of the judgment or order.

B.

The HPH Defendants' cross-appeal is premised on the

assumption that their motion for costs was a motion that tolled

the time for filing a notice of appeal under HRAP Rule 4(a)(3),

and therefore, the motion for costs was deemed denied after the

Circuit Court failed to dispose of the motion within 90 days. 
 However, under HRAP Rule 4(a)(3), only the filing of a timely

motion for costs (1) tolls the time for filing a notice of

appeal, (2) extends the time the trial court retains jurisdiction

to resolve the motion, and (3) triggers the deemed denial of the

motion if not resolved within 90 days. 
 
Here, the HPH Defendants' motion for costs was filed 
pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(d)(1) 
(2000).16 Although HRCP Rule 54(d)(1) imposes a five-day time 
16/ HRCP Rule 54(d)(1) provides:

COSTS OTHER THAN ATTORNEYS' FEES. 
Except when express
provision therefor is made either in a statute or in these rules,
(continued...)

33

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
limit on seeking review of the clerk's action on a request for 
taxation of costs, it does not impose any time limit for filing the initial request for taxation of costs with the clerk. Because HRCP Rule 54(d)(1) does not impose any time limit measured from the entry of judgment to file a motion for costs, we conclude that a post-judgment motion for costs under HRCP Rule 54(d)(1) does not qualify as a timely motion for purposes of the tolling and deemed denial provisions of HRAP Rule 4(a)(3).
17 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court was divested of jurisdiction to decide the HPH Defendants' motion for costs upon the filing of Plaintiffs' notice of appeal. See Cox v. Cox, 125 Hawai
'i 19, 
28-29 & n.14, 250 P.3d 775, 784-85 & n.14 (2011) (filing of notice of appeal divested family court of jurisdiction to decide motion for costs sought pursuant to Rule 68 of the Hawai
'i Family 
Court Rules); Hoddick, Reinwald, O'Connor & Marrack v. Lotsof, 6 Haw. App. 296, 300, 719 P.2d 1107, 1111 (1986). 
Because the Circuit Court was divested of jurisdiction

to resolve the HPH Defendants' motion for costs, the motion is

not deemed denied pursuant to HRAP Rule 4(a)(3). Rather, the
 
motion for costs remains pending before the Circuit Court, and

there is no Circuit Court ruling regarding the motion for costs

for this court to review. We therefore dismiss the HPH

Defendants' appeal from the purported deemed denial of their

motion for costs. The Circuit Court may resolve the motion after

this appeal is concluded and jurisdiction is returned to the

Circuit Court. 
 
16/ (...continued)
costs shall be allowed as of course to the prevailing party unless
the court otherwise directs; but costs against the State or a
county, or an officer or agency of the State or a county, shall be
imposed only to the extent permitted by law. Costs may be taxed
by the clerk on 48 hours' notice. On motion served within 5 days
thereafter, the action of the clerk may be reviewed by the court.

17/ We note that prior to its amendment in 2006, HRAP Rule 4(a)(3)
provided that the time for filing a notice of appeal would be tolled if any
party filed the specified motions "not later than 10 days after entry
judgment." In 2006, this language was changed to read, "[i]f any party files
a timely motion . . . ."

34

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION

Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's

Final Judgment against Plaintiffs and in favor of Defendants. We

dismiss the HPH Defendants' appeal from the Circuit Court's

purported deemed denial of their motion for costs.

DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 14, 2014. 
On the briefs:

Arleen D. Jouxson

Rafael G. Del Castillo

(Jouxson-Meyers & Del Castillo, 
AAL, LLLC)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants

Chief Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate JudgeKenneth S. Robbins 
John-Anderson L. MeyerSergio Rufo(Robbins & Associates, AAL, ALC)Patrick H. Jones Sarah O. WangMelanie Mito May(Marr Jones & Wang, ALLLP)Douglas Ross(Davies Wright Tremaine LLP)Charles Robert Chingfor Defendants-AppelleesHawai
'i Pacific Health,
Kapi'olani Medical Specialists,
Kapi'olani Medical Center for 
Women and Children, Roger Drue,Frances A. Hallonquist,Neal Winn, M.D. andSherrel Hammar, M.D. 
Melvyn M. Miyagi
Gregg M. Ushiroda
Karen Y. Arikawa

(Watanabe Ing LLP)
for Defendant-Appellee
Deloitte & Touche LLP

John S. Nishimoto

Michael J. Van Dyke
(Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto, Sia &
Nakamura, ALLLP)
for Defendant-Appellee
Dennis M. Warren, Esq.

35

