NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29962
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
DAVID KERSH, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
MARKETWATCH INC., DOW JONES & COMPANY INC.,
VIACOM, INC., TD AMERITRADE HOLDING CORP. and
JOE MOGLIA, JOINTLY & SEVERALLY, Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-1930)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant David Kersh (Kersh), appearing pro
 
se, appeals from the judgment entered on September 21, 2009 by
 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 The
 
judgment was entered pursuant to an order dismissing the action
 
due to Kersh's failure to file a pretrial statement.
 
On appeal, Kersh asserts two points of error: (1) the
 
Circuit Court improperly dismissed the case sua sponte; and (2)
 
there was no legal basis for a motion filed by certain defendants
 
to have Kersh declared a vexatious litigant.
 
Based upon our careful review of the record and the
 
briefs submitted by the parties, and having given due
 
1
 The Honorable Victoria Marks presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by
 
the parties, we resolve Kersh's points of error as follows.
 
(1) The Circuit Court properly dismissed the case when
 
Kersh failed to timely file a pretrial statement. Kersh did not
 
avail himself of the opportunity to request that the order be set
 
aside, as allowed by the Circuit Court's order.
 
On September 19, 2008, Kersh filed the complaint in
 
this action alleging misrepresentation, fraud, breach of
 
fiduciary duty, breach of contract, and violations of Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 480-2 (2008 Repl.) and 480-13 (2008
 
Repl.). Kersh's complaint named Defendants-Appellees
 
MarketWatch, Inc., Dow Jones & Company, Inc., Viacom, Inc.
 
(collectively MarketWatch Defendants) and Defendants-Appellees TD
 
Ameritrade Holding Corp. and Joe Moglia (collectively Ameritrade
 
Defendants).
 
On June 30, 2009, nine and a half months after Kersh
 
filed his complaint, the Circuit Court sua sponte issued an Order
 
of Dismissal, which stated in full:
 
It appearing that no pretrial statement has been filed
with the court as required by Rule 12(b) of the Rules of the
Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai' i or within any period
of extension granted by the Court, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED thatthe above entitled action is dismissed. 
This dismissal may be set aside and the action
reinstated by order of the court for good cause shown upon
motion duly filed not later than ten (10) days from the date
of this order of dismissal.
 
Rule 12(q) of the Rules of the Circuit Courts of the
 
State of Hawai' i (RCCH) states: 
An action may be dismissed sua sponte with written notice to
the parties if a pretrial statement has not been filed
within 8 months after a complaint has been filed (or within
any further period of extension granted by the court) or if
a trial setting status conference has not been scheduled as
required by Rule 12(c). Such dismissal may be set aside and
the action reinstated by order of the court for good cause
shown upon motion duly filed not later than ten (10) days
from the date of the order of dismissal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
We review the Circuit Court's dismissal in this case
 
for abuse of discretion. Cf. GLA Inc. v. Spengler, 1 Haw. App.
 
647, 649, 623 P.2d 1283, 1285 (1981). The record confirms, and
 
Kersh does not dispute, that he did not file a pretrial statement
 
within eight months of filing his complaint or at any other time,
 
he did not request an extension to file a pretrial statement, and
 
the Circuit Court did not grant any extension. Likewise, once
 
the dismissal order was issued, Kersh did not seek to set aside
 
the dismissal. To the contrary, Kersh submitted a proposed final
 
order of judgment, which he requested the Circuit Court execute
 
and file. The Circuit Court's dismissal was in accord with RCCH
 
Rule 12(q).
 
We do not agree with Kersh's argument that the Circuit 
Court's discretion to dismiss the case was severely limited. 
Kersh relies on Lim v. Harvis Const., Inc., 65 Haw. 71, 647 P.2d 
290 (1982), in which the Hawai' i Supreme Court reversed a 
dismissal of a case for want of prosecution. Kersh's reliance on Lim is misplaced. In Lim, the Circuit Court dismissed the action 
"with leave to reinstate within ten days for good cause shown." 
Id. at 72, 647 P.2d at 291. This dismissal was not based on any 
particular rule and certainly was not based on any rule similar 
to RCCH Rule 12(q). See id. at 72-73, 647 P.2d at 291. The 
supreme court held that, instead of a letter request to the circuit court, the defendant should have requested dismissal 
pursuant to Rule 41(b) of the Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP).
2 A request for dismissal pursuant to HRCP Rule 41(b) 
2
 For the period relevant in Lim, HRCP Rule 41(b) stated in relevant
 
part:
 
(b) Involuntary Dismissal: Effect Thereof.  For failure of
 
the plaintiff to prosecute or to comply with these rules or any
order of court, a defendant may move for dismissal of an action or
of any claim against him. . . .
 
HRCP Rule 41(b) (1972).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
would have required notice and a hearing. Id. The court further
 
stated that absent "deliberate delay, contumacious conduct or
 
actual prejudice," the court would not uphold the dismissal. Id.
 
at 73, 647 P.2d at 292. Upon examining the record, the court
 found no such conduct and reversed the circuit court's dismissal. 
Id.
 
Of note, the supreme court in Lim distinguished the
 
procedures and requirements under HRCP Rule 41(b) from the
 
then-extant Rule 12(f) of the Rules of the Circuit Court (RCC),
3
 
a predecessor rule similar to the current RCCH Rule 12(q). If
 there had been a default in filing a statement of readiness under
 
RCC Rule 12(f), the supreme court stated that the procedures
 
followed in Lim would have been appropriate. 65 Haw. at 73 n.1,
 
647 P.2d at 291 n.1. The Lim court also expressly distinguished
 
GLA Inc., which had involved a dismissal under RCC Rule 12(f). 
65 Haw. at 73, 647 P.2d at 292; See GLA Inc. 1 Haw. App. at 647,
 
623 P.2d at 1284.
 
Under the circumstances of the instant case, the
 
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in dismissing the
 
case.
 
(2) On May 21, 2009, the MarketWatch Defendants filed
 
a Motion for Prefiling Order and Security (Motion for Prefiling
 
Order), seeking a prefiling order against Kersh as a "vexatious
 
3 In the time period relevant in Lim, RCC Rule 12(f) stated:
 
(f) Where no statement of readiness has been filed within
one year after a complaint has been filed or within any extension
granted by the court, the clerk shall notify in writing all
parties affected thereby that the case will be dismissed for want
of prosecution unless objections are filed within 10 days after
receipt of such notice. If objections are not filed within said
10-day period or any extension granted by the court, the case
shall stand dismissed with prejudice without the necessity of an
order of dismissal being entered therein. Where objections are
filed within said 10-day period or any extension granted by the
court, the court shall hear said objections upon notice and
determine whether the case should be dismissed.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
litigant" pursuant to HRS § 634J-7(a) (1993 Repl.) and requesting
 
that Kersh post security pursuant to HRS § 634J-4 (1993 Repl.). 
The Motion for Prefiling Order was initially set for hearing on
 
June 10, 2009. Upon Kersh's request, the parties stipulated to a
 
continuance of the hearing, which the Circuit Court approved. 
The hearing was thus re-set for September 11, 2009. Before the
 
hearing took place, the Circuit Court issued its order of
 
dismissal. Because the Circuit Court did not rule on the Motion
 
for Prefiling Order, we will not address Kersh's appeal related
 
to these issues.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the judgment
 
entered by the Circuit Court on September 21, 2009 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 23, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
David Kersh 
for Plaintiff-Appellant Pro Se 
David Y. Suzuki
(Burke McPheeters Bordner & Estes)
for Defendants-AppelleesAmeritrade Holding Corp.
and Joe Moglia Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge
Margery S. BronsterCatherine L. Aubuchon 
(Bronster Hoshibata)
for Defendants-AppelleesMarketWatch, Inc., Dow Jones
& Company, Inc. and Viacom, Inc. Associate Judge
5
 