NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29879
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
G.Y., Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
B.Y., Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DIVORCE NO. 05-1-2047)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
The appeal and cross-appeal in this case arise from 
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee G.Y.'s (Wife) motion for 
relief from divorce decree pursuant to Hawai' i Family Court Rules 
(HFCR) Rule 60(b)(3) (Motion For Relief From Decree), filed November 29, 2007, alleging that Defendant-Appellee/Cross-
Appellant B.Y. (Husband) fraudulently concealed a bank account in 
China allegedly containing approximately $3.9 million. 
Wife appeals from the following post-decree orders
 
entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit (family court):
1
 
the May 7, 2009 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law and Order
 Granting Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, Denying Without
 
Prejudice Plaintiff's Motion for Relief from November 29, 2006,
 
Divorce Decree and Dismissing Defendant's Motion for Protective
 
1
 The Honorable Frances Q.F. Wong presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Order (Order Granting Summary Judgment); and the August 27, 2009
 
Order Granting Defendant's Motion for Attorney's Fees and Costs
 
(Order Granting Fees and Costs).
 
Wife's points of error on appeal are that: (1) the
 
family court erroneously granted Husband's motion for summary
 
judgment and denied Wife's request that she be allowed to conduct
 
further discovery pursuant to HFCR Rule 56(f); and (2) the family
 
court erroneously granted Husband's motion for attorney's fees
 
pursuant to HFCR Rule 68.
 
In his cross-appeal, Husband's points of error are that
 
the family court erred: (1) by denying Husband's motion to
 
dismiss Wife's Motion For Relief From Decree, which included a
 
request for fees and costs pursuant to HFCR Rule 11; (2) by
 
granting Husband's motion for summary judgment but denying Wife's
 
Motion For Relief From Decree "without prejudice;" and (3) in
 
regard to Husband's May 28, 2008 motion for attorney's fees and
 
costs, by reducing Husband's request for fees and costs under
 
HFCR Rule 68 and by ignoring his additional request for fees and
 
costs based on HFCR Rule 11 and the court's inherent power to
 
sanction.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, the
 
parties' points of error are resolved as follows.
 
(1) Wife contends that the family court erred in
 
refusing to allow her to conduct further discovery pursuant to
 
her HFCR Rule 56(f) request.2 As part of this point of error,
 
2
 HFCR Rule 56, pertaining to summary judgment, states in relevant
part:
 
(f) When affidavits are unavailable. Should it appear from
the affidavits of a party opposing the motion that the party
cannot for reasons stated present by affidavit facts
essential to justify the party's opposition, the court may
refuse the application for judgment or may order a
continuance to permit affidavits to be obtained or
 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Wife asserts that the family court clearly erred in its finding 
of fact (FOF) 11.3 However, we review the family court's denial 
of Wife's HFCR Rule 56(f) request for an abuse of discretion. See Acoba v. Gen. Tire, Inc., 92 Hawai' i 1, 9, 986 P.2d 288, 296 
(1999). 
Wife filed her Motion For Relief From Decree on
 
November 29, 2007 (one year after entry of the divorce decree). 
Attached to that motion was Wife's affidavit attesting, inter
 
alia, that: "I have now just discovered that the Respondent has
 
an account . . . titled in his name alone at City Commercial Bank
 
. . . in Chengdu, China. This account most recently had a
 
balance of $3,898,565.28."
 
Almost fifteen months later, on February 13, 2009,
 
Husband filed his motion for summary judgment. Attached to his
 
motion was Husband's declaration which specifically attested that
 
he did not and does not have an account as described in Wife's
 
affidavit attached to her Motion For Relief From Decree.
 
In her memorandum opposing Husband's motion, Wife
 
acknowledged that she had no admissible evidence regarding the
 
account in China, and her attached affidavit attested that she
 
brought her Motion For Relief From Decree based on information
 
obtained from investigators she had hired. No declaration or
 
affidavit from her investigators were attached. Rather, Wife
 
argued why she had failed to undertake the necessary discovery
 
2 (...continued)
depositions to be taken or discovery to be had or may make
such other order as is just. 
3
 FOF 11 states:
 
[Wife] argues that she is entitled to a reasonable
amount of time to conduct further discovery under Rule
56(f), Hawaii Family Court Rules. [Wife] claims that she was
hoping to obtain the necessary evidence from [Husband]
before incurring the expenses of conducting discovery on
third parties, such as City Commercial Bank in China. The
 Court finds that [Wife] has had ample opportunity and time
to conduct discovery, formally or informally, to at least
address a summary judgment proceeding.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
regarding the China account, particularly that because
 
international discovery is expensive and time consuming, she
 
first sought discovery in requests to Husband which were served
 
on December 29, 2008 (over a year after her Motion For Relief
 
From Decree had been filed).
 
On May 7, 2009, the family court issued its Order
 
Granting Summary Judgment.
 
On appeal, Wife argues that she did not have ample time
 
to conduct discovery because Husband argued that discovery should
 
be postponed until the family court ruled on his motion to
 
dismiss, that the parties' counsel "agreed, or at least had an
 
understanding" that discovery would not be commenced until the
 
motion to dismiss was decided, and that when Wife finally issued
 
discovery requests to Husband he filed a motion for protective
 
order. The record does not support Wife's claim that there was
 
an agreement or understanding among counsel that discovery would
 
be postponed until Husband's motion to dismiss was decided.
 
Wife further argues on appeal that she provided
 
sufficient reasons to warrant an HFCR 56(f) continuance because
 
she was trying to avoid expensive international discovery. This
 
argument is also unavailing. A trial court does not abuse its
 
discretion by denying further discovery if the movant has failed
 
to diligently pursue discovery in the past. See Wilder v.
 
Tanouye, 7 Haw. App. 247, 253, 753 P.2d 816, 821 (1988). First,
 Wife did not serve discovery requests on Husband until over a
 
year after she filed her Motion For Relief From Decree. Second,
 
Wife's Motion For Relief From Decree was based on the assertion
 
that Husband had fraudulently concealed the China account,
 
including misrepresentations in previous asset disclosures. 
Given Wife's claim of fraudulent concealment against Husband, it
 
is not persuasive to argue that she waited to commence other
 
discovery until discovery from Husband proved futile.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We conclude that the family court did not abuse its
 
discretion in denying Wife's request for an HFCR 56(f)
 
continuance.
 
(2) Wife next challenges the family court's award of
 
$33,541.89 in attorney's fees and $1,544.20 in costs pursuant to
 
HFCR Rule 68. We conclude that the family court did not have
 
jurisdiction to act upon Husband's motion for attorney's fees and
 
costs.
 
The family court issued its Order Granting Summary
 
Judgment on May 7, 2009. On May 28, 2009, Husband filed his
 
motion for attorney's fees and costs, pursuant to HFCR Rules 7,
 
11, 56(g) and 68. On June 8, 2009, Wife filed a timely Notice of
 
Appeal from the Order Granting Summary Judgment. On June 10,
 
2009, Wife filed her memorandum in opposition to Husband's motion
 
for attorney's fees and costs. On June 19, 2009, Husband filed a
 
timely Notice of Cross-Appeal. Thereafter, on August 27, 2009,
 
the family court issued its Order Granting Fees and Costs.
 
Based on the record in this case, the family court 
ruled on the motion for attorney's fees and costs while the case 
was already on appeal. In a similar situation, this court held 
that "[w]hile a case is on appeal, the lower court lacks 
jurisdiction to decide any questions pertaining to attorney fees 
arising out of or relating to the matter on appeal." Wong v. 
Wong, 87 Hawai' i 475, 486, 960 P.2d 145, 156 (App. 1998) 
(citations omitted). Moreover, the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
recently ruled that, notwithstanding amendments to Hawai' i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4(a), the family court "was 
divested of jurisdiction to hear [a] Rule 68 Motion upon the 
filing of the notice of appeal." Cox v. Cox, 125 Hawai' i 19, 29, 
250 P.3d 775, 785 (2011). The supreme court further noted that its holding did not apply where a court rule provides a specific 
definition for timely filing a motion for attorney's fees. Id. 
at 28 n.14, 250 P.3d at 785 n.14. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Husband based his request for attorney's fees and costs
 
on HFCR Rules 11, 56(g) and 68. These court rules do not provide
 
a definition for the timely filing of a motion for attorney's
 
fees or costs. Therefore, pursuant to Wong and Cox, the family
 
court was divested of jurisdiction to act upon Husband's motion
 
for attorney's fees and costs once Wife filed her Notice of
 
Appeal. The Order Granting Fees and Costs is void.
 
As further held in Cox, however, Husband may re-file 
his motion for attorney's fees and costs after the judgment on 
appeal is entered because none of the court rules he relies upon 
place any time limitation on the filing of a motion. 125 Hawai' i 
at 29, 250 P.3d at 785. 
(3) Husband's first point of error is that the family
 
court erred when it converted Husband's motion to dismiss to a
 motion for summary judgment, ignored the Agreement Incident to
 
Divorce releases, and found genuine issues of material fact.
 
Because we held above that the family court properly granted
 
Husband's motion for summary judgment, we need not reach
 
Husband's arguments with respect to his motion to dismiss.
 
Husband also contends that the family court abused its
 
discretion in denying his request for attorney's fees and costs
 
pursuant to HFCR Rule 11, which was filed simultaneously with his
 
motion to dismiss. We do not agree and conclude that the family
 
court did not abuse its discretion in denying this request.
 
(4) Husband's second point of error is that the family
 
court erred when it granted his motion for summary judgment but
 
then denied Wife's Motion For Relief From Decree "without
 
prejudice."
 
As we discussed above, the family court properly
 
concluded that Wife had sufficient time to conduct discovery and
 
thus rejected Wife's request for a HFCR Rule 56(f) continuance. 
The family court further concluded that: Husband was competent to
 
testify that he had no interest in the alleged China account and
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not conceal it or defraud Wife; Wife had not adduced any
 
factual basis to support the existence of the account or that
 
Husband had concealed such an account from her; Wife had failed
 
to show that she was competent to testify as to the existence of
 
the account and only offered hearsay information and
 
unsubstantiated conclusory allegations. The family court thus
 
concluded that Wife failed to produce any admissible evidence to
 
show that a genuine issue of fact exists for trial. On appeal,
 
Wife only challenges the family court's denial of her request for
 
a HFCR Rule 56(f) continuance, and does not raise any point of
 
error as to the family court's determination that she failed to
 
adduce evidence showing that there was a genuine issue of
 
material fact.
 
HFCR Rule 56(c) provides, in relevant part that: "[t]he
 
judgment sought shall be rendered forthwith if the pleadings,
 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file,
 
together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no
 
genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party
 
is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Husband's motion
 
requested that the family court rule as a matter of law that he
 
had no interest or claim in the subject bank account before or at
 
the time of the parties' divorce and that he did not conceal the
 
account or otherwise defraud Wife about the account. These were
 
the issues raised in Wife's HFCR Rule 60(b)(3) Motion For Relief
 
From Decree.
 
The family court based its decision on summary judgment
 
standards. Therefore, under HRCP Rule 56(c) Husband was
 
"entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." A ruling on summary
 
judgment addresses the merits of the case. See 10A Wright,
 
Miller & Kane, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil 3d ยง 2712,
 at 212 (1998) ("Rule 56 is not merely a dilatory or technical
 
procedure; it affects the substantive rights of the litigants. A
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
summary-judgment motion goes to the merits of the case[.]")
 
(internal footnotes omitted).4
 
Therefore, pursuant to our de novo review regarding the
 
summary judgment ruling, we conclude that the family court's
 granting of Husband's summary judgment motion necessarily
 
required that it adjudicate Wife's Motion For Relief From Decree
 
on the merits. The denial of Wife's HFCR Rule 60(b)(3) Motion
 
For Relief From Decree must be "with prejudice."
 
(5) Husband's third point of error challenges the
 
family court's August 27, 2009 Order Granting Fees and Costs to
 
Husband, in that it did not award him fees and costs to the
 
extent he had requested. As discussed above, once Wife filed her
 
Notice of Appeal on June 8, 2009, the family court was divested
 
of jurisdiction to act upon Husband's May 28, 2008 motion for
 
attorney's fees and costs. As further set forth above, however,
 
Husband may re-file his motion for attorney's fees and costs
 
after the judgment on appeal is entered.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT:
 1) 
The family court's May 7, 2009 Order Granting
 
Summary Judgment is modified in that the denial of Wife's HFCR
 Rule 60(b)(3) "Motion For Relief From November 29, 2006 Divorce
 
Decree" is 
with prejudice. The Order Granting Summary Judgment
 
is affirmed in all other respects.
 
4
 HFCR Rule 56, like Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56,
is substantially similar to a prior version of Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure (FRCP) Rule 56, and therefore we may rely on authorities addressingthe similar version of FRCP Rule 56. See Thomas v. Kidani, 126 Hawai' i 125,
130 n.5, 267 P.3d 1230, 1235 n.5 (2011). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2) The family court's August 27, 2009 Order Granting 
Fees and Costs is vacated as void for lack of jurisdiction. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 31, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Charles T. Kleintop
Dyan M. MedeirosNaoko C. Miyamoto(Kleintop, Luria & Medeiros, LLP)for Plaintiff-Appellant/
Cross-Appellee Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
Chunmay Chang
Peter Van Name Esser for Defendant-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant 
9
 