NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. 29794, 29795 AND 29796
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
NO. 29794
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
NELSON KUUALOHA ARMITAGE, Defendant-Appellant.
(CASE NO. 2P106-02017)
 
NO. 29795
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
RUSSELL K. KAHOOKELE, Defendant-Appellant.
(CASE NO. 2P106-02018)
 
NO. 29796
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
HENRY MAILE NOA, Defendant-Appellant.
(CASE NO. 2P106-01909)
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
WAILUKU DIVISION
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
In these consolidated appeals, Defendants-Appellants
 
Nelson Kuualoha Armitage (Armitage), Russell K. Kahookele
 
(Kahookele), and Henry Maile Noa (Noa) (collectively,
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"Defendants") were each charged in separate cases with entering 
into the Kaho' olawe island reserve (Reserve) without 
authorization, in violation of Hawai' i Administrative Rules (HAR) 
§ 13-261-10 (2002). HAR § 13-261-10 provides in relevant part: 
No person or vessel shall enter or attempt to enter
into or remain within the reserve[ 1
] unless such person or
vessel: (a) Is specifically authorized to do so by the
commission [ 2
] or its authorized representative as provided
in section 13-261-11; or, (b) Is specifically authorized to
do so through a written agreement approved by the commission
. . . .
 
(Format altered.) A violation of HAR § 13-261-10 is a petty
 
misdemeanor. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 6K-8 (2009).
 
The District Court of the Second Circuit (District
 
Court) granted Defendants' motion to consolidate their cases for
 trial. Defendants filed a motion to dismiss the charges. After
 holding an evidentiary hearing over several days, the District
 Court denied Defendants' motion to dismiss by issuing its
 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying
 Defendants' Motion to Dismiss."
 
The District Court subsequently held a trial based on
 
the parties' stipulation as to evidence, which incorporated the
 evidence presented during Defendants' motion to dismiss. The
 District Court found Defendants guilty as charged. The District
 Court sentenced each of the Defendants to 25 hours of community
 service and $30 in fees. 
Defendants appeal from the separate Judgments entered
 
against them by the District Court on April 4, 2009.
3 As
 
explained below, we affirm the District Court's Judgments.
 
1
 The term "reserve" is defined to mean "the Kaho' olawe island reserve,"
which is described as "the entire island of Kaho' olawe and those waters and 
submerged lands seaward of the shoreline of Kaho' olawe island to a distance of 
approximately two miles as shown on [an exhibit contained in the rules]." HAR 
§§ 13-261-2, 13-261-3 (2003). 
2
 The term "commission" is defined to mean "the Kaho' olawe island 
reserve commission." HAR § 13-261-2. 
3
 The Honorable Simone C. Polak presided over the proceedings at issue
in this appeal.
 
2
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
Defendants assert that they are native Hawaiians, that
 
they are citizens of the Reinstated Kingdom of Hawai' i; that Noa 
was democratically elected as the Prime Minister of the
 
Reinstated Kingdom of Hawai' i; and that the Reinstated Kingdom of 
Hawai'i was formed in 1999 to reestablish the Kingdom of Hawai' i 
as a sovereign nation.
 
The parties stipulated to the following facts:
 
1. On or about July 31, 2006, Defendants [Armitage,
Kahookele, and Noa] entered the Kaho' olawe island reserve 
(Reserve) in the County of Maui, State of Hawai' i. 
. . . . 
3. Defendants Armitage, Kahookele, and Noa entered
the waters of the Reserve and landed on the island of 
Kaho'olawe in the area of Hakioawa. 
. . . .
 
7. Defendants were not specifically authorized by
the commission or its authorized representative to enter
into or remain within the Reserve as provided in [HAR]
section 13-261-11 . . . .[ 4
]
4 HAR § 13-261-11 (2002), provides in pertinent part: 
(a) Any person required by this chapter to obtain commission
authorization to enter into or conduct activity within the reserve
shall apply for such authorization by making written application
to the commission. The forms for such application may be obtained
from the commission office. The application shall include: 
(1) 	The applicant’s name, address and telephone number;
 
(2) 	The dates and locations of the requested entrance; 
(3) 	A description of the purposes of and activities associated
with the entrance;
 
(4) 	The number and names of persons who will participate in the
requested entrance; and
 
(5) 	A safety and logistics plan addressing transportation to and
from the island, and safety protocols while in the reserve.
 
(6) 	A signed liability release waiver acknowledging and
accepting full risk and responsibility for exposure to all
natural and manmade hazards within the reserve including the
potential presence of and contact with unexploded ordnance
and other hazardous debris. 
(7) 	Information pertinent to the basis of the applicant's claim
(continued...)
 
3
  5
 Defendants asserted that their purpose for entering the Reserve was
(1) "to allow the Reinstated Kingdom of Hawaii to exercise its property rights
in Kaho' olawe"; (2) "to allow the Reinstated Kingdom of Hawaii to proclaim
beneficial ownership of Kaho' olawe"; and (3) "to allow representatives of the
Reinstated Kingdom of Hawaii to build a heiau and perform a prayer on thesite."       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
8. Defendants did not make a written application to
the commission for the authorization of entrance into and
 activity within the Reserve.
 
9. Defendants were not specifically authorized to
enter into or remain in the Reserve through a written
5
agreement approved by the commission.[ ]  
II.
 
On appeal, Defendants contend that the District Court 
erred in: (1) declining to make a determination of sovereignty 
and "to recognize the Reinstated Nation of Hawai' i as the 
sovereign native Hawai' ian entity"; (2) rejecting their defense 
to the charges based on their sovereignty claim; (3) concluding that Defendants' conduct was not protected by the privilege set forth in Article XII, Section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution; and 
(4) rejecting Defendants' claim that the regulations they were
 alleged to have violated were unconstitutional.
 
We resolve Defendants' arguments on appeal as follows:
 
A.
 
With respect to the first two points, we conclude that 
the Hawai' i Supreme Court's recent decision in State v. Kaulia, 
128 Hawai' i 479, 291 P.3d 377 (2013), is dispositive. In Kaulia, 
the supreme court considered Kaulia's claim that "the courts of the State of Hawai' i lacked subject matter jurisdiction over his 
criminal prosecution because the defense proved the existence of the Hawaiian Kingdom and the illegitimacy of the State of Hawai' i 
4(...continued)
to exercise traditional and customary rights if such rights
are claimed. 
(b) Entrance into and activities within the reserve
requested by applicants seeking to exercise traditional and
customary rights and practices compatible with the law, shall be
approved or disapproved by the commission after review and
consultation with cultural practitioners. 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
government." Id. at 486-87, 291 P.3d at 384-85. In rejecting
 
this claim, the supreme court held:
 
Kaulia appears to argue that he is immune from the
court's jurisdiction because of the legitimacy of the
Kingdom government. In that regard, we reaffirm that"[w]hatever may be said regarding the lawfulness" of itsorigins, "the State of Hawai' i . . . is now, a lawful
government." State v. Fergerstrom, 106 Hawai' i 43, 55, 101
P.3d 652, 664 (App. 2004), aff'd, 106 Hawai' i 41, 101 P.3d
225 (2004). Individuals claiming to be citizens of the
Kingdom and not of the State are not exempt from applicationof the State's laws. See id. at 55, 101 P.3d at 664; State 
v. Lorenzo, 77 Hawai' i 219, 883 P.2d 641 (App. 1994); State 
v. French, 77 Hawai' i 222, 883 P.2d 644 (App. 1994);
Nishitani v. Baker, 82 Hawai' i 281, 921 P.2d 1182 (App.
1996); State v. Lee, 90 Hawai' i 130, 976 P.2d 444 (1999). 
Thus we also reject Kaulia's argument that the circuit
court erred in precluding Kaulia from calling a witness to
present evidence concerning the existence of the Kingdom in
support of his Motion to Dismiss.
 
Id. at 487, 291 P.3d at 385 (emphasis added; brackets and
 
ellipsis points in original).
 
Although Defendants assert that they are not attacking 
the District Court's jurisdiction, the essence of their claim is the same as that presented in Kaulia. Like Kaulia, Defendants contend that the "legitimacy" of the Reinstated Nation of Hawai' i 
as the sovereign native Hawaiian entity renders them "exempt from [the] application of the State's laws." See id. However, the 
supreme court held in Kaulia that individuals claiming to be citizens of an independent sovereign entity are not exempt from the application of the State's laws and therefore evidence concerning the existence of the independent sovereign entity was properly excluded. Id. 
Based on Kaulia, we conclude that the District Court 
did not err in (1) rejecting Defendants' defense to the charges based on their sovereignty claims and (2) declining to make a determination of sovereignty and to recognize the Reinstated Nation of Hawai' i as the sovereign native Hawai' ian entity. 
B.
 
Defendants argue that the District Court erred in
 
concluding that Defendants' conduct was not protected by the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
privilege for customary and traditional native Hawaiian practices 
under Article XII, Section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution. We 
disagree. 
Article XII, Section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution 
provides: 
The State reaffirms and shall protect all rights,
customarily and traditionally exercised for subsistence,
cultural and religious purposes and possessed by ahupua' a 
tenants who are descendants of native Hawaiians who inhabited the Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778, subject to theright of the State to regulate such rights. 
The constitutional privilege afforded for native Hawaiian
 
practices under Article XII, Section 7 is not absolute, but is
 subject to the State's right to regulate such practices. State
 
v. Pratt, 127 Hawai' i 206, 213, 277 P.3d 300, 307 (2012). The 
supreme court has adopted a test requiring the balancing of interests under the totality of the circumstances in determining whether State regulations which impose limits on the protections afforded to native Hawaiian practices can be enforced. Id. at 
213-18, 277 P.3d at 307-12. 
Here, the regulations restricting access to the Reserve
 
are necessary to protect public health and safety. The
 Historical Note to HAR § 13-261 states in relevant part: 
In recognition of the substantial amount of unexploded
ordnance and hazardous materials present on the island andin the adjacent waters, institutional controls are requiredbecause of the imminent threat to public health and safetywhich will continue to exist until the Kaho' olawe island 
reserve has been cleared of unexploded ordnance andhazardous waste. 
Moreover, the regulations establish a process under
 
which persons seeking access to the Reserve to exercise
 
traditional and customary native Hawaiian rights and practices
 may apply with the commission for approval. HAR § 13-261-11. 
Defendants admit that they did not attempt to use this process to
 obtain authorized access to the Reserve. Under the circumstances
 of this case, we conclude that the State was entitled to 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prosecute Defendants for violating HAR § 13-261-10. See Pratt, 
127 Hawai' i at 218, 277 P.3d at 312 (concluding that the 
defendant's claim of engaging in privileged native Hawaiian 
practices did not exempt him from prosecution for violating a State regulation restricting access to closed areas of a park, where the regulation was justified by the need to maintain the park for public use and to preserve the environment of the park and where the defendant did not attempt to obtain access to the park through available procedures). 
C.
 
Defendants argue that the regulations they were alleged
 
to have violated, which they identify as HAR §§ 13-261-10 and 13­261-11, are unconstitutional. Defendants contend that the
 regulations violate their fundamental rights as native Hawaiians
 and their First Amendment rights. We disagree.
 
The challenged regulations were promulgated by the 
Kaho'olawe Island Reserve Commission pursuant to statutory 
authority set forth in HRS Chapter 6K. Defendants were prosecuted for violating HAR § 13-261-10, which restricts access to the Reserve. As noted, HAR § 13-261-10 is supported by a compelling State interest to protect the public's health and safety. HAR § 13-216-11 establishes a process for people to seek authorization to enter or conduct activities within the Reserve, which requires the submission of a safety and logistics plan and includes consideration of requests based on the exercise of traditional and customary rights and practices. 
We have already concluded that the protections provided 
by Article XII, Section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution did not 
exempt Defendants from prosecution in this case. Defendants do not cite any persuasive authority or advance any convincing argument to support their claim that the challenged regulations are unconstitutional, and we reject their claim. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
The separate Judgments entered against Defendants by
 
the District Court are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 30, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Daniel G. Hempey
Charles Foster (Hempey & Meyers LLP)
for Defendants-Appellants
 
Renee Ishikawa Delizo 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
8
 