 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DENNIS BROOKS, Defendant-Appellant
 
NO. 29567
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 06-1-1104)
 
JULY 22, 2010
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Dennis Brooks (Dennis) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) filed on
 
December 9, 2008 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (circuit court).
1
 
A jury found Dennis guilty of Kidnapping, in violation
 
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-720 (1993) (Count 6);
 Robbery in the First Degree, in violation of HRS § 708-840 (Supp.
 2005) (Count 7); and Unauthorized Control of Propelled Vehicle
 (UCPV), in violation of HRS § 708-836 (Supp. 2009) (Count 8). 
The circuit court sentenced Dennis to twenty years of
 imprisonment for each of Counts 6 and 7 and five years of
 imprisonment for Count 8, with credit for time served. The
 circuit court ordered the sentence for Count 6 to run
 consecutively to the sentence for Count 7 and the sentence for
 Count 8 to run concurrently with the sentences for Counts 6 and
 7. Because Dennis was a repeat offender, the circuit court
 
sentenced him to a mandatory minimum of six years and eight
 
1
 The Honorable Steven S. Alm presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
months of imprisonment on Counts 6 and 7 and one year and eight
 
months of imprisonment on Count 8. The circuit court also
 ordered Dennis to pay restitution and a crime victim compensation
 fee.
 
On appeal, Dennis argues that the circuit court
 (1) abused its discretion in allowing the State of 
Hawai
'i (State) to adduce at trial evidence of his prior 
convictions; 
(2) erred in failing to instruct the jury on the
 
included offenses of Robbery in the Second Degree and Theft in
 the Fourth Degree;
 
(3) erred in convicting him of Robbery in the First
 
Degree based on insubstantial evidence; and
 
(4) erred in convicting him of Class A, rather than 
Class B, Kidnapping because he had released the victim, Tuan Vo
 (Vo), in a safe place.
 
Dennis asks that we vacate his convictions and remand
 
his case for a new trial if we agree with his first argument or,
 alternatively, vacate his convictions for Robbery in the First
 Degree and Kidnapping if we agree with his second argument,
 reverse his conviction for Robbery in the First Degree if we
 agree with his third argument, and/or reverse his conviction for
 Kidnapping if we agree with his fourth argument.
I.
 
A. PRETRIAL
 1. Complaint
 
The State filed a complaint on May 30, 2006, asserting
 
that William Brooks (William), Dennis, and Barbara Pichay
 (Barbara) had committed various offenses involving Vo. The State
 alleged that on April 16, 2006, Dennis (a) intentionally or
 knowingly restrained Vo with the intent to facilitate the
 commission of Robbery in the First Degree or flight thereafter
 (Count 6, Kidnapping); (b) used force against Vo in the course of
 committing a theft while armed with a dangerous instrument, with
 the intent to overcome Vo's physical resistance or physical power
 of resistance (Count 7, Robbery in the First Degree); and (c)
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
intentionally or knowingly exerted unauthorized control over a
 
propelled vehicle by operating Vo's vehicle without Vo's consent
 (Count 8, UCPV).
2. Pretrial Hearing
 
At the May 22, 2008 pretrial hearing, the circuit court
 
stated the following to Dennis:
 
THE COURT: Okay. The other thing is that based on
certain rulings that we have, those are the ground rules at
the start. So say, for example, the fact that, you know,
you have certain other conviction [sic] for things. I'm
 anticipating that both sides are going to be agreeing that
that is not admissible, not appropriate to come into the
trial.
 
But if you were to get on the stand and testify and
say something like I've never been in trouble with the
police before, no doubt the prosecutor -- I'm not saying
you'd do that, I'm just telling you if you did that the
prosecutor would say, Your Honor, may we approach, and he
would come up here and he would say I think [Dennis] might
be giving an inappropriate picture of himself to the jurors.
And so he then would ask permission to bring in your prior
record which, in a situation like that, I should allow it.
So that's called opening the door, right, that's the legal
expression.
 
The State agreed that it would not introduce any of Dennis's
 
prior bad acts or criminal history in the State's case-in-chief. 
However, the State informed the circuit court that in the event
 Dennis's counsel opened the door to such evidence, the State
 would ask the court to rule on the evidence's admissibility.
B. JURY TRIAL
 1. Vo's Testimony
 
Vo testified that he was a taxi driver. On April 16,
 
2006, he left for work, carrying about $450 cash in his wallet,
 $400 cash in his pocket, and 3,000 yen. He had his driver's
 license and bank cards in his wallet. He was wearing a Rado
 watch and a white gold necklace and had a cell phone with him. 
He had between $10 and $12 in change in the ashtray in his taxi.
 
At about 8:30 a.m., Vo picked up William and Barbara
 
near Lanakila Park. William and Barbara asked him to take them
 to the Chinatown/downtown area to look for a friend. Vo recalled
 that William sat in the front passenger seat and Barbara probably
 sat in the center row behind the passenger seat. Vo drove
 downtown, but William and Barbara could not find the person they
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were looking for. They asked Vo to drive them to Waianae, but Vo
 
declined to do so. William and Barbara then asked Vo to take
 them to Ala Moana. On their way to Ala Moana, William and
 Barbara saw Dennis walking on the sidewalk, and they told Vo to
 pull over and pick him up. Vo pulled up to the curb alongside
 Dennis, and Barbara got out. Barbara walked with Dennis, talking
 to him. Vo drove slowly alongside Barbara and Dennis for about
 two minutes before they got into the van. When William and
 Dennis saw each other, they bumped their fists together, called
 each other "brothers," and apologized to each other about
 something.
 
William, Dennis, and Barbara (collectively, the
 
passengers) told Vo they wanted to go to Barbara's aunt's house
 behind the Lanakila Health Center. When they arrived, Vo parked
 and the passengers got out of the van. Barbara looked for money
 to pay Vo, but could not find any. The passengers got back into
 the van, and Barbara asked Vo to drive to an ATM. Dennis was now
 seated in the front passenger seat and William was in the center
 row, behind the driver's seat. Vo drove to the Liliha Foodland. 
Barbara got out of the van, while William and Dennis remained
 seated. When Barbara returned to the van, the passengers told Vo
 to take them back to the Lanakila area and said they would pay Vo
 there.
 
When they arrived at their destination, Vo put the van
 
in park. As soon as Vo shifted into park, William put his left
 arm around Vo's neck and pulled Vo back against Vo's seat.
 William first put a knife about five-to-five-and-a-half-inches
 long to Vo's side, and then William put the knife to the right
 side of Vo's neck. Dennis held down Vo's hands. William and
 Dennis asked Vo where his money was. Either William or Barbara
 took Vo's wallet, and Dennis took the $10 or $12 in change Vo had
 in the ashtray in the center console of the van. William and
 Dennis took Vo's driver's license out of his wallet and told Vo
 that if he reported the incident to the police, his family would
 be killed. Vo testified that both men made the threat and
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Dennis, more than once. Vo was married and had two daughters. 
He was afraid and felt he had to do what they said.
 
Vo was told to put the van in reverse, but he was too
 
shaky. William pulled and Dennis pushed Vo back into the center
 seat in the second row, between William and Barbara. Dennis got
 into the driver's seat. Vo saw the knife in the console and then
 saw William holding the knife.
 
Dennis drove the van from Honolulu to Kaneohe. In
 
Kaneohe, Barbara got out of the van, removed the van's dome
 light, returned to the van, and sat in the front passenger seat. 
They continued driving and ended up in the Pearl Harbor area. At
 Pearl Harbor, the road was blocked by a military gate,
2
 so they
reversed and proceeded to Waianae.
 
On the way to Waianae, William told Vo to lie down on
 
the floor of the van. Vo did as he was told, lying down between
 the front and center rows. William, who was still holding the
 knife, took Vo's watch, necklace, cell phone, and money that was
 in Vo's pocket. One of the passengers took Vo's wallet. William
 told Vo to look at him, and when Vo did so, William punched him
 in the face three or four times.
 
At some point on the way to Waianae, the van stopped
 
and William changed places with Dennis and became the driver. 
Dennis stepped on the back of Vo's head and on Vo's back, wrapped
 
a tie3
 around Vo's neck, and pulled Vo up with the tie, choking
him. Dennis asked Vo something along the lines of "Who's your
 father?" or "Who's your daddy?" On the way to Waianae, Dennis
 also punched, kicked, and stepped on Vo many times. Vo asked
 Dennis to stop punching and kicking him, but Dennis continued to
 do so. After Dennis choked Vo with Vo's tie, Dennis pointed the
 knife at Vo.
 
Vo asked William to let him out of the van and told
 
William to take the van. Vo told William that he just wanted to
 
2
 Dennis testified that they ended up at Pearl Harbor military base
because he did not know where he was going and Barbara told him to turn around
because they were going to pass "where the MP's were."
3
 Dennis testified that Vo was wearing a red tie at the time of the
incident.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stay alive so he could take care of his children. William said
 
Vo should not worry, William would not beat up Vo because William
 also had children. William stated that he wanted to find a place
 to get out of the van, but he did not want Vo to know where.
 
When the van stopped in Waianae, the passengers told Vo
 
to stay down. Someone choked Vo with their hands, and Vo lost
 consciousness. Before the passengers left the van, they told Vo
 not to look up for ten minutes so he would not know in what
 direction they went after they left and not to call the police or
 his family would be killed. The passengers left the van, taking
 the taxi's two radios with them. A police officer arrived on the
 scene seven to ten minutes later.
 
2. Oral Motion for Judgment of Acquittal
 
After Vo testified, Dennis's counsel orally moved for
 
judgment of acquittal, which the circuit court denied.
3. Other Witnesses' Testimony
 
Numerous other witnesses, including Honolulu Police
 
Department officers and Dr. Saltman testified on behalf of the
 State.
 
4. Dennis's Testimony
(a) Direct examination
 
Dennis's testimony was similar to Vo's in some
 
respects, but he also testified to the following. William was
 Dennis's older brother. At the time of the incident, Dennis was
 living in Waikiki with his fiancee and some friends. William was
 living in Waianae with Barbara, who was William's girlfriend. A
 few days before the incident, Dennis and William had gotten into
 a little argument because William wanted to live with Dennis in
 Waikiki and Dennis told him no. Dennis testified that he did not
 want William to live with him, "Just 'cause of -- from what his
 background is, from what I heard of his drug action and all." 
Dennis had not had any contact or communication with William from
 the time of the argument to the time of the incident. Dennis and
 William were not close and had not spent a lot of time together
 for quite a few years.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On the morning of the incident, Dennis was walking to
 
Waikiki when he heard Barbara behind him, calling his name. 
Dennis kept walking, but Barbara approached him and started
 talking to him. She told him that he and William should try to
 "patch things up" and "get to know each other again" after all
 the years they had been separated. Dennis noticed a van
 following them. Barbara told him that William was sorry, was in
 the van, and wanted them to forget that the argument had
 occurred. Dennis finally agreed and got in the van.
 
Dennis sat behind the driver's seat, in the second row;
 
William was in the front passenger seat. William told Dennis
 that he was sorry they argued and they should try to make amends. 
They gave each other a sort of high five/fist thing as a peace
 gesture. Barbara told Dennis they were going to her aunt's
 house. Vo drove to Lanakila and stopped the van. William and
 Dennis got out, and they talked about why Dennis did not want
 William to live with him. Barbara said they were going to
 Foodland to get money from an ATM. William and Dennis got back
 in the van, switching seats, and Vo drove them to the ATM.
 
After Barbara went to the ATM and came back, Vo drove
 
the van back to Lanakila and parked. William grabbed Vo and put
 the knife to Vo's side. William told Dennis to drive the van. 
William tried to put Vo in the console area between the passenger
 and driver's seats. Dennis did not know that William was going
 to do what he did. Dennis testified he was thinking "oh, hell
 no," and it "kind of tripped [him] out."
 
Dennis switched to the driver's seat and drove the van, 
although he did not know where he was supposed to go. William
 had the knife to Vo's neck. Dennis testified that "as my
 knowledge of my brother's background, I didn't know what was
 going to happen next." Dennis thought it was just best to
 listen. He did not know what was going on behind him in the van
 because the radio was on.
 
Dennis's counsel asked Dennis what he thought was going
 
on between Vo and William while they were driving by Pearl
 Harbor: 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. [DENNIS] I wasn't really thinking about them. I
 
was just thinking of what I was gonna do, you know what I
mean?
 
Q. [DENNIS'S COUNSEL] Okay. What do you mean by
that? What were you going to do?
 
A. How could I get out of this situation without, you
know what I mean, either me getting hurt or somebody else, I
mean. 
Q. Were you worried about your brother?
 
A. As of what he was going to do to Mr. Vo?
 
Q. Yeah.
 
A. A little because I know his background.
 
While driving to Waianae, he could hear William talking
 
to Vo, but not what William was saying, and could hear William
 
beating up Vo. Dennis just hoped that William would not badly
 hurt Vo. When asked if he was worried about how hurt Vo was,
 Dennis responded:
 
A. [DENNIS] I was worried about him but I was more
 
worried about myself, you know what I mean?
 
Q. [DENNIS'S COUNSEL] Um-hum. Did you feel bad about
what your brother was doing?
 
A. I felt bad for Vo, but is -- you know what I mean?
My brother had the knife, what else -- what -- you know what
I mean? I'm unarmed. What am I supposed to do here?
 
Dennis heard William telling Vo to take off Vo's tie,
 
but he did not see a tie "wrapped on or around" Vo at any time
 
during the incident.
 
As soon as Dennis parked the car in Lualualei, he said
 
"the keys are out on the driver's side" and walked away. He left
 the keys on the ground.
 
Dennis testified that he did not hurt, hit, punch,
 
kick, or stomp Vo at any time during the incident. Dennis was
 pretty sure William had done so, but Dennis had not actually seen
 him do it. Dennis testified that he did not take anything from
 Vo or know what was taken from Vo and William and Barbara did not
 offer to give him anything. Dennis stated that when he left the
 van, he felt hurt that William had put him in that situation.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(b)	 Oral motion for a Hawaii Rules of
 
Evidence (HRE) Rule 404 ruling
 
After Dennis's counsel concluded his direct examination
 
of Dennis, the State moved for an HRE Rule 404 ruling:
 
[THE STATE]: At this time the State would ask this
 
court to make a ruling on 404 for the following reasons.
Based on [Dennis's] testimony, the impression that he left
with the jury is that his older brother William not only is
involved in drug activity but is, clearly, the impression
is, that he is the violent one. The impression also that
was left with the jury is that [Dennis] is not violent, he
was a non-participant, and it was his brother who was
violent. As [Dennis's counsel] should be aware right now,
[William] has no convictions for violent activity. His only
felony conviction was for a theft.
. . . .
 
It's a Second Circuit, Maui case. [William] stole
more than $300 of merchandise from K-Mart. That's all he
 
has.
 
[Dennis], on the other hand, has a conviction for
Robbery 1 with the use of a knife, and Robbery 2. It was
 provided in discovery. I have the case number. These are
 from '95 and '97, Second Circuit. The prosecutor's argument
is that he's opened the door because he left the impression
that he's not a violent guy.
 
THE COURT: Okay.
 
[DENNIS'S COUNSEL]: We would obviously object. We
 
didn't open the door at all. [Dennis] gave no indication
that he himself is a peaceful person in general, just that
on this particular incident he didn't commit anything, any
violent acts. That doesn't open the door to at all his
priors.
 
With respect to his brother, we're not claiming he has
-- we didn't put on any evidence that he has violent
convictions or criminal convictions, just that, you know,
they're brothers, they grew up together, he's seen prior
instances of violent behavior by his brother, even though
obviously not convicted.
 
THE COURT: Okay. I'm going to find that three
different times the defendant talked about his brother's
 background. I agree with [the State] and I believe I
explained this to your client [at the pretrial hearing] that
the door is closed right now, but if based on his testimony
he may give the wrong impression, [the State] may ask to
approach. That's exactly what happened.
 
I think he's indicated that based on his brother's
 
background and drugs and he may be able to say it further
about drugs, I don't know about that, but that he gave the
impression that his brother's a dangerous guy and I think by
inference that he is not and so he has reason to fear him
 and everything else, and the fact that he has prior
convictions for Robbery in the First Degree and Robbery in
the Second Degree, I think, are appropriate so I'm going to
allow [the State] to cross-examine him on those two. 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(c) Cross-examination
 
The State asked Dennis about his previous comments
 
regarding his fear of William. Dennis testified that he did not
 
know about William's conviction for felony theft. Dennis
 admitted that he, himself, had a 1996 conviction for Robbery in
 the First Degree (prior Robbery I) stemming from an incident in
 which he pulled a knife on a man and threatened to stab the man
 and cut his throat if the man did not give him $10. Dennis also
 admitted that he had been convicted in 1994 of Robbery in the
 Second Degree (Robbery II) stemming from an incident in which he
 assaulted a man for $24 in cash and $26 in food stamps. The
 State asked Dennis, "[J]ust to be clear, you're not telling the
 jurors that you're somehow a peaceful, non-violent person, are
 you?", and Dennis responded, "No, I'm not."
 
Dennis testified that at the time of the incident, he
 
weighed about 215 pounds and was about five feet, eight inches
 tall. William weighed about 155 pounds and was about Dennis's
 height. Dennis stated that at the time of his arrest he was
 probably physically stronger than William.
 
Dennis admitted that although he testified he had not
 
seen William for several days prior to the incident, he was
 actually with William and Barbara the day before the incident. 
They were in a car, which Barbara was driving, when Barbara
 received a traffic citation.
 
Dennis and the State engaged in the following exchange:
 
Q. [THE STATE] Will you please explain to us why you
were thinking about your kids as [Vo] was getting tuned up
in the back of the van?
 
A. [DENNIS] Because, like I said, it's my brother, I
know my brother's background and his attitude. I wouldn't
 know what he would have done to me if I didn't help him out.
 
Q. So is it your testimony now that your brother made
you participate in this?
 
A. Well, he did have the upper hand with the knife.
 
Q. Is it your testimony that you were powerless
against your brother?
 
A. I was weaponless. I didn't have nothing to back
myself up if he came with the knife to me.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q. [Dennis], the only thing that your brother's been
convicted of is shoplifting at K-Mart, right?
 
A. Like I said, I have no idea what his record is.
 
Q. But your record is using a knife to rob people,
right?
 
A. Many years ago, yes.
 
Q. And also beating up people for $24 in cash and $26
in food stamps, right?
 
A. When I was 18.
 
Later, the State asked Dennis if while driving the van, he had
 
any reason to believe Vo was hurt:
 
A. [DENNIS] I could have speculated that -­
Q. [THE STATE] What would that speculation have been
based on?
 
A. Me knowing -- being raised with my brother.
 
Q. That your brother's violent?
 
A. Well, of me being raised with him while he's on
drugs.
 
Q. And that your brother was probably hurting [Vo] in
the back?
 
A. Probably.
 
Dennis testified that Vo and his van were left in a
 
dirt lot, behind some bushes. No one driving along the road
 
nearby could have seen Vo's van. Dennis, however, believed the
 lot was safe.
 
(d) Recross-examination
 
Dennis testified that he did not run away from the van
 
during the incident because of what William might have done to
 him and Vo. Dennis stated that his brother might have done
 something to them "[b]ecause of his drug habit and as -- I know
 as hanging around him while I was growing up, I know his
 actions." When asked, "So he would not just use drugs but he
 must be doing something violent, that's what you're talking
 about, right?", Dennis responded, "It could be anything." Dennis
 testified, "I know he hangs around gangs and all that . . . . You
 put two and two together . . . . It's just he knows where I live
 . . . . So I -- more worried about my fiancee and my daughter at
 that time."
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. Renewed Oral Motion for Judgment of Acquittal
 
After Dennis testified, his counsel orally renewed the
 
motion for judgment of acquittal, which the circuit court denied.
5. Hearing on Jury Instructions
 
On June 3, 2008, the circuit court held a hearing to
 
settle the jury instructions. At the start of the hearing, the
 
circuit court made further findings regarding its decision to
 allow the State to introduce evidence of Dennis's prior
 convictions: 
[T]he Court wanted to place on the record the further
findings and statements regarding when [Dennis] was
testifying, that it was the Court's determination that he
gave the jury the impression of helpless victimization, and
that was based on his demeanor, his -- the impression he
created with, he's got a short haircut, he's clean-shaven,
he's got glasses, he's speaking in a meek and mild fashion.
 
His weight at the time, which had not been presented
to the jury, was he [sic] 215 pounds at the time of the -­of this incident, and his brother, William, was 155 pounds.
 
[Dennis] was five, eight. His brother's six, five
[sic].
 
He was saying he was fearful and scared of his
brother.
 
And on three occasions as part of his testimony he
talked about his brother's background in drug use and how he
gets, and how that made him scared and fearful.
 
And the Court, in looking at all of this, did a 403
balancing test and it weighed the dangers of unfair
prejudice, the probative value against unfair prejudice, and
it was the Court's determination that [Dennis] was creating
a false impression with the jury that he was a helpless
victim in relation to his brother.
 
And this was confirmed later when, despite me giving
repeated chances to amplify on why his brother was scary or
dangerous, he never came up with a single example of saying
that he was even unaware based on [the State's] questioning
that his brother had been convicted of a felony, albeit a
nonviolent shoplifting type of case.
 
And in this case, that while [Dennis] did not
specifically come out and say, I don't have any prior
violent felonies, or the like, by his words, demeanor and
conduct he left the Court and the jury with a false
impression, i.e., that he was a passive, helpless victim in
relation to his brother.
 
And the Court determined that by doing so he opened
the door to the Prosecution to give a more balanced view of
his past so the jury could weigh more appropriately and
judge for themselves.
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
And in this case now, we have a choice of evils
situation for the jury to consider, as well as duress.
 
And that, again, doing the careful 403 balancing test,
the probative nature of the evidence of his -- limited to
the two prior violent convictions, the probative value of
those outweighs the danger of unfair prejudice.
 
At the same time a limiting instruction will be given
to instruct the jurors on how to consider, that it's not
that [Dennis] is a person of bad character, but that it's
offered for the stated 404(b) factors, as well as to rebut
the impression that he's a peaceful, nonviolent person and a
helpless victim in this situation, if for no other purpose.
 
Dennis's counsel renewed his objection to the admission of the
 
evidence:
 
Again, just to point out that the Court -- as the
Court stated, there was no direct evidence by [Dennis] that
he, himself, is a peaceful, nonviolent person, but the Court
only found that there was an inference.
 
With respect to being a helpless victim, his testimony
was not that he's 215 pounds, his brother was 155, and he
was scared.
 
The point was that -- not the weight of his brother,
but the fact that his brother had possession of the knife at
the time.
 
Regardless of the difference in weight, knowing his
brother had a knife and he didn't have any weapon, that was
the main point of his concern with respect to his brother. 
Also, we would be noting that there was no limiting
instruction given to the jury at the time the evidence was
admitted.
 
And, furthermore, that these two cases of robbery
against [Dennis] that were admitted took place over ten
years ago[.]
 
The circuit court responded:
 
Well, I believe [Dennis's] testimony was that there was a
knife, he was concerned at the time and he was concerned
later on about possible retaliation, and otherwise. So it
 encompassed more than just the situation at the scene. 
It was later on when presumably he . . wouldn't have
 
a knife[.]
 
And the Court ruled as it did based on that.
 
The State responded to Dennis's counsel's argument that
 
the circuit court had erred by failing to give the jury a timely
 
limiting instruction when the court admitted evidence of Dennis's
 prior convictions. The State argued that the jury's recollection
 of Dennis's testimony would not have "dimmed" between the time
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dennis testified and when the jury received a limiting
 
instruction because no evidence had been admitted since Dennis
 testified. The State maintained that a limiting instruction
 given with the rest of the jury instructions would be timely.
6. Jury Instructions
 
As part of the jury instructions, the circuit court
 
gave the following instruction:
 
You have heard evidence that [Dennis] at another time
may have engaged in or committed other crimes, wrongs or
acts. You must not use this evidence to determine that
 [Dennis] is a person of bad character and, therefore, must
have committed the offenses charged in this case.
 
Such evidence may be considered by you only on the
issue of [Dennis's] motive, opportunity, intent,
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi,
absence of mistake or accident or to rebut the suggestion or
inference that [Dennis] is a peaceful and nonviolent or a
helpless victim and for no other purpose.
 
7. Closing Arguments
 
In the State's closing rebuttal, it argued:
 
Well, duress does not apply.
 
First of all, [Dennis] by his own testimony was never
threatened by his brother.
 
Recall my questions of him? What did your brother do
to you. Oh, nothing. But I know how he is. 
I gave him numerous opportunities to explain how his
brother threatened him directly. He couldn't come up with a
single one.
 
And remember, you've heard testimony that [Dennis] has
done other things. Do not think that he is some sort of a
 hapless victim who was in the wrong place at the wrong time
doing his brother's bidding.
 
He has committed a knife-point robbery and beaten
another person in a robbery.
 
This evidence can be considered by you to refute the
suggestion that somehow he was just there and caught up in
this case.
 
In his closing sur-rebuttal, Dennis's counsel argued:
 
We know that William is dangerous. We know that. 
[Dennis] testified that his brother is a drug addict. And
 when he's on drugs he doesn't know what he's going to do or
is capable of doing.
 
He also knows that when they were growing up, that his
brother William could be violent. It's a very dangerous
combination. A person who has a history of violence, and is
on drugs.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
And that's what Dennis knew about William that day.
. . . . 
But keep in mind what Dennis did when he was 18, 19
years old, he's in his 30's now. It's over 12 years ago at
least when he made those mistakes. It's been 12 years.
 
8. Verdict
 
The jury found Dennis guilty of all charges.
C. POST-TRIAL
 
On October 7, 2008, Dennis filed a Motion for a New
 
Trial. Dennis argued that at trial, the circuit court
 
erroneously admitted evidence of his prior convictions. Dennis
 maintained that he did not directly testify that he was a
 peaceful person and the circuit court should not have relied on
 his demeanor at trial to support its ruling. He contended the
 circuit court should not have admitted the evidence, pursuant to
 HRE Rules 401, 402, and 403. Dennis also argued that the verdict
 was manifestly against the weight of the evidence because there
 was not a "requisite finding of a theft" by him.
 
On October 10, 2008, the State filed a memorandum in
 
opposition. On December 3, 2008, the circuit court filed
 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Defendant
 Dennis Brooks' Motion for New Trial. The circuit court denied
 the motion on the basis that it was untimely filed, under Hawaii
 Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rules 33 and 45. The circuit
 court alternatively denied the motion on the bases that Dennis's
 "arguments in support of the motion are speculative," the
 "verdict was not manifestly against the weight of the evidence,"
 and a "new trial is not required in the interests of justice."
 
The circuit court filed the Judgment on December 9,
 
2008, and Dennis timely appealed.
II.
 
A. ADMISSIBILITY OF PRIOR BAD ACT EVIDENCE
 
The admissibility of evidence requires different
standards of review depending on the particular rule
of evidence at issue. State v. Pulse, 83 Hawai' i 229,
246, 925 P.2d 797, 814 (1996). 
When application of a particular evidentiary
rule can yield only one correct result, the
proper standard for appellate review is the
right/wrong standard. However, the traditional
abuse of discretion standard should be applied
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in the case of those rules of evidence that
 
require a "judgment call" on the part of the
trial court. 
Id. at [246], 925 P.2d at [814] (citations omitted). 
"Prior bad act" evidence under [HRE] Rule
404(b) . . . is admissible when it is 1)
relevant and 2) more probative than prejudicial.
A trial court's determination that evidence is
 "relevant" within the meaning of HRE Rule 401
(1993) . . . is reviewed under the right/wrong
standard of review. However, a trial court's
balancing of the probative value of prior bad
act evidence against the prejudicial effect of
such evidence under HRE Rule 403 . . . is
 reviewed for abuse of discretion. An abuse of
 discretion occurs when the court clearly exceeds
the bounds of reason or disregards rules or
principles of law to the substantial detriment
of a party litigant. 
State v. Torres, 85 Hawai' i 417, 421, 945 P.2d 849,
853 (App. 1997) (footnotes[, internal quotation marks,and citations] omitted). 
State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai' i 390, 403-04, 56 P.3d 692,
705-06 (2002). 
State v. Fetelee, 117 Hawai 'i 53, 62-63, 175 P.3d 709, 718-19 
(2008).
 
B.	 GENERAL ENTITLEMENT TO INCLUDED OFFENSE
 
INSTRUCTIONS
 
In State v. Kupau, 76 Hawai 'i 387, 396 n.14, 879 P.2d 
492, 501 n.14 (1994), overruled on other grounds by State v.
 
Haanaio, 94 Hawai 'i 405, 16 P.3d 246 (2001), the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court stated that
 
although there may be sufficient evidence to support a
guilty verdict as to a charged offense, if the weight of the
evidence is to the contrary but supports guilt as to an
included offense, the trial judge would be justified in
giving an instruction regarding the included offense[.]
 
In State v. Kinnane, 79 Hawai 'i 46, 897 P.2d 973 
(1995), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court stated: 
When a defendant in a criminal case timely asks for a
lesser included offense instruction to which he or she is
 entitled, it is reversible error not to give it. On the
 other hand, a trial court is not obligated to charge the
jury with respect to an included offense unless there is a
rational basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the
defendant of the offense charged and convicting him of the
included offense.
 
Indeed, in the absence of such a rational basis in the
evidence, the trial court should not instruct the jury as to
included offenses. A fortiori, it is not error for a trial
 
court to refuse -- and the trial court should refrain from
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
giving -- an instruction regarding an uncharged offense that
is not included, for purposes of the Hawai' i Penal Code,
within the charged offense. 
Where there is such a rational basis in the evidence,
however, we have held that it may be plain error for a trial
court to fail to give an included offense instruction even
when neither the prosecution nor the defendant have
requested it; this is because
 
the trial court is the sole source of all definitions
 and statements of law applicable to an issue to be
resolved by the jury. Moreover, it is the duty of the
 circuit judge to see to it that the case goes to the
jury in a clear and intelligent manner, so that they
may have a clear and correct understanding of what it
is they are to decide, and he or she shall state to
them fully the law applicable to the facts. And faced
 
with inaccurate or incomplete instructions, the trial
 court has a duty to, with the aid of counsel, either
correct the defective instructions or to otherwise
 
incorporate it into its own instructions. In other
 
words, the ultimate responsibility properly to
instruct the jury lies with the circuit court and not
 
with trial counsel. 
. . . .
 
Thus, in order to reconcile the competing
interests of the prosecution and defendants, as well
as to ensure that juries are appropriately instructed
in criminal cases, we hold as follows:  The trial
 
judge must bring all included offense instructions
that are supported by the evidence to the attention of
the parties. The trial judge must then give each such
instruction to the jury unless (1) the prosecution
does not request that included instructions be given
and (2) the defendant specifically objects to the
included offense instructions for tactical reasons. 
If the prosecution does not make a request and the
defendant makes a tactical objection, the trial judge
must then exercise his or her discretion as to whether
 the included offense instructions should be given.
The trial judge's discretion should be guided by the
nature of the evidence presented during the trial, as
well as the extent to which the defendant appears to
understand the risks involved. 
Kupau
, 76 Hawai' i 394-96, 879 P.2d 499-501 (citations,
footnotes, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted)(emphasis in original). 
79 Hawai 'i at 49-50, 897 P.2d at 976-77 (internal quotation 
marks, citations, footnotes, and brackets omitted; emphasis in
 
original).
C. SUFFICIENCY OF THE EVIDENCE
 
The appellate court reviews the sufficiency of evidence
 
on appeal as follows:
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
 
17
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai 'i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 
(1997)). "'Substantial evidence’ as to every material element of
 
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient
 quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
 caution to support a conclusion." Richie, 88 Hawai
'i at 33, 960 
P.2d at 1241 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
D. SENTENCING
 
A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence. The applicable standard of review for
sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the court
committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its
decision. Factors which indicate a plain and manifest abuse
of discretion are arbitrary or capricious action by the
judge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant's
contentions. And, generally, to constitute an abuse it must
appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason
or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant. 
State v. Mundon, 121 Hawai 'i 339, 349, 219 P.3d 1126, 1136 (2009) 
(quoting State v. Kahapea, 111 Hawai 'i 267, 278, 141 P.3d 440, 
451 (2006)).
E. JURY INSTRUCTIONS
 
The standard of review for a trial court's issuance or
 
refusal of a jury instruction is whether, when read and
considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the
error was not prejudicial. In other words, error is not to
be viewed in isolation and considered purely in the
abstract. 
State v. Kassebeer, 118 Hawai 'i 493, 504, 193 P.3d 409, 420 
(2008) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets
 
omitted) (quoting State v. Mainaaupo, 117 Hawai 'i 235, 247, 178 
P.3d 1, 13 (2008)).
 
The standard of review for jury instructions that were
 
not objected to at trial was clarified in State v. Nichols, 111
 Hawai
'i 327, 141 P.3d 974 (2006), where the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
held that
 
although as a general matter forfeited assignments of error
are to be reviewed under [Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure 
18 Id. at 337, 141 P.3d at 984 (footnote omitted). Thus, the
 
appellant must first demonstrate instructional error by rebutting
 the "presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are
 correct." Id. at 337 n.6, 141 P.3d at 984 n.6; accord State v.
 Eberly, 107 Hawai
'i 239, 250, 112 P.3d 725, 736 (2005). If the 
appellant is able to rebut this presumption, the burden shifts to
 the State to prove that the error was harmless beyond a
 reasonable doubt because
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(HRPP)] Rule 52(b) plain error standard of review, in the
case of erroneous jury instructions, that standard of review
is effectively merged with the HRPP Rule 52(a) harmless
error standard of review because it is the duty of the trial
court to properly instruct the jury. As a result, once
instructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate, without
regard to whether timely objection was made, if there is a
reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the
defendant's conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury
instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
[e]rroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a
ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the
record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial.
However, error is not to be viewed in isolation and
considered purely in the abstract. 
It must be examined in
 
the light of the entire proceedings and given the effect
which the whole record shows it to be entitled.
 
Nichols, 111 Hawai 'i at 334, 141 P.3d at 981 (brackets in 
original omitted) (quoting State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai 'i 289, 
293, 119 P.3d 597, 601 (2005)).
III.
 
A. PRIOR BAD ACTS EVIDENCE
 
Dennis contends the circuit court abused its discretion
 
in allowing the State to adduce at trial evidence of his prior
 
convictions.
 
"Relevant evidence" is "evidence having any tendency to
 
make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
 determination of the action more probable or less probable than
 it would be without the evidence." HRE Rule 401. Generally, all
 relevant evidence is admissible. HRE Rule 402. However, HRE
 Rule 404 (Supp. 2009) provides in relevant part:
 
Rule 404. Character evidence not admissible to prove
conduct; exceptions; other crimes.  (a) Character evidence
generally. Evidence of a person's character or a trait of a
person's character is not admissible for the purpose of
proving action in conformity therewith on a particular
occasion, except:
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
20(1) Character of accused.  Evidence of a pertinent
trait of character of an accused offered by an accused, or
by the prosecution to rebut the same; 
. . . .
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts.  Evidence of other
crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the
character of a person in order to show action in conformity
therewith.  It may, however, be admissible where such
evidence is probative of another fact that is of consequence
to the determination of the action, such as proof of motive,
opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident.  In
criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be offered
under this subsection shall provide reasonable notice in
advance of trial, or during trial if the court excuses
pretrial notice on good cause shown, of the date, location,
and general nature of any such evidence it intends to
introduce at trial.
In State v. Clark, 83 Hawai# i 289, 300-01, 926 P.2d
194, 205-06 (1996), the Hawai #i Supreme Court stated:
The list of permissible purposes in Rule 404(b) is not
intended to be exhaustive "for the range of relevancy
outside the ban is almost infinite."  E.W. Cleary, McCormick
on Evidence § 190, at 448 (Cleary ed. 1972).  In United
States v. Miller, 895 F.2d 1431 (D.C. Cir. 1990), cert.
denied, 498 U.S. 825, 111 S. Ct. 79, 112 L. Ed. 2d 52
(1990), the United States District Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia explained:  
[Rule 404(b)] was intended not to define the set of
permissible purposes for which bad-acts evidence may
be admitted but rather to define the one impermissible
purpose for such evidence.  "Only one series of
evidential hypotheses is forbidden in criminal cases
by Rule 404:  a [person] who commits a crime probably
has a defect of character; a [person] with a defect of
character is more likely than [people] generally to
have committed the act in question."  2 J. Weinstein &
M. Berger ¶ 404(8) at 404-52.  In other words, under
Rule 404(b), any purpose for which bad-acts evidence
is introduced is a proper purpose so long as the
evidence is not offered 
solely to prove character. 
The Government's right to introduce bad-acts evidence
for purposes other than showing a defendant's criminal
propensity is by no means unlimited.  But the limits
derive from the "general strictures limiting
admissibility such as Rules 402 and 403," not from
Rule 404(b).  Huddleston [v. United States, 485 U.S.
681, 688], 108 S. Ct. [1496] at 1500 [, 99 L. Ed. 2d
771 (1988)].
Id. at 1436.
See also State v. Arakawa, 101 Hawai #i 26, 34, 61 P.3d 537, 545
(App. 2002) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)
("[T]he supreme court [has] observed that the list of permissible
purposes enumerated in HRE Rule 404(b), such as motive and
intent, was not intended to be exhaustive."). FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Further, in State v. Steger, 114 Hawai 'i 162, 158 P.3d 
280 (App. 2006), this court stated:
 
In ruling on whether to admit evidence under HRE Rule
404(b), the trial court must consider a variety of factors.
State v. Robinson, 79 Hawai' i 468, 471, 903 P.2d 1289, 1292
(1995). These include: 
the strength of the evidence as to the commission of
the other bad acts, the similarities between the
[other] bad acts [and the charged crime], the time
that has elapsed between the [other] bad acts [and the
charged crime], the need for the evidence, the
efficacy of alternate proof, and the degree to which
the evidence will probably rouse the jury to
overmastering hostility.
 
Id.
 
Id. at 172, 158 P.3d at 290. 
In Kassebeer, 118 Hawai 'i at 507, 193 P.3d at 423, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court stated that the use of the word "may" in 
"HRE Rule 404(b)'s directive that evidence of a prior bad act 
'may' be admissible . . . was intended to trigger an inquiry under HRE Rule 403, . . . which provides in relevant part that, '[a]lthough relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.'" 
1. Steger Factors
 
The first Steger consideration is "the strength of the 
evidence as to the commission of the other bad acts." 114 Hawai
'i at 172, 158 P.3d at 290. The evidence of Dennis's other 
bad acts is strong, as it is undisputed that Dennis had the prior Robbery I and Robbery II convictions in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit. As for the second Steger factor, "the similarities between the [other] bad acts [and the charged crime]," id., the Robbery in the First Degree in the instant case clearly was similar to the prior Robbery I and Robbery II charges because all three offenses involved robbery. Further, Dennis used a knife in the prior Robbery I case and in the instant case. 
The fourth Steger factor, the "need for the evidence," 
114 Hawai
'i at 172, 158 P.3d at 290, mitigates in favor of 
admitting the prior convictions. In the instant case, the circuit court found that at trial, Dennis opened the door to the State's introduction to the evidence because 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
while [Dennis] did not specifically come out and say, I
don't have any prior violent felonies, or the like, by his
words, demeanor and conduct he left the Court and the jury
with a false impression, i.e., that he was a passive,
helpless victim in relation to his brother.
 
The circuit court found that Dennis created that false impression
 
by testifying "he was fearful and scared of his brother" and
 testifying three different times about "his brother's background
 in drug use and how [his brother] gets, and how that made him
 scared and fearful." The circuit court further found that the
 evidence of Dennis's prior convictions was necessary to give the
 jury "a more balanced view of [Dennis's] past so the jury could
 weigh more appropriately and judge for themselves." We agree
 that the evidence was needed to counterbalance the impression of
 himself Dennis created at trial. Dennis testified as follows:
 
(1) He did not want William to live with him "[j]ust
 
'cause of -- from what his background is, from what I heard of
 his drug action and all."
 
(2) When William put the knife to Vo's side and told
 
Dennis to drive the van, Dennis did not know that William was
 going to do what he did, and "as my knowledge of my brother's
 background, I didn't know what was going to happen next." Dennis
 thought it was just best to listen.
 
(3) During the incident, Dennis was a little worried
 
about what William would do to Vo because Dennis knew William's
 "background."
 
(4) Dennis was worried about what William would do to
 
him because William had a knife and Dennis was unarmed. William
 "had the upper hand" with the knife.
 
(5) Dennis was thinking about his own safety and that
 
of his children during the incident because he knew William's
 "background and his attitude" and Dennis did not know what
 William would have done to him if he did not "help him out." 
Dennis testified that William hung "around gangs and all
 that . . . . You put two and two together . . . . It's just he
 knows where I live[.]"
 
(6) While driving the van, Dennis could "speculate"
 
that William probably was hurting Vo because Dennis knew William
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and William had done drugs when they were growing up together. 
William might have done something to Dennis and Vo "[b]ecause of
 his drug habit and as -- I know as hanging around him while I was
 growing up, I know his actions."
 
(7) When William was doing drugs, William could do
 
"anything."
 
Dennis did not testify that he was peaceful or non­
violent; in fact, he testified that he was not telling the jury
 he possessed those qualities. Further, Dennis testified that he
 was afraid of William during the incident in part because William
 wielded a knife and Dennis was unarmed. However, Dennis's
 repeated references to William's "background," which made Dennis
 afraid of William; Dennis's testimony that he did not know what
 William had planned to do to Vo when Dennis got into the van;
 Dennis's testimony that William was affiliated with gangs and had
 used drugs and could do "anything" when on drugs; and the circuit
 court's undisputed findings that at trial, Dennis's hair was
 short and he was clean-shaven, had glasses on, and was speaking
 in a meek and mild fashion -- whereas at the time of his arrest,
 Dennis had long hair and wore a short-sleeved T-shirt revealing
 multiple tattoos -- combine to suggest Dennis intended to impress
 upon the jury that he was peaceful, whereas William was not.
 
Two of the Steger factors weigh in favor of denying the 
State's motion to admit the evidence. The third Steger factor is the "time that has elapsed between the [other] bad acts [and the charged crime]." 114 Hawai
'i at 172, 158 P.3d at 290. In 
Kassebeer, 118 Hawai 'i at 507, 193 P.3d at 423, the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court stated that "[t]he passage of time diminishes the probative value of prior bad act evidence." Dennis was convicted of the prior Robbery I charge in 1996 and the Robbery II charge in 1994. The complaint in the instant case alleged that in 2006 he committed the offenses charged. Over ten years had passed since Dennis had been convicted of the prior offenses. The sixth Steger factor is the "degree to which the evidence will probably rouse the jury to overmastering hostility." 114 Hawai
'i at 172, 
158 P.3d at 290. In this case, it is possible that the evidence 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had a prejudicial effect on the jury. See State v. Murray, 116 
Hawai'i 3, 20, 169 P.3d 955, 972 (2007) (emphasis in original) 
(noting that "the risk of tainting the jury verdict with evidence 
of prior convictions is of especial concern when the current charge is for the same crime of which the defendant was previously convicted."). 
We recognize that this is not an easy issue to resolve, 
but for the reasons we have discussed -- primarily with regard to the third Steger factor -- and applying the test set out in HRE Rule 403, we cannot hold that the circuit court abused its discretion in admitting the evidence. We note that the circuit court gave the jury a limiting instruction that the evidence "must not" be used to determine that Dennis was a "person of bad character and, therefore, must have committed the offenses charged in this case." The circuit court also instructed the jury to consider the evidence only, among other things, "to rebut the suggestion or inference that [Dennis] is a peaceful and nonviolent or a helpless victim and for no other purpose." The prejudicial effect of prior bad-act evidence can be reduced or eliminated by proper jury instructions. See State v. Balanza, 93 
Hawai
'i 279, 289, 1 P.3d 281, 291 (2000) (admission of evidence 
may result in some potential for prejudice, but such prejudice may be effectively dispelled by jury instructions); State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai
'i 390, 416, 56 P.3d 692, 718 (2002) (potential 
for unfair prejudice dispelled by circuit court's limiting instruction to the jury). The jury is presumed to follow the court's instructions. State v. Kupihea, 80 Hawai
'i 307, 317-18, 
909 P.2d 1122, 1132-33 (1996); State v. Knight, 80 Hawai 'i 318, 
327, 909 P.2d 1133, 1142 (1996).
2. Limiting Instruction
 
Dennis argues that "the limiting instruction by the
 
court failed to cure the overwhelming prejudicial effect of the
 evidence" because "the instruction was given four days after the
 jury had heard the evidence." Dennis argues that the prejudice
 caused by the circuit court's delay in giving the instruction was
 compounded by the instruction's (1) unnecessary recitation of the
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence's permitted purposes (motive, opportunity, intent,
 
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, absence
 of mistake or accident), which were inapplicable in this case,
 and (2) invitation to the jury to consider whether the evidence
 "rebut[ted] the suggestion that Dennis was 'peaceful and
 nonviolent or a helpless victim,'" which amounted to permission
 "to utilize the evidence as propensity evidence."
 
With regard to Dennis's argument that the limiting 
instruction was given too late to cure any prejudicial effect the prior conviction evidence may have had, Dennis did not request a limiting instruction or object to the lack of a limiting instruction after his prior conviction was introduced as evidence. The appropriate instruction was given to the jury at the conclusion of the trial. Dennis waited until just before the circuit court instructed the jury to object to the court's failure to give the instruction when the evidence was introduced. "The trial judge must consider on a case-by-case basis whether to issue a limiting instruction when HRE Rule 404(b) evidence is introduced and/or at the conclusion of the trial. There is no bright line rule." Cordeiro, 99 Hawai
'i at 418-19, 56 P.3d at 
720-21. Given Dennis's failure to object to the lack of a limiting instruction at the time the evidence was given at trial, coupled with the fact that no other evidence was presented to the jury from the time the prior conviction evidence was presented and the circuit court gave the limiting instruction, Dennis was not prejudiced by the court's delay in giving the instruction. 
With regard to his arguments about the substance of the
 
limiting instruction, Dennis did not object to the instruction on
 this basis at trial. Dennis provides no authority for the notion
 that the instruction's inclusion of all of the permissible uses
 of prior bad act evidence under HRE Rule 404(b), even though
 those uses were inapplicable to this case, rendered the
 instruction prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent,
 or misleading. Further, he provides no authority for the idea
 that permitting the jury to consider the prior convictions to
 rebut the presumption that Dennis was "a peaceful and nonviolent
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or a helpless victim" amounted to an instruction to consider the
 
evidence for propensity. Given our holding that the jury needed
 to consider the prior convictions to rebut the impression created
 at trial that Dennis was a peaceful person, the instruction was
 not prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
 misleading.
 
In the light of the foregoing, the circuit court did
 
not plainly err by giving the limiting instruction.
B.	 JURY INSTRUCTIONS ON INCLUDED OFFENSES
 
Dennis argues that the circuit court erred when it
 
failed to instruct the jury on Robbery in the Second Degree and
 Theft in the Fourth Degree, which were included offenses of
 Robbery in the First Degree. Brooks maintains that because of
 the omission, the court's instructions were prejudicially
 erroneous, incomplete, or misleading.
 
The State charged Dennis with Robbery in the First 
Degree, in violation of HRS § 708-840(1)(b)(i). A person commits Robbery in the First Degree if in the course of committing theft, "the person is armed with a dangerous instrument" and "uses force against the person of anyone present with intent to overcome that person's physical resistance or physical power of resistance." HRS § 708-840(1)(b)(i). Robbery in the Second Degree and Theft in the Fourth Degree are included offenses of Robbery in the First Degree. State v. Arlt, 9 Haw. App. 263, 277, 833 P.2d 902, 
910 (1992) (Robbery in the Second Degree is an included offense of Robbery in the First Degree); State v. Mitsuda, 86 Hawai
'i 37, 
46, 947 P.2d 349, 358 (1997) (Theft in the Fourth Degree is an included offense of Robbery in the First Degree). HRS § 708-841 (1993) provides in relevant part: 
§708-841 Robbery in the second degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of robbery in the second degree if, in
the course of committing theft:
 
(a)	 The person uses force against the person of
anyone present with the intent to overcome that
person's physical resistance or physical power
of resistance; 
(b)	 The person threatens the imminent use of force
against the person of anyone who is present with
intent to compel acquiescence to the taking of
or escaping with the property; or
 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(c)	 The person recklessly inflicts serious bodily
injury upon another.
 
HRS § 708-833 (1993) provides that "[a] person commits
 
the offense of theft in the fourth degree if the person commits
 
theft of property or services of any value not in excess of
 $100."
 
In State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai
'i 405, 16 P.3d 246 (2001), 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court stated the following with regard to 
included offense instructions:
 
[T]he trial court's failure to give appropriate included
offense instructions requested by a party constitutes error,
as does the trial court's failure to give an appropriate
included offense instruction that has not been requested.
Such error, however, is harmless when the jury convicts the
defendant of the charged offense or of an included offense
greater than the included offense erroneously omitted from
the instructions. The error is harmless because jurors are
presumed to follow the court's instructions, and, under the
standard jury instructions, the jury, in reaching a
unanimous verdict as to the charged offense or as to the
greater included offense, would not have reached, much less
considered, the absent lesser offense on which it should
have been instructed.
 
Id. at 415-16, 16 P.3d at 256-57 (internal quotation marks, 
citations, footnote, and brackets in original omitted; emphasis added); see also, State v. Pauline, 100 Hawai
'i 356, 381, 60 P.3d 
306, 331 (2002) (even if rational basis existed to instruct jury on included offenses within murder second, error was harmless because jury found Pauline guilty as charged); State v. French, 104 Hawai
'i 89, 93-94, 85 P.3d 196, 200-01 (App. 2004) (assuming 
it was error to not give the jury included theft instructions, it was harmless error because jury found French guilty of the greater offense of robbery second); State v. Gunson, 101 Hawai
'i 
161, 165-66, 64 P.3d 290, 294-95 (App. 2003) (the absence of included offense jury instructions, if error, was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt where Gunson was found guilty of charged offense, making it unnecessary for the appellate court to determine if indecent exposure is an included offense of fourth degree sexual assault). 
In the instant case, without addressing whether there
 
was a rational basis for jury instructions on the subject of
 included offenses, we hold that any such error would have been
 
27
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
harmless because the jury convicted Dennis of Robbery in the
 
First Degree.
C. INSUBSTANTIAL EVIDENCE
 
Dennis contends the circuit court erred in convicting 
him of Robbery in the First Degree because there was insubstantial evidence to support the conviction. We disagree and hold that when "considered in the strongest light for the" State, "there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." Richie, 88 Hawai
'i at 33, 960 P.2d at 
1241. 
1. Robbery in the First Degree
 
There was sufficient evidence to convict Dennis of
 
Robbery in the First Degree. Vo testified at trial that when
 William put a knife about five-to-five-and-a-half-inches long to
 his neck and asked for Vo's money, Dennis held down Vo's hands.
4
 
Both William and Dennis asked Vo where his money was. William
 and Dennis took Vo's driver's license out of his wallet and told
 him more than once that if he reported the incident to the
 police, they would kill Vo's family. Vo testified that both men
 made the threat and Vo thought Dennis said it more than once. At
 some point, Dennis punched, kicked, and stepped on Vo many times. 
Later, Dennis stepped on the back of Vo's head and on Vo's back,
 wrapped a tie around Vo's neck, and pulled Vo up with the tie,
 choking him. After Dennis choked Vo with the tie, Dennis pointed
 the knife at Vo. Vo was told not to call the police or his
 family would be killed. Based on Vo's testimony alone, there was
 sufficient evidence to convict Dennis of Robbery in the First
 Degree. 
2. Kidnapping
 
HRE § 707-720 provides:
 
§707-720 Kidnapping.  (1) A person commits the
offense of kidnapping if the person intentionally or
knowingly restrains another person with intent to:
. . . . 
4
 The circuit court instructed the jury on accomplice liability. Under
 
HRS § 702-221 (1993), "[a] person is guilty of an offense if it is committed
by his own conduct or by the conduct of another person" when "[h]e is an
accomplice of such other person in the commission of the offense."
 
28
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(c) Facilitate the commission of a felony[.]
 
The evidence summarized in part III.C.1., plus Vo's testimony
 
that Dennis drove the van from urban Honolulu to Kaneohe,
 provides sufficient evidence for Dennis's Kidnapping conviction.
3. UCPV
 
HRS § 708-836 provides in relevant part: "A person
 
commits the offense of [UCPV] if the person intentionally or
 knowingly exerts unauthorized control over another's propelled
 vehicle by operating the vehicle without the owner's consent[.]" 
At trial, Dennis testified that he drove the van, and Vo
 testified that the van belonged to him and he had not given
 Dennis permission to drive it. There was sufficient evidence to
 support the UCPV conviction.
D. KIDNAPPING CONVICTION, CLASS OF FELONY
 
Dennis contends the circuit court erred in convicting
 
him of Kidnapping as a Class A rather than a Class B felony
 because he released Vo in a safe place. Without reviewing
 whether Dennis released Vo in a safe place, we hold that the
 circuit court did not abuse its discretion in convicting Dennis
 of Class A Kidnapping because the jury found that when Dennis
 released Vo, Vo was suffering from serious or substantial bodily
 harm. 
HRS § 707-720(3) provides: "In a prosecution for
 
kidnapping, it is a defense which reduces the offense to a class
 B felony that the defendant voluntarily released the victim,
 alive and not suffering from serious or substantial bodily
 injury, in a safe place prior to trial." 
Vo testified at trial that he was unconscious before
 
Dennis, William, and Barbara left the van, regained consciousness
 as they were leaving, and after they left, "had no more energy
 just to sit up." Vo thought the police arrived about seven to
 ten minutes later. At trial, Dr. Saltman testified that he
 examined Vo after the incident and Vo had "multiple abrasions and
 contusions that were scattered about the head and neck and upper
 . . . body area. He had abrasions on his forehead. He had a
 bruise [sic] tongue." Dr. Saltman stated that Vo's injuries were
 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consistent with Vo's statement to him that Vo had been kidnapped
 
and beaten up. Vo complained of pain in the head, neck, and
 upper back area. Vo later complained that his voice had changed
 and he was having trouble swallowing. In connection with the
 police investigation of this case, Dr. Saltman filled out a
 police form in which he indicated that Vo had suffered a serious
 concussion as a result of the incident. The doctor also
 testified that Vo's concussion coupled with Vo's loss of
 consciousness of unknown duration created a substantial risk of
 death.
 
In response to a special interrogatory regarding
 
whether Dennis had committed Class A or B Kidnapping, the jurors
 were asked, among other things, whether the State had "proven
 beyond a reasonable doubt that prior to trial Dennis Brooks did
 not release Tuan Vo alive and not suffering from serious or
 substantial bodily injury." The jury responded, "Yes." On
 appeal, Dennis does not dispute the jury's finding. Because the
 requirements of HRS § 707-720(3) are set out in the conjunctive,
 rather than the disjunctive, the State needed only to disprove
 one element beyond a reasonable doubt. The State disproved the
 second element of the statute. 
IV.
 
The Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on
 
December 9, 2008 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 
Dean K. Young
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
30
 