FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
MAGDALENA CAMPOS, an individual,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
vs.
 
MARRHEY CARE HOME, LLC,
a Hawai'i Limited Liability Company;
MARCELA ORESCO CARLOS, an individual; and
CASE MANAGEMENT PROFESSIONAL, INC.,
a Hawai'i corporation, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-30, Defendants.
 
NO. 29114
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-0053)
 
September 27, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., and FOLEY and LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Magdalena Campos (Campos), an
 
elderly woman in need of assistance with daily living activities,
 
was placed by Defendant-Appellee Case Management Professionals,
 Inc. (CMP) with Defendant-Appellee Marrhey Care Home, LLC
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Marrhey Care Home), a Type I expanded/extended care Adult
 
Residential Care Home (ARCH). Marrhey Care Home was owned and
 operated by Defendant-Appellee Marcela Oresco Carlos (Carlos). 
Campos alleged that while at Marrhey Care Home, she was
 mistreated, physically and mentally abused, not provided with
 proper basic care, and deprived of prescribed medications, access
 to doctors, and a proper diet. 
Campos filed a complaint against Carlos, Marrhey Care
 
Home, and CMP (collectively, "Defendants") alleging negligence,
 false imprisonment, assault and battery, intentional infliction
 of emotional distress, and negligent infliction of emotional
 distress. The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
1
Court)  dismissed the complaint for lack of subject matter
jurisdiction because Campos had failed to submit her claim to a
 Medical Claims Conciliation Panel (MCCP), pursuant to Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 671-12(a) (1993), prior to filing her
 complaint.
 
The question presented by this appeal is whether
 
Campos's claims against Defendants constitute "medical torts"
 committed by "health care providers" which triggered the
 statutory obligation to submit the claims to an MCCP before
 filing suit. For the reasons explained below, we conclude that
 Campos's claims were not medical torts, and therefore, she was
 not required to submit her claims to an MCCP before filing suit. 
Accordingly, we hold that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing
 Campos's complaint. 
BACKGROUND
 
Campos, who needed assistance with her daily living
 
activities and personal care, sought placement in a care home
 through CMP. CMP was a case management agency licensed by the
 Department of Human Services (DHS), whose services included
 assisting clients in locating and obtaining admission to care
 homes, applying for programs, developing a service plan of care,
 
1 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2
   
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
performing comprehensive nursing and psychosocial assessments,
 
and monitoring the care provided by care homes. Agnes Reyes,
 
CMP's President and Clinical Administrator, was a registered
 
nurse and former certified case manager. 
CMP placed Campos with Marrhey Care Home, which was
 
licensed by the Department of Health (DOH) as a Type I
 extended/expanded care ARCH.
2 Carlos, the owner and operator of
 
Marrhey Care Home, was certified as a nurse aide.3
 
Campos alleged in her complaint that CMP agreed to find
 
a home care provider for her and placed her with Marrhey Care
 Home. Campos asserted that shortly after being placed with
 Marrhey Care Home, she was taken to the hospital as the result of
 not receiving an adequate diet or living conditions, which upset
 Carlos and caused Carlos to retaliate upon Campos's return by
 striking Campos, confining Campos to her room, and not taking 
Campos for a follow up examination the next day as requested by
 her treating physicians. Campos further alleged that Carlos and
 Marrhey Care Home failed to provide Campos with "basic proper
 care and treatment," with the medication Campos had been
 prescribed by her physicians, and with a proper diet; that Carlos
 and Marrhey Care Home failed to take Campos for medical
 treatment; that Carlos physically and mentally abused Campos, 
2 Carlos submitted a declaration in the Circuit Court asserting that
since 1998, Marrhey Care Home has been licensed as a "Type I expanded/extended
adult residential care home." Campos did not submit evidence contradicting
Carlos's declaration, and the Circuit Court apparently found that Marrhey Care
Home was licenced as a Type I expanded ARCH and extended care ARCH in
rendering its decision. We likewise view Marrhey Care Home as being a
licenced Type I expanded ARCH and extended care ARCH in deciding this appeal. 
We note that the applicable statutes and regulations use the terms
"expanded ARCH," "expanded care ARCH," and "extended care ARCH." These terms
 are defined in essentially the same way and any differences in their
definitions are not material to the analysis in this appeal. Therefore, we
use the terms interchangeably, but will primarily use the term "expanded
ARCH."
 
3
 The Hawai' i Administrative Rules (HAR) applicable to this case
required that a primary caregiver for a Type I expanded ARCH reside in theexpanded ARCH and be a nurse aid or licensed nurse. HAR § 11-101-8(h) (1998). 
3
   
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
threatened her with physical harm if she complained about her
 
treatment to outsiders, imposed corporal punishment on her, and
 left her in the care of "persons who were not properly trained or
 qualified to provide care to assisted living patients"; and that
 "as the result of the neglect of care," she suffered physical
 injuries, including "a deep bruise and swollen knee." Campos's
 daughter subsequently discovered the alleged mistreatment, took
 Campos to a doctor, and removed Campos from Marrhey Care Home.
 
Campos's complaint alleged five counts as follows: 
Count I -- negligence against all Defendants; Count II -- false
 imprisonment against Carlos and Marrhey Care Home; Count III -­assault and battery against Carlos; Count IV -- intentional
 infliction of emotional distress against all Defendants; and
 Count V -- negligent infliction of emotional distress against all
 Defendants.
 
CMP filed a motion to dismiss for lack of subject 
matter jurisdiction under Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 12(b)(1) (2000). In its motion, CMP argued that Campos 
failed to submit her claims to an MCCP prior to filing her 
complaint with the Circuit Court as required by HRS §§ 671-12 (1993) and 671-16 (Supp. 2011). Marrhey Care Home and Carlos 
filed a substantive joinder in the motion. After a hearing on 
the motion, the Circuit Court granted the motion to dismiss, concluding that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction. Campos filed a motion for reconsideration, which the Circuit Court denied. The Circuit Court filed its Amended Judgment on March 
20, 2008, which entered judgment against Campos and in favor of 
Defendants on all claims in the complaint for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. This appeal followed. 
DISCUSSION
 
Campos argues that she was not required to submit the
 
claims in her complaint to an MCCP as a condition precedent to
 her filing suit because her claims are not "medical torts" and
 Defendants are not "health care providers" as defined by HRS 
4
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 671-1 (1993). Campos therefore asserts that the Circuit Court
 
erred in dismissing her complaint for lack of jurisdiction. We
 agree that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing Campos's
 complaint.
 
I.
 
HRS § 671-12(a) provides in relevant part: "Effective
 
July 1, 1976, any person or the person's representative claiming
 that a medical tort has been committed shall submit a statement
 of the claim to the medical claim conciliation panel before a
 suit based on the claim may be commenced in any court of this
 State." Under HRS § 671-16, "[t]he claimant may institute
 litigation based upon the claim in an appropriate court only
 after a party to a medical claim conciliation panel hearing
 rejects the decision of the panel," or after a period of twelve­months from the filing of the claim has expired.
4 Compliance
 
with HRS §§ 671-12 and 671-16 are jurisdictional prerequisites
 for filing suit on a medical tort claim. Tobasa v. Owens, 69
 
Haw. 305, 314-15, 741 P.2d 1280, 1286 (1987). Thus, a person
 cannot file suit for a medical tort, and the court lacks
 jurisdiction, unless the medical tort claim is first submitted to
 an MCCP.
5
 
Campos did not submit her claims to an MCCP prior to
 
filing her complaint. The Circuit Court determined that
 Defendants were "health care providers" and that Campos's claims
 
4
 The twelve-month period begins to run from the filing of the claim
with an MCCP or with an approved alternative dispute resolution provider. See
 
HRS §§ 671-16.6 and 671-18 (Supp. 2011). 
5
 In 2012, the Hawai' i Legislature made substantial changes to HRS
Chapter 671, which will take effect on January 1, 2013. 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws 
Act 296 (Act 296). Among other things, the Legislature amended HRS Chapter671 by using the term "inquiry" instead of "claim," renaming an MCCP as aMedical Inquiry and Conciliation Panel (MICP), deleting the decision-makingfunction of the panels, and instead emphasizing the use by panels ofconciliation and mediation to resolve matters before them. Id. at §§ 1, 4.
However, Act 296 still generally requires the submission of a medical tort"inquiry" to an MICP as a prerequisite to filing suit. Id. at § 4. In 
addition, the definitions of "medical tort" and "heath care provider" at issuein this appeal have not changed in pertinent part. 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were "medical torts" within the meaning of HRS Chapter 671. It
 
therefore dismissed Campos's complaint for lack of jurisdiction. 
Our decision in this case turns on the interpretation of the term
 "medical tort," which incorporates the term "heath care
 provider." See HRS § 671-1.
 
We review a trial court's dismissal for lack of subject
 
matter jurisdiction de novo. Casumpang v. ILWU, Local 142, 94
 
Hawai'i 330, 337, 13 P.3d 1235, 1242 (2000). In addition, the 
interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review
 de novo. Garcia v. Kaiser Found. Hosps., 90 Hawai' i 425, 430, 
978 P.2d 863, 868 (1999). The Hawai' i Supreme Court has stated: 
"When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is
to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself." Korean Buddhist
 
Dae Won Sa Temple of Hawaii v. Sullivan, 87 Hawai' i 217,
229, 953 P.2d 1315, 1327 (1998) (quoting 
State v. Cullen, 86
Hawai'i 1, 8–9, 946 P.2d 955, 963–64 (1997)). This court 
has rejected, however, an approach to statutory construction
which is limited to the words of a statute. Four Star Ins.
 
Agency, Inc. v. Hawaiian Elec. Indus., Inc., 89 Hawai' i 427,
431, 974 P.2d 1017, 1021 (1999) (quoting Bragg v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 81 Hawai' i 302, 306, 916 P.2d 1203,
1207 (1996) (citation omitted)). Instead, we must read
statutory language in the context of the entire statute and
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.
Shipley v. Ala Moana Hotel, 83 Hawai' i 361, 364–65, 926 P.2d
1284, 1287–88 (1996) (citing State v. Toyomura, 80 Hawai' i 
8, 19, 904 P.2d 893, 904 (1995)). In doing so, we may
consider "[t]he reason and spirit of the law, and the cause
which induced the legislature to enact it . . . to discover
its true meaning." HRS § 1–15(2) (1993). "Laws in pari
materia, or upon the same subject matter, shall be construed
with reference to each other. What is clear in one statute
 may be called upon in aid to explain what is doubtful in
another." State v. Ake, 88 Hawai' i 389, 395, 967 P.2d 221,
227 (1998) (quoting HRS § 1–16 (1993)).
 
Id. at 437-38, 978 P.2d 875-76 (brackets and ellipsis points in
 
original). 
II.
 
A.
 
In 1976, the Hawai' i Legislature enacted HRS Chapter 
671 entitled "Medical Torts." This enactment was prompted andsupported by findings by the Legislature that (1) Hawai' i was 
affected by the "national crisis in the area of medical
 malpractice"; (2) only one insurance carrier was "actively
 
 
6
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
providing medical malpractice coverage in the State"; and (3)
 
"[p]remium rates for medical malpractice insurance have increased
 substantially and are expected to continue to increase under
 existing conditions, both for physicians and surgeons and for
 hospitals[.]" 1976 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 219 (Act 219), § 1 at
 523.
6 The purposes of Act 219, were to (1) "[s]tabilize the
 
6 The legislative findings and purposes set forth in Act 219 are as
follows:
 
Legislative findings and purposes.  (a) The legislature
finds that:
 
(1)	 The national crisis in the area of medical malpractice
affects Hawaii to the potential disadvantage of all
recipients of health care;
 
(2)	 There is only one insurance carrier that is actively
providing medical malpractice coverage in the State;
 
(3)	 Premium rates for medical malpractice insurance have
increased substantially and are expected to continue to
increase under existing conditions, both for physicians and
surgeons and for hospitals; and
 
(4)	 Act 161, Session Laws of Hawaii 1975, was enacted as a
temporary means to become effective in the event that no
insurance carrier would provide medical malpractice
insurance coverage in the State, and insurance provided
under such joint underwriting plan would be subject to the
cost pressures that have led to the existing increasingly
high premium rates.
 
(b)	 The purposes of this Act are to:
 
(1)	 Stabilize the medical malpractice insurance situation by
reintroducing some principles of predictability and
spreading of risk;
 
(2)	 Decrease the costs of the legal system and improve the
efficiency of its procedures to the end that awards are more
rationally connected to actual damages;
 
(3)	 Impose appropriate sanctions on errant health care
providers, recognizing the integral role in this process
played by the licensing system; and
 
(4)	 Provide and improve the machinery for resolving patient
grievances against health care providers by the addition of
lay members to the board of medical examiners, the hiring of
additional staff for the board, increasing the reporting
requirements to the board, and changing the method of
appointments to the board.
 
1976 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 219, § 1 at 523.
 
7
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
medical malpractice insurance situation . . ."; (2) decrease the
 
costs and improve the efficiency of the legal system so that
 awards are more rationally connected to actual damages; (3)
 "[i]mpose appropriate sanctions on errant health care providers";
 and (4) improve the resolution of patient grievances against
 health care providers by the board of medical examiners. Id.
 
In describing Act 219, the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
explained:
 
A significant aspect of the legislative effort to make the
system less costly and more efficient was the creation of
"medical claim conciliation panels [to] review and render
findings and advisory opinions on the issues of liability
and damages in medical tort claims against health care
providers." HRS § 671–11(a). The panels undoubtedly were
established "to encourage early settlement of claims and to
weed out unmeritorious claims." Hse. Stand. Comm. Rep. No.
417, in 1976 House Journal, at 1460. 
Tobasa, 69 Haw. at 312, 741 P.2d at 1285 (brackets in original).
 
B.
 
The term "medical tort," as used in HRS Chapter 671, is
 
defined to mean "professional negligence, the rendering of
 
professional service without informed consent, or an error or
 omission in professional practice, by a health care provider,
 which proximately causes death, injury, or other damage to a
 
7
patient." HRS § 671-1. At the time relevant to this case,  the
term "health care provider" was defined to mean "a physician or
 surgeon licensed under chapter 453, a physician and surgeon
 licensed under chapter 460, a podiatrist licensed under chapter
 463E, a health care facility as defined in section 323D-2, and
 the employees of any of them." HRS § 671-1(1) (emphasis added).
 
The term "health care facility," in turn, is 
defined under HRS § 323D-2 (2010) as follows:
 
"Health care facility" and "health care service" include any
program, institution, place, building, or agency, or portion
thereof, private or public, other than federal facilities or
services, whether organized for profit or not, used,
operated, or designed to provide medical diagnosis,
 
7
 The allegations in Campos's complaint concern events occurring in
2004.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
treatment, nursing, rehabilitative, or preventive care to
any person or persons. The terms include, but are not
limited to, health care facilities and health care services
commonly referred to as hospitals, extended care and
rehabilitation centers, nursing homes, skilled nursing
facilities, intermediate care facilities, hospices for the
terminally ill that require licensure or certification by
the department of health, kidney disease treatment centers
including freestanding hemodialysis units, outpatient
clinics, organized ambulatory health care facilities,
emergency care facilities and centers, home health agencies,
health maintenance organizations, and others providing
similarly organized services regardless of nomenclature.
 
In 2003, the Legislature amended HRS Chapter 671 by
 
adding a new provision, codified as HRS § 671-12.5 (Supp. 2011),
 
which generally requires that before submitting a medical tort
 claim to an MCCP, the claimant or the claimant's attorney must
 (1) consult with a
 licenced physician knowledgeable or
 
experienced in the same medical specialty as the health care
 professional against whom the claim is made and (2) certify based
 on such consultation that the claim is meritorious. 2003 Haw.
 Sess. Laws Act 211, § 1 at 638-39. HRS § 671-12.5 provides, in
 relevant part, that except for medical tort claims based on the
 lack of informed consent, "[a]ny claim filed with [an MCCP] under
 this chapter shall be accompanied by a certificate which declares
 one of the following:"
 
(1) The claimant or the claimant's attorney has
 
consulted with at least one licenced physician "who is
 knowledgeable or experienced in the same medical speciality as
 the health care professional against whom the claim is made, and
 that the claimant or claimant's attorney has concluded on the
 basis of such consultation that there is a reasonable and
 meritorious cause for filing the claim." 
If a licensed physician
 
in the same medical specialty is not available, the claimant or
 claimant's attorney may consult with a licensed physician "who is
 knowledgeable and experienced in a medical speciality that is as
 closely related as practicable to the medical specialty of the
 health care professional against whom the claim is made."
 
(2) The claimant or claimant's attorney was unable to
 
obtain the consultation required by paragraph (1) because it
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
would have impaired the claimant's action on statute of
 
limitations grounds. In this event, the claimant or claimant's 
attorney shall file the certificate required by paragraph (1)
 within ninety days after filing the claim with the MCCP.
 
(3) The claimant or claimant's attorney was unable to
 
obtain the consultation required by paragraph (1) "after the
 claimant or the claimant's attorney had made a good faith attempt
 to obtain such consultation and the physician contacted would not
 agree to such a consultation." 
HRS § 671-12.5(d) provides that if the required
 
certificate is not filed, "the claim shall not be received for
 filing by the medical claim conciliation panel." 
In its conference committee report, the Legislature
 
explained the impetus for and history behind the new legislation
 that became HRS § 671-12.5 as follows: 
Since 1976, medical tort claims against health providers are
required to undergo a merit review by the MCCP before the
claims may be litigated. Your Committee finds that a
 growing number of baseless claims have been filed with the
MCCP which results in increased costs and expenses for
health care providers and health care facilities that must
defend against the baseless claims. These costs are passed
on to physicians in the form of higher medical malpractice
insurance premiums that ultimately result in higher health
care services to the public. 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 69, in 2003 House Journal, at 1727, 2003
 
Senate Journal, at 980 (emphasis added).
 
III.
 
Campos argues that HRS Chapter 671 and its definition
 
of "medical tort" are intended to apply to medical malpractice
 claims, and not to her claims of neglect, abuse, and failure to
 provide a safe home asserted against a residential care home, its
 operator, and its case management agency. The statutory language
 does not provide a definitive answer to the disputed question. 
However, in light of the Legislature's intent in enacting HRS
 Chapter 671, as revealed by HRS Chapter 671's legislative
 history, and viewing the statutory provisions as a whole, we
 conclude that the claims raised in Campos's complaint do not
 constitute "medical torts" within the meaning of HRS § 671-1. 
10
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, Campos was not required to submit her claims to an
 
MCCP as a condition for her filing suit against the Defendants,
 and the Circuit Court erred in dismissing her complaint based on
 her failure to submit her claims to an MCCP.
 
A.
 
The statutory definition of "medical tort" is
 
"professional negligence, the rendering of professional service
 without informed consent, or an error or omission in professional
 practice, by a health care provider, which proximately causes
 death, injury, or other damage to a patient." HRS § 671-1. HRS
 Chapter 671 does not define "professional negligence" or
 "professional practice." We therefore appropriately consider the
 "reason and spirit of the law," the Legislature's purpose in
 enacting it, and the definition of "medical tort" in the context
 of the entire statute to determine its "true meaning." 
The legislative history of HRS Chapter 671 shows that 
it was directed at medical malpractice claims brought against physicians or health facilities arising out of errors or omissions in providing medical care to patients. In enacting HRS Chapter 671, the Legislature made specific findings regarding the national crisis in the area of medical malpractice that was affecting Hawai' i, the limited availability of medical 
malpractice insurance in Hawai' i, and the increasing premium 
rates for medical malpractice insurance "for physicians and surgeons and for hospitals." 1976 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 219, § 1 at 523. The stated purposes for HRS Chapter 671 included "stabiliz[ing] the medical malpractice insurance situation" and decreasing the costs and improving the efficiency of the legal system in awarding damages. Id. 
8 
In light of the legislative history of HRS Chapter 671,
 
8
 An additional purpose was to improve the machinery for resolving
patient grievances against health care providers by the board of medical
examiners, see 1976 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 219, § 1 at 523, a board with the
authority over licences "to practice medicine or surgery." HRS §§ 453-5 and
453-8 (1976).
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
we construe the term "medical tort" as essentially encompassing
 
claims against health care providers for medical malpractice.
 These would generally be claims against physicians and related
 medical professionals arising out of the practice of medicine and
 the provision of medical care or treatment to patients. The
 legislative history of HRS Chapter 671 does not support a
 legislative intent to require that Campos's claims against
 Defendants be submitted to an MCCP as a condition to her filing
 suit. Campos's claims against Defendants are not medical
 malpractice claims. They do not involve claims against
 Defendants arising out of their practice of medicine and their
 provision of medical care or treatment to Campos. 
Our conclusion that Campos's claims against Defendants
 
were not intended by the Legislature to constitute "medical
 torts" that must be submitted to an MCCP is supported by sections
 of HRS Chapter 671 relating to the composition of an MCCP and the
 procedure for filing claims with an MCCP. Under HRS § 671-11
 (Supp. 2004), one member of every three-member MCCP must be a
 licensed "physician or surgeon." 
Moreover, as previously discussed, the Legislature in
 
2003 enacted HRS § 671-12.5, which imposes a general requirement
 that in order to submit a medical tort claim to an MCCP, the
 claimant or the claimant's attorney must first have (1) consulted
 with a licenced physician "who is knowledgeable or experienced in
 the same medical specialty as the health care professional
 against whom the claim is made" and (2) certify based on such
 consultation that "there is a reasonable and meritorious cause
 for filing the claim." The Legislature explained that the reason
 for imposing this additional requirement was to reduce the number
 of "baseless claims" filed with the MCCP and thereby reduce the
 costs for health care providers to defend against such claims,
 which costs are "passed on to physicians in the form of higher
 medical malpractice insurance premiums[.]" 
The HRS Chapter 671 requirements, that a physician be a
 
member of each MCCP and especially that a physician be consulted
 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and provide a basis for concluding that the medical tort claim
 
submitted to the MCCP is meritorious, confirm that HRS Chapter
 671 is directed at medical malpractice claims and does not
 encompass Campos's claims against Defendants. There is no basis
 for believing that a physician would be qualified to render an
 opinion on the standard of care applicable to an expanded ARCH or
 case management agency, or an opinion on whether there had been a
 breach of that standard of care. The required involvement of
 physicians in the process of submitting and resolving MCCP
 medical tort claims establishes that the Legislature intended the
 MCCP to address medical malpractice claims, and not claims
 involving breaches of duty by expanded ARCHs or case management
 agencies.
9
 
B.
 
It is also questionable whether Defendants fall within
 
the definition of "health care provider" for purposes of HRS
 Chapter 671. See HRS § 671-1(1). Expanded ARCHs and case
 
management agencies are not specifically listed among the various
 facilities that qualify as health care providers by virtue of
 being health care facilities. See HRS § 323D-2. 
In addition, the level of direct physician involvement
 
in the operation of an extended ARCH is less than that of other
 facilities listed under the definition of "health care facility,"
 such as skilled nursing facilities or intermediate care
 facilities. At the time relevant to this case, a skilled nursing
 facility was required to have a physician serve as a medical
 director, and an intermediate care facility was required to have
 
9
 The cases construing the term "medical tort" cited by Defendants are
inapposite. Those cases involved claims against physicians, hospitals, a
hospital parent corporation, and a medical group arising out of the medicaldiagnosis and treatment provided by physicians. E.g., Garcia, 90 Hawai' i 425,
978 P.2d 863; Dubin v. Wakuzawa, 89 Hawai' i 188, 970 P.2d 496 (1998); Doe v. 
City and County of Honolulu, 93 Hawai' i 490, 6 P.3d 362 (App. 2000); Lee v.
Hawaii Pacific Health, 121 Hawai' i 235, 216 P.3d 1258 (App. 2009). The 
courts' broad construction of the term medical torts in those cases to include related claims arising out the medical diagnosis and treatment provided byphysicians does not support Defendants' contention that Campos's claimsagainst them constitute medical torts. 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a physician designated to serve as a medical advisor as needed 
for infectious disease control. See Hawai' i Administrative Rules 
(HAR) § 11-94-21 (1985). On the other hand, an expanded ARCH did not require the direct involvement of a physician in its operation. See HAR Title 11, Chapter 101. CMP, as a case 
management agency, would be less likely than Marrhey Care Home to qualify as a health care facility, as CMP's primary involvement in this case was to place Campos with Marrhey Care Home, and CMP was not directly involved in caring for Campos. 
However, we need not decide whether Marrhey Care Home
 
and CMP fall within the definition of "heath care provider." 
This is because we have already concluded that Campos's claims
 against Defendants did not involve medical malpractice claims
 arising out the provision of medical care or treatment to
 patients, and therefore Campos's claims were not "medical torts"
 within the meaning of HRS Chapter 671. 
C.
 
Based on our analysis, we conclude that the Legislature
 
did not intend that Campos's claims against Defendants constitute
 medical torts and that these claims are not medical torts subject
 to the requirements of HRS Chapter 671. By requiring that
 medical tort claims be submitted to an MCCP as a condition
 precedent for filing a lawsuit, HRS Chapter 671 imposes an
 additional barrier on litigants seeking relief on their tort
 claims. A party whose complaint is later dismissed for failing
 to submit a medical tort claim to an MCCP risks losing the claim
 altogether if the dismissal occurs after the statute of
 limitations has run. Under these circumstances, absent clearer
 and more explicit guidance from the Legislature, we believe that
 construing medical torts to encompass claims against extended
 ARCHs and case management agencies, as asserted by Campos against
 Defendants, is not advisable or warranted. The need to provide
 fair notice to parties pursing tort claims on the prerequisites 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for filing suit provides an additional justification for our
 
decision. 
CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the Circuit Court's Amended Judgment and
 
remand the case for further proceedings consistent with our
 Opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Mark S. Kawata
 
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Jamie A. Chuck
 
Alexander T. MacLaren
 for Defendants-Appellees
Marrhey Care Home, LLC and
Marcela Oresco Carlos
 
Sydney K. Ayabe
J. Thomas Weber
 (Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto,
Sia & Nakamura)
for Defendant-Appellee
Case Management Professionals, Inc.
 
15
 