FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I
 
---o0o--­
WALTER L. WAGNER, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
WORLD BOTANICAL GARDENS, INCORPORATED, Defendant-Appellee.
 
NO. 28998
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 04-1-232)
 
DECEMBER 23, 2011
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, REIFURTH AND GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Walter L. Wagner (Wagner),
 
appearing pro se, appeals from the January 15, 2008 Judgment
 
filed in the Circuit Court for the Third Circuit (circuit court)1
 
in favor of Defendant-Appellee World Botanical Gardens, Inc.
 
(WBGI) and against Wagner as to all claims asserted by Wagner in
 
his First Amended Complaint.
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
WBGI operates a botanical garden on the Island of 
Hawai» i. Wagner's First Amended Complaint presented twelve 
claims alleging the following: eight counts for breach of 
contract under eight separate promissory notes from WBGI to 
Wagner dated between January 1, 1996 to January 1, 2003 for 
providing directorship services for WBGI; one count for breach of 
an oral contract and a subsequent novation of the original 
contract for providing directorship services for WBGI in 2003; 
one count for breach of contract under a "series of monthly oral 
contracts" whereby Wagner agreed to loan several of his personal 
credit cards for use by WBGI; one count for quantum meruit due to 
Wagner's services and activities between January 2, 1995 and 
December 31, 2003 benefitting WBGI; and one count for 
constructive trust as to WBGI land. 
On appeal, Wagner asserts the following points of
 
error: (1) the circuit court erred in vacating a default judgment
 
that had been entered against WBGI on September 10, 2004; (2) the
 
circuit court erred in quashing Wagner's service of process of
 
the First Amended Complaint and vacating an entry of default
 
against WBGI dated January 2, 2007; and (3) the circuit court
 
erroneously granted summary judgment to WBGI.2
 
Wagner's opening brief does not meet the requirements 
of Rule 28(b) of the Hawai» i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
in a variety of ways, including a failure in many respects to 
cite appropriately to the record and to provide authority in 
support of his arguments. In light of his pro se status, we 
address his arguments on appeal to the extent they can reasonably 
be discerned. See Hous. Fin. & Dev. Corp. v. Ferguson, 91 
Hawai» i 81, 85-86, 979 P.2d 1107, 1111-12 (1999); Hawaiian 
2
 We have reordered Wagner's points of error to address them in the
order they were addressed by the circuit court.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3Props., Ltd. v. Tauala, 125 Hawai# i 176, 181 n.6, 254 P.3d 487,
492 n.6 (App. 2011).
We conclude that summary judgment was not warranted as
to Wagner's claim based on quantum meruit, and further
proceedings on remand are required as to this claim.  In all
other respects, we affirm the circuit court.
I.Order Setting Aside Default Judgment
The circuit court did not err in setting aside the
September 10, 2004 Judgment (default judgment).  The default
judgment had been entered after a motion by Wagner and a proof
hearing in August 2004 wherein Wagner made various
representations, including that he and his wife, Linda Wagner,
were the only officers and shareholders of WBGI and that WBGI had
no objection to the default judgment.
WBGI filed its motion to set aside the default judgment
on January 18, 2006, approximately one year and four months after
the default judgment had been entered.
Wagner contends that WBGI's motion to set aside the
default judgment was not timely under Rule 60(b) of the Hawai #i
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) because it was not filed within
one year of the default judgment.  He thus argues that the
circuit court was without jurisdiction to re-open the case.  He
also challenges WBGI's assertion of fraud against him and
generally argues that service on WBGI was made by serving the
complaint on his wife.
A.WBGI's Motion To Set Aside Default Judgment Was Timely
Under HRCP Rule 60(b)(4)
Whether a motion under HRCP Rule 60(b) is timely
"implicates the jurisdiction" of the circuit court.  See Child
Support Enforcement Agency v. Doe, 98 Hawai# i 499, 503, 51 P.3d FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
366, 370 (2002).3 "[T]he existence of jurisdiction is a question
 
of law that we review de novo under the right/wrong standard." 
Captain Andy's Sailing, Inc. v. Dep't of Land & Natural Res. , 113
 
Hawai» i 184, 192, 150 P.3d 833, 841 (2006) (citation omitted). 
WBGI's motion to set aside the default judgment
 
asserted that the default judgment was void because service of
 
process was defective and also that Wagner had committed fraud
 
upon the court in obtaining the default judgment. In ruling on
 
the motion, the circuit court determined there was evidence that
 
Wagner had made untrue representations during the August 2004
 
proof hearing and that the default judgment was procured by fraud
 
or misrepresentation. See HRCP Rule 60(b)(3).4 The circuit
 
court also separately determined that service of the complaint
 
upon WBGI had not been proper. Thus, an independent basis
 
asserted by WBGI and relied upon by the circuit court in setting
 
aside the default judgment was that Wagner failed to properly
 
3 The opinion in Child Support Enforcement Agency addresses Rule 60(b)
of the Hawai »i Family Court Rules (HFCR). 98 Hawai »i 499, 51 P.3d 366.
However, HFCR Rule 60(b) and HRCP Rule 60(b) are substantially similar, and
they are likewise materially similar to Rule 60(b) of the Federal Rules ofCivil Procedure (FRCP). Therefore, treatises and cases interpreting HFCR Rule
60(b) and FRCP Rule 60(b) are persuasive for purposes of interpreting HRCPRule 60(b). See Cvitanovich-Dubie v. Dubie, 125 Hawai
»i 128, 147 n.23, 254
P.3d 439, 458 n.23 (2011); Child Support Enforcement Agency, 98 Hawai »i at 503 
n.7, 51 P.3d at 370 n.7; Hayashi v. Hayashi , 4 Haw. App. 286, 290 n.6, 666
P.2d 171, 174 n.6 (1983). 
4 HRCP Rule 60(b) provides, in pertinent part:
 
Mistakes; Inadvertence; Excusable Neglect; Newly
Discovered Evidence; Fraud, etc.  On motion and upon such
terms as are just, the court may relieve a party or a
party's legal representative from a final judgment, order,
or proceeding for the following reasons: (1) mistake,
inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect; (2) newly
discovered evidence which by due diligence could not have
been discovered in time to move for a new trial under Rule
 59(b); (3) fraud (whether heretofore denominated intrinsic
or extrinsic), misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an
adverse party; (4) the judgment is void . . . . The motion
shall be made within a reasonable time, and for reasons (1),
(2), and (3) not more than one year after the judgment,
order, or proceeding was entered or taken. . . .
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
serve WBGI pursuant to HRCP Rule 4(d)(3), the court did not have
 
jurisdiction over WBGI when the default judgment was entered, and
 
consequently the default judgment was void. See HRCP Rule
 
60(b)(4).
 
The circuit court had jurisdiction to entertain WBGI's 
motion to set aside the default judgment to the extent the motion 
was based on HRCP Rule 60(b)(4), which allows a court to grant 
relief from a void final judgment. Wagner's argument, that 
WBGI's motion to set aside the default judgment had to have been 
filed within one year of the default judgment, applies if a 
motion is brought pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(1), (2) or (3). 
See HRCP Rule 60(b); Cvitanovich-Dubie v. Dubie, 125 Hawai» i 128, 
144, 254 P.3d 439, 455 (2011); Buscher v. Boning, 114 Hawai» i 
202, 214 n.5, 159 P.3d 814, 826 n.5 (2007); Child Support 
Enforcement Agency, 98 Hawai» i at 504-05, 51 P.3d at 371-72. The 
one year limitation does not apply to motions asserting that a judgment is void and which is thus based on HRCP Rule 60(b)(4). 
Instead, "a judgment may be declared void upon a HRCP
 
Rule 60(b)(4) motion regardless of how much time has passed
 
between entry of judgment and filing the motion." Bank of Haw.
 
v. Shinn, 120 Hawai» i 1, 11, 200 P.3d 370, 380 (2008); see also 
Calasa v. Greenwell, 2 Haw. App. 395, 398, 633 P.2d 553, 555 
(1981); 11 Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Mary Kay Kane, 
Federal Practice and Procedure § 2862 (2d ed. 1995) (under FRCP 
Rule 60(b)(4), "there is no time limit on an attack on a judgment 
as void."). 
HRCP, Rule 60(b)(4), differs from the other five clauses of
the rule. It does not involve a question of judicial
discretion, does not require the moving party to show a
meritorious defense, and is not restricted by a reasonable
time requirement.
 
Calasa, 2 Haw. App. at 397, 633 P.2d at 555 (citation omitted).
 
The record in this case establishes that WBGI first
 
became aware of the default judgment when it was discovered by
 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
WBGI's counsel in mid-December of 2005. Approximately one month
 
later, WBGI filed its motion to set aside the default judgment. 
WBGI's motion pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) was not precluded by
 
any time limit.
 
B. The Default Judgment Was Void
 
"The determination of whether a judgment is void is not 
a discretionary issue." In re Hana Ranch Co., 3 Haw. App. 141, 
146, 642 P.2d 938, 941 (1982); see also 12 James Wm. Moore et 
al., Moore's Federal Practice  ÿÿ 60.44[5][a] at 60-163 (3d ed. 
2011). We thus review de novo the circuit court's ruling that 
the default judgment was void. See Cvitanovich-Dubie, 125 
Hawai» i at 139, 254 P.3d at 450. 
"A judgment is void only if the court that rendered it 
lacked jurisdiction of the subject matter, or of the parties, or 
if it acted in a manner inconsistent with due process of law." 
In re Genesys Data Techs., Inc. , 95 Hawai» i 33, 38, 18 P.3d 895, 
900 (2001) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); 
Citicorp Mortg., Inc. v. Bartolome , 94 Hawai» i 422, 430, 16 P.3d 
827, 835 (App. 2000). "In order for a trial court to exercise 
personal jurisdiction over a defendant, the defendant must be 
served with a copy of the summons and the complaint pursuant to 
HRCP Rule 4(d)." Citicorp Mortg., Inc. , 94 Hawai» i at 430, 16 
P.3d at 835 (citation omitted). 
Here, the circuit court made the following findings:
 
3. The Complaint herein was served by Plaintiff
upon his wife, Linda M. Wagner, as evidenced by the Return
and Acknowledgment of Service filed herein on July 29, 2004
by Plaintiff.
4. The Return and Acknowledgment of Service also
represented that Linda M. Wagner was the Secretary/Treasurer
of WBGI as of July 28, 2004.
5. Records submitted by WBGI in support of its
motion establish that since August 16, 2003, Annette Emerson
has served as the Secretary/Treasurer of WBGI pursuant to
appointment of the Board of Directors of WBGI and was
serving in that capacity as of July 28, 2004.
6. WBGI has submitted evidence that WBGI's Board of
 
Directors and officers were not notified of the Complaint
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and also did not have notice or knowledge of the Promissory
Note upon which the Complaint was based. Plaintiff has not
 
responded to or explained the evidence submitted by WBGI on
this issue.5
 
Wagner makes general and conclusory arguments on appeal that his
wife was an officer of WBGI at the time the complaint was served
on her on July 28, 2004. From our review, the record establishes
otherwise. WBGI submitted the affidavits of Ken Francik and
 
Annette Emerson, as well as business and other records, showing
 
that when the complaint was served on Linda Wagner, Annette
 
Emerson was the Secretary/Treasurer of WBGI and that Linda Wagner
did not hold those positions, was not an officer or director of
 
WBGI, and did not represent WBGI in any official capacity. The
 
numerous declarations and records submitted by Wagner did not
 
provide evidence supporting a different conclusion.
  
 

 

 
Wagner thus improperly served the complaint on his
 
wife, Linda Wagner, who on July 28, 2004 was not an officer or
 
director of WBGI and was not an agent of WBGI authorized to
 
receive service of process. HRCP Rule 4(d) and Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 414-64(a) (2004 Repl.).6 As a party to this
 
5 The circuit court did not hold an evidentiary hearing and made its
findings based on the written submissions of the parties. We thus review the
 
record de novo.
 
6 As a corporation, WBGI should have been served pursuant to HRCP Rule
4(d)(3) or HRS § 414-64. HRCP Rule 4(d)(3) and (8) state: 
(d) Same: Personal Service.  The summons and complaint
shall be served together. The plaintiff shall furnish the
person making service with such copies as are necessary.
Service shall be made as follows:
 
. . . . 
(3) Upon a domestic or foreign corporation or upon a
partnership or other unincorporated association which is
subject to suit under a common name, by delivering a copy of
the summons and of the complaint to an officer, a managing
or general agent, or to any other agent authorized by
appointment or by law to receive service of process and, if
the agent is one authorized by statute to receive service
and the statute so requires, by also mailing a copy to the
defendant.
 
(continued...)
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
case, it was also improper for Wagner to have been the person
 
effecting service. HRCP Rule 4(c).7
 
Because service of the complaint and summons was not
 
properly made upon WBGI as required by HRCP Rule 4 or
 
HRS § 414-64, the default judgment was void for lack of
 
jurisdiction over WBGI. See  Romero v. Star Mkts., Ltd., 82
 
Hawai» i 405, 411-12, 922 P.2d 1018, 1024-25 (App. 1996). 
The 
circuit court properly set aside the default judgment.
 
Under BDM, Inc. v. Sageco, Inc. , 57 Haw. 73, 76, 549
 
P.2d 1147, 1150 (1976), the following considerations usually
 
apply as to whether an entry of default or a default judgment
 
should be set aside:
 
In general, a motion to set aside a default entry or a
default judgment may and should be granted whenever the
court finds (1) that the nondefaulting party will not be
prejudiced by the reopening, (2) that the defaulting party
has a meritorious defense, and (3) that the default was not
the result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act. The mere
 
fact that the nondefaulting party will be required to prove
his case without the inhibiting effect of the default upon
the defaulting party does not constitute prejudice which
should prevent a reopening.
 
6(...continued)
 
. . . .
 
(8) Upon a defendant or any class referred to in paragraph
(1)
 or (3) of this subdivision of this rule, it is also
sufficient if the summons and complaint are served in the
manner prescribed by any statute.
 
(Emphasis added). Under HRS § 414-64(a), service of process in the state upon
a corporation may be made "in the manner provided by law upon any registered
agent, officer, or director of the corporation who is found within the
jurisdiction of the court[.]"
 
7 HRCP Rule 4(c) states in relevant part:
 
(c) Same: By Whom Served.  Service of all process
shall be made: (1) anywhere in the State by the sheriff or
the sheriff's deputy, by some other person specially
appointed by the court for that purpose, or by any person
who is not a party  and is not less than 18 years of age; or
(2) in any county by the chief of police or the chief's duly
authorized subordinate. . . .
 
(Emphasis added).
 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(citations omitted). However, we do not consider the BDM  test in
 
this case where the default judgment was void due to lack of
 
service of process. See Peralta v. Heights Med. Ctr., Inc., 485
 
U.S. 80 (1988) (as a matter of due process, defendant was
 entitled to have default judgment against him set aside where he
 
did not receive proper service of process, even though he did not
 
have a meritorious defense); Bludworth Bond Shipyard, Inc. v. M/V
 
Caribbean Wind, 841 F.2d 646, 649 (5th Cir. 1988) (when trial
 
court lacks jurisdiction over defendant due to lack of service of
 
process, "the judgment is void and, under [FRCP] Rule 60(b)(4),
 
the [trial] court must set it aside, regardless of whether the
 
movant has a meritorious defense.") (citations omitted); 10 James
 
Wm. Moore et al., Moore's Federal Practice  ÿÿ 55.70[2][d] at 55-92
 
(3d ed. 2011) ("A party is not required to show a meritorious
 
defense when seeking relief from default or default judgment
 
because the party was not served with process. In this situation
 
the court lacks jurisdiction, and the party is entitled to have
 
the default or default judgment set aside on that basis alone,
 
without regard to any other factors (see § 55.84[2])."); 11
 
Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Mary Kay Kane, Federal
 
Practice and Procedure § 2862 (2d ed. 1995).
 
II. Order Setting Aside Entry of Default
 
After the default judgment was set aside, Wagner filed
 
the First Amended Complaint on June 26, 2006. On January 2,
 
2007, Wagner then filed a request for entry of default against
 
WBGI, attesting that the First Amended Complaint had been served
 
upon WBGI and that WBGI had failed to answer or otherwise plead. 
The clerk of the circuit court entered default against WBGI. 
WBGI thereafter filed a "Motion to Quash Service of Process and
 
to Set Aside Entry of Default," asserting that the First Amended
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Complaint had not been properly served. The circuit court
 
granted WBGI's motion to set aside the entry of default.
 
We typically review a trial court's order setting aside 
an entry of default under the abuse of discretion standard. See 
Nature Conservancy v. Nakila, 4 Haw. App. 584, 589-90, 671 P.2d 1025, 1030 (1983) (A "motion to set aside an entry of default is 
addressed to the sound discretion of the trial court."). In this 
case, however, WBGI sought to set aside entry of default due to 
improper service of process of the First Amended Complaint, which 
raises a question of the circuit court's jurisdiction. See 
Citicorp Mortg., Inc., 94 Hawai» i at 430, 16 P.3d at 835. 
Therefore, we review this issue de novo. Captain Andy's Sailing, 
Inc., 113 Hawai» i at 192, 150 P.3d at 841. 
The circuit court properly granted WBGI's motion to set
 
aside the court clerk's entry of default due to improper service
 
of process on Thomas Yeh (Yeh) and Nikol Sumbicay (Sumbicay). 
HRS § 414-64(a) addresses service of process within the state
 
upon a corporation and provides in pertinent part:
 
§414-64 Service on corporation. (a) Service of any
notice or process authorized by law issued against any
corporation, whether domestic or foreign, by any court . . .
may be made in the manner provided by law upon any
registered agent, officer, or director of the corporation
who is found within the jurisdiction of the court . . .; or
if any registered agent, officer, or director cannot be
found, upon the manager or superintendent of the corporation
or any person who is found in charge of the property,
business, or office of the corporation within the
jurisdiction.
 
HRS § 414-64(a).
 
Under HRCP Rule 4(d), service on a corporation is
 
addressed in sub-paragraphs (3) and (8) as follows:
 
Rule 4. Process.
 . . .
 (d) Same: Personal service. The summons and complaint
shall be served together. The plaintiff shall furnish the
person making service with such copies as are necessary.
Service shall be made as follows:
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . .
 (3) Upon a domestic or foreign corporation or upon a
partnership or other unincorporated association which is
subject to suit under a common name, by delivering a copy of
the summons and of the complaint to an officer, a managing
or general agent, or to any other agent authorized by
appointment or by law to receive service of process and, if
the agent is one authorized by statute to receive service
and the statute so requires, by also mailing a copy to the
defendant.
 . . .
 (8) Upon a defendant or any class referred to in paragraph
(1) or (3) of this subdivision of this rule, it is also
sufficient if the summons and complaint are served in the
manner prescribed by any statute.
 
Further, HRCP Rule 4(c) specifies those who are authorized to
 
effect service:
 
Service of all process shall be made: (1) anywhere in the
State by the sheriff or the sheriff's deputy, by some other
person specially appointed by the court for that purpose, or
by any person who is not a party and is not less than 18
years of age; or (2) in any county by the chief of police or
the chief's duly authorized subordinate. . . .
 
The relevant facts are not disputed. Wagner attempted
 
service on WBGI in two ways, neither of which constituted valid
 
service of process under HRS § 414-64(a) or HRCP Rule 4. First,
 
Linda Wagner's certificate of service and subsequent declaration
 
establish that she mailed a copy of the summons and First Amended
 
Complaint via U.S. mail to Yeh at his business address on
 
W. Lanikaula Street in Hilo, Hawai» i. Yeh is WBGI's counsel and 
has been its registered agent located in Hilo, Hawai» i since 
December 21, 2005. Yeh acknowledged that he received the 
documents by mail on October 31, 2006, but informed Wagner that 
this form of service was not proper. Yeh attested, and it is not 
disputed, that he was physically present in Hilo at relevant 
times and that Walter Wagner has been to his office, yet no 
attempts were made to personally serve Yeh with the First Amended 
Complaint. Pursuant to HRS § 414-64(a) and HRCP Rules 4(c) and 
4(d), Yeh should have been served in person. Mailing the 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complaint and summons to Yeh in these circumstances is not a
 
method allowed under the statute or rule. HRCP Rule 4(c)
 
specifies who is authorized to serve process and does not include
 
service by mail. In turn, HRCP Rule 4(d)(3) requires the method
 
of service on a corporation to be "by delivering a copy" of the
 
summons and complaint to an individual listed therein. Moreover,
 
contrary to Wagner's argument, Yeh's knowledge of the lawsuit did
 
not cure the jurisdictional defect. See Tropic Builders, Ltd. v.
 
Naval Ammunition Depot Lualualei Quarters, Inc., 48 Haw. 306,
 
319, 402 P.2d 440, 448 (1965) (footnote omitted) ("[I]t is
 
service of process, not actual knowledge of the commencement of
 
the action which confers jurisdiction. Otherwise a defendant
 
could never object to the sufficiency of service of process,
 
since he must have knowledge of the suit in order to make such
 
objection.").
 
Second, Wagner attempted service on WBGI by delivery of
 
the summons and First Amended Complaint to Sumbicay while she was
 
working at the botanical gardens on December 8, 2006. Both
 
Wagner and Linda Wagner attested that Sumbicay served as a
 
receptionist at the botanical gardens, while WBGI submitted
 
evidence that Sumbicay was hired through a temporary employment
 
agency to work at the garden's visitor center. In either case,
 
it is undisputed that Sumbicay was working at the botanical
 
gardens on December 8, 2006, but was not a registered agent,
 
officer or director of WBGI. She also was not a managing or
 
general agent, or any other agent authorized to receive service
 
of process. Additionally, even assuming Sumbicay was a person
 
"found in charge of the property," serving the First Amended
 
Complaint on her was not proper under HRS ÿÿ 414-64(a). Wagner
 
knew that Yeh was the registered agent for WBGI and knew where to
 
locate him.
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In sum, Wagner's attempts at serving WBGI wholly failed
 
to comply with HRS § 414-64(a) or HRCP Rule 4, and thus the
 
circuit court properly set aside the entry of default pursuant to
 
HRCP Rule 55(c).8
 
III. Summary Judgment Rulings
 
To the extent it can be discerned from Wagner's opening
 
brief, he challenges the circuit court's grant of summary
 judgment on his claims for breach of contract under the
 
promissory notes, breach of contract for loans through his
 
personal credit cards, and quantum meruit. Wagner does not
 
challenge the judgment as to his claim for breach of contract on
 
the alleged oral contract and novation for services in 2003 or
 
the claim for a constructive trust as to WBGI land.
 
A. Standard of Review
 
We review the circuit court's grant of summary judgment
 
to WBGI under a de novo standard of review. Querubin v. Thronas,
 
107 Hawai» i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005). 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Id. (citations omitted); HRCP Rule 56(c).
 
A summary judgment motion challenges the very existence or
legal sufficiency of the claim or defense to which it is
addressed. In effect, the moving party takes the position
 
8
 Similar to the order setting aside the default judgment, addressed
 
supra, we do not consider the test set out in BDM  regarding the order setting
aside the court clerk's entry of default. In both situations, there was no
proper service on WBGI and therefore the circuit court did not have
jurisdiction over WBGI to issue either the default judgment or the entry of
default. See 10 James Wm. Moore et al., Moore's Federal Practice
ÿÿ 55.70[2][d] at 55-92 (3d ed. 2011).
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that he or she is entitled to prevail because his or her
opponent has no valid claim for relief or defense to the
action. Accordingly, the moving party has the initial burden
of identifying those portions of the record demonstrating
the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. The moving
party may discharge his or her burden by demonstrating that
if the case went to trial there would be no competent
evidence to support a judgment for his or her opponent. For
if no evidence could be mustered to sustain the nonmoving
party's position, a trial would be useless.
 
Sprague v. Cal. Pac. Bankers & Ins. Ltd. , 102 Hawai» i 189, 202, 
74 P.3d 12, 25 (2003) (citation omitted).
 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of
substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as a
matter of law. This burden has two components.
 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing
support for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material
fact exists with respect to the essential elements of the
claim or defense which the motion seeks to establish or
 which the motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed
facts, it is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
law. Only when the moving party satisfies its initial burden
of production does the burden shift to the non-moving party
to respond to the motion for summary judgment and
demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial.
 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving party
and requires the moving party to convince the court that no
genuine issue of material fact exists and that the moving
part is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law.
 
Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc. , 111 Hawai» i 286, 
295-96, 141 P.3d 459, 468-69 (2006) (citations omitted).
 
"[A] motion for summary judgment is used as a means to
 
avoid useless trials, and at the same time achieve a final
 
determination on the merits . . . in order to simplify trial or
 
better prepare for trial." Haw. Prince Hotel Waikiki Corp. v.
 
City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 89 Hawai» i 381, 393, 974 P.2d 21, 33 
(1999) (quoting J. Friedenthal, M. Kane & A. Miller, Civil
 
Procedure: Summary Judgment § 9.1, at 434-35 (1985)) (quotations
 
and brackets omitted).
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. Promissory Notes and Credit Card Loans
 
Wagner's First Amended Complaint claims breach of
 
contract under eight promissory notes allegedly executed at the
 beginning of each year between 1996 to 2003 by "Walter L. Wagner,
 
President, WBGI" and "Linda M. Wagner, Secretary/Treasurer,
 
WBGI." The First Amended Complaint alleges as to each promissory
 
note that Wagner had entered into an oral contract with WBGI to
 
perform directorship services for WBGI, that he had fulfilled the
 
terms of his oral contract, and that due to WBGI's inability to
 
pay for the services "WBGI, by and through its officers of
 
record, signed the Promissory Note attached" and deferred payment
 
for "ten years, or until such earlier time that demand for
 
payment was made."
 
With regard to the credit card loans, the First Amended
 
Complaint alleges that:
 
40. Commencing circa January, 1997, and continuously
thereafter, plaintiff Walter L. Wagner entered into a series
of monthly oral contracts with WBGI, whereby he agreed to
loan several of his personal credit cards to WBGI for use by
WBGI for making materials and services purchases for WBGI
and for making cash advances to WBGI's corporate checking
account, in light of WBGI's then inability to qualify for a
corporate credit card program.
 
41. Under the terms of the loan of credit cards, WBGI was
obligated to monthly pay all charges made on the cards that
were for WBGI purposes. Any charges and balances owing not
paid were to be carried over to the following month's oral
contract, with interest charged thereon by the credit card
copies. All interest accumulated thereon, charged by the
lending institutions, likewise became an obligation of WBGI,
as if it were in stead [sic] of plaintiff. Demand for full
 repayment could be made at any time by plaintiff, and
failure to repay same did not stop any accumulating credit
card interest. Plaintiff was obligated to maintain copies
of his credit card statements, so as to be able to make an
accounting thereon, and subtract out any personal charges
made on his cards.
 
42. Over the course of several years, the monthly balance
on said credit cards grew larger, with the amount owed to
plaintiff increasing to an amount in excess of $80,000 at
the time of the breach of the repayment, which breach of
payments on the monthly charge balances occurred circa
May 24, 2004. Since that time, the interest on the balance
owing by WBGI to plaintiff has continued by the credit card
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
companies, which total balance owing now exceeds
$120,000.00.
 
43. Demand for payment in full was made when WBGI first
breached its repayment program, but no further payments have
been made by WBGI.
 
In support of its motion for summary judgment, WBGI
 
submitted the affidavits of Kenneth A. Francik (Francik), a WBGI
 
shareholder and Chairman of the Board for WBGI as of August 2003,
 
and Leslie Cobos (Cobos), a WBGI shareholder and Secretary for
 
WBGI from approximately September 2004. In Francik's affidavit
 
he attests in pertinent part:
 
15. Since August of 2003, when I was appointed as
Chairman of the Board, Walter Wagner reported to me first as
President of WBGI and beginning in December of 2003, as
WBGI's Garden Director, pursuant to a contract I signed on
behalf of WBGI, as its Chairman of the Board until Walter
Wagner's contract was terminated in May of 2004. At no time
 
prior to this contract was there any contract or salary
package for Mr. Wagner which was approved by either WBGI's
shareholders, nor did I ever see or hear of any promissory
notes being due to Mr. Wagner. Prior to Walter Wagner
negotiating and signing his Garden Directors [sic]
independent contract, at no time did he ever mention or
produce any documentation that indicated he was owed any
back pay or any other claims for monetary compensation.
 
. . . .
 
34. Walter Wagner has never presented evidence to
WBGI's Board to substantiate his claims. He now claims he
 
served WBGI under various employment contracts allegedly
entered into between Wagner and WBGI from 1995 through 2003,
yet WBGI has no record of any such employment contracts.
WBGI has no records indicating that Walter Wagner was ever
an employee of WBGI. Wagner has not produced any W-2 or any
tax returns as to his claim of salary.
 
35. Further, the financial accounting records
maintained by the Wagner's [sic] when they ran WBGI until
2003 do not contain any evidence indicating that WBGI owes
Wagner back wages. For example, there is no record or
corporate resolution that WBGI owed a liability for unpaid
wages or that Wagner's compensation was deferred.
 
In Cobos's affidavit, she attests in pertinent part:
 
6. I am currently a WBGI shareholder. I am also
 
the Secretary of WBGI and have been so since about
September 25, 2004. I have generally maintained custody and
control over WBGI's records. . . .
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
9. At no time prior to my investment, was it ever
disclosed by Walter Wagner or Dan Perkins that Walter Wagner
was owed credit card debts, deferred compensation or
promissory notes by WBGI or any entity I believed I was
investing in.
 
. . . .
 
14. At no time was it ever disclosed to me that
 
WBGI, the Nevada corporation, had ever agreed to assume the
debts or liabilities of a defunct Utah corporation, nor have
I seen any corporate resolution to this effect.
 
. . . .
 
39. WBGI's records do not contain any promissory
notes, deferred compensation or employment agreements,
resolutions, or any other evidence that WBGI owed Walter
Wagner for such sums, or had agreed to assume any
pre-incorporation debts.
 
The affidavits of Francik and Cobos established that,
 
based on their knowledge as well as the records of WBGI, there
 
existed no amounts owing to Wagner from WBGI for the promissory
 
notes or for the alleged credit card loans. In response,
 
therefore, Wagner was required to present evidence raising a
 
genuine issue of material fact that these obligations actually
 
existed.
 
Even considered in the light most favorable to him as
 
the non-moving party, the evidence Wagner submitted in response
 
to WBGI's summary judgment motion failed to make such a showing. 
For instance, none of the alleged promissory notes were sworn to,
 
attached to any affidavit, or properly authenticated. Under HRCP
 
Rule 56(e), there was no admissible evidence as to the existence
 
or terms of the promissory notes.9 At most, Wagner's affidavits
 
make general reference to the promissory notes attached to the
 
9
 HRCP Rule 56(e) states in relevant part: "Supporting and opposing
affidavits shall be made on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as
would be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the affiant
is competent to testify to the matters stated therein. Sworn or certified
 
copies of all papers or parts thereof referred to in an affidavit shall be
attached thereto or served therewith." (Emphasis added).
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
First Amended Complaint. This does not meet the requirements of
 
HRCP Rule 56(e).
 
Likewise, the affidavits submitted in opposition to
 
WBGI's summary judgment motion failed to establish the existence
 
and/or terms of the alleged contract for the credit card loans. 
Wagner also failed to provide any admissible evidence showing the
 
amounts owed to him or establishing any credit card expenses that
 
were WBGI-related expenses.
 
Based on our de novo review of the record, Wagner
 
failed to make a showing that there were genuine issues of
 material fact as to his claims under the alleged promissory notes
 
or for the alleged credit card loans. For these reasons, we
 
conclude the circuit court was warranted in granting summary
 
judgment for WBGI on these claims.
 
C.	 Quantum Meruit
 
With regard to his quantum meruit claim, Wagner alleges
 
in his First Amended Complaint that:
 
44.	 [C]ommencing circa January 2, 1995 and continuously
thereafter through to December 31, 2005, plaintiff
Walter L. Wagner engaged in services and activities
which rendered a net positive benefit to WBGI and its
land holdings, by improving the lands it owns, and
creating a Botanical Gardens with an attendant large
cash flow.
 
Wagner alleges that the fair market value of the services
 
rendered to WBGI exceeds $700,000 and that WBGI has been enriched
 
in that amount. He claims WBGI is indebted to him in the sum of
 
$700,000 less $122,013.25 already paid to him.
 
The circuit court granted summary judgment to WBGI on
 
the quantum meruit claim on the following grounds:
 
20. Wagner's claim for the value of his services in
improving the WBGI property, whether based upon independent
contractor agreements or in quantum meruit is also barred to
the extent that he was not a licensed contractor. On the
 
face of the promissory notes, he was an independent
contractor, not an employee . . . . HRS Section 444-22
prohibits persons who are unlicensed contractors "from
recovering for work done, or materials or supplies
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
furnished, or both on a contract or on the basis of the
reasonable value thereof, in a civil action, if such person
failed to obtain a license under this chapter prior to
contracting for such work." 
21. Wagner's claim for quantum meruit is also barred by
the doctrine of unclean hands. Wagner's failure to disclose
the amount of his contract or claimed debt, and his
representations to shareholders that neither officers or
directors would be compensated estop him from making this
claim, and he also breached his fiduciary duty.
 
On appeal, Wagner argues that he built the botanical
 
gardens and is owed for his services. WBGI does not contest
 
Wagner's claim that he did extensive work regarding the botanical
 
gardens, but argues that Wagner's quantum meruit claim is barred
 
by HRS § 444-22 (1993 Repl.) and the doctrine of unclean hands. 
From our de novo review of the record, we conclude there are
 
genuine issues of material fact that preclude summary judgment as
 
to the quantum meruit claim.
 
It is a truism that "[a] person confers a benefit upon
 
another if he gives to the other possession of or some other
 
interest in money, land, chattels or [choses] in action, . .
 
. , or in any way adds to the other's security or
 
advantage." . . . And it is axiomatic that "[a] person who
has been unjustly enriched at the expense of another is
required to make restitution to the other."
 
Durette v. Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc. , 105 Hawai» i 490, 502, 
100 P.3d 60, 72 (2004) (citations omitted). "[A] claim for 
unjust enrichment requires only that a plaintiff prove that he or 
she 'confer[red] a benefit upon' the opposing party and that the 
'retention [of that benefit] would be unjust.'" Id.  at 504, 100 
P.3d at 74 (citation omitted). 
Under HRS § 444-22, if Wagner was acting as an
 
independent contractor and engaging in services covered by HRS
 Chapter 444, his claim for quantum meruit would be barred as he
 
produced no evidence that he was licensed as required under HRS
 
Chapter 444. See HRS § 444-22. A contractor is defined as: 
[A]ny person who by oneself or through others offers to
undertake, or holds oneself out as being able to undertake,
or does undertake to alter, add to, subtract from, improve,
 
19
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
enhance, or beautify any realty or construct, alter, repair,
add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck, or demolish any
building, highway, road, railroad, excavation, or other
structure, project, development, or improvement, or do any
part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other
structures or works in connection therewith.
 
HRS § 444-1 (Supp. 2010). HRS § 444-9 (1993 Repl.) requires that
 
persons within the purview of HRS Chapter 444 be licensed. In
 
turn, HRS § 444-22 provides: 
§ 444-22 Civil action.  The failure of any person to
comply with any provision of this chapter shall prevent such
person from recovering for work done, or materials or
supplies furnished, or both on a contract or on the basis of
the reasonable value thereof, in a civil action, if such
person failed to obtain a license under this chapter prior
to contracting for such work.
 
(Emphasis added). See Shultz v. Lujan, 86 Hawai» i 137, 140, 948 
P.2d 558, 561 (App. 1997) (footnote omitted) ("Under 
HRS § 444-22, if a person contracts to perform the work of a 
contractor but, at the time of contracting, the person is not 
licensed to do the work, then that person is prohibited from 
bringing civil action to recover payment for work done."). 
The First Amended Complaint alleges that "[a]t all
 
times herein mentioned, plaintiff Walter L. Wagner contracted
 
with defendant WBGI to engage in various services discussed
 
further below" and does not allege that Wagner was an employee of
 
WBGI. Therefore, by Wagner's own claim, there is no dispute that
 
he was not acting in the capacity of an employee who would be
 
exempt from HRS Chapter 444. See HRS 444-2(6) (Supp. 2010). 
However, based on the evidence adduced as to the quantum meruit
 
claim, genuine issues of material fact exist as to whether Wagner
 
was providing services covered by HRS Chapter 444 that required a
 
license.
 
Wagner and his wife are far from consistent in their
 
affidavits as to the work he performed for WBGI, and their
 
affidavits indicate that significant portions of the work he
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
claims to have done may be contracting work covered by HRS
 
Chapter 444. However, Wagner also did attest that his garden
 
director services "included a wide variety of functions,
 
including hiring, training and supervising employees, providing
 
gardening services, negotiating contracts, etc." Such services,
 
or at least a part of those services, may be outside the scope of
 
HRS Chapter 444. Therefore, genuine issues of material fact
 
exist as to: the services Wagner provided to WBGI that would be a
 
basis for his quantum meruit claim; whether he was required to be
 
licensed under HRS Chapter 444 to provide such services; and
 
whether such services that he rendered would be barred from
 
recovery under HRS § 444-22.
 
Genuine issues of material fact also exist whether 
Wagner is barred from recovering on his quantum meruit claim due 
to unclean hands. Quantum meruit is an equitable claim. Under 
the doctrine of unclean hands, it is expressed that "he who comes 
into equity must come with clean hands[.]" 7's Enters., Inc. v. 
Del Rosario,  111 Hawai
» i 484, 494, 143 P.3d 23, 33 (2006). As 
stated by the Hawai» i Supreme Court regarding the doctrine of 
unclean hands: 
Broad as the principle is in its operation, it must
still be taken with reasonable limitations; it does
not apply to every unconscientious act or inequitable
conduct on the part of a plaintiff. The maxim,
 considered as a general rule controlling the
 
administration of equitable relief in particular
 controversies, is confined to misconduct in regard to,
 or at all events connected with, the matter in
 
litigation, so that it has in some measure affected
 
the equitable relations subsisting between the two
 
parties, and arising out of the transaction; it does
not extend to any misconduct, however gross, which is
unconnected with the matter in litigation, and with
which the opposite party has no concern. When a court
 of equity is appealed to for relief it will not go
outside of the subject matter of the controversy, and
make its interference to depend upon the character and
conduct of the moving party in no way affecting the
equitable right which he asserts against the
defendant, or the relief which he demands.
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Woodward v. Auyong, 33 Haw. 810, 811 12 (1936) (emphasis
added). It has also been stated by this court that the
clean hands doctrine "is not one of absolutes, and each case
must be judged on its particular facts and circumstances."
Shinn v. Edwin Yee, Ltd., 57 Haw. 215, 230 31, 553 P.2d 733,
 744 (1976) (citing Keystone Driller Co. v. Gen. Excavator
 
Co., 290 U.S. 240, 54 S.Ct. 146, 78 L.Ed. 293 (1933)).
 
Id. at 494-95, 143 P.3d at 33-34. Whether a party "engaged in
 
iniquitous conduct is primarily a question of fact[.]" Shinn v.
 
Edwin Yee, Ltd., 57 Haw. 215, 230, 553 P.3d 733, 743 (1976).
 
Wagner's quantum meruit claim extends over numerous
 
years and, although there is a multitude of evidence suggesting
 
questionable conduct by Wagner, we are unable to agree with the
 
circuit court that summary judgment is warranted on this claim
 
based on a factual finding of unclean hands. From our review of
 
the record in this case and the numerous affidavits submitted
 
regarding WBGI's summary judgment motion, we conclude that there
 
are genuine issues of material fact on the question of unclean
 
hands pertaining to Wagner's quantum meruit claim.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Judgment filed on
 
January 15, 2008 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is
 
vacated to the extent that it enters judgment on Wagner's claim
 
for quantum meruit in favor of WBGI and against Wagner. This
 
case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings on
 
Wagner's claim for quantum meruit, consistent with this Opinion. 
In all other respects, we affirm the Judgment entered on
 
January 15, 2008.
 
On the briefs:
 
Walter L. Wagner
Plaintiff-Appellant Pro Se
 
Thomas L.H. Yeh
 (Tsukazaki Yeh & Moore)
for Defendant-Appellee
 
22
 