FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
–––O0O–––
 
KEOLA CHILDS, Trustee under that certain unrecorded
Revocable Trust of Keola Childs, PHILIP L. WILSON,
III and CLARE H. WILSON, and DOUGLAS D. TROXEL,
Trustee of the Douglas D. Troxel Living Trust,
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
v.
 
ALAN J. HARADA, WALTER HARADA, and KAREN FUKE,
Co-Trustees under that certain Trust made by
Junichiro Harada, dated April 21, 1981, MIKIE
HARADA, ALAN J. HARADA, SHARON S. HARADA,
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
and
 
JACK HIDETO OKAYAMA, WALLACE SADAO OKAYAMA, HATSUNE O. HIRANO,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
ETHEL NOBUKI TOKI, Trustee of the Ethel N. Toki
Revocable Living Trust, JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE
DOES 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS
1-10, DOE ENTITIES 1-10, DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES
1-10 AND DOE ELEEMOSYNARY CORPORATIONS 1-10,
Defendants
 
NO. 29968
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-0122K)
 
SEPTEMBER 30, 2013
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., FUJISE AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY REIFURTH, J.
 
The parties to this case own neighboring parcels of 
real property makai of the old Government Road, now known as 
Mâmalahoa Highway (the "Highway") in Holualoa, District of North Kona, on the Island of Hawai' i. The case arose out of an action 
in which the Plaintiffs-Appellants sought, in part, to enjoin and restrain the Defendants-Appellees from interfering with or obstructing their use of two adjacent easements located on adjacent parcels for ingress, egress, and utility access across Defendants-Appellees' properties. The Circuit Court of the Third 
1/
Circuit ("Circuit Court")  issued an injunction related to one
of the easements while denying an injunction related to the
 other.
 
This appeal involves three sets of parties, a primary
 
appeal, and a cross-appeal. 
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-
Appellees consist of Keola Childs, as Trustee under that certain
 unrecorded Revocable Trust of Keola Childs ("Childs"), Philip L.
 Wilson III and Clare H. Wilson (the "Wilsons"), and Douglas D.
 Troxel, as Trustee of the Douglas D. Troxel Living Trust
 ("Troxel") (collectively, the "Plaintiffs-Appellants").
2/
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants filed a claim below for declaratory and
 injunctive relief, naming as defendants, among others,
 Defendants-Appellees Jack Hideto Okayama and Wallace Sadao
 
3/
Okayama (the "Okayamas");  and Defendants-Appellees/Cross-
Appellants Alan J. Harada, as Co-Trustee under that certain trust
 made by Junichiro Harada Dated April 21, 1981; Mikie Harada,
 Trustee under that certain trust made by Mikie Harada, dated
 April 21, 1981; Alan J. Harada; and Sharon Harada (the
 
1/
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided.
 
2/
 On October 11, 2005, Troxel was added as a plaintiff in the First
Amended Complaint. Plaintiffs-Appellants, as used herein, refers to Childs
and the Wilsons where the context pertains to events or proceedings before
Troxel was added and includes Troxel where the context pertains to events or
proceedings after he was added.
 
3/
 Hatsune O. Hirano ("Hirano") co-owns land with the Okayamas and
was also a named defendant, but for convenience, in reference to the parties
as they pertain to such land, we refer to them simply as the Okayamas, and
unless otherwise indicated or apparent from context, we intend that such
reference include Hirano. 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Haradas").
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants appeal and the Haradas cross-
appeal from the June 25, 2009 Final Judgment as to All Claims and
 
All Parties ("Final Judgment") entered by the Circuit Court. The
 Final Judgment was issued pursuant to prior orders including (1)
 the June 16, 2008 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
 Order Granting Defendants Okayama[s'] Motion for Summary Judgment
 Filed on 2/25/08"; (2) the March 16, 2009 "Finding[s] of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for
 Partial Summary Judgment Against [the Haradas], Filed on February
 21, 2008 and Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Entry of Default
 Judgment on Ethel Nobuki Toki on All Counts of the Complaint
 Filed, February 21, 2008"; and (3) the July 3, 2008 "Clerk's
 Taxation of Costs in Favor of Defendants [the Okayamas]." 
Additionally, the Haradas cross-appeal from the
 
July 22, 2005 "Order Granting Plaintiff's Ex Parte Motion for
 Issuance of Temporary Restraining Order," and the December 23,
 2005 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting
 Plaintiff's Motion for Preliminary Injunction Filed July 18,
 2005." 
We hold that the Circuit Court erred in concluding,
 
upon motions for summary judgment, that there were no genuine
 issues of material fact regarding both Plaintiffs-Appellants'
 intent to abandon an easement over the Okayamas' land and whether
 the Okayamas had terminated by prescription Plaintiffs-
Appellants' rights in that easement. We affirm the Circuit
 Court's conclusion that it had jurisdiction to hear that portion
 of the case concerning the easement over the Haradas' land court
 property, but conclude that it erred in resolving the dispute
 over the scope of the easement on summary judgment because there
 were disputed issues of material fact. Consequently, we affirm
 in part and vacate/remand for further proceedings.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On June 14, 2005, Plaintiffs-Appellants filed a
 
Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief ("Complaint")
 
against, among others, the Okayamas and the Haradas, asserting
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
land ownership as follows. Childs claimed ownership of Parcel 6, 
Tax Map Key ("TMK") (3) 7-5-012:006, located in North Kona, County of Hawai' i, State of Hawai' i. The Wilsons claimed 
ownership of Parcel 8, TMK (3) 7-5-012:008, and Troxel subsequently claimed ownership of Parcel 38, TMK (3) 7-5-012:038. Plaintiffs-Appellants alleged that Alan J. Harada, Walter Harada, and Karen Fuke owned a one-half undivided interest in Parcel 31, TMK (3) 7-5-012:031, also known as Lot 8-C (which was formerly part of Lot 8 before it was subdivided), Mikie Harada owned the other one-half undivided interest of Parcel 31, and Alan J. Harada and Sharon S. Harada owned a leasehold interest in the entirety of Parcel 31. Plaintiffs-Appellants also contended that the Okayamas owned a one-half undivided interest in Parcel 29, TMK (3) 7-5-012:029, independent of Hirano, and Hirano owned the other one-half undivided interest in Parcel 29. Finally, Plaintiffs-Appellants asserted that Ethel Nobuki Toki ("Toki") owned Parcel 32, TMK (3) 7-5-012:032. 
The land at issue consists of a southern portion, which
 
includes the Haradas' and Toki's parcels ("Southern Portion"),
 and a northern portion which is comprised of the Okayamas'
 parcel, Troxel's parcel, Childs' parcel, and the Wilsons' parcel
 ("Northern Portion"). The Southern Portion was derived from
 Royal Patent Grant 863 ("RPG 863"), and the Northern Portion was
 derived from Royal Patent Grant 982 ("RPG 982"). The Northern
 Portion is divided into two portions: the makai portion, which
 includes the Wilsons' and Childs' parcels ("Makai Portion"), and
 the mauka portion, which includes Troxel's parcel and the
 Okayamas' parcel ("Mauka Portion"). The Mauka Portion parcels
 separate the Makai Portion parcels from the Highway. 
Two easements run along a portion of the boundary that
 
divides the Northern Portion from the Southern Portion. The
 first easement, referred to as the 25' Right of Way, traverses
 the Mauka Portion's entire southern boundary. The second
 easement, just south of the 25' Right of Way, is referred to as
 Easement 3, and traverses the entire northern boundary of the
 Southern Portion. The two easements run adjacent to each other,
 in a mauka-makai orientation, along the southern boundary of the
 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mauka Portion/northern boundary of part of the Southern Portion;
 
thereafter, Easement 3 continues further makai, along and
 coterminous with the northern boundary of Toki's parcel in the
 Southern Portion, abutting both Childs' and a portion of the
 Wilsons' parcel in the Northern Portion. 
The map located on the following page depicts the
 
parcels and easements at issue:
4/
 
A.	 The Okayamas, the Northern Portion, and the 25' Right
of Way
 
The Complaint asserted that RPG 982 (constituting the
 
Northern Portion) was comprised, in relevant part, of Parcels 5
 
(TMK (3) 7-6-012:005), 6, 8, 29, and 38. It also contended that,
 in 1896, a circuit court issued a decree ("1896 Decree") that
 partitioned RPG 982 from sixty acres into two roughly thirty-acre
 parcels; the aforementioned Mauka and Makai Portions. The Mauka
 Portion included what became Parcels 29 and 38. The Makai
 Portion included what became Parcels 5, 6, 7, and 8. The Mauka
 and Makai Portions were divided by the property line between
 Parcels 5 and 38 running parallel to the Highway ("Mauka/Makai
 Boundary Line"). See Map infra. The 1896 Decree also identified
 
a "25' Right of Way" as running from the Highway to the southern
 tip of the Mauka/Makai Boundary Line by way of the Mauka
 Portion's southern boundary, thus traversing what became Parcels
 29 and 38, and thereby providing Highway access to what became
 Parcels 5, 6, and 8.
5/ Plaintiffs-Appellants requested
 
declaratory relief in the form of a judgment entitling them to an
 appurtenant right to use the 25' Right of Way over Parcel 29 and
 injunctive relief such that the Okayamas would not interfere with
 their use of the 25' Right of Way for access and water line
 purposes.
 
4/
 There are limited references in this opinion to Lots 7 and 8-C (or
8), particularly in the context of older land court documents. References to
 
Lots 7 and 8-C (the latter comprising the majority of what was Lot 8 before it
was subdivided) correspond to Parcels 32 and 31, respectively.
 
5/
 Specifically, the 1896 Decree stated that the Mauka Portion was
"subject[ed] to a right of way from the [Makai Portion] to the [Highway];
which right of way shall be twenty-five feet wide and situate [sic] on the
south side of the [Mauka Portion]." 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. The Haradas, the Southern Portion, and Easement 3
 
The Complaint also asserted that on June 8, 1953, the
 
Roman Catholic Church ("Church") filed Land Court Application No.
 
1666 (the "Application") to register and confirm its title to a
 twelve-lot portion of RPG 863. The Complaint alleged that the
 Application specified that Lots 7 and 8 (Parcels 32 and 31,
 respectively, and constituting the Southern Portion) were subject
 to a 16' easement for roadway purposes and designated this as
 "Easement 3." The Application further specified that there were
 public ways running through the twelve lots, disclaimed ownership
 of any public land, and requested that the public ways be
 determined. The Complaint also cited a June 18, 1953 land court
 examiner's report,
6/ which stated that:
 
Certain of the lots, Nos. 3, 4, 7, 8, and 12 are
subject to easements for either public road purposes
or electric transmission lines, while Lot. [sic] 10 is
subject to an easement in favor of Exclusion 2. All
 easements are described fully in the application and
are shown on the map accompanying same.
 
(Emphasis omitted; brackets in original.) The Complaint
 
referenced a map filed with the Application, which depicted
 Easement 3 as traversing the northern boundary of Parcels 31 and
 32 (i.e., the Southern Portion). Plaintiffs-Appellants cited the
 land court's decision as stating:
 
that the applicant has and possesses title in fee
simple to the land described in the application and
delineated and described upon the map or plan
accompanying the application and the survey as
approved by the territorial surveyor, proper for
registration, subject, however, to the easements as
set forth in the application[.]
 
(Brackets in original.) 
In addition, the Complaint asserted that when the
 
Church conveyed Parcel 31 (Lot 8) to the Haradas' predecessor in
 
interest, the deed stated that:
 
Lot 8 is SUBJECT, HOWEVER, to an Easement sixteen
(16.00) feet wide for a roadway designated as EASEMENT
 
6/
 The Southern Portion is further differentiated from the Northern
 
Portion by the fact that the parcels included in the Southern Portion are
included in the land court, or Torrens System, of property registration. The
 land court system is governed by chapter 501 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes
("HRS"). The parcels included in the Northern Portion, on the other hand, are
included in the Regular System of registration, which is governed by chapter
502, HRS.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3 on the map filed together with Land Court
Application 1666[.]
 
(Emphasis omitted; brackets in original.) Similarly, it alleged
 
that the deed from the Church to Toki's predecessors in interest
 in Parcel 32 conveyed:
 
Lot 7, area 14.045 acres, as shown on the Map on file
[in Land Court], . . . with Land Court Application No.
1666[.]
 
SUBJECT, HOWEVER, to an Easement sixteen (16.00) feet
wide for a roadway designated as EASEMENT 3 on the map
filed together with Land Court Application 1666[.]
 
(Emphasis omitted; brackets in original.) 
In the Complaint, Childs claimed that in 1978, he
 
purchased Parcel 6, and his company, Freestyle Corporation,
 
purchased Parcel 5. Childs claimed that his deed to Parcel 6
 stated that there was a sixteen-foot easement as described in
 Land Court Application No. 1666. Childs also stated that, after
 obtaining the Haradas' permission, he graded and paved, and
 installed water lines along, Easement 3 between the Haradas'
 house and Parcels 5 and 6; in doing so, he agreed to, and did,
 reimburse the Haradas for one-half of the costs they had already
 incurred in paving the portion of Easement 3 between their home
 and the Highway. Childs maintained that since that time he had
 continued to use Easement 3 and that it is currently the only
 means of accessing Parcel 6. 
The Wilsons claimed that after purchasing Parcel 8 in
 
1998, they have used Easement 3 to access their property and
 similarly improved a portion of Easement 3 traversing Parcel 32,
 extending from Childs' driveway on Parcel 6 to their residence on
 Parcel 8. 
The Complaint alleges that, in 2004, Childs and the
 
Wilsons were informed by the Haradas that they would no longer be
 permitted to use Easement 3, and that the Okayamas had also
 refused to permit Childs and the Wilsons to use the 25' Right of
 Way. 
C. The Okayamas' Answer and Counterclaim
 
On July 8, 2005, the Okayamas filed an answer to the
 
Complaint and a counterclaim against Plaintiff-Appellants
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
("Counterclaim"). The Okayamas admitted Plaintiffs-Appellants'
 
and the Okayamas' land ownership as alleged and admitted further
 that they had refused to permit Plaintiffs-Appellants' use of the
 25' Right of Way, while denying that there existed any such 25'
 Right of Way. All other allegations were denied. The Okayamas
 also asserted the defenses of bona fide purchasers without
 notice, laches, adverse possession/termination by prescription,
 termination by abandonment, and termination by estoppel. The
 Okayamas' Counterclaim sought a declaration that Parcel 29 was
 free and clear of any easements encumbering it for the benefit of
 Parcels 6 and 8.
 
D.	 The Haradas' Answer
 
On July 25, 2005, the Haradas filed an answer to the
 
Complaint. The Haradas admitted that they were the owners of
 
Parcel 31, as derived from RPG 863, but denied that the roadway
 mentioned in the land court application, i.e., Easement 3, had
 any relation to Parcels 6 and 8, as those parcels were not part
 of Land Court Application No. 1666. The Haradas contended that
 Easement 3 was for use only by the parcels mentioned in Land
 Court Application No. 1666, i.e., Parcels 31 and 32. The Haradas
 asserted additional defenses; in particular, that the Circuit
 Court lacked jurisdiction pursuant to HRS § 501-1 because the
 Haradas' property was registered in land court, and that
 Plaintiffs-Appellants' claim should be denied because no
 easements benefitting Parcels 6 and 8 appear on the Haradas'
 Transfer Certificate of Title. 
E.	 Answer to the Okayamas' Counterclaim
 
On July 26, 2005, Plaintiffs-Appellants filed an answer
 
to the Okayamas' Counterclaim. They claimed, among other things,
 
that the Okayamas "lack standing to assert their claims contained
 in the Counterclaim because they do not have clear legal title to
 parcel 29."
 
F.	 
Temporary Restraining Order and Preliminary Injunction
 
On July 18, 2005, Plaintiffs-Appellants filed a Motion
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for Preliminary Injunction regarding Easement 3. The Wilsons
 
claimed that their water line was cut and that the Haradas
 refused to allow any repair efforts, thereby causing water to
 leak continuously.
 
Similarly, on July 19, 2005, Plaintiffs-Appellants
 
filed an ex parte motion for issuance of a temporary restraining
 order ("TRO Motion"). On July 22, 2005, the Circuit Court
 granted the TRO Motion, thereby prohibiting the Haradas from
 interfering with Plaintiffs-Appellants' use of Easement 3 until
 the court ruled on the Motion for Preliminary Injunction.
 
On December 23, 2005, the Circuit Court issued its
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting
 Plaintiffs' Motion for Preliminary Injunction Filed July 18, 2005
 ("Preliminary Injunction Order"). 
G. Motion to Dismiss Counterclaim
 
On December 7, 2007, Plaintiffs-Appellants filed a
 
motion to dismiss the Okayamas' Counterclaim ("Motion to
 
Dismiss") "on the grounds that [the Okayamas lacked] standing to
 bring the Counterclaim and therefore, the [Circuit] Court is
 without subject matter jurisdiction to adjudicate the claims
 stated therein." On April 2, 2008, the Circuit Court denied the
 motion. 
H. Motions for Summary Judgment 
In February 2008, Plaintiffs-Appellants filed a motion
 
for partial summary judgment against the Okayamas ("MPSJ Against
 
the Okayamas"), and the Okayamas filed their motion for summary
 judgment against Plaintiffs-Appellants ("Okayamas' MSJ").
 Plaintiffs-Appellants also filed a motion for partial summary
 judgment against the Haradas ("MPSJ Against the Haradas"). 
On June 16, 2008, the Circuit Court issued findings of
 
fact and conclusions of law, and an order granting the Okayamas'
 MSJ. The Circuit Court concluded that Plaintiffs-Appellants'
 predecessors in interest had abandoned rights to the 25' Right of
 Way, and separately, that such rights had been terminated by
 prescription. 
10
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On March 16, 2009, the Circuit Court issued its
 
findings of fact and conclusions of law, and an order granting
 
the MPSJ Against the Haradas. The Circuit Court concluded that
 it had jurisdiction over the case under HRS § 501-1 despite the
 easement at issue running over land court property, and granted
 summary judgment for Plaintiffs-Appellants. While declining to
 construe Easement 3 as a public easement without limitation, its
 ruling recognized Plaintiffs-Appellants' right to continue use of
 Easement 3 to the extent that the lot density of their parcels
 did not increase. 
On June 25, 2009, the Circuit Court entered the Final
 
Judgment. Plaintiffs-Appellants filed a timely appeal, and the
 Haradas filed a timely cross-appeal.
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
On appeal, Plaintiffs-Appellants contend that the
 
Circuit Court committed reversible error in (1) denying the
 
Motion to Dismiss because the Okayamas lacked standing to bring
 their claims; (2) denying Plaintiffs-Appellants' MPSJ Against the
 Okayamas and granting the Okayamas' MSJ because Plaintiffs-
Appellants proved that there was no genuine issue of fact to be
 tried regarding the Okayamas' claims and defenses and that the
 Okayamas had notice of the 25' Right of Way; and (3) finding and
 concluding both that Easement 3 is not a public road and that an
 increase in lot density would exceed the scope of the
 contemplated use of Easement 3.
 
On cross-appeal, the Haradas contend that the Circuit
 
Court erred in (1) granting Plaintiffs-Appellants' motion for
 issuance of a temporary restraining order because (a) it did not
 have subject matter jurisdiction over the issue, and (b)
 Plaintiffs-Appellants were unlikely to succeed on the merits; (2)
 granting Plaintiffs-Appellants' motion for preliminary injunction
 because (a) it did not have subject matter jurisdiction over the
 issue, and (b) Plaintiffs-Appellants were unlikely to succeed on
 the merits; (3) granting partial summary judgment against the
 Haradas and entering default judgment against Toki; and (4)
 entering final judgment.
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
Jurisdiction
 
The existence of jurisdiction is a question of law
that we review de novo under the right/wrong standard.
Questions regarding subject matter jurisdiction may be
raised at any stage of a cause of action. When reviewing a
case where the circuit court lacked subject matter
jurisdiction, the appellate court retains jurisdiction, not
on the merits, but for the purpose of correcting the error
in jurisdiction. A judgment rendered by a circuit court
without subject matter jurisdiction is void. 
Lingle v. Hawai' i Gov't Emps. Ass'n, AFSCME, Local 152, AFL-CIO, 
107 Hawai' i 178, 182, 111 P.3d 587, 591 (2005) (quoting Amantiad 
v. Odum, 90 Hawai' i 152, 158-59, 977 P.2d 160, 166-67 (1999)). 
Standing
 
"Whether the circuit court has jurisdiction to hear the
 
plaintiffs' complaint presents a question of law, reviewable de
 
novo. A plaintiff without standing is not entitled to invoke a
 court's jurisdiction. Thus, the issue of standing is reviewed de
 novo on appeal." Right to Know Comm. v. City Council, City &
 
Cnty. of Honolulu, 117 Hawai' i 1, 7, 175 P.3d 111, 117 (App. 
2007) (quoting Hawaii Med. Ass'n v. Hawaii Med. Serv. Ass'n, 113
 Hawai'i 77, 90, 148 P.3d 1179, 1192 (2006)) (internal quotation 
marks omitted).
 
Summary Judgment
 
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant
 
or denial of summary judgment de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107
 
Hawai'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (quoting Durette v. 
Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai' i 490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 
71 (2004)). 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has often articulated that: 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
 fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Id. at 56, 109 P.3d at 697 (brackets omitted) (quoting Durette,
 
105 Hawai' i at 501, 100 P.3d at 71). 
Furthermore, in deciding a motion for summary judgment,
 
a circuit court must keep in mind an important distinction:
 
A judge ruling on a motion for summary judgment cannot
summarily try the facts; his role is limited to applying the
law to the facts that have been established by the
litigants' papers. Therefore, a party moving for summary
judgment is not entitled to a judgment merely because the
facts he offers appear more plausible than those tendered in
opposition or because it appears that the adversary is
unlikely to prevail at trial. This is true even though both
parties move for summary judgment. Therefore, if the
evidence presented on the motion is subject to conflicting
interpretations, or reasonable men might differ as to its
significance, summary judgment is improper.
 
Kajiya v. Dep't of Water Supply, 2 Haw. App. 221, 224, 629 P.2d
 
635, 638-39 (1981) (quoting 10 Charles Alan Wright & Arthur R.
 Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil § 2725 (1973)).
 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. Plaintiffs-Appellants' Appeal as to the Okayamas 
1. Plaintiffs-Appellants' Motion to Dismiss
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants contend that the Okayamas lacked
 
standing to bring their Counterclaim because of an alleged break
 
in the Okayamas' chain of title. They assert, without reference
 to any authority, that in order for the Okayamas to sustain their
 action, the Okayamas must prove that they have legally cognizable
 private title to Parcel 29. Plaintiffs-Appellants' argument
 fails.
 
Standing need not rest on ownership. Nowhere does it
 
appear that the parties dispute that the Okayamas have been in
 possession, or have asserted the rights of possession, of Parcel
 29. Such possession sufficed to confer standing on the Okayamas
 
such that the Circuit Court could determine whether the Okayamas
 could enjoy Parcel 29 free and clear of Plaintiffs-Appellants'
 claimed entitlement to the alleged easement across their land.
 See 59 Am. Jur. 2d Parties § 39 (2002) ("[O]ne in rightful
 possession of real property is the proper person to sue for the
 injury to the possession[.]").
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court properly denied
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants' Motion to Dismiss.
 
2. 	The Circuit Court erred in granting the Okayamas'
MSJ and correctly denied Plaintiffs-Appellants'
MPSJ against the Okayamas.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants challenge both the Circuit
 
Court's denial of Plaintiffs-Appellants' MPSJ Against the
 
Okayamas and its grant of the Okayamas' MSJ. Plaintiffs-
Appellants contend that they had demonstrated that no genuine
 issue of material fact existed regarding the Okayamas' claims and
 defenses—in particular, regarding whether (a) Plaintiffs-
Appellants had abandoned the 25' Right of Way, (b) the Okayamas
 had terminated that easement by prescription, and (c) Troxel had
 an implied easement over Parcel 29. We agree that the Circuit
 Court erred, but only with respect to granting the Okayamas' MSJ.
 
a. 	Abandonment
 
The Okayamas contend that the Circuit Court was correct
 
in ruling that Plaintiffs-Appellants had abandoned their easement
 rights, as deeded to them by the 1896 Decree. They argue that
 Plaintiffs-Appellants and their predecessors in interest had
 never used the easement, that they instead utilized a different
 means of ingress/egress, and that they acquiesced to the
 Okayamas' use of the easement area as physically preventing
 Plaintiffs-Appellants' exercise of their easement rights. On the
 other hand, Plaintiffs-Appellants argue that the potential
 exercise of their easement rights was not negated by the
 Okayamas' use of the easement area and that their nonuse of the
 25' Right of Way and alternative means of access could not
 constitute proof of abandonment. We hold that the Circuit Court
 erroneously concluded that there was no genuine issue of material
 fact regarding the Okayamas' abandonment defense.
 
Several principles guide the review of whether a deeded
 
easement has been abandoned by the owner of the dominant estate:
 
The cases are agreed that at least where a right of
way is created by grant, deed, or reservation, no duty is
thereby cast upon the owner of the dominant estate to make
use thereof as a condition to the right to retain his
interest therein, and that mere nonuser, even for the
prescriptive period, will not extinguish an easement created
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
by grant, deed, or reservation. . . . The intention to
 
abandon is the material question and may be proved by an
infinite variety of acts. It is a question of fact to be
ascertained from all the surrounding circumstances, such as
permitting it to be closed for a long period of time, during
which the owner of the servient estate spends large sums of
money in its improvement. The acts claimed to constitute
 the abandonment must show a destruction of the easement,
impossibility of its legitimate use resulting from some act
of the easement owner or his acquiescence in acts of others
inconsistent with a future enjoyment of the easement. The
 burden of proving abandonment is upon the party alleging it
and must be established by clear and unequivocal evidence of
decisive and conclusive acts.
 
Fleming v. Napili Kai, Ltd., 50 Haw. 66, 68-69, 430 P.2d 316, 318
 
(1967) (quoting Goo v. Young, 36 Haw. 132, 148 (Haw. Terr.
 1942)).
 
What bears emphasis here is that the issue of
 
abandonment is fundamentally a question of intent, and,
 therefore, ultimately a question of fact. See id.  As such, it
 
is generally for the trier of fact to resolve. Peck v. Baltimore
 
Cnty., 410 A.2d 7, 9 (Md. 1979) ("The question of whether there
 has been an abandonment of an easement is usually one of fact for
 the trial court or jury." (citation omitted)). 
Here, however, the Circuit Court reached its
 
determination that Plaintiffs-Appellants had abandoned their
 easement over the Okayamas' land not at trial, but upon motions
 for summary judgment. In so doing, the Circuit Court considered
 and made factual findings regarding evidence of the history of
 Plaintiffs-Appellants' and their predecessors' nonuse of the 25'
 Right of Way since issuance of the 1896 Decree; the presence of
 items within the 25' Right of Way that may have interfered with,
 if not outright prevented, utilization of the easement;
7/ the
 
7/
 Specifically, the Circuit Court considered evidence of a "dry
stack rock wall" that allegedly stood for a period, blocking access to the
makai side of Parcel 29, the presence of a portion of a hoshidana within the
 
25' Right of Way, and trees planted throughout the easement area. As to the
 
hoshidana, the Circuit Court described it as "a coffee-drying structure,"
oriented north-south:
 
approximately 15 to 30 feet wide, 80 to 100 feet long, . . . 10 to
15 feet high[, and] supported by approximately 12 4" x 4" wooden
posts. A wooden drying platform was on the northern half of the
hoshidana. The drying platform could be covered with a moveable
roof set on metal wheels on pipe tracks. This roof was slid over
 the drying platform to protect the coffee from rain in the
evening, and was slid off the platform to allow the coffee to dry
in the sun during the day. The roof sat approximately 1 foot
(continued...)
 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
absence of any objection by Plaintiffs-Appellants to the presence
 
of these items; and Plaintiffs-Appellants' improvement and
 utilization of an alternate means of access to their property
 (Easement 3). Each of these is relevant evidence of whether
 Plaintiffs-Appellants intended to abandon the easement. See 53
 
Am. Jur. Proof of Facts 3d 519 Proof of Intent to Abandon
 Easement §§ 13, 14, 16, 18.5 (1999). 
But to the extent that the Circuit Court inferred from
 
these findings that Plaintiffs-Appellants had therefore abandoned
 their rights to the 25' Right of Way, it was in error. Once it
 evaluated and drew disputed inferences from predicate facts to
 determine the essential fact at issue, it exceeded its role in
 adjudicating the motions for summary judgment and partial summary
 
8/
judgment,  for it was not for the court to "summarily try the
facts." Kajiya v. Dep't of Water Supply
, 2 Haw. App. 221, 224, 
629 P.2d 635, 638-39 (1981) (quoting 10 Charles Alan Wright and Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil § 2725 (1973)). Furthermore, under summary judgment principles, any inferences drawn should have been drawn adversely as to each movant. See Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai' i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 
689, 697 (2005) (quoting Durette v. Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai' i 490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 71 (2004)). Therefore, 
it would have been appropriate for the Circuit Court to infer an intent to abandon only as to Plaintiffs-Appellants' MPSJ Against the Okayamas, and the court should have inferred the opposite as to the Okayamas' MSJ, thereby defeating each motion. 
To the extent that the Circuit Court otherwise
 
concluded that summary judgment was warranted as a matter of law,
 
7/(...continued)
above the drying platform. 
The roof slid off the drying platform
to the south end of the structure and the tracks were supported by
the 4" by 4" posts. The south end of the structure extended to
 approximately 5 feet from the southern boundary of Parcel 29 and
20 feet within the 25-foot right of way.
 
8/
 The Circuit Court also erred in concluding that the hoshidana
 
"effectively block[ed] approximately 20 feet of the right of way[.]"
Plaintiffs-Appellants plausibly disputed the extent to which the hoshidana—in
 
particular, its support elements—would have impaired utilization of the
easement for purposes of passage. Therefore, insofar as the degree of
impairment was material to its conclusion, the Circuit Court erred in
concluding on summary judgment that the right of way was effectively blocked.
 
16
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
this too was in error. The Circuit Court relied on two different
 
sets of facts and principles to support its conclusion of
 abandonment, each of which might have provided support for a
 finding of abandonment, but neither of which necessarily proved
 it. We address them in turn. 
First, the Circuit Court found that (a) between 1896,
 
when the easement was created, and 1940, none of the several
 conveyance documents relating to Plaintiffs-Appellants' lands
 expressly referenced the 25' Right of Way; and (b) from 1978 to
 1979, Plaintiffs-Appellants or a predecessor in interest
 substantially improved Easement 3, including paving over half a
 mile of, and installing water lines within, that alternate route.
 The Circuit Court concluded that these constituted affirmative
 acts "evidenc[ing] an intent to abandon the [25' Right of Way]." 
While these facts might support such a finding, they do
 
not conclusively prove it. We are not aware of any legal
 principle, binding or otherwise, that holds as abandoned an
 unutilized easement appurtenant merely because it is not
 expressly included as part of a conveyance. Additionally, while
 Plaintiffs-Appellants, or a predecessor in interest, did more
 than merely utilize a (more) convenient means of access—they
 substantially improved the already-cleared Easement 3 rather than
 clearing brush, trees, and other impediments from the 25' Right
 of Way—utilization of an alternate means of access is not itself
 proof of abandonment. See Smith v. Muellner, 932 A.2d 382, 396
 
(Conn. 2007). And while the history of nonuse of the 25' Right
 of Way may be some evidence of abandonment, it is of itself
 insufficient to support such a finding. Goo, 36 Haw. at 148–49;
 
accord Goodwin v. Lofton, 662 S.W.2d 215, 217 (Ark. Ct. App.
 1984). Furthermore, it appears that at the time of the
 improvements, Plaintiffs-Appellants may not have been aware of
 their rights over the 25' Right of Way.
9/
 
9/
 The Circuit Court found that Childs did not become aware of his
 
rights until sometime in the 1980s, and it is unclear whether the Wilsons'
predecessor in interest was aware of his or her rights to the easement.
Wilson's deed conveyed the 25' Right of Way, but he mistakenly believed that
his rights were to Easement 3.
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Whether awareness of a right is a prerequisite to
 
abandonment of that right, cf. Adams v. Buchanan, 49 Mo. 64, 67
 
(1871) ("[N]or can [a lien's] abandonment be predicated upon acts
 that merely indicate ignorance of its existence . . . ."), is not
 something we decide here, but we do reasonably conclude that it
 may inform the understanding of an act otherwise inconsistent
 with possession of that right. On the facts recited above, the
 issue of Plaintiffs-Appellants' intent to abandon their rights
 remained in dispute. 
Second, the Circuit Court found that certain acts by
 
the Okayamas had prevented use of the 25' Right of Way, and that
 Plaintiffs-Appellants, or their predecessors in interest, had
 acquiesced to "structures which prevented the use of the right of
 way, evidencing an intent to abandon." Specifically, in addition
 to the planting and presence of trees within the easement area,
 the Circuit Court found that the hoshidana "effectively
 block[ed]" approximately twenty feet of the right of way, and
 that an erstwhile dry stack rock wall running along and through
 the right of way "evidenc[ed] an intent of exclusivity on the
 part of the Okayamas." 
The issue of Plaintiffs-Appellants' awareness of their
 
easement rights notwithstanding, and even assuming for the sake
 of argument that lengthy acquiescence to the erection of
 structures of a perhaps permanent nature preventing would-be
 enjoyment of easement rights might reach the level of determining
 abandonment as a matter of law,
10/ summary judgment is still
 
inappropriate here. The Circuit Court erred in making a finding
 that the easement was "effectively block[ed]" by the hoshidana,
 as this issue was firmly in dispute. As noted supra, note 8,
 Plaintiffs-Appellants plausibly disputed the extent to which the
 elevated hoshidana would have necessarily impaired utilization of
 
10/
 Indeed, the erection or installation of structures by the servient
estate on, within, or around an easement, and the dominant estate's
acquiescence to that structure, may be relevant to a determination of intent
 
to abandon, but does not conclusively prove abandonment as a matter of law.
Goo, 36 Haw. at 149–50 ("The owner of the servient estate may subject it to
various uses without prejudice to the rights of the owner of the dominant
estate and without imposing upon the owner of the dominant estate the duty of
affirmative action to negative an intention to abandon his easement.").
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the easement. It was similarly error for the court to otherwise
 
find, on the basis of the trees and the rock wall, that ingress
 and egress was so permanently impeded as to necessitate a finding
 of an intent to abandon easement rights. 
Mindful of the premise that the issue of abandonment is
 
ultimately a factual question of intent, factors such as
 ignorance of rights of ownership, the degree to which a physical
 impediment impairs utilization of an easement (not to mention the
 ease with which such an impediment (such as a dry stack rock
 wall) might later be mitigated or removed), the length of time
 that the impediment existed, and the evidence of acquiescence to
 the erection or presence of the impediment, may each be
 materially relevant to the inquiry at hand. We therefore hold
 that summary judgment on the issue of abandonment was appropriate
 for neither party.
 
b. Termination by prescription
 
On facts largely in common with their abandonment
 
defense, the Okayamas also asserted below the defense that
 Plaintiffs-Appellants' rights in the 25' Right of Way were
 terminated by prescription.
11/  The Circuit Court agreed with the
 
Okayamas, citing, in part, case law relevant to the law of both
 adverse possession and the extinguishment of easements. In order
 to determine whether either Plaintiffs-Appellants or the Okayamas
 had proven, as a matter of law, that they had prevailed on the
 issue of termination by prescription, we first address the
 showing that either must have made in order to prevail. 
While Hawai' i case law has addressed creation of 
easements by prescription, see, e.g., Nature Conservancy v. Nakila, 4 Haw. App. 584, 671 P.2d 1025 (1983), there is no case law in Hawai' i addressing termination by prescription of an 
11/
 The phrase "termination by prescription" refers to the
extinguishment of a dominant estate's easement rights through acts of the
servient estate owner that are sufficiently adverse to the dominant estate's
rights in the easement. It is closely linked to the concept of adverse
possession, see Mueller v. Hoblyn, 887 P.2d 500, 507 (Wyo. 1994), but, as
discussed infra, the showing required to establish termination by prescription
differs materially from that of adverse possession. 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
existing easement. We therefore consider other jurisdictions and
 
authorities that have addressed such claims. 
In Matoush v. Lovingood, the Colorado Supreme Court
 
stated:
 
An easement is terminated by adverse possession upon a
showing that use of the easement area was: (1) adverse to
the easement holder's use of the easement; (2) open or
notorious; and (3) continuous, without effective
interruption, for the statutorily-mandated period of time
for adverse possession. To be adverse, use of the easement
area must be incompatible or irreconcilable with the
easement holder's right to use the easement. 
177 P.3d 1262, 1265 (Colo. 2008).12/  This is in accord with
 
several treatises. 25 Am. Jur. 2d Easements & Licenses § 102
 
(2004); Jon. W. Bruce et al., The Law of Easements and Licenses
 in Land § 10:25 (2012); 4 R. Powell, Powell on Property § 34.21
 (2010); 7 D. Thomas, Thompson on Real Property § 60.08(b)(7) (2d
 ed. 2006).
 
Although the elements for termination of an easement by
 
prescription are the same as those for creation of an easement by
 prescription, there is an important conceptual distinction
 between the two. 
The distinguishing factor between the creation and
termination of easements by prescription is that in the
former situation the user must be adverse to the possessor
of the land, while in the latter the use, while adverse to
the owner of the easement, is made by the servient tenant on
land in his or her own possession. This creates some
 difference in the type of use that will be considered
sufficiently adverse to start the prescriptive period.
 
4 Powell, supra, § 34.21[1]. Prescriptively terminating easement
 
rights "requires that the showing of adversity and hostility be
 stronger than that required to take possession of land [or create
 rights to an easement] by adverse possession [or prescription]." 
7 Thomas, supra, § 60.08(b)(7); accord Matoush, 177 P.3d at 1270. 
Specifically, "[o]nly use that is 'incompatible or irreconcilable
 with the [easement holder's] authorized right of use' will be
 sufficient to justify terminating an easement by [prescription]." 
Matoush, 177 P.3d at 1270 (quoting 4 Powell, supra, § 34.21[1]). 
"[A] party claiming to have terminated an easement by
 
12/
 The Colorado Supreme Court opted for the term "termination by
adverse possession" rather than "termination by prescription," and recognized
these terms as different in name only. See Matoush, 177 P.3d at 1264 n.2.
 
20
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[prescription] must prove 'that the use interferes significantly
 
enough with the easement owner's enjoyment of the easement to
 give notice that the easement is under threat.'" Id. (quoting 7
 
Thomas, supra, § 60.08(b)(7)(i)). Only upon such use will the
 prescriptive clock be triggered. See id. at 1271. Determining
 
what use qualifies, however, "depends on the circumstances of
 each case." Id.
 
Additional considerations apply where the easement at
 
issue has been expressly created, but, as here, never used or
 improved by the dominant estate. 
When an easement is not in use, the owner of the property
burdened by the easement enjoys "an enlarged scope of
privileged action." [4 Powell, supra, § 34.21[1].]
Logically then, the owner of a property burdened by an
easement enjoys the largest scope of privileged action when
the easement has never been used. . . . 
. . . When an easement is expressly created but never
used, the extent to which the owner of the property burdened
by the easement can use the easement area expands to
resemble the owner's right to use the property as if it were
unburdened by the easement. At the same time, the easement
holder's right to use the easement receives greater
protection because the easement holder's right to use the
easement has not yet come into functional existence.
 
Id.; see also id. (Eid, J., concurring) ("Where . . . an easement
 
holder has not developed the easement, the servient estate owner
 may use the easement area to a far greater extent than in a case
 involving a developed easement.").
 
A New York case, Castle Assocs. v. Schwartz, 407
 
N.Y.S.2d 717 (App. Div. 1978), is commonly cited in cases
 involving termination by prescription of unused easements. 
Castle involved a roadway easement that was both never used and
 never precisely located. 407 N.Y.S.2d at 721. After reviewing
 cases from New York and other jurisdictions, it enunciated the
 rule that:
 
[W]here an easement has been created but no occasion has
arisen for its use, the owner of the servient tenement may
fence his land and such use will not be deemed adverse to
 the existence of the easement until such time as (1) the
need for the right of way arises, (2) a demand is made by
the owner of the dominant tenement that the easement be
 opened and (3) the owner of the servient tenement refuses to
do so.
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Id. at 723.13/ The rule announced in Castle was not newly
 
formulated. Rather, it was a modern restatement of old law
 
regarding prescriptive termination of an easement where there had
 been no use or specific location of the easement. See Litchfield
 
v. Boogher, 142 S.W. 302 (Mo. 1911); Storrow v. Green, 178 P. 339
 (Cal. Dist. Ct. App. 1918).
 
In Spiegel v. Ferraro, New York's highest court later
 
discussed and distinguished Castle, characterizing it as a
 "narrow exception" to the general rule regarding prescriptive
 termination of easement rights, and applicable to "easements that
 have not been definitively located through use." 541 N.E.2d 15,
 17 (N.Y. 1989). Spiegel explained:
 
The theory underlying the exception is that easements
not definitively located and developed through use are not
yet in functional existence and therefore the owner of the
easement could not be expected to have notice of the adverse
claim until either the easement is opened or the owner
demands that it be opened. It is only at such point,
therefore, that the use of the easement by another is deemed
to be adverse to the owner and the prescriptive period
begins to run. So understood, the exception is consistent
with the general theory of adverse possession -- that the
real owner may, by unequivocal acts of the usurper, have
notice of the hostile claim and be thereby called upon to
assert his legal title[.]
 
Id. (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).14/
 
The Colorado Supreme Court, in Matoush, examined Castle
 
and Spiegel, and surveyed other jurisdictions, stating:
 
Despite possible uncertainty created by Spiegel as to
 
the factual circumstances to which the Castle Associates
 rule applies, courts in other jurisdictions have applied the
rule to myriad factual circumstances. Courts apply the
Castle Associates rule irrespective of whether the
easement's location was specifically identified in the
conveyance, or whether the easement holder's property had
been developed. Although these cases are factually unique,
courts have consistently applied the Castle Associates rule
 
to cases in which the easement at issue was expressly
created but never used.
 
177 P.3d at 1273 (footnote omitted).
 
13/
 At times herein, we refer to the second part of Castle's rule as
 
its "demand requirement."
 
14/
 The Spiegel court noted that the landowner's lessee had installed
 
two gates to which only he had the key, regraded the easement, installed
lights, utilized guard dogs to patrol the premises at night, and parked
wrecked cars over the easement such that the plaintiff had not driven a car
over it since that time. 541 N.E.2d at 16. It then held that since the
 easement went unused for the prescriptive time period, the easement was
terminated by prescription. Id. at 18.
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The court then explained its basis for adopting the
 
rule:
 
There are a number of policy reasons that support the
Castle Associates rule. First, as we previously explained,
the rule is consistent with the notion that the owner of the
 property burdened by the easement retains the right to use
his or her property in any way that does not interfere with
the easement holder's right to use the easement. Second,
the rule comports with the long-established principle that
an easement cannot be lost by mere nonuse. Third, this rule
respects recorded easements, which are easily traceable
through title instruments. Fourth, purchasers of property
have a duty of inquiry to determine whether an easement
burdens the property and are on constructive notice of such
easements. Fifth, the purchase price of property reflects
the benefit or burden of an easement, and the rule
reinforces bargains made between buyers and sellers. Last,
the rule prevents an easement holder from incurring
litigation and expense to guard his or her right to use the
easement, as one court noted: "[W]ithout such a rule,
[easement holders] may feel compelled to start litigation,
clear obstacles, or otherwise force an issue . . . merely to
keep alive a record easement right, even though the need to
use the easement has not yet fully matured." Brooks v.
 
Geraghty, No. 288354, 2005 WL 767867, at *9 (Mass. Land Ct.
Apr. 6, 2005).
 
Id.
 
The court concluded its examination by expressly
 
holding that "if an easement is expressly created but never used,
 
then use of the easement area is not adverse and will not trigger
 the statutorily-mandated period of time for adverse possession
 until the easement holder needs to use the easement." Id. This
 
holding might appear to suggest that the focus of the inquiry be
 entirely on whether the dominant estate owner has ever sought to
 use the easement. Accord id. at 1274 ("[W]hether the Castle
 
Associates rule applies to this case . . . depends upon whether
 the easement was expressly created and whether it has ever been
 used as a right-of-way."). The concurrence, however, suggests
 that the inconsistency and irreconcilability of the servient
 owner's use, with respect to the easement rights granted to the
 dominant estate, remain germane. Id. at 1275 (Eid., J.,
 
concurring). 
Most jurisdictions to have considered, post-Castle, the
 
issue of termination of easement rights by prescription in cases
 of nonuse have cited Castle approvingly and/or outright adopted
 it. The cases, infra, tend to focus on two different aspects of
 Castle; either emphasizing Castle's demand requirement,
 
23
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
especially in factually similar cases, or determining whether the
 
degree or character of the allegedly adverse use makes it
 actually adverse in light of nonuse by the dominant estate owner. 
Where the alleged adverse use of the easement is
 
perceived as akin to that of Castle (i.e., a fence), the focus
 tends toward application of Castle's demand requirement. See
 
Vandeleigh Indus., Inc. v. Storage Partners of Kirkwood, LLC, 901
 A.2d 91, 105-06 (Del. 2006) (holding that use of an easement upon
 which a wall had been constructed, but was otherwise undeveloped,
 "will not be deemed adverse to the existence of the easement
 until such time as . . . the need for the right of way arises"
 (quoting Castle, 407 N.Y.S.2d at 723)); Kolouch v. Kramer, 813
 P.2d 876, 879 (Idaho 1991) ("[W]here the easement was created,
 but no occasion has arisen for its use, the owner of the servient
 tenement may plant trees, erect a fence, etc. and such use will
 not be deemed to be adverse (or inconsistent . . .), until the
 need to use the easement arises . . . ."); Halverson v. Turner,
 885 P.2d 1285, 1290 (Mont. 1994) (holding that a boundary fence
 is not an adverse use unless the dominant estate owner objects to
 such); see also Matoush, 177 P.3d at 1273.
 
But where the alleged adverse use is of a potentially
 
more interfering nature, the focus centers on whether such use
 was inconsistent with the dominant estate owner's future
 interests. See City of Edmonds v. Williams, 774 P.2d 1241, 1243­
44 (Wash. Ct. App. 1989) ("Nor is an easement lost by
 prescription during a period of nonuse, unless the adverse use is
 clearly inconsistent with the future use of the easement.");
 Mueller, 887 P.2d at 509 (citing Castle and related cases in
 holding no termination by prescription where the dominant estate
 owner's "use of the land was simply 'not inconsistent with the
 purpose reserved in the easement'" (quoting Kolouch, 813 P.2d at
 880)). 
Upon our review of these cases, we hold that Castle's
 
demand requirement plainly applies where the nature of the
 servient estate owner's use of the easement is a readily removed
 or dismantled impediment, obstruction, or such. We do not go so
 far as to say that the servient estate owner's use, no matter how
 
24
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
permanent, substantial, or detrimental to remove, will never be
 
deemed adverse absent a demand to utilize the easement. In
 intermediate cases, remaining mindful of principles protective of
 equitable servitudes, see, e.g., 28A C.J.S. Easements § 140
 (2008) ("The forfeiture of easements is not favored . . . ."), we
 further hold that courts must determine whether the servient
 estate's use or improvement of an easement is so completely
 irreconcilable with the dominant estate's future interest in the
 easement that the prescriptive period is triggered.
 
In the case at hand, focusing, as the lower court did,
 
on the time period commencing in 1940, we recite the following
 facts as found by the Circuit Court. "The Okayamas and/or their
 predecessors in interest constructed and utilized a hoshidana
 within the easement area, cultivated coffee [trees] and macadamia
 nut[] [trees] within the easement area, and constructed a rock
 wall across the right of way[.]" There is no evidence that
 Plaintiffs-Appellants, or their predecessors in interest, had
 ever utilized the 25' Right of Way.
15/
 
We find Kolouch particularly informative here. In
 
Kolouch, the servient estate owner planted several trees down the
 center of the easement, erected a fence, constructed a concrete
 irrigation diversion, and placed several large boulders at one
 end of the easement. 813 P.2d at 878. The Kolouch court, in
 affirming the lower court's holding that these acts did not
 extinguish the easement, stated:
 
Applied here, we may paraphrase [the Castle] rule to read
that where the easement was created, but no occasion has
arisen for its use, the owner of the servient tenement may
plant trees, erect a fence, etc. and such use will not be
deemed to be adverse (or inconsistent . . .), until the need
to use the easement arises, etc. We think this rule makes
 sense in light of the well established rule that the owner
of the servient estate is entitled to use his land, even
though encumbered by an easement, for any purpose not
inconsistent with the purpose reserved in the easement.
Accordingly, Kramer's use of his property which was subject
to the easement has not been adverse or inconsistent with
 the Kolouchs' rights prior to the time the Kolouchs' need to
use the easement arose, and the trial court's finding to
that effect was not clearly erroneous.
 
15/
 Nor have we been directed to any evidence that, prior to the
events precipitating the instant action, Plaintiffs-Appellants or their
predecessors ever asserted their rights to use the 25' Right of Way.
 
25
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
813 P.2d at 879-80. Kolouch's holding has been cited approvingly
 
in several jurisdictions. See Sabino Town & Country Estates
 
Ass'n v. Carr, 920 P.2d 26, 30 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1996); Vandeleigh
 
Indus., 901 A.2d at 105; Mueller, 887 P.2d at 509. 
Applying Kolouch here, neither the planting of trees
 
nor establishment or maintenance of the rock wall constitutes
 adverse use where Plaintiffs-Appellants' predecessors had never
 sought to use the 25' Right of Way. 813 P.2d at 879-80; see also
 Smith, 932 A.2d at 393 ("[C]ourts routinely reject that
 vegetation on an easement, both cultivated and natural,
 constitutes adverse use adequate to extinguish the easement."). 
What remains undetermined is whether the construction or
 existence of the hoshidana, either considered alone or together
 with the trees and rock wall, was of such a nature as to be
 irreconcilable with Plaintiffs-Appellants' predecessors' future
 interests in utilizing the 25' Right of Way. 
Based on the evidence in the record, the competing
 
motions for summary judgment and the associated principle that we
 construe evidence favorably and draw inferences for the non­moving party, we cannot conclude that such use of the land was,
 or was not, so irreconcilable with the ability of Plaintiffs-
Appellants' predecessors to utilize the 25' Right of Way. 
Therefore, this remains a genuine issue of material fact, and the
 Circuit Court erred by granting summary judgment for the Okayamas
 on the issue of termination by prescription.
 
c. Troxel's claim to an implied easement
 
We agree with the Circuit Court that there is no
 
evidence that would support a finding of an implied reservation
 of an easement over Parcel 29 in favor of Troxel. Plaintiffs-
Appellants' argument to the contrary fails because Troxel has an
 express grant of right to use Easement 3.
16/ Achi v. Poni, 5 Haw.
 
176 (Haw. Kingdom 1884), and its supposition of an implied
 easement apply only insofar as there exists a necessity to imply
 
16/
 Troxel's deed asserts his right to use Easement 3, and despite the
lack of any reference to such right in the Haradas' certificate of title, the
Haradas concede his right. Neither the Okayamas nor Plaintiffs-Appellants
dispute Troxel's express right to Easement 3.
 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
such an easement. Achi, 5 Haw. at 177 ("The law presumes a right
 
of way reserved, or rather gives a new way from the necessity of
 
the case, and the new right of way ceases with the necessity for
 it.").
 
We further agree with the Circuit Court that Troxel, 
having failed to plead a cause of action based upon the doctrine of implied easement, cannot now assert such a claim. See In re 
Genesys Data Techs., Inc., 95 Hawai' i 33, 41, 18 P.3d 895, 903 
(2001) ("Hawaii's rules of notice pleading require that a complaint set forth a short and plain statement of the claim that provides defendant with fair notice of what the plaintiff's claim is and the grounds upon which the claim rests." (citing Haw. R. Civ. P. Rule 8(a) (1999))). Nor was the inverse of the claim (that Troxel had no implied easement) placed in issue by the Okayamas' Counterclaim which sought a declaration that their land was unemcumbered by any easements benefitting Parcels 6 (Childs) and 8 (Wilson). The Okayamas, therefore, were likewise barred from asserting in their motion for summary judgment that Troxel had no implied easement. 
d. The Okayamas' remaining defenses
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants contend that summary judgment 
should have been granted in their favor regarding the Okayamas' other defenses: laches, equitable estoppel, and bona fide purchasers without notice. The Circuit Court, however, expressly declined to rule on whether summary judgment was appropriate. Because we vacate the Circuit Court's judgment as to its grant of summary judgment for the Okayamas and remand for further proceedings, we leave it to the Circuit Court to address these additional defenses in the first instance. See AFL Hotel & Rest. 
Workers Health & Welfare Trust Fund v. Bosque, 110 Hawai' i 318, 
327, 132 P.3d 1229, 1238 (2006) ("This court has long held to the general rule that questions 'not . . . ruled upon by the trial judge will not be considered and passed upon for the first time on appeal.'" (quoting State v. Cummings, 49 Haw. 522, 527, 423 P.2d 438, 442 (1967))). 
27
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
e. 	Plaintiffs-Appellants' remaining claims 
Based on our disposition of Plaintiffs-Appellants' and
 
the Okayamas' claims on appeal as to each other, we leave it to
 
the Circuit Court to address the scope of permissible use of the
 25' Right of Way and whether a prohibitory injunction against the
 Okayamas is warranted.
 
B.	 Plaintiffs-Appellants' Appeal as to the Haradas and the
Haradas' Cross-Appeal
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants argue for an interpretation of
 
the land court's original decree and certificate of title as
 
establishing a public easement by way of Easement 3, based on
 references in the Application to a set of "public ways running
 through the land." The Haradas contend, however, that the
 Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction to hear Plaintiffs-Appellants'
 claims for declaratory and injunctive relief regarding their
 rights as to Easement 3. They argue that Plaintiffs-Appellants
 sought, in effect, to register a public easement, and that
 because the Haradas' land had been registered in land court,
 Plaintiffs-Appellants' claims could only have been properly
 brought in land court. They further argue that the public ways
 referenced in the Application were roads other than Easement 3. 
In considering the claim, we begin by examining the law
 
specifying the land court's jurisdiction:
 
A court is established, called the land court, which
shall have exclusive original jurisdiction of all
 
applications for the registration of title to land and
 
easements or rights in land held and possessed in fee simple
within the State, with power to hear and determine all
questions arising upon such applications, and also have
 jurisdiction over such other questions as may come before it
 
under this chapter, subject to the rights of appeal under
this chapter. The proceedings upon the applications shall
be proceedings in rem against the land, and the decrees
shall operate directly on the land and vest and establish
title thereto. 
HAW. REV. STAT. § 501-1 (1993) (emphasis added). Under HRS § 501­
1, the land court has (1) exclusive original jurisdiction over
 
applications for registration of land, and (2) concurrent
 jurisdiction over issues brought pursuant to chapter 501 that
 arise after the initial registration of land in land court. Iaea
 
v. Iaea, 59 Haw. 648, 650, 586 P.2d 1015, 1017 (1978) ("The
 
28
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court had jurisdiction [to determine a forgery], despite 
the fact that it concerned registered land."); Waimea Falls Park, Inc. v. Brown, 6 Haw. App. 83, 85 n.5, 712 P.2d 1136, 1138 n.5 (1985) ("[HRS] chapter 501 does not contemplate that, after registration, every controversy involving registered land must be decided by the land court. . . . We find nothing in the statutes or our case law indicating that the land court has exclusive jurisdiction over matters affecting registered land."); see also In re Estate of Damon, 5 Haw. App. 304, 310 n.2, 689 P.2d 204, 208 n.2 (1984) (suggesting that while having jurisdiction, the land court might nevertheless elect to forego its jurisdiction in favor of that of the Circuit Court regarding more complex matters). But see Dudoit v. Clifton, 114 Hawai' i 175, 179-80, 
158 P.3d 293, 297-98 (App. 2006) (asserting, in dicta, that questions regarding removal of portions of a rock wall separating two land court properties were "not questions presented or presentable . . . . [T]hese questions must be presented to and answered by the land court."). In this case, the Plaintiffs-Appellants do not seek to register title to land or to the easement; rather, they seek to determine the proper scope of Easement 3. 
In Knauer v. Foote, 101 Hawai' i 81, 63 P.3d 389 (2003), 
the supreme court held, in accordance with HRS § 501-151, that the circuit court had jurisdiction to expunge a lis pendens that had been filed in the land court. In reaching that conclusion, the supreme court overruled In re 2003 and 2007 Ala Wai Blvd., City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 85 Hawai' i 398, 944 P.2d 1341 (App. 
1997) ("Ala Wai Blvd."). 
In Ala Wai Blvd., this court had determined that the
 
circuit court did not have jurisdiction to expunge a lis pendens
 from land court property because HRS § 501-196,
17/ which expresses
 
17/
 HRS § 501-196 provides in part:
 
No erasure, alteration, or amendment shall be made upon the
registration book after the entry of a certificate of title
or of a memorandum thereon, and the approval of the same by
the registrar or an assistant registrar, provided that the
registrar or assistant registrar may correct any clerical
error made by personnel of the registrar's or assistant
(continued...)
 
29
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the requirements for amending a certificate of title, provides
 
the land court with exclusive jurisdiction to amend the
 certificate of title. In overruling the case, the supreme court
 did not determine that the land court had exclusive jurisdiction
 over the amendment of certificates of title. Knauer, 101 Hawai' i 
at 87, 63 P.3d at 395. Rather, the court concluded that, because
 the expungement of a lis pendens did not alter or amend the
 certificate, HRS § 501-196 was inapplicable to the analysis.
18/
  
Id. From there, the court concluded that the circuit court had
 
jurisdiction to expunge the lis pendens under HRS §§ 501-151 and
 501-152. Id. at 88, 63 P.3d at 396.
 Accordingly, regardless of whether the land court
 
enjoys exclusive jurisdiction over amendments or alterations to a
 certificate of title, the circuit court has concurrent
 jurisdiction under HRS § 501-1 to determine matters regarding
 title to land court property as recognized by Iaea. As such, the
 Circuit Court had jurisdiction in this case to determine the
 scope of Easement 3,
19/ but did not have jurisdiction to order an
 
amendment to the Haradas' and Toki's certificates of title.
 
17/(...continued)
registrar's office. 
Any registered owner or other person in
interest may at any time apply by petition to the court,
upon the ground that registered interests of any
description, whether vested, contingent, expectant, or
inchoate have terminated and ceased; or that new interests
have arisen or been created which do not appear upon the
certificate[.]
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 501-196 (2006).
 
18/
 In Knauer, the supreme court questioned the continued validity of
Iaea, 59 Haw. 648, 586 P.2d 1015, where the court had affirmed the circuitcourt's determination that a deed had been forged, but reversed the circuitcourt's order directing the land court to expunge the deed and certificate of
title. Knauer, 101 Hawai' i at 87–88 & n.13, 63 P.3d at 394–95 & n.13.
According to Knauer, "Iaea stands for the narrow proposition that the circuit
court had jurisdiction to hear the subject matter of the dispute, i.e., the
validity of a signature on a deed, but that it did not have the jurisdictionto order the land court to expunge the deed upon a finding that the signature
was forged." Id. at 86, 63 P.3d at 394. We read the criticism included in 
Knauer's footnote 13 as questioning whether HRS § 501-196, as this court heldin Ala Wai Blvd., actually granted the land court exclusive jurisdiction over
matters which may demand an amendment to or alteration of a certificate oftitle. As it stands, however, Iaea remains good law. 
19/
 Consequently, the Haradas' argument that the Circuit Court lacked
jurisdiction to grant the TRO Motion or to enter its Preliminary Injunction
Order fails.
 
30
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Jurisdiction notwithstanding, the Circuit Court erred
 
in resolving the dispute over the scope of Easement 3 on summary
 
judgment because there were disputed issues of fact.
 Specifically, the disputed issue of fact is the scope of the
 ambiguous easement, i.e., whether it is a public road easement as
 contended by Plaintiffs-Appellants, an easement only for the
 benefit of Parcels 31 and 32 as contended by the Haradas, or a
 limited use easement as found by the Circuit Court. The scope of
 the easement, in turn, depends on the intent of the Church in
 establishing the easement when it sought to register Parcels 31
 and 32. Whether Easement 3 is a public road easement may also
 depend on whether it coincides with the location of one of the
 "public ways" identified by the Church in its land court
 application.
20/
 
The Circuit Court found that the land court decree was
 
ambiguous with respect to the scope of Easement 3, and thus
 considered parol evidence. Once the court found the decree
 ambiguous, however, it could not determine the scope of the
 easement as a matter of law. Rather, the scope of the easement
 and the intent of the party creating the easement became
 questions of fact. Here, the Circuit Court considered
 conflicting evidence regarding the intended scope of the easement
 in rendering its decision. Consistent with our analysis above
 regarding the 25' Right of Way, once the Circuit Court evaluated
 and drew inferences from predicate facts to determine the
 essential fact at issue, it exceeded its role in adjudicating the
 motions for summary judgment and partial summary judgment.
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
We vacate all of the June 16, 2008 "Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Defendants Okayama[s']
 
Motion for Summary Judgment Filed on 2/25/08," except for that
 part denying claims and defenses as to Troxel's purported implied
 
20/
 The land court, despite the applicant's request to have these
public ways sited, did not do so in the Decree. Nothing, however, prevents
the Circuit Court from locating the public highways on remand. See Ward v.
 
City and Cnty. of Honolulu, 31 Haw. 787, 789 (1931) ([I]f there is a highway
running over registered land, the existence of the highway may be proven
. . . ."). See generally H AW. REV. STAT. § 501-82(a)(4) (2006). 
31
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
easement; the March 16, 2009 "Finding[s] of Fact, Conclusions of
 
Law and Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary
 Judgment Against [the Haradas], Filed on February 21, 2008 and
 Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Entry of Default Judgment on
 Ethel Nobuki Toki on All Counts of the Complaint Filed,
 February 21, 2008" in its entirety; and the July 3, 2008 "Clerk's
 Taxation of Costs in Favor of Defendants [the Okayamas]". 
Accordingly, we vacate the June 25, 2009 "Final Judgment as to
 All Claims and All Parties," except for paragraph (3) which
 granted the Haradas' motion to amend the caption. This case is
 remanded to the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit for
 proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion. 
On the briefs:
 
R. Laree McGuire and
 
S.V. (Bud) Quitiquit
(Porter Tom Quitiquit
Chee & Watts, LLP)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants/
Cross-Appellees
 
Paul K. Hamano
 
for Defendants-Appellees/
Cross-Appellants
Alan J. Harada, Co-Trustee under
that certain Trust made by
Junichiro Harada dated April 21, 1981,
Mikie Harada, Alan J. Harada, and
Sharon S. Harada
 
Michael W. Moore
 
(Law Offices of Yeh & Moore)
for Defendants-Appellees
Jack Hideto Okayama, Wallace
Sadao Okayama, and Hatsune O.
Hirano
 
32
 