FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
KAUAI SPRINGS, INC., Appellant-Appellee,
v.

PLANNING COMMISSION OF THE COUNTY OF KAUAI, Appellee-Appellant.
  
NO. 29440 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT

(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0042)

APRIL 30, 2013

FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE and GINOZA, JJ.

OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.

This secondary agency appeal addresses whether 
Appellant Planning Commission of the County of Kaua' i (Planning 
Commission) properly denied Appellee Kauai Springs, Inc.'s (Kauai 
Springs) combined application for a Use Permit, a Class IV Zoning 
Permit, and a Special Permit to continue operating a spring water 
bottling facility on land zoned for agricultural use. 
The Planning Commission denied the permits to Kauai

Springs by way of a January 23, 2007 Findings of Fact,

Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order (Planning Commission

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Order). Kauai Springs then appealed to the Circuit Court of the
 
Fifth Circuit (circuit court).1

The circuit court issued its Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law, and Order (Circuit Court Order) on 
September 17, 2008, reversing in part and vacating in part the 
Planning Commission Order. The circuit court ruled, as to the 
Use Permit and the Class IV Zoning Permit, that they were "deemed 
approved" pursuant to deadlines for processing the applications 
imposed by the Kaua' i County Code (KCC), and that Kauai Springs 
had not assented to an extension of the deadlines. The circuit 
court further ruled, inter alia, that Kauai Springs had met its 
burden for the permits, and that the Planning Commission had 
improperly required Kauai Springs to disprove future events, 
i.e., requiring Kauai Springs to prove that the Commission on 
Water Resource Management (Water Commission) and the Public 
Utilities Commission (PUC) would not exercise jurisdiction. The 
circuit court thus ordered that all three permits be issued and 
entered final judgment in favor of Kauai Springs pursuant to the 
Circuit Court Order. 
In its appeal to this court, the Planning Commission

asserts that the circuit court erred by: (1) implicitly holding

that the Planning Commission had no duty under the public trust

doctrine to consider Kauai Springs' water use, (2) concluding

that the record lacked evidence that Kauai Springs' existing or

proposed uses of ground water might affect resources subject to

the public trust, (3) implicitly holding that the Planning

Commission considered improper criteria for the permits when the

Planning Commission required Kauai Springs to prove the legality

of its commercialized use of the water, (4) concluding that Kauai

Springs had carried its burden of proof by presenting sufficient

evidence that its proposed use of the water was legal,

(5) concluding that Kauai Springs was properly integrated into
 
1

The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.

2

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the community of uses and met the requirements for the permits,

and (6) concluding that Kauai Springs did not assent to extending

automatic approval deadlines for the Use Permit and the Class IV

Zoning Permit.

In whole, the Planning Commission's points of error

present four issues for this court to decide, which will be

addressed in the following order:

(1) Whether the circuit court was correct that the Use
 
Permit and the Class IV Zoning Permit were automatically approved

pursuant to provisions in the KCC.

(2) Whether the Planning Commission had public trust
 
obligations to review Kauai Springs' use of water.

(3) If the Planning Commission had public trust
 
obligations to review Kauai Springs' use of water, whether the

Planning Commission applied the proper standards and criteria in

reviewing the application for the permits.

(4) Whether the circuit court was correct that Kauai
 
Springs met its burden of proof to be entitled to the permits.

For the reasons discussed below, we vacate the circuit

court's final judgment and remand this case to the Planning

Commission for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.

I. BACKGROUND

Kauai Springs is a water bottling company owned and 
operated by Jim and Denise Satterfield, and is located in Kôloa, 
Kaua'i. The land on which Kauai Springs operates (the Property) 
is identified as TMK:(4)2-008-002:5 and is within the County of Kaua'i (County) agricultural district and the State agricultural 
land use district. Kauai Springs leases the Property and operates out of a 1,600 square-foot building. Prior to applying 
for the permits that are at issue in this case, Kauai Springs had 
obtained a building permit from the County to construct a 1,600 
square-foot "[bottled] water processing facility," and had also 
obtained a permit from the State Department of Health (DOH) 
approving Kauai Springs as a "bottled water manufacturer." The 
3

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
business operated for a few years with just these permits before

it was notified by the County of zoning code violations.

On May 15, 2006, the County of Kaua' i Planning 
Department (Planning Department) issued a Zoning Compliance 
Notice to the owner of the Property advising that, after 
receiving a complaint, it had found violations of the zoning code 
on the Property. In particular, the notice stated that "[t]he 
activity of processing and packaging without the proper permits" 
was a violation of the zoning code, and that "[t]he use of the 
[Property] for Industrial processing and packaging purposes is 
not generally permitted within the Agricultur[al] District." 
Pursuant to Chapter 8 of the KCC, the notice contained a cease 
and desist order. 
To address the alleged violations, Kauai Springs

submitted an application to the Planning Department on July 5,

2006, for a Use Permit, a Class IV Zoning Permit, and a Special

Permit. The Planning Department accepted the application for

processing on the same day.

Of note, the Hawai' i Supreme Court's opinion in 
Kelly v. 1250 Oceanside Partners, 111 Hawai' i 205, 140 P.3d 985 
(2006) was issued on July 28, 2006, twenty-three days after Kauai 
Springs submitted its permit application to the Planning 
Department. The record indicates that the Planning Commission 
was cognizant of the ruling in Kelly and, in reviewing Kauai 
Springs' application, sought to address its public trust duties 
in light of Kauai Springs' use of water in its water bottling 
operation. 
A. Permit Application and Planning Commission Hearings 
 
Kauai Springs' permit application sought to maintain 
and potentially expand its existing use "for a water harvesting 
and bottling operation" on the Property, in which spring water 
originating from Kâhili Mountain is filled into five-gallon 
recyclable containers to service residents and businesses on the 
Island of Kaua' i. At an August 8, 2006 Planning Commission 
4

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearing, Jim Satterfield (Mr. Satterfield) stated that Kauai

Springs' productivity was at approximately 300-500 five-gallon

bottles per week and he wanted the permits to allow future

expansion of its operations to 1,000 five-gallon water bottles

per day. Kauai Springs also sought to expand its operation to
 
include bottling the water into smaller biodegradable bottles. 
 
As found by the circuit court and uncontested by the 
parties, the Property is located miles away from the source of 
the water and Kauai Springs does not have control over the source 
or the system that brings the water to the Property. The 
location of the water source is owned by the Eric A. Knudsen 
Trust (Knudsen Trust) and the source is an underground spring 
located approximately one-thousand feet up Kâhili Mountain. 
Kauai Springs purchases the water from Knudsen Trust. The water 
is transmitted by way of a gravity-fed private system owned by 
Grove Farm Company (Grove Farm) which was originally constructed 
by Kôloa Sugar Mill in the 1890s to irrigate the ahupua' a of 
Kôloa. Kauai Springs receives the water from a pipe that runs across the Property. The water system also provides domestic 
water to eleven homes along Wailâ' au Road, makai (ocean side) of 
the Property. 
The Planning Commission held four public hearings on

2
the matter,  received numerous letters, and heard testimony from
 members of the public both in opposition to and in support of

permit approval. 
Mr. Satterfield attended each hearing and was
 
accompanied by Kauai Springs' attorney, Harvey Cohen (Cohen), at

the last two hearings. The Planning Commission deferred a
 
decision on the application several times in order to gather

information and to correspond with other government agencies. 
 
In the hearings, the Planning Commission inquired into

Kauai Springs' operations, including how the proposed use of

2

Public hearings on this permit application were held on August 8,
2006; September 26, 2006; November 14, 2006; and November 28, 2006.

5

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
operating a water bottling facility may affect the water

resources it utilizes and the surrounding lands dependent on the

water resources. Kauai Springs purchases the water it uses from

Knundsen Trust pursuant to a licensing agreement and, according

to Mr. Satterfield, there is no limit on the amount of water

Kauai Springs can extract. 
 
At a hearing, Mr. Stacey Wong, Trustee for the Knudsen

Trust, explained that two water tunnels were constructed at the

water source sometime in the early 1900's by McBryde Sugar

Company, and that there is an eight inch pipe line that was used

to provide water for people in the sugar plantation. The record

further indicates that one of the tunnels, referred to as "Tunnel

No. 1," is located at about the 1000-foot elevation and is the

access to the water source for the water used in Kauai Springs'

operation.

Planning Department staff visited the source to view

the water tunnel and the water system. According to a staff
 
report, water from Tunnel No. 1 feeds into a water tank, where it

is chlorinated and serves the Kâhili Mountain Park and feeds a

line going to Kôloa town. At a certain point, the water line

then connects to a Grove Farm operated water tank that is located

approximately 200 feet mauka (mountainside) of Kauai Springs'

building. Prior to this second water tank, Kauai Springs has
 
installed a tap into the water line which feeds a meter and an

underground line to its water bottling facility. 
 
The record does not contain verified data on the amount

of water flowing through Tunnel No. 1 that is utilized by Kauai

Springs for its operations and/or utilized by surrounding homes

before the water eventually feeds back into nearby streams. 
 
Consistent with its rules, the Planning Department also

sought input from various state and county agencies including the

DOH, the State Historic Preservation Division, the County Fire

Department, the County Department of Public Works, the County

Department of Water, the State Land Use Commission, the Water

6

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Commission, and the PUC. See Rules of Practice and Procedure of 
the Kaua' i County Planning Commission (Planning Commission Rules) 
§ 1-13-4(2) (stating that Special Permit applications may be 
routed to appropriate government agencies for comments and 
recommendations); KCC §§ 8-19.5(b), 8-19.6(b).3 
The Planning Commission was particularly concerned with

the input, or the perceived lack of input, it received from the

4	
Water Commission  and the PUC.
5
 
1. Water Commission Comments

The Water Commission first responded to the Planning

Department's request for input on the permit application by

letter, providing its comment that

3.		There may be the potential for ground or surface water
degradation/contamination and recommend that approvals
for this project be conditioned upon a review by the
State [DOH] and the developer's acceptance of any
resulting requirements related to water quality.

The Water Commission also commented that "[g]round-water6

withdrawals from this project may affect streamflows, which may

7
require an instream flow standard  amendment."  The letter also
 
stated that

3 KCC § 8-19.5(b) and KCC § 8-19.6(b), with respect to Use Permits and
Class IV Zoning Permits, state that the Planning Director or his designee
"shall refer the application to the Department of Public Works and the
Department of Water and may refer the application to any other County or State
Department for comment or approval" and "may require additional information if
necessary to make a determination."
 
4 Under article XI, section 7 of the State constitution, the Water
Commission is designated as the primary guardian of public rights under the
water resources trust. See Haw. Const. art. XI, § 7; see also In re Water Use 
Permit Applications, 94 Hawai' i 97, 143, 9 P.3d 409, 455 (2000). 
5
 The powers and duties of the PUC are set forth in HRS Chapter 269.

6

The State Water Code defines "ground water" as "any water found
beneath the surface of the earth, whether in perched supply, dike-confined,
flowing, or percolating in underground channels or streams, under artesian
pressure or not, or otherwise." HRS § 174C-3 (2011 Repl.).
 
7

An instream flow standard (IFS) is a "quantity or flow of water or
depth of water which is required to be present at a specific location in a
stream system at certain specified times of the year to protect fishery,
wildlife, recreational, aesthetic, scenic, and other beneficial instream
uses." HRS § 174C-3.

7

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
OTHER:

. . . 
 The island of Kauai has not been designated as a ground­
water management area;
8
 therefore, a water use permit from
the Commission is not required to use the existing
source(s)9
 or to change the type of water use.  However, if
the source needs to be modified in any way, a well
modification permit from the Commission may be required. In
addition, if a pump is to be installed to induce additional
water flow, a pump installation permit from the Commission
would be required. If the source is modified to induce

additional water flow, and the modification results in

impacts to surface waters,
10 a petition to amend the interim
instream flow standard11 for affected surface waters must be

made and approved prior to the use of the water. 
 
The Planning Department subsequently requested

clarification of these comments in a letter stating:

Pursuant to several conversations with [Water Commission
staff], Planning Department staff understands that provided
the following apply, no permit is required for the
Applicant's use of water from the existing water system:

8 The State Water Code defines "water management area" as "a geographic
area which has been designated pursuant to section 174C-41 as requiring
management of the ground or surface water resource, or both." HRS § 174C-3.
   
9

The State Water Code defines a "water source" as

a place within or from which water is or may be developed,
including but not limited to: (1) generally, an area such as
a watershed defined by topographic boundaries, or a
definitive ground water body; and (2) specifically, a
particular stream, other surface water body, spring, tunnel,
or well or related combination thereof.

HRS § 174C-3.
 
10

The State Water Code defines "surface water" as 
 
both contained surface water -– that is, water upon the
surface of the earth in bounds created naturally or
artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other
watercourses, lakes, reservoirs, and coastal waters subject
to state jurisdiction -– and diffused surface water -– that
is, water occurring upon the surface of the ground other
than in contained water bodies. Water from natural springs
is surface water when it exits from the spring onto the
earth's surface.

HRS § 174C-3.
 
11 An interim instream flow standard (IIFS) is a "temporary instream
flow standard of immediate applicability, adopted by the [Water Commission]
without the necessity of a public hearing, and terminating upon the
establishment of an instream flow standard." HRS § 174C-3. 
 
8

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(a) The tunnel is not being changed, and the
Applicant's use of the water is not affecting the
source in any way (i.e. not inducing more water to
come out of the source or tunnel)

(b) The existing source has been registered and is
basically grandfathered, and there is an agreement
between the new user (Applicant) and the operator
of the system.

(c) There is a closed line from the tunnel to the tank.
 
Please advise if you concur with the foregoing, and if
pursuant to those conditions, no permit is required from
[the Water Commission].

(Emphasis added.) In a second letter, the Water Commission
 
concurred with the Planning Department's summary of its previous

comments and "confirm[ed] that no permits from the [Water]

Commission are required for the proposed use of water under the

three conditions outlined in your letter." (emphases added). The

Water Commission's response did not affirmatively verify that the

three conditions outlined in the Planning Department's letter

actually existed.

2. PUC Comments

With respect to possible regulation by the PUC, Mark

Hubbard, a Grove Farm consultant, testified to the Planning

Commission that to his knowledge, Grove Farm had not communicated

with the PUC. The Planning Department solicited input from the

PUC on the application and the PUC responded to the Planning

Department by letter, stating that Kauai Springs does not appear

to be a public utility subject to its jurisdiction. The PUC

further stated that there is a possibility that Grove Farm may be

operating as a public utility under HRS Chapter 269 and

"[a]dditional information, including a review of all relevant

facts and possibly testimony from all concerned parties, would be

necessary before a determination could be made as to whether

Grove Farm is a public utility under HRS Chapter 269." The PUC's

response indicated it was an informal and non-binding opinion,

and that "[i]f you require a formal opinion on this matter, you

may file a petition for declaratory relief[.]"

9

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. Planning Commission Order

On November 28, 2006, the Planning Commission discussed

conditioning a permit approval on a favorable declaratory ruling

from the PUC and the Water Commission. The Planning Commission

voted instead to close the public hearing on the matter when

commission members realized that the automatic approval deadline

for the Special Permit was approaching.12

On January 23, 2007, the Planning Commission voted 6-1

to deny all three requested permits and issued the Planning

Commission Order which concluded that:

1.		The Commission has jurisdiction over the subject
permits under provisions of Article XIV of the Kauai
County Charter, Section[] 8-20.5 and Section 8-21.2 of
the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, and Chapter 13 of
the Rules of Practice and Procedures of the Kauai

Planning Commission.

2. 	 Due notice was given and all parties were offered an
opportunity to present evidence and argument on the
requested permits.

3. 	 In view of the comments received from [the Water
Commission] and PUC the land use permit process should
insure that all applicable requirements and regulatory
processes relating to water rights, usage, and sale are
satisfactorily complied with prior to taking action on
the subject permits. The Applicant, as a party to this
proceeding should also carry the burden of proof that
the proposed use and sale of the water does not violate
any applicable law administered by [the Water
Commission], the PUC or any other applicable regulatory

agency.

4. 	 There is no substantive evidence that the Applicant has
any legal standing and authority to extract and sell
the water on a commercial basis.

12 According to the Planning Commission Rules, the Planning Commission
has 60 days after the close of the public hearing to take a vote on a Special
Permit petition, but must vote no later than 210 days after the acceptance of
an application. Planning Commission Rules § 13-7(a). If the Planning
Commission fails to act within the aforementioned time period, the petition
"shall be deemed approved after an additional thirty (30) days subject to such
protective restrictions as may be deemed necessary and as permitted under HRS
205-6(c)." Id. § 13-8(a)(2). The Planning Commission accepted Kauai Springs'
application for processing on July 5, 2006. Thus, under the time limitations,
the Planning Commission had to take action on the application by January 31,
2007.

   
10

 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kauai Springs requested reconsideration, which the Planning

Commission denied. 
 
C. Circuit Court Proceedings and Order

On March 15, 2007, Kauai Springs appealed to the

circuit court, essentially arguing that the Planning Commission

Order disregarded the permit standards and improperly placed the

burden on Kauai Springs to prove that its use of the water would

not be subject to regulation by the Water Commission and the

PUC.13

On May 15, 2007, the circuit court granted Kauai

Springs' request for a preliminary injunction and enjoined the

Planning Commission from enforcing its order. 
 
On September 17, 2008, the circuit court issued its

order and entered the following relevant findings of fact (FOFs)

and conclusions of law (COLs):

FINDINGS OF FACT

. . . 
 
54.		The [Planning Commission Order] stated the Water
Commission informed the Planning Commission that Kauai
Springs required "no permits" because "the Applicant's
use of the water is not affecting the source in any way
(i.e., not inducing more water to come out of the
source or tunnel)," "the existing source has been
registered and is basically grandfathered, and there is
an agreement between the new user (Applicant) and the
operator of the system," and "there is a closed line
from the tunnel to the tank." . . . .

. . . 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

. . .

Kauai Springs Did Not Waive the Deadlines, or Assent To An
Extension

32.		Kauai Springs appeared at the Planning Commission
hearings on its permit applications, but its presence

13 Kauai Springs argued that the Planning Commission Order violated
HRS § 91-14(g)(1)-(6) (2012 Repl.) because it was: (1) in violation of
statutory provisions; (2) in excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction
of the agency; (3) made upon unlawful procedure; (4) affected by other error
of law; (5) clearly erroneous; and (6) arbitrary or capricious.

11

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and participation did not constitute a waiver of the
deadlines to which the Planning Commission was
obligated to adhere, and was not consent to or
affirmation of an extension of time for the Planning
Commission to act on the applications. See, e.g.,

October Twenty-Four, Inc. v. Planning and Zoning

Comm'n, 646 A.2d 926, 931-32 (Conn. Ct. App. 1994).

. . .

36.		Kauai Springs did not ask for extra time, nor did it
withdraw its applications.

. . . 
 
40.		The failure to adhere to the time requirements was due
solely to the actions of the Planning Commission.

Use Permit Standards

41.		The Planning Commission did not consider the proper
criteria when reviewing and processing Kauai Springs'
zoning permit applications. The applicable standards
for whether Use, Special, and Class IV permits should
be issued are clearly established.

. . . 
 
43.		Kauai Springs is properly integrated into the community
of uses. It had been operating without issue and with
all the state and county permits necessary including
two County building permits. The Planning Department
staffer remarked about Kauai Springs, "[t]he existing
water bottling facility is relatively low impact at the
subject location in its current function and capacity." 
 . . . .

. . . 
 
45.		There is nothing in the [Planning Commission Order] or
the Record to indicate that Kauai Springs' existing or
proposed uses were not or will not be integrated.

. . .

59.		The [Planning Commission Order] contains no finding,
and there is no evidence in the Record, that Kauai
Springs did not meet the criteria for issuing the three
permits at issue in this appeal.

Public Trust

. . . 
 
61.		The State of Hawaii and its political subdivisions have
duties under the public trust. Haw. Const. art. IX;

Kelly v. 1250 Oceanside Partners, 111 Haw. 205, 140
P.3d 985 (2006).

12

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
62.		"Political subdivisions" of the State include the

County of Kauai. Kelly v. 1250 Oceanside Partners, 111
Haw. 205, 140. P.3d 985 (2006).

63.		Decisions on permit applications must be grounded in
fact and the Record, not speculation, and the Record in
this case is devoid of any evidence that Kauai
Springs['] existing or proposed uses might affect water
resources subject to the public trust.

. . .

71.		The Planning Commission did not identify any other
outstanding regulatory processes that it claimed must
have been fulfilled in order to satisfy any duty under
the public trust that it may have had.

72.		There is nothing in the Record of this case to show
that the Planning Commission did not fulfill any duty
it may have under the public trust. Kelly v. 1250

Oceanside Partners, 111 Haw. 205, 140 P.3d 985 (2006).

Burden of Proof

73.		If Kauai Springs bore the burden of proof that its
proposed use did "not violate any applicable law
administered by [the Water Commission], the PUC or any
other applicable regulatory agency," Kauai Springs
plainly carried that burden of proof. Both of these

agencies had provided their input to the Planning
Commission, and neither agency had any substantial
concerns with Kauai Springs, as reflected in the
[Planning Commission Order]. . . .

74.		There was no evidence presented at the public hearings,
and no findings made by the Planning Commission that
Kauai Springs did not carry any of its burdens to show
it was entitled to the three permits at issue in this
appeal, and the Planning Commission was clearly
erroneous when it determined that Kauai Springs did not
meet the burden on the zoning permit applications.
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 91-14(g).

75.		Conclusions of Law #3 and #4 in the [Planning
Commission Order] do not apply the governing legal
standards set forth in Finding of Fact #15, #16, and
#17, and state only that the Planning Commission denied
the applications because Kauai Springs had not
disproven that the Water Commission or the PUC might
not exercise jurisdiction, despite the fact that the
Planning Commission and the Planning Department
actually knew both of these agencies repeatedly had
disclaimed jurisdiction. Conclusions of Law #3 and #4

are wrong. Because of factual inaccuracies

mischaracterizing the Water Commission and PUC letter
are unsupported by the Record [sic], FOF #19 is clearly
erroneous and must be reversed. Haw. Rev. Stat. 91-14

(g)(5).

13

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The circuit court ultimately reversed the Planning

Commission Order with regard to the Use Permit and the Class IV

Zoning Permit, ruling that the application for these permits had

been automatically deemed approved. In this regard, the circuit
 
court ruled that the deadline for granting or denying these

permits had expired before the Planning Commission Order was

issued and Kauai Springs had not consented to an extension of the

deadlines. The circuit court thus ordered that the Use Permit

and the Class IV Zoning Permit be issued forthwith. 
 
The circuit court further ruled that the Planning

Commission Order "exceeds the Planning Commission's authority or

jurisdiction, is clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,

probative and substantial evidence on the whole record; and is

arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse of discretion

or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion." The circuit

court thus vacated the Planning Commission Order with regard to

the Special Permit and remanded the case to the Planning

Commission with an order to issue the Special Permit immediately. 
 
The court further permanently enjoined the Planning Commission

from enforcing its order or taking any actions that would be

contrary to the issuance of the three permits.

II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW

A. Public Trust

The Planning Commission's points of error related to 
the public trust doctrine implicate questions of constitutional 
law, which this court answers "by exercising its own independent 
judgment based on the facts of the case, and, thus, questions of 
constitutional law are reviewed on appeal under the right or 
wrong standard." Kelly, 111 Hawai' i at 221, 140 P.3d at 1001 
(quoting Freitas v. Admin. Dir. of Courts, 108 Hawai' i 31, 37, 
116 P.3d 673, 679 (2005) (brackets omitted)). "Under the right 
or wrong standard, this court examines the facts and answers the 
question without being required to give any weight to the trial 
court's answer to it." Id. (quoting Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 
14

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
91 Hawai' i 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 1225 (1999) (brackets 
omitted)). 
B. Secondary Appeal

Regarding appeals from agency decisions generally, the

Hawai'i Supreme Court has stated: 
This court's review is ... qualified by the principle that
the agency's decision carries a presumption of validity andappellant has the heavy burden of making a convincingshowing that the decision is invalid because it is unjust
and unreasonable in its consequences. Konno v. County of 
Hawai�i, 85 Hawai' i 61, 77, 937 P.2d 397, 413 (1997)
(citations omitted). 
In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai' i 97, 118-19, 
9 P.3d 409, 430-31 (2000) (hereinafter Waiâhole I) (quoting 
GATRI v. Blane, 88 Hawai' i 108, 112, 962 P.2d 367, 371 (1998)). 
However, this court's deference to agencies is further qualified 
by the principle that "the ultimate authority to interpret and 
defend the public trust in Hawai' i rests with the courts of this 
state." Id. at 143, 9 P.3d at 455. 
"Review of a decision made by a court upon its review 
of an administrative decision is a secondary appeal. The 
standard of review is one in which this court must determine 
whether the court under review was right or wrong in its 
decision." Leslie v. Bd. of Appeals of the Cnty. of Hawai� i, 109 
Hawai'i 384, 391, 126 P.3d 1071, 1078 (2006) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). To determine if the circuit 
court's decision is right or wrong, we "apply the standards set 
forth in HRS § 91-14(g) to the agency's decision." Id. (citation 
omitted). HRS § 91–14(g) (2012 Repl.) enumerates the standards 
of review applicable to an agency appeal and provides: 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:

(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or

15

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or

(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or

(4) Affected by other error of law; or

(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or

(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse
of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion.

"It is well settled 'that in an appeal from a circuit 
court's review of an administrative decision the appellate court 
will utilize identical standards applied by the circuit court. 
The clearly erroneous standard governs an agency's findings of 
fact.'" Leslie, 109 Hawai' i at 391, 126 P.3d at 1078 (brackets 
and citation omitted). "An agency's findings are not clearly 
erroneous and will be upheld if supported by reliable, probative 
and substantial evidence unless the reviewing court is left with 
a firm and definite conviction that a mistake has been made." 
Id. (citation and internal quotation omitted). "The courts may 
freely review an agency's conclusions of law." Id. (brackets, 
citations and internal quotation mark omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION

A. Assent to Extend Automatic Approval Deadlines

We first address whether the circuit court was correct

that the Use Permit and the Class IV Zoning Permit were

automatically approved pursuant to provisions in the KCC. In

this regard, the circuit court ruled that automatic approval

deadlines applied because Kauai Springs had not assented to an

extension of the deadlines for the Use Permit and the Class IV

Zoning Permit.14

14 There is no issue as to timely action for the Special Permit. The

circuit court determined, and it is unchallenged, that the Planning Commission
had up to January 31, 2007 (or 210 days after the permit application was
accepted) to take action on the Special Permit. See Planning Commission Rules
§§ 1-13-7 and 1-13-8. The Planning Commission Order was issued on January 23,
(continued...)

16

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 91-13.5 (Supp. 2006) requires state and county

agencies to adopt rules specifying a maximum time period to grant

or deny, inter alia, a development-related permit. This statute

states in relevant part:

§91-13.5 Maximum time period for business or
development-related permits, licenses, or approvals;
automatic approval; extensions.(a) Unless otherwise provided
by law, an agency shall adopt rules that specify a maximum
time period to grant or deny a business or
development-related permit, license, or approval; . . .

. . .

(c) All such issuing agencies shall take action to
grant or deny any application for a business or
development-related permit, license, or approval within the
established maximum period of time, or the application shall
be deemed approved; provided that a delay in granting or
denying an application caused by the lack of quorum at a
regular meeting of the issuing agency shall not result in
approval under this subsection; provided further that any
subsequent lack of quorum at a regular meeting of the
issuing agency that delays the same matter shall not give
cause for further extension, unless an extension is agreed
to by all parties.

. . .

(e) The maximum period of time established pursuant to
this section shall be extended in the event of a national

disaster, state emergency, or union strike, which would
prevent the applicant, the agency, or the department from
fulfilling application or review requirements.

(Emphases added.)

Even prior to the adoption of HRS § 91-13.5, the County

had adopted maximum time periods for the Planning Commission to

act on the types of permits involved in this case. Under the

applicable county ordinances, the circuit court determined and it

is not contested that the deadline for the Planning Commission to

act on the Use Permit application was October 18, 2006, which was

105 days from the acceptance of the application. See KCC § 8­
20.6 and § 8-19.5. The parties also do not contest the circuit
 
court's determination that the deadline for the Planning

14(...continued)
2007, prior to the deadline for the Special Permit.

17

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Commission to act on the Class IV Zoning Permit application was

November 2, 2006, which was 120 days after the application was

accepted. See KCC § 8-19.6. The Planning Commission Order was
 
issued on January 23, 2007, after the deadlines related to the

Use Permit and the Class IV Zoning Permit had expired.

However, the ordinances applicable to a Use Permit and

a Class IV Zoning Permit provide that, "[i]f the Planning

Director or the Planning Commission fails to take action within

the time limits prescribed in this Article, unless the applicant

assents to a delay, the application shall be deemed approved." 
 
KCC § 8-19.5(g); KCC § 8-19.6(e) (emphasis added). The circuit

court held that Kauai Springs did not assent to a delay of the

prescribed time limits. The Planning Commission contests this
 
ruling and argues that Kauai Springs did assent to a delay and

therefore the Use Permit and Class IV Zoning Permit were not

automatically approved once the respective deadlines had passed.

In response, Kauai Springs argues that if the county

ordinances allow assent to extend the deadlines, they violate the

superior state law set forth in HRS § 91-13.5 and are invalid. 
 
Kauai Springs relies on HRS § 46-1.5(13) (Supp. 2005) and

HRS § 50-15 (2012 Repl.). HRS § 46-1.5(13) provides that each
 
county has the power to enact ordinances "not inconsistent with,

or tending to defeat, the intent of any state statute[.]" In

turn, HRS § 50-15 provides that

[n]otwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, there is
expressly reserved to the state legislature the power to
enact all laws of general application throughout the State
on matters of concern and interest and laws relating to the
fiscal powers of the counties, and neither a charter nor
ordinances adopted under a charter shall be in conflict
therewith.

 
Kauai Springs contends that under HRS § 91-13.5(e), "assent" is

not one of the three enumerated circumstances under which the

time periods designated by the agencies could be extended, and

the inclusion of the specific reasons to extend the time periods

in the statute implies the exclusion of others. Kauai Springs
 
18

  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argues that the County ordinances are thus in conflict with

HRS § 91-13.5(e) and are invalid in allowing assent to extend the

deadlines. We do not agree.

HRS § 91-13.5 is silent as to whether counties may, by

code or rule, provide for assent provisions. HRS § 91-13.5(e)
 
provides for three situations in which the maximum time period

shall be extended, stating:

The maximum period of time established pursuant to this
section shall be extended in the event of a national

disaster, state emergency, or union strike, which would
prevent the applicant, the agency, or the department from
fulfilling application or review requirements.

(Emphasis added.) The inclusion of the mandatory reasons for 
extending the time periods does not necessarily indicate an 
intent to preclude counties from adopting other reasons why the 
time periods may be extended. See Int'l S&L Ass'n v. Wiig, 82 
Hawai'i 197, 201, 921 P.2d 117, 121 (1996) ("[t]he inclusion of a 
specific matter in a statute implies the exclusion of another 
'only where in the natural association of ideas the contrast 
between a specific subject matter which is expressed and one 
which is not mentioned leads to an inference that the latter was 
not intended to be included within the statute.'" (citation 
omitted)). 
"A test to determine whether an ordinance conflicts 
with a statute is whether it prohibits what the statute permits 
or permits what the statute prohibits." Waikiki Resort Hotel, 
Inc. v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 63 Haw. 222, 241, 624 P.2d 
1353, 1366 (1981). As to the issue of whether HRS § 91-13.5 
prohibits the challenged assent provisions, HRS § 91-13.5 is 
ambiguous. See Gillan v. Government Employees Ins. Co., 119 
Hawai'i 109, 117, 194 P.3d 1071, 1079 (2008) ("When there is 
doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness or uncertainty 
of an expression used in a statute, an ambiguity exists." 
(citation and internal quotation mark omitted)). HRS § 91-13.5 
neither explicitly allows or disallows the adoption of rules or 
19

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ordinances which provide that the period for automatic approval

may be extended. In construing an ambiguous statute, a court may
 
resort to extrinsic aids in determining legislative intent, one

of which is legislative history. Gillan, at 119, 194 P.3d at

1081. 
 
While the legislative history indicates that the

purposes for enacting HRS § 91-13.5 include streamlining

administrative processes and improving Hawaii's business climate,

see 1998 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 164, § 1 at 613, the legislative

history as a whole contemplates flexibility in rule-making and a

balance between streamlining on one hand and constitutional

demands, public input, and environmental concerns on the other

hand, and leads us to conclude that the challenged assent

provisions do not conflict with HRS § 91-13.5. See Conf. Comm.

Rep. No. 127, in 1998 Senate Journal, at 799 ("Your Committee on

Conference notes the continued concerns of some that automatic

permit approval will be misused to short-circuit existing public

input processes. Your Committee is confident that agencies will
 
account for the preservation of such processes in their

rulemaking."); S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2386, in 1998 Senate

Journal, at 976-77 ("Your Committees find that establishing time

frames will compel agencies to prioritize permitting and approval

activities, streamline and eliminate any requirements for

unnecessary application information, and in the process identify

critical application information. This can be accomplished by
 
establishing time frames that are goals rather than

'maximums'."); S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2760, in 1998 Senate

Journal, at 1121 ("In streamlining the approval process your

Committee is also mindful of environmental concerns. This bill

is not intended to jeopardize the environment. The provisions in
 
this bill are intended to allow for the continued safeguard of

legitimate review and public comment on those issues.").

Having concluded that the assent provisions in KCC § 8­
19.5(g) and KCC § 8-19.6(e) do not conflict with HRS § 91-13.5,

20

 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
we turn to whether the circuit court correctly determined that

Kauai Springs did not assent to an extension of the maximum time

periods for the Use Permit and the Class IV Zoning Permit.

The word "assent" is not defined by the applicable

county ordinances. However, Black's Law Dictionary defines
 
assent as "[a]greement, approval, or permission; esp., verbal or

nonverbal conduct reasonably interpreted as willingness." 
 
Black's Law Dictionary 132 (9th ed. 2009). The types of assent
 
include the following:

apparent assent. Assent given by language or conduct that,
while not necessarily intended to express willingness, would
be understood by a reasonable person to be so intended and
is actually so understood. 
 
constructive assent. [ ] Assent imputed to someone based on
conduct. 
 
. . . 
 
implied assent. [ ] Assent inferred from one's conduct
rather than from direct expression.

Id. Unlike assent, waiver necessarily involves the intentional 
relinquishment of a known right. See Coon v. City & Cnty. of 
Honolulu, 98 Hawai' i 233, 261, 47 P.3d 348, 376 (2002) 
("Generally, waiver is defined as an intentional relinquishment 
of a known right, a voluntary relinquishment of rights, and the 
relinquishment or refusal to use a right." (citations omitted)). 
The Planning Commission argues that by its conduct,

Kauai Springs led the Planning Commission to reasonably believe

that Kauai Springs assented to a delay in the final decision on

the Use and Class IV Zoning Permits. In our view, as to the
 
question of assent, the relevant conduct of Kauai Springs

includes both verbal and nonverbal conduct that can be reasonably

interpreted as willingness to extend the applicable automatic

approval deadlines, see Black's Law Dictionary 132 (9th ed.

2009), and thus we hold that the circuit court erred in

concluding that Kauai Springs did not assent to extend the

21

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
22automatic approval deadlines for the Use Permit and Class IV
Zoning Permit.
At a November 14, 2006 hearing, almost a month after
the Use Permit deadline had elapsed and more than one week after
the Class IV Zoning Permit deadline had passed, Kauai Springs,
through its attorney, amended its original application to seek
approval for only the current needs of the water-bottling
operation rather than allowing for company growth.
At a November 28, 2006 hearing, Kauai Springs' attorney
retracted his earlier amendment and asked the Planning Commission
to consider its original application, which contemplated company
growth.  Kauai Springs' attorney also continued to negotiate for
the granting of a conditional Use Permit: 
Chair: Yes. I would ask in light of public comment
whether you would be willing to accept the restriction on
the Use Permit that it would be for the use of the applicant
only, it's not transferable and that should you sell the
business that the Commission would have the right to review
the Use Permit?
Mr. Cohen: Yes. 
At a January 23, 2007 hearing, Kauai Springs' attorney
expressed his surprise with the Planning Commission's decision to
deny the permit application, stating that "I think where we were
heading and correct me if I'm wrong was a conditioned approval,
conditioned upon clarifying some of these water right issues." 
He further asked the Planning Commission to "reconsider this
outright denial." 
At a February 13, 2007 hearing, Kauai Springs' attorney
urged the Planning Commission to reconsider its decision, offered
to accept conditional permits, and asked for another continuance
in order to obtain more evidence pertaining to the issue of water
rights, stating: 
Again we were willing to put all sorts of conditions
and I know you have a long docket ahead of you.  What we
would like is for you to vote to reconsider and then
continue this matter to a time in the not [too] distant
future when we can all get our arms around any of the
remaining issues . . . .   I don't see any downside inFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
continuing this matter until we are certain and you
gentlemen are certain that he is indeed operating outside
the limits of the law. I don't think we are going to find
that out but it sure would be nice to get to that point. So

I thank you. 
 
At no point in time did Kauai Springs assert that its

permit application had been automatically approved. 
 
Kauai Springs argues that "merely appearing at a

hearing after an auto approve deadline has passed does not

constitute waiver or affirmation[,]" citing October Twenty-Four,

Inc. v. Planning & Zoning Comm'n, 646 A.2d 926, 931-32 (Conn.

App. Ct. 1994) and Frito-Lay, Inc. v. Planning & Zoning Comm'n,

538 A.2d 1039 (Conn. 1988). However, as outlined above, Kauai
 
Springs actively participated in hearings, asked for a

continuance of the matter, actively negotiated, and opposed and

sought reconsideration of the denial of the permits after the

applicable auto-approve deadlines had passed. Furthermore, the
 
courts in October Twenty-Four and Frito Lay addressed the

separate issue of waiver of an automatic approval deadline, as

opposed to the issue of assent to an extension of an automatic

approval deadline as specifically allowed by ordinance.

The circuit court erred in concluding that Kauai

Springs did not assent to an extension of the deadlines to take

action on the Use Permit and the Class IV Zoning Permit, and

therefore these permits were not automatically approved based on

expiration of the applicable time periods.

B. Public Trust Doctrine Related to Water Resources

With regard to the public trust doctrine, the Planning

Commission takes issue with two COLs by the circuit court which

the Planning Commission contends raise doubt as to whether it had

public trust duties. Specifically, the Planning Commission
 
challenges COLs 71 and 72 in the Circuit Court Order, which

state:

71.		The Planning Commission did not identify any other
outstanding regulatory processes that it claimed must
have been fulfilled in order to satisfy any duty under
the public trust that it may have had.

23

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
72.		There is nothing in the Record of this case to show
that the Planning Commission did not fulfill any duty
it may have under the public trust. Kelly v. 1250

Oceanside Partners, 111 Haw. 205, 140 P.3d 985 (2006).

(Emphasis added.) The Planning Commission argues that because of
 
the indefinite nature of these COLs, referencing any duty that

the Planning Commission "may" have under the public trust

doctrine, the circuit court implicitly held that the Planning

Commission had no duty under the public trust doctrine to

consider Kauai Springs' water use in this matter.

The Planning Commission also challenges COL 63, which

states:

63.		Decisions on permit applications must be grounded in
fact and the Record, not speculation, and the Record in
this case is devoid of any evidence that Kauai
Springs['] existing or proposed uses might affect water
resources subject to the public trust.

The Planning Commission argues that it does not matter that

Knudsen Trust owns the land containing the water source or that

Grove Farm owns the water transport system, but rather, because

the public trust doctrine applies to all water resources, it

could not overlook Kauai Springs' commercialized use of water. 
 
The Planning Commission thus contends that because Kauai Springs

sought to greatly increase its bottling and commercialization of

drinking water taken from a ground water source, and because

Kauai Springs had not investigated its rights (or the rights of

the Knudsen Trust or Grove Farm) related to the water, there was

ample evidence that Kauai Springs' existing or proposed use might

affect resources subject to the public trust. Given these public
 
trust implications, the Planning Commission contends that Kauai

Springs was required to show that its commercialized use of the

water resources "was legal."

In response, Kauai Springs argues that the Planning

Commission misreads the Circuit Court Order, because the circuit

court did recognize that the Planning Commission had public trust

duties and the court determined that those duties had been

24

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
satisfied. Kauai Springs further argues that, because its permit

application did not seek permission to take or extract water

(because it does not control the water source) and all it does is

open a tap on a pipeline that crosses the Property, it is no

different than any other business that purchases water from

another.

Kauai Springs thus contends that the Planning

Commission's public trust inquiry is limited to whether public

resources would be impacted by Kauai Springs' building on

agriculturally-zoned land, and the public trust obligation does

not authorize the Planning Commission "to turn the usual zoning

permit process into an open-ended and standardless [sic] inquiry

in which it is free to stray outside of its delegated

responsibilities merely because a connection can be made between

a permit application and water resources." Rather, according to
 
Kauai Springs, the Planning Commission took "reasonable measures"

and made "appropriate assessments" to protect public trust

resources by seeking input from other government agencies, and

had before it information satisfying the permit criteria as well

as affirmative evidence that the use would not affect public

trust resources. Ultimately, Kauai Springs argues that the

Planning Commission fulfilled its public trust duties, but

wrongfully denied the permit application by requiring Kauai

Springs to exhaust "outstanding regulatory processes," i.e. by

requiring that Kauai Springs had the burden to show that "the

proposed use and sale of the water does not violate any

applicable law administered by [the Water Commission], the PUC or

any other applicable regulatory agency."

Given these arguments, the parties do not dispute that

the County generally has public trust duties. The dispute in
 
this case centers more specifically on the scope of the County's

public trust duties and the applicable standards or criteria that

the County (through the Planning Commission) is authorized to

employ in reviewing the application for the three permits. Thus,
 
25

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
we must determine: (1) whether the County's public trust duties

extend to a review of Kauai Springs' use of ground water in its

water bottling operation or is limited to just reviewing Kauai

Springs' building on the Property; and (2) what are the

applicable standards and criteria that the Planning Commission

should apply in fulfilling its public trust duties.

1.		The Planning Commission's Public Trust Duties Extend To
Reviewing Kauai Springs' Use of Water

The parties do not dispute that the public trust duties 
required under article XI, section 1 of the Hawai' i Constitution 
apply to the County. Article XI, section 1, promulgated in 1978, 
provides: 
Conservation and Development of Resources

Section 1. For the benefit of present and future
generations, the State and its political subdivisions shall
conserve and protect Hawaii's natural beauty and all natural
resources, including land, water, air, minerals and energy
sources, and shall promote the development and utilization
of these resources in a manner consistent with their

conservation and in furtherance of the self-sufficiency of
the State.

All public natural resources are held in trust by the
State for the benefit of the people.

(Emphasis added.)

In Kelly, the Hawai' i Supreme Court ruled that the 
County of Hawai' i was a political subdivision of the State 
pursuant to article VIII, section I of the Hawai' i Constitution, 
and in turn, "the plain language of article XI, section 1 
mandates that the County does have an obligation to conserve and 
protect the [S]tate's natural resources." 111 Hawai' i at 224-25, 
140 P.3d at 1004-05. The same holds true for the County in this case. 
Here, the Circuit Court Order cites to Kelly in COLs 61

and 62, concluding that "[t]he State of Hawaii and its political

subdivisions have duties under the public trust[]" and that the

"'[p]olitical subdivisions' of the State include the County of

Kauai." Therefore, the circuit court clearly recognized that the

26

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Planning Commission had duties under the public trust doctrine,

generally.

As noted above, however, the dispute in this case

centers on whether the public trust duties under article XI,

section 1 extend to a review of Kauai Springs' existing and

proposed use of water for its operations. In this regard, the
 
Circuit Court Order is somewhat conflicting, first ruling in COL

63 that the record "is devoid of any evidence that Kauai

Springs['s] existing or proposed uses might affect water

resources subject to the public trust[,]" but then apparently

suggesting in COLs 71 and 72 that the Planning Commission "may"

have public trust duties in this case. We conclude that the

circuit court's COLs 63, 71 and 72 are incorrect in that they do

not recognize the Planning Commission's public trust duty to

consider and review Kauai Springs' water usage in its water

bottling operation.

First, Hawai' i law has consistently recognized water 
resources as a part of a public trust.15 This public trust has 
its genesis in the common law. See Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 
130, 9 P.3d at 442. The Hawai' i Supreme Court has declared that 
"the right to water is one of the most important usufruct of 
lands, and it appears clear . . . that . . . the right to water 
was specifically and definitely reserved for the people of 
Hawai[']i for their common good in all of the land grants." 
15 Early Hawai' i Supreme Court decisions acknowledged that Hawaii's
system of laws governing water is "based upon and is the outgrowth of ancient
Hawaiian customs and methods of Hawaiians in dealing with the subject of
water." Territory v. Gay, 31 Haw. 376, 395 (1930). The system was of a
cooperative nature and based on a stable "spirit of mutual dependence"
stemming from "the critical import of water in the lives of the people."
Reppun v. Bd. of Water Supply, 65 Haw. 531, 540, 656 P.2d 57, 64 (1982); see generally id. at 540-48, 656 P.2d at 64-68 (detailing the traditional systems
of water and land management in Hawai' i and the emergence of western notions
of property ownership); see also Robinson v. Ariyoshi, 65 Haw. 641, 676 n.33,658 P.2d 287, 311 n.33 (1982) (describing the ancient Hawaiian system of waterallocation). Even after the introduction of a more western system of privateland ownership, Kingdom of Hawai' i laws continued to categorize water as a
resource reserved for the public good. See Reppun 65 Haw. at 542-45, 656 P.2d
at 65-67. 
27

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
McBryde Sugar Co. v. Robinson, 54 Haw. 174, 186, 504 P.2d 1330, 
1338 (1973) (footnote omitted). As such, rights of water 
ownership were not included when private ownership of land was 
instituted in Hawai' i, but rather "the ownership of water in 
natural watercourses[,] streams and rivers remained in the people 
of Hawaii for their common good." Id. at 186-87, 504 P.2d at 
1338-39. The State holds all such water in trust for the benefit 
of the common good. Id. at 187, 504 P.2d at 1339; see also 
Robinson v. Ariyoshi, 65 Haw. 641, 673-74, 658 P.2d 287, 310 
(1982). 
In 1978, amendments to the Hawai' i Constitution, 
including the promulgation of article XI, section 1, "elevated 
the public trust doctrine to the level of a constitutional 
mandate." Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 131, 9 P.3d at 443; Kelly, 
111 Hawai' i at 222, 140 P.3d at 1002. "[T]he public trust 
doctrine applies to all water resources without exception or distinction." Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 133, 9 P.3d at 445; see 
also Kelly, 111 Hawai' i at 222, 140 P.3d at 1002. 
Second, in determining whether the Planning 
Commission's scope of public trust duties required it to consider 
and protect water resources in this case, we are guided by Kelly. In Kelly, to determine whether the County of Hawai' i had a public 
trust duty to protect ocean waters involved in that case, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court based its ruling on a combined analysis of 
article XI, section I and the "general laws" that delegated duties and responsibilities to the county. 111 Hawai' i at 224­
25, 140 P.3d at 1004-05. 
In Kelly, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that the 
County of Hawai' i had public trust obligations to protect ocean 
waters that were affected by development activity on nearby land, where the activity had been regulated and permitted by the 
county. 111 Hawai' i at 224, 140 P.3d at 1004. There, a 1,540 
acre residential, recreational, and agricultural development was 
28

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
being constructed on the island of Hawai' i and, pursuant to the 
Hawai'i County Code, the developer was required to obtain grading 
and grubbing permits from the County of Hawai' i for construction 
activity and erosion control. Id. at 209-10, 140 P.3d at 989-90. 
As a result of two heavy storms, runoff from the property was 
alleged to have polluted the nearby pristine ocean waters, id. at 
211-12, 140 P.3d at 991-92, and claims were subsequently asserted 
against, inter alia, the County of Hawai' i for violating its 
public trust duties. 
In recognizing that the County of Hawaii's public trust 
obligations included protecting the ocean waters involved in that 
case, the Kelly court focused on the constitutional framework 
related to article XI, section 1 and the statutory authority 
conferring powers on the county. Id. at 224, 140 P.3d at 1004. 
The Kelly court first recognized that by its plain language, 
article XI, section 1 "provides that 'the State and its political subdivisions shall conserve and protect Hawaii's natural beauty and all natural resources[.]'" Id. (citation omitted). 
Importantly, the court then noted that, under a separate 
provision of the Hawai' i Constitution -- article VIII, section 1 
-- "[t]he legislature shall create counties, and may create other 
political subdivisions within the State, and provide for the 
government thereof. Each political subdivision shall have and 
exercise such powers as shall be conferred under general laws." 
Id. (quoting Haw. Const. Art. VIII, sec. 1) (italics in 
original, underline emphasis added). 
Given the constitutional mandates of article XI, 
section 1 and article VIII, section 1, the Kelly court then 
analyzed the statutory authority –- i.e., the general laws -­
under which the County of Hawai' i was acting in regulating the 
grading and grubbing activity in that case. The supreme court 
noted that: 
The County's power under general laws with respect to its
public trust duty to protect the natural water resources of

29

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the State can be found in HRS chapter 180C (1993), entitled
"Soil Erosion and Sediment Control." HRS § 180C–2(a)
provides that "[t]he county governments, in cooperation with
the soil and water conservation districts and other

appropriate state and federal agencies, shall enact

ordinances for the purpose of controlling soil erosion and
sediment."

Id. at 224, 140 P.3d at 1004 (underline and bold emphasis added). 
The court then quoted from HRS § 180C-2(b) (2011 Repl.), which

set out the minimum required of county ordinances for the purpose
of soil erosion and sediment control. In particular, the supreme
court highlighted a section of HRS § 180C-2(b) that required

county ordinances to "[c]ontain standards for various types of

soil and land uses, which standards shall include criteria,

techniques, and methods for the control of erosion and sediment

resulting from land disturbing activities." Id. (italics

omitted, underline emphasis added). In turn, the supreme court
 
noted that:


 


"Land disturbing activity" is defined under HRS § 180C–1
(1993), in pertinent part as "any land change which may
result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement

of sediment into state waters [.]" "State waters" are
defined in pertinent part under the same statute as "all
waters, fresh, brackish or salt, around and within the

State, including, but not limited to, coastal waters [.]"

Id. at 225 n.23, 140 P.3d at 1005 n.23 (italics in original,

underline emphasis added). Thus, the supreme court's analysis in
 
Kelly demonstrates that the scope of the county's public trust

duties in that case included the protection of the coastal water

resources in light of both the public trust duties mandated by

article XI, section 1 and the authority and duties delegated to

the county by statute that established protection of the coastal

waters as a concern for the county.

Indeed, the supreme court concluded this portion of its

analysis as follows:

the plain language of article XI, section 1 mandates that
the County does have an obligation to conserve and protect
the [S]tate's natural resources. Coupled with the State's

power to create and delegate duties and responsibilities to
the various counties through the enactment of statutes, the
County's duty to conserve and protect is clear.

30

 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 224-25, 140 P.3d at 1004-05 (bold and underline emphasis

added); see also id. at 227 n.29, 140 P.3d at 1007 n.29 (the

legislative history for HRS Chapter 180C evidenced the

legislature's intention "'to conserve and protect the land,

water, and other resources of the State' by requiring 'the county

governments to enact ordinances for the purpose of controlling

soil erosion and sediment[.]'" (citing H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No.

234-74, in 1974 House Journal, at 647)).

Therefore, to determine whether the duties and

responsibilities delegated to the County (and thus to the

Planning Commission) encompass protection of the water at issue

in this case, we must analyze the "general laws" authorizing the

County (and thus the Planning Commission) to issue the three

permits involved in this case.

(a) The Use Permit and Class IV Zoning Permit

The Use Permit and Class IV Zoning Permit sought by

Kauai Springs are regulated by the County pursuant to the

County's delegated authority to zone. See HRS § 46-4 (Supp.

2006); KCC, Chapter 8, The Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for the

County of Kauai (CZO). The general law that conferred zoning
 
powers to the counties is HRS § 46-4(a). Kaiser Hawaii Kai Dev.

Co. v. City and Cnty. of Honolulu, 70 Haw. 480, 483, 777 P.2d

244, 246 (1989) ("The counties of our state derive their zoning

powers from HRS § 46–4(a) . . . referred to as the Zoning

Enabling Act."). HRS § 46-4(a) provides in relevant part:
 
(a) . . . Zoning in all counties shall be accomplished
within the framework of a long-range, comprehensive general
plan prepared or being prepared to guide the overall future
development of the county. Zoning shall be one of the tools
available to the county to put the general plan into effect
in an orderly manner. . . . The zoning power granted herein
shall be exercised by ordinance which may relate to:
(1) The areas within which agriculture, forestry,
industry, trade, and business may be conducted; 
 
. . .

(12) Other regulations the boards or city council find
necessary and proper to permit and encourage the orderly
development of land resources within their
jurisdictions.

31

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphases added.)

Pursuant to HRS § 46–4(a), the County was thus 
authorized to adopt a comprehensive general plan to guide the 
county's future development and to adopt ordinances to exercise 
the zoning power. Kauai's General Plan recognizes that the 
zoning power granted under HRS § 46-4 must be based on a general 
plan and "[i]n fact, the general plan comes before and guides 
zoning." Kaua' i General Plan, 1.2.1; see also KCC, § 7-1.2 
(Kauai's General Plan is "intended . . . to be considered in 
reviewing specific . . . development applications."). 
Chapter 2 of Kauai's General Plan presents, inter alia, 
the vision for Kaua' i in the year 2020. The vision statement 
includes that "[t]he people of Kauai, along with the State and 
County governments, [will] practice careful stewardship of the 
island's land and waters. The high mountains, forested watershed 
areas, the ocean and coral reefs, beaches - these areas are 
managed as part of the public lands trust." Kaua' i General Plan 
at 2-3 (emphases added).16 
Moreover, in the CZO adopted for the County, a Use

17
Permit and a Class IV Zoning Permit  can be granted only if the
 
Planning Commission finds, inter alia, that "the establishment,

maintenance, or operation of the construction, development,

activity or use in the particular case . . . will not cause any

substantial harmful environmental consequences on the land of the

applicant or on other lands or waters, and will not be

16 Section 3.4 of the Kaua' i General Plan adopts policies related to
watersheds, streams and water quality, however those policies apply "[i]n
developing County roads and drainage facilities and in administering thegrading, flood control, and drainage regulations[.]" Therefore, it does notappear that the policies adopted in Section 3.4 are pertinent to this case. 
17 A Class IV Zoning Permit is required because a Use Permit is
required. See KCC § 8-7.7(4). There do not appear to be any independent
standards in the KCC for approval of a Class IV Zoning Permit and the parties
thus agree that the KCC standards for approving a Use Permit likewise apply to
the Class IV Zoning Permit.

32

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inconsistent with the intent of [the CZO] and the General Plan." 
 
KCC § 8-20.5 (emphases added).

In sum, HRS § 46-4, inter alia, confers authority upon 
each county to zone, to adopt a comprehensive general plan to guide the overall future development of the county, and to 
exercise the zoning power by ordinance. Relevant to the County's 
public trust duty in this case, the Kaua' i General Plan and the 
zoning ordinance for issuing a Use Permit and a Class IV Zoning Permit provide for the protection of water and watershed areas. 
Therefore, as in Kelly, the County's public trust duty under 
article XI, section I of the Hawai' i Constitution, "[c]oupled 
with the State's power to create and delegate duties and 
responsibilities to the various counties through the enactment of 
statutes," 111 Hawai' i at 225, 140 P.3d at 1005 (emphasis added), 
establishes that the County (through the Planning Commission) had a duty to conserve and protect water in considering whether to 
issue the Use Permit and the Class IV Zoning Permit to Kauai 
Springs. 
(b) The Special Permit

A Special Permit was required in this case because the

Property is located in a state agricultural district and

operation of a spring water bottling facility is not otherwise

permitted under HRS § 205-4.5 (Supp. 2006), which lists

permissible uses within the state agricultural districts. 
 
HRS § 205-6 (Supp. 2012) delegates authority to the respective

county planning commissions to promulgate procedures governing

the issuance of Special Permits. HRS § 205-6 states in relevant
 
part:

§ 205-6 Special Permit. (a) Subject to this section,
the county planning commission may permit certain unusual
and reasonable uses within agricultural and rural districts
other than those for which the district is classified. Any
person who desires to use the person's land within an
agricultural or rural district other than for an
agricultural or rural use, as the case may be, may petition
the planning commission of the county within which the
person's land is located for permission to use the person's
land in the manner desired. . . .

33

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . .

(c) The county planning commission may, under such
protective restrictions as may be deemed necessary, permit
the desired use, but only when the use would promote the
effectiveness and objectives of this chapter; . . .

(Emphases added.)

The Hawai' i Supreme Court has ruled that the 
"overarching purpose" of HRS Chapter 205 is to "protect and 
conserve natural resources and foster intelligent, effective, and 
orderly land allocation and development." Curtis v. Bd. of 
Appeals, Cnty. of Hawai� i, 90 Hawai' i 384, 396, 978 P.2d 822, 834 
(1999) (internal quotation marks omitted); see also Cnty. of 
Hawai�i v. Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 Hawai' i 391, 409, 235 P.3d 
1103, 1121 (2010) ("HRS chapter 205 is a law relating to the 
conservation, protection and enhancement of natural 
resources[.]"). As noted in Curtis, 
The stated purpose of the law is, inter alia:

to protect and conserve through zoning the urban,
agricultural and conservation lands within all the
counties. A coordinated, balanced approach not only
within each county but an overall balance of statewide
land needs for economic growth is essential to:

(1) Utilize the land resources in an intelligent,
effective manner based upon the capabilities and
characteristics of the soil and the needs of the

economy;

(2) Conserve forests, water resources and land,
particularly to preserve the prime agricultural lands
from unnecessary urbanization;

(3) State the allocation of land for development in an
orderly plan to meet actual needs and minimize costs of
providing utilities and other public services . . . .

90 Hawai' i at 396, 978 P.2d at 834 (underline emphases added, 
italics and footnote omitted) (quoting H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 
395, in 1961 House Journal, at 855–56). 
HRS § 205-6 thus confers authority to the Planning

Commission to grant special permits for uses not otherwise

permitted in state agricultural districts, but only when the use

34

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
would promote the effectiveness and objectives of HRS Chapter

205. 
The overarching purpose of HRS Chapter 205 includes, among 
other things, the protection and conservation of water resources. Therefore, the Planning Commission's public trust duty under 
article XI, section 1 of the Hawai' i Constitution, coupled with 
the State's power to create and delegate duties to the counties, establishes that the Planning Commission had a duty to conserve 
and protect water resources in considering whether to issue the 
Special Permit to Kauai Springs. 
(c)		 Kauai Springs' Current and Proposed Use of the
Property Affects a Public Trust Resource

Here, Kauai Springs' application seeks to continue 
operating a spring water bottling facility. The spring water 
utilized by Kauai Springs is held in trust for the common good 
and therefore the proposed use does have an impact on a public 
trust resource. See Wai
âhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 133 n.31, 9 P.3d 
at 445 n.31 (rejecting the contention that the reference in 
Article XI, section 1 to "public natural resources" indicates an 
intent to exclude "privately owned" waters from the public trust 
inasmuch as "apart from any private rights that may exist in 
water, 'there is, as there always has been, a superior public 
interest in this natural bounty.'" (citations omitted)). 
According to the record, Kauai Springs currently

bottles between 1,500 and 2,500 gallons of water per week and

proposes an increase to at least 35,000 gallons of water per

week. Thus, the record clearly contains evidence that Kauai

Springs' existing and proposed use of the Property directly

affects a public trust resource. Accordingly, we vacate the
 
circuit court's COL 63. We also vacate the circuit court's COLs

71 and 72 in that they fail to affirmatively recognize that the

Planning Commission has a public trust duty to review Kauai

Springs' use of water in its operations on the Property given

35

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
article XI, section 1, as well as the general laws and authorized

regulatory provisions applicable to issuance of the Use Permit,

Class IV Zoning Permit, and Special Permit.

We therefore agree with the Planning Commission that,

in deciding whether to approve the application for the three

permits, the Planning Commission's public trust duties required

it to consider Kauai Springs' use of water for the existing and

proposed operations of the water bottling facility on the

Property. We thus reject Kauai Springs' assertion that the
 
Planning Commission's public trust inquiry was limited only to

whether public resources would be affected by Kauai Springs'

building on agriculturally-zoned land.

2.		Standards and Criteria for Reviewing the Application
for Permits

Having determined that the Planning Commission's public

trust duties required it to consider Kauai Springs' use of water

in reviewing the application for the three permits, we now turn

to the question of whether the Planning Commission employed the

correct standards and criteria in carrying out its public trust

obligations.

In this regard, the Planning Commission challenges the

following COLs in the Circuit Court Order:

41.		The Planning Commission did not consider the proper
criteria when reviewing and processing Kauai Springs'
zoning permit applications. The applicable standards
for whether Use, Special, and Class IV permits should
be issued are clearly established.

. . .

59.		The [Planning Commission Order] contains no finding,
and there is no evidence in the Record, that Kauai
Springs did not meet the criteria for issuing the three
permits at issue in this appeal.

. . .

73.		If Kauai Springs bore the burden of proof that its
proposed use did "not violate any applicable law
administered by [the Water Commission], the PUC or any

36

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
other applicable regulatory agency," Kauai Springs
plainly carried that burden of proof. Both of these

agencies had provided their input to the Planning
Commission, and neither agency had any substantial
concerns with Kauai Springs, as reflected in the
[Planning Commission Order]. 
 
. . .

75.		. . . [The Planning Commission's] Conclusions of Law #3
and #4 are wrong.

As noted earlier, the Planning Commission's COLs 3 and 4, which

the circuit court held were wrong, stated:

3. 	 In view of the comments received from [the Water
Commission] and PUC the land use permit process should
insure that all applicable requirements and regulatory
processes relating to water rights, usage, and sale are
satisfactorily complied with prior to taking action on
the subject permits. The Applicant, as a party to this
proceeding should also carry the burden of proof that
the proposed use and sale of the water does not violate
any applicable law administered by [the Water
Commission], the PUC or any other applicable regulatory

agency.

4. 	 There is no substantive evidence that the Applicant has
any legal standing and authority to extract and sell
the water on a commercial basis.

(Emphases added.)

To determine whether the Planning Commission applied 
the correct standards and criteria in reviewing Kauai Springs' 
application for the permits, we again turn to Kelly for guidance. 
In Kelly, as noted above, the County of Hawai' i issued grading 
and grubbing permits for development of land near coastal waters. 
111 Hawai' i at 210, 140 P.3d at 990. The Hawai' i Supreme Court 
rejected the County of Hawaii's argument that it had no duty, 
inter alia, to take affirmative action to make pre-permit 
assessments of the effect of the development on coastal 
resources. Id. at 226-28, 140 P.3d at 1006-08. Of note, in 
framing the county's duties and certain relevant standards in 
that case, the court relied, in part, on both the statute and the 
applicable provisions of the Hawai' i County Code setting out the 
37

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
county's obligations to control soil erosion and sediment. Id.

at 227-28, 140 P.3d at 1007-08.

Further, the Kelly court relied on certain standards in

holding that the evidence in that case did not show that the

county violated its public trust duties. Id. at 209, 228, 140

P.3d at 989, 1008. The court stated there was no evidence in the

record "to show a lack of reasonable erosion control measures at

the Property or that actions or inactions of the County caused

any damage to coastal waters." Id. at 228, 140 P.3d at 1006

(emphasis added). The court also noted that "[i]t appears that
 
no evidence was entered establishing a failure by the County to

make appropriate assessments prior to the issuance of any

approval or permit[.]" Id. (emphasis added). The court thus

concluded that "inasmuch as the record is devoid of evidence

adduced at trial that there was a lack of reasonable erosion

control measures or that the County failed to make appropriate

assessments," it could not sustain the trial court's ruling. Id.

(Emphases added). Thus, the supreme court ruled that the trial
 
court had erred in concluding that the county had breached its

public trust duties. Id.

In addition to the guidance provided by Kelly, we 
recognize that, although the public trust doctrine and statutory 
protections of natural resources often overlap, the public trust 
doctrine "exists independently of any statutory protections 
supplied by the legislature." Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 132, 9 
P.3d at 444. As the supreme court expressed, "[t]his view is all 
the more compelling . . . in light of our state's constitutional 
public trust mandate." Id. The supreme court endorsed the idea 
that "[m]ere compliance by [agencies] with their legislative 
authority is not sufficient to determine if their actions comport 
with the requirements of the public trust doctrine. The public 
trust doctrine at all times forms the outer boundaries of 
38

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
permissible government action with respect to public trust

resources." Id. (quoting Kootenai Envtl. Alliance v. Panhandle

Yacht Club, Inc., 105 Idaho 622, 671 P.2d 1085, 1095 (1983)).

We further recognize that under the public trust

doctrine, those seeking the private use of water for economic

gain have the burden to justify the use, given the public trust

considerations. As expressed in In re Kukui (Molokai), Inc., 116

Hawai'i 481, 174 P.3d 320 (2007): 
Although "the state water resources trust acknowledges that
private use for economic development may produce importantpublic benefits and that such benefits must figure into anybalancing of competing interests in water, it stops short ofembracing private commercial use as a protected trust
purpose." [Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 138, 9 P.3d at 450].
Therefore, to the extent that "the public trust ...
establishes use consistent with trust purposes as the normor 'default' condition, ... it effectively prescribes a'higher level of scrutiny' for private commercial uses." Id.at 142, 9 P.3d at 454 (footnote omitted). In this regard,"the burden ultimately lies with those seeking or approvingsuch uses to justify them in light of the purposes protected
by the trust." Id. 
Id. at 508, 174 P.3d at 347; see also Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 
138, 9 P.3d at 450 (noting that prior Hawai' i cases "generally 
demonstrate that the public trust may allow grants of private 
interests in trust resources under certain circumstances," 
however the case law did not "establish private commercial use as 
among the public purposes protected by the trust."). Thus, 
Hawai'i precedent does not suggest that use of water for economic 
gain is illegal or improper per se. Indeed, as noted in In re 
Kukui (Molokai), Inc. and Waiâhole I, private use of water for 
economic gain could produce important public benefits. However, 
such use is not protected as part of the public trust and a 
higher level of scrutiny for such use is required. 
Based on our reading of Kelly, Waiâhole I, and In re

Kukui (Molokai), Inc., we thus hold that the applicable standards

and criteria that the Planning Commission is required to employ

39

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to meet its public trust obligations in this case are as follows:

that the Planning Commission's decision be initially grounded in

the framework of the statutes and regulatory provisions that

authorize the Planning Commission to act in this instance; in

addition thereto, that the Planning Commission make appropriate

assessments and require reasonable measures to protect the water

resources at issue in this case; and, because Kauai Springs seeks

to use the water for economic gain, this case requires that the

Planning Commission give the permit application a higher level of

scrutiny and, although Kauai Springs' use of the water is not

illegal or improper per se, that Kauai Springs carries the burden

to justify the use of the water in light of the purposes

protected by the public trust.

As to the statutory and regulatory framework for the 
Use Permit and Class IV Zoning Permit, as noted above, HRS § 46­
4(a) authorizes the County to adopt the Kauai General Plan and 
zoning ordinances. The general plan sets forth as part of its 
vision statement that "[t]he people of Kaua' i, along with the 
State and County governments, [will] practice careful stewardship of the island's land and waters." The Kauai CZO, more 
specifically, sets out the criteria for issuing the Use Permit 
and Class IV Zoning Permit,
18 as follows: 
(a) A Use Permit may be granted only if the Planning
Commission finds that the establishment, maintenance, or
operation of the construction, development, activity or use
in the particular case is a compatible use and is not
detrimental to health, safety, peace, morals, comfort and
general welfare of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood of the proposed use, or detrimental or
injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood
or to the general welfare of the community, and will not
cause any substantial harmful environmental consequences on
the land of the applicant or on other lands or waters, and

18 As noted earlier, there does not appear to be independent standards
for approval of a Class IV Zoning Permit. The parties agree that the KCC
standards for approving a Use Permit also apply to the Class IV Zoning
Permit.

40

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
will not be inconsistent with the intent of this Chapter and
the General Plan.

(b) The Planning Commission may impose conditions on
the permit involving any of the following matters: location,
amount and type and time of construction, type of use, its
maintenance and operation, type and amount of traffic, off-
street parking, condition and width of adjoining roads,
access, nuisance, values, appearance of the building,
landscaping, yards, open areas and other matters deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission.

KCC § 8-20.5 (emphasis added).

For the Special Permit, as noted above, HRS § 205-6(c) 
provides that "[t]he county planning commission may, under such 
protective restrictions as may be deemed necessary, permit the 
desired use, but only when the use would promote the 
effectiveness and objectives of this chapter[.]"  The 
"overarching purpose" of HRS Chapter 205 is to "protect and 
conserve natural resources and foster intelligent, effective, and 
orderly land allocation and development." Curtis 90 Hawai' i at 
396, 978 P.2d at 834 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Further, and more specifically, the Planning Commission Rules 
1-13-6 provide: 
1-13-6 Guidelines for Issuance of Special Permit. The

Planning Commission may approve a Special Permit under such
protective restrictions as may be deemed necessary if it
finds that the proposed use:

(a) Is an unusual and reasonable use of land situated

within the Agricultural or Rural District, whichever the
case may be. The Planning Commission shall consider the
following guidelines in determining unusual and reasonable
use: 
1) Such use shall not be contrary to theobjectives sought to be accomplished byChapters 205 and 205A HRS, and the rules ofthe Land Use Commission;
2) The desired use would not adversely affectsurrounding property;
3) The use would not unreasonably burden publicagencies to provide roads and streets, sewers,water, drainage, school improvements, andpolice and fire protection;
4) Unusual conditions, trends, and needs havearisen since the district boundaries and rules were established; and 
41

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5) The land upon which the proposed use is sought
is unsuited for the uses permitted within the
district; and

(b) Would promote the effectiveness and objectives of
Chapter 205, HRS, as amended.

(Emphasis added.)

Given the above, the Planning Commission's review of

Kauai Springs' application should have been based, as an initial

matter, upon the standards and criteria specified by its

statutory and regulatory authority to issue the permits in

question. Although the Planning Commission Order cites to, inter

alia, KCC § 8-20.5 and Planning Commission Rules § 1-13-6 as

setting out applicable standards for issuance of the permits, the

denial of the permits is not based on any of the particular

standards or criteria set out in those provisions.

The Planning Commission essentially required Kauai

Springs to prove that its water usage -- and the sale of the

water by the Knudson Trust and Grove Farm's operation of the

water system -- were legal and met all potentially applicable

regulatory requirements. No concerns are articulated in the

Planning Commission Order related per se to Kauai Springs' water

bottling operation or its particular use of the water. For

instance, there is no concern articulated about the amount of

water Kauai Springs sought to use, whether it was a compatible

use in the area, whether it would be detrimental to the general

welfare of other people or other property in the area or to the

community, or whether it would cause harmful environmental

consequences to lands or waters. There also was no concern

articulated that Kauai Springs' use of water would be contrary to

the objectives of HRS Chapter 205, HRS Chapter 205A or the rules

of the Land Use Commission. Rather, the concerns stated in the

Planning Commission Order are based on whether the Knudsen Trust

and Grove Farm, who were non-parties to the proceeding, were in

42

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
compliance with all regulatory requirements, and whether Kauai

Springs has "legal standing and authority to extract and sell the

water on a commercial basis."

The Planning Commission Order references the Water

Commission's remarks, stating:

The Planning Department further acknowledges the qualifying
remarks by [the Water Commission] that:

•		if the source needs to be modified in any way, a
well modification permit from [the Water
Commission] may be required;

•		if a pump is to be installed to induce additional
water flow, a pump installation permit from [the
Water Commission] would be required;

•		if the modification results in impacts to surface
waters, a petition to amend the interim instream
flow standard for affected surface waters must be

made and approved prior to use of the water.

The Planning Commission Order then notes that the site visit to

Tunnel No. 1 showed that certain items had been built in the

tunnel.19 In this regard, the Planning Commission Order states:

In view of the foregoing, there may be outstanding
regulatory processes with [the Water Commission] that the
Applicant must satisfy. Based on the comments provided by
[the Water Commission] and staff observations during the
field trip, it should be the Applicant's responsibility to
confirm and determine the need for any permits that may be
required for the construction of the concrete stem wall and
the steel panel mounted over the tunnel entrance.

The Planning Commission Order further highlights

comments from the PUC that there was a possibility that Grove

Farm may be operating a public utility and thus could be subject

to PUC regulation. Further, the Planning Commission Order notes
 
that the PUC's comments were informal and that to obtain a formal

19 The Planning Commission Order notes that "to prevent infiltration of
surface water into the tunnel, a concrete stem wall was constructed at the
bottom of the tunnel entrance to above [the] water level within the tunnel and
a steel panel was mounted over the tunnel entrance. Furthermore . . . inside

the tunnel, water enters the system through a water pipe installed at or below
the water surface."

43

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
opinion, the Planning Department could file a petition for

declaratory relief.

As a result of the comments by the Water Commission and

the PUC, COL 3 of the Planning Commission Order then concludes in

relevant part that, "the land use permit process should insure

that all applicable requirements and regulatory processes

relating to water rights, usage, and sale are satisfactorily

complied with prior to taking action on the subject permits," and

that Kauai Springs as the applicant should carry the burden of

proof "that the proposed use and sale of the water does not

violate any applicable law administered by [the Water

Commission], the PUC or any other applicable regulatory agency." 
 
(Emphasis added.) Further, although there are no findings
 
related to Kauai Springs' commercial use of the water, COL 4 of

the Planning Commission Order concludes that "[t]here is no

substantive evidence that the Applicant has any legal standing

and authority to extract and sell the water on a commercial

basis."

To its credit, the Planning Commission took seriously

its public trust duty and made appropriate assessments by, inter

alia, investigating the water source and the transmission of the

water, seeking comment from a number of county and state

agencies, and holding several hearings and seeking input from the

community related to Kauai Springs' application for the permits. 
 
However, based on the articulated basis for its decision, the

Planning Commission applied incorrect standards and criteria in

denying the permits.

First, as an initial matter, there is no indication in

the Planning Commission Order that denial of the permits was

grounded upon any statutory or regulatory criteria relevant to

the respective permits, or that those criteria were a part of the

Planning Commission's consideration. For instance, the Planning
 
44

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Commission did not analyze or base its denial of the permits in

any way on Kauai Springs' failure to meet any requirements under

KCC § 8-20.5 (for the Use Permit or Class IV Zoning Permit) or

Planning Commission Rules § 1-13-6 (for the Special Permit).

Second, under the circumstances of this case, it was

not a reasonable measure for the Planning Commission to require

that Kauai Springs prove that "the proposed use and sale of the

water does not violate any applicable law administered by [the

Water Commission], the PUC or any other applicable regulatory

agency." This requirement creates an obscure and indefinite
 
burden of proof because it is completely open-ended as to the

"applicable law" that is of concern to the Planning Commission

and completely open-ended as to "any other applicable regulatory

agency" that the Planning Commission believes would have

jurisdiction relevant to its permit review. Without making its
 
requirements clear, the Planning Commission Order was arbitrary

and capricious in denying the permits. See HRS § 91-14(g)(6)

(2012 Repl.); see also De Maria v. Enfield Planning and Zoning

  
Comm'n, 271 A.2d 105 (Conn.App.Ct. 1970) (holding that vague and

undefined considerations alone were insufficient to support

zoning authority's denial of construction permit); Bethlehem

Christian Fellowship, Inc. v. Planning and Zoning Comm'n of the

Town of Morris, 807 A.2d 1089 (Conn.App.Ct. 2002) (noting that a

special permit could not be denied for vague or general reasons),

overruled on other grounds by Cambodian Buddhist Soc. of

  
Connecticut, Inc. v. Planning and Zoning Comm'n of Town of

Newtown, 941 A.2d 868 (Conn.App.Ct. 2008).

Further, given the circumstances and the record in this

case, it was not a reasonable measure for the Planning Commission

to require Kauai Springs to undertake regulatory action to

establish and confirm that other parties, Knudsen Trust and Grove

Farm, were in compliance with "all applicable requirements and

45

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
regulatory processes," especially given the limited and specific 
concerns raised by the Water Commission and the PUC. As noted 
above, the Planning Commission Order articulates a concern that 
involvement by the Water Commission would be needed if (a) the 
water source needed to be modified in any way, (b) a pump is to 
be installed to induce additional water flow, or (c) a 
modification results in impact to surface waters.20 These 
clearly are issues that could affect the water resource, but they are factual questions that could have been addressed directly by 
the Planning Commission. As found by the circuit court and 
undisputed by the parties, the water system was constructed by 
Kôloa Sugar Mill in the 1890s to irrigate the ahupua' a of Kôloa, 
and thus the question is whether Kauai Springs' existing or proposed use of the water would require modification of the water 
source and/or would require that a pump be installed. Because 
these questions can be answered by the Planning Commission, in 
light of the input from the Water Commission, it was not 
reasonable to require Kauai Springs to initiate an entirely 
separate regulatory proceeding before the Water Commission to 
determine that all applicable requirements were met.
21 In the 
event that Kauai Springs failed to show that its water use would not require modification of the water source and would not 
20 In correspondence with the Planning Commission, the Water Commission
clarified that no permits would be required from it if three conditions were
met: (1) the tunnel is not being changed, and Kauai Springs' use of the water
is not inducing more water to come out of the source or tunnel; (2) the
existing source has been registered and is grandfathered, and there is an
agreement between Kauai Springs and the operator of the system; and (3) there
is a closed line from the tunnel to the tank. The Planning Commission Order
did not raise all of these conditions as a concern and thus we focus on the

concerns raised in the order. Indeed, the record indicates that the water
source had been registered with the Water Commission and that there was a
closed water line from the tunnel to the Grove Farm tank.
 
21 The parties do not address Kauai Springs' standing to initiate a
proceeding before the Water Commission where the water source is on land owned
by the Knudsen Trust, and therefore, we do not consider that question.

46

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
require a pump to be installed to induce more water to flow, then

a denial of the permits on that basis would be appropriate under

the public trust doctrine if modification of the water source or

installation of a pump would jeopardize the water. However, the
 
Planning Commission did not render its decision based on any such

factual determinations.

With regard to the concern raised in the Planning

Commission Order that Grove Farm may possibly be operating a

public utility subject to PUC regulation, there is nothing in the

order or the PUC's comments that suggests the water resources are

in jeopardy or affected without PUC regulation of Grove Farm as a

public utility. Based on the record, Grove Farm's water system
 
has been in place for over a century and it currently supplies

water to other users besides Kauai Springs, including at least

eleven other homes in the area. Specifically as to Kauai

Springs, the PUC commented that Kauai Springs' water bottling

operation does not appear to be a public utility subject to PUC

jurisdiction. Given this record, it was not reasonable to
 
require Kauai Springs to initiate a proceeding with the PUC to

determine if Grove Farm was a public utility subject to PUC

jurisdiction.

Third, it is clear from the record that, because Kauai

Springs seeks to use the water for economic gain, the Planning

Commission did review the permit application with a heightened

scrutiny. Moreover, the Planning Commission clearly placed a
 
heavy burden on Kauai Springs. As articulated by the Planning
 
Commission, however, the burden that it imposed was primarily

focused on whether other parties were in compliance with all

applicable laws. While compliance with the law by non-parties
 
supplying water may in certain circumstances be a proper burden

if such compliance will help to protect and conserve water, the

concerns by the Water Commission in this case could be addressed

47

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by the Planning Commission, and the PUC's comments did not

suggest that water resources would be affected. Thus, the burden
 
imposed here of requiring regulatory compliance by others with

all applicable laws was not reasonable.

However, the Planning Commission can and should require 
Kauai Springs to carry the burden of justifying its use of water 
for economic gain in light of the purposes protected by the 
public trust. In re Kukui (Molokai), Inc., 116 Hawai' i at 508, 
174 P.3d at 347; Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 138, 142, 9 P.3d at 
450, 454. In this regard, because Kauai Springs provides bottled 
water to residents and businesses on Kauai, such water usage "may 
produce important public benefits" and "such benefits must figure 
into any balancing of competing interests in water[.]" Waiâhole 
I, 94 Hawai' i at 138, 9 P.3d at 450. Ultimately, however, Kauai 
Springs must show that its use of the water for economic gain is 
justifiable given the public trust purposes. 
Based on the above, the circuit court's COL 41 is

correct to the extent that it concludes that the Planning

Commission did not consider the proper criteria when reviewing

and processing Kauai Springs' permit application. The circuit

court's COL 75 is also correct to the extent it concludes that

the Planning Commission's COL 3 was wrong.

The Planning Commission also challenged the circuit 
court's conclusion in COL 75 that the Planning Commission's COL 4 
was wrong. As previously noted, the Planning Commission's COL 4 
stated that "[t]here is no substantive evidence that the 
Applicant has any legal standing and authority to extract and 
sell the water on a commercial basis." We read COL 4 as raising 
a concern whether it was illegal or improper per se for Kauai 
Springs to use the water for economic gain. As discussed above, 
Hawai'i precedent does not hold that it is illegal or improper, 
in and of itself, to use water for economic gain. Waiâhole I, 94 
48

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i at 138, 9 P.3d at 450; In re Kukui (Molokai), Inc., 116 
Hawai'i at 508, 174 P.3d at 347. The circuit court was therefore 
correct that the Planning Commission's COL 4 was wrong as a basis 
for denying the permits. 
With regard to the remaining portion of the circuit

court's COL 41, it is vacated to the extent that it suggests

applicable standards inconsistent with this opinion. With

respect to COLs 59 and 73, we address them below.

3. Remand to the Planning Commission is Appropriate

The Planning Commission challenges the circuit court's

FOF 54 and COLs 73 and 74, arguing that the circuit court erred

in determining that Kauai Springs had presented sufficient

evidence that its proposed use of the water resources was legal. 
 
FOF 54 is clearly erroneous in that it misstates the Planning

Commission Order and the information provided by the Water

Commission, and thus it is vacated.22 COLs 73 and 74 are based

essentially on a determination that the Water Commission and the

PUC had not raised substantial concerns about Kauai Springs'

permit application. However, the framework of standards and
 
criteria adopted above, applicable under the Planning

Commission's public trust duties, are different than simply

considering whether other agencies have raised substantial

concerns. Therefore, COLs 73 and 74 are also vacated.

22 The circuit court's FOF 54 states in relevant part:

54.		The [Planning Commission Order] stated the Water Commission
informed the Planning Commission that Kauai Springs required
"no permits" because "the Applicant's use of the water is
not affecting the source in any way (i.e., not inducing more
water to come out of the source or tunnel)," "the existing
source has been registered and is basically grandfathered,
and there is an agreement between the new user (Applicant)
and the operator of the system," and "there is a closed line
from the tunnel to the tank."

(Emphasis added). To the contrary, the Water Commission confirmed that nopermits would be required from it if the stated conditions were met.


49

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Planning Commission further challenges the circuit

court's COLs 43, 45 and 59, asserting that the circuit court

erred in concluding that Kauai Springs met the requirements for

the permits. The circuit court's conclusions, in this regard,
 
appear to hold that Kauai Springs met the regulatory criteria in

the CZO and the Planning Commission Rules for issuing the

permits. The Planning Commission Order, however, does not
 
address in any substantive way the requirements under the CZO and

the Planning Commission Rules. As part of the more comprehensive
 
framework of standards and criteria adopted above, we conclude

that it would be more appropriate to allow the Planning

Commission to consider and decide whether Kauai Springs can carry

its burden in meeting the requirements of the CZO and the

Planning Commission Rules. We therefore also vacate COLs 43, 45
 
and 59.

We remand this matter to the Planning Commission to 
consider Kauai Springs' application for the three permits 
consistent with the analysis set forth in this opinion. See 
Public Access Shoreline Hawaii v. Hawai� i Cnty. Planning Comm'n, 
79 Hawai' i 425, 452, 903 P.2d 1246, 1273 (1995) (remanding permit 
application back to Hawai' i County Planning Commission for 
further proceedings consistent with the court's analysis). 
To reiterate, article XI, section 1 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution and the general laws that authorize the Planning 
Commission to act on the Use Permit, the Class IV Zoning Permit, 
and the Special Permit require the Planning Commission to 
consider Kauai Springs' use of water under the public trust 
doctrine. The standards and criteria that apply are as follows: 
the Planning Commission's decision should be initially grounded 
in the framework of the statutes and regulatory provisions that 
authorize the Planning Commission to act in this instance; in 
addition, the Planning Commission should make appropriate 
50

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assessments and require reasonable measures to protect the water

resources at issue in this case; and, because Kauai Springs seeks

to use the water for economic gain, this case requires that the

Planning Commission give the permit application a higher level of

scrutiny and, although Kauai Springs' use of the water is not

illegal or improper per se, Kauai Springs carries the burden to

justify the use of the water in light of the purposes protected

by the public trust.

IV. CONCLUSION

Based on the foregoing, we vacate the circuit court's

Final Judgment entered on September 23, 2008 and remand this case

to the Planning Commission for further proceedings consistent

with this opinion.

David J. Minkin

Dayna Kamimura-Ching
(Christopher D. Bayne with
David J. Minkin on the briefs)
(McCorriston Miller Mukai and MacKinnon LLP)
(Alfred B. Castillo, Jr.,
Office of the County Attorney with
David J. Minkin on the briefs)
for Appellee-Appellant

Robert H. Thomas

(Mark M. Murakami with him
on the briefs)
(Damon Key Leong Kupchak Hastert)
for Appellant-Appellee

Isaac H. Moriwake 
(EarthJustice)
on the briefs for Amici Curiae 
Mâlama Kaua' i and Hawaii's Thousand Friends 
Jon M. Van Dyke
Ernest M. Kimoto

(Office of Hawaiian Affairs)
on the briefs for Amicus Curiae

Office of Hawaiian Affairs

51

