NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29575
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
COLLEEN MARY SAGON, nka
COLLEEN MARY KELII,
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
vs.
 
ADAM LAWRENCE SAGON, JR.,
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DIVORCE NO. 04-1-1972)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley, and Leonard, JJ.)
 
This appeal arises out of a proceeding for post-divorce
 
decree relief brought by Plaintiff-Appellant Colleen Mary Sagon,
 
nka Colleen Mary Kelii (Colleen or Plaintiff) against Defendant-
Appellee Adam Lawrence Sagon, Jr. (Adam or Defendant). Colleen
 appeals from the following orders entered by the Family Court of
 

the First Circuit (Family Court)1 : (1) the order that was filed
on September 5, 2008 (September 5, 2008, Order); (2) the order
 granting in part and denying in part Plaintiff's motion for
 reconsideration and/or clarification that was filed on December
 24, 2008 (Order Regarding Plaintiff's Motion for
 Reconsideration/Clarification); and (3) the order granting in
 
1
 The Honorable Patricia C. Aburano presided over the
proceedings relevant to this appeal. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
part and denying in part Defendant's motion for reconsideration
 
and/or clarification that was filed on December 24, 2008 (Order
 Regarding Defendant's Motion for Reconsideration/
 Clarification).
2 On July 6, 2009, the Family Court filed
 
"Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law" with respect to these
 orders.
 
On appeal, Colleen argues that the Family Court erred
 
in: (1) concluding that the divorce decree did not require Adam
 to pay the children's post-secondary educational expenses; (2)
 concluding that it lacked jurisdiction to modify the divorce
 decree to impose an obligation to pay the children's post­secondary educational expenses; (3) determining Adam's child
 support arrearages for the parties' daughter; (4) determining the
 current child support for the parties' daughter; and (5)
 requiring both parties to pay their own attorney's fees and
 costs. Colleen challenges numerous findings of fact and
 conclusions of law entered by the Family Court in support of its
 rulings on these points.
 
We conclude that the Family Court erred in concluding
 
that it lacked jurisdiction to modify the divorce decree to
 impose an obligation to pay post-secondary educational expenses,
 and we remand the case for determination of that issue on the
 merits. We affirm the Family Court's orders in all other
 respects.
 
I.
 
We resolve the issues raised by Colleen on appeal as
 
follows:
 
(1) The Family Court did not err in construing the
 
divorce decree as not requiring Adam to pay the children's post­secondary educational expenses. The Family Court's construction
 of the divorce decree was reasonable in light of the
 
2 Adam filed a cross-appeal from these orders. However,
Adam later moved to dismiss his cross-appeal, and this court
dismissed Adam's cross-appeal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances surrounding the entry of the divorce decree, the
 
evidence presented at the hearing, and the absence of language in
 the divorce decree specifically requiring Adam to pay the
 children's post-secondary educational expenses.
 
(2) The Family Court erred in concluding that it 
lacked jurisdiction to modify the divorce decree to impose an obligation to pay the children's post-secondary educational expenses. HRS § 580-47(a), (c), (d) (2006); see Jaylo v. Jaylo, 125 Hawai' i 369, 373-74, 262 P.3d 245, 249-50 (2011). Because 
the Family Court erroneously denied Colleen's request to modify the divorce decree to require Adam to pay post-secondary educational expenses on jurisdictional grounds, it did not address the merits of Colleen's request. We remand the case for a decision by the Family Court on the merits. We express no opinion on what the decision on the merits should be. 
(3) Based on our review of the record, we conclude
 
that the Family Court did not err in determining the child
 support arrearages that Adam owed with respect to his daughter.
 Adam's child support obligations were subject to conditions set
 forth in the divorce decree, and he was not required to pay child
 support when those conditions were not satisfied.
 
(4) Based on our review of the record, we conclude
 
that the Family Court did not err using the joint physical
 custody adjustment in the child support guidelines in determining 
Adam's current child support for his daughter. 
(5) We conclude that the Family Court did not abuse
 
its discretion in requiring both parties to pay their attorney's
 fees and costs. See HRS § 580-47(f) (2006); Wellman v. Wellman,
 
7 Haw. App. 266, 752 P.2d 1079 (1988) (holding that a provision
 in a divorce decree could not deprive the family court of its
 discretion under the predecessor to HRS § 580-47(f) to determine
 whether to award attorney's fees and costs to a party). 
II.
 
We vacate the Family Court's September 5, 2008, Order,
 
the Order Regarding Plaintiff's Motion for Reconsideration/
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Clarification, and the Order Regarding Defendant's Motion for
 
Reconsideration/Clarification to the extent that they denied
 Colleen's request to modify the divorce decree to require Adam to
 pay the children's post-secondary educational expenses on the
 ground that the Family Court lacked jurisdiction to modify the
 divorce decree to impose an obligation to pay post-secondary
 educational expenses. We affirm these orders in all other
 respects. We remand the case for a determination of Colleen's
 request to modify the divorce decree to require Adam to pay the
 children's post-secondary educational expenses on the merits.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 19, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Robert M. Harris 
for Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Chief Judge 
Peter Van Name Esser Sheila Vierra for Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 