  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28762
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
DISTRICT COUNCIL 50 OF THE INTERNATIONAL UNION OF 
PAINTERS & ALLIED TRADES and
 
ALOHA GLASS SALES & SERVICE, INC.,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
KEALI'I S. LOPEZ
Department of Commerce & Consumer Affairs,
Defendant-Appellee
  1
, in her capacity as Director,
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0310)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Circuit Court Judges Pollack and
Castagnetti in place of Nakamura, C.J.,
Fujise, Leonard, Reifurth, and Ginoza, JJ., all recused)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants District Council 50 of the
 
International Union of Painters and Allied Trades and Aloha Glass
 
Sales & Service, Inc. (Appellants) appeal from the Judgment and
 
the "Decision and Order Affirming Board's Final Order, Filed
 
January 22, 2007" entered September 12, 2007 (Order) in the
 
2
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).  Judgment
 
was entered in favor of Defendant-Appellee Keali
'i S. Lopez, in 
1
 This party is the current director and was substituted pursuant to
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 43(c)(1). 
2
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
her capacity as Director, Department of Commerce and Consumer
 
Affairs (Appellee) and against Appellants.
 
On appeal, Appellants contend the circuit court erred
 
in adopting the Administrative Hearings Officer's findings that:
 
(1)
 the metal jalousie window work involved in the
 
project known as the Lanakila Elementary School Renovate and
 
Paint Various Buildings DAGS Job No. 52-16-5581 (Project) was
 
"incidental and supplemental" and thus could be performed by a
 
"B" contractor under a C-5 specialty license;
 
(2) "'[the] work is incidental and supplemental so
 
long as it is directly related to and necessary for the
 
completion of the project' regardless of 'the extent or cost of
 
the work involved[.]'"; and
 
(3) the "glazing metal jalousie window work was
 
incidental and supplemental" despite evidence the value of that
 
work was approximately 20-25% of the value of the total Project.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On March 3, 2005, the State of Hawai' i, Department of 
Accounting & General Services issued a Notice to Bidders (Notice) 
regarding the Project which stated 
[t]he work generally consists of replacement of windows,
floor covering, tackboards, whiteboards, electrical light
fixtures, switches, receptacles and cover plates, doors and
door frames, finish hardware, termite damaged wood, gypsum
wall board partition, sinks and cabinets, re-keying of
locks, interior and exterior painting, cast in place
concrete, concrete repairs, concrete masonry and some minor
repair work. 
A portion of the Project involved the installation of 10,390
 
vinyl slats and 476 aluminum jalousie windows. The Project
 
specifications required that "[f]abrication and installation of
 
jalousie windows shall be done by skilled and experienced
 
mechanics to the best standard of the trade and in accordance
 
with the approved shop drawings."
 
On December 20, 2005, the State of Hawai' i, Department 
of Education entered into a contract with Allied Pacific 
Builders, Inc. (Allied) for the Project. On April 26, 2006, 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellants filed a Petition for Declaratory Ruling (Petition).
 
Appellants disputed the award to Allied contending that, absent a
 
C-22 specialty glazing and tinting license, a general building
 
contractor cannot perform the Project's jalousie window work. 
The Petition asked the Department of Commerce and Consumer
 
Affairs Contractors License Board (Board) to rule that "a general
 
building contractor with a B-license cannot engage in work
 
requiring a C-22 subcontractor license under the general
 
contractor's C-5 license."3 Allied is licensed as a "B" general
 
contractor with a C-5 specialty license, does not possess a C-22
 specialty license, and did not list a sub-contractor with such a
 
license.
 
On October 23, 2006, the Administrative Hearings
 
Officer (Hearings Officer) filed his Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law , and Recommended Order (Recommended
 
Decision). The Hearings Officer found that under Hawaii
 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 16-77-34 "[a] plain reading of the
 
(Notice) leads the Hearings Officer to conclude that the jalousie
 
window replacement work is related to and necessary for the
 
completion of the renovation work, and as such, is incidental and
 
supplemental to the completion of the Project." The Hearings
 
Officer also found that the "jalousie window replacement work can
 
be undertaken by a C-22 specialty contractor, and a C-5 specialty
 
contractor provided that the work is incidental and supplemental
 
to the renovation work for which the C-5 contractor is licensed
 
to perform." (emphasis in original). Accordingly, the Hearings
 
Officer recommended that the Board deny Appellant's Petition.
 
On November 9, 2006, Appellants filed written
 
exceptions to the Hearings Officer's Recommended Decision. The
 
Board issued its Final Order (Final Order) on January 22, 2007
 
adopting the Hearings Officer's Recommended Decision as the
 
Board's Final Order. On February 16, 2007, Appellants filed
 
3
 The Petition presented three other questions, all three of which
were dismissed for lack of jurisdiction and not challenged on appeal.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
their Notice of Appeal to the circuit court. On September 12,
 
2007, the circuit court issued its Order affirming the Board's
 
Final Order and entered Judgment. On September 25, 2007,
 
Appellants filed the instant notice of appeal from the circuit
 
court's Judgment and Order.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Administrative Hearings Officer
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 103D-710(e) (2011) 
governs the "standard by which this court reviews the decisions 
of a hearings officer[.]" Arakaki v. State, Dept. of Accounting 
and Gen. Serv., 87 Hawai' i 147, 149, 952 P.2d 1210, 1212 (1998). 
(e) Upon review of the record the circuit court may affirm
the decision of the hearings officer issued pursuant to
section 103D-709 or remand the case with instructions for
 further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if substantial rights may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings, conclusions,
decisions, or orders are:
 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions;
 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the chief procurement officer or head of the
purchasing agency;
 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure;
 
(4) Affected by other error of law;
 (5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record; or
 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion.
 
HRS § 103D-710(e). 
Secondary Appeals
 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon
its review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal.
In an appeal from a circuit court's review of an
administrative decision the appellate court will utilize
identical standards applied by the circuit court. Questions
of fact are reviewed under the "clearly erroneous" standard.
In contrast, an agency's legal conclusions are freely
reviewable. An agency's interpretation of its rules
receives deference unless it is plainly erroneous or
inconsistent with the underlying legislative purpose.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i Teamsters & Allied Workers, Local 996 v. Dep't of Labor & 
Indus. Relations, 110 Hawai' i 259, 265, 132 P.3d 368, 374 (2006) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Although Appellants present three points on appeal,
 
those points can be distilled into one question: did the Hearings
 
Officer err in allowing jalousie window work to be completed by a
 
contractor with a C-5 speciality license? 
It is undisputed that Allied does not possess a C-22
 
speciality license which would allow a contractor
 
[t]o glaze or tint frames, panels, sash, and doors. To
assemble and install window wall and curtain wall, shower
doors, tub enclosures, mirrors, metal windows and screens,
metal sliding doors, metal jalousies, store front metal and
trim, plastics, tempered glass doors; including items such
as frames and hardware and any allied products not stated
above but affiliated with the glass and glazing industry; 
HAR § 16-77-28(c), Exhibit A. Allied is a "B" general contractor
 
with a C-5 specialty license that allows a contractor 
[t]o install cabinets, cases, sashes, doors, trims, or
nonbearing partitions that become a permanent part of structure, and to
remodel or to make repairs to existing buildings or structures, or both; and
to do any other work which would be incidental and supplemental to the
remodeling or repairing. The repairs, carpentry work, or remodeling shall
include the installation of window shutters, garage doors, bifold, and shutter
doors; and the installation of manufactured sidings and any other work that
would not involve changes or additions to the building's or structure's basic
components[.]
 
HAR § 16-77-28(c), Exhibit A (emphasis added). In addition to
 
the language of the C-5 specialty license, HRS § 444-8 (1993)
 
allows a contractor to take and execute a contract "involving the
 
use of two or more crafts or trades, if the performance of the
 
work in the crafts or trades, other than in which the specialty
 
contractor is licensed, is incidental and supplemental to the
 
performance of work in the craft for which the specialty
 
contractor is licensed." However, HAR § 16-77-33(d) states
 
"[a]ny licensee who acts, assumes to act, or advertises in any
 
classification other than for which the licensee is duly licensed
 
under this chapter shall be construed to be engaged in unlicensed
 
activity." 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The question then becomes whether the Hearings Officer
 
erred in determining the jalousie window work to be "incidental
 
and supplemental" to the C-5 specialty license work. 
HAR § 16-77-34 defines incidental and supplemental "as work in
 
other trades directly related to and necessary for the completion
 
of the project undertaken by a licensee pursuant to the scope of
 
the licensee's license." 
The Hearings Officer found that 
[t]he scope of the C-5 classification includes remodeling or
making repairs to existing buildings or structures, or both,
and doing any other work which would be incidental and
supplemental to the remodeling or repairing. . . . A plain
reading of the (Notice) leads the Hearings Officer to
conclude that the jalousie window replacement work is
related to and necessary for the completion of the
renovation work and as such, is incidental and supplemental
to the completion of the Project. 
The Hearings Officer also rejected Appellant's contention that
 
the jalousie work involved an estimated 20 to 25% of the cost of
 
the total project by stating that "HAR § 16-77-34 . . . does not
 
define incidental and supplemental work in terms of either the
 
extent or the cost of the work involved. Rather, work is
 
incidental and supplemental so long as it is directly related to
 
and necessary for the completion of the project." The Board
 
adopted the Hearings Officer's Recommended Decision in its Final
 
Order, thereby denying Appellants request for a declaratory
 
order.
 
It its Order, the circuit court affirmed the Board's
 
Final Order, finding that 
the finder of fact is the Board, [] it is the Board's duty
to decide the scope of licensing under the C5 license and
other subspecialties, and the Board has consistently found
that where a job requiring renovation work, includes
jalousie window work, the jalousie window work falls within
the term incidental and supplemental. The court further
 concludes that under existing case law the Court must defer
to the Board's determination of the legitimate scope of work
for a licensed specialty, general or otherwise. 
The circuit court further found that "there is nothing to
 
prohibit the Board from determining and interpreting HRS Chapter
 
444 such that jalousie window work representing 20 to 25% of the
 
6
   
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
total project meets the definition of incidental and supplemental
 
under HAR § 16-77-34."
 When interpreting the meaning of an administrative 
rule, "courts look first at an administrative rule's language. If 
an administrative rule's language is unambiguous, and its literal 
application is neither inconsistent with the policies of the 
statute the rule implements nor produces an absurd or unjust 
result, courts enforce the rule's plain meaning." International 
Bhd. of Elec. Workers, Local 1357 v. Hawaiian Tel. Co., 68 Haw. 316, 323, 713 P.2d 943, 950 (1986) (citations omitted). 
"Moreover, an administrative agency's interpretation of its own 
rules is entitled to 'deference unless it is plainly erroneous or 
inconsistent with the underlying legislative purpose.'" Lee v. 
Elbaum, 77 Hawai' i 446, 457, 887 P.2d 656, 667 (App. 1993). 
Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Bd. of Water Supply, stands for the 
proposition that deference should be given to administrative 
hearings officers. 97 Hawai' i 450 at 458, 40 P.3d 73 at 81 
(2002). "[I]nsofar as an administrative hearings officer 
possesses expertise and experience in his or her particular 
field, the appellate court 'should not substitute its own 
judgment for that of the agency' either with respect to questions 
of fact or mixed questions of fact and law." Id. (quoting 
Southern Foods Grp., L.P. v. State, Dept. of Educ., 89 Hawai' i 
443, 452, 974 P.2d 1033, 1042 (1999)). 
In their opening brief, Appellants rely heavily on the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court's decision in Okada Trucking. In Okada 
Trucking, the supreme court was asked the question of whether a 
general engineering contractor with an "A" general license could 
undertake the work encompassed by a C-37 specialty license. 
Okada Trucking, 97 Hawai' i 450, 40 P.3d 73. The supreme court 
held that "a general engineering or building contractor is 
prohibited from undertaking any work, solely or as part of a 
larger project, that would require it to act as a specialty 
contractor in an area in which the general contractor was not 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
licensed to operate." Id. at 462, 40 P.3d at 85 (emphasis in
 
original). 
The supreme court, in Okada Trucking, recognized that 
the "incidental and supplemental" provision was not raised by any 
party. Okada Trucking, 97 Hawai' i at 461 n.16, 40 P.3d at 84 
n.16. Therefore, Okada Trucking is distinguishable from the
 
instant case. Unlike Okada Trucking, in the instant case both
 
the Hearings Officer and the Board made specific findings that
 
the jalousie window work was "incidental and supplemental" to the
 
C-5 work. The Hearings Officer made a determination that the
 
jalousie window work was "incidental and supplemental" to the C-5
 
work, as it was directly related to and necessary for the
 
completion of the renovation work. The "incidental and
 
supplemental" provision comes from HAR § 16-77-28c, which allows
 
a C-5 contractor "to do any other work which would be incidental
 
and supplemental to the [C-5] remodeling or repairing[,]" and is
 
defined by HAR § 16-77-34. Thus, the Hearings Officer's
 
findings, and the Board's approval of such findings are, as an
 
interpretation of an agency's own rules, entitled to deference
 
unless it is plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the
 
underlying legislative purpose. 
The Appellants fail to demonstrate how the Hearing
 
Officer's application of the "incidental and supplemental"
 
provision to the jalousie window work is clearly erroneous or
 
inconsistent with the underlying legislative purpose. Given the
 
standard of review and the deference afforded to administrative
 
decisions of this nature, we conclude the circuit court did not
 
err in affirming the Board's Final Order. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The Judgment and Order entered September 12, 2007, in
 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are hereby affirmed.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 26, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Michael A. Lilly
(Ning, Lilly & Jones)for Plaintiffs-Appellants. Presiding Judge 
David A. Webber Deputy Attorney GeneralLei S. Fukumura Acting Associate Judge 
Special Deputy Attorney GeneralDeborah Day EmersonSupervising Deputy Attorney Generalfor Defendant-Appellee. Acting Associate Judge 
William H. Nagle, III, Honolulu,for amicus curiae Hawaii FlooringAssociation, et al., andIronworkers Union Local 625, et al. 
9
 