FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
ANNE SUE ISOBE and GLENN NOBUKI MURAKAMI,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
MICHAEL DAVID SAKATANI and CHRISTINE MARIE SAKATANI,
individually and as husband and wife;
808 DEVELOPMENT LLC, an administratively
terminated Hawaii limited liability company;
KRISTY SHIN WELLS; LLOYD JAMES HOCHBERG, JR.,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10,
Defendants.
 
NO. 28939
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-1879)
 
MAY 31, 2012
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE and GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
This appeal is brought by Plaintiffs-Appellants Ann Sue
 
Isobe (Isobe) and Glenn Nobuki Murakami (Murakami) (collectively
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants) challenging the rulings by the Circuit
 
1
Court of the First Circuit (circuit court)  granting partial
dismissal and then summary judgment in favor of Defendant-
Appellant James Hochberg (Hochberg). 
Hochberg, an attorney,
 
represented parties adverse to Plaintiffs-Appellants in two prior
 legal proceedings. Arising from those circumstances, Plaintiffs-
Appellants assert claims against Hochberg in this action for
 
slander of title (Count I), abuse of process (Count II), and
 
malicious prosecution (Count III).
 
Following its rulings in favor of Hochberg, the circuit 
court granted Hochberg's motion pursuant to Rule 54(b) of the 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) for certification and 
entry of final judgment on the claims asserted against him.
2 An 
Amended Final Judgment was entered regarding those claims. 
In this appeal, Plaintiffs-Appellants Isobe and
 
Murakami assert the following points of error:
 
(1) The circuit court erred by misconstruing the 
opinion of the Hawai' i Supreme Court in 808 Development, LLC v. 
Murakami, 111 Hawai' i 349, 141 P.3d 996 (2006) and holding that 
Plaintiffs-Appellants were precluded from pursuing claims against 
attorney Hochberg for slander of title, abuse of process, or 
malicious prosecution for initiating and litigating a mechanic's 
lien application that was later dismissed. 
(2) the circuit court erred in applying a litigation
 
privilege to the filing of expunged notices of pendency of action
 
(NOPAs), thus barring the slander of title, abuse of process, and
 
malicious prosecution claims against Hochberg based on the
 
alleged filing of those NOPAs.
 
1
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided. 
2
 Other claims remained in the case against the other defendants.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(3) the circuit court committed reversible error:
 
(a) by applying the wrong standard of proof in summary
judgment proceedings with respect to the Count of malicious
prosecution, (b) by placing the burden of proof upon the
Appellants opposing the motion, (c) by abusing its
discretion by construing a motion for summary judgment which
was based exclusively upon the law as a motion for summary
judgment based upon facts, and (d) by staying the action
while at the same time entertaining and deciding partially
on the facts an opposing motion for summary judgment on that
Count.
 
For the reasons set forth below, we hold that:
 
(1) claim preclusion and issue preclusion do not apply to bar the
 
claims asserted against Hochberg; (2) an absolute litigation
 
privilege applies to provide immunity for Hochberg from the
 
slander of title claim; (3) no litigation privilege applies for
 
the abuse of process and malicious prosecution claims; (4) the
 
allegations in the First Amended Complaint do not support a claim
 
for abuse of process and thus dismissal of that claim is
 
warranted; and (5) as to the malicious prosecution claim,
 
dismissal and summary judgment are appropriate as to certain
 
aspects of that claim, but not in its entirety.
 
I. Case Background
 
The claims against Hochberg stem from: his
 
representation of Michael David Sakatani (Sakatani) and Christine
 
Marie Sakatani (collectively, the Sakatanis) and 808 Development
 
LLC (808 Development) in Hogg v. Murakami, et al., Civil No. 03­
1-1712 (Foreclosure Action); and his representation of 808
 
Development in 808 Development LLC v. Murakami, et al., M.L. No.
 
04-1-0002 (Mechanic's Lien Action). Plaintiffs-Appellants Isobe
 
and Murakami were adverse parties to Hochberg's clients in both
 
the Foreclosure Action and the Mechanic's Lien Action.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants' original Complaint based their
 
claims against Hochberg on allegations that: (1) Hochberg filed
 
the Mechanic's Lien Action on behalf of 808 Development and
 
engaged in various acts of misconduct in the course of that
 
litigation; and (2) Hochberg aided and abetted 808 Development's
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4improper filing of two NOPAs (also referred to as lis pendens ),
one in the Foreclosure Action (First NOPA) and one while the
Mechanic's Lien Action was on appeal (Second NOPA), both of which
were later expunged.
In their First Amended Complaint,3 in addition to the
claims originally asserted, Plaintiffs-Appellants alleged further
factual allegations against Hochberg and expanded the basis for
the claims to Hochberg's alleged instigation and prosecution of
the Foreclosure Action.
A.Allegations In The Complaint
In their original Complaint, Plaintiffs-Appellants lay
out their alleged dispute with Hochberg's clients, the Sakatanis
and 808 Development, as well as their claims against Hochberg and
Kristy Shin Wells (Wells).4  They contend inter alia  that in
2001, they accepted Michael Sakatani and 808 Development's offer
to construct their residence on property located in Kahala,
Honolulu for $1,830,500.  During construction, they allege
Michael Sakatani requested security for monies he claimed were
due to 808 Development and thus Murakami gave Sakatani a draft
promissory note in the amount of $700,000 in favor of 808
Development and a draft mortgage on the subject property (Fourth
Mortgage) in favor of Sakatani as security for the promissory
note.  Plaintiffs-Appellants allege, however, there was a
contemporaneous written understanding, memorialized on May 2,
2002 and executed by Sakatani and Murakami, that the $700,000
promissory note would not be enforceable until an audit was
completed and the actual amount still owing was determined by a
C.P.A.  Plaintiffs-Appellants contend that, contrary to the
3  The First Amended Complaint was filed the same day that Hochberg's
motion to dismiss was heard by the circuit court.
4  Plaintiffs-Appellants named the Sakatanis, 808 Development, Wells and
Hochberg as defendants in the instant lawsuit.  The only claims at issue in
this appeal, however, are those asserted against Hochberg.FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
May 2, 2002 agreement, Sakatani immediately recorded the Fourth
 
Mortgage in the Bureau of Conveyances which became a lien on the
 
property.5 Plaintiffs-Appellants further allege that soon
 
thereafter, on or about July 2, 2002, the Sakatanis assigned the
 Fourth Mortgage to Joseph Elio Spadaro, to whom the Sakatanis
 
allegedly owed money.
 
The Complaint alleges that 808 Development lost its
 
contractor's license on September 30, 2002, and that thereafter:
 
the Sakatanis and Wells, aided and abetted by Hochberg,
sought to extort monies from the Plaintiffs by maliciously
applying financial pressure on the Plaintiffs by preventing
the Plaintiffs from refinancing Plaintiffs' various short-
term mortgages on the subject property senior to said
$700,000 [sic] fraudulent $700,000 mortgage invalidly
notarized by Wells, forcing the Plaintiffs into a series of
threatened foreclosure sales.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
With regard to the Mechanic's Lien Action, the 
Complaint alleges that: 808 Development filed that action on 
January 16, 2004 based on a construction agreement, claiming a 
statutory lien in the amount of $1,830,500 less payments made; a 
hearing was continued at the insistence of 808 Development, with 
Hochberg arguing he needed more time to look for documentation 
although he was unable to provide any documentation of detailed 
construction invoices or to prove that 808 Development had 
complied with written lien disclosure requirements under Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 444-25.5 (Supp. 2003); and at a hearing 
on March 2, 2004, the circuit court granted a motion dismissing 
the Mechanics Lien Action because 808 Development had not 
complied with the written lien disclosure requirements mandated 
by HRS § 444-25.5 and Hiraga v. Baldonado, 96 Hawai' i 365, 31 
P.3d 222 (App. 2001). 
5
 The Complaint also contends that, contrary to the signatures
appearing on the Fourth Mortgage and supposedly witnessed/attested to by
notary public Wells, neither Isobe or Murakami signed the Fourth Mortgage
before Wells. The Complaint further alleges that Isobe's signature on the
Fourth Mortgage and the promissory note are forgeries.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
With regard to the Foreclosure Action, the Complaint
 
asserts that action was initiated against Isobe and Murakami by
 
three mortgage holders from whom they had borrowed money to
 
acquire and construct their residence –- Jim Hogg, Joseph E.
 
Spadaro, and John Nelson Spadaro –- who were suing because
 
construction on the residence had been delayed and abandoned by
 
808 Development after losing its contractor's license, causing
 
most of those mortgages to mature unpaid. The Complaint alleges
 
that, in addition to the application for the mechanic's lien, 808
 
Development and the Sakatanis asserted claims against Isobe and
 
Murakami in the Foreclosure Action on January 5, 2004 for the
 
"identical $1,830,500.00 worth of construction claims[.]" 
Moreover, the Complaint alleges, 808 Development filed a NOPA on
 
January 16, 2004, the First NOPA, thus complicating the
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants' attempts to resolve the foreclosure case
 
by refinancing.
 
The Complaint alleges that Plaintiffs-Appellants
 
retired the mortgage debt owed to Jim Hogg and while working out
 
settlement terms with Joseph E. Spadaro and John Nelson Spadaro
 
to terminate the Foreclosure Action, pay off another debt, and
 
completely refinance the mortgages on their residence, Plaintiff-
Appellants filed a motion seeking to expunge 808 Development's
 
NOPA "which was otherwise blocking all already signed
 
settlements." According to the Complaint, at a hearing on
 
October 12, 2004, the court indicated it saw no basis for 808
 
Development's NOPA, but gave Hochberg additional requested time
 
to submit supplemental papers, and that thereafter "Hochberg had
 
to concede that he had erroneously claimed that 808 [Development]
 
had a right to file [the NOPA.]" Hochberg allegedly made the
 
identical claims in defending the NOPA that he had made in
 
defense of 808 Development's mechanic's lien application.
 
The Complaint alleges that on October 28, 2004, after a
 
judgment was signed dismissing the Mechanic's Lien Action, the
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court in the Foreclosure Action ordered the First NOPA 
immediately expunged. However, it is alleged that approximately 
four hours after the circuit court's oral ruling expunging the 
First NOPA in the Foreclosure Action, 808 Development filed an 
identical NOPA (the Second NOPA) on the same day in the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court, where an appeal had been taken in the Mechanic's Lien Action. The Complaint alleges that the Second NOPA forced 
further protracted litigation in the Foreclosure Action, where 
Plaintiffs-Appellants had allegedly entered into final written 
settlement agreements within the past two weeks with Joseph E. 
Spadaro and John Nelson Spadaro, which was allegedly known by the 
Sakatanis and Hochberg. The Complaint alleges that, although the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court eventually ordered the Second NOPA 
expunged, the delay resulted in a foreclosure decree in favor of John Spadaro such that Plaintiffs-Appellants had to purchase the 
property at the foreclosure sale and, moreover, Plaintiffs-
Appellants had to enter new and further settlement arrangements 
with Joseph E. Spadaro to prevent him from similarly foreclosing. 
The Complaint also alleges that thereafter, Plaintiffs-
Appellants Isobe and Murakami prevailed in the appeal that had
 
been taken by 808 Development in the Mechanic's Lien Action, as
 
set forth in the supreme court's opinion in 808 Development.
 
The Complaint alleges Plaintiffs-Appellants' efforts to
 
refinance were further blocked by the $700,000 mortgage recorded
 
by the Sakatanis. Plaintiffs-Appellants thus allege they filed a
 
petition in Land Court to expunge the mortgage, which was still
 
pending.
 
The Complaint alleges that, as of the time the
 
Complaint was filed, the validity of the $700,000 mortgage
 
remained unadjudicated and that proceedings in the Foreclosure
 
Action remained pending.
 
As a result of the alleged acts of, inter alia,
 
Hochberg, the Plaintiffs-Appellants alleged various damages since
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the filing of the Foreclosure Action and the Mechanic's Lien
 
Action.
 
B. Allegations In The First Amended Complaint
 
The First Amended Complaint added one paragraph
 
containing forty subparagraphs of various and repetitive
 
allegations, all specific to Hochberg. This complaint added
 
specific allegations that Hochberg acted with malice, with
 
certain intentional purposes and ulterior motives, and with the
 
intent and ulterior motive of causing substantial financial
 
damage and injury to Plaintiffs-Appellants unrelated to the
 
merits of his clients' cases. The First Amended Complaint
 
further specified Hochberg's alleged actions related to the
 
Foreclosure Action and the Mechanic's Lien Action.6
 
6 As to the Foreclosure Action, the First Amended Complaint added
allegations inter alia that Hochberg instigated and prosecuted the Foreclosure
Action with full knowledge that he was making false representations by:
alleging the Sakatani parties were owed construction costs without supporting
documentation; by alleging the Sakatani parties held a valid $700,000
mortgage, knowing it had been improperly notarized; alleging the Sakatani
parties held a valid $700,000 note, knowing there was no documentation for
such debt; alleging he did not have sufficient time to retain handwriting
experts when he had an expert report with negative findings that he kept
hidden; alleging he needed more time for trial or arbitration based on
misrepresentations about his construction accounting expert; alleging the
Sakatani parties were entitled to file a lis pendens; and alleging to the
arbitrator in the Foreclosure Action that he had a non-waivable conflict with
 the Sakatani parties requiring his withdrawal due to the filing of the
complaint in the instant action. The First Amended Complaint also added
allegations that Hochberg made knowingly unsubstantiated settlement demands in
the Foreclosure Action.
 
As to the Mechanic's Lien Action, the First Amended Complaint added
allegations, inter alia that Hochberg instigated and prosecuted the Mechanic's
Lien Action with full knowledge that he was making false representations by:
alleging the Sakatani parties were entitled to a mechanic's lien, knowing the
legal requirements were not met and as an afterthought claiming he was seeking
to modify existing law; and misrepresenting that an unnamed attorney had
copies of certain records which he needed more time to obtain. The First
 Amended Complaint also added allegations that Hochberg instigated and
prosecuted the NOPA in the Mechanic's Lien Action knowing he was making false
representations that the Sakatani parties were entitled to file the NOPA.
 
Finally, the First Amended Complaint also added allegations that
Hochberg knowingly made representations in the Land Court action "pertaining
to where a certain $300,000 was deposited" that were contradictory to
representations made in the Foreclosure Action and the Mechanic's Lien Action.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C. Proceedings Before the Circuit Court
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Isobe and Murakami filed their
 
Complaint on October 30, 2006.
 
On December 7, 2006, Hochberg filed a Motion to Dismiss
 
the Complaint, asserting that all claims against him should be
 
dismissed. Plaintiffs-Appellants opposed the motion to dismiss
 
and a hearing was held on January 3, 2007. The morning of the
 
hearing, Plaintiffs-Appellants filed their First Amended
 
Complaint. At the hearing, the circuit court orally granted the
 
motion to dismiss in part, explaining that it would not grant
 
dismissal to the extent the claims arose from the filing of the
 
two NOPAs. On February 13, 2007, the circuit court entered its
 
written order. As to each of the three causes of action asserted
 
against Hochberg, the circuit court granted partial dismissal:
 
to the extent that such Counts and/or claims arise out of
and are based upon a mechanic's lien application and
proceedings in 808 Development, LLC v. Glenn Nobuki 
Murakami, et al., M.L. No. 04-1-0002, based upon the
doctrines of claim preclusion, res judicata and/or
collateral estoppel and the Hawaii Supreme Court decision in
808 Development, LLC v. Glenn Nobuki Murakami, et al., 111
Hawai'i 349, 141 P.3d 996 (2006). The Motion is GRANTED 
with prejudice with respect to such claims notwithstanding
the filing of Plaintiffs' First Amended Complaint on January3, 2007, since any additional allegations as to such claimsare futile. 
On February 7, 2007, Hochberg filed a motion for
 
summary judgment on the remaining claims against him, which he
 
framed as the causes of action for slander of title, abuse of
 
process, and malicious prosecution arising from the filing of the
 
two NOPAs. The circuit court granted the motion in its entirety.
 
With respect to the remaining aspects of the slander of title and
 
abuse of process claims, the circuit court granted summary
 
judgment for Hochberg based on its determination that a
 
litigation privilege precluded those claims. With respect to the
 
remaining aspects of the malicious prosecution claim, the circuit
 
court held that Hochberg's declaration in support of the summary
 
judgment motion was the only evidence as to why the NOPAs were
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
filed and therefore there were no genuine issues of material fact
 
as to the required element of malice.
 
On April 26, 2007, the circuit court entered its
 
written order granting Hochberg's motion for summary judgment.
 
On December 27, 2007, the Amended Final Judgment was
 
entered as to the claims against Hochberg.
 
On January 7, 2008, Plaintiffs-Appellants timely
 
appealed from the Amended Final Judgment.
 
II. Standards of Review
 
A. Motion to Dismiss
 
We review the circuit court's ruling on the motion to
 
dismiss de novo. Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117
 
Hawai'i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). 
"A complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state a
claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff canprove no set of facts in support of his or her claim that
would entitle him or her to relief." Dunlea v. Dappen, 83
Hawai'i 28, 32, 924 P.2d 196, 200 (1996) (citations
omitted), overruled on other grounds by Hac v. Univ. of 
Hawai�i, 102 Hawai' i 92, 73 P.3d 46 (2003). This court must,
therefore, "view a plaintiff's complaint in a light most
favorable to him or her in order to determine whether the allegations contained therein could warrant relief under any
alternate theory." Id. (citation omitted). Consequently,
"in reviewing the circuit court's order dismissing the
plaintiffs' complaint in this case, our consideration isstrictly limited to the allegations of the complaint, and we
must deem those allegations to be true." Id. (citation
omitted). 
Kahala Royal Corp. v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 113 
Hawai'i 251, 266, 151 P.3d 732, 747 (2007). 
B. Motion for Summary Judgment
 
We review a circuit court's grant of summary judgment
 
de novo. Id. (citation omitted).
 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
 fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Id. (quoting Price v. AIG Hawai� i Ins. Co., 107 Hawai' i 106, 110, 
111 P.3d 1, 5 (2005)). 
III. Discussion
 
A. Claim Preclusion and Issue Preclusion
 
In granting Hochberg's motion to dismiss in part, the
 
circuit court dismissed all three of the asserted claims to the
 
extent that they arose out of the mechanic's lien application and
 the proceedings in the Mechanic's Lien Action (except the filing
 
of the Second NOPA). The circuit court based its ruling on
 
"claim preclusion, res judicata and/or collateral estoppel" given
 
the supreme court's opinion in the Mechanic's Lien Action, 808
 
Development. In that prior litigation, Plaintiffs-Appellants'
 
motion for sanctions under HRCP Rule 11 had been rejected.
7
 
Considering their point of error and the arguments they
 
point to having made in the circuit court, Plaintiffs-Appellants
 
essentially take issue with the partial dismissal of their claims
 
based on the doctrines of "claim preclusion, res judicata and/or
 
collateral estoppel." We agree with Plaintiffs-Appellants that
 
dismissal of their claims on these grounds was not proper.
 
As expressed by the Hawai' i Supreme Court: 
It is well-settled in our jurisdiction that 
[r]es judicata, or claim preclusion, and
collateral estoppel, or issue preclusion, aredoctrines that limit a litigant to oneopportunity to litigate aspects of the case toprevent inconsistent results and multiplicity ofsuits and to promote finality and judicial economy. Claim preclusion and issue preclusionare, however, separate doctrines that involvedistinct questions of law. 
7
 The request for sanctions under HRCP Rule 11 had been asserted
"against 808 Development and its attorney." 808 Development, 111 Hawai' i at 
353, 363-65, 141 P.3d at 1000, 1010-12. 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai' i 43, 53, 85 P.3d 150, 160 (2004)
(internal quotation marks, citations, brackets, and footnote
omitted). 
Exotics Hawai� i-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Dupont De Nemours & Co., 104 
Hawai'i 358, 364-65, 90 P.3d 250, 256-57 (2004) (brackets in 
original, footnote omitted).8 
Claim preclusion "prohibits a party from relitigating a 
previously adjudicated cause of action." Bremer v. Weeks, 104 
Hawai'i 43, 53, 85 P.3d 150, 160 (2004) (emphasis added) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). On the other 
hand, "[i]ssue preclusion applies to a subsequent suit between 
the parties or their privies on a different cause of action and 
prevents the parties or their privies from relitigating any issue 
that was actually litigated and finally decided in the earlier 
action." Id. at 54, 85 P.3d at 161 (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
In the instant action, the circuit court relied upon
 
both claim preclusion and issue preclusion in its partial grant
 
of dismissal. We conclude, however, that neither doctrine
 
applies given the claims and issues that were litigated and
 
decided in the Mechanic's Lien Action and the claims asserted
 
against Hochberg in this case.
 
1. Claim Preclusion
 
The party asserting claim preclusion has the "burden of
 
establishing that (1) there was a final judgment on the merits,
 
(2) both parties are the same or in privity with the parties in
 
the original suit, and (3) the claim decided in the original suit
 
is identical with the one presented in the action in question." 
Id. at 54, 85 P.3d at 161.
 
Hochberg's motion to dismiss asserted that because the
 
supreme court had rejected Isobe and Murakami's request for
 
8
 We will refer infra to claim preclusion (instead of res judicata) and
issue preclusion (instead of collateral estoppel).
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sanctions under HRCP Rule 11 in 808 Development, the claims
 
against him in this case for slander of title, abuse of process,
 
and malicious prosecution were precluded.
 
In 808 Development, the supreme court addressed Isobe 
and Murakami's contention under HRCP Rule 11 that "808 Development's lien application was frivolous, wholly lacking in 
any factual or legal support." 111 Hawai' i at 364, 141 P.3d at 
1011 (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). In that case, the circuit court denied Isobe and Murakami's request for 
Rule 11 sanctions on the grounds that 808 Development had argued 
for a good faith extension of the law. Id. at 353, 141 P.3d at 
1000. The supreme court, in turn, held that the circuit court 
had not erred in denying the Rule 11 motion. Id. at 365, 141 
P.3d at 1012. 
Claim preclusion does not apply to bar Plaintiffs-
Appellants Isobe and Murakami's claims against Hochberg in the
 
instant case. First, the motion for sanctions under HRCP Rule 11
 
was not a "claim" for which there was a "judgment on the merits." 
C.f., Cooter & Gell v. Hartmarx Corp., 496 U.S. 384, 396 (1990)
 
("[T]he imposition of a Rule 11 sanction is not a judgment on the
 
merits of an action. Rather, it requires the determination of a
 
collateral issue: whether the attorney has abused the judicial
 
process, and, if so, what sanction would be appropriate."); Cohen
 
v. Lupo, 927 F.2d 363, 365 (8th Cir. 1991) ("Rule 11 sanctions
 
must be sought by motion in a pending case; there can be no
 
independent cause of action instituted for Rule 11 sanctions.")
 
(citation omitted); Robinson v. Eng, 148 F.R.D. 635, 640 (D. Neb.
 
1993). 
Second, even if an HRCP Rule 11 motion could be
 
construed as a "claim," the claims asserted in this case are not
 
"identical" with the HRCP Rule 11 motion that was litigated in
 
the Mechanic's Lien Action. The differences are underscored by
 
13
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
comparing the elements for the claims asserted in this case with
 
the requirements for HRCP Rule 11 sanctions.
 
Slander of title has been discussed in prior Hawai' i 
appellate opinions, but not yet formally adopted. We now recognize it as a common law tort in Hawai' i and adopt the 
following generally recognized elements to establish a claim for slander of title: 
(1) ownership of or interest in the property by the
plaintiff; (2) falsity of the words published; (3) malice of
the defendant in publishing the false statements; (4)
publication to some person other than the owner; (5)
publication in disparagement of plaintiff's property or the
title to it; and (6) special damages proximately resulting
from such publication.
 
50 Am. Jur. 2d Libel and Slander § 530 (2006); C.f. B & B Inv.
 
Grp. v. Gitler, 581 N.W.2d 17, 20 (Mich. Ct. App. 1998) ("To
 
establish slander of title at common law, a plaintiff must show
 
falsity, malice, and special damages, i.e., that the defendant
 
maliciously published false statements that disparaged a
 
plaintiff's right in property, causing special damages.")
 
(citations omitted); Kensington Dev. Corp. v. Israel, 407 N.W.2d
 
269, 272 (Wis. Ct. App. 1987).
 
With regard to a cause of action for abuse of process,
 
there are two essential elements: "(1) an ulterior purpose and
 
(2) a wilful act in the use of the process which is not proper in 
the regular conduct of the proceeding." Young v. Allstate Ins. 
Co., 119 Hawai' i 403, 412, 198 P.3d 666, 675 (2008) (citation 
omitted). 
With regard to a cause of action for malicious
 
prosecution, there are three essential elements: "(1) that the
 
prior proceedings were terminated in the plaintiffs' favor,
 
(2) that the prior proceedings were initiated without probable
 
cause, and (3) that the prior proceedings were initiated with
 
malice." Myers v. Cohen, 67 Haw. 389, 391, 688 P.2d 1145, 1148
 
(1984) (citations omitted).
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On the other hand, the supreme court considered Isobe
 
9
and Murakami's assertions under HRCP Rule 11  that the lien
application was frivolous, and whether the circuit court properly 
rejected sanctions because 808 Development had argued for a "good 
faith extension of the law[.]" 111 Hawai' i at 365, 141 P.3d at 
1012. Although the HRCP Rule 11 motion may have involved some overlapping considerations that could be relevant to particular 
elements of claims in this case, the Rule 11 motion was not 
identical to the claims or causes of action asserted against 
Hochberg in this case. 
9 The relevant portions of HRCP Rule 11 were quoted in 808 Development ,
as follows:
 
(b) Representations to court. By presenting to the court
(whether by signing, filing, submitting, or later
advocating) a pleadings, written motion, or other paper, an
attorney or unrepresented party is certifying that to the
best of the person's knowledge, information, and belief,
formed after an inquiry reasonable under the circumstances:
 
(1) it is not being presented for any improper purpose, such
as to harass or to cause unnecessary delay or needless
increase in the cost of litigation;
 
(2) the claims, defenses, and other legal contentions
therein are warranted by existing law or by a nonfrivolous
argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of
existing law or the establishment of new law;
 
(3) the allegations and other factual contentions have evidentiary
support or, if specifically so identified, are likely to have
evidentiary support after a reasonable opportunity for further
investigation or discovery; and
 
(4) the denials of factual contentions are warranted on the
evidence or, if specifically so identified, are reasonably based
on a lack of information or belief.
 
(c) Sanctions. If, after notice and a reasonable opportunity to
respond, the court determines that subdivision (b) has been
violated, the court may, subject to the conditions stated below,
impose an appropriate sanction upon the attorneys, law firms, or
parties that have violated subdivision (b) or are responsible for
the violation.
 
111 Hawai' i at 364, 141 P.3d at 1011 (emphasis in original). In its quote of
the rule, the supreme court emphasized its focus on section (b)(2) as thealleged basis for sanctions. 
15
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Moreover, because HRCP Rule 11 is patterned after and 
substantially similar to Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) 
Rule 11, we are guided by authorities addressing and interpreting 
FRCP Rule 11. See Gap v. Puna Geothermal Venture, 106 Hawai' i 
325, 341, 104 P.3d 912, 928 (2004). The Advisory Committee Notes 
for the 1993 amendments to FRCP Rule 11 state that "Rule 11 is 
not the exclusive source for control of improper presentation of 
claims, defenses, or contentions[,]" and further expressly 
advises that "Rule 11 does not preclude a party from initiating 
an independent action for malicious prosecution or abuse of process." Fed. R. Civ. P. 11, Advisory Committee Notes (1993 
Amendments)(emphasis added). On January 1, 2000, HRCP Rule 11 
was amended to incorporate, in almost identical language, the 
1993 amendments to FRCP Rule 11. 
Like its federal counterpart, HRCP Rule 11 serves a 
purpose that is distinct from the tort claims asserted in this 
case. The Advisory Committee Notes for the 1993 amendments to 
FRCP Rule 11 also state that "the purpose of Rule 11 sanctions is 
to deter rather than to compensate[.]" Id.; see also Canalez v. 
Bob's Appliance Serv. Ctr., Inc., 89 Hawai' i 292, 303, 972 P.2d 
295, 306 (1999). Courts from other jurisdictions have generally 
concluded that FRCP Rule 11, or similar rules, are not a 
substitute for tort claims like malicious prosecution. See Bus. 
Guides v. Chromatic Commc'ns. Enters., 498 U.S. 533, 553 (1991) 
(rejecting the argument "that [FRCP] Rule 11 creates a federal 
common law of malicious prosecution" and stating that "[t]he main 
objective of the Rule is not to reward parties who are victimized 
by litigation; it is to deter baseless filings and curb 
abuses."); Plus Intern., Inc. v. Pace, 689 So.2d 160, 162 (Ala. 
Civ. App. 1996) (an award or denial of sanctions under a statute 
similar to FRCP Rule 11 did not have claim preclusion effect in 
subsequent malicious prosecution action); Gordon v. Marrone, 590 
N.Y.S.2d 649, 654-55 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1992), aff'd, 616 N.Y.S.2d 98 
16
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(N.Y. App. Div. 1994) (holding that a court rule similar to FRCP
 
Rule 11 does not obviate or replace the common law tort of
 
malicious prosecution, noting the differences in the purpose and
 
the relief afforded under each).
 
Therefore, the rejection of Plaintiffs-Appellants' HRCP
 
Rule 11 motion in the Mechanic's Lien Action does not bar, under
 
the doctrine of claim preclusion, the claims asserted herein for
 
slander of title, abuse of process, and malicious prosecution.
 
2. Issue Preclusion
 
The party asserting issue preclusion must establish
 
that:
 
(1) the issue decided in the prior adjudication is identical to
 
the one presented in the action in question; (2) there is a final
judgment on the merits; (3) the issue decided in the prior
adjudication was essential to the final judgment; and (4) the
party against whom [issue preclusion] is asserted was a party or
in privity with a party to the prior adjudication.
 
Bremer, 104 Hawai' i at 54, 85 P.3d at 161 (emphasis added) 
(citation omitted) (brackets in original). The parties raise no 
dispute regarding the last three requirements. However, they 
disagree as to the first requirement, that is, whether the HRCP 
Rule 11 issues decided by the supreme court in the Mechanic's 
Lien Action can be construed as identical to issues required to 
prove slander of title, abuse of process, and malicious 
prosecution. 
As to the slander of title and malicious prosecution
 
claims, Hochberg argues that the supreme court's ruling on the
 
HRCP Rule 11 motion -- upholding the determination that 808
 
Development made a good faith argument for the extension of the
 
law and that 808 Development's actions in the Mechanics Lien
 
Action were not frivolous -- "precludes a finding of malice"
 
which is a required element for these claims. As to the abuse of
 
process claim, Hochberg contends that there can be no finding
 
that there was a misuse of process given the supreme court's
 
ruling and thus that claim must fail as well. Hochberg therefore
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argues that all three claims were properly dismissed to the
 
extent that they arise from the mechanic's lien application and
 
the proceedings in the Mechanic's Lien Action.
 
In the Mechanic's Lien Action, Isobe and Murakami
 
argued that 808 Development's lien application was frivolous
 because:
 
(1) 808 Development was "allowed months of extra time to
hunt for a signed written [bond and lien] disclosure" and
failed to provide it at the hearing; (2) when confronted
with the ICA's holding in Hiraga, it failed to address it in
its reply; (3) when confronted with the express statutory
requirements of HRS § 444-25.5 at the March 2, 2004 hearing,
808 Development's counsel "claimed that he knew where
written bonding and lien rights disclosures signed by
[Owners] could be found," yet he failed to produce them; and
(4) "808 Development LLC is no longer operating and is
merely a shell[;] [t]hus, unless Rule 11 sanctions are
issued, 808 [Development] and its counsel will escape any
consequences for [their] litigation abuse."
 
808 Dev., 111 Hawai' i at 364, 141 P.3d at 1011 (brackets in 
original).
 
The supreme court rejected these arguments and
 
explained the basis for its ruling as follows:
 
As previously mentioned, the probable cause hearing
was scheduled for a little over one month after service of
 
the lien application, i.e., forty days. Thus, Owners'
suggestion that 808 Development had "months of extra time"
 
to search for the purported amended contract is somewhat
exaggerated. In addition, the circuit court denied Owners'
motion for Rule 11 sanctions based on its finding that 808
Development had argued for a "good faith extension of the
law set forth" in Hiraga. In addition, 808 Development's
failure to discuss Hiraga does not render its arguments
frivolous because Hiraga promotes strict adherence to the
requirements of the relevant statutes as they relate to a
lien application, whereas 808 Development's arguments
centered on why the court should exempt it from the strict
statutory requirements. Moreover, 808 Development took the
position that Owners did not need the required notice and
disclosures because of their sophistication and knowledge of
lien and bonding issues. Thus, 808 Development's failure to
produce the amended contract does not render its arguments
frivolous as they were not premised on the existence of the
purported amended contract. Lastly, there is nothing in the
record to suggest that the circuit court "clearly exceeded
the bounds of reason" in refusing to sanction 808
Development. Accordingly, we hold that the circuit court did
not err in denying Owners' Rule 11 motion.
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 365, 141 P.3d at 1012. Thus, the supreme court based its
 
decision on fairly narrow and particular grounds.
 
Although some of the factual assertions underlying
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants' prior HRCP Rule 11 motion are also made to
 
support their claims in this case, the issues decided for the
 
HRCP Rule 11 motion are not identical to the issue of malice for
 
purposes of the slander of title or malicious prosecution claims.
 
The malice element for slander of title has been
 
described as follows:
 
Malice, express or implied, in the making of the slanderous
statement is an essential ingredient of a cause of action for
slander of title. While actual malice must be shown--that is,
knowledge by the defendants that the disparaging statements were
false or were made with reckless disregard for their truth or
falsity--the malice necessary for a finding of liability for
slander of title is not malice in its worst sense. An act will be
 deemed malicious if made in reckless or wanton disregard of the
rights of another and with personal ill-will, or with an intent to
deceive or injure, or to vex or annoy, or with no legal
justification. Malice is established by showing that a party made
a false statement, with full knowledge of its falsity, for the
purpose of injuring the complainant.
 
50 Am. Jur. 2d Libel and Slander § 531 (2006) (internal footnotes
 
omitted). The issues decided by the supreme court for the HRCP
 
Rule 11 motion did not involve any allegation of slanderous or
 
disparaging statements made with malice, and thus the issues
 
decided for the Rule 11 motion are far from identical to the
 
issue of malice for the slander of title claim in this case.
 
With regard to the malice element for a malicious
 
prosecution claim, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has explained as 
follows:
 
To sustain a claim for malicious prosecution, a
plaintiff must show that the defendant initiated the prior
lawsuit with malice, which this court has defined as "the
intent, without justification or excuse, to commit a
wrongful act," "reckless disregard of the law or of a
person's legal rights," and "ill will; wickedness of heart."
Awakuni v. Awana, 115 Hawai' i 126, 141, 165 P.3d 1027, 1042
(2007) (quoting Black's Law Dictionary 976 (8th ed.2004)).
"The emphasis is upon the misuse of criminal—and sometimes
civil—actions as a means for causing harm." Prosser and
 
Keeton on Torts, § 119, at 870.
 
19
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Young, 119 Hawai' i at 419, 198 P.3d at 682 (brackets omitted). 
Although perhaps a closer call, again, the issues litigated and 
decided relative to the HRCP Rule 11 motion in the Mechanic's 
Lien Action are not identical to the malice element for the 
malicious prosecution claim in this case. The allegations in the 
First Amended Complaint regarding the Mechanic's Lien Action are 
broader than the issues considered and decided for the HRCP Rule 
11 motion. Moreover, although one potential basis for an HRCP 
Rule 11 motion could be that a pleading, written motion, or other 
paper signed by an attorney was "presented for any improper 
purpose," see HRCP Rule 11(b)(1), that issue was not addressed or 
decided in 808 Development. 
In Myers, the plaintiff brought a malicious prosecution 
claim against an attorney who had filed a counterclaim against 
the plaintiff in a prior lawsuit. In support of his malicious 
prosecution claim, the plaintiff pointed to an order in the prior 
lawsuit granting attorney's fees and finding that the 
counterclaim was "completely frivolous and totally unsupported by 
the facts and the law[.]" 67 Haw. at 392, 688 P.2d at 1148.10 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court ruled that the defendant-attorney was 
not "bound" by that prior finding relative to whether the 
attorney had acted with malice in the prior lawsuit,11 but that 
the finding was evidence (along with other evidence) that raised a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the attorney had 
acted with malice. Id. at 393, 396, 688 P.2d at 1149, 1151; see 
also Gordon v. Marrone, 590 N.Y.S.2d at 655 (noting that a 
court's findings in imposing an award under a rule similar to 
10 It is unclear in Myers if the award of attorney's fees was based on
HRCP Rule 11.
11 It appears that at least part of the reason the attorney was not
bound by the prior finding of frivolousness is because he had withdrawn from
the prior case and had not had the opportunity to litigate the frivolousness
issue. 67 Haw. at 392-93, 688 P.2d at 1148-49. Although a similar concern is
not raised in this case, we view Myers as instructive.
 
20
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
FRCP Rule 11 would not necessarily collaterally estop a jury
 
determination on the issue of malice in a subsequent malicious
 
prosecution action).
 
We thus conclude that the prior ruling in the
 
Mechanic's Lien Action –- that 808 Development argued for a good
 
faith extension of the law and its arguments were not frivolous
 
under HRCP Rule 11 –- can be evidence on the issue of malice for
 
the malicious prosecution claim, but the prior ruling is not
 
necessarily identical to or singularly dispositive of the malice
 
issue.
 
With regard to the abuse of process claim, we likewise 
conclude that issue preclusion does not bar that claim in this 
case. As previously noted, the elements required for an abuse of 
process claim are: "(1) an ulterior purpose and (2) a wilful act 
in the use of the process which is not proper in the regular 
conduct of the proceeding." Young, 119 Hawai' i at 412, 198 P.3d 
at 675 (citations omitted). For the first element, ulterior 
purpose, the question is whether the defendant used legal process 
"primarily" for a purpose that was not legitimate. Id. at 413­
14, 198 P.3d at 676-77. For the second element, willful act, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court has explained that: 
"[s]ome definite act or threat not authorized by the
process, or aimed at an objective not legitimate in the use
of the process, is required; and there is no liability where
 the defendant has done nothing more than carry out the
 
process to its authorized conclusion, even though with bad
 intentions."
 
Id. at 414, 198 P.3d at 677 (citing Prosser and Keeton on Torts
 
§ 121, at 898 (5th ed., W. Page Keeton et al. eds., 1984)). 
Further, "the plaintiff must prove a 'willful act' distinct from
 
the use of process per se." Id. at 416, 198 P.3d at 679. None
 
of these issues were litigated or decided for purposes of the
 
HRCP Rule 11 motion in the Mechanic's Lien Action.
 
21
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3.	 Conclusion as to Claim Preclusion and Issue
 
Preclusion
 
Based on the above, we conclude that it was error for
 
the circuit court to rely on the doctrines of claim preclusion or
 
issue preclusion as the basis to dismiss, in part, the claims of
 
slander of title, abuse of process and malicious prosecution.
 
As discussed below, however, dismissal as to some of 
these claims was proper on other grounds. "[W]here the circuit 
court's decision is correct, its conclusion will not be disturbed 
on the ground that it gave the wrong reason for its ruling." 
Reyes v. Kuboyama, 76 Hawai' i 137, 140, 870 P.2d 1281, 1284 
(1994); see also Strouss v. Simmons, 66 Haw. 32, 40, 657 P.2d 
1004, 1010 (1982) ("An appellate court may affirm a judgment of 
the lower court on any ground in the record which supports 
affirmance."); McCarthy v. Yempuku, 5 Haw. App. 45, 52, 678 P.2d 
11, 16 (1984). 
B.	 Litigation Privilege
 
In its April 26, 2007 order, the circuit court granted
 
summary judgment for Hochberg as to all remaining claims asserted
 
in the First Amended Complaint. Hochberg had argued that a
 
litigation privilege precluded certain claims against him in this
 
case. As explained during the hearing on the motion, the circuit
 
court held that a litigation privilege applied to the claims
 
against Hochberg for slander of title and abuse of process.12
 
Because we concluded above that claim preclusion and
 
issue preclusion do not bar any part of the claims asserted, we
 
will consider Hochberg's assertion of a litigation privilege as
 
12 Although its written order was silent as to the basis for its
ruling, the circuit court's oral ruling at the hearing expressed its reliance
 
on Woodcourt II Ltd. v. McDonald Co., 119 Cal. App. 3d 245 (Cal. Ct. App.
1981) and Hochberg's citation to 11 A. Miller, Miller & Star California Real
 Estate § 11:45 at 118-19 & nn.22-25 (3d ed. 2000) (which in turn cited inter
 alia to Albertson v. Raboff, 295 P.2d 405 (Cal. 1956) and Woodcourt).
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
it applies to the full extent of the claims asserted against him
 
in the First Amended Complaint.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants contend on appeal that there is 
no litigation privilege in Hawai' i barring claims against an 
attorney for slander of title, abuse of process, or malicious prosecution. They focus their argument on multiple cases from 
other jurisdictions and the core of their argument is that the 
privilege recognized in Albertson v. Raboff, 295 P.2d 405, 409 
(Cal. 1956) has been abandoned or abrogated by California statute 
and subsequent cases.
13 They assert, therefore, that Hawai' i 
courts should not adopt the privilege set forth in Albertson. 
In turn, Hochberg argues on appeal that this court 
should apply the litigation privileges previously recognized in 
Hawai'i in Matsuura v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., 102 Hawai' i 
149, 73 P.3d 687 (2003), and Kahala Royal, 113 Hawai' i 251, 151 
P.3d 732. 
Hawai'i has its own line of cases relevant to the 
issues on appeal, and we therefore need not rely on Albertson and 
its progeny. Hawaii's appellate courts have already delineated 
certain contours of the litigation privilege when claims are 
asserted against an attorney. Considering these authorities and 
their logical extension, we conclude that an absolute litigation 
privilege applies with respect to the slander of title claim, but 
that no litigation privilege applies to the claims for abuse of 
process and malicious prosecution. 
13 In Albertson, the California Supreme Court held that a notice of lis
 
pendens was privileged with respect to a claim for disparagement of title.
295 P.2d at 409.
 
The court also noted, however, that "the fact a communication may be
absolutely privileged for the purposes of a defamation action does not prevent
its being an element of an action for malicious prosecution in a proper case."
Id. at 410 (emphasis added). The court held that the complaint in that case
stated a cause of action for malicious prosecution and thus reversed the trial
court's judgment of dismissal.
 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
241.Litigation Privilege Applies to the Slander of 
Title Claim
"Hawai#i courts have applied an absolute litigation
privilege in defamation actions for words and writings that are
material and pertinent to judicial proceedings."  Matsuura, 102
Hawai#i at 154, 73 P.3d at 692 (citations omitted) (emphasis
added).  Moreover, it has been recognized that the privilege
adopted in Hawai #i is consistent with the privilege as set forth
in Restatement (Second) of Torts § 586 (1977).  McCarthy , 5 Haw.
App. at 48-49, 678 P.2d at 14-15.
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 586 states:
An attorney at law is absolutely privileged to publish
defamatory matter concerning another in communications
preliminary to a proposed judicial proceeding, or in the
institution of, or during the course and as a part of, a
judicial proceeding in which he participates as counsel, if
it has some relation to the proceeding.
In McCarthy , this court further explained the policy reasons and
the requirements for the privilege to apply:
The absolute privilege is grounded on the important
public policy of "securing to attorneys as officers of the
court the utmost freedom in their efforts to secure justice
for their clients."  Restatement § 586 comment a. Thus, it
not only protects attorneys in the pursuit of their
profession, but also ensures the public's right to zealous
legal representation.  Counterbalancing this, however, is
the equally important policy of protecting individuals from
defamatory statements which are unrelated to the judicial
proceeding involved.  Consequently, "the privilege does not
cover the attorney's publication of defamatory matter that
has no connection whatever with the litigation." 
Restatement § 586 comment c.
To avail himself of the absolute privilege, an
attorney has the burden of proving the following essential
elements: (1) that the defamatory statements were made in
the course of a judicial proceeding and (2) that the
statements were related, material, and pertinent to that
proceeding.
Regarding the first element, the Restatement construes
"the course of a judicial proceeding" as follows:
The publication of defamatory matter by an attorney is
protected not only when made in the institution of the
proceedings or in the conduct of litigation before a FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judicial tribunal, but in conferences and other
communications preliminary to the proceeding.
 
Restatement § 586 comment a.
 
To prove the second element, it must be shown that
there is a sufficient connection between the defamatory
statements and the judicial proceeding. See Restatement
 
§ 586 comment c. For the court to find such a connection,
the statements must be (1) "reasonably related" to the
proceeding, which means that the statements must "have some
 connection or logical relation to the judicial proceeding,"
and (2) "made to achieve the objects of the litigation."
 
5 Haw. App. at 48-49, 678 P.2d at 14. (internal citations
 
omitted).
 
It does not appear that Hawaii's appellate courts have
 
previously considered whether to apply this absolute litigation
 
privilege to a claim for slander of title. However, it is
 
generally recognized that the absolute litigation privilege
 
should be extended to apply to a slander of title claim. The
 
Restatement (Second) of Torts references slander of title as one
 
type of a claim for "injurious falsehood." See Restatement
 
(Second) of Torts §§ 623A and 624. In turn, Restatement (Second)
 
of Torts § 635 extends the absolute litigation privilege to
 
injurious falsehood claims, stating "[t]he rules on absolute
 
privilege to publish defamatory matter stated in §§ 583 to 592A
 
apply to the publication of an injurious falsehood." Restatement
 
(Second) of Torts § 635. See also Bennett v. McKibben, 915 P.2d
 
400, 404-05 (Okla. Civ. App. 1995) (holding that the absolute
 
litigation privilege provided to attorneys in Restatement
 
(Second) of Torts § 586 applies to slander of title actions as
 
well); Conservative Club of Wash. v. Finkelstein, 738 F.Supp. 6,
 
13 (D.D.C. 1990).
 
We therefore hold, as a matter of first impression,
 
that the absolute litigation privilege as recognized in Matsuura
 
and McCarthy applies to claims for slander of title. In this
 
case, the claim for slander of title against Hochberg in the
 
First Amended Complaint is based on the filing of the two NOPAs. 
25
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Considering the requirements for application of the absolute
 
litigation privilege set out in McCarthy, the privilege applies
 
here. That is, the NOPAs were filed in the course of judicial
 
proceedings and were related to those proceedings. See McCarthy,
 
5 Haw. App. at 48-49, 678 P.2d at 14. Thus, the judgment in
 
favor of Hochberg on the slander of title claim was proper.
 
As discussed infra, although Plaintiffs-Appellants
 
cannot pursue a cause of action for slander of title arising from
 the filing of the NOPAs in this case, the conduct of filing the
 
NOPAs may still be relevant to other claims to which a privilege
 
does not apply.
 
2.	 The Privilege Recognized in Kahala Royal Does Not
 
Apply to Claims for Abuse of Process and Malicious
Prosecution
 
In Kahala Royal, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that a 
litigation privilege applied to preclude claims of intentional 
interference with contractual relations (IICR) and intentional 
interference with prospective economic advantage (IIPEA) against 
attorneys who had represented parties adverse to the plaintiff in 
prior arbitration-related proceedings. 113 Hawai' i at 266-73, 
151 P.3d at 747-54. The plaintiffs in Kahala Royal argued that 
attorneys should not be immune under a litigation privilege when 
claims of intentional torts are asserted against them, but the 
supreme court did not agree. The court instead focused on 
whether the allegations against the attorneys met certain 
criteria for the litigation privilege to apply. 
As an initial matter, Kahala Royal dispensed with the
 
notion that a litigation privilege could only apply to
 
communications made during litigation. Discussing Clark v.
 
Druckman, 624 S.E.2d 864 (W.Va. 2005),
14 the court noted
 
14 Clark cited to the Hawai' i Supreme Court's opinion in Matsuura, 102
Hawai'i at 155, 73 P.3d at 693, and considered the policies underlying the
litigation privilege as articulated in Matsuura. See 624 S.E.2d at 870. In 
(continued...)
 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
favorably that the Clark court saw "no reason to distinguish 
between communications made during the litigation process and conduct occurring during the litigation process." 113 Hawai' i at 
268, 151 P.3d at 749 (quoting Clark, 624 S.E.2d at 870). In Clark, it was held that the litigation privilege should apply 
beyond written or oral statements arising in civil litigation to 
also apply to alleged conduct in the course of such litigation. 
See 624 S.E.2d 864. 
After further analyzing Clark and a number of cases 
from other jurisdictions, the Hawai' i Supreme Court in Kahala 
Royal concluded that a litigation privilege applied in that case 
because: the complaints failed to allege that the defendant-
lawyers were acting outside the scope of their lawyer-client 
relationship; the complaints failed to set forth factual 
allegations from which actual malice could reasonably be said to 
exist, such that there was "no allegations that indicate that the 
Lawyers possessed a desire to harm which is independent of the 
desire to protect their clients"; and the complaints were "devoid 
of any allegations that the Lawyers acted for personal gain or 
with ill-will towards [the plaintiffs]." 113 Hawai' i at 271, 151 
P.3d at 752 (internal quotation marks and original brackets omitted). 
14(...continued)
Matsuura
, the Hawai' i Supreme Court stated that generally "[t]he scope of any
privilege is based upon policy considerations" and that the "interrelated
policies associated with the litigation privilege" include: 
(1) promoting the candid, objective, and undistorted
disclosure of evidence; (2) placing the burden of testing
the evidence upon the litigants during trial; (3) avoiding
the chilling effect resulting from the threat of subsequent
litigation; (4) reinforcing the finality of judgments; (5)
limiting collateral attacks upon judgments; (6) promoting
zealous advocacy; (7) discouraging abusive litigation
practices; and (8) encouraging settlement.
 
102 Hawai' i at 155, 73 P.3d at 693. 
27
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Importantly for purposes of this case, however, the 
Kahala Royal court appears to have carved out certain claims from 
the litigation privilege recognized in that case, including 
claims for malicious prosecution and abuse of process. After 
quoting a part of Clark that explained that the litigation 
privilege did not bar liability of an attorney in all 
circumstances, the Hawai' i Supreme Court noted this court's 
statement that "an attorney may be liable for malicious 
prosecution if he acts for an improper purpose" and that "an 
attorney may also be sued and held personally liable if he 
maliciously participates in [an] abuse of process[.]" 113 
Hawai'i at 269, 151 P.3d at 750 (emphasis added) (quoting Myers 
v. Cohen, 5 Haw. App. 232, 236, 243, 687 P.2d 6, 11, 14–15
 (1984), overruled on other grounds by Myers, 67 Haw. 389, 688
 
P.2d 1145).
15
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court's reliance on Clark is of 
further note because although Clark held that "the litigation privilege is generally applicable to bar a civil litigant's claim 
for civil damages against an opposing party's attorney if the 
alleged act of the attorney occurs in the course of the 
attorney's representation of an opposing party and is conduct 
related to the civil action," 624 S.E.2d at 871, Clark also held 
that "the litigation privilege does not apply to claims of malicious prosecution and fraud." Id. at 872 (emphasis added). 
With regard to a claim for abuse of process, other
 
courts generally have held that a litigation privilege does not
 apply to provide immunity for an attorney. See Mozzochi v. Beck,
 
529 A.2d 171 (Conn. 1987); Peerman v. Sidicane, 605 S.W.2d 242,
 
15 The Kahala Royal court also noted the conclusion in Matsuura that "a 
party is not immune from liability for civil damages based upon that party's
fraud engaged in during prior litigation proceedings[.]" 113 Hawai' i at 269, 
151 P.3d at 750 (emphasis added) (quoting Matsuura, 102 Hawai' i at 162, 73
P.3d at 700). 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
245 (Tenn. Ct. App. 1980); see also 1 Am. Jur. 2d Abuse of
 
Process § 21 (2005) ("The absolute privilege that protects
 
attorneys from liability for defamation occurring in the course
 
of a judicial proceeding does not provide an attorney with an
 
absolute defense to liability for abuse of process.").
 
We therefore hold that the litigation privilege
 
recognized in Kahala Royal does not apply to provide immunity for
 
the abuse of process and malicious prosecution claims in this
 
case.
 
C. Abuse of Process Claim
 
Given our holdings above that claim preclusion and 
issue preclusion do not bar the abuse of process claim in this 
case, and that the litigation privilege recognized in Kahala 
Royal does not extend to provide immunity against the abuse of 
process claim, we now consider whether Plaintiffs-Appellants have 
asserted allegations sufficient to support such a claim. 
Hochberg points to the Hawai' i Supreme Court's decision in Young, 
where the court declined to accept the lack-of-justification 
standard to establish an abuse of process claim. See 119 Hawai' i 
at 416, 198 P.3d at 679. We agree that, in light of the decision 
in Young, Plaintiffs-Appellants have failed to allege a 
cognizable claim for abuse of process.
 In Young, the Hawai' i Supreme Court analyzed the 
underlying requirements for meeting the two elements for an abuse 
of process claim, which are: "(1) an ulterior purpose and (2) a 
wilful act in the use of the process which is not proper in the 
regular conduct of the proceeding." Id. at 412, 198 P.3d at 675. 
Having concluded that the allegations in that case were 
sufficient to meet the first element, the court then considered 
the second element. In this part of its analysis, the court 
refused to follow cases from other jurisdictions which "have 
essentially held that using process itself will constitute the 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
requisite willful act where a party's use of procedures is 'not
 
justified or used for legitimate or reasonably justifiable
 
purposes of advancing [his] interests.'" Id. at 415, 198 P.3d at
 
678.16 Importantly, the court explained:
 
this lack-of-justification requirement serves the same
function as the element of a malicious prosecution claim
requiring that the prior proceedings were initiated without
probable cause.
 
The tort of malicious prosecution, however, differs
from the tort of abuse of process, because it requires that
the prior proceedings must have terminated in the
 
plaintiff's favor. Yet, if the willful act requirement of
the tort of abuse of process could be satisfied by showing
that there was a lack of justification in the use of
process, parties could avoid their obligation of
establishing the dispositional element in a malicious
prosecution claim by simply alleging a claim for abuse of
 process. This dispositional requirement furthers the
interests of finality and judicial economy.
 
Id. (internal citations, quotation marks, and footnote omitted). 
In short, the court rejected the idea that an abuse of process
 
claim could be a short-cut to avoid the "dispositional element"
 
required for a malicious prosecution claim. The court concluded:
 
"We therefore decline to follow the lack-of-justification
 
standard and instead hold that, in order to establish an abuse of
 
process claim, the plaintiff must prove a 'willful act' distinct
 
from the use of process per se." Id. at 416, 198 P.3d at 679
 
(some emphasis added).
 
Applying Young to the instant case, we conclude that
 
the allegations in the First Amended Complaint fail to assert a
 
willful act distinct from the use of process. Instead, the
 
16 One of the cases that the Hawai' i Supreme Court refused to follow in
Young was Nienstedt v. Wetzel, 651 P.2d 876 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1982). In 
Nienstedt, the defendant-attorney in an abuse of process action had inter alia 
made factual misrepresentations to a prior court and the prior court had made
a finding it had been deceived by him. Id. at 880. The attorney was found
liable for abuse of process because his "use of various legal processes was
not justified or used for legitimate or reasonably justifiable purposes of
advancing appellants' interests in ongoing litigation." Id. at 882. To the 
contrary, under Young, when the willful act is not distinct from the use of 
process, an abuse of process claim cannot be established. 119 Hawai' i at 415­
16, 198 P.3d at 678-79. 
30
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
allegations contend in numerous and varied ways that Hochberg
 
lacked justification for his use of process in the Mechanic's
 
Lien Action and the Foreclosure Action. Given the holding in
 
Young, such lack-of-justification allegations do not suffice to
 
support an abuse of process claim. Dismissal of the claim is
 
warranted and thus, for these reasons, the judgment in favor of
 
Hochberg on the abuse of process claim was proper.
 
D.	 Malicious Prosecution Claim
 
As discussed above, claim preclusion and issue
 
preclusion do not bar the malicious prosecution claim, and the
 
litigation privilege set out in Kahala Royal does not provide
 
immunity from a malicious prosecution claim. We thus consider
 
whether Plaintiffs-Appellants have asserted allegations in their
 
First Amended Complaint sufficient to state a cause of action for
 
malicious prosecution. To the extent they have, we review the
 
circuit court's grant of summary judgment related to this claim.
 
As stated earlier, to establish a claim for malicious
 
prosecution, the required elements are: "(1) that the prior
 
proceedings were terminated in the plaintiffs' favor, (2) that
 
the prior proceedings were initiated without probable cause, and
 
(3) that the prior proceedings were initiated with malice." 
Myers, 67 Haw. at 391, 688 P.2d at 1148 (citations omitted).
 
1.	 Malicious Prosecution Based on the Foreclosure
 
Action
 
a. Dismissal on the Pleadings
 
Given the first required element, that the prior
 
proceedings were terminated in Plaintiffs-Appellants' favor, the
 
malicious prosecution claim was properly dismissed on the
 
pleadings as to all allegations related to the Foreclosure
 
Action, except for the filing of the First NOPA.
 
By its own terms, the First Amended Complaint asserted
 
that the Foreclosure Action was still pending in the circuit
 
31
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court and that parts of the claims therein were to be decided in
 
binding arbitration. Therefore, the claims in the Foreclosure
 
Action were still being litigated when Plaintiffs-Appellants
 
initiated this case and their claim for malicious prosecution
 
could not be maintained without those proceedings having first
 
been terminated in their favor.
 
As to the First NOPA, however, the First Amended
 
Complaint alleged that the NOPA had been filed in the Foreclosure
 
Action and had been expunged after hearings before the circuit
 
court. Although the main proceedings in the Foreclosure Action
 
were not yet terminated, we conclude that the First NOPA resulted
 
in a type of ancillary proceeding that may support a subsequent
 
malicious prosecution action, so long as the NOPA filing was
 
terminated in favor of the party who later files the malicious
 
prosecution claim. In other words, regardless of the outcome of
 
the prior main proceeding, the alleged termination of this prior
 
ancillary proceeding in favor of Plaintiffs-Appellants can
 
support their malicious prosecution claim in this case.
 
In addressing the malicious prosecution cause of 
action, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has noted its reliance on 
Prosser, Law of Torts § 120 at 850-56 (4th ed. 1971). See Myers, 
67 Haw. at 391, 688 P.2d at 1148. An updated version of this treatise provides: 
Ordinarily, the plaintiff must prove the termination
of the former proceeding in his favor. But there are
 
necessary exceptions where, as in the case of putting a man
under bond to keep the peace, the proceeding is an ex parte
one and relief is granted without an opportunity for the
party against whom it is sought to be heard. This is true
 
also as to proceedings ancillary to a civil suit, such as
 attachment or arrest under civil process, as to which, if
 they are themselves unjustified, it is unnecessary to show a
 
favorable termination of the main action. It usually is
held, however, with a little authority to the contrary, that
if an opportunity has been given to contest the facts, the
plaintiff must show a favorable termination of the ancillary
proceeding itself.
 
Prosser and Keeton, Law of Torts § 120 at 892 (5th ed. 1984)
 
(emphasis added). Similarly, Restatement (Second) of Torts
 
32
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
§ 674, which addresses liability for the wrongful use of civil
 
proceedings, is in accord that an ancillary proceeding can be the
 
underlying basis for a malicious prosecution claim. Comment f to
 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 674, provides:
 
A particular civil proceeding may be ancillary to other
proceedings. . . . Even though the principal proceedings are
properly brought, the ancillary proceeding may be wrongfully
initiated. In this case the wrongful procurement and
execution of the ancillary process subjects the person
procuring it to liability under the rule stated in this
Section.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court's analysis in S. Utsunomiya 
Enterprises v. Moomuku Country Club, 75 Haw. 480, 866 P.2d 951 
(1994) provides further support that a lis pendens or NOPA filing 
can create ancillary proceedings. There, the Hawai' i Supreme 
Court set forth the limited purposes for which a lis pendens could be filed under HRS § 634-51 (1985).
17 Important for 
purposes of this case, the court expressed its concern about the 
adverse impact that a recorded lis pendens could have. In 
holding that a lis pendens was an encumbrance on property, the court noted that "a lis pendens itself operates as a burden on 
the property tending to lessen the value or interfere with its 
free enjoyment, separate and apart from the underlying claim[.]" 
Id. at 503, 866 P.2d at 963 (emphasis added) (internal quotation marks and original brackets omitted); Cf. Knauer v. Foote, 101 Hawai'i 81, 85, 63 P.3d 389, 393 (2003) (an order expunging a lis 
pendens is an appealable collateral order "affecting rights which 
are independent of, and separable from, the rights asserted in 
the main action[,]" in part because it "does not address the 
merits of the underlying claim."). Given the consideration and 
17 In S. Utsunomiya, the court relied on Urez Corp. v. Superior Court,
 
190 Cal.App.3d 1141 (1987) and quoted favorably from Urez that "allegations of
 
equitable remedies, even if colorable, will not support a lis pendens if,
 
ultimately, those allegations act only as a collateral means to collect money
 damages." 75 Haw. at 511, 866 P.2d at 966. The court in S. Utsunomiya thus
 
held that the lis pendens in that case should have been expunged because the
party filing it had not claimed "title to or a right of possession of the
property." Id. at 513, 866 P.2d at 967.
 
33
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concerns expressed in S. Utsunomiya, we conclude that the filing
 
of a lis pendens is an ancillary proceeding. If a lis pendens is
 
terminated favorably for a party to the prior proceeding who was
 
adversely affected by its filing, the lis pendens filing can
 
serve as the basis for meeting the first element of a subsequent
 
malicious prosecution claim.
 
In the instant case, Plaintiffs-Appellants alleged that
 
Hochberg had aided and abetted in the filing of the First NOPA
 
(which related to their residence), that Hochberg had opposed
 
expungement of the NOPA but later conceded that 808 Development
 
did not have a right to file it, and that the NOPA was later
 
expunged. These allegations are sufficient to meet the first
 
element of the malicious prosecution claim, i.e. that the prior
 
ancillary proceeding involving the filing of the First NOPA was
 
terminated in favor of Plaintiffs-Appellants.
 
Further, the First Amended Complaint contains
 
sufficient allegations regarding the other two required elements:
 
that the prior proceedings were initiated without probable cause;
 
and that the prior proceedings were initiated with malice.
 
Therefore, dismissal on the pleadings for the malicious
 
prosecution claim was not proper with respect to the ancillary
 
proceeding involving the filing of the First NOPA, but was proper
 
with regard to all other allegations pertaining to the
 
Foreclosure Action.
 
b.	 Summary judgment on the malicious prosecution
claim related to the First NOPA
 
Although dismissal on the pleadings is not warranted,
 
based on evidence adduced by Hochberg, the circuit court properly
 
granted summary judgment on the malicious prosecution claim
 
related to the First NOPA.
 
The circuit court granted summary judgment to Hochberg
 
on the malicious prosecution claim to the extent it was based on
 
the filing of both NOPAs. The circuit court's oral ruling
 
34
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
indicated it focused on the malice element and determined that
 
Hochberg's uncontested declaration established that there were no
 
genuine issues of material fact that precluded judgment in his
 
favor. For the following reasons, we agree as to the First NOPA
 
that summary judgment was appropriate on the malicious
 
prosecution claim.
 
In support of his motion for summary judgment, Hochberg
 
submitted his declaration which attested, among other things,
 
that: at the time the First NOPA was filed, Sakatani held the
 
original of the promissory note and Hochberg had a bona fide
 
belief that his clients had a right to foreclose on the property;
 
and 808 Development and the Sakatanis had prayed for foreclosure
 
on the subject property.18
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants failed to submit any admissible 
evidence in opposition to Hochberg's motion for summary 
judgment.19 In order to establish the element of malice for a 
malicious prosecution claim, a plaintiff must show inter alia 
that the defendant initiated the prior proceeding with "the 
intent, without justification or excuse, to commit a wrongful 
act" and the emphasis is on the misuse of criminal or civil 
actions "as a means for causing harm." Young, 119 Hawai' i at 
419, 198 P.3d at 682 (brackets omitted). Here, the uncontested 
evidence was that at the time the First NOPA was filed, Hochberg 
18 In Black's Law Dictionary, to "foreclose" means "[t]o terminate a
mortgagor's interest in property[.]" Black's Law Dictionary 719 (9th ed.
2009).
19 We find no merit in Plaintiffs-Appellants' point of error alleging
generally and without specificity that the circuit court applied the wrong
standards for summary judgment and abused its discretion in its handling of
the summary judgment proceedings. Hochberg's motion for summary judgment was
properly filed, to which his declaration and certain exhibits were attached.
Plaintiffs-Appellants had a full opportunity to respond and filed a memorandum
in opposition to which they attached various exhibits without any accompanying
affidavit or declaration. Moreover, notwithstanding their assertion that they
did not have adequate time to conduct discovery, Plaintiffs-Appellants do not
contend, and the record does not indicate, that they sought a continuance
pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(f) to conduct discovery.
 
35
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had a bona fide belief that his clients had a right to foreclose
 
on the property and 808 Development and the Sakatanis had prayed
 
for foreclosure on the subject property. Given these undisputed
 
facts, there are no genuine issues of material fact with regard
 
to the required element of malice.
 
The circuit court thus properly granted summary
 
judgment for Hochberg on the malicious prosecution claim with
 
respect to the filing of the First NOPA.
 
No portion of the malicious prosecution claim remains
 
related to the Foreclosure Action.
 
2.	 Malicious Prosecution Based on the Mechanic's Lien
 
Action
 
a.	 Dismissal on the Pleadings Not Warranted
 
The First Amended Complaint alleges that the Mechanic's
 
Lien Action, which was ultimately resolved by the supreme court's
 
opinion in 808 Development, was terminated in favor of
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants. Similarly, the First Amended Complaint
 
also alleges that the Second NOPA was expunged by the supreme
 
court. Hence, Plaintiffs-Appellants have asserted sufficient
 
allegations to meet the first element of the malicious
 
prosecution claim. Moreover, the First Amended Complaint
 
contains sufficient allegations to support the remaining two
 
elements as well. Therefore, dismissal on the pleadings is not
 
warranted for the malicious prosecution claim to the extent the
 
allegations involve the Mechanic's Lien Action.
 
b.	 Summary judgment on the malicious prosecution
claim related to the Second NOPA
 
The circuit court granted summary judgment on the
 
malicious prosecution claim to the extent it arose from the
 
filing of the Second NOPA, concluding there were no genuine
 
issues of material fact on the malice element. However, in his
 
declaration, Hochberg does not address the basis for the filing
 
36
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the Second NOPA. Instead, he attests that he never intended
 
to file the Second NOPA and he attached as Exhibit D a copy of
 
the Second NOPA showing he did not file it. Plaintiffs-
Appellants challenged the admissibility of Exhibit D and the
 
circuit court did not consider the exhibit in its ruling.
 
Because Exhibit D is crucial as to whether summary 
judgment was warranted related to the Second NOPA, we consider 
Hochberg's request pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Evidence (HRE) 
201 that this court take judicial notice of the Second NOPA filed in the Mechanic's Lien Action. HRE 201 provides, in relevant 
part:
 (b) Kinds of facts. A judicially noticed fact must be
one not subject to reasonable dispute in that it is either
(1) generally known within the territorial jurisdiction of
the trial court, or (2) capable of accurate and ready
determination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannot
reasonably be questioned.
 (c) When discretionary. A court may take judicial
notice, whether requested or not.
 (d) When mandatory. A court shall take judicial notice
if requested by a party and supplied with the necessary
information.
 
HRE 201. "Courts have generally recognized that they may, in 
appropriate circumstances, take notice of proceedings in other 
courts, both within and without their judicial system, if those 
proceedings have a direct relation to the matter at issue." 
Roxas v. Marcos, 89 Hawai' i 91, 110 n.9, 969 P.2d 1209, 1228 n.9 
(1998) (quoting Sapp v. Wong, 3 Haw. App. 509, 512 n.3, 654 P.2d 
883, 885-86 n.3 (1982)) (brackets and other citations omitted). 
Moreover, we need not take judicial notice as to the truth of any 
facts asserted within the Second NOPA. See State v. Kotis, 91 
Hawai'i 319, 341-42, 984 P.2d 78, 100-01 (1999). Rather, the 
pertinent information contained in the Second NOPA is whether 
Hochberg appears as counsel on the document. 
Because of its direct relation and relevance to an
 
issue before this court, we agree to take judicial notice of the
 
37
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Second NOPA that was filed on October 28, 2004 in the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court in the Mechanic's Lien Action, 808 Development LLC 
v. Murakami, Appeal No. 26610. In particular, we take judicial
 
notice that Hochberg's name does not appear as counsel for the
 
filing party, 808 Development, or as the signing attorney.
 
Hochberg's uncontested declaration states that "a
 
second Notice of Pendency of Action was not going to be filed as
 
808 was relying on the foreclosure action as a vehicle through
 
which a mechanics lien would be foreclosed in the event the
 
Hawaii Supreme Court reversed [the circuit court in the
 
Mechanic's Lien Action]." Based on this evidence and the
 
judicially noticed fact that Hochberg was not the counsel who
 
filed the Second NOPA, he is entitled to summary judgment on the
 
malicious prosecution claim as it relates to the filing of the
 
Second NOPA.
 
3.	 Remaining portions of the malicious prosecution
claim
 
Hochberg's summary judgment motion and the circuit
 
court's summary judgment ruling were limited to the claims as
 
they arose from the filing of the two NOPAs. All other aspects
 
of the claims in the original complaint had previously been
 
dismissed on grounds of claim preclusion or issue preclusion,
 
which we have determined above do not apply. Therefore, except
 
with regard to the Second NOPA, summary judgment was not
 
requested or considered regarding the allegations pertaining to
 
the Mechanic's Lien Action. 
In light of the above, except with respect to the
 
filing of the Second NOPA, the malicious prosecution claim
 
remains to the extent it arises from allegations pertaining to
 
the Mechanic's Lien Action.
 
38
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. Conclusion
 
On the slander of title claim, Hochberg is entitled to
 
dismissal pursuant to the litigation privilege recognized in
 
Matsuura and McCarthy.
 
On the abuse of process claim, Hochberg is entitled to
 
dismissal because pursuant to Young, the allegations in the First
 
Amended Complaint fail to state a claim for abuse of process.
 
On the malicious prosecution claim: Hochberg is
 
entitled to dismissal on the pleadings as to all allegations
 
involving the Foreclosure Action, except as to the First NOPA;
 
based on Hochberg's uncontested declaration, summary judgment was
 
proper as to the First NOPA; and because Hochberg did not file
 
the Second NOPA, summary judgment was also proper as to the
 
Second NOPA. The only claim that remains is the malicious
 
prosecution claim to the extent it arises from allegations
 
related to the Mechanic's Lien Action, but excluding matters
 
pertaining to the Second NOPA.
 
We therefore vacate the judgment in favor of Hochberg
 
on the malicious prosecution claim to the extent that claim
 
arises from allegations related to the Mechanic's Lien Action,
 
other than matters pertaining to the Second NOPA.
 
In all other respects we affirm the judgment in favor
 
of Hochberg.
 
On the briefs:
 
Gary Victor Dubin
Long H. Vu
(Dubin Law Offices)
for Plaintiff-Appellants
 
David M. Louie
 
Jodie D. Roeca
 for Defendant-Appellee
Lloyd James Hochberg, Jr.
 
39
 