NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29827
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
In the Matter of the Arbitration between
 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF INTERNATIONAL COLONY CLUB,
Petitioner-Appellee,
v.
 
DAN DEIGERT and EDITH DEIGERT, Individually and as Trustee of the
Edith M. Deigert Revocable Living Trust dated April 22, 2006,
Respondents-Appellants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(SP. NO. 09-1-0011(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Respondents-Appellants Dan Deigert (Dan) and Edith
 
Deigert (Edith), Individually and as Trustee of the Edith M.
 
Deigert Revocable Living Trust dated April 22, 2006 
(collectively, the Respondents), appeal from: (1) the "Order
 Granting Petitioner Association of Apartment Owners of
 International Colony Club's Motion for an Order Confirming Final
 Arbitration Award and for Judgment filed February 3, 2009
 [Opposition filed February 23, 2009]" (Order Confirming
 Arbitration Award); and (2) the "Judgment in Favor of Petitioner
 Association of Apartment Owners of International Colony Club"
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Judgment), both of which were filed by the Circuit Court of the
 
1
 on April 14, 2009.    
 Second Circuit (Second Circuit Court)
On appeal, Respondents argue that the Second Circuit
 
Court erred in confirming the arbitration award and entering the
 
Judgment against Respondents because: (1) the arbitrator refused
 to consider evidence material to the controversy; (2) the
 arbitrator exceeded her authority in (a) providing for
 affirmative relief against the Edith M. Deigert Revocable Living
 Trust (Edith's Trust) in the arbitration award and (b) finding
 that Dan and Edith (the Deigerts) failed to obtain prior approval
 for the improvements to their unit from 75 percent of the owners
 of the International Colony Club; and (3) the arbitrator's
 resolution of the dispute by summary disposition was improper in
 that it deprived the Deigerts of the opportunity for an
 arbitration hearing. 
For the reasons set forth below, we affirm
 
the Second Circuit Court's Order Confirming Arbitration Award and
 its Judgment.
 
I.
 A.
 
Petitioner-Appellee Association of Apartment Owners of 
International Colony Club (AOAO) is a condominium association that operates the International Colony Club (ICC), a condominium property regime located at Hanaka' ô'ô, Maui. In May 2004, the 
Deigerts purchased cottage unit #34 (Unit #34) in the ICC. Later that year, the Deigerts began renovating the exterior of Unit #34. 
Under the Deigerts' Warranty Deed, the Deigerts'
 
ownership of Unit #34 was subject to conditions set forth in the
 ICC's governing documents, and as a unit owner, the Deigerts were
 required to comply with the AOAO's rules, including rules
 concerning exterior improvements. The 2003 version of the 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 
2
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
AOAO's Modification and Structural Rules provided in relevant
 
part:
 
2.	 Before any construction or major landscape changes
begin on the owner's application [for exterior or
major landscaping changes], the Site Manager must have
approval from a majority of the Board of Directors in
writing, along with the written approval of all
adjoining owners and those owners whose view or
similar are affected or impaired by such modification.
 
After the Deigerts began construction of the
 
renovations to their unit, a dispute arose concerning whether the
 
Deigerts had obtained the necessary approvals for the
 renovations.
 
B. 
By letter dated February 15, 2006, the AOAO served the
 
Deigerts with a demand for arbitration regarding their dispute.
2
 
According to the AOAO, in August 2006, the Deigerts conveyed
 their interest in Unit #34 to Edith Deigert, as tenant in
 severalty, and in September 2006, Edith Deigert conveyed her
 interest in Unit #34 to Edith Deigert, as trustee of Edith's
 Trust. By letter dated February 20, 2007, the Deigerts, through
 their counsel, expressed their agreement to submit their dispute
 with the AOAO to arbitration and to utilize the Honorable Marie
 Milks (Ret.) as the arbitrator (Arbitrator). The Deigerts'
 counsel's letter identified the issues for arbitration as (1)
 whether the additions and alterations constructed at the
 Deigerts' unit were without the approval of the AOAO's Board of
 Directors and/or owners of adjacent units; (2) whether the
 additions and alterations should be removed and the unit restored
 to its original condition; (3) whether the Deigerts are
 responsible for expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees
 and costs; (4) whether the fines and other expenses sought by the
 AOAO were invalid and unenforceable; (5) whether the Deigerts are
 
2
 The demand for arbitration was made pursuant to Hawaii Revised
Statutes (HRS) § 514A-121 (Supp. 2005) (repealed effective July 1, 2006, by
2004 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 164 (as amended by 2005 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 93), but
re-enacted effective July 1, 2006, by 2007 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 244). 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entitled to damages suffered as a result of the actions of the
 
AOAO and others relating to the additions and alterations; and
 (6) whether the Deigerts are entitled to their expenses including
 reasonable attorney's fees and costs.
 
On June 4, 2007, the Deigerts signed an Agreement to
 
Participate in Binding Arbitration (Arbitration Agreement), which
 provided that the Arbitrator would preside over the arbitration. 
The Arbitration Agreement also provided, in relevant part, that
 "the Arbitrator must determine all issues submitted to
 arbitration by the parties and may grant any and all remedies
 that the Arbitrator determines to be just and appropriate under
 the law."
 
On September 3, 2008, the AOAO submitted a motion for
 
summary disposition on the issue of whether the Deigerts had
 obtained the necessary prior approvals before commencing their
 construction work. After a hearing on the motion, the Arbitrator
 issued an order granting the AOAO's motion for summary
 disposition (Summary Determination), which provided in relevant
 part as follows:
 
1. The By-Laws, House Rules, and rules governing
this condominium regime that were in existence when the
Deigerts acquired their ownership interest in Unit #34 by
Warranty Deed, recorded on May 14, 2004, [ 3
] are valid and
enforceable. 
2. Both Dan and Edith Deigert, individually and as
Trustee of the Edith M. Deigert Revocable Living Trust dated
April 22, 2006, were obligated to follow these rules.
 
3. Based on these pre-existing rules, the Deigerts
were required to obtain prior approval from: a) the AOAO
Board of Directors and all adjoining unit owners (Units #29,
#33, and #35) before commencing any construction work on the
exterior of Unit 34; or b) approval from the AOAO Board of
Directors and 75% of all unit owners before commencing
construction of any material changes to the exterior of Unit
34.
 
4. The required full authority and approval from
the Board, adjoining unit owners and/or 75% of all unit
owners was not demonstrated by the Deigerts for the disputed
existing work and for additional proposed exterior
construction work on Unit # 34.
 
3 The record indicates that the Warranty Deed was signed by the parties
on May 14, 2004, but was recorded on June 18, 2004.
 
4
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5. Because the Deigerts constructed the exterior
alterations and additions to Unit # 34 without the requisite
prior approval, Dan and Edith Deigert and all persons or
entities acting under their control, including Edith Deigert
as trustee of her trust, must immediately restore the
property to its original condition.
 
The Arbitrator subsequently issued a final award in
 
favor of the AOAO (Arbitration Award). The Arbitration Award
 
incorporated six prior orders the Arbitrator had issued in
 resolving the matters submitted for arbitration, including the
 Summary Determination and orders awarding fines, attorney's fees,
 and costs against the Deigerts.
 
C. 
The Deigerts filed a motion to vacate the Arbitration
 
Award in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, which was
 denied.
4 In the meantime, the AOAO filed a motion to confirm the
 
Arbitration Award and for judgment in the Second Circuit Court. 
The Second Circuit Court entered its Order Confirming Arbitration
 Award and its Judgment, and this appealed followed. 
II.
 
Our review of an order confirming an arbitration award
 
is subject to the following principles:
 
"We review the circuit court's ruling on an
arbitration award de novo, but we also are mindful that the
circuit court's review of arbitral awards must be extremely
narrow and exceedingly deferential." Tatibouet v.
 
Ellsworth, 99 Hawai' i 226, 233, 54 P.3d 397, 404 (2002)
(internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted).
 
Judicial review of an arbitration award is
 
limited by the following precepts:
 
First, because of the legislative policy
to encourage arbitration and thereby discourage
litigation, arbitrators have broad discretion in
resolving the dispute. Upon submission of an
issue, the arbitrator has authority to determine
the entire question, including the legal
construction of terms of a contract or lease, as
well as the disputed facts. In fact, where the
parties agree to arbitrate, they thereby assume
all the hazards of the arbitration process,
including the risk that the arbitrators may make
mistakes in the application of law and in their
findings of fact.
 
4 The Honorable Eden E. Hifo presided.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Second, correlatively, judicial review of
an arbitration award is confined to the
 
strictest possible limits. An arbitration award
 may be vacated only on the four grounds
specified in [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)]
§ 658–9 and modified and corrected only on the
three grounds specified in HRS § 658–10.
Moreover, the courts have no business weighing
the merits of the award.
 
Third, HRS §§ 658–9 and –10 also restrict
the authority of appellate courts to review
judgments entered by circuit courts confirming
or vacating the arbitration awards.
 
Schmidt v. Pac. Benefit Servs., Inc., 113 Hawai' i 161,
165–66, 150 P.3d 810, 814–15 (2006) (citationsomitted). 
Although formulated under the prior arbitration
statute, this standard of review is equally applicable to
arbitrations conducted under HRS Chapter 658A. Under HRS
 Chapter 658A, an arbitration award can be vacated only on
the six grounds specified in HRS § 658A–23(a) and modified
and corrected only on the three grounds specified in HRS
§ 658A–24. The supreme court has made it clear that the
courts have no business weighing the merits of an
arbitration award. See also, e.g., United Public Workers,
AFSCME, Local 646 v. Dawson Int'l, Inc., 113 Hawai' i 127,
137–38, 149 P.3d 495, 505–06 (2006).
 
Kona Village Realty, Inc. v. Sunstone Realty Partners, XIV, LLC,
 
121 Hawai' i 110, 112-13, 214 P.3d 1100, 1102-03 (App. 2009), 
aff'd, 123 Hawai' i 476, 236 P.3d 456 (2010). 
Among the six grounds specified in Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 658A-23 (Supp. 2010) for vacating an arbitration
 award are the following:
 
(3)	 An arbitrator . . . refused to consider evidence
 
material to the controversy, or otherwise conducted
the hearing contrary to section 658A-15, so as to
prejudice substantially the rights of a party to the
arbitration proceeding; [and]
 
(4)	 An arbitrator exceeded the arbitrator's powers[.]
 
A party appealing from an order confirming an
 
arbitration award may argue grounds the party asserted in a
 
timely motion to vacate the award. See Schmidt v. Pac. Benefit
 
Servs., Inc., 113 Hawai' i 161, 168, 150 P.3d 810, 817 (2006). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
We resolve the arguments Respondents raise on appeal as
 
follows:
 
A.
 
Respondents argue that the Second Circuit Court erred
 
in confirming the arbitration award because the Arbitrator
 
refused to consider evidence material to the controversy. We
 disagree. The record does not support Respondents' claim that
 the Arbitrator refused to consider material evidence. Instead,
 the record reflects that the Arbitrator considered the evidence
 presented by the Deigerts but determined that it was not
 persuasive. 
Respondents contend that the Arbitrator refused to
 
consider the 2003 version of the AOAO's rules that was applicable
 to the Deigerts' exterior renovation of their unit. This claim
 is without merit. In her Summary Determination, the Arbitrator
 determined that "[t]he By-Laws, House Rules, and rules governing
 this condominium regime that were in existence when the Deigerts
 acquired their ownership interest in Unit #34 by Warranty Deed,
 recorded on May 14, 2004, are valid and enforceable." The 2003
 version of the AOAO's rules regarding the requirements for
 exterior renovations to units was in existence and effect when
 the Deigerts acquired Unit #34. Thus, the Arbitrator implicitly
 found that the 2003 version of the AOAO's rules for exterior
 renovations applied to the Deigerts' renovation of their unit. 
Respondents do not provide any effective argument to support
 their claim that the Arbitrator refused to consider the 2003
 version of the AOAO's rules applicable to their exterior
 renovations.
 
The principal issue in the arbitration was whether the
 
Deigerts had the requisite prior approvals under the AOAO's rules
 for renovating their unit. In essence, Respondents contend that
 the Arbitrator must have refused to consider material evidence
 because she ruled in favor of the AOAO on the merits. However,
 in reviewing an order confirming an arbitration award, we do not
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reevaluate the merits of the arbitrator's decision. See Kona 
Village Realty, 121 Hawai' i at 113, 214 P.3d at 1103. 
Respondents' disagreement with the Arbitrator's decision does not 
show that she refused to consider material evidence. 
B.
 
We reject Respondents' claim that the Arbitrator
 
exceeded her authority in providing for affirmative relief
 against Edith's Trust in the Arbitration Award. When the dispute
 over the renovations began and when the AOAO served their demand
 for arbitration, Unit #34 was owned by the Deigerts. However, by
 the time that the Deigerts signed the Arbitration Agreement,
 title to Unit #34 had been transferred to Edith's Trust.
5 In
 
agreeing to arbitration, the Deigerts acknowledged that one of
 the issues submitted to the Arbitrator would be whether the
 additions and alterations to Unit #34 should be removed and the
 unit restored to its original condition. 
"Arbitrators . . . normally have broad discretion to 
fashion appropriate remedies." Hokama v. University of Hawai' i, 
92 Hawai' i 268, 273, 990 P.2d 1150, 1155 (1999). Moreover, the 
Arbitration Agreement that the Deigerts signed specifically provided that "the Arbitrator . . . may grant any and all remedies that the Arbitrator determines to be just and appropriate under the law." The Arbitrator's Summary Determination, which was incorporated into the Arbitration Award, ruled that because the Deigerts had constructed alterations and additions "to Unit # 34 without the requisite prior approval, Dan and Edith Deigert and all persons or entities acting under their control, including Edith Deigert as trustee of her trust, must immediately restore the property to its original condition." 
Respondents do not dispute that Edith had full control
 
and authority over her revocable living trust. Edith was clearly
 a party to the arbitration. She was required to comply with the
 
5
 The AOAO erroneously asserts in its brief that Unit #34 was
transferred to Edith's Trust "during the course of the arbitration." 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Arbitrator's orders and had agreed to submit to arbitration the
 
question of whether the additions and alterations to Unit #34
 should be removed and the unit restored to its original
 condition. Given the Arbitrator's broad discretion to fashion an
 appropriate remedy, we conclude that, under the circumstances of
 this case, the Arbitrator did not exceed her authority in
 providing for affirmative relief against Edith's Trust in the
 Arbitration Award.
 
Respondents argue that the Arbitrator exceeded her 
authority by finding that the Deigerts failed to obtain prior approval for the improvements to their unit from 75 percent of the owners of the ICC. However, Respondents do not explain how such a factual finding, even if erroneous, demonstrates that the Arbitrator exceeded her authority. See Schmidt, 113 Hawai' i at 
165, 150 P.3d at 814 (concluding that where parties agree to arbitrate, "they thereby assume all the hazards of the arbitration process, including the risk that the arbitrators may make mistakes in the application of law and in their findings of fact"). Accordingly, Respondents are not entitled to relief based on their claim regarding the Arbitrator's factual finding. 
C.
 
Respondents' contention that the Arbitrator's
 
resolution of the dispute by summary disposition was improper is
 without merit. HRS § 658A-15 (Supp. 2010) authorizes an
 arbitrator to conduct the arbitration "in such manner as the
 arbitrator considers appropriate for a fair and expeditious
 disposition of the proceeding." HRS § 658A-15(b)(2) further
 provides that "[a]n arbitrator may decide a request for summary
 disposition of a claim or particular issue: . . . (2) Upon
 request of one party to the arbitration proceeding if that party
 gives notice to all other parties to the proceeding, and the
 other parties have a reasonable opportunity to respond." 
Respondents do not demonstrate that the Arbitrator failed to
 comply with HRS § 658A-15(b)(2) in rendering her Summary
 Determination.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
We affirm the Second Circuit Court's Order Confirming
 
Arbitration Award and its Judgment that were both entered on
 
April 14, 2009.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, December 29, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Charles H. Brower
 
for Respondents-Appellants
 
Chief Judge
John P. Manaut
 Lindsay N. McAneeley
(Carlsmith Ball LLP)
for Petitioner-Appellee
(on Appellee's Affirmative Claims) Associate Judge
and
 Jonathan L. Ortiz
 Jacqueline E. Thurston
(Ortiz & Katano)
for Petitioner-Appellee Associate Judge
(on Appellee's Defense Claims)
 
10
 