 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29990
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
HYRAM NAO, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
LIZCINDAMAE MATSUO, Defendant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0306)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Hyram Nao (Nao) appeals from the 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) entered by the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) on July 7, 2009.
1 Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged Nao 
and co-defendant Lizcindamae Matsuo (Matsuo) by Felony Information and Non-Felony Complaint. Nao was charged with (1) 
promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree (Count II); (2) 
possessing drug paraphernalia with intent to use (Count III); and (3) unauthorized entry into a motor vehicle in the second degree
 (UEMV II) (Count IV). Matsuo was charged with unauthorized
 control of a propelled vehicle (UCPV) (Count I). Matsuo pleaded
 no contest to the UCPV charge, and Nao proceeded to trial. 
1 The Honorable Michael A. Town presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A jury found Nao guilty as charged on Counts II, III,
 
and IV. The Circuit Court sentenced Nao to five years of
 
imprisonment, with a mandatory minimum term of three years, on
 Count II; five years of imprisonment on Count III; and one year
 of imprisonment on Count IV. The Circuit Court ordered that
 these sentences be served concurrently with each other and with
 any other sentence Nao was serving. 
On appeal, Nao argues that the Circuit Court: (1) erred
 
in admitting evidence of Nao's post-arrest statement telling
 Matsuo to shut up, to not say anything to the police, and to ask
 for an attorney; (2) plainly erred by allowing the prosecutor to
 make improper remarks during closing argument; (3) plainly erred
 in instructing the jury on the elements for UEMV II; and (4)
 erred in denying his motion for judgment of acquittal on the UEMV
 II charge. We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. 
I.
 
On the same day that Saturn of Honolulu reported that a
 
car, a Saturn Vue, had been stolen from its lot, the police
 apprehended Nao and Matsuo in the car. Matsuo was driving and
 Nao was in the passenger seat. 
A.
 
Prior to trial, Nao filed a motion in limine to exclude 
a post-arrest statement he made to Matsuo. At the hearing on the
 motion, Officer Charles Rezentes (Officer Rezentes) testified
 that when he told Mastsuo that she was under arrest for driving a
 stolen car, Matsuo said that Nao told her it was Nao's car. Nao
 then told Matsuo to "shut up and wait for an attorney; get an
 attorney, not to say anything." The Circuit Court denied Nao's
 motion to exclude his statement.
 
B.
 
The following evidence was presented at trial. Edward
 
Basuel (Basuel), a Saturn employee, cleaned and detailed a new
 Saturn Vue on the Saturn of Honolulu car lot. After finishing,
 Basuel left the key in the ignition and went to retrieve another
 vehicle from the storage lot. When Basuel returned about fifteen
 
2
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
minutes later, the Saturn Vue was gone. Basuel did not
 
immediately realize that the car was gone.
 
Jose Trillo (Trillo), an events coordinator for Saturn
 
of Honolulu, saw the Saturn Vue while it was being prepared for
 
delivery. After seeing the Saturn Vue, Trillo left for five
 minutes, and when he returned, the car was gone. John Strandberg
 (Strandberg), the general sales manager for Saturn of Honolulu,
 was notified by a sales manager that the Saturn Vue had been
 stolen and instructed the sales manager to report the theft to
 the police. Strandberg testified that Saturn of Honolulu had not
 sold the Saturn Vue to Nao or Matsuo and that neither of them had
 permission to enter or be within the car. Basuel and Trillo
 testified that they had not given anyone permission to drive the
 vehicle off the lot. 
The Saturn Vue was equipped with OnStar satellite
 
technology, which was used to help the police locate the car. On
 the same day that the Saturn Vue was stolen, Officer Rezentes was
 advised by dispatch that OnStar had located the car. Officer
 
Rezentes spotted the Saturn Vue, maneuvered his car behind the
 
Saturn Vue, and at about 3:30 p.m., he activated his lights and
 siren to pull the Saturn Vue over. The Saturn Vue did not
 immediately stop.  Officer Rezentes drove alongside the Saturn
 
Vue and observed Nao, the passenger, motioning to Matsuo, the
 
driver, to keep going. The Saturn Vue eventually pulled over. 
Officer Rezentes positioned his car in front of the Saturn Vue
 and Officer Keala Noda (Officer Noda) stopped his car behind the
 Saturn Vue, blocking it in. The Saturn Vue reversed into the
 front bumper of Officer Noda's car. 
The officers arrested Nao and Matsuo. Officer Rezentes
 
testified that once he advised Matsuo that "she was being
 arrested for a stolen vehicle," Nao told Matsuo something to the
 effect of "shut up and get an attorney." During a search
 incident to arrest, Officer Rezentes recovered from Nao's pants
 pocket a cylindrical tube with a bulbous end, which Officer
 Rezentes recognized as "[d]rug paraphernalia used to ingest
 
3
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
crystal methamphetamine." The tube contained a whitish residue
 
which was later confirmed to be crystal methamphetamine.
 
After the State rested, Nao called Matsuo as his
 
witness. Matsuo admitted that she had been convicted of driving
 
the stolen Saturn Vue. Matsuo testified that she got the car
 from Nao, who drove the Saturn Vue to Matsuo's house to pick her
 up at about 1:30 p.m. on the day they were arrested. Later, Nao
 asked Matsuo to drive so that Nao could eat. As they were being
 
stopped by the police, Nao made hand gestures and kept telling
 
Matsuo to "just keep going." After they were blocked in by the
 
two police vehicles, Nao put the Saturn Vue in reverse, causing
 
it to hit the police vehicle behind them, because Nao did not
 want Matsuo to stop. 
According to Mastuo, when the police officer told her
 
she was being arrested for driving a stolen vehicle, she yelled
 at Nao, "I thought this car was your car? What going on, Hyram?" 
Nao responded by telling Matsuo to "shut up and no say nothing"
 and to "ask for a lawyer." 
II.
 
We resolve Nao's arguments on appeal as follows:
 
A.
 
Nao argues that the Circuit Court erred in admitting
 
evidence of Nao's post-arrest statement to Matsuo telling her to
 shut up, to not say anything to the police, and to ask for an
 attorney. Nao asserts that this statement should have been
 excluded as (1) irrelevant and unduly prejudicial; and (2) an
 impermissible comment on Nao's claim of the privilege against
 self-incrimination and on his exercise of his constitutional
 rights to remain silent and to counsel. We disagree. 
The evidence that Nao directed Matsuo to shut up, to
 
refrain from saying anything to the police, and to ask for a
 lawyer was highly relevant to showing his consciousness of guilt
 and criminal intent. Nao's statement to Matsuo came in response
 to Matsuo's asking Nao to explain what was going on and Matsuo's
 assertion that she thought the stolen Saturn Vue belonged to Nao. 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Matsuo's remarks to Nao, her presence in the car with Nao, and 
the circumstances of her arrest clearly demonstrated that Matsuo had direct knowledge and information about Nao's involvement with the car. Moreover, viewed in context, Nao's statement to Matsuo evinces Nao's concern that she could provide the police with information that would incriminate Nao. Accordingly, Nao's attempt to silence Matsuo and dissuade her from sharing her knowledge with the police was strong and probative evidence of Nao's consciousness of guilt. See State v. Arakawa, 101 Hawai' i 
26, 32-33, 61 P.3d 537, 543-44 (App. 2003) (concluding that the defendant's threats of violence against potential testifying witnesses was relevant and admissible to showing the defendant's consciousness of guilt). 
Contrary to Nao's contention, the admission of Nao's 
statement was not an impermissible comment on Nao's claim of the privilege against self-incrimination and on his exercise of his constitutional rights to remain silent and to counsel. In analyzing the analogous question of whether a prosecutor has impermissibly commented on a defendant's exercise of his or her right to refuse to testify, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has held 
that "[t]he test to be applied is whether the language used was manifestly intended or was of such character that the jury would naturally and necessarily take it to be a comment on the failure of the accused to testify." State v. Padilla, 57 Haw. 150, 158, 
552 P.2d 357, 362 (1976) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Here, the State's introduction of Nao's statement to
 
Matsuo was not "manifestly intended" and was not "of such
 character that the jury would naturally and necessarily take" the
 introduction of Nao's statement to be a comment on Nao's exercise
 of his right to remain silent or his right to counsel. Most
 importantly, Nao, in his statement, did not invoke his right to
 remain silent or his right to counsel. Instead, Nao instructed
 Matsuo to keep quiet and ask for a lawyer. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Moreover, the context of Nao's statement reveals that
 
it was not motivated by Nao's concern over protecting Matsuo's
 
constitutional rights. Rather, Nao's statement was directed at
 silencing Matsuo because Nao was concerned that Matsuo would
 provide the police with information that would incriminate Nao. 
Under these circumstances, the jury would not "naturally and
 necessarily" interpret the introduction of Nao's statement as a
 comment on Nao's exercise of his constitutional rights. Our
 conclusion is supported by decisions of other courts which have
 ruled that the admission of evidence that the defendant told
 others to remain silent was not an impermissible comment on the
 defendant's exercise of the defendant's right to remain silent. 
See Cameron v. Birkett, 348 F. Supp. 2d 825, 842 (E.D. Mich.
 2004) (concluding that the defendant's instructing a co-defendant
 to remain silent was not an impermissible comment on the
 defendant's exercise of the defendant's right to remain silent
 and was relevant evidence of the defendant's consciousness of
 guilt); United States v. Warren, 578 F.2d 1058, 1073 (5th Cir.
 1978) (en banc), rev'd on other grounds by 612 F.2d 887 (5th Cir.
 1980) (en banc). 
For the same reasons, we conclude that the State's
 
introduction of Nao's statement was not an improper comment on
 Nao's claim of his privilege against self-incrimination. Hawaii
 Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 509 (1993) provides that "[t]o the
 extent that such privilege exists under the Constitution of the
 United States or the State of Hawaii, a person has a privilege to
 refuse to disclose any matter that may tend to incriminate the
 person." HRE Rule 513 (1993), in turn, provides in relevant part
 that "[t]he claim of a privilege, whether in the present
 proceeding or on a prior occasion, is not a proper subject of
 comment by judge or counsel. No inference may be drawn
 therefrom." 
Nao argues that his statement should have been excluded
 
under HRE Rule 513. We disagree. As previously explained, Nao's
 statement was not an invocation of his privilege against self­
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
incrimination. In his statement, Nao was not claiming his own
 
privilege but was advising Matsuo to claim her privilege against
 self-incrimination. However, Matsuo's privilege against self-
incrimination belongs to her, and not to Nao, and Nao cannot
 claim the privilege on Matsuo's behalf. The introduction of
 Nao's statement was not a comment, much less an improper comment,
 on Nao's claim of his privilege against self-incrimination. 
In sum, Nao's statement was highly probative of his
 
consciousness of guilt, and the introduction of the statement did
 not constitute an impermissible comment on Nao's claim of his
 privilege against self-incrimination or on his exercise of his
 constitutional rights. We reject Nao's contention that the
 probative value of his statement was substantially outweighed by
 the danger of unfair prejudice. See HRE Rule 403 (1993). We
 
conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in admitting Nao's
 statement. 
B.
 
Nao contends that the prosecutor's closing arguments
 
that (1) the State's witnesses and Matsuo were credible and had
 no reason to lie and (2) it was not an issue that the pipe seized
 from Nao appeared to be drug paraphernalia constituted
 misconduct. Because Nao did not object to the prosecutor's
 remarks when they were made, we review his claims on appeal for
 plain error. Nao's contentions are without merit.
 
Contrary to Nao's assertions, the prosecutor's
 
arguments regarding the credibility of witnesses did not
 impermissibly inject her personal beliefs into the proceedings
 and were not based on facts outside the record. Disputes over
 the credibility of witnesses arise in almost every case, and the
 State is entitled to make arguments about witness credibility. 
During closing argument, prosecutors are allowed "wide latitude"
 in discussing the evidence, and it is "within the bounds of
 legitimate argument for prosecutors to state, discuss, and
 comment on the evidence as well as to draw all reasonable 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inferences from the evidence." State v. Clark, 83 Hawai' i 289, 
304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996). 
In Nao's case, the prosecutor did not suggest that her
 
arguments regarding the credibility of witnesses were based on
 
personal knowledge or information that had not been presented to
 the jury. Instead, the prosecutor's arguments that the witnesses
 were credible and had no reason to lie were based on reasonable
 inferences drawn from the evidence presented. We conclude that
 the prosecutor's arguments regarding the credibility of the
 witnesses did not constitute misconduct.
 
We also reject Nao's claim that the prosecutor engaged
 
in misconduct by "misstating the law" in presenting her argument
 about the pipe seized from Nao. The prosecutor's argument, which 
Nao challenges and characterizes as a misstatement of law, was as
 follows: "That the object was drug paraphernalia, it's pretty
 much not an issue, it's a glass meth pipe, it does appear to be
 one. Reason and common sense, appear." Nao contends that the
 prosecutor "misstated the law" by advising the jury that the
 State was not required to prove that the glass pipe seized from
 Nao constituted drug paraphernalia, but only that it "appeared"
 to be drug paraphernalia. When viewed in context, the prosecutor
 clearly was not purporting by her argument to advise the jury on
 the law, but was arguing that the evidence was so strong that the
 glass pipe constituted drug paraphernalia that it was not a
 reasonably disputed issue in the case. We further reject Nao's
 argument that the prosecutor expressed an impermissible personal
 opinion by arguing that the object seized from Nao "appeared" to
 be drug paraphernalia.
 
C.
 
Nao argues that the Circuit Court committed plain error
 
in instructing the jury on the elements for UEMV II. The
 instruction challenged by Nao stated in relevant part:
 
There are three material elements of the offense of
 
Unauthorized Entry Into Motor Vehicle in the Second Degree,
each of which the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable
doubt. 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
These three elements are:
 
1. That, on or about the 25th day of February,
2008, in the City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii,
the Defendant unlawfully entered into a motor vehicle; and
 
2. That the Defendant did so without being invited,
licensed, or otherwise authorized to enter into the motor
vehicle; and 
3. That the Defendant acted intentionally or
knowingly as to each of the foregoing elements. 
(Emphasis added).
 
Nao argues that the instruction was erroneous because 
the plain language of the statute defining the UEMV II offense,
 
2
HRS § 708-836.6 (Supp. 2010),  does not require that the entry
into the motor vehicle be "unlawful." We conclude that any error
 
in the Circuit Court's instruction was harmless. The effect of
 the alleged error in requiring the State to prove something not
 required by the offense statute would be to increase the State's
 burden of proof on the conduct element.
3 The giving of an
 
instruction that increases the State burden of proof is not
 prejudicial to a defendant and cannot provide a basis for
 overturing the defendant's conviction. See United States v.
 
Royal, 100 F.3d 1019, 1027 (1st Cir. 1996) (concluding that "the
 [trial] court's instructions, by using language that imposes a
 higher burden on the government than the law requires, did not
 prejudice [the defendant]"). 
Nao suggests that increasing the State's burden on the
 
2 HRS § 708-836.6 provides in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of unauthorized
entry into a motor vehicle in the second degree if the
person intentionally or knowingly enters into a motor
vehicle without being invited, licensed, or otherwise
authorized to do so.
3 HRS § 702-205 (1993) provides in relevant part that "[t]he
elements of an offense are such (1) conduct, (2) attendant
circumstances, and (3) results of conduct, as . . . [a]re
specified by the definition of the offense . . . ." 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conduct element of the crime may have made it easier for the
 
State to prove the attendant circumstances element -- that the
 defendant acted "without being invited, licensed, or otherwise
 authorized to [enter into the motor vehicle]." We disagree. 
Under the Circuit Court's instruction, the jury was required to
 find that the State had proved the attendant circumstances
 element as a separate element in order to return a guilty
 verdict. Increasing the State's burden of proof on the conduct
 element would not have misled the jury into believing that the
 State's burden on the attendant circumstances element had changed
 or been reduced.
 
D.
 
Nao argues that the State failed to present sufficient
 
evidence to prove that Nao entered the Saturn Vue "without being
 invited, licensed, or otherwise authorized to do so." Nao
 acknowledges that the State presented evidence that Saturn of
 Honolulu employees Basuel, Trillo, and Standberg had not given
 Nao permission to enter into the Saturn Vue. Nao nevertheless
 argues that the evidence was insufficient because the State
 "failed to adduce substantial evidence that nobody from Saturn
 invited, licenced, or otherwise authorized Nao to enter the
 Saturn Vue that was taken from the lot . . . ." (Emphasis
 added.) In effect, Nao claims that the State cannot prove a UEMV
 II offense unless it introduces evidence that every person who
 could possibly have authorized entry into the vehicle did not
 authorize the defendant's entry. We disagree with this
 contention.
 
We conclude that the State presented substantial
 
evidence that Nao entered into the Saturn Vue "without being
 invited, licensed, or otherwise authorized to do so." When
 viewed in the light most favorable to the State, see State v.
 Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981), the
 evidence showed that: (1) the Saturn Vue was stolen from the lot
 of Saturn of Honolulu, and the theft was reported to the police;
 (2) Basuel, who last had possession of the car, and two other
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Saturn of Honolulu employees, Trillo and Standberg, had not given
 
Nao permission to enter the car; (3) at about 1:30 p.m. on the
 same day that the Saturn Vue was stolen, Nao drove the car to
 Matsuo's house to pick her up; and (4) Nao displayed his guilty
 knowledge that the Saturn Vue was stolen and indicated that he
 had entered into the car without being invited, licensed, or
 authorized to do so by: (a) telling Matsuo to keep driving when
 the police attempted to pull the Saturn Vue over; (b) reversing
 the Saturn Vue into the police car that was blocking it; and (c)
 attempting to prevent Matsuo from talking to the police by
 telling her to shut up and to ask for a lawyer. 
Based on the evidence presented and the reasonable
 
inferences the jury could draw from that evidence, there was
 sufficient evidence to support Nao conviction for UEMV II. The
 Circuit Court did not err in denying Nao's motion for judgment of
 acquittal.
 
III.
 
We affirm the July 7, 2009, Judgment of the Circuit
 
Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 30, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Craig W. Jerome
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11
 