NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28958
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
C. BREWER AND COMPANY, LTD.,
Plaintiff-Appellant
vs.
 
INDUSTRIAL INDEMNITY COMPANY; INDUSTRIAL INSURANCE
COMPANY OF HAWAII, LTD.; NATIONAL UNION FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY
OF PITTSBURGH; UNITED STATES FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY;
LIBERTY MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY; TIG INSURANCE COMPANY;
COLUMBIA CASUALTY COMPANY; JAMES RIVER INSURANCE COMPANY;
THE HOME INSURANCE COMPANY; MARINE INDEMNITY INSURANCE
COMPANY OF AMERICA; RELIANCE INSURANCE COMPANY;
LEXINGTON INSURANCE COMPANY; CIGNA PROPERTY AND
CASUALTY INSURANCE CO.; PACIFIC EMPLOYERS INSURANCE CO., INC.;
SCOTTSDALE INSURANCE COMPANY; FIREMAN'S FUND INSURANCE COMPANY
OF HAWAII; FIRST STATE INSURANCE CO.; KILAUEA IRRIGATION CO.,
INC.; KEHALANI HOLDINGS CO., INC.; STATE OF HAWAII;
HAWAII INSURANCE GUARANTY ASSOCIATION; and
DOE DEFENDANTS 2-30, Defendants-Appellees
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Third-Party Plaintiff-Cross-Appellant,
vs.
 
MARSH USA, INC.; and DOE THIRD-PARTY DEFENDANTS 1-30,
Third-Party Defendants-Appellees
and
 
KEHAULANI HOLDINGS COMPANY, INC.,
Third-Party Plaintiff-Cross-Appellant
vs.
 
UNITED NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY; COMMONWEALTH INSURANCE
COMPANY; ALEXANDER HOWDEN LIMITED; INTEGRITY INSURANCE
COMPANY; HAWAIIAN INSURANCE & GUARANTY COMPANY, LIMITED;
HOLLAND-AMERICA; INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY;
TRADEWIND INSURANCE COMPANY, LIMITED; ISLAND INSURANCE
COMPANY, LIMITED and DOE THIRD-PARTY DEFENDANTS 1-30,
Third-Party Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CV. NO. 06-1-0140)
  MEMORANDUM OPINION
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley, J., and
Circuit Court Judge Alm, in place of Fujise and
Leonard, JJ., all recused)
 
INTRODUCTION
 
I.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant C. Brewer and Company, Ltd. (C. 
Brewer) filed a second amended complaint for declaratory relief 
seeking a declaration regarding the insurance coverage obligations, including the duty to defend and indemnify, owed by numerous insurance companies. 
C. Brewer had been sued for 
damages in three lawsuits (Underlying Lawsuits) filed in the aftermath of the breach of the Kaloko Dam on Kaua' i on March 14, 
2006, which resulted in seven deaths and extensive property damage. The Underlying Lawsuits are: Pflueger v. State, Civil No. 06-1-1391 (Pflueger); Fehring v. Pflueger, Civil No. 06-1­0082 (Fehring); and Midler v. Pflueger, Civil No. 06-1-0110 (Midler). In its declaratory relief action, C. Brewer named as defendants seventeen insurance companies (collectively, 
1
 "Defendant Insurers") that had issued insurance policies to C.
Brewer covering periods from 1987 through the Kaloko Dam breach. 
C.
 Brewer grouped the insurance policies issued into
 
the following categories: (1) commercial general liability
 policies (CGL policies); (2) multi-peril property policies
 
1 C. Brewer named the following insurance companies as defendants in its
second amended complaint: Industrial Indemnity Company (Industrial Indemnity);
Industrial Insurance Company of Hawaii, Ltd. (Industrial Insurance); National
Union Fire Insurance Company of Pittsburgh (National Union); United States
Fire Insurance Company (U.S. Fire); Liberty Mutual Insurance Company (Liberty
Mutual); TIG Insurance Company (TIG); Columbia Casualty Insurance Company
(Columbia Casualty); James River Insurance Company (James River); The Home
Insurance Company (Home); Marine Indemnity Insurance Company of America
(Marine Indemnity); Reliance Insurance Company (Reliance); Lexington Insurance
Company (Lexington); CIGNA Property and Casualty Insurance Co., now known as,
ACE Property and Casualty (ACE); Pacific Employers Insurance Co., Inc.
(Pacific Employers); Scottsdale Insurance Company (Scottsdale); Fireman's Fund
Insurance Company of Hawaii (Fireman's Fund); and First State Insurance
Company (First State) (collectively, "Defendant Insurers"). C. Brewer also
 named as a defendant Hawaiian Insurance Guaranty Association (HIGA), which C.
Brewer asserted was responsible for addressing the claims of insolvent
insurers Home and Reliance.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(property policies); and (3) excess insurance or umbrella
 
policies (excess policies). For purposes of our analysis, we
 further categorize the insurance policies and Defendant Insurers
 based on whether the policy issued had a policy period that ended
 before the March 14, 2006, breach of the Kaloko Dam (pre-breach)
 or was in effect at the time of the Kaloko Dam breach. For
 example, James River issued a CGL policy for the period December
 15, 2005, to January 1, 2007, that was in effect at the time of
 the Kaloko Dam breach. Columbia Casualty issued a pre-breach CGL
 policy for the period December 15, 2004 to December 15, 2005,
 which was the policy period immediately preceding the Kaloko Dam
 breach. 
In its declaratory relief action, C. Brewer named the 
State of Hawai' i (State), Kehalani Holdings Company (Kehalani), 
and Kilauea Irrigation Company (Kilauea Irrigation) as additional "necessary party" defendants.
2 The State, Kehalani, and Kilauea 
Irrigation had been sued along with C. Brewer in the Underlying Lawsuits, and C. Brewer alleged that the State, Kehalani, and Kilauea Irrigation were named as an insured or additional insured on certain of the insurance policies issued to C. Brewer. The State and Kehalani, in turn, filed claims for declaratory relief concerning the issue of their insurance coverage in cross-claims against Defendant Insurers and in third-party complaints against additional insurance companies.
3 
2 In its opening brief, Kehalani states that it "is the successor in
interest to or the current name for Hawaiiana Investment Company, Inc., C.
Brewer Properties, Inc., C. Brewer Homes, Inc., a Hawaii corporation, C.
Brewer Homes, Inc., a Delaware corporation, and Hawaii Land & Farming Company,
Inc. for certain periods of time." Kehalani describes its relationship to C.
Brewer and Kilauea Irrigation as follows: "[C. Brewer] was the parent of
Hawaiiana Investment Co., Inc., C. Brewer Properties, Inc. and C. Brewer
Homes, Inc. until 12/15/93. [Kilauea Irrigation] was a subsidiary of
Hawaiiana Investment Co., Inc., C. Brewer Properties, Inc., and C. Brewer
Homes, Inc. until 12/15/93 when it became a subsidiary of C. Brewer." Unless
 otherwise indicated, we will use "Kehalani" to refer to Kehalani Holdings
Company, Inc. as well as its predecessor companies.
 
3
 The State filed a third-party complaint naming Marsh USA Inc. as a
defendant. Kehalani filed a third-party complaint naming the following
(continued...)
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
Defendant Insurers filed motions to dismiss for failure
 
to state a claim or for summary judgment with respect to C.
 
Brewer's claims for declaratory relief. Through a series of
 orders, the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court)
4
 
granted these motions. In dismissing C. Brewer's claims against
 Defendant Insurers that issued pre-breach CGL policies (pre­breach CGL insurers), the Circuit Court essentially found that
 the damages alleged in the Underlying Lawsuits had occurred on or
 after March 14, 2006, the date of Kaloko Dam breach. The Circuit
 Court therefore ruled that the damages alleged in the Underlying
 Lawsuits did not occur during the pre-breach CGL policy periods,
 and that the pre-breach CGL insurers had no duty to defend or
 indemnify C. Brewer. The Circuit Court granted summary judgment
 in favor of Columbia Casualty on the additional ground that C.
 Brewer had failed to show any potential for coverage in light of
 the "Known or Continuing Injury or Damage" endorsement set forth
 in Columbia Casualty's policy. 
The Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor of
 
James River, the CGL insurer that issued the policy in effect
 when the Kaloko Dam breach occurred, based upon the designated
 premises endorsement in the policy James River issued to C.
 Brewer. The Circuit Court ruled that this endorsement precluded
 insurance coverage and the duty to defend because the site of the
 Kaloko Dam was not included as a designated premises. The
 Circuit Court dismissed C. Brewer's claims against the Defendant
 Insurers that issued excess policies (excess insurers) based on
 the excess insurers' joinder in motions filed by primary coverage
 
3(...continued)
insurance companies as defendants: United National Insurance Company;
Commonwealth Insurance Company; Alexander Howden, Limited; Integrity Insurance
Company; Hawaiian Insurance & Guaranty Company, Limited; Holland-America;
International Insurance Company; Tradewind Insurance Company, Limited; and
Island Insurance Company, Limited.
 
4
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided over the proceedings
and entered the orders that are the subject of this appeal. 
4
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
insurers or the excess insurers' own motions.
 
The property policies identified by C. Brewer in its
 
declaratory relief action were all issued for pre-breach policy
 
periods. In dismissing C. Brewer's claims against Defendant
 Insurers that issued the pre-breach property policies (property
 insurers), the Circuit Court ruled that a manifestation trigger
 applied to these policies and that C. Brewer failed to allege
 that any covered damages had become manifest during the pre-
breach property policy periods. 
Applying the same reasoning it used in ruling against
 
C. Brewer, the Circuit Court also dismissed the claims for
 declaratory relief asserted by the State against certain of the
 Defendant Insurers. Eventually, through various Circuit Court
 orders and stipulations between the parties, all claims for
 declaratory relief asserted by C. Brewer, the State, and Kehalani
 (collectively, the "Insureds") against the Defendant Insurers
 were dismissed, and this appeal followed.
 
III. 
On appeal, C. Brewer argues: 
1. With respect to the pre-breach CGL insurers, the
 
Circuit Court erred in ruling that these insurers had no duty to
 defend despite the allegations in the Underlying Lawsuits of
 "continuous, incremental, and indivisible" property damage during
 the policy period covered by each of the pre-breach CGL
 policies.
5
 
2. With respect to Columbia Casualty, a pre-breach
 
CGL insurer, the Circuit Court erred in ruling that Columbia
 Casualty's "Known or Continuing Injury or Damage" endorsement 
5
 C. Brewer's arguments regarding "continuous, incremental, and
 
indivisible" property damage also apply to James River's CGL policy up until
the breach of the Kaloko Dam. However, we analyze and consider the James
River policy, which was in effect when the Kaloko Dam breached, separately
from the pre-breach CGL policies because unlike the pre-breach CGL policies,
there is no dispute that the Underlying Lawsuits sought recovery of damages
occurring during James River's policy period and because the Circuit Court
relied upon a different ground in dismissing C. Brewer's claims against James
River.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
provided an additional basis for concluding that it had no duty
 
to defend. 
3. With respect to James River, the Defendant Insurer
 
that issued the policy in effect on the date of the Kaloko Dam
 breach, the Circuit Court erred in ruling that there was no duty
 to defend based on the policy's designated premises endorsement. 
4. With respect to the property insurers, the Circuit
 
Court erred in determining that a manifestation trigger for
 coverage applied.
 
5. With respect to the excess insurers, the Circuit
 
Court erred in dismissing the claims against the excess insurers.
 
Defendant-Cross-Appellant the State and Defendant­
Cross-Appellant Kehalani raise similar arguments. The State
 argues:
 
1. The Circuit Court erred in ruling that the CGL 
insurers had no duty to defend, and it failed to properly apply Hawai'i Supreme Court precedents and Hawai' i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6) (2000) and Rule 56 (2000) in rendering its decisions. 
2. The Circuit Court erred in adopting a
 
manifestation trigger for the property policies.
 
3. 
The Circuit Court erred in dismissing the claims
 
against the excess insurers.
 
Kehalani argues:
 1. The Circuit Court erred in ruling that the CGL
 
insurers had no duty to defend.
 
2. The Circuit Court erred in concluding that a
 
manifestation trigger applied to the property policy issued by
 Marine Indemnity.
 
As explained in greater detail below, we hold that the
 
Circuit Court: (1) erred in ruling that the pre-breach CGL
 insurers had no duty to defend in the 
Pflueger lawsuit on the
 
ground that the Pflueger lawsuit did not allege any injury-in­fact that occurred during their policy periods, but properly
 ruled that the pre-breach CGL insurers had no duty to defend in
 
6
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Fehring and Midler lawsuits; (2) erred in relying on Columbia
 
Casualty's "Known or Continuing Injury or Damage" endorsement as
 an additional ground for its ruling that Columbia Casualty had no
 duty to defend in the Pflueger lawsuit; (3) erred in ruling that
 James River had no duty to defend in the Underlying Lawsuits
 based on James River's designated premises endorsement; (4) erred
 in dismissing the claims against the property insurers for
 failure to state a claim for relief; and (5) erred in dismissing
 the claims against the excess insurers based on its rulings
 dismissing the primary insurers. 
BACKGROUND
 
On March 14, 2006, a large portion of the Kaloko Dam
 
collapsed, releasing over three hundred million gallons of water
 and claiming seven lives and causing extensive property damage. 
The Underlying Lawsuits were subsequently filed seeking damages
 against C. Brewer, the State, Kehalani, and others. C. Brewer
 was insured under various CGL policies, excess policies, and
 property policies issued by Defendant Insurers from 1987 through
 
6
the Kaloko Dam breach in 2006,  and the State and Kehalani were
named as an insured or additional insured under a number of these
 policies. C. Brewer filed the instant declaratory relief action
 to determine the duties owed by Defendant Insurers. 
I.
 
According to the allegations in the 
Pflueger complaint,
 
which were later incorporated into the Fehring and Midler 
6
 In an appendix to its opening brief, C. Brewer identifies the
Defendant Insurers issuing CGL, excess, and property policies that are subject
to its appeal as follows: 
1. CGL Insurers: Industrial Indemnity, National Union, Industrial
Insurance, U.S. Fire, Liberty Mutual, Pacific Employers, TIG, Columbia
Casualty, and James River.
 
2. Excess Insurers: First State, National Union, Liberty Mutual, ACE,
Pacific Employers, Scottsdale, Fireman's Fund, and Lexington.
 
3. 
Lexington. Property Insurers : Marine Indemnity, National Union, and 
7  
   
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complaints, the background regarding the history of the Kaloko
 
Irrigation System and the Kaloko Dam is as follows:7
 
The Kaloko Irrigation System (System) was constructed
 
by a subsidiary of C. Brewer, the Kilauea Sugar Company, in the
 late 1800s. The System carried water flowing from the
 
government-owned mauka watersheds into the Kaloko Ditch (Ditch),
 
which then transported the water into the Kaloko Reservoir
 (Reservoir), where it was stored and then distributed for the
 irrigation of sugar cane fields on makai lands. The water was
 
held within the Reservoir by the Kaloko Dam, an earthen dam
 
constructed in the streambed by Kilauea Sugar Company in or
 around 1890. With the decline of the sugar industry, the Kilauea
 
Sugar Company allegedly stopped maintaining the System in about
 
1970, which caused the System to fall into disrepair.
 
As part of an agreement with the State, C. Brewer in
 
8
1981 created Kilauea Irrigation  to revitalize the System and tosell System water to local farmers for irrigation. The State issued permits (Water Permits) to Kilauea Irrigation granting it the right and authority to use government waters from government land, "together with the right to construct, operate, repair and maintain a water transportation system within the [Kaloko] Ditch Right of Way and the Pu[
']u Ka Ele Stream."9 
Kehalani, a subsidiary of C. Brewer, owned title to a
 
portion of the land underneath the Kaloko Reservoir. Title to
 the rest of the land underneath the Reservoir was owned by an
 adjoining land owner, the Lucas Trust. In February 1987, Kilauea
 Irrigation entered into a Water Rights Agreement with the Lucas
 
7
 We focus on the allegations of the Pflueger complaint because the duty 
to defend turns on whether the underlying lawsuit raises the possibility that
coverage exists. See Sentinel Ins. Co. v. First Ins. of Hawaii, 76 Hawai' i 
277, 287, 875 P.2d 894, 904 (1994). 
8
 As noted in footnote 2, supra, Kehalani states that Kilauea Irrigation
 
was a subsidiary of Kehalani until December 15, 1993, when Kilauea Irrigation
became a subsidiary of C. Brewer.
9
 The State owns the lands mauka of the Reservoir which serve as the
 
watershed that feeds the System.
 
8
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trust. As part of this agreement, Kilauea Irrigation assumed
 
sole responsibility for the operation, inspection, maintenance,
 
and repair of the System, including the Kaloko Dam. Despite this
 duty, C. Brewer, through Kilauea Irrigation, allegedly did little
 maintenance on the Kaloko Dam, or the System as a whole, for
 decades.
 
In 1987, Kehalani sold its property, including the 
Kaloko Dam, to James H. Pflueger (Pflueger). The deed conveying the property was subject to the 1987 Water Rights Agreement. As such, the responsibility for the operation, inspection, maintenance, and repair of the System and Dam remained with Kilauea Irrigation. In November 2005, the Hawai' i Public 
Utilities Commission approved the sale of C. Brewer's stock in Kilauea Irrigation to Hitch Co., and the sale was completed in December 2005. Hitch Co. was a company created by Thomas Hitch 
(Hitch), who had operated the System as an independent contractor 
for Kilauea Irrigation for many years. Hitch Co. and its owner Hitch assumed Kilauea Irrigation's rights and responsibilities under the Water Rights Agreement and the Water Permits to operate, inspect, maintain and repair the System. 
II. 
In the aftermath of the Kaloko Dam breach on March 14,
 
2006, the Underlying Lawsuits were filed. 
A. 
Pflueger, Pflueger Properties, and Pflueger Management,
 
LLC (collectively, "Pflueger Plaintiffs") filed a complaint
 seeking recovery of damages, including indemnification against
 claims brought against them arising out of the Kaloko Dam breach. 
The Pflueger Plaintiffs asserted twenty-three claims against the
 Insureds, including claims for negligence, gross negligence,
 negligent entrustment, fraud, breach of contract, trespass,
 nuisance, and contribution and indemnification, and broadly seek
 a judgment for "general, special and punitive damages in an
 amount to be proven at trial." 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the introduction to their complaint, the Pflueger
 
Plaintiffs stated that:
 
This Complaint arises out of the March 14, 2006 breach
of the Ka Loko Dam in Kilauea, Kaua' i, which resulted in the
tragic loss of human life as well as property damage. This
 
Complaint seeks to hold accountable the only parties that
had the practical ability and the legal obligation to
prevent the tragedy. . . .
 
The Pflueger  complaint alleged that the Insureds had various
 
responsibilities and duties concerning the Kaloko Dam and that
 
the Insureds negligently failed to meet these responsibilities
 and duties, including that:
 
(1) "[C. Brewer's subsidiary] announced its exit
from the [sugar] business in about 1970, and
ceased its maintenance of the System. 
The
 
System then fell into a state of disrepair." 
(2) "[C. Brewer], thorough its wholly-owned
subsidiary [Kilauea Irrigation], did little
maintenance on the [Kaloko] Dam, or the
System as a whole, for decades. Trees were
 allowed to grow at the foot of the [Kaloko]
Dam. Ditches were obstructed. Gates rusted
 and became inoperable. Seepage that affected
the structural stability of the [Kaloko] Dam
went unaddressed. The System was largely in
disrepair."
 
(3) C. Brewer never adequately capitalized Kilauea
Irrigation and Kilauea Irrigation "put very little
money into the care and maintenance of the
System."
 
(4) "[C. Brewer] and its subsidiaries, [Kehalani]
and [Kilauea Irrigation], all failed to take
any action to make the recommended repairs to
the [Kaloko] Dam or to otherwise address the
concerns regarding its structural stability."
 
(5) "[C. Brewer], independently and through its
wholly-owned subsidiary, [Kilauea
Irrigation], breached its duty to properly
operate, inspect, repair and/or maintain the
System, including the [Kaloko] Dam, its
appurtenant structures and/or the Reservoir."
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(6)	 C. Brewer and Kehalani failed to disclose to
 
Pflueger and purchasers of property makai of the
Kaloko Dam the content of reports questioning the
structural stability of the Kaloko Dam or the
significant estimated cost of repairing the Kaloko
Dam and Reservoir. 
(7) "[The State] . . . (1) knew since 1982 that
the structural stability of the [Kaloko] Dam
was questionable but never required
[Kehalani] or its affiliates to make repairs;
(2) never told [Pflueger] that the structural
stability of the [Kaloko] Dam was
questionable; . . . and (4) authorized an
inexperienced and undercapitalized public
utility company, [Kilauea Irrigation], to
operate, inspect, maintain and repair the
irrigation system, including the [Kaloko]
Dam, and then failed to properly monitor and
oversee [Kilauea Irrigation] and failed to
intervene when it became clear that [Kilauea
Irrigation] was not meeting its obligations."
 
(8) "The State, independently and through the
[Public Utilities Commission] and [Department
of Land and Natural Resources], breached its
duty of care to [the Pflueger] Plaintiffs by"
its actions and inactions, including failing
to supervise the System and its water;
failing to monitor or require Kilauea
Irrigation to monitor the volume of water
flowing into the Reservoir; failing to use or
require Kilauea Irrigation to use the
existing water control systems to stop the
flow of water into the Reservoir during the
heavy rains in February and March of 2006;
improperly classifying the Kaloko Dam as a
"low hazard"; "failing to warn [the Pflueger]
Plaintiffs of reports that the structural
stability of the [Kaloko] Dam was
questionable"; failing to ensure that Kilauea
Irrigation and/or Hitch Co. had the
expertise, knowledge, and resources to
operate and maintain the System, including
the Kaloko Dam, before granting various
certificates, permits, and approvals.
 
In an interrogatory answer submitted in the Pflueger
 
lawsuit, the Pflueger Plaintiffs asserted that they are in part
 
alleging in their complaint that the failure of the Insureds to
 
11
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
maintain the Kaloko Dam from 1982 to March 14, 2006, resulted in
 
a "continuous, incremental and indivisible process of damage to
 the dam . . . that culminated in the breach of the dam on
 3/14/06."
 
B.
 
The Fehring and Midler complaints sought to recover
 
damages resulting from the March 14, 2006, breach of the Kaloko
 Dam. The Fehring complaint sought recovery for the deaths of
 seven people who were downstream of the Kaloko Dam when the
 breach occurred. The Midler complaint sought recovery for
 property damage. The Fehring and Midler complaints alleged
 negligence by the Pflueger Plaintiffs,
10 the Insureds, and
 
others, and both complaints incorporated by reference the
 allegations made in the Pflueger complaint. 
The Pflueger Plaintiffs filed cross-claims against the
 
Insureds in Fehring seeking indemnification for any damages the
 Pflueger Plaintiffs were required to pay.  The Pflueger
 
Plaintiffs also filed similar cross-claims against the Insureds
 
in Midler. 
C.
 
The State also asserted informal claims against C.
 
Brewer seeking reimbursement for costs the State incurred in
 responding to the breach of the Kalolo Dam and the resulting
 flood. 
III.
 
C. Brewer asserts that it tendered the defense of the
 
Underlying Lawsuits to the Defendant Insurers, but none of the
 Defendant Insurers agreed to defend or indemnify C. Brewer. C.
 
Brewer filed its complaint for declaratory relief seeking a
 
declaration that Defendant Insurers have a duty to defend and/or
 indemnify C. Brewer under their respective insurance policies. 
10
 In addition to the three Pflueger Plaintiffs, the Fehring and Midler
 
complaints also named Pflueger Partners as a defendant. With respect to the
Fehring and Midler lawsuits, we will use "Pflueger Plaintiffs" to collectively
refer to the three Pflueger Plaintiffs as well as Pflueger Partners. 
12
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A.
 
Several of the Defendant Insurers filed motions to
 
dismiss C. Brewer's first amended complaint. C. Brewer, in turn,
 
filed a motion for partial summary judgment against U.S. Fire,
 
which the State and Kehalani joined. The Circuit Court granted
 
the motions to dismiss the first amended complaint filed by the
 
Defendant Insurers, but without prejudice to C. Brewer filing a
 second amended complaint. The Circuit Court denied C. Brewer's
 motion for partial summary judgment. The Circuit Court also
 dismissed without prejudice cross-claims filed by the State and
 Kehalani, which were based on C. Brewer's first amended
 complaint. 
B.
 
C. Brewer filed a second amended complaint, in which it
 
asserted, among other things, that:
 
The Pflueger Complaint alleges that [C. Brewer's] negligent
acts and/or omissions (i.e. failure to inspect, maintain,
and/or repair the dam) caused continuous, incremental and
indivisible physical injury to tangible property -­Pflueger's dam -- constituting injury in fact to Pflueger's
property, to wit: loss of earth from the earthen dam caused
by water seepage, over a period of time including during the
policy period of each of the Defendant Insurers.
 
Defendant Insurers filed various motions to dismiss the
 
second amended complaint. The Circuit Court granted the motions.
 
The Circuit Court dismissed with prejudice C. Brewer's second
 amended complaint as to the moving Defendant Insurers with pre-
breach CGL policies and pre-breach excess policies, ruling as
 follows:
 
1. . . . [C. Brewer] filed a First Amended
Complaint which this Court had dismissed without prejudice
on granting [C. Brewer] leave to file an amended complaint
to assert damages because of bodily injury or property
damage occurring within the policy periods of the insurance
policies issued by the moving and joining defendants
insurers, as required by the insurance policies and Hawaii
law. On March 14, 2007, [C. Brewer] filed a Second Amended
Complaint;
 
2. Under the injury-in-fact trigger of coverage
analysis set forth in the Hawaii Supreme Court's opinion inSentinel Insurance Co. v. First Insurance Co., 76 Hawai' i 
277, 875 P.2d 894 (1994), [C. Brewer's] Second Amended 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Complaint fails to state a claim against [the moving
Defendant Insurers] upon which relief can be granted because
the [claims in the Underlying Lawsuits] made against [C.
Brewer] do not allege damages because of bodily injury or
property damage occurring within the policy periods of the
insurance policies issued by [the moving Defendant
Insurers], as required by the insurance policies and Hawaii
law, and therefore, [the moving Defendant Insurers are] not
under any obligation to defend or indemnify in connection
with such claims[.]
 
In granting the motion to dismiss the second amended
 
complaint filed by Marine Indemnity, a property insurer, with
 
prejudice, the Circuit Court ruled that:
 
a manifestation trigger of coverage would apply to an
alleged multi-peril, first-party property insurance policypursuant to the Hawaii Supreme Court's discussion of first-
party and third-party policies set forth in its opinion in Sentinel Insurance Co. v. First Insurance Co., 76 Hawai' i 
277, 875 P.2d 894 (1994), citing Garvey v. State Farm Fire & Cas. Co., 48 Cal. 3d 395 (1989). This Court further finds 
that under the manifestation trigger of coverage, [C.Brewer's] Second Amended Complaint fails to state a claimagainst [Marine Indemnity] because [C. Brewer's] SecondAmended Complaint fails to allege any covered damages withinthe alleged Marine Indemnity . . . policy period . . . asrequired by the alleged policy and Hawaii law. 
James River, which issued the insurance policy that was
 
in effect on the date of the Kaloko Dam breach, filed a motion
 
for summary judgment regarding the second amended complaint. 
Columbia Casualty, which issued pre-breach CGL policies for the
 periods immediately preceding the Kaloko Dam breach, filed a
 motion to dismiss the second amended complaint or, in the
 alternative, for summary judgment.   Fireman's Fund, which issued
 
excess policies during the policy periods covered by the James
 River and Columbia Casualty policies, filed a substantive joinder
 to both these motions.
 
In granting James River's motion for summary judgment,
 
the Circuit Court relied upon the designated premises endorsement
 in James River's policy. The Circuit Court granted Columbia
 Casualty's motion on the same ground that it dismissed C.
 Brewer's claims against other pre-breach CGL insurers and on the
 additional ground that C. Brewer had failed to show any potential
 for coverage in light of the Known or Continuing Injury or Damage
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
endorsement in Columbia Casualty's policies. The Circuit Court
 
dismissed C. Brewer's claims against Fireman's Fund based on
 Fireman's Funds' substantive joinder in the motions filed by
 James River and Columbia Casualty. 
Through a series of orders, the Circuit Court ruled
 
that none of the Defendant Insurers had any duty to defend or
 indemnify C. Brewer, and it dismissed C. Brewer's second amended
 complaint against them. The Circuit Court also denied or
 dismissed as moot C. Brewer's motions for partial summary
 judgment against certain of the Defendant Insurers.
 
C.
 
The State and Kehalani, which asserted they were an
 
insured or additional insured on various insurance policies
 issued to C. Brewer, filed cross-claims against certain of the
 Defendant Insurers and third-party complaints against other
 insurers, seeking declaratory relief. Through various orders and
 stipulations, the Circuit Court dismissed the cross-claims and
 third-party complaints filed by the State and Kehalani against
 the Defendant Insurers and other insurers.
 
D.
 
C. Brewer filed a motion for HRCP Rule 54(b) (2000)
 
certification with respect to the Circuit Court's orders. The
 Circuit Court granted the motion, and on December 21, 2007, it
 entered Final Judgment pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b) (Final
 
11
Judgment) in favor of Defendant Insurers  and against C. Brewer,
the State, and Kehalani. C. Brewer, the State, and Kehalani
 appeal from the Final Judgment. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
On appeal, the Insureds challenge the Circuit Court's
 
orders granting various motions filed by Defendant Insurers to
 
11
 The Final Judgment was entered in favor of the following Defendant
Insurers: National Union, U.S. Fire, Liberty Mutual, TIG, Columbia Casualty,
James River, Marine Indemnity, Lexington, ACE, Pacific Employers, Scottsdale,
Fireman's Fund, and First State. 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dismiss or for summary judgment on the Insureds' claims for 
declaratory relief. The Circuit Court granted motions to dismiss pursuant to HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. We review a trial court's ruling on such a motion de novo. Wright v. Home Depot U.S.A., Inc., 111 
Hawai'i 401, 406, 142 P.3d 265, 270 (2006). 
A complaint should not be dismissed for failure to
state a claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the
plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of his or her
claim that would entitle him or her to relief. [The
appellate court] must therefore view a plaintiff's complaint
in a light most favorable to him or her in order to
determine whether the allegations contained therein could
warrant relief under any alternative theory.
 
In re Estate of Rogers, 103 Hawai' i 275, 280, 81 P.3d 1190, 1196 
(2003) (block quote formatting altered and citations omitted). 
We review a trial court's grant or denial of summary 
judgment de novo, Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai' i 48, 56, 109 
P.3d 689, 697 (2005), using the same standard applicable to the 
trial court. Iddings v. Mee–Lee, 82 Hawai' i 1, 5, 919 P.2d 263, 
267 (1996). Summary judgment is proper "if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." HRCP Rule 56(c). The evidence and the inferences drawn from the evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 104, 
176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of
substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as a
matter of law. This burden has two components.
 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing
support for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material
fact exists with respect to the essential elements of the
claim or defense which the motion seeks to establish or
 which the motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed
facts, it is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
law. Only when the moving party satisfies its initial
burden of production does the burden shift to the non-moving
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
party to respond to the motion for summary judgment and
demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial.
 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving
party and requires the moving party to convince the court
that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that the
moving party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
law.
 
French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai' i 462, 470, 99 P.3d 
1046, 1054 (2004) (emphasis in original omitted) (quoting GECC 
Fin. Corp. v. Jaffarian, 79 Hawai' i 516, 521, 904 P.2d 530, 535 
(App. 1995)). 
II.
 
Before addressing the specific issues raised on appeal,
 
we review several general principles and concepts that are
 relevant to our analysis.
 
A. 
As noted, Defendant Insurers issued insurance policies
 
to C. Brewer that basically fall into three categories: (1) CGL
 policies, (2) property policies, and (3) excess policies. In
 general, each type of policy is designed to protect the insured
 against different kinds of injury or damage. 
CGL policies are "third-party" policies which protect 
the insured against liability it may incur to another. Sentinel 
Ins. Co. v. First Ins. of Hawaii, 76 Hawai' i 277, 289, 875 P.2d 
894, 906 (1994). On the other hand, property policies are typically "first-party" policies which provide coverage for loss or damage sustained by the insured upon the occurrence of a covered risk. See id. Excess policies are secondary policies 
under which liability attaches after primary coverage has been exhausted. Cmty. Redev. Agency v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 57 Cal. 
Rptr. 2d 755, 759 (Cal. Ct. App. 1996). 
C. Brewer acknowledged at oral argument that there is
 
no duty to defend imposed under the property policies. With
 respect to these policies, C. Brewer only sought a declaration
 that the property insurers have a duty to indemnify for losses
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
covered by the policies. With respect to excess policies, unless
 
the policy otherwise specifies, "an excess insurer has no
 obligation to provide a defense to its insured before the primary
 coverage is exhausted." Id. at 760.
 
B.
 
CGL policies typically impose both a duty to defend and 
to indemnify. An insurer's duty to defend and its duty to indemnify an insured are separate and distinct. Sentinel, 76 
Hawai'i at 291, 875 P.2d at 908. 
[T]he obligation to defend is broader than the duty to
[indemnify] and arises wherever there is the mere potential
 
for coverage. In other words, the duty to defend rests
primarily on the possibility that coverage exists. This
 
possibility may be remote but if it exists, the insurer owes
the insured a defense. All doubts as to whether a duty to
defend exists are resolved against the insurer and in favor
of the insured.
 
Id. at 287, 875 P.2d at 904 (emphasis in original; quotation
 
marks, citations, brackets, and ellipsis points omitted). An
 insurer's already heavy burden of proof as a movant for summary
 judgment is increased when moving for summary judgment on the
 issue of its duty to defend. In that circumstance,
 
[the insurer bears] the burden of proving that there [is] no
genuine issue of material fact with respect to whether a
possibility exist[s] that [the insured] would incur
liability for a claim covered by the polic[y]. In other
 words, [the insurer is] required to prove that it would be
impossible for the [party suing the insured for damages] to
prevail against [the insured] in the underlying lawsuit[] on
a claim covered by the polic[y]. Conversely, [the
insured's] burden with respect to its motion for summary
judgment [is] comparatively light, because it [has] merely
to prove that a possibility of coverage exist[s].
 
Dairy Road Partners v. Island Ins. Co., 92 Hawai' i 398, 412-13, 
992 P.2d 93, 107-08 (2000) (emphasis in original). 
The duty to defend under an insurance policy is 
contractual in nature, and the court "must look to the language 
of the policy involved to determine the scope of that duty." Hawaiian Holiday Macadamia Nut Co. v. Indus. Indem. Co., 76 Hawai'i 166, 169, 872 P.2d 230, 233 (1994). Generally, "[t]he 
duty to defend is limited to situations where the pleadings have 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
alleged claims for relief which fall within the terms for
 
coverage of the insurance contract." Id. at 169, 872 P.2d at
 
233. However, where the pleadings of the underlying lawsuit do
 
not address issues crucial to the determination of coverage, 
"an insurer must look beyond the effect of the pleadings and
must consider any facts brought to its attention or any
facts which it could reasonably discover in determining
whether it has a duty to defend. . . . The possibility of
coverage must be determined by a good faith analysis of all
information known to the insured or all information
 reasonably ascertainable by inquiry and investigation."
 
Sentinel, 76 Hawai' i at 288, 875 P.2d at 905 (ellipsis points in 
original; block quote formatting altered; brackets and citation 
omitted). 
III.
 
According to C. Brewer, it was continually insured
 
under CGL policies issued by Defendant Insurers from at least
 1987 through the Kaloko Dam breach in March 2006. We first
 address the Circuit Court's ruling that the pre-breach CGL
 insurers had no duty to defend. 
The Circuit Court, applying the injury-in-fact trigger,
 
ruled that the pre-breach CGL insurers had no duty to defend
 because the Underlying Lawsuits did not allege damages occurring
 within the policy periods of the pre-breach CGL insurers. The
 Circuit Court therefore dismissed the Insureds' claims against
 the pre-breach CGL insurers. 
C. Brewer argues that the Circuit Court erred in ruling 
that the pre-breach CGL insurers had no duty to defend on the
 ground that the Underlying Lawsuits did not allege damages
 occurring during the pre-breach CGL policy periods. C. Brewer
 contends that the Pflueger complaint alleged continuous,
 incremental, and indivisible property damage to the Kaloko Dam
 during each of the pre-breach CGL policy periods, and that the
 allegations of the Pflueger complaint were incorporated into the
 Fehring the Midler complaints. The State and Kehalani join with
 C. Brewer in arguing that the Circuit Court erred in ruling that
 the pre-breach CGL insurers had no duty to defend. 
19
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As explained below, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
erred in ruling that the pre-breach CGL insurers had no duty to
 
defend in the Pflueger lawsuit based on its determination that
 the Pflueger lawsuit did not allege any damages that occurred
 during the pre-breach CGL policy periods. We further conclude,
 however, that the Circuit Court properly ruled that the pre-
breach CGL insurers had no duty to defend in the Fehring and
 Midler lawsuits. 
A.
 
Each of the pre-breach CGL policies contain language
 
that is substantively similar, if not identical, to the
 following:
 
We will pay those sums that the insured becomes legally
obligated to pay as damages because of "bodily injury" or
"property damage" to which this insurance applies. . . .
This insurance applies only to "bodily injury" and "property
damage" which occurs during the policy period. . . . We
 will have the right and duty to defend any "suit" seeking
those damages.
 
These are "occurrence policies" which obligate the insurers to 
pay those sums that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages because of "bodily injury" or "property damage" which occurs during the policy period. "[U]nder an occurrence policy, the event that triggers potential coverage is the sustaining of actual damage by the complaining party and not the date of the act or omission that caused the damage." Sentinel, 76 Hawai' i at 
288, 875 P.2d at 905. 
There is no dispute that the Underlying Lawsuits did
 
not claim damages for bodily injury which occurred during any
 pre-breach CGL policy periods. Therefore, the relevant inquiry
 is whether the Underlying Lawsuits sought recovery for property
 damage which occurred during the pre-breach CGL policy periods.
 
In Sentinel, the Hawai' i Supreme Court construed 
12
standard form CGL policies,  which contained language that is
12
 In Sentinel , the supreme court construed comprehensive general
 
liability policies, which have largely been replaced by commercial general
(continued...)
 
20
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
substantively the same as the above-quoted language of the pre-
breach CGL policies at issue in this case.13 The supreme court
 
adopted the injury-in-fact trigger for standard CGL occurrence-
type policies. Id. at 297-98, 875 P.2d at 914-15. The supreme
 
court noted that in latent defect cases,
 
the date when the property damage occurs is often difficult,
if not impossible to pinpoint. Thus several analytical
theories -- such as the manifestation of loss theory, the
exposure theory, and the injury-in-fact theory -- have been
developed to guide courts in making the determination of
when damage "occurs," thereby triggering coverage.
 
Id. at 297, 875 P.2d at 914. 
After examining each of these theories, the supreme
 
court concluded that the "injury-in-fact trigger is the only
 
theory of coverage consistent with the plain language of the
 policies" at issue, and it adopted "the injury-in-fact trigger
 for all standard CGL policies." Id. at 298, 875 P.2d at 915.
 
Under this trigger, "coverage is triggered by the actual
 occurrence during the policy period of an injury-in-fact." Id. 
Moreover, "[u]nder this trigger, an injury occurs whether
 detectable or not; in other words, an injury need not manifest
 itself during the policy period, as long as its existence during
 that period can be proven in retrospect." Id. 
The supreme court further concluded that
 
where injury-in-fact occurs continuously over a period
 
12(...continued)
liability policies. See Black's Law Dictionary 877 (9th ed. 2009) (defining
"commercial general-liability policy" and "comprehensive general-liability
policy"). We will refer to both of these policies as "CGL policies."
 
13 As quoted in Sentinel, the CGL policies at issue in Sentinel
provided:
 
[Insurer] will pay on behalf of the insured all sums which the
insured shall become legally obligated to pay as damages because
of . . . property damage to which this insurance applies, caused
by an occurrence, and [insurer] shall have the right and duty to
defend any suit against the insured seeking damages on account of
such . . . property damage, even if the allegations are
groundless, false or fraudulent.
 
Sentinel, 76 Hawai' i at 287, 875 P.2d at 904 (ellipsis points in original). 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
covered by different insurers or policies, and actual
apportionment of the injury is difficult or impossible to
determine, the continuous injury trigger may be employed to
equitably apportion liability among insurers.
 
Id. at 300, 875 P.2d at 917. Under the continuous injury
 
trigger, 
property damage is deemed to have "occurred" continuously
for a fixed period (the "trigger period"), and every insurer
on the risk at any time during that trigger period is
jointly and severally liable to the extent of their policy
limits, the entire loss being equitably allocated among the
insurers. The trigger period begins with the inception of
the injury and ends when the injury ceases. Before the
 continuous injury trigger may be applied, the party urging
its application must make two factual showings. It must be
 established that: (1) some kind of property damage occurred
during the coverage period of each policy under which
recovery is sought; and (2) the property damage was part of
a continuous and indivisible process of injury.
 
Id. at 298, 875 P.2d at 915 (citations omitted).
 
B.
 
In reviewing the Circuit Court's ruling that the pre-
breach CGL insurers had no duty to defend, we must examine
 
whether the Underlying Lawsuits "raised the possibility" that the
 Insureds would be entitled to indemnification under the pre-
breach CGL policies. Id. at 287, 875 P.2d at 904. The Insureds
 
and the pre-breach CGL insurers agree that an injury-in-fact
 trigger applies to the pre-breach CGL policies. They disagree,
 however, over whether the Underlying Lawsuits seek recovery for
 an injury-in-fact, namely, actual property damage, which occurred
 during the pre-breach CGL policy periods. 
The Insureds argue that the pre-breach CGL insurers 
had a duty to defend them in the Pflueger lawsuit because the
 Pflueger lawsuit seeks damages for continuous, incremental, and
 indivisible property damage to the Kaloko Dam (owned by the
 Pflueger Plaintiffs), with such damage beginning in at least 1987
 and continuing through the pre-breach CGL policy periods. The
 Pflueger complaint asserted that the Insureds were negligent in
 carrying out their responsibilities regarding the operation,
 inspection, maintenance, and repair of the System, which includes
 the Kaloko Dam, and broadly seeks a judgment for "general,
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
special and punitive damages in an amount to be proven at trial." 
The Insureds argue that because the Fehring and Midler complaints
 incorporate the allegations of the Pflueger complaint, and
 because the Pflueger Plaintiffs filed cross-claims against the
 Insureds in the Fehring and Midler lawsuits, the pre-breach CGL
 insurers also had a duty to defend them in the Fehring and Midler
 lawsuits. 
On the other hand, the pre-breach CGL insurers argue
 
that the plaintiffs in the Underlying Lawsuits do not seek
 compensation for damages that occurred prior to the breach of the
 Kaloko Dam. Instead, they argue that a plain reading of the
 Pflueger, Fehring, and Midler complaints demonstrates that the
 plaintiffs in the Underlying Lawsuits are only seeking recovery
 of damages that occurred on or after the Kaloko Dam breach on
 March 14, 2006. They assert that neither the Pflueger complaint
 nor the Fehring and Midler complaints mention any continuous,
 incremental, or indivisible property damage to the Kaloko Dam. 
The pre-breach CGL insurers further argue that even if the Kaloko
 Dam did sustain continuous, incremental, and indivisible damage
 during the pre-breach CGL policy periods, this would be
 irrelevant because that is not the damage for which the
 plaintiffs in the Underlying Lawsuits are suing. The pre-breach
 CGL insurers assert that the duty to defend is not triggered by
 the mere existence of actual property damage during the policy
 period, but only by actual property damage during the policy
 period for which a third-party is suing to recover.
 
C.
 1.
 
The Pflueger complaint does not clearly and explicitly
 
state that the Pflueger Plaintiffs are seeking recovery for
 actual incremental and continuous damage to the Kaloko Dam that
 was sustained during the pre-breach CGL policy periods. However,
 "[w]here the complaint does not address the crucial issue of
 whether the alleged property damage occurred during the policy
 period," in determining whether an insurer has a duty to defend,
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
24"an insurer must look beyond the effect of the pleadings and
must consider any facts brought to its attention or any
facts which it could reasonably discover in determining
whether it has a duty to defend. . . .  The possibility of
coverage must be determined by a good faith analysis of all
information known to the insured or all information
reasonably ascertainable by inquiry and investigation."
Sentinel, 76 Hawai# i at 288, 875 P.2d at 905 (ellipsis points in
original; block quote formatting altered; brackets, footnote, and
citation omitted).
In its second amended complaint for declaratory relief,
C. Brewer cited the following response by the Pflueger Plaintiffs
to an interrogatory posed in the Pflueger  lawsuit:
11.In the Complaint, are you in part alleging
that Defendants [(which include the Insureds)] failure
to maintain the dam from 1982 to 3/14/06 resulted in a
continuous, incremental and indivisible process of
damage to the dam over that period of time that
culminated in the breach of the dam on 3/14/06?
Answer:  
Yes and, in actuality, Defendants' failure to maintain
the dam and reservoir also predates 1982.
C. Brewer's second amended complaint also referred to a
report prepared by Special Deputy Attorney General Robert C.
Godbey (Godbey Report).  Mr. Godbey had been appointed by the
State to investigate the possible causes of the Kaloko Dam
breach.  The Insureds assert that the Godbey Report provides
support for the claim that ongoing failure to maintain and repair
the Kaloko Dam for several decades could have caused continuing,
incremental, and indivisible damage to the Kaloko Dam.  The
Godbey Report indicated that the Kaloko Dam's failure could
possibly have been caused by internal erosion of the embankment
or dam foundation materials by seepage leading to the formation
of a conduit or pipe through the embankment or foundation and the
eventual collapse of the crest.  The Godbey Report also indicated
that there was evidence in the factual record of concern with
seepage that went back for several decades.
In addition, the record in this case contains a
transcript of statements made by counsel for the Pflueger  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs at a hearing in the Pflueger lawsuit. These
 
statements make clear that the Pflueger Plaintiffs were not
 simply seeking indemnity and contribution from the Insureds for
 claims brought against the Pflueger Plaintiffs, but were also 
seeking recovery of damages for property damage to the Kaloko
 Dam, which the Pflueger Plaintiffs owned.
14
 
2.
 
We conclude that the Pflueger lawsuit raised the
 
possibility that the Insureds would be subject to liability for
 actual damage (injury-in-fact) to the Kaloko Dam that occurred
 during the pre-breach CGL policy periods. Our conclusion is
 based on allegations in the Pflueger complaint regarding the
 Insureds' failure to properly maintain, repair, and inspect the
 Kaloko Dam; the Pflueger Plaintiffs' broad prayer for "general,
 special and punitive damages in an amount to be proven at trial";
 the Pflueger Plaintiffs' interrogatory answer that their
 complaint alleges "continuous, incremental and indivisible
 process of damage to the [Kaloko D]am"; the Godbey Report's
 identification of internal erosion and piping as a possible cause
 of the Kaloko Dam's failure; and the statement of counsel for the
 Pflueger Plaintiffs that they are seeking compensation for the
 loss of the Kaloko Dam.
 
It is the possibility of coverage upon which the duty 
to defend rests. Sentinel, 76 Hawai' i at 287, 875 P.2d at 904. 
"This possibility may be remote, but if it exists, the insurer owes the insured a defense." Id. (brackets omitted). The 
Pflueger lawsuit raised the possibility that the Pflueger 
14
 Counsel for the Pflueger Plaintiffs stated:
 
[The] Court is absolutely correct. We filed a 23-claim
 
complaint, only one of which, which is the 23rd claim, has
anything to do with contribution and indemnity. I think it's
 rather surprising for the other side to argue disingenuously that
our land and our property, that we didn't suffer any property or
economic damages as a result of the flood. Judge, you just have
to take one look at the pictures on TV and we're missing a dam. I
 mean, you can quantify that as $18 million right there in damages
in the loss of the dam structure itself.
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs could prevail against the Insured on a claim for 
property damage covered by the pre-breach CGL policies. Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in ruling that the pre-breach CGL insurers had no duty to defend the Insureds in the Pflueger lawsuit based on its determination that the Pflueger lawsuit did not allege any damages that occurred during the pre-breach CGL policy periods. See id.; Pancakes of 
Hawaii, Inc. v. Pomare Properties Corp., 85 Hawai' i 286, 291, 944 
P.2d 83, 88 (App. 1997) (stating that where a duty to defend arises, "the insurer has a duty to accept the defense of the entire suit even though other claims of the complaint fall outside the policy's coverage" (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). 
D.
 
We reach a different conclusion, however, with respect
 
to the duty of the pre-breach CGL insurers to defend the Insureds
 in the Fehring and Midler lawsuits. Unlike the Pflueger
 complaint, which raised the possibility of recovery against the
 Insureds for continuous and incremental damage to the Pflueger
 Plaintiffs' property (namely, the Kaloko Dam) that occurred
 during the pre-breach CGL policy periods, the Fehring and Midler
 complaints did not raise the possibility of recovering damages
 that occurred during the pre-breach CGL policy periods. The
 Fehring complaint sought damages for seven deaths caused by the
 Kaloko Dam breach; the Midler complaint sought to recover for
 property damage that resulted from flooding after the breach of
 the Kaloko Dam. The Fehring and Midler complaints only sought
 recovery for bodily injury and property damage that were
 sustained after the breach of the Kaloko Dam. Such injury or
 damage resulting from the March 14, 2006, Kaloko Dam breach could
 not have occurred during the policy periods of the pre-breach CGL
 policies. Accordingly, there was no possibility that the
 Insureds would be subject to liability under the Fehring and
 Midler lawsuits for damages that were covered by the pre-breach
 CGL policies.
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Insureds do not contend that the plaintiffs in
 
Fehring and Midler sought to recover for actual damages which
 
occurred during the pre-breach CGL policy periods. Nevertheless,
 they argue that the pre-breach CGL insurers' duty to defend
 extends to the Fehring and Midler lawsuits because the Fehring
 and Midler complaints incorporated the allegations of the
 Pflueger complaint and because the Pflueger Plaintiffs filed
 cross-claims against the Insureds in the Fehring and Midler
 lawsuits. We disagree.
 
The incorporation of the Pflueger complaint allegations
 
into the Fehring and Midler complaints did not change the nature
 of the damages sought in the Fehring and Midler lawsuits. The
 Fehring and Midler complaints still only sought damages which
 occurred and were sustained after the Kaloko Dam breach. The
 cross-claims filed by the Pflueger Plaintiffs in the Fehring and
 Midler lawsuits also did not create a duty to defend. The
 Pflueger Plaintiffs' cross-claims sought indemnity and
 contribution from the Insureds for any damages the Pflueger
 Plaintiffs were required to pay to the Fehring and Midler
 plaintiffs in the Fehring and Midler lawsuits. Accordingly, the
 Pflueger Plaintiffs' cross-claims did not change the post-breach
 nature of the damages sought in the Fehring and Midler lawsuits
 and did not expose the Insureds to possible liability for any
 actual damage that occurred during the pre-breach CGL policy
 periods. We therefore affirm the Circuit Court's ruling that the
 pre-breach CGL insurers had no duty to defend the Insureds in the
 Fehring and Midler lawsuits.
 
E.
 
As fallback arguments, the pre-breach CGL insurers
 
argue that even if the Circuit Court erred in basing its decision
 that they had no duty to defend in the Pflueger lawsuit on the
 ground that the Pflueger complaint did not allege any damages
 occurring during the pre-breach GGL policy periods, this court
 should still affirm the Circuit Court. The pre-breach CGL
 insurers assert that various exclusions and other provisions of
 
27
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
their policies, which the Circuit Court did not rely or rule upon
 
in its decision, preclude the possibility of coverage for the
 claims raised in the Pflueger complaint and thus establish that
 they had no duty to defend in the Pflueger lawsuit. 
The Insureds argue that we should not address on appeal
 
exclusions and other policy provisions that the Circuit Court did
 not rely upon because the pre-breach CGL insurers did not cross-
appeal from the Final Judgment and seek review of the Circuit
 Court's failure to rule on these matters; allowing the pre-breach
 CGL insurers to raise these claims in their answering briefs
 unfairly restricts the Insureds' ability to fully brief the
 issues; and determining the applicability of the cited exclusions
 and other policy provisions requires factual determinations that
 cannot be made for the first time on appeal.
 
We decline to address exclusions and other policy
 
provisions not ruled upon by the Circuit Court. On remand, the
 Circuit Court may consider whether the various exclusions and
 other policy provisions cited by the pre-breach CGL insurers
 preclude the possibility of coverage and establish that the pre-
breach CGL insurers had no duty to defend under their policies in
 the Pflueger lawsuit.
15
 
IV.
 
With respect to one of the pre-breach CGL insurers,
 
Columbia Casualty, the Circuit Court did rely upon a specific
 provision of Columbia Casualty's policies, the "Known or
 Continuing Injury or Damage" endorsement, as an additional ground
 for ruling that Columbia Casualty had no duty to defend in the
 Underlying Lawsuits. We therefore address this provision. 
15
 We note that in their briefs, the Insureds referred to lawsuits that
were filed against them after the Circuit Court's rulings which are the
subject of this appeal. U.S. Fire filed a motion to strike the references in
 the Insureds' opening briefs to these subsequently-filed lawsuits. In
 rendering our decision in this appeal, we did not rely upon or consider these
subsequently-flied lawsuits, which were unnecessary to our analysis.
 
28
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. 
Columbia Casualty issued two pre-breach CGL policies to
 
C. Brewer for the policy periods December 15, 2003 to December
 
15, 2004 and December 15, 2004 to December 15, 2005. Columbia
 
Casualty filed a motion to dismiss C. Brewer's second amended
 
complaint, or in the alternative, for summary judgment after the
 Circuit Court granted motions to dismiss filed by other pre-
breach CGL insurers and ruled that those insurers had no duty to
 defend because the Underlying Lawsuits did not claim damages that
 occurred within their pre-breach policy periods. Columbia
 Casualty argued that it was entitled to dismissal based on that
 ruling under the "law of the case" doctrine. In the alternative,
 Columbia Casualty argued that it was entitled to summary judgment
 based on the "Known or Continuing Injury or Damage" endorsement
 in its policies. The Circuit Court granted Columbia Casualty's
 motion on both grounds asserted by Columbia Casualty.
 
With respect to Columbia Casualty's alternative motion
 
for summary judgment, the Circuit Court ruled that Columbia
 Casualty was entitled to judgment in its favor based upon the
 Known or Continuing Injury or Damage endorsement
16 because 
C. Brewer, and all other parties claiming coverage under the
Columbia Casualty policies, have failed to allege sufficient
facts to bring the claims within the coverage of the
policies and have failed to present any evidence that would
create a material question of fact to show any potential for
coverage under the Known or Continuing [Injury or Damage]
Endorsement for the bodily injury or property damage alleged
in the [Underlying Lawsuits].
 
C. Brewer argues that the Circuit Court erred in ruling
 
that Columbia Casualty had no duty to defend based on its Known
 
or Continuing Injury or Damage endorsement. We agree and
 conclude that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary
 judgment in favor of Columbia Casualty regarding its duty to
 defend based on this endorsement.
 
16
 The Circuit Court referred to this endorsement as the "Known or
 
Continuing Loss Endorsement." 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
The Known or Continuing Injury or Damage endorsement in
 
Columbia Casualty's policies provided in relevant part as
 
follows:
 
1.	 Insuring Agreement
 
. . . .
 b.	 This insurance applies to "bodily injury" and
"property damage" only if:
 
(1)	 The "bodily injury" or "property damage"
is caused by an "occurrence" that takes
place in the "coverage territory";
 
(2)	 The "bodily injury" or "property damage"
occurs during the policy period; and
 
(3)	 With respect to "bodily injury" or
"property damage" that continues, changes
or resumes so as to occur during more than
one policy period, both of the following
conditions are met:
 
(i)	 Prior to the policy period, no
Authorized Insured knew that the
 "bodily injury" or "property damage"
had occurred, in whole or in part;
and
 
(ii)	 During the policy period, an
Authorized Insured first knew that
 the "bodily injury" or "property
damage" had occurred, in whole or in
part.
 
For purposes of this Paragraph 1.b(3)
only, if (a) "bodily injury" or "property
damage" that occurs during the policy
period, does not continue, change or
resume after the termination of this
 policy period; and (b) no Authorized
Insured first knows of this "bodily
injury" or "property damage" until after
the termination of this policy period,
then such first knowledge will be deemed
to be during this policy period.
 
(Certain emphasis added.)
 
For property damage that occurs during more than one
 
policy period, the Known or Continuing Injury or Damage
 
endorsement limits coverage to claims for property damage that
 (1) was not known to have occurred prior to the policy period by
 any authorized insured; and (2) was first discovered by an
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
authorized insured during the policy period. However, what
 
knowledge C. Brewer (as an authorized insured) had regarding
 property damage claimed in the Pflueger lawsuit for which C.
 Brewer could possibly be held liable and when it obtained such
 knowledge were disputed issues of fact in the Pflueger lawsuit. 
Columbia Casualty contends that the Circuit Court 
properly granted Columbia Casualty's motion for summary judgment and ruled that it had no duty to defend because C. Brewer failed to present sufficient evidence to create a material question of fact as to the potential for coverage under Columbia Casualty's policies. Under Dairy Road, however, it was Columbia Casualty that had the burden of proving that "it would be impossible for the [Pflueger Plaintiffs] to prevail against [C. Brewer] in [the Pflueger lawsuit] on a claim covered by the policies." See Dairy 
Road, 92 Hawai' i at 412-13, 992 P.2d at 107-08. Until the 
factual questions regarding nature, extent, and timing of C. Brewer's knowledge of the property damage claimed by the Pflueger Plaintiffs were resolved, a possibility existed that C. Brewer would incur liability for a claim covered by the Columbia Casualty policies. Accordingly, the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Columbia Casualty and ruling that it had no duty to defend based on the Known or Continuing Injury or Damage endorsement. 
V.
 
James River issued a CGL policy to C. Brewer that was
 
in effect on the date of the March 14, 2006, Kaloko Dam breach. 
Thus, as to the James River policy, there was no dispute that
 injury-in-fact as alleged in the Underlying Lawsuits occurred
 during the James River policy period, which covered the period
 from December 15, 2005 to January 1, 2007. C. Brewer tendered
 the defense of the Underlying Lawsuits to James River. James
 River declined to defend C. Brewer on the ground that the James
 River policy did not cover the claims asserted in the Underlying
 Lawsuit based on endorsements and exclusions in the policy.
 
31
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
James River moved for summary judgment seeking a
 
declaration that it had no obligation to defend or indemnify C.
 
Brewer with respect to the Underlying Lawsuits.17 James River
 
argued that various endorsements and exclusions in its policy,
 including the designated premises endorsement, precluded coverage
 under its policy. The Circuit Court found that the terms of
 James River's policy were "clear and unambiguous." Relying on 
the designated premises endorsement, the Circuit Court found that
 the there was no coverage under the James River policy and
 granted James River's motion for summary judgment. The Circuit
 Court emphasized that it did not reach the effect of the
 exclusions argued by James River in rendering its decision.
 
On appeal, the Insureds argue that the Circuit Court
 
erred in finding that James River had no duty to defend in
 granting summary in favor of James River. We agree. We conclude 
the James River policy was ambiguous with respect to whether
 coverage was barred by the designated premises endorsement and
 therefore that the intent of the parties in using this
 endorsement raised genuine issues of material fact. Accordingly,
 the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment without
 considering the parties' intent. 
A.
 
"Insurance policies are subject to the general rules of 
contract construction; the terms of the policy should be interpreted according to their plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech unless it appears from the policy that a different meaning is intended . . . ." First Ins. Co. of 
Hawai'i, Inc. v. State, 66 Haw. 413, 423-24, 665 P.2d 648, 655 
(1983) (citation omitted). In construing a contract, "[t]he court's objective is 'to ascertain and effectuate the intention of the parties as manifested by the contract in its entirety.'" 
17
 James River also sought summary judgment with respect to a
counterclaim filed by Kehalani against C. Brewer in the declaratory relief
action and informal claims made by the State and Kilauea Irrigation against C.
Brewer.
 
32
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Hawaiian Ass'n of Seventh-Day Adventists v. Wong, No. SCWC-28592, 
--- P.3d ----, 2013 WL 3364395, at *7 (Hawai' i June 28, 2013) 
(citation omitted). 
"A contract is ambiguous when its terms are reasonably 
susceptible to more than one meaning." Id. The court is 
permitted to consider parol or extrinsic evidence where a contract is ambiguous or incomplete "to explain the intent of the parties and the circumstances under which the agreement was executed." Id. When the terms of a contract or insurance policy 
are ambiguous "so that there is some doubt as to the intent of the parties, intent is a question of for the trier of fact." Foundation Intern., Inc. v. E.T. Ige Const., Inc., 102 Hawai' i 
487, 497, 78 P.3d 23, 33 (2003); DiTullio v. Hawaiian Ins. & Guaranty Co., 1 Haw. App. 149, 154-56, 616 P.2d 221, 225-26 (1980) (concluding that ambiguous terms in an insurance policy created genuine issues of material fact regarding the parties intent, which precluded summary judgment in favor of insurer on its duty to defend). 
If the ambiguity in the policy cannot be resolved
 
through extrinsic evidence of the parties' intent, then the court
 should apply principles of construction applicable to insurance
 policies. See Sallie v. Tax Sale Investors, Inc., 814 A.2d 572,
 
584 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 2002); Ellis Court Apartments Ltd. P'ship
 v. State Farm Fire & Cas. Co., 72 P.3d 1086, 1090 (Wash. Ct. App. 2003). Under these principles, insurance policies "must be construed liberally in favor of the insured and any ambiguities must be resolved against the insurer." Dairy Road, 92 Hawai' i at 
411-12, 992 P.2d 106-07 (block quote format, brackets, and citation omitted). 
B.
 
James River issued a CGL policy to C. Brewer that
 
covered (1) bodily injury and property damage liability; (2)
 personal and advertising injury liability; and (3) medical
 payments. The policy was subject to numerous endorsement and
 exclusions, including a designated premises endorsement which
 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stated: "This insurance applies only to 'bodily injury',
 
'property damage', or 'personal and advertising injury' arising
 out of the ownership, maintenance, and use of the premises shown
 in the above Schedule." The "above Schedule" in the policy
 refers to "Premises: Locations 1-3." In addition, the policy
 contains a "Schedule of Locations" which lists 311 Pacific
 Street, which C. Brewer states was its corporate headquarters, as
 well as "3-1480 Kaumaualii Hwy", "Old Mamalahoa Hwy", and
 numerous parcels of vacant land identified by their tax map key
 numbers. The site of the Kaloko Dam and Reservoir is not among
 the properties listed in the Schedule of Locations.
 
The James River policy also includes a classification
 
limitation endorsement which states, in relevant part: "The
 coverage provided by this policy applies only to those operations
 . . . described under the 'description of operations' or
 'classification' on the declarations of the policy." The
 policy's declarations do not contain a section entitled
 "description of operations" or "classification." They do,
 however, have a section which states: "BUSINESS DESCRIPTION: 
Real Estate Owners."
 
C.
 
Contrary to the Circuit Court, we conclude that the
 
designated premises endorsement is ambiguous with respect to
 whether it precludes coverage under the circumstances of this
 case. The key question is whether the language "arising out of
 the ownership, maintenance, and use of the [designated] premises"
 can be interpreted to encompass the use of C. Brewer's business
 headquarters (one of the designated premises) to make negligent
 business decisions that caused personal injury and property
 damage outside of the designated premises. 
C. Brewer asserts that the Underlying Lawsuits alleged
 
that C. Brewer made numerous negligent corporate decisions that
 emanated from its corporate headquarters at 311 Pacific Street,
 including the ongoing failure to warn the plaintiffs in the
 Underlying Lawsuits about the unsafe condition of the Kaloko Dam
 
34
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and the failure to adequately capitalize its land operations and
 
companies responsible for maintaining and repairing the Kaloko
 Dam, which caused injuries and damages to the plaintiffs. C.
 Brewer argues that the Underlying Lawsuits alleged a sufficient
 causal connection between C. Brewer's use of its headquarters and
 the damages sought to show that there was coverage under the
 James River policy. In support of its argument, C. Brewer cites
 Am. Guar. & Liab. Ins. Co. v. 1906 Co., 129 F.3d 802 (5th Cir.
 1977), a case from another jurisdiction, where the court
 construed a designated premises endorsement with language similar
 to the James River policy. The court concluded that the
 designated premises endorsement did not exclude coverage for
 negligent decisions made at corporate headquarters, a designated
 premises, which resulted in personal injuries sustained at a non-
designated premises. Id. at 807-08.
18
 
On the other hand, James River argues that the
 
designated premises endorsement in its policy should not be
 construed as encompassing negligent business decision made on the
 designated premises that result in injury elsewhere. Instead, it
 contends that this endorsement should be construed as limiting
 coverage to occurrences which take place on the designated
 premises. In support of its argument, James River cites Union
 Am. Ins. Co. v. Hatian Refugee Center/Sant Refijie Ayisyin, Inc.,
 858 So.2d 1076 (Fla. Dist. Ct. 2003), which construed a similar
 designated premises endorsement as precluding coverage for the
 alleged failure to provide adequate security, where the injury
 took place a mile from the insured's corporate headquarters, the
 designated premises. Id. at 1077-79.
19
 
18
 C. Brewer also cites State Auto. & Cas. Underwriters v. Beeson, 516
 
P.2d 623 (Colo. 1973), in support of its argument. 
19 James River also cites additional authority in support of its
argument, including Founders Commercial, Ltd. v. Trinity Universal Ins., 176
S.W.3d 484 (Tex. App. 2004). 
35
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We conclude that the both of the conflicting
 
interpretations of the designated premises endorsement offered by
 
C. Brewer and James River are reasonable. Accordingly, the
 designated premises endorsement is ambiguous as it is "reasonably
 susceptible to more than one meaning." 
See Hawaiian Ass'n of
 
Seventh-Day Adventists, No. SCWC-28592, 2013 WL 3364395, at *7. 
The use of the language "arising out of the ownership,
 maintenance, and use of the premises" suggests that the parties
 may have intended to restrict coverage to injuries and damages
 occurring on the designated premises. However, the designated
 premises endorsement applies not only to bodily injury and
 property damage, but also to "personal and advertising injury"
 arising out of the use of the designated premises. While
 decisions made at C. Brewer's corporate headquarters would likely
 be the cause of any advertising injury, the resulting advertising
 injury would occur off the designated premises. Thus, the
 inclusion of advertising injury in the designated premises
 endorsement suggests that the parties may have intended to
 include coverage for negligent decisions made at a designated
 premises that resulted in injury and damages elsewhere.
 
In 
Sallie, 814 A.2d at 584, the court concluded that
 
the designated premises endorsement was ambiguous with respect to
 whether it provided coverage for a wrongful eviction that
 occurred off of the designated premises. It therefore vacated
 the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of the
 insurer and remanded the case for the trial court to receive 
extrinsic evidence on the parties' intent in construing the
 provision. Id. In DiTullio, 1 Haw. App. at 155-56, 616 P.2d at
 
226, this court found that the language of the insurance policy
 was ambiguous and created a genuine issue of fact regarding the
 parties' intent in using it. We therefore vacated the trial
 court's grant of summary judgment in favor of the insurer on its
 duty to defend, and we remanded the case for "further inquiry to 
36
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determine the intention of the parties." Id.; see also, Union
 
Insurance Society of Canton, Ltd. v William Gluckin & Co., 353
 
F.2d 946, 950-52 (2d Cir. 1965) (vacating summary judgment in
 favor of insurer and remanding on the issue of what the parties
 intended as to the scope of the insurance policy).
 
Similarly, in this case, we conclude that the
 
designated premises endorsement is ambiguous and raises a genuine
 issue of fact with respect to the parties' intent.
20
 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment
 regarding James River's duty to defend based on the designated
 premises endorsement without considering the parties' intent. On
 remand, the parties will be entitled to introduce extrinsic
 evidence to explain their intent regarding this endorsement.
 
D.
 
In addition to the designated premises endorsement,
 
James River argues that the classification limitation endorsement
 supports its position that there was no possibility of coverage
 under its policy. Reading the classification limitation and
 designated premises endorsements together, James River asserts
 that because the policy describes C. Brewer as a "real estate
 owner" and because C. Brewer did not own the property on which
 the Kaloko Dam and Reservoir or its corporate headquarters were
 located,
21 C. Brewer "could not -- as a 'real estate owner' -­
have 'used' the 311 Pacific Street location to make decisions
 about the operation of the [Kaloko] Irrigation System, at any
 time." 
It is not clear whether the Circuit Court relied upon
 
the classification limitation endorsement in its analysis. Even
 
20
 In this regard, we note that there is a suggestion in James River's
arguments, based on extrinsic circumstances, that C. Brewer was winding up its
corporate affairs and thus intended to obtain a different kind of CGL policy
-- one that would require a lower premium but provide more limited coverage. 
21
 C. Brewer apparently was leasing the 311 Pacific Street property
 
where its corporate headquarters was located. 
37
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assuming that the Circuit Court did, we conclude that the
 
classification limitation endorsement did not resolve the
 ambiguity regarding coverage. As C. Brewer argues, the policy
 does not define "real estate owner" and the allegations in the
 Underlying Lawsuits arguably implicated C. Brewer's activities
 and operations as a real estate owner, such as the failure to
 warn about the unsafe condition of the Kaloko Dam and the failure
 to adequately capitalize its land operations and companies
 responsible for maintaining and repairing the Kaloko Dam.
 
On appeal, James River also argues that certain
 
exclusions it its policy, such as the irrigation operations
 exclusion and subsidence and earth movement exclusion, provide
 independent grounds for its position that there was no coverage
 or duty to defend under its policy. It is clear, however, that
 the Circuit Court did not reach or rely upon any policy
 exclusions in granting James River's motion for summary judgment. 
We decline to address on appeal policy exclusions that the
 Circuit Court did not rule upon in rendering its decision. 
VI.
 
C. Brewer was covered at various times between 1987 and
 
2004 by multi-peril property policies issued by National Union,
 Lexington, and Marine Indemnity. The policy periods for all of
 the property insurers ended before the March 14, 2006 breach of
 the Kaloko Dam. C. Brewer's second amended complaint did not
 allege that the property insurers owned a duty to defend. Thus,
 the only issue regarding the property insurers is their duty to
 indemnify. 
The Circuit Court dismissed C. Brewer's second amended
 
complaint against the property insurers for failure to state a
 claim upon which relief can be granted. As explained below, we
 conclude that the Circuit Court erred.
 
A.
 
The Circuit Court dismissed C. Brewer's claims against
 
the property insurers because it found
 
38
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that a manifestation trigger of coverage would apply to an
alleged multi-peril, first-party property insurance policypursuant to the Hawaii Supreme Court's discussion of first-party and third-party policies set forth in its opinion in
Sentinel Insurance Co. v. First Insurance Co., 76 Hawai' i 
277, 875 P.2d 894 (1994), citing Garvey v. State Farm Fire & Cas. Co., 48 Cal. 3d 395 (1989). 
The Circuit Court then found that under a manifestation trigger,
 
C. Brewer's second amended complaint failed to state a claim for
 relief against the property insurers because no covered damages
 were alleged to have become manifest during their policy
 periods.
22
 
The Circuit Court was wrong in relying on Sentinel in 
concluding that a manifestation trigger applied to the property policies. The Hawai' i Supreme Court in Sentinel did not address, 
much less discuss, what the appropriate trigger would be for a first-party property insurance policy. Rather, the Supreme Court in Sentinel only addressed and determined the appropriate trigger for standard third-party CGL policies. Moreover, the supreme court did not adopt a manifestation trigger for standard CGL policies, but determined, based on the plain language of standard CGL policies, that an injury-in-fact trigger was the appropriate trigger for such policies. Sentinel, 76 Hawai' i at 298-99, 875 
P.2d at 915-16. 
The supreme court's references in Sentinel to first-
party policies were cursory and made for the purpose of
 distinguishing first-party from third-party insurance and
 explaining why First Insurance's reliance on Home Insurance Co.
 v. Landmark Insurance Co., 253 Cal. Rept. 277 (Cal. Ct. App. 1988), a first-party case from California which applied a manifestation trigger to a first-party policy, was not persuasive. Sentinel 76 Hawai' i at 290, 875 P.2d at 907. The 
supreme court's citation of Home Insurance for the purpose of 
22
 Although the Circuit Court only set forth this reasoning in its order
dismissing C. Brewer's claims against Marine Indemnity, we assume that it
applied the same reasoning in dismissing the claims against the other property
insurers.
 
39
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
distinguishing it cannot be viewed as an indication that the
 
supreme court agreed with its analysis. Thus, the Circuit Court
 erred in reading Sentinel as supporting the adoption of a
 manifestation trigger for first-party property policies.
23
 
In Sentinel, the supreme court focused on the plain
 
language of the policies at issue, which it found were standard
 form CGL policies, in determining that an injury-in-fact trigger
 was the appropriate trigger for standard CGL policies. In other
 words, the supreme court let the language of the policies at
 issue control its decision on the appropriate trigger. In
 deciding this appeal, it is not necessary for this court to
 attempt to determine whether there is a particular trigger that
 should be applied to all first-party property policies. Rather,
 just as in other insurance coverage disputes, it is the language
 of the policy that guides our decision. We therefore focus on
 the language of the policies at issue to determine whether C.
 Brewer stated a claim upon which relief can be granted. 
B.
 
The Marine Indemnity policy, which contains language
 
that is substantively the same as the other property policies at
 issue, provided in relevant part as follows:
 
1. TERM OF INSURANCE
 
In consideration of $[-----] annual installment
premium, this policy attaches and covers for a
period from [-----] to [-----], . . . .
 
. . . .
 
6. COVERAGE
 a. Real and Personal Property
 Except as hereinafter excluded, this policy
covers:
 
(1) The interest of the Assured in all real
 
23
 The Circuit Court's reference to Garvey was also inapposite. The 
supreme court in Sentinel cited Garvey in noting the basic differences between
first-party and third-party insurance. Sentinel, 76 Hawai' i at 289, 875 P.2d
at 289. However, Garvey did not discuss whether a manifestation trigger wasthe appropriate trigger for a first-party policy. 
40
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and personal property owned, used, or
intended for use by the Assured, or
hereafter erected, installed, or acquired
including while in course of building,
erection, installation, and assembly, and
including interest in improvements and
betterments in buildings not owned by the
Assured.
 
(2) 	The interest of the Assured in the real
 and personal property of others in the
Assured's care, custody, or control, and
the Assured's liability imposed by law or
assumed by contract, whether written or
oral, for such property. 
. . . .
 
(Emphasis added.) 
C. Brewer relies on the language in paragraph 6.a.(2)
 
which provides coverage for (1) its interest "in the real and
 
personal property of others in [its] care, custody, or control";
 and (2) its "liability imposed by law or assumed by contract[.]" 
C. Brewer argues that: (1) as the alleged alter ego of Kilauea
 Irrigation, it was solely responsible for the operation,
 inspection, maintenance, and repair of the Kaloko System and
 Kaloko Dam pursuant to the Water Rights Agreement, and therefore
 it had an interest in property of others (the Kaloko Dam) in its
 care, custody or control; (2) by virtue of the Water Rights
 Agreement, C. Brewer's liability for damage to the Kaloko Dam had
 been assumed by contract or imposed by law; and (3) there had
 been continuous, incremental damage to the Kaloko Dam during the
 policy periods of the property insurers. 
As noted, a complaint should not be dismissed for 
failure to state a claim unless, when viewed in the light most favorable to plaintiff, "it appears beyond doubt that plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of [its] claim that would entitle [it] to relief." Estate of Rogers, 103 Hawai' i at 280, 
81 P.3d at 1195 (block quote format and citations omitted). Applying this standard, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing C. Brewer's claims against the property insurers. 
Although, in general, first-party property policies are
 
designed to cover loss or damage to property of the insured, the
 
41
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
property policies in this case extended coverage to property of
 
others in C. Brewer's care, custody, or control, or for which
 liability had been imposed on or assumed by C. Brewer by contract
 or law. The property policies at issue do not contain language
 which specifically conditions or limits coverage to property
 damage that is discovered or becomes manifest during the policy
 period. See Ellis Court, 72 P.3d at 1090 (construing language of
 
first-party property policy as triggering coverage based on when
 damage first began, rather than when it first became manifest,
 where policy provided coverage for "loss commencing during policy
 period" and did not contain any language purporting to condition
 or limit coverage to when damage was discovered); Kief Farmers
 Coop. Elevator Co. v. Farmland Mut. Ins. Co., 534 N.W.2d 28, 35­36 (N.D. 1995) (same). At minimum, the property policies are
 ambiguous as to whether a manifestation trigger or an injury-in­fact trigger should be applied. Under these circumstances, we
 cannot say beyond doubt that C. Brewer would not be able to prove
 any set of facts entitling it to relief. Accordingly, we
 conclude that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing C. Brewer's
 claims against the property insurers for failure to state a claim
 for relief.
 
VII.
 
The Circuit Court in various orders dismissed all
 
claims against the excess insurers. It appears from the record
 that the Circuit Court dismissed the claims against the excess
 insurers in reliance on its rulings that the insurers holding the
 primary policies during the corresponding policy periods had no
 duty to defend or indemnify the Insureds. Based on our
 determination that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing claims
 against the primary insurers, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 erred in relying on its rulings regarding the primary insurers in
 dismissing the claims against the excess insurers. We therefore
 vacate the Circuit Court's dismissal of the claims against the
 
42
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
excess insurers.24
 
The excess insurers argue that the Circuit Court's
 
dismissal of the claims against them should be affirmed on the
 
alternative ground that the Insureds failed to adequately allege
 or show that the underlying primary insurance coverage applicable 
to each excess policy had been exhausted.  The Insureds dispute
 
that this alternative ground is valid. Because there is no
 
indication that the Circuit Court rendered a decision on this
 issue, we decline to address it on appeal. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's Final Judgment, and we remand the case for further
 proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 7, 2013. 
Kenneth R. Kupchak
Tred R. Eyerly
(Mark M. Murakami with them
on the briefs)
(Damon Key Leong Kupchak Hastert) for Plaintiff-Appellant
C. Brewer and Company
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Acting Associate Judge
Lissa H. Andrews 
(Devon I. Peterson with her
on the brief)
(Rush Moore LLP)
Susan J. Field (Erin M. Donovan with her
on the brief)
(Musick Peeler & Garrett, LLP)
for Defendant-Appellee
United States Fire Insurance Co.
 
James Monma
 
(Randall Y.S. Chung and
Ward F.N. Fujimoto on the
brief)
(Matsui Chung, ALC)
for Defendant-Appellee
 
24 There is a dispute as to whether the policies issued by ACE and
Pacific Employers were primary CGL policies or excess policies. This dispute
can be addressed on remand. 
43
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.
 
Bradford F.K. Bliss
 
(Jeffrey A. Griswold with him
on the brief)
(Lyons, Brandt, Cook & Hiramatsu)
for Defendant-Appellee
Columbia Casualty Insurance Co.
 
Keith K. Hiraoka
 
(Roeca, Louie & Hiraoka)
for Defendant-Appellee
Fireman's Fund Insurance Co.
 of Hawaii, Inc.
 
Keith K. Hiraoka
 (Roeca, Louie & Hiraoka)
Robert J. Romero
 (Anne D. O'Niell and
Cassidy E. Chivers with him
on the brief)
(Hinshaw and Culbertson, LLP)
for Defendant-Appellee
James River Insurance Co.
 
Paul S. White (admitted pro hac vice)
(Tressler, Soderstrom, Maloney & Priess)
(Gale L. F. Ching and Mitzi A. Lee
with him on the brief)
(Ching & Lee)
for Defendant-Appellee
Marine Indemnity Insurance Co. of America
 
William A. Bordner
 
(Devin L. Choy with him
on the brief)
(Burke McPheeters Bordner & Estes)
(Kevin G. McCurdy (pro hac vice) and
 Mary P. McCurdy (pro hac vice)
with him on the brief)
(McCurdy & Fuller, LLP)
for Defenadnt-Appellee
Lexington Insurance Co. and
National Union Fire Insurance Co.
 of Pittsburg
 
Shelton G.W. Jim On
 (SJO & Associates, LLLLC)
(Law Office of Shelton G.W. Jim On)
(Henry F. Beerman with him
on the brief)
(Jim On and Beerman)
 
44
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for Defendant-Appellee
Ace Property and Casualty Insurance
Company fka CIGNA Property and
Casualty Insurance Co. and
Pacific Employers Insurance Co.
 
45
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Wesley D. Shimazu
(Yamamura & Shimazu, AAL, ALC)
(John Price and Amanda J. Weston
on the brief)
(Alan B. Yuter on the brief)
(Selman Breitman, LLP)
for Defendant-Appellee
Scottsdale Insurance Co.
 
Peter W. Olson
 
(Cades Schutte, LLP)
for Defendant-Appellee
First State Insurance Co.
 
William K. Meheula III
 
(Andrew S. Winer with him
on the briefs)
(Winer Meheula & Devens LLP)
for Defendant-Cross-Appellant
Kehalani Holdings Co., Inc.
 
Reese R. Nakamura
 
(Michael S. Vincent with him
on the briefs)
Deputies Attorney Generalfor Defendant-Cross-AppellantState of Hawai' i 
Michele-Lynn E. Luke
(Kessner Umebayashi Bain & Matsunaga)
for Defendants-Appellees
Tradewind Insurance Co., Ltd. and
Island Insurance Co., Ltd.
 
Patricia Kehau Wall
 
(appearing at oral argument
but no brief filed)
for Defendant-Appellee
TIG Insurance Company
 
46
 