NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NOS. 29984, 29985, and 29986
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
NO. 29984
 
IN THE INTEREST OF BP CHILDREN
 
(FC-S NO. 07-11351)
AND
 
NO. 29985
 
IN THE INTEREST OF NP
 
(FC-S NO. 07-11352)
AND
 
NO. 29986
 
IN THE INTEREST OF B CHILDREN
 
(FC-S NO. 07-11353)
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
In this consolidated appeal of Nos. 29984, 29985, and

 
1
29986, Appellant Father (Father) appeals from the Orders
Awarding Permanent Custody and Establishing a Permanent Plan

 
filed on June 23, 2009 in FC-S Nos. 07-11351, 07-11352, and 07­
11353, respectively, in the Family Court of the First Circuit2
 
(family court).
 
1
 The order consolidating appeal Nos. 29984, 29985, and 29986 was filed
on September 22, 2009 by this court.
2
 The Honorable Nancy Ryan presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Father contends that he successfully
 
completed his court-ordered service plan and, therefore,
 
established that he can provide a safe family home for his
 
3
children, AB, JB, NB, EB, and RB  (collectively, the children). 
He also contends that "[t]here is no finding as to why or how the
 
permanent plan will assist in achieving the goal of adoption."4
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Father's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) The family court did not err by finding that
 
Father was not willing and able and it was not reasonably
 
foreseeable that Father would become willing and able to provide
 
the children with a safe family home, even with the assistance of
 
a service plan. Despite Father's completion of anger management,
 
domestic violence, and parenting classes, Father demonstrated
 
that he was not able to utilize the information from such
 
services. Since the children were first placed in foster custody
 
in April 2007, Father has denied that he physically abused Mother
 
and the children. In response to DHS's Petition for Temporary
 
3 There is also a sixth child, SP, who is Father's step-child, but SP
is not involved in this appeal.
4 HRS § 587-73(a)(3) (2006 Repl.) provides:
 
§587-73 Permanent plan hearing.
. . . .
 
(3)	 The proposed permanent plan will assist in achieving
the goal which is in the best interests of the child;
provided that the court shall presume that:
 
(A)	 It is in the best interests of a child to be
 
promptly and permanently placed with responsible
and competent substitute parents and families in
safe and secure homes; and
 
(B)	 The presumption increases in importance
proportionate to the youth of the child upon the
date that the child was first placed under
foster custody by the court[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Foster Custody, Father stated that was Mother who physically and
 
psychologically abused him for eight years. This was contrary to
 
DHS's reporting that Mother was hospitalized due to depression
 
and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder from being a victim of
 
domestic violence for ten years during her relationship with
 
Father.
 
After completing services, Father continued to deny
 
that he had abused Mother. During a permanent plan hearing in
 
April 2009, Father stated that he believed his children were
 
being coached by his in-laws to tell the children's therapist
 
that they are afraid of Father.
 
Father admitted that he pled guilty to Harassment and
 
Abuse of a Household or Family Member involving Mother. Yet,
 
Father denied that he broke Mother's foot and claimed that Mother
 
kicked him. Father also denied that he was violent. Father then
 
accused the maternal grandparents, who were also the children's
 
foster parents, of "probably raping and molesting and pimping"
 
the children. Father believed that the maternal grandfather was
 
raping AB. He then accused SP's stepfather of pimping his
 
children.
 
Father is unable or unwilling to recognize the
 
documented harm to his children even with the uncontroverted
 
evidence of a prior conviction involving domestic violence. 
Instead, Father leveled unsupported accusations against a broad
 
range of people involved with his children's care. There is
 
clear and convincing evidence that Father cannot adequately
 
recognize and differentiate between harm and/or threatened harm
 
to his children and, therefore, cannot provide a safe family
 
home, presently or in the reasonably foreseeable future, even
 
with the assistance of a service plan. 
(2) Father's claim that there are insufficient
 
findings of fact to support adoption as a goal in the permanent
 
plan and as in the best interest of the children is without
 
merit. Father did not point to where in the record he objected
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to adoption in the permanent plan. We cannot find any instance
 
where Father objected to the permanent plan's goal of adoption. 
The presumption under HRS § 587-73(a)(3) that prompt and
 
permanent placement of the children is in the children's best
 
interest has not been rebutted by Father.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Orders Awarding Permanent
 
Custody and Establishing a Permanent Plan filed on June 23, 2009
 in FC-S Nos. 07-11351, 07-11352, and 07-11353 in the Family Court
 
of the First Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 15, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Herbert Y. Hamada
 
for Father-Appellant.
 
Jay K. Goss and
Mary Anne Magnier, Deputy Attorneys General
for Petitioner-Appellee
Department of Human Services.
 Presiding Judge

Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge
 
4
 