 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 27945
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
In the Matter of the Arbitration Between
 
UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO,
Union-Appellee,
v.
 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU, BOARD OF WATER SUPPLY
(Griev. of Scot Ouchi); ES-04-07; 2006-002,
Employer-Appellant
 APPEAL FROM CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P. NO. 06-1-0063)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Employer-Appellant City and County of Honolulu, Board
 
of Water Supply (Employer) appeals from: 1) the order granting
 
the motion of Union-Appellee United Public Workers, AFSCME, Local
 646, AFL-CIO (UPW) to confirm the decision and amended decision
 of Arbitrator R. Charles Bocken (Confirmation Order), entered by
 the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) on
 April 20, 2006; 2) the circuit court's April 20, 2006, Judgment
 that was based on the Confirmation Order; and 3) the circuit
 court's June 6, 2006, order denying Employer's motion for
 reconsideration and/or clarification of the Confirmation Order.
1/
 
The arbitrator's decision and amended decision involved a
 grievance filed by UPW which challenged Employer's dismissal of
 employee Scot Ouchi (Ouchi).
 
For the reasons discussed below, we conclude that the
 
circuit court exceeded its statutory authority in issuing the
 Confirmation Order because the circuit court decided matters that
 went beyond the arbitration award. We therefore vacate the
 portion of the Confirmation Order in which the circuit court
 exceeded its authority.
 
I.
 
Ouchi was employed by the Board of Water Supply as a
 
pipefitter. Prior to December 2003, Ouchi possessed a commercial
 
1/ The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
driver's license (CDL), performed safety-sensitive functions, and
 
was subject to random alcohol and drug testing under the
 collective bargaining agreement (CBA) between UPW and Employer. 
On December 12, 2003, Ouchi was instructed to take a
 
random drug test. Ouchi initially provided a urine sample at
 7:59 a.m. that was sufficient in volume for testing, but was
 outside the acceptable temperature range. Ouchi provided two
 more samples at about 10:30 a.m. and 11:00 a.m., both of which
 were not sufficient in volume for testing. On December 17, 2003,
 Ouchi received a letter from Employer stating that there was
 sufficient cause to end Ouchi’s employment because his inadequate
 urine samples constituted a "refusal to test" under the CBA. 
After a pre-termination hearing, Ouchi was discharged effective
 January 23, 2004. 
On February 20, 2004, UPW filed a grievance which
 
alleged that Employer violated the CBA by disciplining Ouchi
 without just cause. In an arbitration decision dated January 6,
 2006, Arbitrator R. Charles Bocken (Bocken) determined that the
 drug testing procedure used in Ouchi's case violated United
 States Department of Transportation (DOT) rules. Arbitrator
 Bocken found that contrary to DOT rules, Employer did not
 immediately retest Ouchi under direct supervision after the
 initial sample was found to be outside the acceptable temperature
 range and did not give Ouchi three hours after the first
 inadequate-volume sample to provide a sample with adequate
 volume. Arbitrator Bocken set aside Ouchi's discharge and
 awarded him back pay for a period of four months, together with
 other benefits and seniority for that period. The portion of the
 arbitration decision relevant to this appeal stated:
 
DECISION
 
. . . .
 
Accordingly, I find that the procedural error i[n] not
immediately conducting a test after the 7:59 am collection
and failing to provide three hours after the 10:30 am
collection requires setting aside [Ouchi's] discharge. 
Section 63.12 of the [CBA] provides that "A test which is
not valid as provided in the DOT Rules or violated the
Employee's rights shall not be used for discipline." . . . 
. . . .
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
AWARD
 
[Ouchi] is awarded back pay for a period of four
months together with other benefits and seniority for that
period. Back pay benefits are to be reduced to the extent
of unemployment benefits received.
 
(Emphases added.) An amended arbitration decision correcting
 
typographical errors was issued on January 26, 2006.
 
After the arbitration decision, as amended, was issued, 
Ouchi met with Employer on February 21, 2006, and informed Employer that he did not have a valid Hawai
'i driver's license. 
Employer paid Ouchi retroactive back pay in accordance with the arbitration award. Employer also reinstated Ouchi to his pipefitter position, but Ouchi was prohibited from performing safety-sensitive functions. Employer maintained that Ouchi could not perform safety-sensitive functions until he complied with federal requirements, including the possession of a valid CDL. Employer also required Ouchi to enroll in a substance abuse program (SAP). UPW objected to Employer's failure to permit Ouchi to perform safety-sensitive duties. 
On February 23, 2006, UPW filed a motion with the
 
circuit court 1) to confirm the January 6, 2006, arbitration
 decision and award and the January 26, 2006, amended arbitration
 decision and award; 2) to obtain a judgment in favor of UPW
 pursuant to these decisions and awards; and 3) for other relief,
 as the circuit court deemed appropriate. Employer opposed the
 motion, arguing that the January 6, 2006, award could not be
 confirmed because it had been amended on January 26, 2006. 
Employer also objected to UPW's request that other relief be
 awarded as appropriate. UPW filed a reply brief, requesting that
 the circuit court 1) specifically order Employer to return Ouchi
 to the "status quo ante" by reinstating Ouchi to a safety-
sensitive pipefitter position and not requiring him to
 participate in any SAP; and 2) award attorney's fees and costs in
 favor of UPW and against Employer. 
On April 20, 2006, the circuit court issued the
 
Confirmation Order and the Judgment in favor of UPW. In the
 portion of the Confirmation Order pertinent to this appeal, the
 circuit court stated:
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
4. [Employer] has failed to fully comply with the
remedial terms of the January 6, 2006 and January 26, 2006
arbitration awards. Although Scot Ouchi, the grievant, has
received back pay as ordered, he has not been fully
reinstated to perform safety sensitive functions as a
pipefitter, and the status quo ante which preceded his
discharge (which the Arbitrator Bocken ordered be "set
aside") has not been entirely restored. . . . Under the
circumstances, Employer shall pay to [UPW] . . . costs in
the amount of $378.60 and attorney's fees in the amount of
$948.60 . . . in accordance with Section 658A-25, HRS
[(Hawaii Revised Statutes)]. . . . Employer is hereby
ordered forthwith to fully abide by the remedial terms of
the January 6, 2006 and January 26, 2006 awards.
 
Employer filed a motion for reconsideration and/or clarification
 
of the Confirmation Order, which was denied on June 6, 2006. 
II.
 
On appeal, Employer argues that: 1) the circuit court
 
exceeded its jurisdiction and authority when it concluded that
 Employer failed to comply with the remedial terms of the
 arbitration award by not fully reinstating Ouchi to perform
 
2/
safety-sensitive functions as a pipefitter;  2) to the extent
that the arbitration award was ambiguous, the circuit court
 should have remanded the matter back to the arbitrator for
 clarification; 3) the circuit court erred in ordering Employer to
 pay attorney's fees; and 4) the circuit court erred in denying
 Employer's motion for reconsideration and/or clarification of the
 Confirmation Order.
3/
 
III.
 
"We review the circuit court's ruling on an arbitration
 
award de novo, but we also are mindful that the circuit court's
 review of arbitral awards must be extremely narrow and
 exceedingly deferential." Tatibouet v. Ellsworth, 99 Hawai
'i 
226, 233, 54 P.3d 397, 404 (2002) (internal quotation marks,
 brackets, and citations omitted). "Although formulated under the
 
2/ Although Employer argued to the circuit court that the circuit court
could not confirm the January 6, 2006, award because an amended decision
correcting typographical errors was issued on January 26, 2006, Employer has
not raised this claim on appeal. For simplicity, we will refer to the January
6, 2006, arbitration decision and award, as amended by the January 26, 2006,
arbitration decision, as a single decision and award.
 
3/ Employer also summarily asserts that the circuit court exceeded its
jurisdiction when it ordered Employer to fully abide by the remedial terms ofthe arbitration award. Employer offers no specific argument or authority forthis contention, and we therefore deem it to have been waived. See Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7). 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
prior arbitration statute, this standard of review is equally 
applicable to arbitrations conducted under [(Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] Chapter 658A." Kona Village Realty, Inc. v. Sunstone Realty Partners, 121 Hawai
'i 110, 113, 214 P.3d 1100, 
1103 (App. 2009).4/ 
IV.
 
We resolve the arguments raised by Employer in this
 
appeal as follows:
 
A.
 
Employer frames the issue as whether the circuit court
 
exceeded its jurisdiction in issuing the Confirmation Order. The
 circuit court had jurisdiction to decide UPW's confirmation
 motion pursuant to HRS Chapter 658A. The pertinent question is
 whether the circuit court exceeded its statutory authority in
 issuing the Confirmation Order. We conclude that the circuit
 court exceeded its statutory authority in issuing the
 Confirmation Order because it decided matters that went beyond
 confirming the arbitration award.
 
"It is well established that [the Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court] has confined judicial review of arbitration awards to the strictest possible limits. This is because of the legislative policy encouraging arbitration and thereby discouraging litigation." Gepaya v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 94 
Hawai
'i 362, 365, 14 P.3d 1043, 1046 (2000) (internal quotations 
marks, brackets, ellipsis points, and citations omitted). With respect to arbitration awards, "[t]he circuit court cannot act except as allowed by . . . [statute]." United Pub. Workers, 
AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO v. Dawson Int'l, Inc., 113 Hawai
'i 
127, 145, 149 P.3d 495, 513 (2006) (referring to HRS Chapter 658) (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citation omitted). "[W]hen faced with a motion to confirm an arbitration award, the circuit court is limited to whether the arbitration award was correctly rendered as measured against specific standards." 
4/ In 2001, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 658 was repealed and
replaced with the Uniform Arbitration Act, codified in HRS Chapter 658A. HRS
 
Chapter 658A is similar in many respects to the repealed HRS Chapter 658, and
therefore certain decisions under HRS Chapter 658 remain instructive. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Labrador v. Liberty Mut. Group, 103 Hawai 'i 206, 212, 81 P.3d 
386, 392 (2003). 
Under HRS Chapter 658A, the circuit court may vacate an
 
arbitration award "only on the six grounds specified in HRS 
5/
§ 658A-23(a)"  and may modify or correct an arbitration award
"only on the three grounds specified in HRS § 658A-24."6/  Kona
 
5/ HRS § 658A-23(a) (Supp. 2009) provides:
 
(a) Upon motion to the court by a party to an arbitration
proceeding, the court shall vacate an award made in the
arbitration proceeding if:
 
(1)	 The award was procured by corruption, fraud, or other undue
means;
 
(2)	 There was:
 
(A)	 Evident partiality by an arbitrator appointed as a
neutral arbitrator;
 
(B)	 Corruption by an arbitrator; or
 
(C)	 Misconduct by an arbitrator prejudicing the rights of
a party to the arbitration proceeding;
 
(3)	 An arbitrator refused to postpone the hearing upon showing
of sufficient cause for postponement, refused to consider
evidence material to the controversy, or otherwise conducted
the hearing contrary to section 658A-15, so as to prejudice
substantially the rights of a party to the arbitration
proceeding;
 
(4)	 An arbitrator exceeded the arbitrator's powers;
 
(5)	 There was no agreement to arbitrate, unless the person
participated in the arbitration proceeding without raising
the objection under section 658A-15(c) not later than the
beginning of the arbitration hearing; or
 
(6)	 The arbitration was conducted without proper notice of the
initiation of an arbitration as required in section 658A-9
so as to prejudice substantially the rights of a party to
the arbitration proceeding. 
6/ HRS § 658A-24 (Supp. 2009) provides, in relevant part:
 
(a) Upon motion . . . the court shall modify or correct the
award if:
 
(1)	 There was an evident mathematical miscalculation or an
 evident mistake in the description of a person, thing,
or property referred to in the award;
 
(2)	 The arbitrator has made an award on a claim not
 submitted to the arbitrator and the award may be
corrected without affecting the merits of the decision
upon the claims submitted; or
 
(3)	 The award is imperfect in a matter of form not
(continued...)
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Village Realty, 121 Hawai 'i at 113, 214 P.3d at 1103. "The 
supreme court has made it clear that the courts have no business 
weighing the merits of an arbitration award." Id. 
In this case, Employer did not move to vacate the
 
arbitration award. Thus, the grounds for vacating the award were
 inapplicable. 
The circuit court could only modify or correct the
 
award on the limited grounds set forth in HRS § 658A-24. 
The arbitration decision only "set aside" Ouchi's 
discharge and awarded Ouchi four months of back pay, other benefits, and seniority for that period. The decision did not address whether Ouchi was to be unconditionally reinstated to perform safety-sensitive functions. The effect of Ouchi's lack of a valid Hawai
'i driver's license or CDL, which presumably 
disqualified him from performing safety-sensitive functions, was not discussed in the arbitrator's decision.
7/ Indeed, it appears 
that Ouchi did not advise Employer about his lack of a valid driver's license until after the arbitrator's decision was issued. 
The circuit court's Confirmation Order, however, 
concluded that Employer failed to fully comply with the arbitration award because Employer failed to fully reinstate Ouchi to perform safety-sensitive functions as a pipefitter. This was clearly a "modification" of the arbitration award that went beyond the three grounds authorized under HRS § 658A-24. The circuit court thus exceeded its statutory authority and erred in issuing the Confirmation Order. See Gepaya, 94 Hawai
'i at 362, 366, 14 P.3d at 1043, 1047 (holding 
that in a proceeding to confirm an arbitration award, "the court was mandated to confirm the award according to its terms" and was not permitted to decide a question which was not decided by the 
6/(...continued)
affecting the merits of the decision on the claims
submitted.
 
(b) If a motion made under subsection (a) is granted, the
court shall modify or correct and confirm the award as modified or
corrected. Otherwise, unless a motion to vacate is pending, the
court shall confirm the award.
 
7/ UPW does not dispute that upon his return to work, Ouchi lacked a
valid CDL that was necessary for him to perform safety-sensitive functions.
 
7
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
arbitrator); Inlandboatmen's Union of the Pacific v. Sause 
Brothers, Inc., 77 Hawai 'i 187, 192, 881 P.2d 1255, 1260 (App. 
1994) (concluding that because the respondent's request to modify the arbitration award did not come within any of the specified statutory grounds, "the circuit court had no power to modify the award"). 
We therefore vacate the portion of the Confirmation
 
Order that went beyond confirming the arbitration award and
 concluded that Employer failed to fully comply with the terms of
 the arbitration award.
 
B.
 
Although the circuit court is only authorized to modify 
or correct an arbitration award on the grounds set forth in HRS § 658A-24, the circuit court may, pursuant to HRS § 658A-20(d)(3) (Supp. 2009), remand the case back to the arbitrator to clarify the award. See Dawson Int'l, 113 Hawai
'i at 147 n.22, 149 P.3d 
at 515 n.22 ("[I]t is well-recognized that courts are authorized to remand matters to the arbitrators for clarification where the award is ambiguous."); see also Hanford Atomic Metal Trades Council, AFL-CIO v. General Elec. Co., 353 F.2d 302, 307-08 (9th Cir. 1965); Bakery, Confectionery and Tobacco Workers Local Union Number 362-T, AFL-CIO-CLC v. Brown and Williamson Tobacco Corp., 971 F.2d 652, 654-55 (11th Cir. 1992). On remand, the circuit court may consider whether a remand to the arbitrator to clarify the arbitration award is appropriate. 
C.
 
Under HRS § 658A-25(b) (Supp. 2009), a court may allow 
reasonable costs of a motion to confirm an arbitration award.
 
Employer does not provide any argument against the circuit
 
court's award of costs to UPW. We therefore affirm the circuit
 court's award of costs to UPW. 
Under HRS § 658A-25(c) (Supp. 2009), the circuit court
 
may award reasonable attorney's fees on the application of a
 prevailing party to a contested judicial proceeding on a motion
 brought to confirm an arbitration award. With regard to the
 circuit court's award of attorney's fees under HRS § 658A-25(c),
 we disagree with Employer's argument that UPW's motion to confirm
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
was uncontested. Employer opposed UPW's motion to confirm on the
 
ground that the January 6, 2006, award could not be confirmed
 because it had been amended, and Employer contested other aspects
 of UPW's motion. UPW's motion was a "contested" proceeding
 within the meaning of HRS § 658A-25(c). 
However, given our decision to vacate the portion of
 
the Confirmation Order in which the circuit court exceeded its
 authority, we find it necessary to vacate the circuit court's
 award of attorney's fees in favor of UPW. 
We remand the case to
 
permit the circuit court to reevaluate its award of attorney's
 fees in light of our decision.
 
V.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the portions of
 
the circuit court's April 20, 2006, Confirmation Order that 1)
 went beyond confirming the arbitration award and concluded that
 Employer failed to fully comply with the terms of the arbitration
award and 2) awarded attorney's fees. We affirm the Confirmation
Order in all other respects. Because we are vacating portions of
the Confirmation Order, we also vacate the circuit court's April
 20, 2006, Judgment and its June 6, 2006, order denying Employer's
motion for reconsideration and/or clarification of the
 Confirmation Order, to the extent that they were based on the
 portions of the Confirmation Order that we are vacating. We
 remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
 Memorandum Opinion.
 
   
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 25, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Paul K.W. Au, Ch
Deputy Corporation Counsel,
City & County of Honolulu,
for Employer-Appellant. 
Associief Judge 
ate Judge 
Herbert R. Takahashi and 
Rebecca L. Covert (Takahashi Vasconcellos &
Covert)
for Union-Appellee. Associate Judge 
9
 