NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29797
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
PROVIDENT FUNDING ASSOCIATES, L.P., Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
NATASHA ANELA VIMAHI AND LUSEANE ENITI VIMAHI,
Defendants-Appellants, and JOHN and MARY DOES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-1788)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Natasha Anela Vimahi and Luseane
 
Eniti Vimahi (Vimahis) appeal from the Judgment and Writ of
 
Ejectment issued in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Provident Funding
 
Associates L.P. (Provident), filed on April 29, 2009 in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 
On appeal, the Vimahis raise four points of error: (1)
 
there were genuine issues of material fact and therefore
 
Provident was not entitled to judgment as a matter of law; (2)
 
Provident lacked standing to sue for ejectment; (3) the Circuit
 
Court failed to make sufficient findings of fact pursuant to
 
Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 52(a); and (4) the
 
Vimahis should have been allowed to conduct discovery pursuant to
 
HRCP Rule 56(f).
 
1
 The Honorable Karen N. Blondin presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve the Vimahis' points of error as follows:
 
This is an appeal from an action for ejectment, not a 
foreclosure action. The subject property was foreclosed upon 
through a nonjudicial foreclosure conducted pursuant to HRS 
§§ 667-5 to 667-10 prior to the filing of this action. A 
Mortgagee's Affidavit of Foreclosure Under Power of Sale was 
recorded in the Office of the Assistant Registrar of the Land 
Court of the State of Hawai 'i on June 27, 2008 as Document No. 
3764149. An Amended Mortgagee's Affidavit of Foreclosure Under Power of Sale was recorded in the Office of the Assistant 
Registrar of the Land Court of the State of Hawai
'i on August 19, 
2008 as Document No. 3781245. A Quitclaim Deed was recorded in the Office of the Assistant Registrar of the Land Court of the 
State of Hawai
'i on August 13, 2008 as Document No. 3779868 and 
Transfer Certificate of Title (TCT) No. 918,819. 
(1) On appeal, the Vimahis claim that they objected to 
the entry of summary judgment on the ground that the note and 
mortgage were void in a memorandum in opposition to Provident's 
motion for summary judgment and for writ of ejectment, in a 
motion to reconsider, and at a hearing on February 11, 2009. 
Contrary to their claim, the Vimahis did not raise the issue of a 
void note and mortgage in their opposition to Provident's motion 
for summary judgment. Nor did they raise the issue in their 
motion to reconsider. A transcript of a February 11, 2009 
hearing is not part of the record on appeal. The Vimahis did not 
point to where in the record the alleged error was brought to the 
attention of the Circuit Court. Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). 
The first time the Vimahis alleged that the note and
 
mortgage were void pursuant to HRS § 454-1 was in a response to
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Provident's proposed form of the order granting the motion for
 
summary judgment and writ of ejectment, pursuant to Rule 23 of
 
the Hawaii Rules of the Circuit Court (HRCC). Objections
 
pursuant to HRCC Rule 23 are only as to the form or wording of
 
the written order, not substantive objections on the merits
 
because the proposed order must be submitted "within 10 days
 
after decision of the court awarding any judgment, decree or
 
order that requires settlement and approval by a judge[.]" HRCC
 
Rule 23 does not provide a party with another opportunity to make
 
substantive objections after the court has made a decision. The
 
Vimahis' objection to ejectment on the basis that the underlying
 
note and mortgage were void was not made properly in the court
 
below, therefore, the point of error will be disregarded. HRAP
 
Rule 28(b)(4).
 
Indeed, it appears from the record that Provident is 
the registered owner of the subject property as evidenced by TCT 
No. 918,819. Thus, title is conclusive and unimpeachable. See 
HRS § 501-118; Aames Funding Corp. v. Mores, 107 Hawai 'i 95, 110 
P.3d 1042 (2005) (defenses to mortgages foreclosed upon by 
exercise of mortgagee's power of sale must be raised prior to 
entry of new certificate of title). A TCT is binding upon the 
registered owner and upon all persons claiming under the 
registered owner. HRS § 501-106(b). In cases where registration 
was allegedly procured by fraud, the owner may pursue all 
remedies against the parties to the fraud. HRS § 501-106(b). 
However, the party alleging fraud must file a petition with the 
Land Court within one year after entry of the new certificate of 
title. HRS § 501-71. There is no evidence that the Vimahis ever 
filed a petition with the Land Court. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
granting summary judgment in favor of Provident on its claim for
 
ejectment.
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) Provident is the registered owner of the subject
 
property as evidenced by TCT No. 918,819. Accordingly, Provident
 
had standing to sue for ejectment.
 
(3) HRCP Rule 52(a) requires the court to issue
 
findings of fact upon "all actions tried upon the facts without a
 
jury or with an advisory jury[.] "A summary judgment is not the
 
result of a trial on the merits." Motion Picture Industry
 
Pension Plan v. Hawaiian Kona Coast Assoc., 9 Haw. App. 42, 52,
 823 P.2d 752, 757 (1991). The Circuit Court did not try the
 
action upon the facts when it granted Provident's motion for
 
summary judgment. Therefore, the Circuit Court was not required
 
to issue findings of fact and conclusions of law pursuant to HRCP
 
Rule 52(a).
 
(4) The Circuit Court's decision to deny a request for
 
a continuance pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(f) shall not be reversed
 
absent an abuse of discretion. Assocs. Fin. Servs. Co. of
 
Hawaii, Inc. v. Richardson, 99 Hawai
'i 446, 454, 56 P.3d 748, 756 
(App. 2002). 
[T]he request must demonstrate how postponement of a ruling
on the motion will enable him or her, by discovery or other
means, to rebut the movants' showing of absence of a genuine
issue of fact. An abuse of discretion occurs where the
 trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or
disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
Id. (citation omitted). 
The Vimahis failed to demonstrate how the postponement
 
of a ruling would have enabled them to rebut Providence's showing
 
of an absence of a genuine issue of material fact as to its
 
entitlement to ejectment based on Providence's land court
 
registered title.
 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's April 29, 2009
 
Judgment and Writ of Ejectment are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 10, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin
Long H. VuFrederick J. Arensmeyerfor Defendants-Appellants 
Lester K.M. Leu Gary Y. OkudaKaryn A. Doi(Leu & Okuda)for Plaintiff-Appellee  Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
5 