NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29651
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MALCOLM G. YORKSTON, III, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 06-1-0685)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Malcolm G. Yorkston, III (Yorkston)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Probation
 
Sentence/Notice of Entry entered in the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit (Circuit Court) on February 11, 2009.1/ Following
 
a jury-waived trial, the Circuit Court convicted Yorkston of
 
sexual assault in the fourth degree under Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) § 707-733(1)(a) (1993).2/  On appeal, Yorkston contends
 
1/ The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided. 
2/ This section provides: 
§ 707-733. Sexual assault in the fourth degree. (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the fourth
degree if:
 
(a) 	The person knowingly subjects another person to
sexual contact by compulsion or causes another
person to have sexual contact with the actor by
compulsion.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that: (1) there is insufficient evidence to support the
 
conviction; (2) the Circuit Court erred in failing to notify the
 
parties prior to closing arguments of its intention to consider a
 
lesser included offense; and (3) the Circuit Court erred in
 
concluding it had no discretion to enter restitution in an amount
 
different from that ordered by the Crime Victim Compensation
 
Commission. We conclude that there is insufficient evidence to
 
support the conviction and, accordingly, reverse.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. The Charge
 
A grand jury issued an indictment against Yorkston and
 
his co-defendant, Johnnie Martin Stevens (Stevens), on April 6,
 
2006. The indictment charged Yorkston with the following
 
offenses: (1) Count VI - Sexual Assault in the Second Degree by
 
"knowingly subjecting [Complainant] to an act of sexual
 
penetration by compulsion, by placing his finger into her genital
 
opening"; (2) Count VII - Sexual Assault in the Second Degree by
 
"attempting to place his penis in [Complainant's] genital
 
opening"; (3) Count VIII - Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree by
 
"placing his hand on [Complainant's] breast"; and (4) Count IX ­
Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree by "placing his mouth on
 
[Complainant's] breast." The indictment charged Stevens with
 
similar offenses, all of which allegedly occurred on May 2, 2005.
 
B. The Trial
 At a joint bench trial, Yorkston, Stevens, and the
 
complaining witness (Complainant) all testified to the events
 
surrounding the alleged assault. All testified that the events
 
took place in Stevens' bedroom. No one else was present in the
 
bedroom when the events occurred.
 
Their testimonies are largely consistent regarding the 
events leading up to the alleged assault. Complainant, who was 
29 years old at the time, had recently moved to Hawai' i. She met 
Yorkston and Stevens through a running club called the Aloha Hash 
2
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
House Harriers (Harriers). Complainant initially met Yorkston at
 
a Harriers social event on April 30, 2005. Yorkston testified
 
that he recognized Complainant because she had been posting
 
sexually explicit material on the Harriers' website. He believed
 
she was "showing herself to be . . . a partier." 
At the Harriers event, Complainant told Yorkston about
 
a social group she had started called the Sad Lonely Losers Club. 
Yorkston testified that Complainant told him, "I like it in the
 
middle," and "[I like] things to get wild." At a Harriers event
 
the next day, Yorkston invited Complainant to a "moving party" at
 
Stevens' apartment that would take place the following day.3/
 
The purpose of the get-together was to move boxes and say goodbye
 to Stevens, who had been reassigned to the mainland. Yorkston
 
mentioned that Stevens's apartment complex had a pool and
 
Jacuzzi. 
The following day, May 2nd, Complainant e-mailed
 
Yorkston information about the Sad Lonely Losers Club, including
 
a link to its website. Yorkston testified that Complainant had
 
posted "very explicit and very sexual" material on the website. 
Yorkston replied via e-mail with his phone number so they could
 
coordinate going to Stevens's moving party that night. He also
 
wrote that he wanted to "make [her] wet in the jacuzzi." 
After work that night, Yorkston picked up Complainant
 
and they stopped at a liquor store and purchased a bottle of wine
 
and a twelve-pack of beer. Because Yorkston had forgotten his
 
ID, Complainant purchased the alcohol and he reimbursed her.
 
Yorkston and Complainant arrived at Stevens's apartment
 
in a high-rise building in downtown Honolulu at around 8:30 p.m. 
Stevens's two roommates were in the living room. After about
 
forty-five minutes, when Complainant, Yorkston, and Stevens had
 
3/
 Yorkston and Stevens both testified that they were discussing
plans for moving boxes and hanging out at the Jacuzzi. Complainant overheard
them talking, said "Hey, I like Jacuzzis," and asked if she could come along. 
3
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
finished the bottle of wine, Complainant suggested that they go
 
to the Jacuzzi. They continued to drink beer at the Jacuzzi. 
While in the Jacuzzi, Yorkston and Stevens both massaged
 
Complainant's feet. The defendants testified that Complainant
 
talked about sexually explicit material pertaining to her
 
relationship with another man in the running club. Stevens
 
testified that he was "turned on" by the discussion.
 
At some point while they were in the Jacuzzi, Yorkston
 
moved in between Complainant's legs and touched her thigh. 
Complainant pushed or slapped his hand away and told him no. 
Yorkston testified that Complainant said "[O]h, come on, stop" in
 
a joking way because other people were around. Complainant
 
testified that other than the thigh-touching incident, she
 
consented to the foot massage.
 
The pool and Jacuzzi closed around 10:00 p.m., and the
 
three went back up to the apartment. Stevens's roommates were
 
still in the living room. The three went into Stevens's bedroom. 
For ten to fifteen minutes, Yorkston and Stevens discussed moving
 
plans while Complainant sat on the bed, still wearing her one-
piece bathing suit. At this point, Complainant's story and that
 
of Yorkston and Stevens diverged. 
1. Complainant's testimony
 
Complainant testified that the next thing she
 
remembered was waking up on the bed. When she woke up, the
 lights were off, the door was closed, her bathing suit was off,
 
and Yorkston and Stevens were "doing stuff to [her]." Stevens
 
was completely naked and Yorkston wore a t-shirt but was naked
 
below the waist. They kissed her mouth, kissed and touched her
 
breasts, and alternated between the top and bottom of her body. 
Complainant felt as though she were in a "live coma where you can
 
see things going on and you're trying to move and do things, but
 
you can't. You're not quite there." On cross-examination, she
 
confirmed her statements to a detective that "[S]omething came
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
over me where I couldn't talk," and "It was like I was paralyzed
 
. . . I just kept trying to talk, and I couldn't." She told the
 
detective that something "knocked me out" as if "there was some
 
type of like electromagnetic shield thing that was just hovering
 
over me." She further told him she believed the defendants had
 
drugged her.4/
  
On direct examination, Complainant testified that while
 
the defendants were alternating between the top and lower
 
portions of her body, she tried to mumble:
 
Q	 Were you able to say anything to [the defendants] when
this was occurring?
A	 
I remember trying to mumble. Again, I'm not sure if
it was audible or not. I didn't get a response from
them.
 
Q 
Okay. And do you recall them saying anything to you?
A As far as me saying to stop, no. I didn't get any
response as far as that.
 
Stevens "went down on" Complainant, but then began
 
feeling sick and went to the bathroom to vomit.  Yorkston told
 
her, "I'm going to have you tonight, tomorrow, and the next
 
week."  She then testified in detail as to Yorkston's first
 
attempt at penetration:
 
He was standing at the bottom of the bed, and he had my legs
up in the air. And I kept trying to cross them as best I
could, and he wasn't able to, you know, try to stick his
penis in because I kept trying to move and as best I could
to try to not allow that to happen. So then he puts his
hand in my vagina, and then he pulls out my tampon and says,
Oh, this is why you're putting up a fight.
 
Complainant testified vaguely as to a second attempt at
 
penetration that occurred immediately after Yorkston removed the
 
tampon:
 
Q	 When Malcolm [Yorkston] was attempting penetration
[the first time], was Johnnie [Stevens] in the room or
 
4/
 At trial, Complainant admitted that she was taking various
prescription medications at the time of these events, including narcotics.
Several of them carried warnings about adverse interactions with alcohol that
could intensify drowsiness. She testified that she had taken them for quite
some time, knew how they would interact with alcohol, and was careful not to
take "all the narcotics at once with alcohol." Yorkston testified that in the
 car on the way to Stevens's apartment, Complainant told him she popped pills,
including Valium and Percodan. 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
not?
 
A 
Well, after he took my tampon out is when I think
Johnnie left, and then Malcolm was attempting it
again.
Q 
So when Malcolm is attempting, what is he saying to
you?
A 
At this point I think he decided to stop, and he said,
We need to get her out of here.
 
She testified that she heard Yorkston and Stevens walk
 
in with a camera and try to take pictures of her. She heard
 
Yorkston say the flash wouldn't go off. The lights were still
 
off at that time. 
Complainant testified that after the camera incident,
 
"[w]hen [Stevens] was kissing me, his penis did rub up against my
 
face." The defendants then stopped, put her bathing suit back
 
on, and turned on the lights. Complainant was "slowly coming to"
 
but felt that she was still in danger. Yorkston and Stevens were
 
moving boxes, the bedroom door was open, and the lights were on. 
Yorkston and Stevens then returned to the bedroom with
 
the camera. Yorkston moved her bathing suit bottom to the side
 
and started trying to take pictures of her again. Complainant
 
testified that it was at this point was the first time she
 
recalled being able to talk. Stevens attempted to "kiss [her]
 
and touch [her] breast again." Complainant kicked Yorkston and
 
scratched at both defendants' faces. An altercation ensued. 
Yorkston ran out of the room, away from the brawl, while Stevens
 
tried to restrain Complainant. Stevens's roommates summoned the
 
security guards. Complainant then went down to the lobby, where
 
she called the police. She identified Yorkston and Stevens as
 
they were carrying luggage out of the apartment. Complainant
 
testified that she did not consent to any of the sex acts.
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2. The Remaining Testimony
 
Yorkston's and Stevens's testimonies were largely
 
5/
consistent with each other.  After the Jacuzzi, the three went
 
into Stevens's bedroom. They were sitting on the bed, with
 
Complainant in the middle, when Complainant began kissing
 
Yorkston. Complainant's swimsuit top came down at some point,
 
and Yorkston and Stevens touched and kissed her breasts. Stevens
 
testified that when he "went to touch her the first time," she
 
crossed her legs but did not say no. He took that to mean she
 
"just didn't want [him] touching down there at the moment." 
Stevens left the room to vomit for the first time,
 
having fallen ill from mixing alcohol. 
When he returned, he saw
 
Complainant's "legs apart and Malcolm standing in front of her." 
Yorkston testified that he was standing or kneeling between
 
Complainant's legs and rubbed his crotch area, through his
 
underwear, against her "bathing suit crotch area." He did not
 
specify when this occurred. Yorkston denied that he told
 
Complainant "I'm going to have you tonight, tomorrow, and next
 
week," and he denied removing her tampon. 
Stevens testified that he touched and placed his mouth
 
on Complainant's genitalia and then left the room to vomit for
 
the second time, again ill from mixing alcohol. When he returned
 
to the bedroom, he saw a tampon on the floor. He continued to
 
kiss Complainant and touch her breasts. Sometime thereafter, he
 
heard Complainant clearly say no. He and Yorkston stopped and
 
helped Complainant pull her swimsuit top back up. He then left
 
the room to vomit for a third time. When he returned to the
 
bedroom to put his shorts on, Yorkston was packing boxes and
 
Complainant was lying on the bed, apparently asleep. 
5/
 Yorkston admitted on direct examination that he had denied the
 
occurrence of any sexual activity in his initial interview with a detective.
He said he lied because he was scared about being in jail, concerned about
losing his job, and worried that his pregnant wife would leave him. 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Yorkston testified that he found Stevens's repeated
 
vomiting "disturbing" and was unable to maintain an erection. 
The mood passed and the sexual activity "just petered out." At
 
that point, Complainant said stop "and that was it." Both
 
defendants testified that Complainant consented to the sexual
 
activity up until it ended when she said stop. 
After Complainant said no, Stevens left the room and
 
Yorkston began packing boxes. He found Stevens's camera and
 
decided to take a picture of Complainant for Stevens to find when
 
he was away at sea. At that time, Complainant was lying back on
 
the bed with her hand over her eyes. Yorkston pulled the bottom
 
of her bathing suit aside and tried to take a picture, but the
 
flash would not go off. Complainant told him, "I know what
 
you're trying to do to me . . . . You're going to try to rape
 
me." She then kicked the camera. Stevens came back into the
 
room, and both defendants testified that Yorkston was initially
 
up against the wall and then ran out of the room. Stevens
 
testified that Complainant was yelling, "I know what you guys are
 
trying to do to me. You guys are trying to rape me, drug me. 
You guys are assholes." Complainant attacked Stevens and he
 
"wrestl[ed] her to the ground" several times to prevent her from
 
hitting him. One of Stevens's roommates observed the altercation
 
and testified that Stevens restrained Complainant defensively to
 
prevent her from hitting him. The roommate recalled that
 
Complainant broke several lamps and attempted to hit Stevens with
 
them. He further described Complainant as angry, hostile, and
 
yelling profanities at a very loud volume. 
The responding police officer testified that he was
 
called to the apartment complex on a report of a disorderly
 
female. When he arrived in the apartment lobby, he found
 
Complainant yelling at the security guards. He could smell
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alcohol on her from three to four feet away. It took him about
 
fifteen minutes to get Complainant to lower her voice. 
3. Findings and Verdict
 
At the conclusion of the bench trial, the Circuit Court
 
acquitted Stevens on all counts. It convicted Yorkston of
 
fourth-degree sexual assault, a lesser offense included in the
 
second-degree sexual assault charge (Count VII). The court
 
entered oral findings in conjunction with the verdict:
 
Generally, the counts alleged in this case require among
other things that the defendant act knowingly as to the
attendant circumstance of compulsion. A person acts
knowingly with respect to attendant circumstances when he is
aware that such circumstances exist, and compulsion is
defined, essentially, as absence of consent. So, the
prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that as to
each count, the defendant was aware that what he did or, in
the case of Count 7, intended to do was without the
complainant's consent. Although I am not necessarily of the
belief that the complainant consented to any of the sexual
activities shown by the evidence to have occurred in
defendant Stevens' room on May 2nd, 2005, I find that with
the exception of Count 7, the prosecution has failed to
prove the state of mind applicable to the element of
compulsion as to each count of the indictment.
 
By her own testimony, the complainant was unable, for
whatever reason, to communicate unequivocally to the
defendants that she wanted them to stop until most, if not
all, of the sexual activity alleged in the indictment had
ended. This together with the largely undisputed evidence
relating to the conduct of the complainant leading up to the
acts charged is sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt as to
whether the defendants were aware that they did not have
complainant's consent to do what they did.
 
Now, accordingly, I am finding defendant Stevens not guilty
of Counts 1, 2, 4, and 5, and defendant Yorkston not guilty
of Counts 6, 8, and 9.
 
Now, Count 7 alleges an attempt on the part of defendant
Yorkston to commit sexual assault in the second degree. The
 Court finds credible the complainant's testimony that she
believed that Yorkston attempted to penetrate her twice.
According to the complainant, the first time was sometime
after Stevens put his mouth on her genitals but before
Yorkston removed her tampon. Now, I'm finding that both of
these events -- the placing of Stevens' mouth on the
complainant's genitals and Yorkston's removal of the tampon
-- occurred, in fact.
 
At this point, Yorkston was naked from the waist down but
could not make penetration because the complainant had
crossed her legs. The second time was after her tampon was
removed and after Stevens left the room. The complainant
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not say specifically whether Yorkston was clothed or
unclothed at the time, but it was shortly after the second
attempt that Yorkston stopped his sexual advances until the
camera incident, when he pulled the crotch of the
complainant's suit aside and attempted to take a photograph.
 
Now, each defendant has admitted in testimony that at some
point in time during the events of May 2nd, 2005, the
complainant said no, or stop, and he became aware that any
further sexual activity with the complainant would not have
been consensual. A key question concerning Count 7 is
whether it occurred before or after that point.
 
According to Stevens, he was not present when the tampon was
removed but returned from his second vomiting episode to see
it lying on the floor. At that point, he says he began
kissing the complainant's breasts. She said no and they
stopped. He then left the room. Yorkston's testimony also
indicates that Stevens left the room after the complainant
said stop.
 
I find that what the complainant referred to as Yorkston's
second attempt at penetration occurred after the complainant
said no, or stop, and both Yorkston and Stevens were aware
that the complainant was not consenting to any further
sexual activity. I further find that what the complainant
referred to as Yorkston's second attempt at penetration
consisted in his rubbing his crotch through his underwear
against the complainant's crotch through her bathing suit,
which Yorkston admits having done. There were only two
attempts at penetration, according to the complainant, and
during the first attempt, Yorkston was not wearing any
underwear.
 
This rubbing of crotches clearly meets the definition of
sexual contact, but is it a substantial enough step to make
Yorkston guilty of attempted sexual assault in the second
degree?
 
HRS Section 705-503 provides that conduct shall not be
considered a substantial step, unless it is strongly
corroborative of the defendant's criminal intent. Here,
Yorkston and the complainant were both clothed. Yorkston
 did not proceed beyond the rubbing, and he stopped shortly
thereafter. Under the circumstances, this was not a
substantial step in a course of conduct intended to
culminate in the crime of sexual assault in the second
 degree, which requires proof of knowing sexual penetration
by compulsion.
 
I do find, however, that all of the essential elements of
the included offense of sexual assault in the fourth degree
in violation of Section 707-733(1)(a) have been proved
beyond a reasonable doubt. I also find that the Court has
 jurisdiction, that venue is proper, and that the offense
established under Count 7 was committed within the period
specified by the applicable statute of limitations.
Accordingly, I find defendant Yorkston guilty of sexual
assault in the fourth degree in Count 7.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court imposed a one-year probation sentence
 
and ordered Yorkston to pay restitution in the amount ordered by
 
the Crime Victim Compensation Commission. On February 24, 2009,
 
it entered a Free Standing Order of Restitution against Yorkston
 
in the amount of $8,119.56. Yorkston filed a timely notice of
 
appeal on February 20, 2009.
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Yorkston asserts the following points of error on
 
appeal:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred in adjudging Yorkston
 
guilty because there is no substantial evidence that Yorkston
 
subjected Complainant to sexual contact after she said no; 
(2) The Circuit Court erred in failing to inform the
 
parties prior to closing arguments that it would consider sexual
 
assault in the fourth degree as a lesser offense included in
 
Count VII; and 
(3) The Circuit Court erred in concluding it had no
 
discretion to enter a restitution order in an amount different
 
from that ordered by the Crime Victim Compensation Fund.
 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(citation omitted). "Substantial evidence as to every material 
element of the offense charged is credible evidence which is of 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of 
reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted). 
11
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. No Substantial Evidence of Mens Rea for Count VII
 
Yorkston argues there is insufficient evidence to
 
support the conviction for fourth-degree sexual assault, a lesser
 offense included in Count VII, because essential findings are
 
unsupported by the testimony at trial, including the
 
Complainant's own testimony. He maintains there is no
 
substantial evidence in support of the conviction. Upon careful
 
examination of the record, we agree.
 
The test for sufficiency of the evidence is whether 
there is "substantial evidence" for each material element of the 
offense. 
State v. Matavale,  115 Hawai
'i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 
322, 330-31 (2007) (quoting State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 
831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992)). Substantial evidence is "credible 
evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to 
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." 
Id. at 158, 166 P.3d at 331 (quoting Batson, 73 Haw. at 248-49, 
831 P.2d at 931) (brackets omitted). The test is not whether 
guilt has been established beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. 
Bayly, 118 Hawai' i 1, 6, 185 P.3d 186, 191 (2008). 
In a bench trial, the trial judge is entitled "to make 
all reasonable and rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial evidence." Batson, 73 Haw. at 
249, 831 P.2d at 931. It is not the role of the appellate court to weigh credibility or resolve conflicting evidence. State v. 
Eastman, 81 Hawai' i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996); accord 
State v. Ferm, 94 Hawai' i 17, 27, 7 P.3d 193, 203 (App. 2000); 
State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai' i 382, 418, 910 P.2d 685, 731 (1996). 
In considering sufficiency, we must view the evidence in the 
light most favorable to the prosecution. Bayly, 118 Hawai' i at 
6, 185 P.3d at 191. Here, we must determine whether substantial evidence supports the elements of fourth-degree sexual assault. 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A person commits sexual assault in the fourth degree
 
when he or she "knowingly subjects another person to sexual
 
contact by compulsion or causes another person to have sexual
 
contact with the actor by compulsion." HRS § 707-733(1)(a). 
Compulsion is defined as the absence of consent. HRS § 707-700
 
(1993). The material elements of fourth-degree sexual assault
 
are, in their basic form: (1) a knowing mens rea; (2) sexual
 
contact; and (3) absence of consent.
 
There is substantial evidence in support of the second
 
element -- that the sexual contact, referred to as a second
 
attempt at penetration,6/ in fact occurred. Complainant
 
testified that just after Yorkston removed her tampon and Stevens
 left the room, Yorkston made a second attempt at penetration. 
Yorkston admitted that he rubbed his crotch area against
 
Complainant's, through their clothes, while he was standing or
 
kneeling between her legs. 
There is also substantial evidence in support of the
 
third element -- that Complainant did not, in fact, consent. 
Complainant testified that she did not consent to any of the sex
 
acts that occurred.
 
The pivotal element here, however, is the mens rea, 
which requires the actor to be aware of the attendant circumstances, including the complainant's lack of consent. 
State v. Adams, 10 Haw. App. 593, 606-07, 880 P.2d 226, 234-35 
(1994); see also State v. Kinnane, 79 Hawai' i 46, 53-54, 897 P.2d 
973, 980-81 (1995); HRS §§ 702-206(2) (1993) (defining "knowingly") & 702-218 (1993) (mistake of fact). Yorkston's 
conviction turned on the critical finding of when exactly the 
defendants heard Complainant say no. The court expressly found 
6/
 Although the court referred to this act as an attempt at
penetration, it ultimately concluded that it was "not a substantial step in a
course of conduct intended to culminate in the crime of sexual assault in the
 second degree." For the sake of convenience, however, we will refer to it as
the second attempt at penetration.
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonable doubt as to whether Complainant had unequivocally
 
conveyed her lack of consent before that point. Both defendants
 
consistently maintained that they did not hear her say no until
 
the very end of the time line, when the sexual activity ceased.
 
The Complainant's testimony was that, although she was "trying to
 
mumble" earlier, she was not able to talk "until when they tried
 
to take pictures the second time, and I said, what – what are you
 
– what are you doing?" Complainant's own testimony, as well as
 
that of the defendants, does not give rise to a reasonable
 
inference that they heard her say no before Yorkston's second
 
attempt at penetration, which occurred significantly earlier than
 
the second attempt at picture-taking.
 
Regardless of any inferences that might be drawn from
 
Complainant's mumbling, the Circuit Court expressly found
 
reasonable doubt as to whether she adequately conveyed her lack
 
of consent before the defendants, according to their own
 
testimony, heard her say no. Yorkston and Stevens were both very
 
clear about when they heard Complainant say no. Stevens
 
testified that after he returned from vomiting the second time,
 
he resumed kissing and touching Complainant's breasts. 
Complainant then said no, everything stopped, and he and Yorkston
 
helped her pull her top up. Likewise, Yorkston testified that
 
after Stevens returned from vomiting the second time, Complainant
 
said no and the sexual activity stopped. 
Yorkston and Stevens both testified that after
 
Complainant said no, Stevens left the room. Stevens testified
 
that he left to vomit for a third time and then returned to the
 
bedroom to put on his shorts. He saw Yorkston packing boxes, and
 
Complainant appeared to be asleep on the bed. Yorkston's with
 
Stevens's account: after Stevens left, Yorkston got dressed and
 
began packing boxes. Complainant was laying on the bed with her
 
hand over her eyes. Complainant similarly testified that after
 
the lights came on, she was lying back on the bed to recover her
 
14
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
strength. At that point, Yorkston attempted to photograph
 
Complainant's crotch, the second attempt at picture-taking. 
Stevens returned to the bedroom to find Complainant yelling at
 
Yorkston, who was up against the wall. 
Despite all three testimonies to the contrary, the
 
court found that the second attempt at penetration occurred after
 
Yorkston and Stevens both heard Complainant say no. In so
 
finding, the court apparently confused the second time that
 
Stevens left the room, in the middle of the time line, with the
 
third time he left, after which their sexual activity ceased and
 
Yorkston began packing boxes. Complainant's own testimony was
 
that the second attempt occurred just after the first, while
 
Stevens was out of the room for the first time. During the first
 
attempt, Yorkston was standing in between Complainant's legs. 
He then removed her tampon, after which Stevens left the room. 
Yorkston then made the second attempt at penetration. In
 
contrast, both Yorkston and Stevens testified that after they
 
heard Complainant say no, all sexual activity stopped and Stevens
 
left the room for the third time. 
There is no evidence that the second attempt at
 
penetration occurred after Stevens left the room for the third
 
time. Complainant's own testimony was that the second attempt
 
occurred right after the first, just after Yorkston removed the
 
tampon and after Stevens had left for the first time. The
 
testimony of all three was consistent that after Stevens left the
 
room for the third time, the lights were on, Yorkston began
 
packing boxes, and Complainant was lying back on the bed.
 
The court's own findings undermine its ultimate
 
conclusion. The court found that Yorkston's second attempt at
 
penetration occurred just after he removed her tampon, while
 
Stevens was out of the room. Stevens returned to see the tampon
 
on the floor. He resumed kissing Complainant's breasts; then
 "[s]he said no and they stopped." These findings affirm that the
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
second attempt occurred before Complainant said no. Nonetheless,
 
the court went on to conclude that the second attempt occurred
 
after both defendants heard Complainant say no. 
The Circuit Court faced a difficult task in piecing 
together days of convoluted testimony. Although it was entitled 
to draw inferences from the evidence, those inferences must still 
have been reasonable. Batson, 73 Haw. at 249, 831 P.2d at 931. 
A fortiori, there must have been some evidentiary basis from 
which to draw those inferences. Id. Here, the court was not 
faced with conflicting testimony regarding the timing of the 
second attempt and the timing of when Yorkston heard Complainant 
say no. Each of these critical facts was adduced by 
uncontroverted testimony. There was simply no evidence to 
support the Circuit Court's timing of the facts critical to the 
conviction. C.f. State v. Jackson, 81 Hawai' i 39, 43, 46, 912 
P.2d 71, 75, 78 (1996) (holding there was sufficient evidence where complainant testified she was crying, repeatedly said no, 
attempted to pull away, and told defendant she did not want to 
touch him). 
In addition, we note that Complainant's testimony that
 
she clenched her mouth and crossed her legs arguably could have
 
supported the mens rea element of the conviction. However, the
 
Circuit Court specifically found that although the leg-crossing
 
occurred, Complainant was unable to convey her lack of consent
 
until "most, if not all, of the sexual activity alleged in the
 
indictment had ended." It found a reasonable doubt as to the
 
mens rea element until the defendants heard Complainant say no. 
The Circuit Court thus declined to convict on the basis of
 
Complainant's testimony regarding her leg-crossing and mouth-
clenching. As this finding concerns "the ultimate issue of
 
guilt," we may not affirm the conviction on the basis of evidence
 
that the trier of fact expressly rejected. See State v. Alsip, 2
 
Haw. App. 259, 262, 630 P.2d 126, 128 (1981) ("It is well-settled
 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that in reviewing a decision rendered in a case tried by the 
court without a jury, an appellate court will indulge every 
reasonable presumption in favor of findings made by the court 
below as the basis of its decision.") (emphasis added); Batson, 
73 Haw. at 246, 831 P.2d at 930 ("[F]indings of the trial court 
will not be disturbed unless clearly erroneous"); accord State v. 
Gabrillo, 10 Haw. App. 448, 459 n.7, 877 P.2d 891, 896 n.7 
(1994); Eastman, 81 Hawai' i at 139, 913 P.2d at 65 ("It is for 
the trial judge as fact-finder to assess the credibility of witnesses and to resolve all questions of fact; the judge may 
accept or reject any witness's testimony in whole or in part."). 
Finally, the State argues that the testimony regarding
 
the second camera incident was sufficient to support a conviction
 
of fourth-degree sexual assault. The Circuit Court did not
 
reference the camera incident as the basis for its finding of
 
guilt, but it did find that the incident occurred. Yorkston
 
testified that while Complainant was lying on the bed, he moved
 
the bottom of her swimsuit aside in order to take a picture of
 
her crotch. He admitted that in so doing, his hand touched her
 
"crotch area." His testimony indicates that the camera incident
 
occurred sometime after he heard her say no.
 
Although this testimony arguably provides substantial
 
evidence for each of the elements of fourth-degree sexual
 
assault, it cannot sustain the conviction in this case because
 
the camera incident was not charged in the indictment, nor was it
 
a lesser included offense.
 
A trier of fact may convict on a lesser offense if 
"there is a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict 
acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and convicting 
him of the included offense." Kinnane, 79 Hawai' i at 49, 897 
P.2d at 976 (quoting State v. Kupau, 76 Hawai' i 387, 390, 879 
P.2d 492, 495 (1994) (citation and internal quotation marks 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
omitted)). The common-law scheme for lesser included offenses
 
was codified by statute as follows:
 
§ 701-109. Method of prosecution when conduct
establishes an element of more than one offense. (1) When
 
the same conduct of a defendant may establish an element of
more than one offense, the defendant may be prosecuted for
each offense of which such conduct is an element. The
 defendant may not, however, be convicted of more than one
offense if:
 
(a) 	One offense is included in the other, as defined
in subsection (4) of this section; or
 
. . . .
 
(4) A defendant may be convicted of an offense
included in an offense charged in the indictment or the
information. An offense is so included when:
 
(a) 	It is established by proof of the same or less
than all the facts required to establish the
commission of the offense charged; or
 
(b) 	It consists of an attempt to commit the offense
charged or to commit an offense otherwise
included therein; or
 
(c) 	It differs from the offense charged only in the
respect that a less serious injury or risk of
injury to the same person, property, or public
interest or a different state of mind indicating
lesser degree of culpability suffices to
establish its commission.
 
HRS § 701-109 (1993). Fourth-degree sexual assault may be a 
lesser included offense within second-degree sexual assault under 
paragraph (c) because it involves a "different state of mind 
indicating a lesser degree of culpability" and it "envisions a 
less serious injury or risk of injury." Kinnane, 79 Hawai' i at 
982-83, 897 P.2d at 55-56 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
In Kinnane, the lesser included offense stemmed from
 
the same conduct as that alleged in the complaint. Id. at 975­
76, 897 P.2d at 48-49. Here, the indictment alleges different
 
conduct than the camera incident. Count VII charges second-
degree sexual assault on the basis that Yorkston 
intentionally engage[d] in conduct which, under the
circumstances as he believed them to be, constituted a
substantial step in a course of conduct intended to
culminate in his commission of the crime of Sexual Assault
 
18
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in the Second Degree against [Complainant], by attempting to
place his penis in her genital opening, thereby committing
the offense.
 
The charge therefore stemmed from Yorkston's attempt at
 
penetration. By all accounts, the camera incident was a separate
 
act that occurred some time after the penetration attempts.  The
 
indictment does not allege any facts or offenses pertaining to
 
the camera incident.
 
A separate act, giving rise to a separately punishable 
offense, cannot be the basis for a lesser included offense. The 
Hawai'i Supreme Court has held that where "two different criminal 
acts are at issue, supported by different factual evidence even though separated in time by only a few seconds, one offense by 
definition cannot be 'included' in the other. The defendant can 
properly be punished for both, under different, or the same 
statutory provisions." State v. Mendonca, 68 Haw. 280, 284, 711 
P.2d 731, 735 (1985) (quoting State v. Pia, 55 Haw. 14, 19, 514 P.2d 580, 584-85 (1973) (emphasis omitted)). Because the camera 
incident was a separate act from the attempted penetration, it 
cannot be a lesser offense included in Count VII. 
Moreover, under the Hawai' i Constitution, "the 
prosecution must allege all essential elements of an offense in 
the charging instrument." State v. Jess, 117 Hawai' i 381, 393, 
184 P.3d 133, 145 (2008). An indictment must contain "an allegation of every fact which is legally essential to the 
punishment." Id. (quoting Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 
510 (2000) (Thomas, J., concurring)). Without a proper charge, a conviction "constitute[s] a denial of due process." State v. 
Elliott, 77 Hawai' i 309, 311, 884 P.2d 372, 374 (1994) (quoting 
State v. Jendrusch, 58 Haw. 279, 281, 567 P.2d 1242, 1244 
(1977)); see also State v. Israel, 78 Hawai' i 66, 71, 890 P.2d 
303, 308 (1995) (noting that defendants should not be forced to "speculate as to what crime [they] will have to meet in 
defense.") (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); HRS 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 806-34 (1993) (requiring that indictment contain allegations
 
sufficient to "give the accused reasonable notice of the
 
facts."). Because the indictment does not charge Yorkston with
 
any offense relating to the camera incident, nor even allege any
 
facts pertaining to it, the testimony regarding that incident
 
cannot sustain the conviction under Count VII.
 
B. Yorkston's Other Points of Error
 Because we reverse Yorkston's conviction for
 
insufficiency of evidence, we need not address his other points
 of error.
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that there is
 
insufficient evidence to support Yorkston's conviction for sexual
 
assault in the fourth degree. Accordingly, we reverse the
 
Circuit Court's Judgment of Conviction and Probation
 
Sentence/Notice of Entry entered on February 11, 2009 and the
 
Free Standing Order of Restitution entered on February 24, 2009.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 17, 2012. 
PAUL J. CUNNEY 
VICTOR J. BAKKE DEAN C.M. HOE MARCUS B. SIERRA (Paul J. Cunney, A Law
Corporation)
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge 
JAMES M. ANDERSON 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
20
 