NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28108
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE MATTER OF WATER USE PERMIT APPLICATIONS,
PETITIONS FOR INTERIM INSTREAM FLOW STANDARD
 
AMENDMENTS, AND PETITIONS FOR WATER RESERVATIONS
FOR THE WAI AHOLE DITCH COMBINED CONTESTED CASE HEARING
 
APPEAL FROM THE COMMISSION ON WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

 
(CASE NO. CCH-OA95-1)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION

 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Circuit Judges McKenna and Chan in place of
Foley, Fujise, Leonard, JJ., all recused)
 
This is the third appeal arising out of a contested 
case hearing before the Commission on Water Resource Management 
(Water Commission) regarding waters distributed by the Wai ahole 
Ditch System (Wai ahole Ditch). The Wai ahole Ditch is a major 
irrigation infrastructure that collects water from the windward side of O
'ahu and delivers it to the leeward side. 
The contested case hearing began in 1995 and involved 
twenty-five parties. The Water Commission has issued three decisions, each containing extensive findings of fact and conclusions of law. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has vacated in 
part the prior two decisions issued by the Water Commission and remanded for further proceedings. The supreme court's opinions and the Water Commission's actions on remand have served to  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
significantly reduce the remaining issues in dispute and the
 
number of contesting parties.
 
In In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai 'i 97, 
9 P.3d 409 (2000) (Wai ahole I), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court vacated 
in part the Water Commission's first decision, which was entitled "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order" (D&O I), and remanded the case for further proceedings on seven issues. Id. at 189, 9 P.3d at 501. The court affirmed 
all aspects of D&O I not otherwise addressed in its opinion. Id. 
at 190, 9 P.3d at 502. On remand, the Water Commission issued its second decision, which was entitled "Legal Framework, Findings of Fact, and Decision and Order" (D&O II). In In re Water Use Permit Applications, 105 Hawai
'i 1, 93 P.3d 643 (2004) 
(Waiahole II), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court vacated in part D&O II 
and remanded the case for further proceedings on specified issues. Id. at 27, 93 P.3d at 669. 
The instant appeal involves the Water Commission's 
third decision, which was issued on remand after Wai
ahole II and 
is entitled "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order" (D&O III). Petitioners-Appellants Hakipu
'u 'Ohana and 
Ka Lahui Hawai 'i (collectively, the "Windward Parties"), joined 
1
by Appellant Hawai 'i's Thousand Friends (HTF),  appeal from D&O
III. On appeal, the Windward Parties argue that the Water 
Commission erred in: (1) issuing a water use permit to Appellee The Estate of James Campbell (Campbell Estate) when an alternative ground water source was available; (2) refusing to consider the merits of the Windward Parties' motion to deny the water use permit application of Appellee Pu
'u Makakilo, Inc. 
(PMI), which motion was based on new evidence that PMI did not need the water for which it had applied, and issuing a water use 
1
 HTF did not file an opening brief but filed a joinder to the opening
brief of the Windward Parties. We will attribute the arguments contained in
the Windward Parties' brief to the Windward Parties, with the understanding
that HTF has joined in those arguments.
 
2
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
permit to PMI when PMI had not established a reasonable-
beneficial use; (3) setting interim instream flow standards
 
2 3
(IIFSs)  for the windward streams  that were not supported by
sufficient data and failing to include water that remained
 unpermitted in the IIFSs.
4
 
We hold that: (1) the Water Commission did not err in
 
issuing a water use permit to Campbell Estate; (2) the Water
 Commission erred by granting PMI a water use permit without
 considering the merits of the Windward Parties' motion, which was
 based on new evidence that PMI did not need the water for which
 it had applied for a reasonable-beneficial use; and (3) the Water
 Commission did not err in setting the IIFSs for the windward
 streams and in declining to include unpermitted water in the
 IIFSs. 
BACKGROUND
 
The facts underlying this case are set forth in detail

 
in 
Waiahole I and Wai ahole II. We will limit our discussion to 
2 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 174C-3 (1993) defines the terms
"[i]nstream flow standard" and "[i]nterim instream flow standard" as follows:
 
"Instream flow standard" means a quantity or flow of water
or depth of water which is required to be present at a specific
location in a stream system at certain specified times of the year
to protect fishery, wildlife, recreational, aesthetic, scenic, and
other beneficial instream uses.
 
. . . .
 
"Interim instream flow standard" means a temporary instream
flow standard of immediate applicability, adopted by the
commission without the necessity of a public hearing, and
terminating upon the establishment of an instream flow standard.
 
3
 The windward streams for which D&O III set IIFSs were the Waia hole,
Waianu, Waika ne, and Kahana Streams. 
4 While this appeal was pending, the following substitution of parties
took place: 1) James Campbell Company LLC (JCCLLC) was substituted for the
Campbell Estate, Monsanto Company was partially substituted for JCCLLC, and
Syngenta Hawaii, LLC was substituted for JCCLLC, which then withdrew as a
party-in-interest in the case; and 2) Grace Pacific Corporation was
substituted for PMI. For simplicity purposes, we will use "Campbell Estate"
and "PMI" to refer not only to Campbell Estate and PMI, but to the parties
that have been substituted for and have replaced them in this appeal.
 
3
 ______________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the background facts pertinent to the issues raised in this
 
appeal.
 
The circumstances leading to the Water Commission's
 
issuance of D&O I are summarized as follows:
 
[T]he Waia hole Ditch system, built in significant part
between 1913 and 1916, collects fresh surface water and
dike-impounded ground water from windward O' ahu and delivers 
it to leeward O' ahu. For many years, the ditch diversions,
along with ground water pumped from the Pearl Harboraquifer, irrigated O' ahu Sugar Company's sugar plantation.
These diversions, however, reduced the water flow inWaiahole, Waika ne, Waianu, and Kahana streams, thereby
affecting the streams' natural environment and nearby humancommunities. 
. . . .
 
Following the designation of windward O' ahu's five 
aquifer systems as ground water management areas in 1992,
the existing users of Waia hole Ditch water were required to
apply for water use permits. In June 1993, the former
operator of the ditch system, the Waia hole Irrigation
Company,
2/ filed a combined permit application for the
existing users of the Waia hole Ditch water. In August 1993,
large amounts of ditch water became available when O' ahu 
Sugar Company announced the end of its sugar operations.
Various parties filed applications for existing water use
permits, applications for new water use permits, petitions
to restore water to streams by amending the IIFS, and
petitions for reservations of water. In 1995, the Water
Commission admitted a total of twenty-five parties,
including the Windward Parties and HTF, and commenced a
combined contested case hearing for all applications and
petitions. 
2/ In July 1999, ADC acquired the operations of the
Waiahole Ditch system from the Waia hole Irrigation Company.
 
Waiahole II, 105 Hawai 'i at 5-6, 93 P.3d at 647-48 (citations 
omitted). 
I. D&O I
 
On December 24, 1997, the Water Commission issued 
D&O I. In D&O I, out of the 27 million gallons per day (mgd) of
 
water flowing through the Wai ahole Ditch, the Water Commission
 
(1) assigned 14.03 mgd to permitted leeward agricultural and
 nonagricultural uses and system losses and (2) released 12.97 mgd
 into windward streams. Id. at 6, 93 P.3d at 648. The water use
 permits issued by the Water Commission included a permit to PMI
 for golf course use and a permit to Campbell Estate to irrigate
 
4

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
agricultural properties. Wai ahole I, 94 Hawai 'i at 164-65, 9 
P.3d at 476-77. Of the 12.97 mgd released into windward streams, 
6.0 mgd were allocated to amending the IIFSs for windward streams
 by adding 4.0 mgd to the base flow of Wai
ahole Stream and 2.0 mgd
 
to the base flow of Waianu Stream, and 6.97 mgd were kept
 available for leeward offstream uses as a "proposed agricultural
 reserve" or "non-permitted ground water buffer." Id. at 116-18,
 
9 P.3d at 428-30. 
II. Wai
ahole I
 
In Waiahole I, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court vacated the 
water use permit issued to Campbell Estate because "[i]n neglecting to address the practicability of using pumped ground water as an alternative to stream diversion, the [Water] Commission failed to establish an adequate basis for the allocations granted to Campbell Estate." Id. at 165, 9 P.3d at 
477. The court also vacated PMI's water use permit because the
 
Water Commission had granted PMI's requested allocation "without
 any reasoned discussion of the practicability of using ground
 water . . . ." Id. at 171, 9 P.3d at 483. The court remanded
 
the case to the Water Commission for additional findings and
 conclusions regarding, among other things, "the practicability of
 Campbell Estate and PMI using alternative ground water
 sources[.]" Id. at 189, 9 P.3d at 501. 
The court also vacated the IIFSs for windward streams
 
set forth in D&O I and remanded the case for "the designation of
 an [IIFS] for windward streams based on the best information
 available, as well as the specific apportionment of any flows
 allocated or otherwise released to the windward streams[.]" Id.
 
at 156, 189, 9 P.3d at 468, 501.
 
III. D&O II
 
On remand, the Water Commission issued D&O II on 
December 28, 2001. The Water Commission found that Campbell Estate had no practicable alternatives to Wai
ahole Ditch water 
and issued Campbell Estate a water use permit for 4.74 mgd. Wai
ahole II, 105 Hawai 'i at 16, 93 P.3d at 658. With respect to 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
PMI, the Water Commission found that PMI had no practicable
 
alternatives to Wai ahole Ditch water and issued PMI a water use
 
permit for 0.75 mgd. Id. at 17, 93 P.3d at 659. 
The Water Commission used the "half approach" to amend
 
the IIFSs. Wai ahole II, 105 Hawai 'i at 9-10, 93 P.3d at 651-52. 
The Water Commission explained that, 
a reasonable and practicable approach would be to restore
[the windward streams] to one-half their pre-[Waia hole]
Ditch base flow levels which would also exceed their 1960
 levels where testimony established the presence of aquatic
biota at a higher level than today. The [Water] Commission
believes that the IIFSs set at such a level would protect
aquatic biota in the streams.
 
Id. at 10, 93 P.3d at 652 (emphasis in original omitted). The
 
Water Commission first determined two sets of possible pre-
Wai
ahole Ditch flow measurements for the windward streams, one
 
based on 1911 stream data and the other based on each stream's
 current base flow plus the flow diverted by the Wai
ahole Ditch. 
Id. at 9, 93 P.3d at 651. It then calculated the amount of
 Wai
ahole Ditch water that would need to be added to each windward
 
stream to reach one-half of the two possible pre-Wai ahole Ditch
 
flow measurements, taking the higher of the two calculations in
 setting the IIFSs for the streams. Id. at 9-10, 93 P.3d at 651­
52. Finally, the Water Commission added an additional 1.1 mgd to
 
the Wai
ahole and Waianu Streams and .10 mgd to the Waik ane
 
Stream, after considering appurtenant rights, riparian uses, and
 existing uses. Id. at 10, 93 P.3d at 652. 
Based on this approach, the Water Commission set the
 
IIFSs for the windward streams as follows, with the figures in
 parentheses showing the amount of Wai
ahole Ditch water added to
 
each stream: 1) Wai ahole Stream, 8.7 mgd (4.8 mgd added); 2)
 
Waianu Stream, 3.5 mgd (3.0 mgd added); 3) Waik ane Stream, 3.5
 
mgd (2.1 mgd added); and 4) Kahana Stream, 11.2 mgd (0 mgd
 added). Id. at 10, 93 P.3d at 652. The Water Commission did not
 
make any findings regarding the 2.2 mgd of unpermitted Wai
ahole
 
Ditch water that was not allocated to the IIFSs. Id. at 13, 93
 
P.3d at 655. 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. Waiahole II
 
In Waiahole II, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court vacated the 
water use permit issued to Campbell Estate on the ground that 
Campbell Estate had failed to meet its burden of establishing that no practicable alternative sources of water existed. Id. at 
16-17, 93 P.3d at 658-59. The court noted that the Water Commission had entered no findings of fact or conclusions of law as to whether Campbell Estate had met its burden. Id. The court 
stated that, on remand, 
[i]f the Water Commission enters findings that Campbell
Estate satisfied its burden [of establishing that no
practicable alternatives existed], the Water Commission must
clearly articulate the alternatives presented by Campbell
Estate and its analysis of those alternatives in determining
whether each alternative is practicable, together with
proper citations to the record.
 
Id. at 17, 93 P.3d at 659. 
The court concluded that PMI had met its burden of
 
establishing the absence of practicable alternative water
 
sources. Id. at 17-19, 93 P.3d at 659-61. Nevertheless, the
 
court vacated PMI's permit because the Water Commission had
 "erred by basing its decision that Campbell Estate and PMI had no
 practical alternative water sources (1) on the effect reduced
 water flows will have on the economic viability of the [Wai
ahole]
 
Ditch and (2) on the theory that public trust resources may not
 be prioritized." Id. at 20, 93 P.3d at 662. Because the court
 
could not tell if the Water Commission had relied upon these two 
factors in reaching its decision that Campbell Estate and PMI had
 no practicable alternative water sources, the court stated that
 it had "no choice" but to vacate their water use permits and
 remand for further proceedings." Id. at 20-21, 93 P.3d at 662­
63.
 
The court concluded that the Water Commission had erred
 
in relying upon the "half approach" in establishing the IIFSs for
 windward streams. Id. at 10-11, 93 P.3d at 652-53. The court
 
further concluded that the Water Commission did not clearly err
 in "deem[ing] credible the testimony that the flow in the 1960s
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was adequate to support the stream's ecosystem and native
 
Hawaiian customs and practices." Id. at 12, 93 P.3d at 654. The
 
court, however, held that the Water Commission failed to make
 findings of each windward stream's flow during the 1960s and thus
 failed to support the Water Commission's "conclusion that the
 current IIFS flow is more than the flow in the 1960s." Id. The
 
court remanded this issue for further proceedings and stated: 
If, on remand, the Water Commission is able to support
its conclusion with findings quantifying the windward
streams' flows during the 1960s, then the 1960s testimonials
would be sufficient to set the IIFS at the levels
 established in the D&O II, inasmuch as: (1) more water would
be added to the streams than that which adequately supported
the streams' ecosystem in the 1960s; (2) the increase in
stream flow over the 1960s stream flow would be beneficial
 in light of the Water Commission's finding that increasing a
stream's flow results in stream habitat improvement; and (3)
appurtenant rights, riparian uses, and existing uses would
be accounted for by further increases in stream flow. The
 foregoing would then adequately establish that instream
values would be protected to the extent practicable for
interim purposes.
 
Id. (citations and footnote omitted). 
V. D&O III
 
On remand from Wai ahole II, the Water Commission issued
 
D&O III on July 13, 2006. The Water Commission considered
 
evidence proffered by the Campbell Estate regarding five
 alternative ground-water sources from the Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer
 for the Wai
ahole Ditch water. The Commission concluded that the
 
construction of a new well that would draw ground water from the
 Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer provided an alternative ground-water
 source to Wai
ahole Ditch water to irrigate Campbell Estate's
 
lands. The Water Commission further concluded, however, that the
 water from the Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer was not a practicable
 alternative to the Wai
ahole Ditch water for Campbell Estate's
 
water use permit application. The Water Commission noted that 
Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water is potable and its highest and best
 use is for domestic use by the general public, particularly as
 drinking water, whereas the highest and best use of non-potable
 Wai
ahole Ditch water is for agricultural irrigation. Based on
 
its prioritization of these two available public trust resources,
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Water Commission concluded that Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water,
 
and any well using such water, is not a practicable alternative
 to the use of Wai
ahole Ditch water to irrigate Campbell Estate's
 
agricultural lands. Accordingly, after considering the needs of
 the fields on Campbell Estate's lands in actual cultivation, the
 Water Commission issued a water use permit to Campbell Estate for
 3.98
 mgd.
 
With respect to PMI's water use permit application, the
 
5
 Windward Parties filed a motion with the Water Commission to
deny PMI's application. The motion proffered new evidence of
 changed circumstances showing that PMI did not need the requested
 0.75 mgd. In support of its motion, the Windward Parties cited
 evidence that although PMI's original permit request in 1995 was
 to use the 0.75 mgd to irrigate a planned golf course, the golf
 course was not in operation and that PMI had used only a
 negligible amount of the 0.75 mgd that had been allocated to PMI. 
The Windward Parties also referred to a newspaper article which
 suggested that PMI had abandoned its plans to use its property
 for a golf course. 
The Water Commission refused to consider the merits of

 
the Windward Parties' motion in the proceedings on remand from
 Wai
ahole II and denied the motion as being outside the scope of
 
the supreme court's remand. The Water Commission ruled that the
 "remanded hearing was convened specifically to clarify the basis
 on which the [Water] Commission concluded that there were no
 practicable alternatives for PMI's use of [Wai
ahole D]itch water
 
and not to revisit the [Water] Commission's original award in 
D&O I of 0.75 mgd to PMI as a reasonable and beneficial use." 
The Water Commission therefore denied the Windward Parties'
 motion without prejudice and stated that the motion would be
 "addressed and decided by the [Water] Commission, but not in this
 limited remand from the Court." The Water Commission reiterated
 
5
 The motion was filed by Hakipu' u 'Ohana and Ka La hui Hawai' i as well as 
the Kahalu' u Neighborhood Board. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
findings of fact from D&O II that led to its conclusion that PMI
 
had no practicable alternatives water sources for PMI's permit
 application and confirmed that this was the basis for the Water
 Commission's granting the water use permit to PMI. The Water
 Commission therefore reinstated PMI's water use permit for 0.75
 mgd.
 
In addressing the IIFS issue, the Water Commission used
 
information from the United States Geological Survey (USGS) to
 support its finding that the base flows of windward streams in
 the 1960s were as follows: "1) Wai
ahole Stream: 3.9 mgd at its
 
confluence with Waianu Stream; 2) Waianu Stream: 0.5 mgd at its
 confluence with Wai
ahole Stream; 3) Waik ane Stream: 1.4 mgd at
 
altitude of 75 feet; and 4) Kahana Stream: 11.2 mgd at altitude
 of 15 feet." The Water Commission concluded that these base
 flows have remained stable since the 1960s and were the base
 flows for the windward streams when the IFFSs were first
 established in 1992. The Water Commission found that stability
 in the Wai
ahole Ditch flows started in about 1938. It analyzed
 
three Wai ahole Ditch-related events that took place since the
 
mid-1960s that might have affected the windward streams' base
 flows and concluded that none of the events had a significant
 impact on the 1960s base flows. 
The Water Commission set the amended IIFSs at higher
 
levels than the 1960s base flows. The amended IIFSs set forth in
 D&O III are as follows, with the figures in parentheses showing
 the amount of Wai
ahole Ditch water added to the streams: 
Waiahole Stream, 8.7 mgd (4.8 mgd added); Waianu Stream, 3.5 mgd
 
(3.0 mgd added); Waik ane Stream 3.5 mgd (2.1 mgd added); and
 
Kahana Stream 13.3 mgd (2.1 mgd added).6 Thus, under the amended
 
IIFSs, the Water Commission added 12 mgd of Wai ahole Ditch water
 
to the windward streams. 
6
 In comparison with D&O II, D&O III confirmed the IIFS for Waika ne
 
Stream; kept the same IIFSs for Waia hole and Waianu Streams, but removed the
variable IIFSs; and increased the IIFS for Kahana Stream by 2.1 mgd.
 
10
   "Trial de novo is not allowed on review of commission
 
actions under" Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter 174C.
HRS § 174C-12 (1993). This court's review of the Water
 
Commission's D&O II is governed by HRS chapter 91, which
provides in relevant part that:
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Of the remaining 15 mgd of Wai ahole Ditch water
 
available for offstream uses, the Water Commission issued permits
 
for 12.57 mgd, leaving 2.43 mgd of Wai ahole Ditch water that
 
remained unpermitted. The Water Commission did not add the 2.43
 mgd of unpermitted water to the IIFSs, but determined that it
 would be diverted into the windward streams until such time as it
 is permitted for offstream use. The Water Commission ruled that
 "[t]he unpermitted water and any permitted water not needed for
 day-to-day operations will be diverted into the windward streams
 as previously specified in D&O I and D&O II; i.e., 0.9 mgd into
 Waik
ane Stream and the remainder into Wai ahole Stream . . . ."
 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW

 
In Waiahole II, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court set forth the 
following standards of review for a decision of Water Commission 
and the interpretation of the State Water Code, HRS Chapter 174C: 
A. Judicial Review of the Water Commission's Decision
 
Upon review of the record the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may
reverse or modify the decision and order if the
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings,
conclusions, decisions, or orders are:
 
(1)	 In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
 
(2) 	In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
 
(3) 	Made upon unlawful procedure; or
 
(4) 	Affected by other error of law; or
 
(5) 	Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
 
(6) 	Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterizedby abuse of discretion or clearly

 

unwarranted exercise of discretion.
HRS §§ 174C-12 and 91-14(g) (1993). "[U]nder HRS § 91-14(g),
conclusions of law [(COL)] are reviewable under subsections
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1), (2), and (4); questions regarding procedural defects
under subsection (3); findings of fact [(FOF)] undersubsection (5); and an agency's exercise of discretion undersubsection (6)." In re Hawaiian Elec. Co., 81 Hawai' i 459,
465, 918 P.2d 561, 567 (1996) (citing Outdoor Circle v.Harold K.L. Castle Trust Estate, 4 Haw. App. 633, 638, 675P.2d 784, 789 (1983)). 
As such, the Water Commission's COLs are freely
reviewable under the right/wrong standard "to determine if
[its] decision was in violation of constitutional or
statutory provisions, in excess of statutory authority or
jurisdiction of agency, or affected by other error of law."
Waiahole I, 94 Hawai' i at 119, 9 P.3d at 431 (citations
omitted). The Water Commission's FOFs are reviewed under
 the clearly erroneous standard "to determine if the [Water
Commission's] decision was clearly erroneous in view of
reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record." Id. (citations omitted). A FOF is clearly
erroneous when "(1) the record lacks substantial evidence to
support the finding or determination, or (2) despite
substantial evidence to support the finding or
determination, the appellate court is left with the definite
and firm conviction that a mistake has been made." Id.
 (citation omitted). Substantial evidence is defined as
 "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion." Id. (citation and quotation marks
 omitted).
 
We review the Water Commission's action "pursuant to
the deferential abuse of discretion standard." Paul's
 Electrical Service, Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai' i 419, 91
P.3d at 501-02 (2004) (holding that "[i]f the legislature
has granted the agency discretion over a particular matter,
then we review the agency's action pursuant to the
deferential abuse of discretion standard [ ]bearing in mind
that the legislature determines the boundaries of that
discretion"). However, because water is a public trust
resource and the public trust is a state constitutional
doctrine, this court recognizes certain qualifications to
the standard of review regarding the Water Commission's
decisions. Waia hole I, 94 Hawai' i at 143, 9 P.3d at 455.
"As with other state constitutional guarantees, the ultimate
authority to interpret and defend the public trust in
Hawai'i rests with the courts of this state." Id. (citation 
omitted).
 
This is not to say that this court will supplant its
judgment for that of the legislature or agency.
However, it does mean that this court will take a
"close look" at the action to determine if it complies
with the public trust doctrine and it will not act
merely as a rubber stamp for agency or legislative
action.
 
Id. at 144, 9 P.3d at 456 (citations omitted) (emphasis in
original). As such, "the [Water Commission] may compromise
public rights in the resource pursuant only to a decision
made with a level of openness, diligence, and foresight
commensurate with the high priority these rights command
under the laws of our state." Id. at 143, 9 P.3d at 455.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. Interpretation of the State Water Code
 
In construing statutes, this court has recognized that
 
our foremost obligation is to ascertain and give
effect to the intention of the legislature, which is
to be obtained primarily from the language contained
in the statute itself. And we must read statutory
language in the context of the entire statute and
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.
 
When there is doubt, doubleness of
meaning, or indistinctiveness or uncertainty of
an expression used in a statute, an ambiguity
exists . . . .
 
In construing an ambiguous statute, the meaning
of the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may be
compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.
Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids in
determining legislative intent. One avenue is the use
 of legislative history as an interpretive tool. This
 court may also consider the reason and spirit of the
law, and the cause which induced the legislature to
enact it . . . to discover its true meaning.
 
Laws in pari materia, or upon the same subject
matter, shall be construed with reference to each
other. What is clear in one statute may be called
upon in aid to explain what is doubtful in another.
 
Id. at 144, 9 P.3d at 456 (citations, quotation marks,
brackets, and formatting omitted) (ellipses in the
original).
 
If the legislature has unambiguously spoken, the
inquiry ends.
 
When the legislative intent is less than clear,
however, this court will observe the well
established rule of statutory construction that,
where an administrative agency is charged with
the responsibility of carrying out the mandate
of a statute which contains words of broad and
 indefinite meaning, courts accord persuasive
weight to administrative construction and follow
the same, unless the construction is palpably
erroneous.
 
Id. (citations and quotation marks omitted). "The rule of
 judicial deference, however, does not apply when the
agency's reading of the statute contravenes the
legislature's manifest purpose. Consequently, we have not
hesitated to reject an incorrect or unreasonable statutory
construction advanced by the agency entrusted with the
statute's implementation." Id. at 145, 9 P.3d at 457
(citations omitted).
 
Waiahole II, 105 Hawai 'i at 7-9, 93 P.3d at 649-51 (brackets, 
emphasis, and ellipsis points in original).
 
13
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
I. Campbell Estate's Water Use Permit
 
The Windward Parties argue that the Water Commission
 
erred in issuing a water use permit to Campbell Estate because
 
(1) it was arbitrary and capricious to allocate Wai ahole Ditch
 
water to Campbell Estate when Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water was
 available; and (2) the Water Commission should have engaged in
 rulemaking procedures when it "reserved" Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer
 for domestic, drinking purposes. We disagree with the Windward
 Parties' arguments.
 
A.	 The Water Commission's decision to give priority
to potable Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water over non-
potable Wai
ahole Ditch water in granting Campbell
Estate's permit application was not arbitrary or
capricious.
 
1.
 
The Water Commission granted Campbell Estate a water
 
use permit of 3.98 mgd of Wai
ahole Ditch water to irrigate
 
Campbell Estate's agricultural lands. In rendering its decision,
 
the Water Commission found that there were two potential sources
 for the water requested by Campbell Estate, both of which were
 public trust resources: (1) potable groundwater from the Waipahu­
7
Waiawa Aquifer;  and (2) non-potable Wai ahole Ditch water. The
 
Water Commission stated that "the highest and best use of potable
 Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water is domestic use of the general
 public, particularly drinking water."
8
 
7
 The Water Commission noted that Campbell Estate's obtaining water from
the Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer through the drilling of a new well "is a reasonable
alternative to Waia hole Ditch waters on the basis of cost, existing
technology, and logistics."
 
8
 HRS § 174C-3 defines "[d]omestic use" to mean "any use of water for
individual personal needs and for household purposes such as drinking,
bathing, heating, cooking, noncommercial gardening, and sanitation."
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Water Commission then explained its determination
 
that potable Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water was not a practicable
 
alternative source to Wai ahole Ditch water for Campbell Estate's
 
water needs: 
It is the [Water] Commission's priority that water
resources be matched with their highest and best use. When
 
applied by the [Water] Commission to water for agriculture
uses from a potable versus non-potable water source, the
decision must be the use of [Waia hole] Ditch water and not
water from the Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer to irrigate Campbell
Estate's agricultural lands. Non-potable Waia hole Ditch
 
water is available for its highest and best use,
agricultural irrigation. Agricultural use is not the
highest and best use of the Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer. To use
 potable Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water when a non-potable
source is equally and even more available, taking into
consideration cost, existing technology and logistics in
light of the overall water planning process, would be
counter to the priorities of the [Water] Commission.
 
. . . The [Hawai' i Supreme] Court has concluded that
"considering whether alternative water resources are
practicable innately requires prioritizing among publictrust resources." ([Waia hole II,] 105 [Hawai' i] at 20, [93
P.3d at 662]) The [Water] Commission's prioritizing resultsin the conclusion that the highest use for [Waia hole] Ditch
water is for agricultural uses, while the highest use forWaipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water is for potable purposes.Campbell Estate's water use permit application was foragriculture use on its lands, which is best met with[Waiahole] Ditch waters. Thus, after prioritizing among
these two public trust resources, the [Water] Commissionconcludes that Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water is not apracticable alternative water resource, and a new well usingsuch water, or any well utilizing the same source, is not apracticable alternative to the use of [Waia hole] Ditch water
to irrigate Campbell Estate's lands. 
(Brackets in original omitted.)
 
We conclude that it was not arbitrary, capricious, or
 
an abuse of discretion for the Water Commission to prioritize
 
between trust resources and to allocate non-potable Wai ahole
 
Ditch water for Campbell Estate's agricultural needs instead of
 potable Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water, which could be used to
 satisfy the public's future drinking water needs.
 
15

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
HRS § 174C-49(a) (1993)9
 sets forth the conditions that
an applicant for a water use permit must satisfy. Among the
 
conditions relevant to this appeal are that "the applicant [must]
 establish that the proposed use of water: . . . (2) Is a
 reasonable-beneficial use as defined in section 174C-3; . . .
 [and] (4) Is consistent with the public interest[.]" HRS § 174C­49(a). HRS § 174C-3 defines the term "[r]easonable-beneficial
 use" to mean "the use of water in such a quantity as is necessary
 for economic and efficient utilization, for a purpose, and in a
 manner which is both reasonable and consistent with the state and
 

 2.
 
county land use plans and the public interest."
In 
Waiahole I, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court explained: 
The Code's "reasonable-beneficial use" standard allows use 
only "in such a quantity as is necessary for economic andefficient utilization." HRS § 174C-3 (emphasis added).Furthermore, besides advocating the social and economicutility of their proposed uses, permit applicants must alsodemonstrate the absence of practicable mitigating measures,including the use of alternative water sources. Such a requirement is intrinsic to the public trust, the statutoryinstream use protection scheme, and the definition of"reasonable-beneficial" use, and is an essential part of anybalancing between competing interests. 
9
 HRS § 174C-49(a) provides as follows:
 
Conditions for a permit.  (a) To obtain a permit pursuant to
this part, the applicant shall establish that the proposed use of
water: 
(1) Can be accommodated with the available water source; 
(2) Is a reasonable-beneficial use as defined in section 174C-3; 
(3) Will not interfere with any existing legal use ofwater; 
(4) Is consistent with the public interest; 
(5) Is consistent with state and county general plans andland use designations; 
(6) Is consistent with county land use plans and policies;and 
(7) Will not interfere with the rights of the departmentof Hawaiian home lands as provided in section 221 ofthe Hawaiian Homes Commission Act. 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Waiahole I, 94 Hawai 'i at 161-62, 9 P.3d at 473-74 (footnote and 
some citations omitted). 
The court noted that "states have uniformly recognized
 
domestic uses, particularly drinking, as among the highest uses
 
of water resources[,]" and the court recognized "domestic water
 use as a purpose of the state water resources trust." Id. at
 
137, 9 P.3d at 449. The court further stated that "[u]nder the
 public trust, the state has both the authority and the duty to
 preserve the rights of present and future generations in the
 waters of the state." Id. at 141, 9 P.3d at 453; see Haw. Const.
 
Art. XI, § 1 (requiring the protection and conservation of water
 resources "[f]or the benefit of present and future generations"). 
In Wai
ahole II, the court concluded that "[c]onsidering 
whether alternative water resources are practicable innately requires prioritizing among public trust resources. As such, by failing to prioritize among public trust resources, the Water Commission failed to fulfill its duty, under the Water Code and the public trust doctrine, of considering whether practicable alternatives exist." Wai
ahole II, 105 Hawai 'i at 20, 93 P.3d at 
662.
 
3.
 
We conclude that the Water Commission's decision-making 
in granting Campbell Estate's permit application was consistent with the analytical framework established by the Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court. There is no dispute that the alternative sources of water that could satisfy Campbell Estate's agricultural irrigation needs were both public trust resources. Thus, in rendering its decision, the Water Commission had to prioritize among public trust resources and balance between competing interests. The Water Commission determined that in addressing Campbell Estate's water needs, it was better to use non-potable Wai
ahole Ditch 
water and to conserve potable Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water, which could be used for domestic purposes, such as drinking water. This determination is consistent with the Wai
ahole I court's 
recognition of domestic uses of water, "particularly drinking, as 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
among the highest uses of water resources" and "domestic water 
use as a purpose of the state water resources trust." Waiahole 
I, 94 Hawai 'i at 137, 9 P.3d at 449. 
In deciding Campbell Estate's permit application, the 
Water Commission made a policy choice to give priority to a potable water resource over a non-potable water resource. We cannot say that the Water Commission's policy choice was arbitrary or capricious or that the Water Commission abused its discretion. The Windward Parties' contention that there is no immediate need to use Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water for drinking water does not change our conclusion. The Water Commission was entitled to consider the future water needs of Hawai
'i and its 
people in fulfilling the State of Hawai 'i's "obligation to 
protect, control and regulate the use of Hawai 'i's water 
resources for the benefit of its people." Haw. Const. Art. XI, § 7; see Haw. Const. Art. XI, § 1. 
B.	 The Water Commission did not violate rulemaking
procedures in explaining its reasons for
determining that potable Waiphau-Waiawa Aquifer
water was not a practicable alternative to non-
potable Wai
ahole Ditch water for Campbell Estate's
permit application.
 
Under HRS § 174C-49(d) (1993), "[t]he [Water
 
C]ommission, by rule, may reserve water in such locations and
 
quantities and for such seasons of the year as in its judgment
 may be necessary." (Emphases added.) As noted, in resolving
 Campbell Estate's permit application, the Water Commission
 referred to a policy of matching water resources with their
 highest and best use. In the context of Campbell Estate's permit
 application, the Water Commission explained that "the highest and
 best use of potable Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water is domestic use
 of the general public, particularly drinking water," whereas the
 highest and best use of non-potable Wai
ahole Ditch water is
 
agricultural irrigation. Therefore, the Water Commission
 concluded that for purposes of irrigating Campbell Estate's
 agricultural lands, Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water was not a
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
practicable alternative to Wai ahole Ditch water, which it found
 
was equally and even more available than Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer
 
water.
 
The Windward Parties contend that the Water
 
Commission's explanation of its policy choice of giving potable
 water priority over non-potable water in determining Campbell
 Estate's permit application constituted improper rulemaking. 
They claim that the Water Commission's statement that the highest
 and best use of potable Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water is for
 domestic use constituted a "reservation" of water under HRS 
§ 174C-49(d). We disagree.
 
In Waiahole I, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court rejected a 
similar argument. In that case, PMI argued that the Water
 Commission's expression of its intention to hold non-agricultural
 uses of water to higher standards and conditions than other uses
 constituted "illegal rulemaking." Wai
ahole I, 94 Hawai 'i at 168­
71, 9 P.3d at 480-83. The court recognized that 
the line between agency rulemaking and adjudication is not
always a clear one and in fact the two functions merge at
many points. In exploring this problematic distinction,
therefore, we have adopted the general rule that the choice
between proceeding by general rule or by individual, ad hoc
litigation is one that lies primarily in the informed
discretion of the administrative agency.
 
Id. at 169, 9 P.3d at 481 (internal quotation marks, brackets,
 
and citations omitted).
 
The court further explained:
 
One useful distinction between rulemaking and
adjudication is that the former affects the rights of
individuals in the abstract while the latter operates
concretely upon individuals in their individual capacity.
In this case, the [Water] Commission was required by law to
rule on the various competing permit applications, including
that of PMI, by way of an adjudicative proceeding. Based on
 the evidence presented at the hearing, the [Water]
Commission decided, in view of the particular water source
in question and the specific competing interests involved,
that it would hold certain uses to a higher standard than
others. The [Water] Commission did not, as PMI and others
allege, propose any general rules automatically applicable
in all circumstances, but instead devised a principled
solution to a specific dispute based on facts applied to
rules that have already been promulgated by the legislature
-- the definition of agency adjudication.
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In rendering its decision, the [Water] Commission
developed new policies and guidelines that may very well
precedentially affect future cases involving the Waia hole
 
Ditch System and perhaps other water sources. Such a
 process does not constitute rulemaking. As we stated in [In
re] Hawaiian Electric [Co., 81 Haw. 459, 467, 918 P.2d 561,
569-70 (1996)]:
 
In exercising its quasi-judicial function, an agency
must frequently decide controversies on the basis of
new doctrines, not theretofore applied to a specific
problem, though drawn to be sure from broader
principles reflecting the purposes of the statutes
involved and from the rules invoked in dealing with
related problems. If the agency decision reached
under the adjudicatory power becomes a precedent, it
guides future conduct in much the same way as though
it were a new rule promulgated under the rule-making
power.
 
Id. at 169-70, 9 P.3d at 481-82 (internal quotation marks,
 
brackets, citations, and ellipsis points omitted). The court
 held that "the [Water] Commission's distinctive treatment of
 'nonagricultural uses' in its decision did not constitute illegal
 rulemaking.'" Id. at 171, 9 P.3d at 483.
 
In the present case, the Water Commission was called
 
upon to resolve a specific dispute presented by Campbell Estate's
 permit application. In deciding the question of whether Campbell
 Estate had any practicable alternative water source to Wai
ahole
 
Ditch water, the Water Commission balanced competing interests
 and decided to give priority to potable Waiphau-Waiawa Aquifer
 water over non-potable Wai
ahole Ditch water. The Water
 
Commission explained that its determination that Waiphau-Waiawa
 Aquifer water was not a practicable alternative for Campbell
 Estate's permit application was based on the Water Commission's 
assessment of the highest and best use of the available Waipahu-
Waiawa Aquifer water and Wai
ahole Ditch water and its matching of
 
these waters with their highest and best uses. The Water
 Commission's explanation of its rationale was in conformance with
 the Wai
ahole II court's direction that on remand, the Water
 
Commission "must clearly articulate" its analysis of the
 alternative water sources presented by the Campbell estate in
 determining whether those alternatives were practicable. 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We conclude that the Water Commission did not engage in 
illegal rulemaking in explaining its rationale for determining 
that Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water was not a practicable alternative for Campbell Estate's permit application. The Water Commission was required to adjudicate a specific dispute presented by Campbell Estate's permit application. In adjudicating this dispute, the Water Commission explained its analysis. In doing so, the Water Commission did not "propose any general rules automatically applicable in all circumstances," see Wai
ahole I, 94 Hawai 'i at 169, 9 P.3d at 481, but instead 
made choices necessary to adjudicate the specific dispute before it. 
The Water Commission did not state that it was imposing
 
a general rule that water from the Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer could
 only be used for domestic use, but simply explained its reason
 for determining that such water was not a practicable alternative
 in this case for Campbell Estate's permit application. The Water
 Commission did not foreclose the possibility that it would permit
 the use of Waipahu-Waiawa Acquifer water for non-domestic
 purposes where different circumstances or different competing
 interests were involved. Our conclusion that the Water
 Commission did not engage in illegal rulemaking is supported by
 the general rule that the "choice between proceeding by general
 rule or by individual, ad hoc litigation is one that lies
 primarily in the informed discretion of the administrative
 agency." Id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
For essentially the same reasons, we conclude that the 
Water Commission did not "reserve" Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water for domestic use by stating that "the highest and best use of potable Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer water is domestic use of the general public, particularly drinking water." The term "reserve" is not defined in the State Water Code or in the relevant administrative rules. See In re Wai
'ola O Moloka 'i, Inc., 103 
Hawai'i 401, 427, 83 P.3d 664, 690 (2004) (Wai 'ola). According to 
Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 1059 (11th ed. 2003), 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"reserve" is defined as verb meaning "to hold in reserve: keep 
back" and "to set or have set aside or apart." See Schefke v. 
Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd., 96 Hawai 'i 408, 424, 32 P.3d 
52, 68 (2001) ("We may resort to legal or other well accepted dictionaries as one way to determine the ordinary meaning of certain terms not statutorily defined." (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). Where established, a reservation of water pursuant to HRS § 174C-49(d) has consisted of a specific amount of water set aside for a particular party and for particular uses. See generally, Wai
'ola, 103 Hawai 'i at 423-33, 
83 P.3d at 686-96. 
The Water Commission did not "reserve" Waipahu-Waiawa
 
Aquifer water solely for domestic use. As noted, the Water
 Commission did not state that it was imposing a general rule that
 water from the Waipahu-Waiawa Aquifer could only be used for
 domestic use. Nor did it preclude the use of Waipahu-Waiawa
 Acquifer water for non-domestic purposes under different
 circumstances or where different competing interests were
 involved. Accordingly, in deciding Campbell Estate' permit
 application, the Water Commission did not "reserve" Waipahu-
Waiawa Aquifer water by location and quantity or season within
 the meaning of HRS § 174C-49(d).
 
II. PMI's Water Use Permit
 
On remand from Wai
ahole II, the Windward Parties filed
 
a motion to deny PMI's permit application for 0.75 mgd of
 Wai
ahole Ditch water, which PMI had justified as necessary to
 
irrigate PMI's planned golf course. In support of its motion,
 the Windward Parties proffered new evidence of changed
 circumstances which they contended established that PMI no longer
 needed the 0.75 mgd because PMI's plans to operate a golf course
 had been indefinitely delayed or abandoned. The Water Commission
 denied the motion without considering its merits because the
 Water Commission viewed the motion as raising issues beyond the
 scope of the supreme court's remand in Wai
ahole II. Thus, in
 
deciding PMI's permit application, the Water Commission limited
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
its consideration to the specific issue remanded by the Wai ahole
 
II court, namely, the practicability of PMI using alternative
 
ground water sources.
 
On appeal, the Windward Parties argue that the Water
 
Commission erred in granting PMI's water use permit application
 without considering the Windward Parties' motion on the merits. 
They describe their motion as providing "new evidence of changed
 circumstances establish[ing] that PMI did not need anything close
 to 0.75 mgd to economically and efficiently utilize its
 property." We conclude that the Water Commission erred in
 refusing to consider the Windward Parties' motion on the merits
 before deciding PMI's permit application. 
A. The Windward Parties' motion on remand
 
In Wai
ahole II, the supreme court concluded that PMI 
had met its burden of establishing the absence of practicable alternative water sources. Wai
ahole II, 105 Hawai 'i at 17-19, 93 
P.3d at 659-61. The court, however, further concluded that the Water Commission had erred by "basing its decision that . . . PMI had no practical alternative water sources (1) on the effect reduced water flows will have on the economic viability of the [Wai
ahole] Ditch and (2) on the theory that public trust 
resources may not be prioritized." Id. at 20, 93 P.3d at 662. 
Because the Water Commission had failed to articulate "its analysis with reasonable clarity," the court could not tell if the Water Commission had relied upon these two factors in reaching its decision that PMI had no practicable alternative water sources. Id. at 21, 93 P.3d at 663. Thus, the court 
stated it had "no choice" but to vacate PMI's water use permit. Id. The court remanded the case for further findings and 
conclusion regarding "the practicability of . . . PMI using alternative ground water sources." Id. at 27, 93 P.3d at 669. 
On remand, the Windward Parties filed a motion to deny
 
PMI's permit application. In their motion, the Windward Parties
 stated that "PMI does not have the need for water assumed in its
 application, and it appears that its golf course is not even in
 
23
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
operation, despite many years of these proceedings." The
 
Windward Parties attached a May 31, 2004, Honolulu Advertiser
 newspaper article which: 1) described the Pu'u Makakilo Golf
 Course as "defunct"; 2) reported that the golf course clubhouse 
had not been manned by security for several years and had been
 vandalized within the past two months; 3) stated that Grace
 
10
Pacific Corp.  had purchased the golf course and clubhouse at a
foreclosure auction in 1994 and was planning to turn the
 clubhouse into a corporate office; and 4) reported that a vice-
president of Grace Pacific Corp. said that the area is not
 suitable for a golf course. The Windward Parties proffered more
 recent evidence that the clubhouse appeared to have been
 demolished. They also cited monthly water use statistics which
 showed that PMI had not used any Wai
ahole Ditch water in the
 
prior six months; that since the Water Commission issued D&O II,
 PMI's average monthly water use ranged from 0.0 to 0.057 mgd; and
 that in the prior 39 months, PMI's water use was negligible,
 exceeding 0.05 mgd in only three of those months. The Windward
 Parties also cited evidence indicating it was likely that PMI had
 been using less than half of the acreage for which PMI had been
 allocated water.
 
In their motion, the Windward Parties argued that PMI

 
bears the burden of justifying its proposed water use, including
 the burden of establishing that such use is reasonable and
 beneficial. They noted that "[d]emonstrating the absence of
 practicable mitigating measures . . . comprises only part of the
 reasonable-beneficial analysis." The Windward Parties asserted
 that because PMI had failed to establish an actual need for the
 0.75 mgd sought by PMI's permit application, the Water Commission
 should deny PMI's permit application.
 
The Water Commission refused to consider the merits of
 
the Windward Parties' motion. The Water Commission's refusal was
 
10
 In their opening brief, the Windward Parties refer to Grace Pacific
Corp. as "PMI's parent." In a subsequent pleading filed with this court,
Grace Pacific Corp. reported that PMI was merged into Grace Pacific Corp.
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
apparently based on its view that the supreme court's remand in
 
Waiahole II precluded the Water Commission from considering the
 
Windward Parties' motion because the motion raised issues that
 were not among the issues specified by the Wai
ahole II court in
 
remanding the case. Accordingly, with respect to PMI, the Water
 Commission limited its consideration on remand to the
 practicability of PMI using alternative ground water sources for
 the 0.75 mgd it requested, the issue specifically identified by
 the supreme court in remanding the case. The Water Commission
 reiterated findings from D&O II regarding its analysis of the
 three ground water alternatives considered by PMI which showed
 that they did not provide practicable alternatives to Wai
ahole
 
Ditch water. The Water Commission also confirmed that its
 analysis of these ground water alternatives formed the basis for
 its determination that PMI had met PMI's burden of establishing
 the absence of any practicable alternative water source and for
 the Water Commission's decision to grant PMI's permit
 application. The Water Commission therefore reinstated PMI's
 water use permit for 0.75 mgd.
 
B.	 The Water Commission erred in refusing on remand
to consider the Windward Parties' motion on the
 merits before deciding to grant PMI's water use
permit application.
 
In its answering brief, PMI argues that the issue
 
raised by the Windward Parties' motion exceeded the scope of the
 
issues on remand and thus the Water Commission properly refused
 to consider the merits of the motion. We disagree.
 
On remand, it is the duty of a tribunal "to comply
 
strictly with the mandate of the appellate court according to its
 true intent and meaning, as determined by the directions given by
 the reviewing court." State v. Lincoln, 72 Haw. 480, 485, 825
 
P.2d 64, 68 (1992). However, on remand, the tribunal is free to
 decide issues not covered in the mandate and issues that were not
 decided explicitly or by necessary implication in the prior
 appeal. Id.; Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. E.E.O.C., 691 F.2d 438,
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
441 (9th Cir. 1982). In addition, even where an issue has been
 
addressed by the appellate court and is covered by the mandate,
 the tribunal on remand may reconsider the issue based on new
 evidence or changed circumstances. Lincoln, 72 Haw. at 485, 825
 
P.2d at 68 ("This is not to say that a trial court is bound to
 perform the mandate of an appellate court under subsequently
 changed circumstances . . . ."); United States v. Alexander, 106
 F.3d 874, 876 (9th Cir. 1997) (stating that exceptions to the
 "law of the case" doctrine, which generally preclude
 reconsideration of an issue that has already been decided by the
 same or higher court, include "where: . . . 3) the evidence on
 remand is substantially different; 4) other changed circumstances
 exist; or 5) a manifest injustice would otherwise result").
 
In Wai
ahole II, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court addressed the 
issue of whether the Water Commission had properly determined that PMI did not have a practicable alternative water source for its 0.75 mgd permit application. However, the absence of a practicable alternative water source is only one component of the State Water Code's reasonable-beneficial use standard, which "allows use only 'in such a quantity as is necessary for economic and efficient utilization.'" Wai
ahole I, 94 Hawai 'i at 161, 9 
P.3d at 473 (quoting the definition of "reasonable-beneficial use" set forth in HRS § 174C-3). The Windward Parties' motion did not raise the issue of whether PMI had a practicable alternative water source for its 0.75 mgd permit application, but focused on the question of whether the 0.75 mgd requested by PMI was necessary for PMI to economically and efficiently utilize its property. Thus, it is not clear that by vacating PMI's permit and remanding the case for further proceedings on the practicability of PMI using alternative ground water sources in Wai
ahole II, the supreme court decided the issue raised in the 
Windward Parties' motion. 
More significantly, even if the supreme court had
 
decided the issue raised in the Windward Parties' motion in
 Wai
ahole II, the Windward Parties' motion proffered new evidence
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of significantly changed circumstances that occurred after the
 
Water Commission issued its decision in D&O II. The new evidence
 of significantly changed circumstances set forth in the Windward
 Parties' motion had not been before the supreme court when it
 decided Wai
ahole II. Accordingly, the Water Commission was not
 
precluded from considering the Windward Parties' motion based on
 the supreme court's mandate in Wai
ahole II. See Lincoln, 72 Haw.
 
at 485, 825 P.2d at 68; Alexander, 106 F.3d at 876. 
The Windward Parties proffered evidence that after the
 
Water Commission issued D&O II, the circumstances regarding PMI's
 plans to operate of a golf course, which formed the basis for
 PMI's water use permit application, had changed. The evidence
 proffered by the Windward Parties indicated that PMI no longer
 needed the requested 0.75 mgd to irrigate a golf course because
 PMI had indefinitely delayed or abandoned its plans to operate a
 golf course and because PMI had not used the vast majority of the
 0.75 mgd allocated to it in the prior 39 months. 
We conclude that under the particular facts of this
 
case, the Water Commission erred in refusing to consider the
 Windward Parties' motion on the merits before deciding to grant
 PMI's water use permit application. The evidence proffered by
 the Windward Parties went to the very heart of the State Water
 Code's reasonable-beneficial use standard and challenged the
 essence of PMI's permit application -- whether PMI in fact had
 any legitimate need for the requested water to economically and
 efficiently utilize its property. 
Under analogous circumstances, the Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court held that the Water Commission had erred in failing to consider the impact that the closure of a hotel and golf course would have in rendering its decision on a permit application. In 
re Contested Case Hearing on Water Use Permit Application Filed by Kukui (Moloka
'i), Inc., 116 Hawai 'i 481, 504-06, 174 P.3d 320, 
343-45 (2007) (Kukui Moloka 'i). In Kukui Moloka 'i, the Water 
Commission issued a permit which included allocations of water to a hotel and golf course as proposed uses. Id. at 505, 174 P.3d 
27
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 344. The Water Commission's findings and conclusions did not
 
indicate that it had taken the closing of the hotel and golf
 course into consideration in its proposed use allocation
 decision. Id. The supreme court vacated the Water Commission's
 
decision to grant the applicant a permit for proposed uses
 "[b]ecause the [Water] Commission failed to consider whether and
 to what extent the closure of the hotel and golf course would
 have on [the applicant's] proposed uses when [the Water
 Commission] made its proposed use allocation decision . . . ." 
Id. at 506, 174 P.3d at 345.
11
 
Our conclusion that the Water Commission erred in 
refusing to consider the Windward Parties' motion on the merits is additionally supported by the affirmative duty of the State of Hawai
'i (State) "to take the public trust into account in the 
planning and allocation of water resources, and to protect public trust uses whenever feasible." Wai
ahole I, 94 Hawai 'i at 141, 9 
P.3d at 453 (internal quotation marks, citation, and footnote omitted). The Hawai
'i Supreme Court "has described the public 
trust relating to water resources as the authority and duty 'to maintain the purity and flow of our waters for future generations and to assure that the waters of our land are put to reasonable and beneficial uses.'" Id. at 138, 9 P.3d at 450 (citation 
omitted). Article XI, section 7 of the Hawai
'i Constitution 
provides that "[t]he State has an obligation to protect, control and regulate the use of Hawai
'i's water resources for the benefit 
of its people[,]" and the Hawai 'i Constitution "designates the 
[Water] Commission as the primary guardian of public rights under the trust." Wai
ahole I, 94 Hawai 'i at 143, 9 P.3d at 455. 
11
 In Kukui Moloka' i, the Water Commission justified its refusal to 
consider evidence of the closure of the hotel and golf course in issuing the
permit based in part on HRS § 174C-58(4) (1993), which authorizes the WaterCommission to revoke a permit as to the amount of water not used for a periodof four continuous years or more. Kukui Moloka' i, 116 Hawai' i at 504-05, 174
P.3d at 343-44. The supreme court rejected the Water Commission's reliance onHRS § 174C-58(4) as "misplaced." Id. at 506, 174 P.3d at 345. We likewise 
reject as misplaced PMI's reliance on HRS § 174C-58(4) in support of its claimthat the Water Commission did not err in refusing to consider the merits ofthe Windward Parties' motion. 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has stated that "the [Water] 
Commission must not relegate itself to the role of a mere umpire 
passively calling balls and strikes for adversaries appearing before it, but instead must take the initiative in considering, protecting, and advancing public rights in the resource at every stage of the planning and decisionmaking process." Wai
ahole II, 
105 Hawai 'i at 16, 93 P.3d at 658 (block quote format, citation, 
and ellipsis points omitted). The evidence proffered in the Windward Parties' motion raised a substantial question over whether PMI actually needed the water for the requested purpose. In furtherance of its public trust obligations, the Water Commission should have considered the merits of the Windward Parties' motion, in order to evaluate whether PMI's proposed use of Wai
ahole Ditch water was a reasonable-beneficial use, before 
issuing PMI a permit for 0.75 mgd. 
III. The IIFSs for the Windward Streams
 
In D&O II, the Water Commission cited testimonials from
 
people who had lived in the area of the windward streams in the
 1950s and 1960s. These individuals reported that up to the
 1960s, there was adequate flows in the streams to support the
 streams' ecosystems and native Hawaiian customs, with some of the
 individuals reporting a significant decrease in the amount of
 water in the streams after 1962 and 1963.
 
In Wai
ahole II, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court concluded 
that the Water Commission did not err in deeming credible and relying on the testimony that the streams' flows in the 1960s were adequate to support the windward streams' ecosystems and native Hawaiian customs and practices. Id. at 12, 93 P.3d at 
654. The supreme court, however, held that the Water Commission
 
"failed to make findings of each [windward] stream's flow during
 the 1960s[,]" and, as a result, the Water Commission "failed to
 support its conclusion that the current IIFS flow is more than
 the flow in the 1960s." Id. 
29
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The supreme court then stated: 
If, on remand, the Water Commission is able to support
its conclusion with findings quantifying the windward
streams' flows during the 1960s, then the 1960s testimonials
would be sufficient to set the IIFS at the levels
 established in the D&O II, inasmuch as: (1) more water would
be added to the streams than that which adequately supported
the streams' ecosystem in the 1960s; (2) the increase in
stream flow over the 1960s stream flow would be beneficial
 in light of the Water Commission's finding that increasing a
stream's flow results in stream habitat improvement; and (3)
appurtenant rights, riparian uses, and existing uses would
be accounted for by further increases in stream flow. The
 foregoing would then adequately establish that instream
values would be protected to the extent practicable for
interim purposes.
 
Id. (citations omitted). 
On appeal, the Windward Parties attack the IIFSs
 
established by the Water Commission in D&O III, arguing: (1) that
 
contrary to the Wai ahole II court's instructions, "D&O III does
 
not contain any data establishing the flows during the 1960s";
 and (2) that the Water Commission erred in refusing to include
 unpermitted water in the amended IIFSs. We disagree.
 
A.	 The Water Commission set forth sufficient findings
to support its conclusion that the current IIFS
flow is more than the flow in the 1960s.
 
In D&O III, the Water Commission set forth specific
 
findings regarding the estimated long-term stream flows,

 
including the Q90 flows,12 of the windward streams based on data
 
from the United States Geological Survey (USGS), which used the
 
base period July 1, 1926, to June 30, 1960. The Water Commission 
found that the Wai
ahole Ditch flows have been stable since 1938. 
It also set forth findings that addressed three events occurring
 
12  The Q90 flow is a measure of the base flow which the Water Commission
used to determine the IIFSs. In D&O III, the Water Commission described "base
flow" and "Q90 flow" as follows:
 
The base flow is an estimate of the ground-water

contribution to the stream. The Q90 flow is used as an index of
the reliability of flow from a water source for water development
studies and represents that volume of water that is equaled or
exceeded 90 percent of the time over the period of record. The
 Q90 flow is an estimate of the dry weather flow (base flow) of
streams, and, in most cases, the Q90 flow is an estimate of the
ground-water contribution to the stream.
 
30
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
since the mid-1960s that might have impacted the windward
 
streams' base flows -- the 1964 extension of the Uwau Tunnel, 
the 1982 cessation of pumping of 1 to 1.5 mgd of water from
 Wai
ahole Stream, and the 1992 installation of the Kahana Tunnel
 
bulkhead -- and explained its conclusion that none of these
 events had a significant impact on the 1960s base flows of the
 windward streams.
13
 
We conclude that the Water Commission set forth
 
sufficient findings to quantify the windward streams' flows
 during the 1960s and to support its conclusion that the current
 IIFS flow is more than the flow in the 1960s, and it therefore 
complied with the instructions of the Wai
ahole II court. In
 
Waiahole II, the court concluded that the Water Commission was
 
entitled to rely upon the testimony of people who had personally
 observed the windward streams in the 1950s and 1960s. Because
 these individuals reported adequate flows at least up to the
 early 1960s, we cannot say that the Water Commission erred in
 relying on USGS data which used the base period July 1, 1926, to
 June 30, 1960 to estimate the windward streams' flows during the
 1960s. In addition, the Water Commission found that the Wai
ahole
 
Ditch flows have been stable since 1938, and it set forth
 findings concerning events that occurred since the mid-1960s that
 might have impacted the windward streams' base flows and
 explained why those events had no significant impact on the
 streams' base flows. The Water Commission's findings and
 analysis support its conclusion that the amount of Wai
ahole Ditch
 
water it was adding to the windward streams through its amended
 IIFSs in D&O III increased the streams' flows over the flows
 existing in the 1960s. We therefore conclude that the Water
 Commission did not err in establishing the amended IIFSs for the
 windward streams.
 
13
 The Water Commission concluded that the Uwau Tunnel extension could
 
have decreased stream flows and the other two events could have increased
 
stream flows.
 
31
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B.	 The Water Commission did not err in declining to
include unpermitted water in the amended IIFSs. 
In D&O III, of the 27 mgd of water developed by the
 
Waiahole Ditch, the Water Commission allocated 12 mgd for
 
addition to the windward streams under the amended IIFSs. The
 
Water Commission issued permits allocating 12.57 mgd for
 offstream use to various permittees, leaving 2.43 mgd of Wai
ahole
 
Ditch water that remained unpermitted. The Water Commission
 ruled that the 2.43 mgd of unpermitted water would "be diverted
 into the windward streams until such time as it is permitted for
 offstream use."
 
The Windward Parties argue that the Water Commission
 
erred in failing to include the 2.43 mgd in unpermitted water in
 the amended IIFSs. We conclude that this argument lacks merit. 
In Wai
ahole I, the supreme court disapproved of the 
Water Commission's creation of a buffer of 5.39 mgd of unpermitted water for unidentified offstream uses before IIFSs were properly designated. Wai
ahole I, 94 Hawai 'i at 155-56, 9 
P.3d at 467-68. The court explained that "where the [Water] Commission has yet to designate proper instream flow standards
,[ 14]
 a buffer stands the [Hawai 'i] [C]onstitution and 
[State Water] Code on their heads, allowing diversions of instream flows 
before the completion of the requisite procedure 
and analysis for instream use protection."  Id. at 156, 9 P.3d at 468 (footnote and emphases added). In D&O III, however, the Water Commission allocated Wai
ahole Ditch water to first satisfy 
the amended IIFSs before granting permits for offstream uses. The unpermitted water remaining after the permits were granted did not serve as the type of buffer that was struck down in Wai
ahole I. While the unpermitted water remained available for 
unspecified offstream uses, it was left unallocated only after 
14
 In the context of this discussion, the supreme court used the term
"instream flow standards" to broadly encompass both "interim" and "permanent"
standards, unless otherwise indicated. Waiahole I, 94 Hawai' i at 147 n.48, 9
P.3d at 459 n.48. We will do the same for purposes of our discussion in thissection. 
32
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the amended IIFSs were properly established to provide protection
 
for the windward streams. 
In Waiahole I, the court contemplated that unpermitted
 
water in excess of the instream flow standard could remain
 unallocated and would not automatically be incorporated in the
 instream flow standard. The court stated:
 
Any flows in excess of [the instream flow standard] shall
remain in the stream until permitted and actually needed for
offstream use, in keeping with the policy against waste and
in recognition that the standard merely states an absolute
minimum required under any circumstances. These unallocated
 
flows, however, will not constitute a distinct category or
quantity, but will fluctuate according to variations in
supply and demand.
 
Id. at 156, 9 P.3d at 468 (emphasis added). In addition, while
 
vacating the Water Commissions's designation in D&O I of the
 IIFSs and the nonpermitted buffer, the court noted that it was
 not requiring the Water Commission to include the amount of the
 buffer in the IIFS. The court stated, "We do not bar the [Water]
 Commission, pending the establishment of permanent standards,
 from setting the interim standard lower than the combined total
 of the previous 'base' and the 'buffer' flows . . . ." Id. at
 
156, 9 P.3d at 468. 
Here, we have held that the Water Commission did not 
err in establishing the amended IIFSs for the windward streams in D&O III. The amended IIFSs are at or exceed the D&O II levels which the supreme court held in Wai
ahole II would be sufficient 
if the Water Commission could support its conclusion that the current (D&O II) IIFS flow is more than the flow in the 1960s. Wai
ahole II, 105 Hawai 'i at 12, 93 P.3d at 654. Under these 
circumstances, we conclude that the Water Commission did not abuse its discretion or act arbitrarily or capriciously in declining to include the 2.43 mgd in unpermitted water in the amended IIFSs. 
CONCLUSION
 
We vacate PMI's water use permit because we conclude
 
that the Water Commission erred in refusing to consider the
 Windward Parties' motion on the merits before deciding PMI's
 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
permit application, and we remand the case for further
 
proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. On remand,
 the Water Commission shall consider whether changed circumstances
 since the issuance of D&O II have affected PMI's need for the
 requested 0.75 mgd of Wai
ahole Ditch water under the State Water
 
Code's reasonable-beneficial use standard. We express no opinion
 on the merits of this remanded issue. In all other respects, we
 affirm D&O III.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 13, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Paul H. Achitoff
 
D. Kapua'ala Sproat (Earthjustice)
for Petitioners/Appellants
Hakipu'u'ohana and
Ka L
ahui Hawai'i Chief Judge
Acting Associate Judge
 
Colin J. Lau
 
Deputy Attorney General
Department of the Attorney General for Appellee
Commission on Water Resource
 Management
 Acting Associate Judge
Yvonne Y. Izu
 Michael H. Lau
 (Morihara Lau & Fong LLP)
for Appellee
Monsanto Company
(previously for
James Campbell Company LLC)
 
Don Jeffrey Gelber
Stephen M. GelberRichard K. Ingersoll(Gelber, Gelber & Ingersoll)for AppelleeSyngenta Hawai
'i, LLC 
34
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On the briefs (continued):
 
Deborah Day Emerson
Haunani Burns Myra M. KaichiDeputies Attorney GeneralDepartment of the Attorney Generalfor State of Hawai
'i,
Agribusiness Development Corp.and Department of Agriculture 
James T. Paul
 
Pamela W. Bunn
 (Paul Johnson Park & Niles)
for Hawaii's Thousand Friends
 
Gilbert D. Buston
 
(Reinwald O'Connor & Playdon LLP)
for Grace Pacific Corporation
 
35
 