   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28654
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
SHARON S.H. CHIN, Plaintiff-Appellant v.
VENETIA K. CARPENTER-ASUI, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(Civil No. 05-1-2287)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Sharon S.H. Chin (Chin) appeals the
 
June 25, 2007 final judgment of the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit (circuit court) in favor of Chin's former attorney
 
Defendant-Appellee Venetia K. Carpenter-Asui (Carpenter-Asui).1
 
The circuit court granted summary judgment in favor of Carpenter-
Asui on all five of Chin's claims for legal malpractice, breach
 
of contract, breach of fiduciary duty, emotional distress and
 
punitive damages.
 
Chin, proceeding pro se, appeals from the circuit
 
court's grant of summary judgment and generally reiterates her
 
contentions below that, due to Carpenter-Asui's alleged
 
mishandling of Chin's marital status discrimination case against
 
her former employer City Bank (Chin v. City Bank, Civ. No. 03-1­
2
0196), Chin not only lost that case but was forced to give up
her right to appeal as part of an unwanted and coerced
 
settlement. A significant component of Chin's current appeal
 
focuses on Carpenter-Asui's alleged failure in the underlying
 
action to contest City Bank's motion for attorney's fees and
 
costs, which Chin argues led to a judgment against her in the
 
1
The Honorable Randal K. O. Lee presided .
 
2
 In the underlying action, Chin asserted claims against City Bank and
a City Bank manager who allegedly harassed Chin due to her status as a single
female.
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
amount of $54,734.60. This in turn allegedly caused Chin to
 
ultimately decide to forgo her appeal in the underlying action in
 
exchange for City Bank's dropping its demand for attorney's fees
 
and costs.
 
I. Standard of Review
 
We review de novo the circuit court's grant of summary
 
judgment. Hawaii Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai 'i 
213, 221, 11 P.3d 1, 9 (2000). As the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has 
often articulated: 
[s]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law . .
 . . The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable
to the non-moving party.
 
Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai 'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) 
(quoting Durette v. Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai 'i 
490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 71 (2004)). 
The respective burdens of the movant and the opposing
 
party regarding a summary judgment motion must be considered. 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of
substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as a
matter of law. This burden has two components.
 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing
support for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material
fact exists with respect to the essential elements of the
claim or defense which the motion seeks to establish or
 which the motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed
facts, it is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
law. Only when the moving party satisfies its initial burden
of production does the burden shift to the non-moving party
to respond to the motion for summary judgment and
demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving
party and requires the moving party to convince the court
that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that the
moving party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
law.
 
Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House Inc., 111 Hawai 'i 286, 
295-96, 141 P.3d 459, 468-69 (2006) (quoting French v. Hawaii 
Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai 'i 462, 470, 99 P.3d 1046, 1054 
(2004)). 
In responding to a summary judgment motion, "an adverse 
party may not rest upon the mere allegations or denials of the adverse party's pleading, but the adverse party's response, by 
affidavits or as otherwise provided in this rule, must set forth 
specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." 
Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 56(e) (2010). Thus, "[a] 
party opposing a motion for summary judgment cannot discharge his or her burden by alleging conclusions, 'nor is [the party] 
entitled to a trial on the basis of a hope that [the party] can 
produce some evidence at that time.'" Henderson v. Prof'l 
Coatings Corp., 72 Haw. 387, 401, 819 P.2d 84, 92 (1991) (quoting 10A Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Mary Kay Kane, 
Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil 2d § 2727 (1983)). 
II. Discussion
 
A. Circuit Court's Ruling
 
The circuit court determined that Carpenter-Asui "used
 
the skill, prudence and diligence that a lawyer of ordinary skill
 and capacity possesses and exercises," and granted summary
 
judgment in favor of Carpenter-Asui on the first three counts of
 
the complaint: (1) legal malpractice, (2) breach of contract,
 
(3) breach of fiduciary duty.
 
As to Chin’s claim for emotional distress, which the
 
circuit court characterized as a claim for Intentional Infliction
 
of Emotional Distress (IIED), the circuit court ruled that Chin
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failed to meet her burden of presenting evidence that Carpenter-
Asui acted in an unreasonable or outrageous manner. Accordingly,
 
the court granted Carpenter-Asui’s motion for summary judgment on
 
the IIED claim.
 
Having decided the other counts in favor of Carpenter-
Asui, the circuit court granted summary judgment on the punitive
 
damages claim as well.
 
B. Evidence Adduced Regarding The Summary Judgment Motion
 In support of her motion for summary judgment,
 
Carpenter-Asui submitted a detailed declaration and exhibits
 setting forth her actions in representing Chin in the underlying
 
action. 
This declaration set forth facts establishing, inter
 
alia, that Carpenter-Asui communicated with Chin on a regular and
 
extensive basis, that she responded to and opposed several
 
substantive motions by the City Bank defendants, and that she
 
perfected an appeal in the underlying action from the trial
 
court's judgment against Chin.
 
Of note, the only information in Carpenter-Asui's
 
declaration regarding City Bank's underlying motion for
 
attorney's fees and costs is that the motion was granted in the
 
amount of $47,093.73 in fees and $7,640.87 in costs ($54,734.60
 
total), and that Carpenter-Asui's strategy –- apparently after
 
the motion was granted –- "was to move to stay the award of fees
 
and costs pending the outcome of the Appeal and to see what City
 
Bank would be willing to settle for in the meantime." Absent
 
from the record is any evidence as to whether Carpenter-Asui
 
responded to or opposed the motion for fees and costs in the
 
first instance, and if not, the reason for not responding or
 
opposing it. Moreover, the underlying motion for fees and costs
 
is not in evidence in this case.
 
4
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Of further significance in this case, however, is that 
Chin completely failed to present any admissible evidence in
 
responding to Carpenter-Asui's motion for summary judgment.3
 
Therefore, there is nothing in the record to rebut the facts to
 
the extent they are set forth in Carpenter-Asui's declaration or
 
exhibits in support of her motion.
 
C.	 Legal Malpractice Claims 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has established that: 
[t]he general rule with respect to the liability of an
attorney for failure to properly perform his duties to his
client is that the attorney, by accepting to give legal
advice or to render other legal services, impliedly agrees
to use such skill, prudence, and diligence as lawyers of
ordinary skill and capacity commonly possess and exercise in
the performance of the tasks which they undertake.
 
Blair v. Ing, 95 Hawai 'i 247, 259, 21 P.3d 452, 464 (2001) 
(quoting Lucas v. Hamm, 364 P.2d 685, 689 (Cal. 1961)). However, 
"an attorney cannot be held liable for every mistake made in his 
or her practice, especially for an error as to a question of law 
on which reasonable doubt may be entertained by well-informed 
lawyers." Id. 
In general, the elements of a cause of action for legal
 
malpractice are: (1) the attorney-client relationship or other
 
basis for duty; (2) a negligent act or omission; (3) causation
 
and (4) damages. Kurinij v. Hanna & Morton, 55 Cal.App.4th 853,
 
863 (1997).
 
With regard to causation, a legal malpractice case "is
 
the type of case that imposes a burden on a plaintiff . . . in
 
conducting 'a trial within a trial,' i.e. it is necessary for
 
plaintiff to prove both the attorney's negligence and also what
 
3
 The only evidence that Chin proffered was a letter from her
psychologist purporting to document her emotional trauma from the alleged
discrimination at City Bank and her failure to get vindication through the
legal system. Carpenter-Asui objected to the admission of the unauthenticated
letter and the circuit court refused to consider the letter on hearsay
grounds.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the outcome of the mishandled litigation would have been if it
 
had been properly tried." Collins v. Greenstein, 61 Haw. 26, 38,
 
595 P.2d 275, 282 (1979). Moreover, "[w]here reasonable persons
 would not dispute the absence of causality . . . the court may
 
take the decision from the jury and treat it as a question of
 
law." Id. at 42, 595 P.2d at 284, (citing Ishmael v. Millington,
 
241 Cal.App.2d 520, 525-26 (1966)).
 
Ultimately, "where there is no conflict from the
 
evidence and but one inference can be drawn from the facts, it is
 the duty of the court to pass upon the question of negligence and
 
proximate cause as questions of law." Collins, 61 Haw. at 38,
 
595 P.2d at 282 (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Young
 
v. Price, 47 Haw. 309, 313, 388 P.2d 203, 206 (1963)).
 
For purposes of the legal malpractice claims, 
Carpenter-Asui contends that irrespective of Carpenter-Asui's 
actions, Chin must make a showing that she would have prevailed 
if the underlying discrimination case went forward (i.e. 
causation, or the "trial within a trial" analysis). 
Moreover, we 
must take into account that because Chin has the burden of proving such causation at trial, for summary judgment purposes 
she must make a sufficient showing on this essential element. 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated: 
[w]here the moving party is the defendant, who does not bear
 
the ultimate burden of proof at trial, summary judgment is
 
proper when the non-moving party-plaintiff
 
fails to make a showing sufficient to establish the
 
existence of an element essential to that party's
 case, and on which that party will bear the burden of
 proof at trial. In such a situation, there can be no
genuine issue as to any material fact, since a
complete failure of proof concerning an essential
element of the nonmoving party's case necessarily
renders all other facts immaterial. The moving party
is entitled to judgment as a matter of law because the
nonmoving party has failed to make a sufficient
showing on an essential element of her case with
respect to which she has the burden of proof.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 
Hawai'i 277, 302, 172 P.3d 1021, 1046 (2007)(emphasis in 
original) (citation omitted). 
Here, Chin has the burden of making a sufficient
 
showing that there is at least a genuine issue of material fact
 regarding whether she would have had some sort of success going
 
forward in the underlying discrimination case. That is, not only
 
that she would have prevailed on appeal, but that she would have
 
also succeeded on some part of her underlying claim on remand in
 
that case. Chin has completely failed to present any evidence or
 
to make any showing whatsoever on this point. Under the
 
particular circumstances of this case, Chin has failed to make
 
any showing to "establish the existence of an element essential"
 
for her claims related to alleged malpractice.
 
Summary judgment was therefore proper with regard to
 
Chin's first three causes of action.
 
D. IIED claim
 
The elements for an IIED claim under Hawai
'i law are: 
1) that the act allegedly causing the harm was intentional
or reckless, 2) that the act was outrageous, and 3) that the
act caused 4) extreme emotional distress to another.
 
Hac v. University of Hawaii, 102 Hawai 'i 92, 106-07, 73 P.3d 46, 
60-61 (2003). "Outrageous" is construed as meaning "without just 
cause or excuse and beyond all bounds of decency." Lee v. Aiu, 
85 Hawai 'i 19, 34 n.12, 936 P.2d 655, 670 n.12 (1997) (internal 
quotation marks omitted) (quoting Chedester v. Stecker, 64 Haw. 
464, 468, 643 P.2d 532, 535 (1982)). 
Here, to the extent Carpenter-Asui set forth in her
 
declaration and supporting exhibits the efforts she made to
 
represent Chin in the underlying action, summary judgment was
 
appropriate. That is, given the evidence adduced by Carpenter-
Asui and that no counter evidence was submitted by Chin, there is
 
no genuine issue of material fact that Carpenter-Asui
 
7
    
         NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
communicated often and extensively with Chin, sought to assert
 
Chin's claims, defended against several substantive motions by
 
the City Bank defendants, and perfected an appeal after judgment
 
was entered against Chin. Thus, as to these areas, Carpenter­
Asui's conduct in the underlying case was not "outrageous."
 
As noted, however, Carpenter-Asui failed to present
 
evidence as to whether she responded to or opposed the underlying
 
motion for fees and costs, and if not, why. Moreover, the facts
 
surrounding the fees and costs motion could impact whether
 
Carpenter-Asui's actions in later addressing settlement and
 dismissal of the underlying appeal constitute a basis for IIED.
4
 
That Carpenter-Asui's declaration touches on the fees and costs
 
award but does not address these issues raises questions of fact
 
in itself.
 
Carpenter-Asui, as summary judgment movant, had the
 
initial burden to establish the material facts related to the
 
IIED claims. Without anything in the record to determine what
 
actions Carpenter-Asui took in addressing the motion for fees and
 
costs, the basis for such action or inaction, and what the merits
 
or demerits of the motion were, it was error for the trial court
 
to grant summary judgment regarding these allegations. That is,
 
there was no basis to determine whether Carpenter-Asui's conduct
 
in addressing the motion for fees and costs was "intentional or
 
reckless," and whether it would constitute "outrageous" conduct.
 
Therefore, summary judgment was appropriate on the IIED
 
claim except as to the allegations that Carpenter-Asui failed to
 
properly handle the underlying motion for fees and costs and that
 
"subsequently, [Carpenter-Asui] pressured and forced [Chin] to
 
settle the matter and [withdraw] her appeal."
 
4
 For purposes of the IIED claim, the "trial within a trial" analysis
does not apply. Instead, the elements as to IIED must be considered.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E. Punitive Damages
 
Punitive damages serve as a remedy. See, Masaki v. 
General Motors Corp., 71 Haw. 1, 6, 780 P.2d 566, 570 (1989). 
"[A] claim for punitive damages is . . . purely incidental to a 
separate cause of action." Ross v. Stouffer Hotel Co. (Hawai 'i), 
Ltd., 76 Hawai 'i 454, 466, 879 P.2d 1037, 1049 (1994). 
To the extent that part of the IIED claim survives, the
 
remedy of punitive damages remains viable.
 
III. Conclusion
 
Upon a careful review of the record and upon due
 
consideration of the arguments made and issues raised by the
 
parties, we hold that:
 
(1) Summary judgment was appropriate with regard to the
 
claims for legal malpractice, breach of contract, and breach of
 
fiduciary duty;
 
(2) With regard to the claim for IIED, summary judgment
 
was appropriate as to all of Chin's allegations except those
 
pertaining to the handling of the underlying motion for fees and
 
costs and whether the handling of that motion had any relation to
 
efforts by Carpenter-Asui to settle and dismiss the underlying
 
appeal;
 
(3) The remedy of punitive damages remains viable to
 
the extent the claim for IIED survives.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We therefore affirm in part, vacate in part and remand
 
for further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 24, 2008. 
On the briefs: 
Sharon S.H. Chin 
for Plaintiff Pro Se Appellant Presiding Judge 
William C.H. Jarrett for Defendant-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
10
 