FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
–––O0O–––
 
LEIS FAMILY LIMITED PARTNERSHIP, a Hawai' i limited 
partnership, and COOLING ASSOCIATES LLC, a Hawai' i 
limited company, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. 
SILVERSWORD ENGINEERING, a Hawai' i corporation, Defendant,
and 
C. DON MANUEL/HAWAII, INC., a Hawai' i corporation,
and MORIKAWA & ASSOCIATES, LLC, a Hawai' i limited 
liability company, Defendants-Appellees 
NO. 29120
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-0057(3))
 
FEBRUARY 16, 2012
 
FUJISE AND REIFURTH, JJ., AND
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, CONCURRING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY REIFURTH, J.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Leis Family Limited Partnership
 
("Leis Family") and Cooling Associates LLC ("Cooling")
 
(collectively, "Appellants") appeal from the March 24, 2008
 judgment ("Judgment") issued by the Circuit Court of the Second
 
1
Circuit ("Circuit Court")  in favor of Defendants-Appellees C.
Don Manuel/Hawai
'i, Inc. ("Manuel") and Morikawa & Associates, 
LLC ("Morikawa") (collectively, "Designers"). The Circuit Court
 granted the Designers' motion for summary judgment on the grounds
 that Appellants' professional negligence claims were barred by
 the economic loss doctrine. We affirm.
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.	 BACKGROUND2
 
This appeal pertains to the design, construction, and
 
3
installation of a thermal energy system ("System")  at Premier
Place, a building located in the Maui Technology Park in Kîhei. 
In an October 2002 contract, Double P, the owner of Premier
 Place, hired General Contractor to provide contractor services
 related to the System. 
Appellants allege that General Contractor
 
subcontracted with Dorvin D. Leis Company, Inc. ("Dorvin")4 to
 
provide mechanical engineering and construction services related
 to the System. Dorvin, in turn, subcontracted with Silversword
 Engineering, Inc. ("Silversword") to design the System. The
 contract between Dorvin and Silversword contains a provision
 labeled "9. Limitation of Liability," that states: "To the
 maximum extent permitted by law, liability for [Dorvin's] damages
 will not exceed the compensation received under this Agreement." 
Silversword subcontracted with Manuel for design assistance on
 the System and with Morikawa for electrical engineering
 assistance for data collection concerning the chiller equipment
 at Premier Place. Morikawa appears to have had a separate
 contract with Dorvin to design electrical circuits, although no
 such contract is in the record and its existence is not clear
 from the parties' briefs. 
2 Appellants' opening brief fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure ("HRAP") Rule 28(b)(3), which requires appellants to
present "the facts material to consideration of the questions and pointspresented" with record citations to "all supporting and contradictoryevidence." Here, the "Factual Background" section of the opening brief merelyrestates and references the "Factual Background" section of the Appellants'January 15, 2008 memorandum in opposition to the Designers' motion for summaryjudgment. The "Factual Background" section of the memorandum in opposition,on the other hand, references nothing at all. As a result, it amounts to argument. It is axiomatic that the "[a]rgument of counsel in a memorandum of
law . . . is not evidence." Thomas v. Burlington Indus., Inc., 769 F. Supp.
368, 369 (S.D. Fla. 1991). 
Counsel for Appellants is warned that, pursuant to HRAP Rule 51,
future non-compliance with HRAP 28(b)(3) may result in sanctions.
 
3
 The System is an alternative air conditioning unit designed to
make ice at night, when power costs are lower, to use as coolant during the
day. 
4
 Dorvin Leis is identified as the President of Dorvin Leis Company,
Inc. in the June 27, 2002 standard agreement for services between Silversword
and Dorvin. 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Appellants allege that the System was severely
 
undersized, did not satisfy the Premier Place's cooling load
 
requirement, was prone to failure, and had experienced numerous
 problems since its installation. 
Although the record is unclear, the parties agree that
 
at some point, the Appellants acquired an interest in the
 Contract and/or the System. On February 18, 2005, Appellants
 filed a Complaint against Silversword and the Designers alleging
 professional negligence. Appellants did not allege that the
 Designers, or either of them, made negligent misrepresentations
 regarding the qualities, performance characteristics, or
 capabilities of the System. There is no evidence that Appellants
 filed suit against General Contractor or its immediate
 subcontractor, Dorvin. 
On December 10, 2007, Designers filed a motion for
 
summary judgment arguing that the economic loss doctrine bars
 Appellants' claims against them. The Circuit Court agreed and
 granted the Designers' motion for summary judgment. The Judgment
 was entered in favor of the Designers on March 24, 2008.
5 This
 
appeal followed.
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
On appeal, Appellants contend that the trial court
 
erred: (1) in granting summary judgment on the basis of the
 
economic loss doctrine, despite the fact that the parties were
 not in privity of contract; (2) in concluding that privity is not
 a requirement for application of the economic loss doctrine; and
 (3) in not adopting the deviation-from-industry-standards
 exception to the economic loss doctrine. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant
 
or denial of summary judgment de novo. Under the de novo
 
5
 Appellants' claim against Silversword was dismissed pursuant to a
March 20, 2008 settlement agreement between Leis Family, Cooling, Dorvin,
Double P, General Contractor and Silversword, and an April 14, 2008
stipulation for dismissal with prejudice of Appellants' claims against
Silversword entered into between Leis Family, Cooling, Silversword and the
Designers. 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
standard, [the appellate court examines] the facts and answer the 
question without being required to give any weight to the circuit court's answer to it." Haw. Ventures, LLC, v. Otaka, Inc., 114 
Hawai'i 438, 457, 164 P.3d 696, 715 (2007) (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets omitted). 
IV.	 DISCUSSION
 
The economic loss doctrine "bars recovery in tort for 
purely economic loss." City Express, Inc. v. Express Partners, 
87 Hawai' i 466, 469, 959 P.2d 836, 839 (1998). It "marks the 
fundamental boundary between the law of contracts, which is 
designed to enforce expectations created by agreement, and the law of torts, which is designed to protect citizens and their property by imposing a duty of reasonable care on others." Id. 
(quoting Berschauer/Phillips Constr. Co. v. Seattle Sch. Dist., 881 P.2d 986, 990 (Wash. 1994)) (internal quotation marks omitted). The doctrine "was designed to prevent disproportionate liability and allow parties to allocate risk by contract." Id. 
A.	 The progression of the economic loss doctrine in
Hawai'i 
The economic loss doctrine was first acknowledged by
 
the United States Supreme Court in East River Steamship Corp. v.
 
Transamerica Delaval, Inc., 476 U.S. 858 (1986). The Supreme
 Court effectively adopted the rationale of the California Supreme
 Court in Seely v. White Motor Co., 403 P.2d 145 (Cal. 1965), and
 held that no products liability claim lies in admiralty when a
 commercial purchaser alleges injury only to the product itself,
 resulting in purely economic loss. E. River, 476 U.S. at 871.
 
In holding that a manufacturer in a commercial
 
relationship has no duty under either a negligence or strict
 products liability theory to prevent a product from injuring
 itself, the Supreme Court explained that:
 
"The distinction that the law has drawn between tort
 
recovery for physical injuries and warranty recovery for
economic loss is not arbitrary and does not rest on the
'luck' of one plaintiff in having an accident causing
physical injury. The distinction rests, rather, on an
understanding of the nature of the responsibility a
manufacturer must undertake in distributing his [or her]
products." Seely[, 403 P.2d at 151]. When a product
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
injures only itself the reasons for imposing a tort duty are
weak and those for leaving the party to its contractual
remedies are strong.
 
The tort concern with safety is reduced when an injury
is only to the product itself. When a person is injured,
the "cost of an injury and the loss of time or health may be
an overwhelming misfortune," and one the person is not
prepared to meet. Escola v. Coca Cola Bottling Co. [of
 
Fresno, 150 P.2d 436, 441 (Cal. 1944)] (opinion concurring
in judgment). In contrast, when a product injures itself,
the commercial user stands to lose the value of the product,
risks the displeasure of its customers who find that the
product does not meet their needs, or, as in this case,
experiences increased costs in performing a service. Losses
 
like these can be insured. See 10A G. Couch, Cyclopedia of
Insurance Law §§ 42:385–42:401, 42:414–417 (2d ed. 1982); 7
E. Benedict, Admiralty, Form No. 1.16-7, p. 1–239 (7th
ed.1985); 5A J. Appleman & J. Appleman, Insurance Law &
Practice § 3252 (1970). Society need not presume that a
customer needs special protection. The increased cost to
 the public that would result from holding a manufacturer
liable in tort for injury to the product itself is not
justified.  Cf. United States v. Carroll Towing Co., 159
F.2d 169, 173 (C.A.2 1947).
 
Id. at 871–72.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court first adopted the economic 
loss doctrine "insofar as it applies to claims for relief based
 
on a product liability or negligent design and/or manufacture
 theory" in State ex rel. Bronster v. U.S. Steel Corp., 82 Hawai' i 
32, 40, 919 P.2d 294, 302 (1996). In Bronster, the City and
 County of Honolulu selected a certain type of steel manufactured
 by the defendant, U.S. Steel Corp., for use in the construction
 of Aloha Stadium after U.S. Steel Corp. allegedly represented
 that the steel would be resistant to corrosion. Id. at 36–38,
 
919 P.2d at 298–300. After the steel began to rust to the point
 that it endangered the structural integrity of the stadium, the
 State, which had taken over responsibility for the stadium
 project from the City and County of Honolulu, sued U.S. Steel
 Corp. for negligent misrepresentation. Id. at 38, 919 P.2d at
 
300. The trial court granted U.S. Steel Corp's motion to
 dismiss, stating that "where a seller or a manufacturer of a
 product negligently misrepresents the qualities, performance
 characteristics, or capabilities of the product, and the product
 fails to perform according to those representations, resulting in
 economic damage only, the seller may not be held liable in tort." 
Id.
   
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court, however, reversed, holding 
that a cause of action founded on negligent misrepresentation is 
not precluded by the economic loss doctrine because the claim does not sound in products liability. Id. at 40, 919 P.2d at 
302. The Court reasoned that (1) the tort of negligent
 
misrepresentation is founded on the breach of a duty separate and
 distinct from the duty abolished by the economic loss rule, (2)
 pecuniary losses are recoverable in a claim for negligent
 misrepresentation, and (3) the conflict between recovery of
 economic losses under a product liability theory and the Uniform
 Commercial Code is not present in the case of an action based on
 negligent misrepresentation. Id. at 40-43, 919 P.2d at 302-05.
 
Two years later, in City Express, Inc., the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court addressed the case of a developer who hired an architectural company to design a warehouse. The architectural company employed an architect and engineer who worked on the project. 87 Hawai' i at 467, 959 P.2d at 837. After the 
warehouse was constructed, the use of forklifts on the second floor caused the floor to crack. Id. The developer filed a 
third-party complaint against the architectural company, as well as the architect and engineer in their personal capacities, alleging professional negligence. Id. at 467–68, 959 P.2d at 
837–38. The trial court granted the third-party defendants' motion for directed verdict, holding, in part, that "[i]n a claim for negligence, no recovery may be had for 'economic loss' damages, such as cost to repair the product of the alleged negligence, its diminished value, or consequential loss of profit. Such 'economic loss' damages must instead be recovered in contract . . . . Since [the developer's] claim is in negligence, it may not recover 'economic loss' damages." Id. at 
468, 959 P.2d at 838. 
We partially vacated the ruling, holding that the 
third-party defendants could recover damages for additional costs, lost rent, and either the cost of remedying the defect or the difference between the value of the building as designed and the value of the building if it had been properly designed. Id. 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court granted certiorari to address "the 
6
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
availability of economic loss damages in a negligence action
 
against a design professional." Id.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court reversed, holding that "[i]n 
the context of construction litigation, where a party is in privity of contract with a design professional, economic loss damages are limited to contractual remedies, and a negligence action may not be maintained." Id. at 469, 959 P.2d at 839. The 
Court noted that the opposite holding would hamper the ability of parties to construction contracts to allocate their risks. Id. 
at 470, 959 P.2d at 840. The Court stated that its ruling "preserves the right of design professionals to limit their exposure to liability through contract." Id. 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court subsequently explored the 
application of the economic loss doctrine in the absence of privity of contract. In Association of Apartment Owners of Newtown Meadows ex rel. its Board of Directors v. Venture 15, Inc., 115 Hawai' i 232, 167 P.3d 225 (2007), a condominium 
association sued a subcontractor in negligence for constructing defective concrete slabs which were used in the construction of the condominium project. Id. at 238–239, 167 P.3d at 231–32. 
The subcontractor did not have a contract with the condominium association. Id. at 285, 167 P.3d at 278. The subcontractor 
argued that the pure economic losses of the condominium association were barred by the economic loss doctrine. Id. 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court held that recovery for 
economic loss in negligence is barred, even in the absence of privity of contract, "when allowing such recovery would blur the distinction between contract and tort law." Id. at 292, 167 P.3d 
at 285. The Court noted that the general contractor and subcontractor had "allocated the risks and benefits of performance in their contract," id., and that imposing a tort duty upon the subcontractor correlative to the contract's specifications "would disrupt the contractual relationships between and among the various parties." Id. (quoting Plourde 
Sand & Gravel Co. v. JGI Eastern, Inc., 917 A.2d 1250, 1256-57 (N.H. 2007)) (internal quotation marks omitted).
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Court also noted, however, that the economic loss
 
doctrine may not apply when the plaintiff alleges that the
 
defendant breached a duty independent and separate from its
 contractual obligations. Id. at 295, 167 P.3d at 288. The Court
 
agreed with Kennedy v. Columbia Lumber & Manufacturing Co., 384
 S.E.2d 730 (S.C. 1989), which stated:
 
A builder may be liable to a home buyer in tort
despite the fact that the buyer suffered only "economic
losses" where: (1) the builder has violated an applicable
 building code; (2) the builder has deviated from industry
standards; or (3) the builder has constructed housing that
he knows or should know will pose serious risks of physical
harm.
 
Newtown Meadows, 115 Hawai' i at 295, 167 P.3d at 288 (quoting 
Kennedy, 384 S.E.2d at 738). The Court specifically adopted the 
first exception related to violation of an applicable building code, but declined to address the second or third exceptions. Id.
 
Appellants here contend that the economic loss doctrine
 
does not apply to negligence claims against design professionals
 who are not in privity of contract. Alternatively, Appellants
 urge us to adopt the second Kennedy exception and to recognize an
 exception to the economic loss doctrine where the builder has
 deviated from industry standards.
 
B.	 The application of the economic loss doctrine is not
dependent on whether parties are in privity of
contract.
 
Appellants argue that "under City Express, the
 
application of the economic loss doctrine to negligence claims
 
against a design professional turns on whether or not a party is
 in privity of contract with the design professional." 
Appellants, however, appear to read a substantive distinction
 into City Express where none exists. City Express stands for the
 
proposition that the economic loss doctrine applies when a party
 is in privity of contract with a design professional. It does
 not foreclose application of the doctrine in the absence of
 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
privity of contract.6 The Hawai' i Supreme Court in City Express 
merely limited its holding to the specific facts of the case, a 
practice consistent with "the common law's wisdom in insisting on singular determinations on singular issues reasoned narrowly . . . ." See Richard B. Cappalli, The Common Law's Case Against Non-
Precedential Opinions, 76 S. Cal. L. Rev. 755, 783 (2003). 
To prove this point, Newtown Meadows, although a 
construction case not involving design professionals, clearly stands for the proposition that the economic loss doctrine bars the recovery of purely economic losses, even in the absence of privity of contract, so long as "allowing such recovery would blur the distinction between contract and tort law." 115 Hawai'i at 292, 167 P.3d at 285. 
In order for us to adopt the Appellant's position, we 
would have to conclude that the Hawai' i Supreme Court intended to 
apply the economic loss doctrine in construction cases involving design professionals in privity of contract, and to all other construction-related parties – but not design professionals – whether in privity of contract or not.
7 We observe no basis for 
the proposed distinction, and Appellant does not suggest one. Therefore, we hold that Appellants' argument is without merit. 
6 Although the Court in City Express applied the economic loss
doctrine in the case of a design professional in privity of contract with the
Plaintiff-owner, its rationale was not limited to design professionals:
 
If tort and contract remedies were allowed to overlap,
certainty and predictability in allocating risk would
decrease and impede future business activity. The
 construction industry in particular would suffer, for it is
in this industry that we see most clearly the importance of
the precise allocation of risk as secured by contract. The
 
fees charged by architects, engineers, contractors,
 
developers, vendors, and so on are founded on their expected
 liability exposure as bargained and provided for in the
 contract.
 
87 Hawai' i at 470, 959 P.2d at 840 (quoting Berschauer/Phillips Constr. Co.,
881 P.2d at 992). 
7
 The legal principle enunciated in Newtown Meadows is of general
applicability and is grounded in the holding in City Express. Furthermore,
"[t]he work provided by construction contractors or the services rendered by
design professionals in the commercial building process are both integral to
the building process and impact the quality of building projects." See
 
Terracon Consultants W., Inc. v. Mandalay Resort Grp., 206 P.3d 81, 90 (Nev.
2009). 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C.	 The Designers did not have a duty sounding in tort to
avoid economic loss.
 
Appellants argue that the economic loss doctrine is 
inapplicable because their claims "are based on allegations that 
[the Designers] violated a legal duty, separate and apart from any contractual duty."
8 Under the economic loss doctrine, "a 
manufacturer in a commercial relationship has no duty under either a negligence or strict products liability theory to prevent a product from injuring itself." Bronster, 82 Hawai' i at 
39, 919 P.2d at 301. This principle applies with equal force to design professionals. See City Express, 87 Hawai' i at 469–70, 
959 P.2d at 839–40. Even in the absence of privity of contract between the design professional and a project owner, the law does not impose a duty in tort if it would "disrupt the contractual relationships between and among the various parties." See 
Newtown Meadows, 115 Hawai' i at 292, 167 P.3d at 285. "Society 
need not presume that a customer needs special protection." See 
Bronster, 82 Hawai' i at 40, 919 P.2d at 302 (quoting E. River, 
476 U.S. at 868). 
Appellants fail to state a duty owed by the Designers
 
to Appellants cognizable under our tort law. Double P contracted
 with General Contractor for the construction of the System. As
 with every commercial transaction of this sort, Double P had the
 opportunity to negotiate contractual rights against General
 Contractor or any of its subcontractors. Its failure to do so,
 and irrespective of Appellants' reasons for not bringing suit
 against those with whom it was in privity of contract, does not
 warrant creation of a duty in tort on the part of the Designers. 
After all, the subcontractors and design professionals similarly
 
8
 In an August 30, 2010 letter to the Clerk of the Appellate Court,
Appellants' attorney drew our attention to Hawaii Motorsports Investment, Inc.
 
v. Clayton Group Services, Inc., 693 F. Supp. 2d 1192 (D. Haw. 2010) for the
proposition that "[t]he economic loss rule does not preclude a professional
negligence claim arising from the breach of a duty arising from a professional
relationship, not from a contract." Id. at 1199. That case, however, dealt
with a motion to dismiss under Federal Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 12(b)(6).
As a result, the U.S. District Court's holding hinged on the fact that the
plaintiff alleged that the defendant breached a professional duty, not that
any duty actually existed in that case. See id. Thus, Hawaii Motorsports
 
does not provide support for Appellants' position.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had the right to negotiate limits to their liability, as
 
Silversword did with Dorvin. 
Allowing Appellants to recover purely economic loss 
under a tort theory would allow a commercial project owner to recover product-related damages under a tort theory as a consequence of the owner's deliberate choice not to contract with the third party (the design professional), but instead to require the second party (the general contractor) to do so. There is no reason that we can perceive to make tort liability against design professionals contingent on the project owner's election to hire a general contractor and thus "blur the distinction between contract and tort law." Newtown Meadows, 115 Hawai' i at 292, 167 
P.3d at 285. "[T]he injury suffered — the failure of the product to function properly — is the essence of a warranty action, through which a contracting party can seek to recoup the benefit of its bargain." E. River, 476 U.S. at 868. Because the 
economic loss doctrine functions to bar the recovery of such losses in "negligent design and/or manufacture" cases, Bronster, 82 Hawai' i at 40, 919 P.2d at 302, we conclude that Appellants' 
claims are barred. 
D.	 The "deviation-from-industry-standards" exception to
the economic loss doctrine.
 
In the event that we conclude that the economic loss
 
doctrine applies to design professionals not in privity of
 
contract, Appellants urge us to adopt Kennedy's deviation-from­industry-standards exception to the doctrine. That is, they ask
 us to recognize that a design professional owes a duty in tort to
 a commercial project owner to perform its work "commensurate with
 industry standards," Kennedy, 384 S.E.2d at 737 (citing Terlinde
 v. Neely, 271 S.E.2d 768, 770 (S.C. 1980)), the breach of which
 allows the owner to recover purely economic damages.
9 Appellants
 
9
 Kennedy itself does not support the breadth of the Appellants'
proposed exception. "Kennedy's holding is expressly limited to the home
buyer/builder context, and is specifically premised on a policy of protecting
the new home buyer." Colleton Preparatory Acad., Inc. v. Hoover Universal,
 
Inc., 412 F.Supp.2d 560, 563 (D. S.C. 2006) (citing Bishop Logging Co. v. John
 Deere Indus. Equip. Co., 455 S.E.2d 183, 188 (S.C. Ct. App. 1995) (describing
(continued...)
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
warn that a contrary holding would insulate a design professional
 
from liability. 
The Nevada Supreme Court in Terracon Consultants
 
Western, Inc. v. Mandalay Resort Group, 206 P.3d 81 (Nev. 2009)
 ably explains why we reject Appellants' position. In Terracon,
 the plaintiffs hired an engineering consultant to prepare a
 geotechnical report and a recommended foundation design for a
 proposed Las Vegas resort and casino. Id. at 83–84. The
 
consultant allegedly failed to predict the amount of settling
 underneath the foundation, and the plaintiffs were required to
 repair and reinforce the foundation before continuing
 construction. Id. at 84. Plaintiffs sued in Nevada state court
 
for professional negligence, but the consultant removed the
 matter to the U.S. District Court for the District of Nevada. 
Id.
 
In a certified question, the district court asked the
 
Nevada Supreme Court: "Does the economic loss doctrine apply to
 preclude negligence-based claims against design professionals
 such as engineers and architects, who provide services in the
 commercial property development or improvement process, when the
 plaintiffs seek to recover purely economic losses?" Id. at 83. 
The Nevada Supreme Court held that the answer was yes. Id. at
 
83. The court reasoned that the purpose of the economic loss
 
doctrine is "to shield defendants from unlimited liability for
 all of the economic consequences of a negligent act, particularly
 in a commercial or professional setting . . . ." Id. at 83. The
 
court stated:
 
In the context of engineers and architects, the bar
created by the economic loss doctrine applies to commercial
activity for which contract law is better suited to resolve
professional negligence claims. This legal line between
contract and tort liability promotes useful commercial
economic activity, while still allowing tort recovery when
personal injury or property damage are present. . . . 
. . . .
 
We perceive no significant policy distinction that
would drive us to permit tort-based claims to recover
 
9(...continued)
Kennedy
 as a partial rejection of the economic loss rule "in the residential
home building context")).
 
12
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
economic losses against design professionals, such as
architects and engineers, who provided their professional
services in the commercial property development and
improvement process, when we have concluded that such claims
are barred under the economic loss doctrine if brought
against contractors and subcontractors involved in
physically constructing improvements to real property. The
 work provided by construction contractors or the services
rendered by design professionals in the commercial building
process are both integral to the building process and impact
the quality of building projects. Therefore, when the
quality is deemed defective, resulting in economic loss,
remedies are properly addressed through contract law.
 
Id. at 89–90 (citations omitted).
 
The holding in Terracon is consistent with Hawai' i 
precedent and reflects our judgment of the proper allocation of 
commercial risk. The Hawai' i Supreme Court has held that design 
professionals in privity of contract with the plaintiff are not liable in tort for economic damages. City Express, 87 Hawai' i at 
470, 959 P.2d at 840. As stated earlier, privity of contract is not the criterion upon which the economic loss doctrine depends; instead, it is whether "allowing such recovery would blur the distinction between contract and tort law." Newtown Meadows, 115 
Hawai'i at 292, 167 P.3d at 285; see also Francis v. Lee Enter., 
Inc., 89 Hawai' i 234, 244, 971 P.2d 707, 717 (1999) ("Courts 
should avoid creating causes of action that unnecessarily blur the distinction between tort and contract"). That is, we will not "disrupt the contractual relationships between and among the various parties." Newtown Meadows, 115 Hawai' i at 292, 167 P.3d 
at 285 (quoting Plourde, 917 A.2d at 1256-57) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
In commercial contracts, parties "are free to adjust 
their respective obligations to satisfy their mutual expectations." See City Express, 87 Hawai' i at 470, 959 P.2d at 
840 (quoting American Towers Owners Ass'n v. CCI Mechanical, Inc., 930 P.2d 1182, 1190 (Utah 1996)) (internal quotation marks omitted). The application of the economic loss doctrine encourages parties to negotiate and state clearly the limits of their liability in a contract, and "preserves the right of design professionals to limit their exposure to liability through contract." Id. 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We decide today only that a deviation from industry
 
standards exception to the economic loss doctrine generally does
 
not apply to design professionals. If work falling below
 industry standards was excepted from the economic loss doctrine,
 it would, for all practical purposes, destroy the design
 professional's ability to contract for protection from liability. 
In virtually all suits in negligence against a design
 professional, the crux of the claim is that the design
 professional's work product was substandard. Because a duty to
 conform to industry standards would run parallel to any contract,
 the design professional would constantly be subject to
 litigation.
10 To compensate for this risk, the costs of hiring a
 
design professional would inevitably rise.
 
Strong policy considerations compel us to reject
 
Appellants' arguments that the economic loss doctrine should not
 apply here and, alternatively, that we should adopt the
 deviation-from-industry-standards exception to the economic loss
 doctrine in this case. Any countervailing policy considerations,
 we think, can be mitigated through contractual negotiations. 
Here, Double P, as Appellants' presumable predecessor in
 interest, could have protected itself through its contract with
 General Contractor; any failure to do so, or the Appellants'
 decision not to sue General Contractor for some other reason,
 does not warrant an expansion of the law to permit Appellants to
 sue the Designers in tort. Therefore, based on the record before
 us, we hold that the Circuit Court was correct in granting
 summary judgment to the Designers. 
V. CONCLUSION
 
The March 24, 2008 Judgment in Favor of Defendants C.
 
Don Manuel/Hawaii, Inc. and Morikawa & Associates, LLC as to all
 
10
 Appellants argue that the State of Hawai' i's newly constituted
design claim conciliation panels, as established by Hawaii Revised Statutes
§ 672B-1 et seq. (Supp. 2010), would preclude the bringing of frivolous andfraudulent claims against design professionals. This misses the point: theHawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure already prevent parties from bringing
frivolous and fraudulent claims. See Haw. R. Civ. P. 11(b). The economic 
loss doctrine protects wider, deeper interests than does the existence ofdesign claim conciliation panels. 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Claims in the Complaint, entered in the Circuit Court of the
 
Second Circuit, is affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 
Philip L. Deaver and
Lori N. Tanigawa
(Bays Deaver Lung Rose & Holma)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants
Leis Family Limited Partnership
and Cooling Associates LLC
 
Bruce M. Ito,
for Defendants-Appellees
C. Don Manuel/Hawaii, Inc. and
Morikawa & Associates, LLC
 
15
 