  
  
  2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28430
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
STEVEN A. FREITAS, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
KANEOHE DIVISION
 
(HPD Criminal No. 6026023MO)
(1P405-01655)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley, Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Steven A. Freitas (Freitas) appeals
 
the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order (judgment) filed on
 
February 2, 2007 in the District Court of the First Circuit,
 
1
Kane'ohe Division (district court)  convicting him of the petty
2
misdemeanor of disorderly conduct  occurring on November 20,
2005, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 711-1101
 (1993 & Supp. 2005).
3
 
1 The Honorable T. David Woo presided.
 Although the district court did not state that the conviction was for a
petty misdemeanor, the district court sentenced Freitas, inter alia
, to six
months probation. HRS § 706-623(1)(d) (Supp. 2006), the statute in effect at
the time of sentencing on February 2, 2007, provides for six months probation
"upon conviction of a petty misdemeanor."
 
3 HRS § 711-1101 states:
 
§711-1101 Disorderly conduct. (1) A person commits the
offense of disorderly conduct if, with intent to cause physical
inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the public, or
recklessly creating a risk thereof, the person:
 
(a) Engages in fighting or threatening, or in violent or
tumultuous behavior; or 
(b) Makes unreasonable noise; or 
(c) Subjects another person to offensively coarse behavior
or abusive language which is likely to provoke a violent
response; or 
(continued...)
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Freitas contends that:
 
(1) The disorderly conduct charge was defective. 
First, he contends the district court erred in denying his
 motions to dismiss the charge as a petty misdemeanor because it
 lacked the essential elements for a petty misdemeanor. Second,
 although raised by Freitas for the first time on appeal, he
 contends this court should reverse the conviction because the
 alternatives for "unreasonable noise” were charged in the
 disjunctive;
 
(2) The district court erred in convicting Freitas of a
 
petty misdemeanor rather than a violation; and
 
(3) There was insufficient evidence that Freitas made
 
“unreasonable noise” to support either a violation or a petty
 misdemeanor.
 
The State does not contest that the charge was
 
defective for purposes of charging a petty misdemeanor. However,
 the State asserts that the oral charge was adequate to charge
 
3(...continued)
 
(d) Creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any
act which is not performed under any authorized license or permit;
or 
(e) Impedes or obstructs, for the purpose of begging or soliciting
alms, any person in any public place or in any place open to the
public. 
(2) Noise is unreasonable, within the meaning of subsection
(1)(b), if considering the nature and purpose of the person's
conduct and the circumstances known to the person, including the
nature of the location and the time of the day or night, the
person's conduct involves a gross deviation from the standard of
conduct that a law-abiding citizen would follow in the same
situation; or the failure to heed the admonition of a police
officer that the noise is unreasonable and should be stopped or
reduced.
 
The renter, resident, or owner-occupant of the premises who
knowingly or negligently consents to unreasonable noise on the
premises shall be guilty of a noise violation.
 
(3) Disorderly conduct is a petty misdemeanor if it is the
defendant's intention to cause substantial harm or serious
 inconvenience, or if the defendant persists in disorderly conduct
after reasonable warning or request to desist. Otherwise
disorderly conduct is a violation.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disorderly conduct as a violation, and that substantial evidence
 
existed to support a conviction as a violation.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 vacate the district court's judgment of February 2, 2007 and
 remand for the reasons set forth below.
 I. Background
 
This case arises from complaints on November 20, 2005
 
of loud music coming from a house located at 44-329 Kaneohe Bay
 Drive. The complaints were of loud drumming and singing coming
 from the house over several hours.
 
Just prior to the trial on February 2, 2007, the
 
following oral charge was presented to Freitas:
 
Mr. Freitas, on or about November 20th, 2005, in the
City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, with the
intent to cause physical inconvenience or alarm by a member
or members of the public, you reckless, or recklessly
creating a risk thereof, you did make unreasonable noise
defined as a gross deviation from law-abiding citizen's
conduct given the nature and purpose of your conduct,
location and time of day, or a failure to heed a peace
officer's warning that the noise is unreasonable and should
be stopped, thereby committing the offense of Disorderly
Conduct in violation of Section 711-1101(1)(b) of the Hawaii
Revised Statutes. . . .
 
During the trial, the district court heard testimony
 
from the complaining witness Gordon Uptmor, Police Officer
 
Theodore Hackbarth, Police Officer Kenneth Tjomsland, and
 defendant Freitas. At close of the State's case, Freitas orally
 moved for dismissal on grounds that the charge was defective for
 failing to assert a petty misdemeanor. The trial court denied
 the motion. Freitas reasserted the contention in closing
 argument.
 
At the conclusion of the trial, the district court made
 
the following findings and conclusions:
 
. . . [The] music commenced at about 10 o'clock in the
morning and continued unabated until police officers finally
showed up in response to Mr. Uptmor's call, calls.
 
Despite the fact that officers came to defendant's
residence and informed him that the music was loud and to
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
turn it down, the defendant continued to persist in playing
loud music with other persons and this resulted in multiple
visits to his house by the police officers.
 
The Court has observed the demeanor of Mr. Uptmor and
also in light of the fact that the witness is a minister,
the Court has concluded from observing his demeanor and the
manner in which the witness testified that he is not a
 person that is overly sensitive to music and that he was, in
fact, seriously inconvenienced by the loudness of this
music.
 
The Court finds that Mr. Uptmor has made thirty to
forty calls to 911 requesting the police to assist him in
getting the defendant to tone down the music, and the Court
finds that based on the fact that there were so many
repetitive complaints made, the defendant was well aware of
the fact that playing this loud music was offensive to
neighbors and that he intended to play music at such a
volume.
 
The Court finds that Officer Hackbarth went to
 
defendant's house, observed the defendant playing music
there, and in the words of Officer Hackbarth, the music was
extremely loud, it was amplified. The sound pressure of the
music was so loud that you could palpably feel the
percussive sound pressure of this music.
 
And as the officer testified, it was, let's see,
officer testified too that defendant's attitude was totally
defiant, and in the case of Officer Tjomsland, he gave that
officer the definite impression that the defendant did not
intend to comply with the officer's warnings to quiet the
music down.
 
Both officers testified that upon exiting their
automobiles the music was so loud that they were able to
hear the music immediately upon getting out of their cars.
In the case of Officer Tjomsland, he said possibly eighty
feet away he could hear that, okay.
 
Court definitely finds that this was not unamplified
music. When the officers were there talking to defendant,
one guitarist kept playing so loudly that they couldn't
converse with the defendant. Court finds that that is
 definitely not an unamplified guitar.
 
At any rate, the Court finds that this music was
exceedingly loud and it's really loud, unreasonably so and
not, and I would say within the meaning of the statute, it's
unreasonable noise. The Court, therefore, finds that the
State has proven their case beyond the reasonable doubt. I
 find the defendant guilty as charged. . . .
 
II. Sufficiency of the Charge
 
“'Whether [a charge] sets forth all the essential
 
elements of [a charged] offense . . . is a question of law[,]'
 
which we review under the de novo, or 'right/wrong,' standard." 
State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai
'i 383, 390, 219 P.3d 1170, 1177 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5(2009) (quoting State v. Wells, 78 Hawai #i 373, 379, 894 P.2d 70,
76 (1995)).
A. The Oral Charge Did Not Sufficiently Charge
Disorderly Conduct as a Petty Misdemeanor.
As apparently conceded by the State, the oral charge
prior to trial did not charge the disorderly conduct offense as a
petty misdemeanor.  The charge failed to cite to the petty
misdemeanor subsection HRS § 711-1101(3).  It also failed to
include allegations of Freitas' "intention to cause substantial
harm or serious inconvenience" or allegations of Freitas
"persist[ing] in disorderly conduct after reasonable warning or
request to desist[.]" See State v. Moser, 107 Hawai #i 159, 167,
111 P.3d 54, 62 (App. 2005) (footnote omitted) ("The Complaint
did not charge Moser with disorderly conduct as a petty
misdemeanor, nor allege any operative facts that would apprise
Moser that she was being charged with the petty misdemeanor
offense").
Consequently, the district court erred in denying
Freitas' motion to dismiss on these grounds and in convicting
Freitas of disorderly conduct as a petty misdemeanor.
B. Freitas Raises a Post-Conviction Challenge that
the Charge Asserts Disjunctive Alternative Bases
for "Unreasonable Noise"
During the district court proceedings, Freitas did not
object that the charge was defective on grounds that the
alternatives for “unreasonable noise” were charged in the
disjunctive.  Instead, Freitas raises this issue for the first
time on appeal and now takes issue with the part of the charge
that stated:
. . . you did make unreasonable noise defined as a gross
deviation from law-abiding citizen's conduct given the
nature and purpose of your conduct, location and time of
day, or a failure to heed a peace officer's warning that the
noise is unreasonable and should be stopped ...
(Emphasis added).  Freitas relies on State v. Jendrusch, 58 Haw.
279, 567 P.2d 1242 (1977), in which the Hawai #i Supreme Court
noted that where different types of conduct were proscribed under  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
different sections of a statute, charging the defendant in the
 
disjunctive rather than in the conjunctive "left the defendant
 uncertain as to which of the acts charged was being relied upon
 as the basis for the accusation against him." Id. at 283 n.4, 567
 P.2d at 1245 n.4.
4 The court thus stated that "[w]here a statute
 
specifies several ways in which its violation may occur, the
 charge may be laid in the conjunctive but not in the
 disjunctive." Id. (citing Territory v. Lii, 39 Haw. 574, 1952
 
WL 7385 (Haw. Terr. 1952)).
 
We resolve this point of error against Freitas for
 
several reasons. First, Jendrusch is inapposite because Freitas
 was not charged with engaging in conduct proscribed by different
 sections of HRS § 711-1101, but was only charged with making
 unreasonable noise, in violation of HRS § 711-1101(b).
 
Second, unlike in Jendrusch, the same conduct or action
 
in this case (i.e. playing loud music) satisfies the alternative
 requirements under the statute for "unreasonable noise." That
 is, in this case, the single act of playing loud music was both
 
4 In Jendrusch, the defendant was charged under both subsection 1(b) and
1(c) of the disorderly conduct statute, which then stated in part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct if, with intent
to cause physical inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the
public, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he:
 
(b) Makes unreasonable noise; or
 (c) Makes any offensively coarse utterance, gesture, or display, or
addresses abusive language to any person present, which is likely to
provoke a violent response; . . . .
 
HRS § 711-1101 (Supp. 1974).
 
The charge as presented to Jendrusch stated:
 
You (Jendrusch) are hereby charged that in the City and County of
Honolulu, State of Hawaii, on or about the 14th day of September, 1974,
with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm by members
of the public or recklessly creating a risk thereof, you did make
unreasonable noise or offensively coarse utterance, gesture or display
or address abusive language to any person present, thereby committing
the offense of Disorderly Conduct in violation of Section 1101(1)(b) of
the Hawaii Penal Code. (Emphasis added)
 
Jendrusch, 58 Haw. at 280, 567 P.2d at 1243-44.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"a gross deviation from law-abiding citizen's conduct given the
 
nature and purpose of [defendant's] conduct, location and time of
 day" as well as "a failure to heed a peace officer's warning that
 the noise is unreasonable and should be stopped." Therefore,
 this case is additionally distinguishable from Jendrusch because
 the use of the disjunctive alternatives for "unreasonable noise"
 did not create "uncertain[ty] as to which of the acts charged was
 being relied upon as the basis for the accusation against
 [defendant]." 58 Haw. at 283 n.4, 567 P.2d at 1245 n.4.
 
Third, where an indictment is challenged only after a 
conviction, a "flexible rule of liberal construction" applies under which "we must liberally construe the [charge] in favor of validity." State v. Motta, 66 Haw. 89, 93, 657 P.2d 1019, 1021 
(1983). In these circumstances, the conviction will not be reversed "unless the defendant can show prejudice or that the indictment cannot within reason be construed to charge a crime." Id. at 91, 657 P.2d at 1020; see also Wheeler, 121 Hawai
'i at 
399, 219 P.3d at 1186. 
The charge tracked the language of the statute. See 
State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai 'i 390, 406, 56 P.3d 692, 708 (2002) 
(noting that generally, "a charge drawn from the language of the statute proscribing the offense is not fatally defective"); see also State v. Silva, 67 Haw. 581, 585, 698 P.2d 293, 296 (1985). Freitas has made no effort to show that he has been prejudiced by the charge setting out the alternative bases for "unreasonable noise" in the disjunctive. In this regard, there is ample information in the trial record establishing that the conduct at issue was Freitas' playing music too loudly on the day of the offense and that by his playing of the loud music he failed to heed an officer's warning. The record reflects that Freitas defended against this alleged conduct. Moreover, as set forth above, because the same conduct or action (i.e. playing loud music) was the basis for either alternative establishing "unreasonable noise," no confusion was created and the charge can reasonably be construed to charge a crime. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We therefore reject Freitas' argument, raised for the
 
first time on appeal, that his conviction should be reversed
 
because the charge stated the alternatives to establish
 "unreasonable noise" in the disjunctive. 
III.	 There is Sufficient Evidence for a Conviction of 
Disorderly Conduct as a Violation.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has often stated the standard 
of review for sufficiency of the evidence as follows:
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution when
the appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of such
evidence to support a conviction; the same standard applies
whether the case was before a judge or jury. The test on
appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a
reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence
to support the conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Sprattling, 99 Hawai 'i 312, 317, 55 P.3d 276, 281 (2002) 
(quoting State v. Young, 93 Hawai 'i 224, 230, 999 P.2d 230, 236 
(2000)). "'[I]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not 
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the [trier of fact].'" Sprattling, 99 Hawai
'i at 317, 55 P.3d at 281 (quoting 
State v. Sua, 92 Hawai 'i 61, 69, 987 P.2d 959, 967 (1999). 
Because we held above that the charge was defective in
 
alleging a petty misdemeanor, we review the sufficiency of the
 evidence to support a disorderly conduct violation. Based on the
 testimony of Uptmor and the two police officers who responded to
 the complaints of the loud music, there is more than sufficient
 evidence to support a conviction for a disorderly conduct
 violation.
 
Uptmor, the complaining witness and next door neighbor
 
to Freitas, testified there "was loud drumming, singing coming
 from the house next door" that started earlier in the day and
 went on until about 4 p.m. when he called police. Uptmor
 testified the volume was so loud that "with the doors and windows
 closed and the TV on, you can still hear it," that he could "feel
 the pounding of the drums" within his home, and that he could not
 get any work or anything done because the music was constant. 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Prior to November 20, 2005, Uptmor had made numerous 911 calls
 
regarding the loud music.
 
On November 20, 2005, Officer Hackbarth responded at
 
approximately 3:00 p.m. to a complaint of loud noise in the area
 and testified that "we've had a lotta calls at this address about
 loud noise, especially the drumming." As he walked towards the
 music, Officer Hackbarth could definitely feel the music as well
 as hear it. Officer Hackbarth saw an open garage with a band
 playing and saw Freitas playing the drums and another male
 playing an amplified guitar. After determining the music was
 unreasonably loud, Officer Hackbarth informed them about the
 complaint, asked them to turn it down and practice the guitar
 without the amplifier. According to Officer Hackbarth, Freitas
 "told me he would turn it down, and I said okay, fine, just
 consider it your first warning, and I left." Officer Hackbarth
 gave this warning at about 3:10 p.m. He also estimated the
 
distance from where Freitas was playing to Uptmor's home was
 
about thirty feet.
 
Later that day, Officer Tjomsland was sent to the same
 
location for a loud music complaint. Officer Hackbarth also
 responded. When he drove up to the house, and while at the
 complainant's house, Officer Hackbarth could hear "same thing,
 drumming, electric guitar, real loud." After getting
 complainant's statement, Officer Hackbarth and Officer Tjomsland
 went to Freitas' house. According to Officer Hackbarth, Freitas
 "was at a point where" he stated "I've been living here for
 years, arrest me" and Freitas' attitude towards the end was "like
 defiant."
 
Officer Tjomsland testified that on the day in question
 
he was sent twice to 44-329 Kaneohe Bay Drive, once at around
 1:40 p.m. and the second time after 5 o'clock. The first call
 was by someone who wanted to remain anonymous and upon
 responding, Officer Tjomsland did not hear anything and did not
 approach Freitas' residence. At approximately 5:45 p.m., Officer
 Tjomsland was dispatched and again went to the area. This time,
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as soon as he got out of his car and started walking down the
 
driveway, he could hear music. Officer Tjomsland testified that
 the farthest away he could hear the music was about eighty to
 eighty-five feet. Standing outside of complainant's house,
 Officer Tjomsland could hear and feel the music, describing it as
 "amplified" music. Officer Tjomsland went to Freitas' residence
 and informed Freitas that he was there because of the loud noise. 
According to Officer Tjomsland, Freitas responded "that he knew
 that we had been there before" and that "he's gonna keep playing
 it." Officer Tjomsland testified that "[Freitas] seemed to have
 a defiant conduct" and "[Freitas] told [Officer Tjomsland] he's
 been doing this it [sic] for years, he's gonna continue doing
 it." Officer Tjomsland issued Freitas a citation for disorderly
 conduct.
 
Freitas testified that he played unamplified drums for
 
about twenty minutes around 12 p.m. or 1 p.m. According to
 Freitas, the first time he really played was around 3 p.m., when
 he played with two other people and it was not amplified. They
 played for an hour and "then the officer came down, and we
 stopped completely until my brother got there about 5:30, and
 that's when we played again." Freitas stated they all shared one
 amplifier. According to Freitas, Officer Tjomsland was reluctant
 to cite him. Freitas also testified that when Officer Hackbarth
 came to Freitas' residence earlier that day, Officer Hackbarth
 "didn't say anything about the noise[,]" but said "just maybe
 easy on the base." Freitas testified "I told 'em we're gonna
 play later this afternoon, he says no, you better cruise then
 now[;] [s]o I cruised until my brother came." According to
 Freitas, both Officer Hackbarth and Officer Tjomsland's comments
 were "more of a praise" and "[c]omplaining about the neighbor,
 not the music."
 
Viewing the evidence in the strongest light for the
 
prosecution, the foregoing constitutes substantial evidence of a
 disorderly conduct violation under HRS § 711-1101. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Because the trial court found Freitas guilty of 
disorderly conduct as a petty misdemeanor and because the 
elements of the included violation are satisfied by substantial evidence, the case may be remanded for entry of a judgment of conviction on disorderly conduct as a violation. See State v. 
Kekuewa, 114 Hawai
'i 411, 424, 163 P.3d 1148, 1161 (2007) (where 
a conviction is reversed because of a defective charge, "an appellate court may nevertheless remand for entry of judgment of conviction and resentencing as to any offenses adequately set forth in the [charge]"). 
Based on the foregoing, the judgment filed on
 
February 2, 2007 convicting Freitas of disorderly conduct as a
 petty misdemeanor is vacated. The case is remanded for entry of
 a judgment that Freitas committed the offense of disorderly
 conduct as a violation.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 22, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Deborah L. Kim
 
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge
 
Kathryn Smith
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu Associate Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
 
11
 