NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30257
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF KC
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 07-11559)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley, Leonard, JJ.)
 
Father-Appellant (Father) and Mother-Cross-Appellant

 
(Mother) appeal from the "Order Awarding Permanent Custody"
 
(Permanent Custody Order) filed on December 11, 2009, in the
 Family Court of the First Circuit (family court).
1 The Permanent
 
Custody Order terminated the parental rights of Mother and Father
 to KC, their child, and awarded permanent custody of KC to the
 Department of Human Services (DHS). 
On appeal, Father and Mother contend that the family
 
court erred in ruling that each parent was not presently willing
 and able, and it was not reasonably foreseeable that each parent
 would become willing and able within a reasonable period of time,
 to provide KC with a safe family home. Father and Mother
 challenge various findings of fact and conclusions of law made by
 the family court in support of its ruling. We affirm.
 
1 The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided over the proceedings
at issue in this appeal.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
Mother twice tested positive for crystal
 
methamphetamine while pregnant with KC. KC was placed in
 
protective custody shortly after birth but was returned to family
 supervision and resided with Father and Mother. When KC was less
 than two months old, DHS became aware of domestic violence by
 Father against Mother. Mother refused DHS's request that she
 remove herself and KC from the home. Instead, Mother and Father
 agreed to have DHS place KC in foster care. In October 2007, the
 family court awarded foster custody over KC to DHS. In November
 2007, KC was placed with Mother under family supervision after
 Mother was admitted to a residential drug treatment program. In
 November 2008, the family court returned KC to foster custody
 after Mother relapsed on drugs and tested positive for
 methamphetamine. In November 2009, the family court held a trial
 on DHS's motion for order awarding permanent custody (Permanent
 Custody Motion).
 
II.
 
The family court did not err in terminating Father's
 
parental rights. DHS established by clear and convincing
 evidence that Father was not presently willing and able, and it
 was not reasonably foreseeable that he would become willing and
 able within a reasonable period of time, to provide KC with a
 safe family home. See Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 587-73
 
(2006 & Supp. 2009)
 
Father has a history of drug use, specifically crystal
 
methamphetamine, dating back to when he was nineteen years old. 
Father tested positive for methamphetamine four times since the
 case was opened in October 2007. Father admitted that he had
 used drugs as recently as one and a half months before the
 November 2009 trial held on DHS's Permanent Custody Motion. 
Father had not completed any substance abuse treatment program,
 and he only began substance abuse treatment one and a half months 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
before the trial despite the case being open for two years. 
Father could not provide a date for when he would be eligible for
 a clinical discharge from the substance abuse treatment program. 
Although Father completed anger management classes, Father
 demonstrated that he did not apply what was taught when he left
 two threatening messages for a social worker. 
III.
 
The family court did not err in terminating Mother's
 
parental rights. DHS established by clear and convincing
 evidence that Mother was not presently willing and able, and it
 was not reasonably foreseeable that she would become willing and
 able within a reasonable period of time, to provide KC with a
 safe family home. See HRS ยง 587-73.
 
At the time of trial, Mother had a twenty-five year
 
history of substance abuse, including use of alcohol beginning at
 age thirteen and crystal methamphetamine beginning at age
 fourteen. Mother's parental rights had been terminated with
 respect to her four other children who are older than KC. Mother
 tested positive for crystal methamphetamine while pregnant with
 KC and later admitted to using drugs during the pregnancy. 
Mother had failed to obtain clinical discharge from numerous
 substance abuse programs in which she has participated since
 1999. Mother relapsed by using methamphetamine on five occasions
 between August 2007 and December 2008, and she failed to appear
 for drugs tests in August 2007 and September 2009. Mother was
 unsuccessful in her Family Drug Court participation and was
 discharged from that program in February 2009. 
The record reflects Mother's inability to remain clean
 
and sober despite extensive participation in substance abuse
 treatment and services. Her relationship with Father was marked
 by domestic violence, and she stated that she and Father had to 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
be "high on ice" to be together.2 There is substantial evidence
 
in the record to support the family court's findings and its
 
decision to terminate Mother's parental rights.
 
On appeal, Mother contends that the family court erred 
because she had made recent progress to overcome her history of substance abuse. In support of her argument, Mother refers to certain alleged positive achievements and improvements in her drug treatment that occurred after the family court entered its Permanent Custody Order and which were not based on evidence in the record. We cannot consider matters that are not part of the record. See Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rules 10(a) 
(2009) and 28(b) (2008); Casumpang v. ILWU Local 142, 108 Hawai 'i 
411, 420, 121 P.3d 391, 400 (2005) (concluding that appellate court cannot consider matters that were not properly introduced into the record); State v. Moses, 102 Hawai
'i 449, 455, 77 P.3d 
940, 946 (2003) (stating that an appellate court "cannot consider evidence outside the record"). 
Mother did present evidence at trial, which is part of
 
the record, of recent progress she had made in drug treatment. 
However, Mother has a history of doing well in drug treatment for
 a period of time, only to relapse into drug abuse. The family
 court was entitle to consider Mother's long history of chronic
 drug abuse, her numerous failures to obtain clinical discharge
 from substance abuse programs, and her pattern of relapsing in
 rendering its decision. Contrary to Mother's contention, we
 conclude that DHS established by clear and convincing evidence
 that Mother would not become willing and able within a reasonable
 period of time to provide KC with a safe family home. 
2 At trial, both Mother and Father testified that they are
no longer in a relationship.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
We affirm the "Order Awarding Permanent Custody" filed
 
by the family court on December 11, 2009.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 30, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Patrick K. Shea
 
Attorney for Father-Appellant
 
Chief Judge

Patricia A. Brady
Attorney for Mother-Cross-Appellant
 
Dorothy Sellers 
Solicitor General
 Kimberly Tsumoto Guidry
Deputy Solicitor General
Department of the Attorney General for Petitioner-Appellee
 Associate Judge

Associate Judge
5

 