FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MATTHEW HIGA, Defendant-Appellant
 
NO. 30546
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0132)
 
JANUARY 31, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., FUJISE AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FUJISE, J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Matthew Higa (Higa) appeals from
 
the May 5, 2010 judgment of conviction and sentence, entered in
 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court),1
 
convicting him of second-degree murder, in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-701.5 (1993).
 
Higa was found guilty in a bench trial of throwing 23­
month-old Cyrus Belt (the child) to his death on the H1 Freeway
 
from the Miller Street overpass on January 17, 2008. Higa was
 
undisputedly on methamphetamine and amphetamine at the time of
 
the crime. Higa was found competent to stand trial and did not
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario (Judge Del Rosario) presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
raise the defense of mental disease or defect. Due to the age of
 
his victim, Higa was sentenced to life imprisonment with the
 
possibility of parole, subject to a 15-year mandatory minimum,
 
pursuant to HRS § 706-660.2 (1993).
 
I. Background
 
A. Retainer of Attorney Randall Oyama
 
Higa privately retained Randall Oyama (Oyama) shortly
 
after his January 24, 2008 indictment. In February, Higa, then
 
twenty-three years old, signed a general power of attorney
 
authorizing his father, Shelton Higa (Father), to pay Oyama's
 
retainer from the proceeds of a structured settlement.
 
At a May 7, 2008 status conference, Oyama stated that
 
he may have to withdraw because he was not being paid. He also
 
stated that he was considering filing for a fitness examination
 
of Higa. At a May 27, 2008 status conference, Oyama said he had
 
resolved matters with Father and was still "undecided" as to
 
whether he would file a motion for a mental fitness exam and
 
raising a mental defense.
 
2
On June 26, 2008, the circuit court,  issued an order
purportedly granting Higa's oral motion to appoint examiners to
 
determine Higa's fitness to proceed and penal responsibility,
 
pursuant to HRS Chapter 704. That order was set aside on July
 
15, 2008, on the grounds that it was "inadvertently filed."
 
On July 17, 2008, Oyama filed a motion to appoint 
examiners to determine Higa's fitness for trial and penal
 
responsibility. 
Four days later, but before the circuit court
 
entered an order appointing the examiners, Higa executed a second
 power of attorney, revoking the authority granted to Father and
 
"authorizing Mr. Oyama to act on [Higa's] behalf."
3 Oyama did
 
2
 The Honorable Michael D. Wilson signed the first order appointing
examiners.
 
3
 The exact scope of the powers of attorney granted is unclear.
Higa's Waiver Declaration states that he authorized Oyama, in a July 21, 2008
power of attorney, and then attorney Ronald Fujiwara, in an April 9, 2009
power of attorney, "to act on my behalf." To further confuse matters, Higa's
(continued...)
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
not advise Higa to seek independent legal advice before executing
 
the power of attorney. Under the power of attorney, Oyama
 
received Higa's monthly settlement checks and placed them into a
 
client trust account.
 
After the changes in Higa's attorney-in-fact, Father
 
sent the circuit court a handwritten letter, dated October 22,
 
2008, requesting a postponement because Father had "lost all
 
confidence in [Oyama's] abilities to represent [Higa] properly"
 
and was concerned by "Oyama's casual attitude." Father also told
 
the circuit court that he filed a complaint with the Disciplinary
 
Board. In another letter to the court dated November 5, 2008,
 
Father told the court he was still bothered by Oyama's
 
representation.
 
The court called two status conferences regarding the
 
matter, on November 6, 2008, and December 17, 2008. At one of
 
the hearings, Oyama "indicated there was no longer a problem"
 
because Oyama had power of attorney to handle Higa's finances. 
The circuit court noted that the matter of Higa's fitness to
 
proceed was still pending and, based on one examiner's opinion
 
that had been submitted, the court questioned whether Higa had
 
the capacity to execute the change in the power of attorney. 
Oyama told the circuit court that he was going to stipulate to
 
Higa's fitness. The court stated that this raised a potential
 
conflict of interest, because Oyama would have a financial
 
interest in having Higa found fit to proceed, because if Higa
 
were not, he would have been incompetent to execute a power of
 
attorney. The State indicated that it was considering filing a
 
motion to determine whether a conflict existed, and if so, to
 
remove Oyama from representing Higa. To the circuit court's
 
suggestion that Oyama withdraw, Oyama stated that Higa wanted
 
(...continued)
waiver claims that on May 22, 2009, he executed a document entitled
"Revocation of Durable Power of Attorney[,] which revoked the July 21, 2008
General Power of Attorney in favor Mr. Oyama." (Emphasis added). The record
 does not contain copies of any of the three powers of attorney.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Oyama to continue representing him. The circuit court then
 
suggested "obtaining guidance" from the Office of Disciplinary
 
Counsel (ODC).
 
In a March 9, 2009 letter to Charles Hite, acting chief
 
disciplinary counsel, Honolulu Prosecutor Peter B. Carlisle told
 
the ODC that the circuit court had requested that the parties
 
obtain a formal advisory opinion. Oyama had an opportunity to
 
review and approve the letter. Carlisle relayed that Oyama
 
proposed two things to remedy the potential conflict: (1) a
 
formal waiver of the conflict of interest and (2) a power-of­
attorney held by a third party.
 
ODC's response is not in the record. However, the
 
parties proceeded in accordance with Oyama's proposal. Higa
 
signed (1) a power-of-attorney in favor of Ronald Fujiwara
 
(Fujiwara), a licensed attorney, and (2) a declaration waiving
 
any conflict of interest (Waiver Declaration). In the Waiver
 
Declaration, Higa attested that Oyama disclosed the ODC opinion
 
to him. Higa further asserted that Mr. Oyama was his "attorney
 
of choice" and expressed his "full confidence" in him. The
 
Waiver Declaration further reads:
 
8. 	Because of the July 21, 2008 Power of Attorney and
financial arrangements I had with Mr. Oyama, questions
of conflicts of interest were raised regarding:
 
(A)	 Whether I am capable of executing a power
of attorney in favor of Mr. Oyama when the
issue of my fitness to proceed and penal
responsibility had been raised and it was
undecided at the time of the execution on
 July 21, 2008;
 
(B)	 Whether Mr. Oyama's argument as my
criminal defense attorney on the issue of
my fitness would be at odds with his
position that I was capable of executing
the Power of Attorney in which he had a
direct personal financial interest;
 
(C)	 Whether because he had unfettered
 discretion to authorize payment to himself
for legal fees, Mr. Oyama's decision
regarding my defense would be based on my
best interest, or based on the financial
affect it may have on him.
 
. . . .
 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
12.	 Having a full and complete understanding of the
foregoing, I hereby waive any conflict of interest
that may have existed or may still exist based upon
Mr. Oyama's prior dual role as criminal attorney and
holder of my Power of Attorney
.
 
At a June 24, 2009 hearing, after finding Higa
 
competent to proceed, as discussed in more detail below, the
 
court engaged in the following colloquy with Higa regarding the
 
Waiver Declaration.
 
THE COURT: Okay. The other matter relating to the issue of a
conflict-free representation, I've been provided with a
declaration from Mr. Higa waiving any possible conflict.
 
Q. (By the Court) Mr. Higa, have you discussed this issue
with your attorney, Mr. Oyama?
 A. Yes.
 
Q. Okay. And I've been provided with what's been entitled
Matthew Higa's Declaration of Waiver of Conflict of
Interest. Have you reviewed this document?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Okay. On the last page of this document it appears to
have your signature, is this your signature?
 A. Yes.
 
Q. Okay. Did you go over with your lawyer before -- did
you go over this document with your lawyer before you signed
it?
 
A. Yes, Your Honor.
 
Q. And did you read and understand it before you signed it? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Do you have any questions about this?
 
A. 
No.
 
At the request of the State and without objection, the circuit
 
court made Higa's Declaration of Waiver of Conflict of Interest
 
part of the record and found that Higa "made a knowing,
 
intelligent, and voluntary waiver of his right to a conflict-free
 
representation by his execution of this document in open court."
 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. Fitness to Proceed
 
4
On July 27, 2008, the circuit court  appointed a three-
member panel to examine Higa. The panel determined two-to-one
 
that Higa was competent to stand trial.
 
Psychiatrist Dr. Martin Blinder (Dr. Blinder), based on
 
a July 10, 2008 psychiatric exam of Higa, diagnosed Higa with a
 
"thought disorder, in part secondary to addiction to stimulant
 
drugs." He noted in a report dated July 25, 2008:
 
This gentleman exhibits a persistent thought disorder as
well as the eccentric affect (emotional tone) characteristic
of schizophrenics. Nevertheless, his commerce with reality
is sufficient to render him fit to proceed. There is,
however, substantial evidence that his mental disability
affected his state of mind and criminal intent at the time
 of his offense.
 
On August 18, 2008, Dr. Blinder examined Higa again and sent the
 
court an updated report on August 25, 2008. Dr. Blinder
 
observed:
 
[Higa's] answers to the standard "704 competency" questions
was [sic] entirely orthodox. He knew the charges, possible
penalties, role of the various court officers, and this time
(unlike last time) understood an NGI [(not guilty by reason
of insanity)] defense: "It means you weren't in your right
state of mind. But that doesn't apply to me. I was in my
right state of mind. I just didn't commit the crime."
 
. . . .
 [Higa] sees no basis for an NGI defense. Rather, he will
stick to his claims of innocence and the fact that no one
 actually saw him do the deed.
 
Dr. Blinder wrote, "In summary, though psychiatrically disabled,
 
sometimes confused, and in denial, Mr. Higa is mentally competent
 
to proceed. Though his disability played a role in his offense
 
(there is no rational reason for his doing what he did) there is
 
insufficient clinical data to support an insanity defense." Dr.
 
Blinder's report also contained this footnote:
 
4
 Judge Del Rosario entered this order.
 
6
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I believe that Mr. Higa's persistent adherence to an
improbable scenario may be an example of confabulation,
wherein the mind creates an alternative scenario to fill
 gaps in memory caused by a mental disease or a defect. As
 such, it is distinguished from conscious lying or
dissembling. This phenomenon doubtless adds somewhat to
defense burdens but does not in itself negate competence.
 
Psychologist Stephen E. Gainsley (Dr. Gainsley) opined
 
that Higa was fit to proceed. Dr. Gainsley stated he thought
 
Higa "was not substantially impaired as to either cognitive or
 
volitional capacity as a result of mental disease or disorder at
 
the time of the alleged offense[,]" but rather was "experiencing
 
a substance-induced psychotic episode" as a result of
 
methamphetamine use shortly before the incident. Dr. Gainsley
 
noted he did not believe that Higa had a preexisting psychotic
 
disorder, because he had not been previously treated for anything
 
other than substance abuse.
 
Dr. Dennis R. Donovan (Dr. Donovan), a psychological
 
consultant with the Department of Health, Adult Mental Health
 
Division, Courts & Corrections Branch, opined that Higa was not
 
fit to proceed. Dr. Donovan wrote:
 
Mr. Higa does have some of the capacities underlying fitness
and at first glance he does appear fit, and I think an
understandable argument can be made in support of that. He
 certainly does not appear to be grossly psychotic,
disorganized or to have psychomotor agitation or
retardation. However, I don't think he is fit to proceed,
and I think he likely is mildly psychotic as a residual of
his crystal methamphetamine use. . . .
 
Mr. Higa was well oriented on all occasions. He is aware of
 
the role and function of court personnel and is capable of
understanding basic court procedures. He understands the
 charge and allegations against him, but does not demonstrate
an appreciation of the strength of the case against him or
his legal jeopardy. He is aware of basic pleas/defenses and
their consequences, understanding that a conviction could
bring a lengthy jail sentence and that a finding of "not
guilty" could bring him freedom. He did not know initially
and did not seem to care to learn the nature and possible
consequences of an insanity defense, showing little interest
in it, with his only query involving whether or not he would
be allowed to smoke at the Hawaii State Hospital if he were
to go there.
 
. . . .
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . He does not seem to appreciate his legal
jeopardy and seems comfortable in the idea that he will
(magically) be found not guilty. He indicates [he] would
not consider a plea bargain, even in a hypothetical
situation I presented to him where it likely would be in his
best interest to take a plea bargain. He wants to go to
trial immediately so that he can win and be released
immediately.
 
. . . Mr. Higa denies the charge, denies mental
illness and does not want the insanity defense to be
considered.
 
During the June 24, 2009 hearing, Higa stipulated to
 
his fitness for trial. Based on the stipulation and the panel's
 
reports, the circuit court concluded that Higa was fit to stand
 
trial.
 
Higa filed a trial memorandum on November 30, 2009. 
At the December 10, 2009 hearing on the State's motions in
 
limine, the court instructed Oyama to file responsive memoranda
 
to the State's motions in limine regarding, inter alia, the
 
voluntariness of the statements Higa made to police and medical
 
personnel, stating that the court "wanted to treat this
 
[instruction] as a -- perhaps an education as well as an
 
admonishment to make a better appellate record." Then, the
 
following interaction took place:
 
THE COURT: Okay. One other point I wanted to raise is
that earlier we had talked about trial memorandums, in
particular the defense theories. The state had submitted a
trial memorandum. Mr. Oyama, have you -- are you going to
file a trial memorandum as to your legal theory of the case? 
MR. OYAMA: I did file a trial memorandum.
 
MR. CARLISLE: He did. Does the Court not have a copy
of it? 
THE COURT: I was looking for it and I wasn't able to
locate it.
 
MR. CARLISLE: It definitely, definitely exists. 
THE COURT: Anything else at this time?
 
In response to this interaction, on January 19, 2010, Higa filed
 
a "Motion to Disqualify the Presiding Judge." The motion was
 
based upon HRS § 601-7 and the Hawaii Revised Code of Judicial
 
Conduct. Attached to the motion was an affidavit by Oyama, but
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
no affidavit from Higa himself. Oyama's affidavit states in
 
relevant part:5
 
2. In the early stages of the Higa case, Judge Del
Rosario informed [Oyama] that he should withdraw from the
 
case. Judge Del Rosario stated his belief that a conflict
of interest existed between [Oyama] and [Higa]. [Oyama] did
not believe that a fatal conflict existed.
 
3. [Oyama] did not withdraw as suggested by Judge Del
Rosario. Therefore, to satisfy Judge Del Rosario, the
matter was brought before the Office of Disciplinary Counsel
to render an advisory opinion regarding the conflict that
Judge Del Rosario claimed existed.
 
4. In the Higa case, Judge Del Rosario requested that
the parties prepare and submit trial memorandum by November
30, 2009.
 
5. On November 30, 2009, [Oyama] filed Defendant
Matthew Higa's Trial Memorandum. (See attached Exhibit
"A").
 
. . . .
 
7. On December 9, 2009, after the completion of the
scheduled Motion in Limine, Judge Del Rosario, in open court
with the media present, announced that he had asked counsel
to prepare trial memorandum. Judge Del Rosario then pointed
out that he had received the State's trial memorandum. 
Finally, Judge Del Rosario pointed out that he did not
receive a trial memorandum from [Oyama].
 
[Oyama] responded by telling Judge Del Rosario that he
had in fact filed a trial memorandum as requested. Upon
hearing [Oyama's] response, Judge Del Rosario glared at
[Oyama] with a look of disbelief. Following a brief period
of uncomfortable silence, the State's attorney, Peter
Carlisle, confirmed [Oyama's] contention that the trial
memorandum had been filed. Upon learning this fact, Judge
Del Rosario indicated that he would review it later and left
 the courtroom.
 
. . . .
 21. [Oyama] believes that Judge Del Rosario has
demonstrated bias and/or prejudice towards [Oyama] based
upon the following:
 
a. Intentionally humiliating [Oyama] in open
court with media present subsequent to completion of
the scheduled court activity for December 9, 2009, by
falsely accusing [Oyama] of non-performance in
submitting trial memorandum. Intentional humiliation
 demonstrates bias and prejudice.
 
5
 Oyama's affidavit included a great deal of information about the
criminal case of State v. Ryan Kawamoto, Cr. 09-1-1632, that has no readily
apparent connection to Higa other than Oyama's representation of both men at
the same time in cases presided over by Judge Del Rosario. 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The circuit court held a hearing on the motion to
 
disqualify on January 20, 2010. The parties offered no oral
 
argument on the motion. Prior to announcing its decision, the
 
circuit court outlined the law on judicial disqualification under
 
statute and the common law "appearance of impropriety" standard. 
The circuit court stated that, as there was no affidavit from
 
Higa as required by the statute, it need only consider the
 
appearance of impropriety part of the analysis. The circuit
 
court, addressing paragraphs 2 and 3 of Oyama's affidavit, stated
 
that it believed that Oyama's "representations are not entirely
 
accurate" regarding how the ODC opinion came about. The circuit
 
court explained:
 
The court indicated that perhaps this is a matter that
we can obtain guidance from the Office of Disciplinary
Counsel, and perhaps based on their guidance, it could also
satisfy the State's concern regarding any possible appellate
issue. For that reason, we had continued the matter further
for both the prosecution and Mr. Oyama to work on the
communication to the Disciplinary Counsel laying out the
facts and circumstances that arose and to give some type of
informal opinion as to the course of action to take, both to
protect Mr. Higa, the defendant, protect Mr. Oyama as his
counsel, as well as to protect the State's interest.
 
Later, the circuit court characterized this not as a "referral"
 
bur rather "advice to the attorneys to get an informal opinion
 
from the Disciplinary Counsel."
 
To Oyama's allegation that the court had "intentionally
 
humiliated" Oyama in front of the media by inferring that Oyama
 
did not file a trial memorandum, Judge Del Rosario explained that
 
the court did not receive the customary "courtesy copy" and
 
Oyama's memorandum was not in the judge's folder at the hearing. 
As the circumstances surrounding the court's questioning of Oyama
 
about the memorandum was on the record, the court would say only
 
that the record "speaks for itself."
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Higa objects on appeal to the following findings of
 
6
fact and conclusions of law, which the circuit court entered
February 10, 2010, after trial:
 
21. With respect to the conflict of interest issue,
the Court notes that it did not make any referrals to the
Office of Disciplinary Counsel in this case regarding
improper conduct, but an inquiry was made by counsel.
 
. . . . 
33. Mr. Oyama indicated his client wanted him to
continue representing him and that he wanted to remain on
the case. The Court therefore suggested obtaining guidance
from the Office of Disciplinary Counsel (ODC) and the
attorneys agreed to work on a letter to ODC laying out the
facts and circumstances that had arisen to date in order to
 obtain an opinion as to a course of action that would
protect Defendant, Mr. Oyama and the State's interest.
 
. . . .
 
35. As a result of the letter to ODC, independent
counsel was retained by Mr. Higa to manage his financial
interests and to advise him on the potential conflict of
interest. Mr. Higa elected to waive any conflict at a
hearing held June 24, 2009.
 
. . . .
 
40. The circumstances related above arose as part of
the Higa case and the Court was required to deal with them.
The Court unequivocally has no bias or prejudice against Mr.
Oyama or Defendant Higa, nor is the Court disposed in favor
of the state.
 
. . . .
 
42. In consideration of the records as a whole in 
both State of Hawai' i vs. Ryan Kawamoto, Cr. No. 09-1-1632 
and State of Hawai' i vs. Matthew Higa, Cr. No. 08-1-0132,
the Court finds the Affidavit of Randy Oyama has not
objectively established that the Court has a bias orprejudice against Mr. Oyama or in favor of the State suchthat Mr. Kawamoto and Mr. Higa cannot obtain a fair trial. 
The circuit court concluded that, when the facts and
 
circumstances were viewed objectively, Judge Del Rosario did not
 
appear to demonstrate bias, lack of partiality, or competence and
 
therefore Higa had failed to meet his burden of establishing a
 
basis to disqualify Judge Del Rosario.
 
6
 Higa also objects to findings 17 and 18, which deal with the
Kawamoto case.
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C. Trial testimony
 
The parties do not dispute most of the events leading
 
up to the child's death. The following testimony is relevant to
 
Higa's contention on appeal that the child died before Higa threw
 
him from the overpass.
 
1. Appearance of the child by lay observers
 
Kraig Hengst (Hengst), who lived across the street from
 
the Miller Street overpass, testified that he and a roommate were
 
in the apartment's ground-floor garage around 11:30 to 11:40 a.m.
 
on January 17, 2008. Hengst saw a man in green medical scrubs
 
walking a "little hunched over" on the overpass. The man was
 
alone. When Hengst looked up, Hengst saw the man throw, in an
 
arcing motion over the overpass railing, what Hengst thought to
 
be a doll, by its arm. The doll-like object made a "cartwheel
 
motion spinning in the air" with the arms extended directly to
 
the side, legs a shoulder width apart. It cartwheeled about one
 
and a half spins, before it dropped out of Hengst's sight. 
Hengst said he could not recall hearing crying or seeing a
 
struggle. After a moment, Hengst and his roommate walked to the
 
overpass, as the man, whom Hengst identified as Higa, walked
 
about two to three car lengths away from them in the Diamond Head
 
direction, smoking a cigarette and occasionally looking back at
 
them. It was only after Hengst looked onto the highway that he
 
realized the object was a child.
 
Hansen "Sonny" Kiaha (Kiaha) was driving a delivery
 
truck westbound on the H1, traveling about forty miles per hour,
 
when he saw something that looked like "a child doll coming in
 
front of the truck." Kiaha's passenger Jimmy Aliven (Aliven)
 
yelled, "Uncle, it's a baby." Kiaha felt a thump and then heard
 
a loud pop. Kiaha had "no chance" to avoid hitting the object. 
He pulled the truck to the side of the road, and ran into the
 
highway where the men saw it was a child's body on the pavement.
 
Aliven testified through a translator that he believed
 
the child was already dead when it was falling because "there was
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
no movement at all," the child made no sound as it fell, and
 
"when we hit the baby, there was no more blood coming out."
 
Mary Susan Arnold, a nurse who was driving a car behind
 
Kiaha's truck, pulled over and ran to what she thought was "a
 
doll" in the road. She looked up and saw a man on the overpass. 
Turning her attention to the child, she saw there was "nothing I
 
could do." She held his hand, which was "warm," and covered him
 
with a blanket.
 
2. Medical experts' testimony and physical evidence
 
Dr. Gayle F. Suzuki (Dr. Suzuki) performed the autopsy
 
on the child. At the time, she was the medical examiner for the
 
City & County of Honolulu and a board certified forensic
 
pathologist. Dr. Suzuki opined the cause and manner of the
 
child's death was "multiple injuries due to fall from a height,
 
and it was homicide." She summarized the child's injuries as
 
follows:
 
[H]e had extensive head injuries with the skull being
crushed and opened up with the brain being avulsed or
traumatically removed from the head.
 
He had all of those road rash or brush abrasions on
 
the surface of his body, and internally, even though the
skin is pretty much in tact [sic] on the outside, but
internally there was so much damage to the organs itself;
injuries to the lungs were bruised and it was torn.
 
He had a torn kidney. The aorta was also torn, and a
lot of bruising. That liver was bruising, with a lot of
tearing or injury of the -- of the liver itself.
 
So these are really severe type of injuries that is
consistent with him being run over by a motor vehicle. These
are the crush type injuries that result in -- I mean, it's
really severe.
 
The child also had a fractured collar bone.
 
Dr. Suzuki ruled out the possibility that the child was
 
suffocated or strangled, because he did not have injuries to his
 
mouth, nose, or eye lids that would indicate as much. A
 
toxicology screen showed that there were no drugs or alcohol in
 
the child's body.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Dr. Suzuki testified that the child's body had
 
"extensive bruising" in the organs and tissue of the chest and
 
abdominal area, which indicated that his heart was pumping and
 
blood was flowing throughout his body at the time the injuries
 
occurred. She said:
 
[I]f he had already died prior to being thrown over, then,
you know, there can be some blood, but not hemorrhaging or
bleeding into the tissues itself, or this much of a bruise.
. . . [Y]ou don't get this much bleeding if the person is
already dead. . . . You can get some seepage of blood that's
still in the capillaries, but there's no bleeding into the
tissues itself.
 
(paragraph formatting altered).
 
Dr. Suzuki also opined that the child spinning in a
 
cartwheel motion supported the notion he was alive when thrown as
 
it would take muscle control to maintain that position. By
 
contrast, a dead child's limbs would be "floppy."
 
On cross-examination, Dr. Suzuki agreed that the damage
 
to the brain and skull made it impossible to rule out a subdural
 
hemorrhage, a sign of shaken baby syndrome, or a skull fracture
 
prior to the fall. She, however, countered that it was "really,
 
really, really unlikely" that the child had suffered shaken baby
 
syndrome because of the child's age.
 
For its part, the defense presented the testimony of
 
Dr. James Navin (Dr. Navin). Dr. Navin testified that, based on
 
the witnesses' statements to police, his opinion was that the
 
child was unconscious or dead at the time he was dropped from the
 
overpass. He opined:
 
[T]he description of the child being thrown through the air
with arms and legs extended and not moving. And you ever
take the kids to the beach and throw them up in the air,
they don't do that. They don't just not move. . . . They
clutch out. They have a righting reflex[.]
 
Dr. Navin said he also read the autopsy report and found it
 
"problematic" that a one-inch long laceration on the child's face
 
was "so clean," meaning there was no blood around it, which
 
suggested to him that the child was already dead when he
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sustained the laceration. However, Dr. Navin also said that a
 
"sudden instant death" may result in not much bleeding "so
 
there's nothing absolute about it."
 
Consistent with Dr. Suzuki's testimony, Dr. Navin said
 
it was impossible to rule out a traumatic brain injury prior to
 
the fall, due to the extent of the damage to the child's skull
 
and brain.
 
Dr. Navin opined that Dr. Suzuki's conclusion that the
 
presence of massive internal bruising proves that he was living
 
prior to the fall was "not valid." Citing to a forensic
 
pathology textbook, Dr. Navin said that a post-mortem injury "can
 
cause movement of blood in small channels for at least 20 minutes
 
after cessation of cardiac activity." As a result, the extensive
 
bruising did "not necessarily" indicate that the child was alive
 
before the fall.
 
Dr. Navin also said that he described to about eight
 
other physicians how the child's body appeared as it went through
 
the air and their "almost universal response was, He's [sic] out
 
of it, either dead or unconscious." Dr. Navin could not rule out
 
the possibility that the child was merely unconscious and not
 
dead.
 
3. Statements to police7
 
William Daubner, the Honolulu Police Department (HPD)
 
officer (Ofr. Daubner) who arrested Higa, testified that at the
 
time of the arrest, Higa was sweating profusely and was rocking
 
back and forth. Higa told Ofr. Daubner that he smoked ice a day­
and-a-half earlier, that a Latino lady with a blue scarf handed
 
7
 At a hearing on the State's motion to determine the voluntariness
of Higa's statements made to police, Oyama orally objected to the State's
motion. The circuit court ordered Oyama to submit written pleadings with his
position in opposition. After being read HPD Form 81, "Warning Persons Being
Interrogated of their Constitutional Rights," Higa stated that he did not want
to have an attorney present and signed the form. The circuit court held the
 statement made under interrogation was admissible, given that Higa was "lucid
and able to engage in conversation intelligently and articulate his thoughts
and feelings and that his statements were voluntarily given and uncoerced" and
that the detectives had given Higa the warnings required by Miranda. The
 circuit court also held that the statements that Higa made to police on
January 17, 2008, were made knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily.
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
him the baby and he threw it, and he said thank you for
 
everything. HPD Officer Kevin Ching (Ofr. Ching), who arrived
 
after Ofr. Daubner arrested Higa, testified that as Higa was
 
being handcuffed, he said, "I didn't mean to do it."
 
HPD Detectives Kenneth Higa (Det. Higa) and Sheryl
 
Sunia (Det. Sunia) questioned Higa at 7:30 p.m. on January 18,
 
2008, after he had been in custody for more than a day. Higa
 
told them that he was walking on the overpass towards Queen's
 
Medical Center to see his sister, when a lady with dark brown or
 
black hair ran toward him, saying her "boyfriend's going to kill
 
'em." Higa said:
 
She has a carriage, and she . . . puts the baby in my
hands. And I all -- I didn't know what to do, right because
I was on . . . . And she told me to kill my baby before my
husband comes and kills it.
 
. . . .
 And then I don't know she -- she guides my hand, and then
the baby fell over. She put the baby in my hands, and she
pushed -- like pushed my hands, and the baby fell over. 
Higa told the detectives that the baby was crying, moving its
 
arms and legs. Higa admitted that he had done "one hit" the
 
morning before and that he smoked ice "frequently," every day or
 
twice a week for the past two years.
 
On appeal, Higa challenges the sufficiency of the
 
evidence in support of his conviction, the failure of the circuit
 
court to recuse itself due to bias against his counsel, the
 
finding that he waived the right to conflict-free counsel, and
 
claims for the first time that his trial counsel was ineffective.
 
II. Discussion
 
A. Evidence was sufficient to prove that the child was alive
when Higa threw him off the overpass.
 
In this appeal, Higa challenges the sufficiency of the
 
evidence presented at trial.
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or a jury. The test on appeal is
not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt,
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
but whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact. Indeed, even if it could
be said in a bench trial that the conviction is against the
weight of the evidence, as long as there is substantial
evidence to support the requisite findings for conviction,
the trial court will be affirmed.
 
"Substantial evidence" as to every material
element of the offense charged is credible evidence
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion. And as trier of fact, the trial judge is
free to make all reasonable and rational inferences
 under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial
evidence.
 
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 
(2007) (brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 
248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992)). His argument on appeal hinges 
on conflicts in testimony offered by the medical experts Dr. 
Suzuki and Dr. Navin. However, in view of the trial judge's 
responsibilities as a finder of fact during a bench trial, Dr. 
Suzuki's testimony is sufficient, probative evidence, when viewed 
in the strongest light for the prosecution, that the child was 
alive when Higa threw him from the overpass. 
Higa contends that Dr. Suzuki's analysis was based on
 
"incomplete information," because Det. Higa had not told
 
Dr. Suzuki of testimony from witnesses regarding the description
 
of the body as it fell. However, Dr. Suzuki testified that she
 
did not base her cause-of-death conclusion upon the witnesses'
 
descriptions, but upon the autopsy results. For instance, upon
 
cross-examination, she stated that although the description of
 
the child making a cartwheel was "consistent with him being
 
alive[,]" she did not "need that information in order to conclude
 
that he was alive."
 
The trier of fact has the responsibility of reconciling 
conflicting evidence. See State v. Kikuta, 125 Hawai' i 78, 94, 
253 P.3d 639, 655 (2011) (citing State v. Gabrillo, 10 Haw. App. 448, 457, 877 P.2d 891, 895 (1994)). "Expert testimony is not 
conclusive and like any testimony, the jury [or fact-finder] may 
accept or reject it." Bachran v. Morishige, 52 Haw. 61, 67, 469 
P.2d 808, 812 (1970). Based on the differences in Dr. Suzuki's 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Dr. Navin's experience in conducting autopsies and their
 
respective backgrounds in forensic medicine, the circuit court
 
may have considered Dr. Suzuki's opinion to be more credible. 
Furthermore, Dr. Navin's opinion is based upon eyewitness
 
descriptions, rather than the physical evidence of the child's
 
body, upon which Dr. Suzuki based her opinion. Resolving the
 
conflicts in testimony in favor of the State, there was
 
sufficient evidence based on Dr. Suzuki's testimony that the
 
child was alive when Higa threw him and that the impact with the
 
pavement and truck, both direct results of being thrown, caused
 
the child's death.
 
In addition to Dr. Suzuki's testimony, the State
 
presented evidence that the child had been seen alive by HPD
 
Officer Darryl Jones (Ofr. Jones) at about 11:15 a.m., which was
 
only about twenty minutes before Hengst saw Higa throw the child
 
off the overpass. The State also introduced evidence that Higa
 
told detectives that the child had been crying and moving his
 
arms and legs. Such evidence constitutes additional,
 
corroborating evidence that the child was alive when Higa threw
 
him off the overpass and that Higa was responsible for causing
 
the child's death.
 
Moreover, Hengst's testimony regarding Higa's physical
 
actions, lifting the child over the protective guard rail, is
 
sufficient evidence that Higa intentionally acted to cause the
 
child's death. Accordingly, there is substantial evidence of
 
every element of the crime for which Higa was convicted.
 
B. The circuit court did not err by denying Higa's motion to
disqualify itself.
 
Higa's second argument is that the circuit court erred
 
in denying his January 19, 2010 motion to disqualify the trial
 
judge.8 "Decisions on recusal or disqualification present
 
8
 In connection with this point on appeal, Higa challenges Findings
of Fact (FOF) 17, 18, 21, 33, 35, 40, and 42 and Conclusions of Law (COL) 9,
11, and 13. He does not, however, provide argument supporting his position
(continued...)
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
perhaps the ultimate test of judicial discretion and should thus 
lie undisturbed absent a showing of abuse of that discretion." 
TSA Int'l Ltd. v. Shimizu Corp., 92 Hawai' i 243, 252, 990 P.2d 
713, 722 (1999) (quoting State v. Ross, 89 Hawai' i 371, 375, 974 
P.2d 11, 15 (1998)). 
Higa's memorandum in support of his motion recited the 
standards for disqualifying a judge under HRS § 601-7 and under 
the "appearance of impropriety" standard outlined in State v. 
Ross, 89 Hawai' i 371, 974 P.2d 11 (1998), but did not explain how 
the facts of his case required recusal under either standard. On appeal, Higa abandons the argument that disqualification was 
appropriate under HRS § 601-7, but maintains that 
disqualification was warranted under Ross and Office of 
Disciplinary Counsel v. Au, 107 Hawai' i 327, 338, 113 P.3d 203, 
214 (2005) (quoting Ross, 89 Hawai' i at 380, 974 P.2d at 20). 
Ross provides that where a judge's alleged bias does 
not fall within the statutory grounds for disqualification, "the court may then turn, if appropriate, to the notions of due 
process described in Brown, in conducting the broader inquiry of 
whether 'circumstances . . . fairly give rise to an appearance of 
impropriety and . . . reasonably cast suspicion on [the judge's] 
impartiality.'" Ross, 89 Hawai' i at 377, 974 P.2d at 17 (quoting 
State v. Brown, 70 Haw. 459, 467 n.3, 776 P.2d 1182, 1188 n.3) (1989).
9 In Brown, the Hawai' i Supreme Court overturned a 
criminal contempt conviction entered by the judge who cited the 
(...continued)
that FOF 17, 18, and 35 were erroneous, and furthermore states in his Reply
brief that he "is not attempting to dispute the correctness of many of thelower court's findings in this regard." We therefore deem his challenge tothese FOF abandoned. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP)
Rule 28(b)(7); Hawaii Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai' i 438, 478-79,
164 P.3d 696, 736-37 (2007). 
9
 Ross was based on the 1992 Code of Judicial Conduct (CJC), which
 
was replaced in its entirety in 2008 by the Revised Code of Judicial Conduct
(RCJC); State v. Mata, 71 Haw. 319, 789 P.2d 1122 (1990) and Brown were based
on the 1988 Code of Judicial Conduct. However, the canons cited in Ross,
Mata, and Brown have counterparts in the current Revised Code. Compare CJC 
Canon 3C (1988), with CJC Canon 3E (1992), and RCJC Rule 2.11 (2008).
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defendant, citing the maxim that "justice must satisfy the
 
appearance of justice." 70 Haw. at 467, 776 P.2d at 1188
 
(quoting Offutt v. United States, 348 U.S. 11, 14 (1954)
 
(internal quotation marks omitted)). "[T]he test for
 
disqualification due to the 'appearance of impropriety' is an
 
objective one, based not on the beliefs of the petitioner or the
 
judge, but on the assessment of a reasonable impartial onlooker
 
appraised of all the facts." Ross, 89 Hawaii at 380, 974 P.2d at
 
20.
 
On appeal, Higa cites four reasons to doubt the court's
 
impartiality: (1) "the court's inability to acknowledge that the
 opinion of the ODC was obtained 'at its direction,'" (2) "its
 
repeated interference with defense counsel's continuing with the
 
case;" (3) its "obvious displeasure with defense counsel" and (4)
 
the holding of numerous chambers conferences. We conclude that
 
there was no appearance of impropriety in this case, and
 
accordingly the circuit court judge did not abuse its discretion
 
in refusing to disqualify himself.
 
To the first complaint, Higa admits that under State v.
 
Mata, 71 Haw. at 324, 789 P.2d at 1125, there would be no
 
impropriety if the circuit court had indeed referred Oyama to the
 
ODC. Yet, Higa contends that the court "in effect denied having
 
done exactly that" and the denial must be presumed was done to
 
avoid the appearance of impropriety. Higa is quibbling over
 
semantics. Higa does not claim that the circuit court itself
 
initiated a complaint with ODC. It is to the initiation of a
 
complaint that the term "referral" applies. See Mata, 71 Haw. at
 
324, 789 P.2d at 1125 (using the word "refer" and "referral" to
 mean the process of initiating appropriate disciplinary measures,
 
and in particular, reporting the attorney in question to ODC for
 
professional conduct violations). Finding of Fact number 21 (FOF
 
21), stating that the court did not make any "referrals" to the
 
ODC, is consistent with Mata's use of the word "referral."
 
To the extent that we read Higa's briefs to argue that
 
the circuit court must be biased because it would not acknowledge
 
20
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that it ordered or directed the parties to get an ODC opinion on 
Oyama's situation, Higa failed to produce transcripts that 
indicate such an order or "direction" was made. The circuit 
court's ruling characterized its position as "advice to the 
attorneys to get an informal opinion from the Disciplinary 
Counsel." There is nothing in the record before us that 
indicates otherwise. Because the appellant "carries the burden 
of demonstrating the alleged error in the record", State v. 
Hoang, 93 Hawai' i 333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000), we do not 
find that the circuit courts court's FOF 21, which states "it did not make any referrals to the Office of Disciplinary Counsel," to 
be clearly erroneous. Given that Higa's first allegation of the 
circuit court's apparent partiality is premised on FOF 21 being 
clearly erroneous, Higa fails to prove error based on the circuit 
court's "inability to acknowledge that the opinion of the ODC was 
obtained 'at its direction.'" 
Higa further states that the circuit court's lack of
 
impartiality is evidenced by "its repeated interference with
 
defense counsel's continuing with the case." As his single
 
example of the court's interference, Higa cites to Carlisle's
 
letter to the ODC. We do not construe the rest of Higa's
 
argument as an objection to the court refusing to further
 
relevant court dates, as Higa has not pointed to any continuances
 
requested but denied. Rather, we read Higa's argument as a
 
challenge to the circuit court's suggestion that Oyama should
 
have withdrawn from representation.
 
Trial courts have an independent duty of ensuring a
 
fair trial. Wheat v. United States, 486 U.S. 153, 161 (1988)
 
(citing Glasser v. United States, 315 U.S. 60, 62 (1942)). This
 duty includes the duty to inquire into a conflict of interest
 
where the probable risk of conflict has been raised, see Holloway
 
v. Arkansas, 435 U.S. 475, 483-84 (1978), or where "the trial
 
court knows or reasonably should know that a particular conflict
 
exists." See Cuyler v. Sullivan, 446 U.S. 335, 347 (1980). Even
 
where, as here, a defendant has waived his or her right to
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
conflict-free counsel, the trial courts have substantial latitude
 
in accepting or denying that waiver. Wheat, 486 U.S. at 163. 
Assuming, arguendo, that the waiver was valid, the circuit court
 had the power to refuse to accept it and could have removed Oyama
 
as counsel. Given that Oyama continued to serve as trial
 
counsel, the circuit court cannot be fairly accused of
 
interfering with Oyama's "continuing with the case."
 
Higa's complaint regarding the circuit court's "obvious
 
displeasure with defense counsel" is unclear. Higa cites to
 
Oyama's affidavit in support of the motion to disqualify, which
 
states that after Oyama told the court that he had filed a trial
 
memorandum, Judge Del Rosario "glared at [Oyama] with a look of
 
disbelief" and that after "a brief period of uncomfortable
 
silence," the prosecutor confirmed that the memorandum had been
 
filed. If the circuit court gave Oyama any incredulous looks or
 
the court room was uncomfortably silent, the transcript does not
 
convey that, nor do we expect that it would. See Alt v. Krueger,
 
4 Haw. App. 201, 209, 663 P.2d 1078, 1083 (1983) ("we appreciate
 that the cold written word can never adequately convey to the
 
reader such things as facial expression, 'body language,' and the
 
general climate in which things are said"). But even if such
 
expressions did occur, it is unclear that expressions rise to the
 
level of impropriety necessary for disqualification. See
 
David E. Rigney, Annotation, Gestures, Facial Expressions, or
 Other Nonverbal Communication of Trial Judge in Criminal Case as
 
Ground for Relief, 45 A.L.R. 5th 531 (1997) (collecting cases
 
where a judge's nonverbal communication was and was not
 
prejudicial error, specifically in jury trials). Cf. Rollins v.
 
Massanari, 261 F.3d 853, 858 (9th Cir. 2001) (quoting Liteky v.
 United States, 510 U.S. 540, 555-56 (1994) ("expressions of
 
impatience, dissatisfaction, annoyance, and even anger . . . do
 
not establish bias") (internal quotation marks omitted) (applying
 
an "actual bias" standard for recusal of federal administrative
 
law judge).
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Higa also argues that there was an appearance of 
impropriety where the court held "numerous chambers conferences." 
Rule 77 of the Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) provides 
that, except for trials upon the merits, "[a]ll other acts or proceedings may be done or conducted by a judge in chambers, 
without the attendance of the clerk or other court officials and 
at any place either within or without the circuit[.]" To the 
extent that Higa complains that the court discussed the case with 
counsel in chambers, the argument is without merit. 
C. Counsel's performance was not ineffective.
 
Higa's third and fourth points of error involve
 
overlapping challenges to the conduct of his trial attorney. In
 
his third point, Higa challenges his purported waiver of a
 
conflict of interest on the part of his counsel, Oyama. In his
 
fourth point, Higa argues that his counsel's representation was
 
ineffective for a number of reasons, including his counsel's
 
alleged conflict of interest. 
The record makes clear that Oyama was Higa's counsel of 
choice. The right to privately retained counsel of one's 
choosing is guaranteed by both the Hawai' i and United States 
Constitutions. Wheat, 486 U.S. at 159; State v. Maddagan, 95 
Hawai'i 177, 180, 19 P.3d 1289, 1292 (2001). However, this right 
is not absolute and "can be outweighed by countervailing governmental interests." Maddagan, 95 Hawai' i at 180, 19 P.3d at 
1292 (quoting United States v. Monsanto, 836 F.2d 74, 80 (2d Cir. 1987)). In other words, "in the absence of countervailing 
considerations, a criminal defendant should have his, her, or its 
choice of retained counsel." Id. 
A defendant's right to counsel of his choice may be 
complicated by the corresponding right to conflict-free counsel, 
a right which "inheres in the right to counsel guaranteed by the 
federal constitution and our state constitution." Fragiao v. 
State, 95 Hawai' i 9, 17, 18 P.3d 871, 879 (2001) (internal 
citation omitted). See also State v. Pitt, 77 Hawai' i 374, 378, 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
884 P.2d 1150, 1154 (App. 1994) (quoting Wood v. Georgia, 450
 
U.S. 261, 271 (1981)) (The right to counsel "encompasses the 
'correlative right to representation that is free from conflicts 
of interest[.]'"), overruled on other grounds by State v. Richie, 
88 Hawai' i 19, 44, 960 P.2d 1227, 1252 (1998), as recognized by 
State v. Mark, 123 Hawai' i 205, 244, 231 P.3d 478, 517 (2010). 
Another component of the right to counsel is the right 
to effective assistance of counsel. In analyzing an ineffective assistance of counsel claim, the appellate court considers 
whether counsel acted "within the range of competence demanded of 
attorneys in criminal cases." State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 
504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003). However, it is the defendant's burden to show counsel was ineffective under a two-
part test: 
1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting
counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that
such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal
 or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
defense. To satisfy this second prong, the defendant needs
to show a possible impairment, rather than a probable
impairment, of a potentially meritorious defense. A
 defendant need not prove actual prejudice. 
Id. at 514, 78 P.3d at 327 (footnote and citation omitted)
 
(quoting State v. Aplaca, 74 Haw. 54, 66-67, 837 P.2d 1298, 1305
 
(1992)). We now turn to Higa's specific claims.
 
1. Oyama's alleged conflict of interest was resolved before
it rose to the level of ineffectiveness.
 
Higa's first challenge to Oyama's effectiveness is 
predicated on the alleged conflict of interests between Oyama and 
Higa. Ritchie and Mark teach us that "representation is 
constitutionally ineffective where there exists '(1) a relationship giving rise to a conflict of interest . . . between 
defense counsel and his/her clients; and (2) either the 
relationship adversely affected defense counsel's performance, or 
the client did not consent to the relationship." Mark, 123 
Hawai'i at 241, 231 P.3d at 514 (emphasis in original); Richie, 
88 Hawai' i at 44, 960 P.2d at 1252. 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, the first inquiry is whether an actual conflict 
existed. At the time Higa entered his waiver, there was no 
actual conflict between his interests and Oyama's. "To determine 
whether a relationship giving rise to a conflict of interest 
existed, we turn to the [Hawaii Rules of Professional Conduct 
(HRPC)] for guidance." Fragiao, 95 Hawai' i at 18, 18 P.3d at 880 
("Satisfaction of the first prong of the Richie test depends on whether the relevant HRPC provisions would prohibit [the 
attorney] from representing [the client].") 
Rule 1.7(b) of the HRPC prohibits a lawyer from
 
representing a client "if the representation of that client may
 
be materially limited . . . by the lawyer's own interests,
 
unless: (1) the lawyer reasonably believes the representation
 
will not be adversely affected; and (2) the client consents after
 
consultation." Comment 4 to Rule 1.7 emphasizes that an
 
attorney's duty of loyalty is impaired "when a lawyer cannot
 
consider, recommend or carry out an appropriate course of action
 
for the client because of the lawyer's other responsibilities or
 
interests."
 
Higa's ineffectiveness claim apparently assumes that
 
Oyama's representation was "materially limited" because Oyama
 
could not pursue a challenge to Higa's fitness to proceed without
 
also calling into question the validity of the power of attorney
 
Higa had given him. However, such an assumption is unwarranted. 
Oyama already moved for expert examination of Higa's fitness to
 
proceed and penal responsibility four days before Higa executed
 
the power of attorney in Oyama's favor. Thus, to the extent
 
Oyama sought the power of attorney, it did not limit his
 
representation because it did not prevent him from also
 
initiating an investigation of Higa's fitness to proceed and
 
capacity to commit the charged offense.
 
More importantly, two months before any decision was
 
made on Higa's fitness to proceed, Oyama himself suggested that a
 
superceding power of attorney be executed in favor of an attorney
 
unconnected to this case. The record indicates this was done. 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, by the time Oyama stipulated to Higa's fitness to proceed,
 
he no longer held the power of attorney and thus it could not
 
have materially limited his representation.
 
This temporal analysis has been employed in the context 
of conflicts due to multiple or successive representation. In 
Richie, the Hawaii Supreme Court noted that, although defense 
counsel represented both Richie and Alves (in a civil matter), by 
the time Richie went to trial, Alves was no longer a co-defendant 
and although Alves was a potential witness against Richie, Alves 
was never called as an actual witness against him. Richie, 88 
Hawai'i at 44, 960 P.2d at 1252; see State v. Mark, 123 Hawai'i 
at 239-40, 231 P.3d at 512-13 (noting Richie's use of a temporal 
analysis in determining whether a conflict of interest existed). Along with the fact that Richie was represented by two attorneys, 
only one of which also represented Alves, the Richie court 
concluded that "trial counsel's relationship with his clients was 
[not] sufficient to give rise to a conflict of interest." Id. 
Here, a consideration of all the circumstances convince
 
us that Oyama did not have an actual conflict of interest. We
 
note that Higa agrees that Oyama was retained with a deposit of
 
$10,000, the balance of the retainer to be paid with funds from a
 
structured settlement owed to Higa and that "efforts were
 
undertaken to convert the structured settlement into a lump sum
 
to pay off the balance of the retainer." Thus, the record
 
supports the notion that Oyama was hired to provide Higa legal
 
services and that these settlement funds were to go to Oyama, in
 
payment for his legal services. Even if Oyama was not given the
 
power of attorney, he would have been able to make a claim
 
against Higa's assets, including the structured settlement
 
payments, to collect his fee for services rendered. The
 
execution of the power of attorney in Oyama's favor was merely a
 
means by which he could collect his retainer until the lump sum
 
payment was secured or in the event the lump sum payment could
 
not be secured.
 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Shortly before this power of attorney was executed,
 
Oyama moved for the appointment of examiners to examine Higa for
 
fitness and penal responsibility. The circuit court granted the
 
motion a week later, staying the proceedings in the case while
 
the examinations could be conducted. By the time the hearing to
 
determine Higa's fitness to proceed was held, the power of
 
attorney executed in favor of Oyama was superceded by one in
 
favor of an attorney uninvolved in this case. 
Finally, the record indicates that Higa never wanted
 
Oyama to assert a mental defense. Higa told at least two of the
 
psychiatric examiners, Drs. Blinder and Donovan, a year before
 
the stipulation, that he did not want to raise an insanity
 
defense10 and wanted to proceed to trial and demonstrate his
 
innocence, which could not happen if he was deemed unfit to stand
 trial. Two of the examiners, Drs. Blinder and Gainsley, found
 
Higa fit to proceed. 
Given that the power of attorney was merely the means
 
to accomplish what Higa had already agreed to do--pay Oyama for
 
his legal services--that Oyama did set in motion the process to
 
determine Higa's fitness to proceed before he was given the power
 
of attorney and did not have the power of attorney by the time
 
the hearing on Higa's fitness was held, that Higa does not
 
challenge on appeal Oyama's stipulation to fitness, or otherwise
 
challenge the circuit court's determination that he was competent
 
to stand trial, and that Higa had long expressed the belief that
 
he did not commit the crime and wanted to go to trial to prove
 
his innocence, Higa's argument that Oyama holding Higa's power of
 
attorney when Higa's mental state was at issue rendered his
 
representation ineffective is without merit. Finally, as Oyama
 
10
 Admittedly, there is a difference between fitness to proceed, as
defined by HRS § 704-403 (1993), and penal responsibility, meaning the
defendant is "not responsible . . . as a result of physical or mental disease,
disorder, or defect[,]" under HRS § 704-400 (1993). We can infer from Higa's
comments regarding the insanity defense that he did not want to rely on his
mental state for either purpose.
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not have an actual conflict of interest, we need not decide
 
whether the waiver of that conflict was valid.
 
2. Trial counsel's failure to use grand jury testimony and
decision to call child's mother as a witness at trial will
 
not be second-guessed on review.
 
Oyama's second alleged omission was the failure to
 
elicit at trial the evidence before the grand jury that (1) the
 
child's arms were "sort of dangling" or "limp" and (2) that there
 
were as many as twenty minutes between when the baby was last
 
seen alive and when Higa was seen on the bridge.
 
Appellate counsel does not provide a citation to the 
grand jury testimony which she claims was necessary. A review of 
the grand jury transcripts indicates that the first testimony in 
question may have come from Kraig Hengst. The defense cross-
examined Hengst at trial, but did not ask Hengst about the "limp" 
comment. Hengst affirmed that he believed the child was a toy 
doll, and that he changed his opinion only after he looked over 
the overpass railing and saw the child's body on the highway. 
Hengst agreed on cross-examination that "a toy doll is a lifeless 
object." Although it was within Oyama's prerogative to impeach 
Hengst with the prior inconsistent statement, see Hawai' i Rules 
of Evidence Rule 802.1(1), it is apparent that Oyama chose not to press Hengst about the differences between his grand jury and 
trial testimony. 
In Richie, the Hawai' i Supreme Court observed, as it 
has many times before, that "[t]he decision whether to call 
witnesses in a criminal trial is normally a matter within the 
judgment of counsel and, accordingly, will rarely be 
second-guessed by judicial hindsight." 88 Hawai' i at 40, 960 
P.2d at 1248 (quoting Aplaca, 74 Haw. at 70, 837 P.2d at 1307) (internal quotation marks omitted). Richie pointed to the 
American Bar Association's Defense Function Standards, which provide that "whether and how to conduct cross-examination" is a 
strategic and tactical decision to be made by counsel. American 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Bar Association, Standards for Criminal Justice—Prosecution
 
Function and Defense Function, Standard 4–5.2 (3d ed. 1993)).
 
The difference between Hengst's testimonies was not 
dramatic; both supported Higa's position that the child was not 
alive when thrown. Thus, trial counsel's apparent decision not 
to question Hengst about his prior description that the child was 
"limp" while being thrown was a strategic decision, which will 
not be second-guessed. Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 39-40, 960 P.2d at 
1247-48. Accord State v. Terlep, No. 29624 2010 WL 3638836, at * 
7 (App. Sept. 21, 2010) (mem. op.) (refusing to review an 
attorney's decision to object rather than cross-examine a 
witness). 
As to the second subject of testimony, Higa's argument
 
that trial counsel erred by not producing testimony that there
 
were ten to twenty minutes between the last time the child was
 
seen alive and the time the first calls to police dispatch
 
regarding the child on the highway, evidence of that lapse of
 
time was presented at trial. Officer Jones testified that he saw
 
the child in the middle of the street around 11:15 a.m. and
 
returned the child to Shane Mizusawa (Mizusawa), the child's
 
mother's boyfriend. Hengst testified that at approximately 11:30
 
to 11:40 a.m., he was outside his apartment when he saw Higa walk
 
by. Moreover, the State acknowledged this interval in its
 
closing statements. There is no basis for concluding that Oyama
 
failed to use "critical grand jury testimony" about the interval
 
between the child's last known whereabouts and his being thrown,
 
much less that this "failure" amounted to ineffective assistance
 
of counsel.
 
Higa also alleges Oyama erred in eliciting testimony
 
from Nancy Chanco, the child's mother, that she and Mizusawa were
 
at Ala Moana during the time that the child died, which he claims
 
cast suspicion back on Higa. Higa's theory is apparently that by
 
doing so, Oyama diverted suspicion from Mizusawa, whom Oyama
 
implied killed the child before Higa, undisputedly, threw him
 
from the overpass. Given that there was some tactical decision
 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
made to call Chanco to testify,11 it is not for this court to 
second-guess Oyama's decisions on how to question her. See 
Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 39-40, 960 P.2d at 1247-48. Accordingly, 
we do not find that counsel was ineffective based on his choice 
of questions to ask witnesses nor his choice of which witnesses 
to call. 
3. Trial counsel was not ineffective for not moving to
dismiss indictment because such a motion was not potentially
meritorious.
 
In his point of error, Higa argues that his trial 
counsel erred by not moving to dismiss the indictment on the 
basis of "police misconduct and failure to present exculpatory 
evidence to the grand jurors, with respect to withholding witness 
observations of the baby's condition from the medical examiner." 
Higa does not provide any argument on this point in the argument 
section of his Opening Brief; the argument section restates the 
point of error. Where the opening brief does not include 
"argument, containing the contentions of the appellant on the 
points presented and the reasons therefor, with citations to the 
authorities, statutes and parts of the record relied on" the 
"[p]oints not argued may be deemed waived." HRAP 28(b)(7); 
Hawaii Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai' i 438, 478-79, 164 
P.3d 696, 736-37 (2007). 
Even if we were to address this point, we could
 
conclude that Oyama's failure to move to dismiss the indictment
 did not result "in either the withdrawal or substantial
 
impairment of a potentially meritorious defense" as there is no
 
basis upon which such a motion could be granted.
 
11
 Oyama attempted to elicit testimony from Chanco that she had said
on television following the child's death that a traffic camera filmed the
child, already dead, falling through the air and that the medical examiner
told her the child was dead pre-fall. However, the State's hearsay objections
were sustained. Further, Oyama said he "intend[ed] to show that basically
there is no freeway camera, that the medical examiner did not tell her that
this happened. So I'm thinking that she may have gotten the information from
somewhere else, perhaps, the person she was with all day."
 
30
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
There are several accepted bases for granting a motion 
to dismiss indictment, see, e.g., Hawai' i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 6(b)(2) (objections to the grand jury array 
or qualification of individual grand juror); State v. Jendrusch, 
58 Haw. 279, 281, 567 P.2d 1242, 1244 (1977) (deficiencies in the charge); State v. Chong, 86 Hawai' i 282, 289, 949 P.2d 122, 129 
(1997) ("prosecutorial misconduct or other circumstances which prevent the exercise of fairness and impartiality by the grand 
jury"). However, the appellate courts are reluctant to overturn 
indictments. See State v. Chong, 86 Hawai' i 290, 298, 949 P.2d 
130, 138 (App. 1997); see also State v. Pulawa, 62 Haw. 209, 218, 614 P.2d 373, 378 (1980) ("an indictment should only be quashed 
on the clearest and plainest grounds"). Higa does not contend 
that the indictment was facially invalid or that the grand jury 
was improperly impaneled. 
Higa's argument implies that there was police
 
misconduct where "witness observations of the baby's condition"
 
was withheld from the medical examiner and the grand jurors. 
Higa does not cite any authority to support the proposition that
 
the police have an affirmative duty to provide the medical
 
examiner any information obtained in an investigation, much less
 
all eyewitness observations gathered prior to the autopsy. But
 
see Rollins v. State, 866 A.2d 926, 955 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 2005)
 ("it is entirely appropriate for the medical examiner to gather
 
information [from police] regarding the circumstances surrounding
 
the demise of a decedent"). Thus the "police misconduct"
 
allegation is without merit.
 
The argument that the grand jurors were not provided
 
with observations of the child's condition is similarly without
 
merit. Higa's Opening Brief establishes that the description of
 
the child most favorable to his theory of the case was the
 
description of the child as being "limp." As noted above, Hengst
 
gave this description to the grand jury. Higa does not cite
 
another witness observation, known to police and prosecutors at
 
the time the grand jury convened, that was withheld.
 
31
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Furthermore, the prosecution is "required only to 
present to the grand jury evidence which is clearly exculpatory 
in nature." State v. Bell, 60 Haw. 241, 242, 589 P.2d 517, 518 
(1978) overruled on other grounds by State v. Chong, 86 Hawai' i 
282, 949 P.2d 122 (1997). The eyewitnesses' observations of a 
"limp" body did not conclusively negate Higa's guilt and was not 
"clearly exculpatory." Thus, even if the prosecutors had 
withheld this observation, it would not be misconduct. 
Higa has failed to meet his burden and thus his 
ineffective assistance of counsel claims are without merit. 
Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 45, 960 P.2d at 1253. 
III. Conclusion
 
The May 5, 2010 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence of
 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 
Lila Barbara Kanae,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Donn Fudo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
32
 