NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30596
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CHRIS GRINDLING, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAII, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
WAILUKU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. DC SP 09-1-0003 (04-48531 & 04-48534))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
  
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Chris Grindling (Grindling)
 
appeals from the "Order Denying Petitioner's Motion to Transfer
 
Petition to Vacate, Set Aside or Correct Judgment to Circuit
 
Court and Dismissing Petitioner's Petition to Vacate, Set Aside,
 
or Correct Judgment" (Order) filed on May 17, 2010 in the
 
1
District Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division  (district
court). Grindling filed his Petition to Vacate or Set Aside 
Judgment (Rule 40 Petition) on December 9, 2009 pursuant to 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40. 
In the underlying criminal case, the district court
 
found Grindling guilty of Criminal Tampering in the Second
 
Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 708-827
 
(Supp. 2010), and Harassment, in violation of HRS ยง 711-1106
 
(Supp. 2008). 
The district court sentenced Grindling to
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
imprisonment for two concurrent terms of ten days and filed a
 
Judgment in each of the two cases on June 23, 2004. Grindling
 
timely appealed, and this court affirmed the two Judgments.
 
On December 9, 2009, Grindling filed his Rule 40 
Petition, in which he alleged that the two police officers had 
perjured themselves. The State of Hawai' i (State) opposed the 
Rule 40 Petition. On May 17, 2010, the district court filed the Order, and Grindling timely appealed. On appeal, Grindling 
contends the district court erred when it ruled that it did not 
have jurisdiction to review his criminal conviction because of 
the pending civil matter. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude this
 
appeal is without merit.
 
In the appeal of the underlying criminal case, Grinding
 
contended the district court erred in finding him guilty of
 
Criminal Tampering in the Second Degree and Harassment because
 
the State failed to present sufficient evidence to prove that he
 
committed those offenses. As to the second degree criminal
 
tampering charge, Grindling contended the State failed to prove
 
beyond a reasonable doubt that (1) he was the person who put
 
toilet paper on the video surveillance cameras and (2) he acted
 
with the required state of mind. As to the Harassment charge,
 
Grindling contends the State failed to prove beyond a reasonable
 
doubt that (1) his threat to damage property was one he was
 
reasonably capable of carrying out and (2) he acted with the
 
required state of mind. This court affirmed Grindling's
 
convictions, holding that the State presented sufficient evidence
 
to prove Grindling was guilty of Criminal Tampering in the Second
 
Degree and Harassment.
 
Grindling's Rule 40 Petition alleged that his
 
conviction was based on perjured testimony. The district court
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
denied Grindling's Rule 40 Petition as premature because he had
 
pending civil suits addressing this alleged perjured testimony. 
Regardless of whether HRPP Rule 40(f) supports the district
 
court's basis for dismissal of the Rule 40 Petition without a
 
hearing, the district court properly dismissed Grindling's Rule
 
40 Petition. 
Rule 40(f) provides that "the court may deny a hearing
 
if the petitioner's claim is patently frivolous and is without
 
trace of support either in the record or from other evidence
 
submitted by the petitioner." Furthermore Rule 40(a)(3) provides
 
that "Rule 40 proceedings shall not be available and relief
 
thereunder shall not be granted where the issues sought to be
 
raised have been previously ruled upon or were waived." 
Grindling was not entitled to a hearing on his Rule 40 Petition,
 
and his petition was properly dismissed because his claims were
 
previously raised, waived, or patently frivolous and without
 
support in the record or from evidence submitted by Grindling.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Denying
 
Petitioner's Motion to Transfer Petition to Vacate, Set Aside or
 Correct Judgment to Circuit Court and Dismissing Petitioner's
 
Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment" filed on
 
May 17, 2010 in the District Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku
 
Division, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 26, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Chris Grindling,
Petitioner-Appellant pro se. Presiding Judge 
Peter A. Hanano,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui,for Respondent-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
3
 