    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30281
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
AKAKU: MAUI COMMUNITY TELEVISION,
a domestic non-profit corporation, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. KEALI
'I S. LOPEZ, Director, Department of Commerce and
Consumer Affairs, State of Hawai' i, AARON FUJIOKA, Administrator,
State Procurement Office, State of Hawai' i, and DEPARTMENT OF
COMMERCE AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS, Defendants-Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0278(1))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Akaku: Maui Community Television 
(Akaku
) appeals from a December 9, 2009 Final Judgment (Judgment) 
entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit 
Court) in favor of Defendants-Appellees Keali' i S. Lopez, the 
Director of the Hawai' i Department of Commerce and Consumer 
Affairs (Director), Aaron Fujioka, the Administrator of the State Procurement Office (SPO), and the Department of Commerce and 
1
Consumer Affairs (DCCA).  The Circuit Court granted the DCCA's 
motion for summary judgment and determined that, under Hawai' i 
Revised Statutes (
HRS) chapter 440G, the Director had the 
authority to use the State Procurement Code (Code), set forth in 
HRS chapter 103D, to designate public, educational, and 
governmental (PEG) access organizations. On appeal, Akaku argues 
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the Circuit Court erred when it denied Akaku's motion for
 
summary judgment and renewed motion for summary judgment, and
 
when it granted the DCCA's motion for summary judgment, because: 
(1) HRS chapter 103D prohibits the DCCA from using the Code to
 
designate PEG access organizations, (2) the Director does not
 
have the authority under HRS chapter 440G to use the Code to
 
designate, and (3) policy considerations disfavor use of the Code
 
to designate PEG access organizations. For the reasons set forth
 
below, we affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. The Director's Designation of PEG Access Organizations
 
Pursuant to applicable law, the Director has the
 
authority to issue cable television franchises to cable operators
 and to require these cable operators to set aside channels and
 
funding for PEG access. See 47 U.S.C. § 521, et seq.; see also
 
HRS chapter 440G.
2 In Maui County and Lahaina, at times relative
 
to this appeal, the Director had issued cable television
 
franchises to Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P. (Time
 
Warner). Time Warner was required to set aside five channels for
 
PEG access use and pay fees to the Director or the Director's
 
designee.
 
On June 17, 1999, the (former) Director contracted with
 
Akaku and designated it as the PEG access organization in Maui
 
"to (among other things) manage and operate the PEG access
 
channels, train the public to use the PEG facilities and
 
equipment to create programs, and cablecast the programs created
 
and submitted by the public on [Time Warner's] channels in Maui
 
County and Lahaina." Later, when reviewing the PEG access
 
services contracts with Akaku and other PEG access organizations
 
2
 Federal law does not mandate PEG access and allows states to 
determine the amount of PEG access to provide. See 47 U.S.C. § 521, et seq. 
In Hawai' i, cable operators are required to provide at least three PEG access
channels as well as funds for PEG access facilities and equipment, and the
Director is given discretion in implementing HRS chapter 440G. See, e.g., HRS 
§§ 440G-4, -7, -8, -8.2, -8.3, -10, -12. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
on O'ahu, Hawai' i, and Kaua' i, the DCCA asked the Department of
the Attorney General whether the contracts were subject to the 
Code. The contracts were determined to be subject to the Code, 
unless an exemption in HRS § 103D-102(b) applied. 
On November 4, 2005, the DCCA submitted a request to
 
the SPO for a temporary exemption from the Code. On December 12,
 
2005, the SPO disapproved of the DCCA's exemption request,
 
finding that the DCCA's contracts with PEG access organizations
 
were subject to the Code. After the DCCA considered public
 
comments in February 2006, regarding whether to issue a Request
 
for Proposals (RFP) pursuant to the Code or seek a permanent
 
exemption from the Code, the DCCA submitted a request to the SPO
 
on April 10, 2006, for a permanent exemption from the Code. 
Although the SPO again found that PEG access services contracts
 
should be awarded in accordance with the Code, the SPO allowed
 
the DCCA to be exempt from the Code from July 1, 2006, to June
 
30, 2007, to ensure that PEG access services would continue until
 
the DCCA could complete the procurement process guidelines in
 
accordance with the Code and award new contracts. 
The DCCA requested the SPO's assistance in preparing a 
draft RFP. Public comments were considered on two draft RFPs for 
PEG access services, and on July 30, 2007, the SPO issued "RFP 
No.-07-043-SW, Sealed Proposals to Operate, Maintain, and Manage 
Public, Educational, and Governmental Access Channels, Funds, 
Facilities, and Equipment for the State of Hawai' i" in accordance 
with the Code. 
3
 The four PEG access organizations were: Akaku on Maui; Olelo:
The Corporation for Community Television on O' ahu; Na Leo O'  Hawai'i, Inc. on
Hawai'i; and Ho' ike: Kaua' i Community Television, Inc. on Kaua' i. 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.	 The Circuit Court Proceedings
 
On August 3, 2007, Akaku filed its complaint, asserting
 
that the DCCA needed to follow an administrative rule when
 designating PEG access organizations. Akaku sought to enjoin the
 
DCCA from using competitive sealed bidding, pursuant to the Code,
 
to select PEG access organizations. 
On August 6, 2007, Akaku filed a motion for preliminary
 
injunction. On November 15, 2007, the Circuit Court denied
 
Akaku's motion, but it strongly encouraged the DCCA to adopt a
 
rule, pursuant to the formal rulemaking process under HRS § 91-3,
 
that would govern the DCCA's process of designating and selecting
 
PEG access organizations under HRS chapter 440G. 
On November 10, 2008, the DCCA adopted Hawaii
 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 16-131-70, which states:
 
§ 16-131-70 Designation and selection of access
organizations. (a) For purposes of this section, "PEG" means
public, educational, and governmental.
(b) The director shall comply with the applicable
provisions of chapter 103D, HRS, when designating and
selecting an access organization to oversee the development,
operation, supervision, management, production, or
broadcasting of programs on PEG channels obtained under
chapter 440G, HRS.
(c) When designating and selecting an access
organization, the director shall, at a minimum, consider the
following factors or criteria:
(1) 	The management and technical experience of the
organization, and its existing or proposed
staff;
(2) 	The broadcast or cablecast media and
 telecommunications experience of the
organization and its existing or proposed staff;
(3) 	The ability of the organization, and its
existing or proposed staff, to provide the
PEG access services requested by the
director;
(4) 	The organization's short-term and
long-term plans for PEG access services
for a designated franchise area;
(5) 	The financial capability of the organization;
(6) 	The amount of funding required by the
organization to provide the PEG access services
requested by the director;
(7) 	The ability of the organization to provide
reports, audits, and other information to
the director;
 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(8) 	Whether the organization agrees to expand the
marketplace of ideas, and is committed to
allowing members of the public to express their
First Amendment free speech rights;
(9) 	The organization's prior dealings and
relationships with the State, if any;
(10) 	The organization's references;
(11) 	Other additional services, if any, the
organization proposes to provide to the State
and the public, and
(12) 	Other factors or criteria deemed applicable or
necessary by the director.
(d) The relative weights of the factors or criteria
considered by the director under subsection (c) shall be
specified in any applicable request for proposals or
invitation for bids issued under chapter 103D, HRS. [Eff
12/3/08] (Auth: HRS §§440G-3, 440G-12) (Imp: HRS §§440G-3,
440G-12)
 
HAR section 16-131-70 became effective on December 3, 2008. 
On December 20, 2007, Akaku filed a motion for summary
 
judgment, a permanent injunction, attorney's fees, and costs,
 
which the Circuit Court denied in part and continued in part on
 
May 27, 2008. The Circuit Court determined that the use of the
 
Code to designate PEG access organizations in accordance with HAR
 
§ 16-131-70 did not exceed the Director's authority when the DCCA
 
created the RFP criteria and had the right to approve the final
 
awardee. 
On January 23, 2009, Akaku amended its complaint,
 
arguing that the DCCA's new administrative rule was invalid
 
because it exceeded the statutory authority delegated to the DCCA
 
and its Director. On April 30, 2009, Akaku filed a renewed
 
motion for summary judgment. On June 1, 2009, the DCCA filed a
 
motion for summary judgment. On October 26, 2009, the Circuit
 
Court denied Akaku's renewed motion and granted the DCCA's
 
motion, determining that the DCCA had the authority to use the
 
procedures of the Code for the designation of PEG access
 
organizations. The Circuit Court reiterated that the Director
 
had the authority under HRS chapter 440G to use the Code,
 
stating:
 
The Court also previously indicated (in its May 27, 2008
Order) that Defendant DCCA has the authority to subject the
designation and selection process of PEG access
 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
organizations to the requirements set forth in the State's
Procurement Code ("Code") or any other requirements that
Defendant DCCA deems reasonable. Defendant DCCA has chosen
 to follow the Code and is free to choose another
 [designation and selection process] at some point by going
through the rulemaking process again. Therefore,
Plaintiff's request for declaratory judgment to invalidate
the use of the Code to designate and select PEG access
organizations is denied.
 
On December 9, 2009, the Circuit Court entered the
 
Judgment. On January 7, 2010, Akaku timely filed a notice of
 
appeal. On appeal, "Akaku seeks a judgment . . . that DCCA's
 
new rule exceeds the statutory authority granted to the agency
 
and that the Director of the DCCA may not use the procurement
 
process in fulfilling his duty to 'designate' access
 
organizations." 
C. Act 19
 
After Akaku filed its appeal, Act 19 of the 2011 
Hawai'i Session Laws (Act 19) was enacted and codified at HRS 
§ 440G-8.3. See 2011 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 19, § 1; see also HRS § 
440G-8.3 (Supp. 2011). Act 19 amended HRS chapter 440G by adding 
a new section entitled, "Designation of access organizations for 
public, educational, or governmental access channels." 2011 Haw. 
Sess. Laws Act 19, § 1. HRS § 440G-8.3(a) states: 
The [D]irector may designate an access organization to
oversee the development, operation, supervision, management,
production, and broadcasting of programs of public,
educational, or governmental access facilities obtained
under section 440G-8; provided that the designation shall be
 exempt from chapter 103D.
 
HRS § 440G-8.3(a) (emphasis added).
 
Thus, HRS § 440G-8.3(a), as amended, exempts PEG
 
designation from compliance with the Code. Act 19 became
 
effective on July 1, 2011, and is scheduled to sunset on June 30,
 
2014. 2011 Haw. Sess. Laws. Act 19, § 4; HRS § 440G-8.3.
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Akaku raises three related points of error on appeal,
 
contending that the Circuit Court erred when it: (1) denied
 
Akaku's motion for summary judgment, preliminary injunction,
 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attorneys' fees, and costs, by concluding that the DCCA's use of
 
the Code to designate PEG access organizations did not exceed the
 
Director's authority; (2) granted the DCCA's motion for summary
 
judgment, and (3) denied Akaku's renewed motion for summary
 
judgment.
 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
In determining whether an agency determination should
be given deference, the standard to be applied is as
follows:
 
[W]hen reviewing a determination of an administrative
agency, we first decide whether the legislature
granted the agency discretion to make the
determination being reviewed. If the legislature has
granted the agency discretion over a particular
matter, then we review the agency's action pursuant to
the deferential abuse of discretion standard (bearing
in mind that the legislature determines the boundaries
of that discretion). If the legislature has not
granted the agency discretion over a particular
matter, then the agency's conclusions are subject to
de novo review.
 
Olelo: The Corp. for Cmty. Television v. Office of Info.
 
Practices, 116 Hawai' i 337, 344, 173 P.3d 484, 491 (2007) 
(citation omitted).
 
This court reviews the interpretation of a statute de
 
novo.
 
When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is
to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. And we must read
 statutory language in the context of the entire statute and
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.
 
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used in a
statute, an ambiguity exists.
 
In construing an ambiguous statute, the meaning of the
ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context with
which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may be
compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.
Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids in
determining legislative intent. One avenue is the use of
 legislative history as an interpretive tool.
 
This court may also consider the reason and spirit of
the law, and the cause which induced the legislature to
enact it to discover its true meaning. Laws in pari
materia, or upon the same subject matter, shall be construed
 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
with reference to each other. What is clear in one statute
 
may be called upon in aid to explain what is doubtful in
another. . . .
 
Where an administrative agency is charged with the
responsibility of carrying out the mandate of a statute
which contains words of broad and indefinite meaning, courts
accord persuasive weight to administrative construction and
follow the same, unless the construction is palpably
 erroneous. . . .
 
Stated differently: 
Where an agency is statutorily responsible for
carrying out the mandate of a statute which contains broad
or ambiguous language, that agency's interpretation and
application of the statute is generally accorded judicial
deference on appellate review. . . . However, an
interpretation by an agency of a statute it administers is
not entitled to deference if the interpretation is plainly
erroneous and inconsistent with both the letter and intent
 of the statutory mandate.
 
 
Haole v. State of Hawai' i, 111 Hawai 'i 144, 149-50, 140 P.3d 377, 
382-83 (2006) (citations and brackets omitted; format altered).
 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. Mootness
 
First, we consider whether the issues raised by Akaku
 
are moot because this court has a duty "to decide actual
 controversies by a judgment which can be carried into effect, and
 
not to give opinions upon moot questions or abstract
 
propositions, or to declare principles or rules of law which
 
cannot affect the matter in issue in the case before it." Wong
 
v. Bd. of Regents, Univ. of Hawai' i, 62 Haw. 391, 394-95, 616 
P.2d 201, 204 (1980) (citations omitted). The mootness doctrine 
applies "where events subsequent to the judgment of the trial 
court have so affected the relations between the parties that the 
two conditions for justiciability relevant on appeal -- adverse 
interest and effective remedy –- have been compromised." Wong, 
62 Haw. at 394, 616 P.2d at 203-04; see also Alakai Na Keiki, Inc. v. Matayoshi, 127 Hawai' i 263, 270, 277 P.3d 988, 995 (2012) 
(citation omitted), stating: 
A case is moot if it has lost its character as a present,
live controversy of the kind that must exist if courts are
to avoid advisory opinions on abstract propositions of law. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The rule is one of the prudential rules of judicial self-
governance founded in concern about the proper -- and
properly limited -- role of the courts in a democratic
society. We have said the suit must remain alive throughout
the course of litigation to the moment of final appellate
disposition to escape the mootness bar. 
 
Kaho'ohanohano v. State,  114 Hawai' i 302, 332, 162 P.3d 696, 726 
(emphasis deleted) (citations omitted). 
As discussed above, Act 19 amended HRS § 440G-8.3(a) to
 
exempt the Director's designation of PEG access organizations
 
from compliance with the Code. 
Section 4 of Act 19, however,
 
includes a sunset provision, which provides that Act 19
 automatically terminates on June 30, 2014. 
Even assuming arguendo that, in light of Act 19's 
exemption, this case currently lacks a live controversy, we conclude that this case falls within the "public interest" 
exception to the mootness doctrine. "[W]hen the question 
involved affects the public interest and an authoritative 
determination is desirable for the guidance of public officials, 
a case will not be considered moot." Slupecki v. Admin. Dir. of 
Courts, State of Hawai
'i, 110 Hawai' i 407, 409 n.4, 133 P.3d 1199, 
1201 n.4 (2006) (citations omitted). The court considers three 
criteria to determine whether the public interest exception 
should apply: 
Among the criteria considered in determining the existence
of the requisite degree of public interest are [(1)] the
public or private nature of the question presented, [(2)]
the desirability of an authoritative determination for the
future guidance of public officers, and [(3)] the likelihood
of future recurrence of the question. 
Johnston v. Ing, 50 Haw. 379, 381, 441 P.2d 138, 140 (1968)
 
(citation omitted). 
Here, all three prongs of the public interest exception 
test are met. As both parties contend, there is sufficient 
public interest implicated to meet the first prong of the test. 
See Kaho' ohanohano, 114 Hawai' i at 333, 162 P.3d at 727 (finding 
that there was "a matter of public interest sufficient to meet 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the first prong of the test" where there was an alleged matter of 
public interest at stake and a significant number of people 
involved). The DCCA's designation of PEG access organizations 
affects a significant number of people in Hawai' i who utilize 
public access television to express their views or otherwise present creative expressions or who simply tune in to public 
access channels to see and hear from others in the community. 
Additionally, "[t]he procurement of goods and services by 
governmental bodies 'clearly involves matters of public 
concern.'" Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 99 
Hawai'i 191, 197, 53 P.3d 799, 805 (2002) (quoting CARL Corp. v. 
State, Dept. of Educ., 93 Hawai' i 155, 165, 997 P.2d 567, 577 
(2000)). The second prong is met because "it is obvious that determination of the matter would assist public officers in the 
future." Kaho' ohanohano, 114 Hawai' i at 333, 162 P.3d at 727 
(citation omitted). Because HRS § 440G-8.3 is scheduled to be repealed on June 30, 2014, a decision in this case will provide 
guidance to the Director for designations made after that date. 
Lastly, the third prong is met because if the DCCA reverts to 
using the Code after June 30, 2014, Akaku or another aggrieved 
PEG access organization will likely raise this issue again. 
Accordingly, this case is not moot. 
B. Applicability of HRS Chapter 103D
 Akaku argues that the Code does not apply to PEG access
 
services contracts because State funds are not used to fund PEG
 access organizations, the funding does not fit into any of the
 
categories of "consideration" in HRS § 103D-102(a), and the
 
DCCA's designation does not involve "procurement" by the State
 
under HRS § 103D-104.
4
 
4
 As the issue is not before us, we do not analyze Akaku's claims
under Act 19. We note, however, that HRS § 103D-102(d) provides, in part:
"Governmental bodies making procurements which are exempt from this chapter
are nevertheless encouraged to adopt and use provisions of this chapter and
its implementing rules as appropriate."
 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We conclude, however, that Akaku reads HRS § 103D­
102(a) too narrowly. HRS § 103D-102(a) sets forth the
 
application of the Code to State contracts: 
This chapter shall apply to all procurement contracts made
by governmental bodies whether the consideration for the
contract is cash, revenues, realizations, receipts, or
earnings, any of which the State receives or is owed; in-
kind benefits; or forbearance; provided that nothing in this
chapter or rules adopted hereunder shall prevent any
governmental body from complying with the terms and
conditions of any other grant, gift, bequest, or cooperative
agreement.
 
HRS § 103D-102(a). 
The Code defines the terms "procurement," "contract,"
 
and "services" as follows: 
"Procurement" is defined as "buying, purchasing, renting,
leasing, or otherwise acquiring any good, service, or
construction. The term also includes all functions that
 pertain to the obtaining of any good, service, or
construction, including description of requirements,
selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award
of contracts, and all phases of contract administration."
 
"Contract" is defined as "all types of agreements,
regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement
or disposal of goods or services, or for construction."
 
"Services" is defined as "the furnishing of labor, time, or
effort by a contractor, not involving the delivery of a
specific end product other than reports which are merely
incidental to the required performance."
 
HRS § 103D-104.
 
A PEG access services contract is clearly a "contract"
 
between a governmental agency and a third party for the
 
"procurement" of PEG programming-related "services." In other
 
words, a PEG access services contract is an agreement between the
 
DCCA and a PEG access organization for the acquiring of the PEG
 
access organization's labor, time, and effort to, for example,
 
"manage and operate the PEG access channels, train the public to
 
use the PEG facilities and equipment to create programs, and
 
cablecast the programs created and submitted by the public on [a
 
cable operator's] channels[.]" See HRS § 103D-104. 
11   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Contrary to Akaku's argument, the Director's
 
designation and selection of PEG access organizations to provide
 
a service to the public plainly falls within the broad definition
 
of "procurement." See HRS § 103D-104. The Director's
 
designation is a manner of "acquiring" that organization's
 services. See HRS § 103D-104. Even if it was not considered to
 
be an acquisition of the access organization's services, the
 Director's designating and selecting an organization is, at the
 
very least, a "function[] that pertain[s] to the obtaining of [a]
 
service[.]" HRS § 103D-104.
5
 
C. HAR Section 16-131-70
 Akaku argues that HAR § 16-131-70, which requires the
 
DCCA to comply with the applicable provisions of the Code when
 designating PEG access organizations, exceeds the statutory
 
authority granted to the DCCA and its Director under HRS chapter
 
440G. We disagree. An agency's authority includes both express
 
and implied powers. The supreme court has stated that
 
an administrative agency can only wield powers expressly or
implicitly granted to it by statute. However, it is well
established that an administrative agency's authority
includes those implied powers that are reasonably necessary
 to carry out the powers expressly granted. 
Haole v. State, 111 Hawai' i 144, 152, 140 P.3d 377, 385 (2006) 
(emphasis in original) (citation omitted). 
Here, the Director has the authority under HRS § 440G­
16 to adopt administrative rules to implement HRS chapter 440G. 
See HRS § 440G-16(1993). Pursuant to this authority, the 
Director promulgated HAR § 16-131-70 in accordance with Hawai' i 
5
 We note that even if the procurements made by a state agency are
exempt from the Code, the agency is not precluded from using or following the
Code pursuant to HRS § 103D-102(d). HRS § 103D-102(d) provides, in relevant
part: "Governmental bodies making procurements which are exempt from this
chapter [103D] are nevertheless encouraged to adopt and use provisions of this
chapter and its implementing rules as appropriate." HRS § 103D-102(d). This
 evidences a legislative intent to encourage government agencies to follow the
Code, even if the procurements are exempt. 
12  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Administrative Procedure Act (HAPA) rulemaking requirements, as
 
set forth in HRS chapter 91. 
Contrary to Akaku's assertion, the adoption of a rule 
specifying the method by which the Director will designate and 
select PEG access organizations is not in conflict with the 
Director's authority under HRS chapter 440G. An "access 
organization" is defined as "any nonprofit organization 
designated by the [D]irector to oversee the development, 
operation, supervision, management, production, or broadcasting 
of programs for any channels obtained under section 440G-8[.]" 
HRS § 440G-3. The law is silent as to the method of designating 
PEG access organizations. The Director's authority necessarily 
includes "those implied powers that are reasonably necessary to 
carry out the powers expressly granted." Haole, 111 Hawai' i at 
152, 140 P.3d at 385 (emphasis deleted). To carry out his express power to designate PEG access organizations, the Director 
has the implied power under HRS chapter 440G to specify the 
method by which he would designate PEG access organizations. See 
id. Consequently, the DCCA did not exceed its authority in 
promulgating HAR § 16-131-70 to guide the designation process. 
Nor does HAR § 16-131-70 impermissibly delegate the
 
discretion to designate PEG access organizations to the SPO. 
Contrary to Akaku's assertions, nothing in the rule states or
 
even suggests that the Director and the DCCA are delegating their
 
discretionary function to make the actual selection of PEG access
 
organizations. Instead, HAR § 16-131-70(b) requires compliance
 
with the Code, which specifies the process and procedures that
 
agencies need to follow, HAR § 16-131-70(c) specifies enumerated
 
factors or criteria that the Director must (at a minimum)
 
consider, and HAR § 16-131-70(d) requires that the relative
 
weights of such factors or criteria must be specified as part of
 
the process for requesting proposals or inviting bids.
 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D. Public Policy
 
Finally, Akaku argues that public policy considerations 
disfavor the use of the Code to designate PEG access organizations. As set forth above, "[w]here an agency is 
statutorily responsible for carrying out the mandate of a statute 
which contains broad or ambiguous language, that agency's 
interpretation and application of the statute is generally 
accorded judicial deference[.]" Haole, 111 Hawai' i at 150, 140 
P.3d at 383 (citations and brackets omitted). HRS chapter 440G contains broad language, granting considerable discretion to the 
DCCA and the Director, and therefore the DCCA's interpretation 
and application of the statute is entitled to deference, as is 
the SPO's determination of the applicability of the Code to PEG 
access services contracts. Indeed, it is the "policy of the 
State [to utilize the Code] to foster broad-based competition. 
Full and open competition shall be encouraged. With competition, 
the State and counties will benefit economically with lowered 
costs." Communications-Pacific, Inc. v. City and Cnty. of 
Honolulu, 121 Hawai' i 527, 532, 221 P.3d 505, 510 (App. 2009). 
The Code allows the State and public to maximize the purchasing 
value of funds by engaging entities in the competitive bidding 
process. CARL Corp v. State, Dept. of Educ., 85 Hawai' i 431, 
456, 946 P.2d 1, 26 (1997). It is speculative at best for Akaku to argue that the marketplace of ideas will be inhibited if 
subjected to a competitive bidding process. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V.	 CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's December 9, 2009
 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 30, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Anthony L. Ranken
(Ranken & Drewyer)for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
Rodney J. TamJames F. NagleDeborah Day EmersonDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendants-AppelleesKEALI
'I S. LOPEZ, Diretor,
Department of Commerce andConsumer Affairs, State ofHawai'i, and DEPARTMENT OF
COMMERCE AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
Patricia Ohara 
Diane Erickson Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendant-AppelleeAARON FUJIOKA, Administrator,State Procurement Office,State of Hawai' i 
15 