NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30598
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DEREK K. HO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 09-1-1980)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Derek K. Ho (Ho) appeals from the
 
May 13, 2010 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence; Notice of Entry
 
as to Count II (Judgment) entered by the Family Court of the
 
First Circuit (Family Court).1 Ho was charged with Terroristic
 
Threatening in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) §§ 707-715 and 707-717(1) (1993) and was sentenced
 
to one year of probation with special terms of, inter alia, one
 
day of imprisonment and court fees. This sentence was stayed
 
pending appeal.
 
On appeal, Ho argues that the Family Court (1) erred
 
when it denied his motion for judgment of acquittal and
 
1
 The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided.
 
Ho was charged in Count I with Abuse of a Family or Household
Member in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709-906 (Supp. 2011)
but was acquitted.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) abused its discretion in limiting his voir dire during jury
 
selection. 
After a careful review of the record, the points raised
 
by the parties, their arguments and the relevant authorities, we
 
resolve Ho's appeal as follows and affirm.
 
1. The Family Court did not err in denying Ho's motion 
for judgment of acquittal as to Count II.2 While at trial, Ho 
argued, citing to State v. Valdivia, 95 Hawai 'i 465, 24 P.3d 661 
(2001), that as a matter of law, the statement upon which the 
prosecution relies was not a "true threat" as it was conditional 
in nature. On appeal, Ho challenges the sufficiency of the 
evidence in support of his conviction, relying in the main, on 
Valdivia. 
2	 In Count II, Ho was charged as follows:
 
On or about August 17, 2009, in the City and County of
Honolulu, State of Hawai' i, DEREK K HO, in reckless
disregard of the risk of terrorizing, did threaten by wordor conduct, to cause [complainant] bodily injury, therebycommitting the offense of Terroristic Threatening in theSecond Degree in violation of Sections 707-715 and 707­717(1) of the Hawaii Revised Statutes. 
Section 707-715, HRS, provides:
 
Terroristic threatening, defined.  A person commits the
offense of terroristic threatening if the person threatens,
by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury to another person
or serious damage to property of another or to commit a
felony:
 
(1)	 With the intent to terrorize, or in reckless
disregard of the risk of terrorizing, another
person; or
(2)	 With intent to cause, or in reckless disregard
of the risk of causing evacuation of a building,
place of assembly, or facility of public
transportation.
 
Section 707-717(1), HRS, provides:
 
Terroristic threatening in the second degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of terroristic threatening in the second
degree if the person commits terroristic threatening other
than as provided in section 707-716.
 
Section 707-716, HRS, pertains to multiple-occasion threats, multiple-person
threats, threats against a public servant and threats using a dangerous
instrument.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai 'i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 
(1997)). "'Substantial evidence' as to every material element of
 
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient
 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
 
caution to support a conclusion." Richie, 88 Hawai 'i at 33, 960 
P.2d at 1241 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
We agree with the California Supreme Court that the
"imminency" required by [United States v. Kelner, 534 F.2d
1020 (2d Cir. 1976)], and hence by [State v. Chung, 75 Haw.
398, 416-17, 862 P.2d 1063, 1072-73 (1993)], can be
established by means other than proof that a threatening
remark will be executed immediately, at once, and without
delay. Rather, as a general matter, the prosecution must
prove that the threat was objectively susceptible to
inducing fear of bodily injury in a reasonable person at
whom the threat was directed and who was familiar with the
 circumstances under which the threat was uttered. Of
 course, one means of proving the foregoing would be to
establish, as in Chung and Kelner, that the threat was
uttered under circumstances that rendered it "so
 unequivocal, unconditional, immediate, and specific as to
the person threatened, as to convey a gravity of purpose and
imminent prospect of execution." See Chung, 75 Haw. at
416-17, 862 P.2d at 1073; Kelner, 534 F.2d at 1026-27. But
 another would be to establish that the defendant possessed
"the apparent ability to carry out the threat," such that
"the threat . . . would reasonably tend to induce fear [of
bodily injury] in the victim." In re M.S., 10 Cal. 4th at
712-15, 42 Cal. Rptr. 2d 355, 896 P.2d at 1372-74.
 
Valdivia, 95 Hawai 'i at 477, 24 P.3d at 673 (some internal 
citations and brackets omitted).
 
When taking the evidence presented here in the light
 
most favorable to the prosecution, Ho's argument that it was
 
insufficient because his threat was couched in terms of the
 
conditional, "If you call the cops, I'll kill you" is not
 
persuasive. The Complaining Witness, Ho's wife, testified that
 
Ho burst into their bedroom, slamming the door open, yelling at
 
the top of his voice, immediately engaged in a struggle with her
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
over her purse, grabbed her arm, and while she had her cell phone
 
in her hand, Ho brought back his fist and slowly moved it forward
 
as if to hit her, uttered the threat in question, causing her
 
fear. This evidence was sufficient to conclude that the threat
 
was uttered under circumstances that would reasonably induce fear
 
of bodily injury and therefore sufficient to establish a "true
 
threat."
 
2. The Family Court did not abuse its discretion in 
limiting Ho's voir dire by preventing him from questioning 
potential jurors regarding their attitudes regarding surfers.3 
See Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 24(a) (2010);4 
State v. Churchill, 4 Haw. App. 276, 279, 664 P.2d 757, 760 
3 During voir dire, Ho's counsel stated the following purpose for
her proposed questioning:
 
I'm gonna bring out the fact that he has an occupation as a
surfer because there's problems – there could be potential
biases about that in particular, assumptions about surfers
and what kinds of activity they engage in that I need to be
able to elicit because that's going to come out at the
trial. 
But my other concern -- 'cause I'm trying to do that, but
aside from that -- is if I say that, there may be some
people who didn't recognize him initially but, once I say
that they'll make the connection.
 
The court denied the request, stating that it did not find the subject
relevant, and if any other of the jurors reported recognizing Ho, it would
conduct voir dire at the bench. By this point, the Family Court had asked the
jurors in the box if anyone knew Ho, to no response. The court had examined
 
two jurors at the bench regarding their knowledge of Ho, and both were passed
for cause at the time, although both were later excused for other good cause.
Still later, a third juror who reported that he knew Ho as a surfer was
examined at the bench and eventually served as a juror. No motion to remove
 this juror for cause was made. Except for one against a potential alternate
juror, the defense did not exercise its peremptory challenges. 
4
 HRPP Rule 24(a) provides:
 
(a) Conduct of jury selection. At the discretion of
 
the court, the parties may present a "mini-opening
statement" to the jury panel prior to the commencement of
jury selection. The mini-opening statement shall be limited
to a brief statement of the facts expected to be proven.
The court shall permit the parties or their attorneys to
conduct the examination of prospective jurors or shall
itself conduct the examination. In the latter event the
 court shall permit the parties or their attorneys to
supplement the examination by such further inquiry as it
deems proper.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1983) ("The law is well established in this jurisdiction that
 
the trial court is vested with discretion to regulate voir dire
 
examination so as to keep the questioning by counsel within
 
reasonable bounds and to confine it to assisting in the
 
impaneling of an impartial jury.").
 
In ruling as to a particular question, the trial judge must
be guided in very large part by his appraisal of the
usefulness of the question in achieving the selection of an
impartial jury, which in turn will depend upon his judgment
of the likelihood that the question will disclose a mental
attitude which would be significant in exercising
challenges, whether for cause or peremptory. The question
for us is whether such a likelihood existed here and whether
 its existence should have been so apparent to the trial
judge that his refusal to permit the question was an abuse
of discretion.
 
. . . .
 
When the matter sought to be explored on voir
 
dire does not relate to one of those recognized
classes, it is incumbent upon the proponent to lay a
foundation for his question by showing that it is
reasonably calculated to discover an actual and likely
source of prejudice, rather than pursue a speculative
will-o-the-wisp. The appellants made no such effort
at the time the question was submitted to the trial
judge; nor did they present before this court any
material tending to show that prejudice against a
claim of self-defense was likely to be encountered in
the community from which the veniremen were drawn.
Absent such a showing, we find no prejudice to the
rights of the accused.
 
State v. Altergott, 57 Haw. 492, 500-01, 559 P.2d 728, 734-35
 
(1977) (citation omitted) (in trial of sexual assault against a
 
married woman, questions regarding biases regarding the sex act
 
involved, extramarital affairs, and women who bring sexual
 
assault charges).
 
The Family Court conducted an individualized voir dire
 
with anyone who expressed any familiarity with Ho's name. 
Although defense counsel maintained "[t]here are certain biases
 
within our community about individuals who are employed as
 
surfers." However, Ho did not elaborate on the nature of these
 
biases and provided no support for the existence of this
 
potential bias. The Family Court found Ho's profession to be
 
irrelevant for the purposes of voir dire.  As Ho's profession had
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
no relationship to the facts underlying the offense, nor to
 
matters relating to any defense raised, we agree.
 
Therefore the May 13, 2010 Judgment entered by the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 21, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge
 
Anne K. Clarkin,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
6
 