FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--–
 
INTERNATIONAL DISPLAY SYSTEMS, INC., Appellant-Appellant,
vs.
 
GLENN M. OKIMOTO, DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, STATE
OF HAWAI' I; FORD N. FUCHIGAMI, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION, AIRPORTS DIVISION; DESIGNEES OF AARON S. FUJIOKA,
ADMINISTRATOR, STATE PROCUREMENT OFFICE, STATE OF HAWAI' I; FORD
AUDIO-VIDEO SYSTEMS, INC.; DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND CONSUMER
AFFAIRS, Appellees-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10; AND
DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Appellees.
 
NO. 30488 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CV NO. 09-1-2244)
 
APRIL 29, 2013
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND FOLEY AND FUJISE, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
This appeal arises out of a request for proposals
 
issued by the State of Hawai
'i (State), Department of  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1
Transportation-Airports Division (DOTA),  to provide new
passenger information systems for the Kahului Airport (Kahului
 
Airport Project). In response to the request for proposals, two
 companies, International Display Systems, Inc. (IDS) and Ford
 Audio-Video Systems, Inc. (Ford), submitted proposals. The DOTA
 rated Ford's proposal above IDS's proposal and awarded the
 contract for the Kahului Airport Project to Ford. IDS filed a
 protest of the contract award to Ford, which was denied by the
 DOTA. IDS then filed a request for administrative hearing on its
 protest before the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) of the
 State Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs (DCCA). 
Before a hearing was held on the merits of IDS's
 
protest before the OAH, the DOTA in May 2009 cancelled the
 Kahului Airport Project and the contract awarded to Ford. 
The
 
DOTA explained that due to the declining economy, there were
 insufficient funds to cover all of the DOTA's capital improvement
 projects, and the DOTA had decided to cancel the Kahului Airport
 Project, which it ranked as among its lower priority projects. 
The DOTA moved to dismiss IDS's request for an administrative
 hearing on its protest based on the cancellation of the Kahului
 Airport Project. 
The OAH hearings officer granted the motion and
 
dismissed IDS's request for an administrative hearing. The
 hearings officer determined that the DOTA had cancelled the
 solicitation for the Kahului Airport Project due to budget
 constraints related to "the current financial crisis" and that
 "there was no evidence that the cancellation was motivated by an
 improper purpose." IDS sought judicial review of the hearings
 officer's decision before the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
 For simplicity, we will use "DOTA" to refer not only to the State
Department of Transportation-Airports Division, but also to include the State
Department of Transportation, the Director of the State Department of
Transportation, and the Deputy Director of the State Department of
Transportation-Airports Division. 
2
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(Circuit Court).2 The Circuit Court affirmed the hearings
 
officer's decision to dismiss IDS's request for an administrative
 
hearing on its protest, although on different grounds.
 
The question raised by this appeal is whether despite
 
DOTA's cancellation of the Kahului Airport Project and the
 underlying solicitation for the project, IDS was entitled to have
 the hearings officer rule on the merits of its protest so that
 IDS could pursue its claim for proposal preparation costs and
 attorney's fees. We conclude, under the circumstances of this
 case, where IDS did not demonstrate that the DOTA acted in bad
 faith or arbitrarily and capriciously in cancelling the Kahului
 Airport Project, that the answer to this question is no. We
 therefore affirm the Circuit Court's Final Judgment entered
 against IDS.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
On May 7, 2008, the DOTA issued a Request for Proposals 
to Provide New Passenger Information Systems For Kahului Airport,
 Project No. AM1042-29R (RFP). The RFP for the Kahului Airport
 Project sought proposals for new passenger information systems
 for Kahului Airport, including a flight information display
 system, a public address system, and a gate management system. 
IDS and Ford submitted proposals, which were close in terms of
 cost. IDS's proposal was in the amount of $5,104,898.47, and
 Ford's proposal was in the amount of $5,161,731.00. Both
 proposals met the mandatory requirements of the RFP. Although
 IDS's proposal was for a slightly lower cost than Ford's
 proposal, the DOTA ranked Ford's proposal as the best proposal
 and IDS's proposal as the second best based on evaluation
 criteria that included approach, company experience, and cost. 
2
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided over the proceedings
relevant to this appeal.
 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Pursuant to this evaluation, DOTA awarded the contract for the
 
RFP to Ford for $5,161,731.00.3
 
II.
 
On September 3, 2008, IDS protested the award of the
 
contract to Ford. Among other things, IDS contended that the
 DOTA had failed to conduct a reasonable cost or price analysis of
 Ford's proposal as required by the applicable administrative
 rules and that Ford's proposal improperly restricted disclosure
 of purchasing information. The DOTA denied IDS's protest.
 
III.
 
A. 
On October 10, 2008, IDS requested an administrative
 
review hearing on its protest before the OAH.
4 IDS requested,
 
among other things: (1) the termination of the contract awarded
 to Ford; (2) the award of the contract to IDS because its
 proposal was rated second to Ford's proposal; (3) if the contract
 is not awarded to IDS, that IDS be awarded its proposal
 preparation costs; and (4) IDS be awarded attorney's fees and
 costs of the proceeding. Ford filed a motion to intervene in the
 proceeding which the OAH hearings officer granted. The hearing
 on IDS's protest was delayed by disputes over the extent to which
 IDS was entitled to disclosure of pricing information on which
 Ford's proposal was based, which Ford asserted was confidential. 
Eventually, a hearing on IDS's protest was scheduled for May 21,
 2009.
 
3
 The DOTA had previously awarded a contract to Ford in February 2008,
under a prior request for proposals to provide new passenger information
systems at Kahului Airport (Prior RFP). However, IDS filed a protest of this
award, and in response to IDS's protest, the DOTA cancelled the Prior RFP,
citing technical deficiencies in the Prior RFP. IDS does not challenge the
DOTA's actions in cancelling the Prior RFP in this appeal. 
4 Named as "Respondents" in IDS's "Request for Hearing" before the OAH
were the Director of the State Department of Transportation and the Deputy
Director of the State Department of Transportation-Airports Division, as
designees of the Administrator of the State Procurement Office, who we will
collectively refer to as the "DOTA."
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
However, shortly before the scheduled hearing date, the
 
DOTA cancelled the Kahului Airport Project and terminated its
 
contract with Ford. By letter dated May 11, 2009, the DOTA
 informed Ford that 
[d]ue to the declining economy, projects at the Airports
Division, Department of Transportation, that have not yet
been issued Notices to Proceed are being reprioritized and
we regret to inform you that the contract with [Ford] for
the [Kahului Airport Project] is terminated. [The DOTA]
hopes to issue a new competitive bid for a modified project
with a reduced scope in the near future. 
By letter dated May 13, 2009, the DOTA advised IDS that "[d]ue to
 
current budget constraints which will require substantial project
 modifications, we regret to inform you that all bids submitted
 for the subject project have been rejected. . . . We plan to
 redesign the project and advertise it at a later date."
 
On May 15, 2009, the DOTA notified the OAH hearings
 
officer that it "has cancelled the [Kahului Airport Project] due
 to budget constraints and reprioritization of Airports Division
 projects." The DOTA also notified the hearings officer of its
 request for a status conference to discuss procedures for
 dismissing the case. IDS responded with a letter to the hearings
 officer dated May 18, 2009, arguing that the DOTA's decision to
 terminate "the contract" was "unnecessary and in bad faith." IDS
 informed the hearings officer that it planned to oppose the
 DTOA's motion to dismiss the case. The May 21, 2009, hearing on
 the merits of IDS's protest was taken off the calender.
 
The DOTA and IDS agreed that IDS would not be required
 
to file an additional, separate protest of the DOTA's
 cancellation/termination of the Kahului Airport Project, but
 could raise any issues and claims stemming from the
 cancellation/termination in the ongoing administrative
 proceeding. In preparation for the DOTA's filing of its motion
 to dismiss, IDS served subpoenas duces tecum on the DOTA for
 documents relating to the DOTA's decision to cancel the Kahului
 Airport Project and terminate the contract to Ford. The DOTA
 produced documents in response to the subpoenas deces tecum. In
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
addition, Jeffrey Chang (Chang), the Engineering Program Manager
 
for the DOTA who was involved in the decision to cancel the
 Kahului Airport Project, testified when the subpoenas duces tecum
 were returned.
 
B.
 
On July 7, 2009, the DOTA filed a motion to dismiss
 
IDS's request for an administrative hearing on IDS's protest of
 the award of the contract to Ford. The DOTA explained its
 decision to cancel the Kahului Airport Project as follows:
 
Due to the declining economy in the State, and the
corresponding decline in funding for Airports capital
improvement projects, DOT Airports Division has been using
its available funding to finish up projects that have
already started and also for projects with the highest
priority, i.e., the projects involving safety and/or
security, and projects mandated by State or federal law.
The cash balance for the Airports Division capital
improvement projects is insufficient to cover all of the
planned and pending projects. Accordingly, Engineering
Program Manager Jeff Chang was forced to cancel several
projects with lower priority, which included [the Kahului
Airport Project]. . . . 
On June 2, 2009, Jeff Chang and DOT Airports Fiscal
Officer Ross Higashi testified at the return hearing on two
subpoenas duces tecum for records concerning this project
and the subsequent decision to cancel the project. As Mr.
 Chang testified, the DOT Airports Division could not proceed
with the steps to encumber funds specifically for this
project because of the stay imposed by the filing of the bid
protest. Due to the economic downturn and the limited
 availability of funding for Airports capital improvement
projects, Mr. Chang made the decision to cancel several
projects that were low in priority and had not yet
commenced. 
In prioritizing its capital improvement projects, DOT
Airports Division follows specific written guidelines.
Projects involving security or safety are given the highest
priority, followed by projects mandated by State or federal
law. [The Kahului Airport Project], although desirable for
passenger convenience, is not mandated for security or
safety reasons and is not required by State or federal law.
From the time that the stay was imposed by the filing of the
bid protest until the present, [the Kahului Airport Project]
was superseded by five other higher priority projects. 
[The Kahului Airport Project] covered three
systems--the flight information display system
("FIDS"), the public announcement system ("PA"), and
the gate management system ("GMS") at Kahului Airport.
Cancellation of the project enables DOT Airports to
readvertise for one of the systems, depending upon
future economic conditions and funding availability,
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and also depending upon which system, FIDS or PA,
needs replacement first. The GMS system is lower
priority than the FIDS or PA systems and, therefore,
will not be advertised. 
(Citations omitted.)
 
In support of its explanation, the DOTA cited the 
Declaration of Chang, which was attached to the motion, and 
Chang's testimony at the return hearing. In his Declaration, Chang, stated that as the Engineering Program Manager for the DOTA, his duties include prioritizing capital improvement projects for all airports in Hawai' i based on available funding 
and on established guidelines for prioritization of airport projects. Chang stated that: (1) the Kahului Airport Project was cancelled "due to budget constraints" and the decision to cancel was based on the lack of sufficient funds for airport capital improvement projects, the fact that work had not commenced on the project, and the fact that the project was lower in priority than other projects; (2) the current balance in the Airports fund is insufficient to cover all the planned and pending capital improvement projects; (3) under the DOTA's prioritization guidelines, the Kahului Airport Project was not a high priority project because it is "for passenger convenience and is not required for safety and/or security and is not required by State and federal law"; (4) other projects were being cancelled for the same reasons; (5) due to the stay placed on the project by IDS's bid protest, the appropriate steps to encumber funds for the project could not be taken; (6) after the stay went into effect, five new projects have superseded the Kahului Airport Project in priority; and (7) Chang made the decision to cancel rather than defer the Kahului Airport Project because of the uncertainty of future economic conditions of the Airports Division and uncertainty over whether the flight information display system or the public announcement system would need replacement first, with the DOTA deciding not to seek rebids for the gate management system. 
7
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The DOTA argued that the cancellation of the Kahului
 
Airport Project and the termination of the contract with Ford
 
rendered IDS's bid protest moot, because "there is no project and
 no contract to be awarded[.]" The DOTA further argued that for
 the reasons set forth in Chang's declaration and testimony, the
 DOTA's decision to cancel the Kahului Airport Project and the
 solicitation was a valid exercise of its discretion, was in the
 best interests of the government, and had a reasonable basis.
 
IDS filed a memorandum in opposition to the DOTA's
 
motion to dismiss. IDS argued that the cancellation of the
 Kahului Airport Project and termination of Ford's contract did
 not render its protest moot. Although acknowledging that its
 request to terminate Ford's contract was moot, IDS contended that
 its request for recovery of proposal costs and the award of
 attorney's fees could still be resolved in its favor and
 prevented its protest from being moot. IDS also argued that the
 DOTA's termination of the contract for the Kahului Airport
 Project was unjustified, improper, and "an act of bad faith." 
IDS disputed the DOTA's assertion that the cancellation of the
 Kahului Airport Project was justified by the lack of funds and
 need to prioritize projects. IDS argued that the cancellation
 was done for the purpose of rendering its protest moot and that
 the DOTA's actions violated the stay imposed under Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 103D-701(f) (2012).
5
 
C. 
After holding a hearing on the DOTA's motion to dismiss
 
and considering the evidence and arguments presented, the
 hearings officer granted the DOTA's motion to dismiss, and he
 issued his "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order
 Granting [the DOTA's] Motion to Dismiss [IDS's] Request for
 
5
 HRS § 103D-701(f) provides, in pertinent part, that "in the event of a
timely protest . . . , no further action shall be taken on a solicitation or
award of the contract until the chief procurement officer makes a written
determination that the award of the contract without delay is necessary to
protect substantial interests of the State." 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Administrative Hearing" (Order Granting Motion to Dismiss). In
 
his findings of fact, the hearings officer cited Chang's
 Declaration and Chang's testimony at the return hearing, as
 follows:
 
56. Chang also testified at the June 2, 2009 return
and in his July 6, 2009 declaration that although the
Legislature appropriated funds for the [Kahului Airport]
Project, those funds are not encumbered for the [Kahului
Airport] Project until after the contract is executed by all
parties, approved by the Department of the Attorney General,
and [the Department of Transportation's (DOT)] Contracts
Office routes the contract, the Batch Slip, and the C-41
form to the Department of Accounting & General Services
("DAGS") and DAGS posts the C-41 form for the [Kahului
Airport] Project. According to Chang, due to the stay
placed on the solicitation for the [Kahului Airport] Project
by the filing of [IDS's] protest, the Airports Fiscal Office
had not yet prepared the C-41 form and accompanying
documents for transmittal to [the DOT's] Contracts Office
and thus, the funds were not encumbered for the [Kahului
Airport] Project.
 
57. Chang testified that the total cash balance
available for [the DOTA] projects was insufficient to cover
all of the current and pending projects, including the
[Kahului Airport] Project. Chang also testified that the
[DOTA] is in a serious cash crunch because of several
factors including the bankruptcies of several airlines and
the current financial crisis. According to Chang, he
applied the written guidelines that had been developed by
his predecessor in prioritizing Airports projects and in
determining which projects would be continued and which
would be deferred or closed.
 
58. According to the written guidelines, projects
involving safety and/or security are ranked first in
priority, projects mandated by State or federal law are
ranked second in priority, projects to repair and preserve
the facilities are ranked third, projects for utilities or
systems are ranked fourth, projects for functional
improvements to existing facilities are ranked fifth,
projects for expansion or capacity enhancement are ranked
sixth, and projects to enhance business ventures to generate
revenues such as concessions and fixed based facilities are
 ranked seventh.
 
59. Chang testified that the [Kahului Airport]
Project, which involved information systems for passengers,
was ranked third in priority according to the written
guidelines. Chang also testified that only projects that
are first or second in priority according to the written
guidelines are moving forward because [the DOTA] would be
subject to fines if those projects were not implemented.
 
60. Chang further testified that the [Kahului
Airport] Project was placed on the list of projects to be
deferred or closed because of its lower priority and that
the passenger information systems project would be done in
phases as funds for Airports CIP projects become available.
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In accordance with Chang's declaration and testimony,
 
the hearings officer determined that the
 
evidence established that [the DOTA] cancelled the
solicitation for the [Kahului Airport] Project due to budget
constraints related to, among other things, the current
financial crisis. According to the evidence, [the DOTA]
would not be able to fund all of its capital improvement
projects unless or until its revenues improved. As a
 result, [the DOTA] applied its internal written guidelines
to prioritize its projects and determined which projects
would be deferred or closed. Only projects determined to be
first and second in priority under the guidelines would move
forward in order to avoid the imposition of penalties. The
 [Kahului Airport] Project was ranked third in priority under
[the DOTA's] written guidelines. Consequently, the [Kahului
Airport] Project was placed on a list of projects to be
deferred or closed until revenues improved.
 
In other words, the hearings officer adopted the DOTA's
 
explanation for its cancellation of the Kahului Airport Project. 
The hearings officer also specifically determined that "there was
 no evidence that the cancellation was motivated by an improper
 purpose." (Footnote omitted.) The hearings officer ruled that
 notwithstanding a pending protest and the stay imposed by HRS 
§ 103D-701(f), a solicitation may be cancelled when the
 government's best interests are served by the cancellation. 
Based on the record, the hearings officer concluded that the
 government's best interests were served by the cancellation of
 the Kahului Airport Project and, accordingly, the DOTA was
 entitled to cancel the project.
 
The hearings officer rejected IDS's argument that
 
despite the cancellation of the Kahului Airport Project, IDS was
 
6
entitled to recover the bid preparation costs  it incurred in
connection with the solicitation. The hearings officer noted
 that HRS § 103D-701(g) provides:
 
In addition to any other relief, when a protest is
sustained and the protestor should have been awarded the
contract under the solicitation but is not, then the
protestor shall be entitled to the actual costs reasonably 
6 The terms "bid preparation costs" and "proposal preparation costs"
were used interchangeably in the underlying proceedings, and we will do the
same in this opinion.
 
10
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
incurred in connection with the solicitation, including bid
or proposal preparation costs but not attorney's fees.
 
The hearings officer ruled that HRS § 103D-701(g) "must be
 
construed along with HRS § 103D-308 [(2012)]."7 He interpreted
 
HRS § 103D-308 as authorizing the government to cancel a
 solicitation when the cancellation is in the government's best
 interest and, in that situation, not permitting the low bidder to
 recover any of its bid preparation costs. The hearings officer
 could "find no reasonable justification for allowing a successful
 protestor to recover its bid preparation costs even though the
 solicitation is properly cancelled pursuant to HRS § 103D-308
 while denying the same relief to a low bidder who would have been
 awarded the contract but for the cancellation." 
The hearings officer concluded that "where a
 
solicitation is properly cancelled under HRS § 103D-308, a
 protestor is not entitled to recover its bid preparation costs." 
Based on his determination that the DOTA had properly cancelled
 the Kahului Airport Project in the government's best interests,
 the hearings officer concluded that IDS was not entitled to
 recover its bid preparation costs. The hearings officer also
 rejected IDS's request for attorney's fees based on his
 determination that the DOTA's cancellation of the Kahului Airport
 Project was proper and did not violate the HRS § 103D-701(f) stay
 provision. 
7
 HRS § 103D-308 provides:
 
An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other
solicitation may be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may
be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the
solicitation, when it is in the best interests of the governmental
body which issued the invitation, request, or other solicitation,
in accordance with rules adopted by the policy board. The reasons
 therefor shall be made part of the contract file.
 
11
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
IDS appealed the hearings officer's Order Granting
 
Motion to Dismiss to the Circuit Court.8 IDS argued that: (1)
 
the "solicitation" relating the Kahului Airport Project ended
 
when the DOTA awarded the contract to Ford, and therefore the
 hearings officer erred in construing the DOTA's termination of
 the contract awarded to Ford as a cancellation of the
 solicitation under HRS § 103D-308; and (2) the hearings officer
 compounded his error by applying the limited scope of remedies
 available for the pre-award cancellation of a solicitation under
 HRS § 103D-308 in concluding that IDS had no protest remedies
 under HRS § 103D-701(g) post-award. 
After considering the briefs presented by IDS and the
 
DOTA and hearing oral argument, the Circuit Court affirmed the
 hearings officer's Order Granting Motion to Dismiss. The Circuit
 Court issued an order affirming the Order Granting Motion to
 Dismiss, which stated in pertinent part as follows:
 
The subject dismissal in this matter is affirmed. The
 
Court determined the dismissal was the correct result even
 
if for the wrong reason. Assuming H.R.S. Section 103D-308
is not the correct basis for the dismissal, the Court
determines that the appeal should be dismissed as moot or
because, on the record, any contract awarded to Ford or to
[IDS] (if [IDS] prevailed on remand on its protest) would
"neither be binding nor have any force and effect of law"
pursuant to H.R.S. Section 103D-309.
[ 9
]
Finally, this Court rejects [IDS's] argument that the
law requires a remand and determination below on the merits
 
8 Named as "Appellees" in IDS's appeal to the Circuit Court were the
Respondents in the OAH proceeding, see supra note 4, the DCCA, and Ford. Ford
 
did not enter an appearance before the Circuit Court. 
9 HRS § 103D-309(a) (2012) states in pertinent part:
 
Contracts awarded pursuant to section 103D-302, 103D­
303, or 103D-306, shall neither be binding nor have any
force and effect of law unless the comptroller, the director
of finance of a county, or the respective chief financial
officers of the department of education, the judiciary, or
the legislative branches of the State or county, as the case
may be, endorses thereon a certificate that there is an
appropriation or balance of an appropriation over and above
all outstanding contracts, sufficient to cover the amount
required by the contract[.]
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of the protest when the state has no funds to pay for the
contract and has cancelled the Ford contract. To adopt
[IDS's] argument on this record would cause an absurd result
which is anathema to proper statutory construction.
 
On May 3, 2010, the Circuit Court issued its Final Judgment
 
against IDS and in favor of the DOTA and the DCCA. This appeal
 followed.
 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
This is a secondary appeal of the Circuit Court's
 
review of the hearings officer's decision under the Hawai' i 
Public Procurement Code, HRS Chapter 103D. We review the Circuit
 Court's decision de novo, utilizing the same standards set forth
 in HRS § 103D-710(e) (2012) for circuit court review of the
 hearings officer's decision. 
Bombardier Transp. (Holdings) USA
 
Inc. v. Director, Dep't of Budget and Fiscal Servs., 128 Hawai'i
 413, 417, 289 P.3d 1049, 1053 (App. 2012); United Pub. Workers,
 AFSCME, Local 646, AFL–CIO, v. Hanneman, 106 Hawai' i 359, 363, 
105 P.3d 236, 240 (2005). Under HRS § 103D-710(e), the circuit
 court, based on review of the record, 
may affirm the decision of the hearings officer issued
pursuant to section 103D-709 or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may reverse or
modify the decision and order if substantial rights may have
been prejudiced because the administrative findings,
conclusions, decisions, or orders are:
 
(1)	 In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions;
 
(2) 	In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the chief procurement officer or
head of the purchasing agency;
 
(3)	 Made upon unlawful procedure;
 
(4) 	Affected by other error of law;
 
(5)	 Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
 
(6) 	Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion.
 
"[C]onclusions of law are reviewable under subsections (1), (2),
 
and (4); questions regarding procedural defects under subsection
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(3); findings of fact under subsection (5); and the Hearings 
Officer's exercise of discretion under subsection (6)." CARL 
Corp. v. State, Dep't of Educ., 85 Hawai' i 431, 446, 946 P.2d 1, 
16 (1997) (hereinafter, "CARL I") (block quote format, brackets in original, and citation omitted). 
"A [conclusion of law] that presents mixed questions
of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous
standard because the conclusion is dependent upon the facts
and circumstances of the particular case." When mixed
 questions of law and fact are presented, an appellate court
must give deference to the agency's expertise and experience
in the particular field. "The court should not substitute
 its own judgment for that of the agency."
 
Southern Foods Group, L.P. v. State, Dep't of Educ., 89 Hawai' i 
443, 452, 974 P.2d 1033, 1042 (1999) (brackets in original and
 
citations omitted). "A hearings officer abuses his or her
 discretion when he or she 'clearly exceeds bounds of reason or
 disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the
 substantial detriment of a party.'" Id. (citation omitted). 
Moreover, 
[
I]n order to preserve the function of administrative
agencies in discharging their delegated duties and the
function of this court in reviewing agency determinations, a
 presumption of validity is accorded to decisions of
 
administrative bodies acting within their sphere of
 expertise and one seeking to upset the order bears the heavy
burden of making a convincing showing that it is invalid
because it is unjust and unreasonable in its consequences.
 
Id. at 453, 974 P.2d at 1043 (emphasis in original; citation
 
omitted). 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
IDS argues that the DOTA violated HRS § 103D-701(f) by
 
cancelling the Kahului Airport Project and terminating the DOTA's
 
contract with Ford while IDS's protest was still pending. We
 disagree.
 
HRS § 103D-701(f) provides that in the event of a
 
timely protest of the solicitation or award of a contract, "no
 further action shall be taken on the solicitation or the award of
 the contract until the chief procurement officer makes a written
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
determination that the award of the contract without delay is 
necessary to protect substantial interests of the State." The focus of HRS § 103D-701(f) is to stop the project from moving forward, subject to the exception that the State is permitted to proceed with the project where delay would harm its substantial interests. The Hawai' i Supreme Court has explained that the 
purpose of HRS § 103D-701(f) is to prevent work on the project from proceeding to the point where the availability of effective remedies are precluded by expense and impracticality. CARL I, 85 
Hawai'i at 453, 946 P.2d at 23. In discussing HRS § 103D-701(f), 
the court stated that "[b]y maintaining the status quo during the pendency of a protest, violations of the procurement code can be rectified before the work on the contract has proceeded so far that effective remedies, for the protestor and the public, are precluded by expense and impracticality." CARL I, 85 Hawai' i at 
453, 946 P.2d at 23. 
We construe the phrase "no further action shall be
 
taken on the solicitation or the award of the contract" in HRS 
§ 103D-701(f) as precluding actions in furtherance of
 establishing or completing the contract, and not actions to
 terminate or cancel the contract. Our interpretation is
 consistent with the supreme court's view that HRS § 103D-701(f)
 was designed to prevent work on the project from proceeding so
 far that effective remedies were prevented due to expense and
 impracticality. Termination of an awarded contract does not
 implicate the concerns that HRS § 103D-701(f) was designed to
 address.
 
One of the principal remedies available to an
 
unsuccessful bidder is to terminate the contract that has been
 awarded to the winning bidder. Indeed, that was the principal
 remedy sought by IDS in filing its protest. It would be
 anomalous if the government were statutorily precluded from
 resolving a protest by taking action to grant a protestor the
 principal remedy it seeks. IDS does not cite any case in which
 the court has held that the government's decision to terminate
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the protested solicitation or contract award violates the stay 
provisions of HRS § 103D-701(f). Rather, the Hawai' i Supreme 
Court's decision in CARL Corp. v. State, Dep't of Educ., 93 Hawai'i 155, 997 P.2d 567 (2000) (hereinafter, "CARL II"), 
indicates that despite the pendency of a protest, the government retains the ability to terminate the protested contract. CARL 
II, 93 Hawai' i at 163-65, 997 P.2d 567, 575-77 (holding that (1) 
the government had the authority to terminate the protested contract despite the supreme court's remand to the hearings officer to decide whether to terminate or ratify the contract, and (2) that the government's termination of the contract rendered the hearings officer's decision moot). 
Our interpretation of HRS § 103D-701(f) is also
 
supported by case law from other jurisdictions. In Caber
 Systems, Inc. v. Dep't of Gen. Services, 530 So.2d 325, 336 (Fla.
 Dist. Ct. App. 1988), the court construed a Florida statute
 similar to HRS § 103D-701(f) which provided that "'the agency
 shall stop the bid solicitation process or the contract award
 process until the subject of the protest is resolved by final
 agency action.'" The court construed this language 
to mean that the Department [of General Services] could not
continue the bidding process leading toward the award of any
contract to other bidders until a bidder's protest had been
resolved, but not that the Department was also precluded
from immediately rejecting all bids and initiating a new
[invitation to bid] upon discovery of valid grounds for
doing so. . . . There is no limitation in the statutory
language restricting the Department's power to immediately
reject all bids and start the bid process anew with a valid
[invitation to bid], rather than locking up the entire
process pending hearing on the protest so that nothing could
proceed. Once [the Department] had decided to reject all
bids for the reason specified, to first await the outcome of
a hearing on Caber's first protest before taking action
would be a complete waste of time and taxpayers' money.
 
Id. (emphasis in original).
 
II.
 
A.
 
The Circuit Court ruled that IDS's appeal of the
 
hearings officer's decision was moot because the DOTA's
 
cancellation of the Kahului Airport Project meant that no
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
enforceable contract could be awarded to IDS, even if IDS
 
prevailed on its protest. The Circuit Court cited HRS § 103D­309, which provides that contracts awarded by the government
 "shall neither be binding nor have any force and effect of law"
 unless the appropriate financial officer verifies that there are
 sufficient funds appropriated for the contract. The Circuit
 Court reasoned that where the State has no funds to pay for the
 Kahului Airport Project and has cancelled the Ford contract, it
 would be "absurd" for the law to require a remand for a
 determination of the merits of IDS's protest. 
In general, "this court does not have jurisdiction to
decide abstract propositions of law or moot cases." Lathrop
v. Sakatani, 111 Hawai' i 307, 312, 141 P.3d 480, 485 (2006)
(citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted).
"A case is moot where the question to be determined isabstract and does not rest on existing facts or rights." In 
re Application of Thomas, 73 Haw. 223, 226, 832 P.2d 253,254 (1992). 
A case is moot if it has lost its character as a
 
present, live controversy of the kind that must exist
if courts are to avoid advisory opinions on abstract
propositions of law. The rule is one of the
 prudential rules of judicial self-governance founded
in concern about the proper-and properly limited-role
of the courts in a democratic society. We have said
 the suit must remain alive throughout the course of
litigation to the moment of final appellate
disposition to escape the mootness bar.
 
Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Group v. Lyman, 69 Haw. 81, 87, 734
P.2d 161, 165 (1987) (citations, internal quotation marks,
and brackets omitted).
 
The mootness doctrine is said to encompass the
circumstances that destroy the justiciability of a
suit previously suitable for determination. Put
 another way, the suit must remain alive throughout the
course of litigation to the moment of final appellate
disposition. Its chief purpose is to assure that the
adversary system, once set in operation, remains
properly fueled. The doctrine seems appropriate where
events subsequent to the judgment of the trial court
have so affected the relations between the parties
that the two conditions for justiciability relevant on
appeal-adverse interest and effective remedy-have been
compromised.
 
Lathrop, 111 Hawai' i at 312-13, 141 P.3d at 485-86
(citations and block quote format omitted). 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Queen Emma Foundation v. Tatibouet, 123 Hawai' i 500, 506-07, 236 
P.3d 1236, 1242-43 (App. 2010). 
B.
 
IDS does not dispute that its request to terminate the
 
contract awarded to Ford has been rendered moot by the DOTA's
 
cancellation of the Kahului Airport Project and termination of
 the contract with Ford. IDS, however, contends that its request
 for proposal preparation costs pursuant to HRS § 103D-701(g)
 prevents its case from being moot.
 
HRS § 103D-701(g) provides:
 
In addition to any other relief, when a protest is
sustained and the protestor should have been awarded the
contract under the solicitation but is not, then the
protestor shall be entitled to the actual costs reasonably
incurred in connection with the solicitation, including bid
or proposal preparation costs but not attorney's fees.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has stated that under HRS § 103D­
701(g), a protesting bidder is entitled to recover its bid 
preparation costs "if: (1) the protest is sustained; (2) the protestor should have been awarded the contract; and (3) the protestor is not awarded the contract." CARL I, 85 Hawai' i at 
456, 946 P.2d at 26. Under this test, the merits of an underlying protest must be decided and a determination that the protestor should have been awarded the contract must be made for a protestor to be entitled to recover its bid or proposal preparation costs. 
IDS argues that it is entitled to have the hearings
 
officer determine the underlying merits of its protest and
 whether it should have been awarded the contract, even though the
 contract can no longer be awarded, so that it can pursue its
 request for proposal preparation costs under HRS § 103D-701(g). 
We disagree. We conclude that as a general rule, the
 cancellation of the underlying project and termination of the
 protested contract renders moot an unsuccessful bidder's protest
 of the contract award. There is an exception to this general
 rule where the protestor can show that the government acted in
 
18
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
bad faith or arbitrarily and capriciously in cancelling the
 
underlying project and terminating the protested contract. 
However, IDS has failed to make this showing.
 
In Queen Emma Foundation, this court addressed the 
analogous situation of whether an appeal of the trial court's award of attorney's fees and costs to the prevailing party kept alive the underlying controversy over the interpretation of a lease, which had become moot due to the post-appeal transfer of appellant Tatibouet's interest in the lease in bankruptcy proceedings. Queen Emma Foundation, 123 Hawai' i at 503, 236 P.3d 
at 1239. Tatibouet challenged the trial court's award of attorney's fees and costs on the ground that the trial court had erroneously resolved the merits of the lease claim and found the other party, The Queen Emma Foundation, to be the prevailing party in the case. Id. He argued that because his appeal of the 
award of attorney's fees and costs turned on the merits of the lease claim, this court was required to resolve the merits of the dispute over the interpretation of the lease. Id. at 504, 236 
P.3d at 1240. 
We rejected this argument, holding that Tatibouet's
 
appeal of the trial court's award of attorney's fees and costs
 did not permit adjudication of an otherwise moot controversy
 regarding the merits of the underlying lease claim. Id. at 509­
10, 236 P.3d at 1245-46. We concluded that "[w]here the
 underlying controversy has become moot, 'there is no right to
 review or redetermine any of the issues in the underlying action
 solely for the purpose of deciding the attorney's fees
 question.'" Id. (citation omitted).
10
 
Queen Emma Foundation supports our conclusion that
 
IDS's claim for proposal preparation costs does not keep alive
 
10
 Based on this analysis, we declined to examine the correctness of the
trial court's determination of the merits of the underlying lease claim and
limited our review to whether The Queen Emma Foundation, Tatibouet'sadversary, was the prevailing party based on the outcome of the trial courtproceedings. Queen Emma Foundation, 123 Hawai' i at 510-11, 236 P.3d at 1246­
47. 
19
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IDS's underlying protest over whether the contract for the
 
Kahului Airport Project was properly awarded to Ford, which
 became moot after the DOTA cancelled the project and terminated
 Ford's contract. Queen Emma Foundation also supports our
 
conclusion that IDS is not entitled to a determination of the
 merits of its protest and whether it should have been awarded the
 contract, which are predicate determinations that must be made 
for IDS to demonstrate its entitlement to the recovery of
 proposal preparation costs.
 
In CCL Service Corp. v. United States, 43 Fed. Cl. 680
 
(1999), the United States Court of Federal Claims held, in
 protests filed over the award of federal procurement contracts,
 that the protestors' claims for bid preparation and proposal
 costs did not survive the termination of the protested contracts
 and the cancellation of the solicitation for the contracts. CCL,
 
43 Fed. Cl. at 689-90. The plaintiffs in CCL, who were
 unsuccessful bidders on government computer maintenance
 contracts, filed protests of the award of the contracts to a
 competitor. Id. at 681. After extensive litigation, the
 
government terminated the contracts and cancelled the
 solicitation before a decision on the merits of plaintiffs'
 protests had been made. Id. at 683-86. 
The CCL court addressed the question of whether
 
plaintiffs' claims for bid preparation and proposal costs
 survived the government's termination of the protested contracts
 and cancellation of the solicitation, and it concluded that these
 claims did not survive. Id. at 689-90. The court noted that the
 
cancellation of the solicitation prevented the reinstatement of
 the award to the competitor and mooted the question of the
 propriety of the award to the competitor. Id. at 690. The court
 
stated that "[t]he mere fact that plaintiffs may have been
 entitled to more relief than they received had there been a
 decision on the merits is insufficient to permit continued
 litigation in light of [the government's] actions, which have
 rendered the underlying issue moot." Id. The court concluded
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that "[h]aving negated any impropriety by canceling the award and
 
the solicitation, [the government] has precluded the court from
 making a finding regarding [whether error occurred in the
 procurement process]." Id. The court reasoned that a decision
 
on the merits of the contract award must be made prior to the
 award of bid preparation and proposal costs, and it held that
 without analysis of the merits of the contract award, the court
 lacked a basis to grant relief on plaintiffs' claims for such
 costs. Id. 
The court recognized an exception to the rule barring a
 
protestor from recovering bid preparation and proposal costs in
 the event of a cancelled solicitation and award, where the
 government's conduct in cancelling the solicitation and award "is
 found to be arbitrary or capricious and prejudicial." Id. at
 
691. The court observed, that it
 
is aware of the potential harm to plaintiffs in permitting
the Government the opportunity to avoid litigation by
canceling the solicitation upon protest. Although the
Government should be allowed to take corrective action to
 resolve disputes regarding a procurement in an efficient
manner, the Government is not entitled to avoid liability by
merely canceling a solicitation flawed inherently or in its
execution.
 
Id. at 690 (citation omitted). However, because the plaintiffs
 
did not contest the cancellation of the solicitation, the court
 held that it could not determine whether the exception applied. 
Id. at 691-92.
 
C.
 
The purposes of the Hawai' i Public Procurement Code 
(Procurement Code) are to: 
(1) Provide for fair and equitable treatment of all persons
dealing with the government procurement system;
 
(2) Foster broad-based competition among vendors while
ensuring accountability, fiscal responsibility, and
efficiency in the procurement process; and
 
(3) Increase public confidence in the integrity of the
system.
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CARL I, 85 Hawai'i at 456, 946 P.2d at 26 (quoting S. Stand.
 
Comm. Rep. No. S8–93, in 1993 Senate Journal, Special Sess., at
 39). 
Permitting IDS to pursue its request for proposal
 
preparation costs despite the cancellation of the Kahului Airport
 Project would be contrary to the purpose of the Procurement Code
 to ensure efficiency and fiscal responsibility in the procurement
 process. It would require the State to incur the costs of
 engaging in litigation over the merits of IDS's protest of the
 contract award to Ford and whether IDS should have been awarded
 the contract, even though there is no longer any contract to
 award. On the other hand, permitting IDS to pursue its request
 for proposal preparation costs might result in revealing
 improprieties in the procurement process and advance the purposes
 of the Procurement Code to provide for fair and equitable
 treatment of bidders and increase public confidence in the
 integrity of the system.
 
In balancing these interests, we conclude that it is 
appropriate to recognize an exception to the general rule barring a protestor from recovering bid or proposal preparation costs where the project has been cancelled and the contract award terminated. This exception would apply where the protestor can show that the government acted in bad faith or arbitrarily and capriciously in cancelling the project and terminating the protested contract. Such an exception would be consistent with the approach used by the Hawai' i Supreme Court in creating a 
right to recover attorney's fees as a remedy for the government's bad faith in failing to comply with the requirements of the Procurement Code. See CARL I, 85 Hawai' i at 458-61, 946 P.2d at 
28-31. It would also be consistent with the approach taken by the United States Court of Federal Claims and the United States Court of Claims in federal procurement cases. See CCL, 43 Fed. 
Cl. at 690-91; Keco Indus., Inc. v. United States, 492 F.2d 1200, 1203-04 (Ct. Cl. 1974). 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We conclude that IDS has failed to meet its burden of
 
showing that this exception applies in this case. In opposing
 
the DOTA's motion to dismiss, IDS specifically argued that the
 DOTA's cancellation of the Kahului Airport Project, which led to
 the termination of the contract awarded to Ford, was unjustified,
 improper, and "an act of bad faith." On the other hand, the DOTA
 argued that the cancellation of the Kahului Airport Project and
 the underlying solicitation for the project was necessitated by
 budgetary constraints, was reasonable, and was in the best
 interests of the government. After considering the arguments and
 evidence presented by the parties, the hearings officer rejected
 IDS's arguments. The hearings officer found that the DOTA's
 cancellation of the solicitation for the Kahului Airport Project
 was justified "due to budget constraints related to . . . the
 current financial crisis" and that "there was no evidence that
 the cancellation was motivated by an improper purpose." We
 conclude that these findings were based on substantial evidence
 and were not clearly erroneous. Accordingly, we are bound by
 these findings, which establish that the DOTA did not act in bad
 faith or arbitrarily and capriciously in cancelling the Kahului
 Airport Project and terminating the contract awarded to Ford, but
 rather acted properly in making its decision.
11
 
11 IDS's reliance on Arizona's Towing Prof'ls, Inc. v. State, 993 P.2d
1037 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1999), is misplaced. In Arizona's Towing, Shamrock
Towing (Shamrock) was awarded a procurement contract over Western Towing
(Western), and Western filed a bid protest. Id. at 1038. The government
agency upheld Western's bid protest and cancelled Shamrock's contract on that
basis. Id. at 1039. However, after Shamrock filed an appeal of this
decision, the government agency notified Shamrock that it was cancelling
Shamrock's contract pursuant to a cancellation for convenience clause in the
invitation for bids. Id. On judicial review, the Arizona Court of Appeals
rejected the government agency's claim that the cancellation for convenience
of Shamrock's contract rendered moot Shamrock's challenge to the government
agency's decision to uphold Western's bid protest and cancel Shamrock's
contract based on Western's protest. Id. at 1041-42. The court concluded
 
that every contract imposes a duty of good faith and fair dealing. Id. at
 
1041. The court found that the government agency "did not act in good faith"
because it had "invoked the cancellation for convenience provision in an
effort to render moot Shamrock's appeal of its original cancellation over the
bid protest" and because the government agency did not have a valid reason for
cancelling Shamrock's contract. Id. at 1041-42. The court stated that the
 
(continued...)
 
23
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D.
 
IDS contends that certain actions taken by the DOTA
 
after the Circuit Court affirmed the hearings officer's Order
 
Granting Motion to Dismiss support its claim of bad faith on the
 part of the DOTA and asks this court to take judicial notice of
 these actions. However, HRS § 103D-710(d) (2012) provides that
 judicial review of the hearings officer's decision by the circuit
 court "shall be conducted on the record of the administrative
 proceedings, and briefs and oral argument. No new evidence shall
 be introduced, except that the circuit court may, if evidence is
 offered which is clearly newly discovered evidence and material
 to the just decision of the appeal, admit the same." The
 evidence proffered by IDS was not part of the administrative
 record and it was not considered by the Circuit Court. We
 therefore decline to consider it.
 
III.
 
IDS argues that it is entitled to have the merits of
 
its protest resolved so that it can pursue its request for
 attorney's fees incurred in prosecuting its protest.
12 IDS's
 
argument is based on its contention that the DOTA violated HRS 
11(...continued)
government agency "should not be permitted to use the cancellation for
convenience provision to thwart administrative or judicial review of its
decisions. Id. at 1041. 
Here, the terminated contract had been awarded to Ford, and not to IDS.
Therefore, unlike the aggrieved party in Arizona's Towing, IDS is not
contesting the government's termination of a contract that had been awarded to
IDS. More importantly, unlike in Arizona's Towing
, we have concluded, based
on the hearings officer's findings, that the DOTA did not act in bad faith,
but rather had a valid reason and proper purpose for terminating Ford's
contract. Thus,
 Arizona's Towing  is distinguishable and does not show that
IDS is entitled to relief.
 
12
 In CARL I, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that "a protestor is
entitled to recover its attorney's fees incurred in prosecuting its protestif: (1) the protestor has proven that the solicitation was in violation of the[Procurement] Code; (2) the contract was awarded in violation of HRS§ 103D–701(f); and (3) the award of the contract was in bad faith." CARL I, 
85 Hawai'i at 460, 946 at 30. 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
§ 103D-701(f) and acted in bad faith in cancelling the Kahului
 
Airport Project. We have already rejected these contentions. We
 conclude that IDS's claim for attorney's fees did not survive the
 cancellation of the Kahului Airport Project or render the
 dismissal of its case improper. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's Final Judgment. 
Terry E. Thomason
(Corianne W. Lau and
Shannon M.I. Lau (Alston
Hunt Floyd & Ing, A Law
Corporation) with him on
the briefs)
for Appellant-Appellant
 
Stella M.L. Kam
 
(Donna H. Kalama with her
on the brief)
Deputy Attorneys General
for Appellees-Appellees
Brennon T. Morioka and
 Designees of Aaron Fujioka
 
25
 