NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30727
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
SEAN ALLAN WASZILY, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0027)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Sean A. Waszily (Waszily) appeals 
from the "Order Granting Department of Public Safety, State of 
Hawai
'i's Motion to Correct Illegal Sentence" (Order Granting 
Motion to Correct Illegal Sentence) filed on August 23, 2010, in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 We 
affirm. 
I.
 
Waszily pleaded no contest in Hawai' i to unauthorized 
possession of confidential personal information, second-degree forgery, two counts of second-degree theft, and three counts of credit card fraud. He was sentenced to five years of probation. On March 3, 2008, a bench warrant was issued for Waszily's arrest 
1 The Honorable Shakley F. Raffetto presided over the
proceedings relevant to this appeal. 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
when he failed to appear at a hearing related to alleged
 
probation violations. 
Waszily was arrested in Nevada on Nevada charges on 
September 15, 2008. On September 18, 2008, Waszily executed a waiver of extradition to Hawai' i. Waszily pleaded guilty to the 
Nevada charge of possession of credit or debit card without cardholder's consent. He was sentenced by the Nevada District Court to a maximum of thirty-six months of imprisonment with a minimum parole eligibility of twelve months in the Nevada Department of Corrections, to run concurrent with the Hawai' i 
sentence. Waszily's Nevada Judgment of Conviction was filed on October 3, 2008. Waszily remained incarcerated in Nevada on the 
Nevada charges until he was extradited to Hawai' i. 
On July 2, 2009, Waszily was extradited back to 
Hawai'i. The Circuit Court subsequently revoked his probation. 
The Circuit Court resentenced Waszily to five years of 
imprisonment and initially ordered that Waszily receive credit for time served effective September 18, 2008, which was the date he executed the waiver of extradition while in custody in Nevada. However, the Department of Public Safety of the State of Hawai' i 
(State) filed a motion to correct illegal sentence, arguing that because Waszily had been in custody in Nevada for Nevada crimes, the Circuit Court's order granting him credit for time served as of September 18, 2008, was illegal. The Circuit Court agreed with the State and issued its Order Granting Motion to Correct Illegal Sentence. The Circuit Court ruled that Waszily was not entitled to credit in his Hawai' i case for the time served in his 
separate criminal case in Nevada. The Circuit Court ordered that Waszily's credit for time served be modified to reflect credit for time served as of July 2, 2009. 
II.
 
On appeal, Waszily contends that the Circuit Court
 
erred in granting the State's motion to correct illegal sentence. 
Waszily contends that he is entitled to credit for the time he 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
served incarcerated in Nevada after he signed the waiver of
 
extradition on September 18, 2008. We disagree.
 
Credit for time served is governed by HRS ยง 706-671
 
(1993) which states in relevant part:
 
(1) When a defendant who is sentenced to imprisonment
has previously been detained in any State or local
correctional or other institution following the defendant's
arrest for the crime for which sentence is imposed, such
period of detention following the defendant's arrest shall
be deducted from the minimum and maximum terms of such
 sentence. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Under HRS ยง 706-671, a defendant is entitled to credit
 
"for any time served [in presentence incarceration] in connection
 
with the same offense." State v. March, 94 Hawai' i 250, 254, 11 
P.3d 1094, 1098 (2000) (emphasis in original). However, the
 Hawai'i Supreme Court has held that a defendant is not entitled 
to pre-sentence credit for time served in connection with an
 unrelated criminal offense:
 
HRS ยง 706-671 . . . does not authorize courts to credit
Defendant with time served for another offense. Based on
 the plain language of the statute, the legislature clearly
intended the credit to apply only to the sentence for the
offense for which the presentence time was served. Any
other result would allow credit for time served in
 connection with wholly unrelated offenses. Under the
 criminal justice system, once convicted, the defendant must
serve the sentence imposed for the offense committed.
Accordingly, we hold that a sentence that credits Defendant
with the time served for an unrelated offense is illegal
because the sentencing court is not authorized by chapter
706 to grant such a credit.
 
Id. at 254-55, 11 P.3d at 1098-99. 
Waszily's claim that he became entitled to credit for
 
time served upon signing the waiver of extradition on September
 
18, 2008, is without merit. A defendant held in another
 jurisdiction is entitled to credit for time served with respect
 to a Hawai' i offense if the defendant was being held in custody 
in the other jurisdiction for the purpose of being extradited to
 Hawai'i for the Hawai' i offense. See State v. Mason, 79 Hawai' i 
175, 183, 900 P.2d 172, 182 (App. 1995). Under these 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
circumstances, the defendant's confinement in the other 
jurisdiction is "in connection with" the Hawai' i offense. 
In this case, however, Waszily was being held in Nevada 
for a Nevada crime that was unrelated to his Hawai' i offenses. 
Waszily's execution of a waiver of extradition on September 18, 2008, in Nevada did not trigger his entitlement to credit for time served on his Hawai' i offenses because he continued 
thereafter to be held in custody by Nevada for the Nevada crime. It was only after Nevada authorities released Waszily from custody for his Nevada offense and extradited him back to Hawai' i 
that Waszily became entitled to presentence credit for his Hawai'i offenses. Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not err in 
its Order Granting Motion to Correct Illegal Sentence. See 
March, 94 Hawai' i at 254-55, 11 P.3d at 1098-99; see also State 
v. Schmidt, 84 Hawai' i 191, 200, 932 P.2d 328, 337 (App. 1997) 
(holding that defendant was not entitled to presentence credit on Hawai'i offenses for time served in Minnesota on an unrelated 
crime based on a detainer filed by the State of Hawai' i to hold 
him for return to Hawai' i). 
III.
 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Order Granting Motion to
 
Correct Illegal Sentence. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 4, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Matson Kelley
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Lisa M. Itomura Diane K. Taira Deputies Attorney Generalfor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 