NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30680
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DAVID EDWARD KIM, DENISE NYUK LEN KIM and
TINA JEAN KIM, Plaintiffs-Appellees, v.
KEITH SHIGEAKI ODA, Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION, STATE OF HAWAII,
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant, and
FINANCE FACTORS, LIMITED, DISCOVER BANK, through
its servicing agent, DISCOVER FINANCIAL SERVICES, INC.,
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY,
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR &
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, STATE OF HAWAII, Defendants-Appellees,
and DOE PERSONS 1-20, AND DOE ENTITIES 1-20, Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-1242-05)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Keith Shigeaki Oda
 
(Oda) appeals from a July 30, 2010 Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit (Circuit Court) Judgment, which confirmed the partition
 
sale of certain property, as prayed for by Plaintiffs-
Appellees/Cross-Appellees David Edward Kim (David Kim), Denise
 
Nyuk Len Kim (Denise Kim), and Tina Jean Kim (Tina Kim), Oda's
 
1
ex-wife (collectively, the Kims).  Defendant-Appellee/Cross-
Appellant Department of Taxation of the State of Hawai
'i (Tax 
Department) cross-appeals from the July 30, 2010 Judgment. 
Defendant-Appellee Department of Labor and Industrial Relations
 
of the State of Hawai
'i (DLIR) purports to "substantively join" 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in the Tax Department's Opening Brief, but did not submit a
 
notice of cross-appeal.
 I. BACKGROUND FACTS
 A. The Property
 The subject property in this partition action is a 
parcel of real property located in Aiea, Hawai
'i (Property). On 
February 14, 1991, title to the Property was transferred to the Kims and Oda through a warranty deed. Oda and Tina Kim, who were married at the time of the transfer, held a fifty-percent interest in the Property as tenants by the entirety, and they were tenants in common in relation to the interests of David and Denise Kim. David and Denise Kim, who are married, held the other fifty-percent interest in the Property as tenants by the entirety as to each other. 
Prior to June 2009, when the Kims filed the partition
 
complaint herein, Oda and Tina Kim divorced and, as a result,
 each owned a twenty-five percent interest in the Property as
 tenants in common. David and Denise Kim continued to own a
 fifty-percent interest in the Property as tenants by the entirety
 and as tenants in common in relation to the interests of Oda and
 Tina Kim. In contemplation of Oda and Tina Kim's divorce, Oda
 and the Kims entered into an Agreement in Regard to Resolution of
 Tax Obligations and Possible Buyout of Interests in Real Property
 (Buyout Agreement), which is discussed further below.
 
B. The Liens
 Defendant/Cross-Claimant/Counterclaimant-Appellee 
Finance Factors, Ltd. (Finance Factors) held an interest in the 
Property pursuant to a first mortgage of $100,000, dated March 
11, 1991, and recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the State of Hawai
'i (Bureau of Conveyances) as Document No. 91-033556. On 
March 11, 1991, the Kims and Oda executed and delivered to Finance Factors an Adjustable Rate Promissory Note and an Adjustable Rate Mortgage. In its Counterclaim and Cross-claim filed on June 29, 2009, Finance Factors alleged that, as of June 17, 2009, the Kims and Oda owed a principal balance of $69,739.49, plus interest of $278.95, for a total of $70,018.44, 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
plus any further interest, late charges, and advances, accrued
 
thereafter, as well as any attorneys' fees and expenses incurred
 by Finance Factors.
 
Finance Factors also held an interest in the Property
 
pursuant to a second mortgage in the original amount of $130,000,
 dated February 7, 1996, and recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances
 as Document No. 96-018016. On February 7, 1996, David and Denise
 Kim executed and delivered to Finance Factors an Adjustable Rate
 Promissory Note. In addition, on that same day, the Kims and Oda
 executed and delivered the second mortgage, with David and Denise
 Kim identified as the mortgagors, and with Oda and Tina Kim
 identified as accommodation mortgagors. In its Counterclaim and
 Cross-claim, Finance Factors alleged that, as of June 17, 2009,
 David and Denise Kim owed a principal balance of $102,700.08 on
 the note associated with the second mortgage, plus interest of
 $308.10, minus an escrow of $1,626.84, for a total of
 $101,381.34, plus any further interest, late charges, and
 advances, accrued thereafter, as well as any attorneys' fees and
 expenses incurred by Finance Factors.
2
 
On August 12, 1994, the Tax Department recorded in the
 
Bureau of Conveyances, as Document No. 94-134872, a Certificate
 of State Tax Lien against Oda in the amount of $66,042.05, dated
 August 10, 1994. On December 12, 1995, the Tax Department
 recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances, as Document No. 95-160485,
 a second Certificate of State Tax Lien against Oda in the amount
 of $10,540.70, dated December 11, 1995. The Tax Department
 identified its liens and claimed additional taxes, penalties, and
 interest were due from Oda, in its Answer and Affirmative
 Statement of Claim, filed on July 22, 2009, which included copies
 of the liens, and a summary of taxes due.
 
2
 As of October 15, 2009, updated principal and interest balances
owed to Finance Factors were reportedly $68,859.76 on the note secured by the
first mortgage and $101,850.59 on the note secured by the second mortgage,
apparently unadjusted for the escrowed funds. The record does not include any
report of the actual amounts disbursed from the proceeds of the sale of the
Property.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On September 20, 1994, the DLIR recorded in the Bureau
 
of Conveyances, as Document No. 94-154533, a Certificate of State
 
Tax Lien against Oda in the amount of $8,483.21, which was dated
 September 15, 1994. On October 5, 1995, the DLIR recorded in the
 Bureau of Conveyances, as Document No. 95-128729, a second
 Certificate of State Tax Lien against Oda in the amount of
 $2,533.99, which was dated October 4, 1995. On August 9, 1996,
 the DLIR recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances, as Document No.
 96-115269, a third Certificate of State Tax Lien against Oda in
 the amount of $40.93, which was dated August 8, 1996. In its
 Answer and Affirmative Statement of Claim, filed on June 25,
 2009, the DLIR referenced liens, taxes, penalties and interest
 due to DLIR, but did not include copies of its liens. Copies of
 its first and second Certificates of State Tax Lien were
 submitted to the Circuit Court by the DLIR, on November 10, 2009,
 in conjunction with its limited opposition to a summary judgment
 motion filed by Finance Factors. A copy of its third Certificate
 of State Tax Lien was submitted to the Circuit Court by the DLIR,
 on June 4, 2010, in conjunction with its limited opposition to
 the Kims' motion for confirmation of partition sale, which
 included a request for distribution of proceeds.
 
On September 4, 2008, Defendant-Appellee Discover Bank
 
(Discover Bank) recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances, as
 
Document No. 2008-139445, a judgment dated October 24, 2001,
 
which was entered in favor of Discover Bank and against Oda in
 the amount of $6,064.24.
3
 
On November 15, 2006, Defendant-Appellee Internal
 
Revenue Service (IRS), recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances, as
 
Document No. 2006-208753, a Notice of Federal Tax Lien against
 
Oda, in the amount of $8,195.70. In its Answer, Counterclaim,
 
3
 This court notes that a November 9, 2009 memorandum filed by
Discover claims a total amount due of $11,119.35, as of October 5, 2009, for
"post judgment interest and other charges." The record does not appear to
include any declaration or other evidence supporting these amounts. In
 addition, it is unclear why the Circuit Court determined that Discover Bank's
judgment lien, recorded in 2008, took priority over the IRS's Federal Tax
Lien, recorded in 2006. However, as no objection or argument has been made
concerning these issues, any such argument is waived. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Cross-claim, filed on July 30, 2009, the IRS asserted an
 
outstanding balance due on that lien in the amount of $574.40, as
 of August 3, 2009.
 
C. The Oda-Kim Divorce
 Prior to the filing of Oda and Tina Kim's Divorce
 
Decree on June 4, 2008, Oda and the Kims entered into the Buyout
 Agreement, which is undated, but appears to have been executed
 some time in 2005. In the Buyout Agreement, Oda agreed to make a
 good faith effort to negotiate a release of the tax liens on the
 Property. Upon a settlement with the taxing authorities, Denise
 and David Kim were to be given an opportunity to buy the Property
 from Oda and Tina Kim. Paragraph 12 of the Buyout Agreement set
 forth the parties' agreement, if one of the parties was unable to
 timely perform their obligations, and provides as follows:
 
If, notwithstanding the best good faith efforts of the
parties, one or more of them are unable to perform their
obligations hereunder within the specified time periods, and
it is therefore not possible to effect a buyout in regard to
the [Property] in accordance with the terms and provisions
set forth herein, then, the parties' rights, obligations,
and interests with respect to the [Property] in the Divorce
shall be settled and resolved as follows:
 
(a) [Tina Kim],[Oda], and [David and Denise Kim] shall
continue to be co-owners of the [Property], subject to the
Mortgages and the Tax Liens.
 
(b) [Tina Kim] shall own a one-fourth (1/4) share of the
[Property] as a tenant in common as to the other co-owners.
 
(c) [Oda] shall own a one-fourth (1/4) share of the
[Property] as a tenant in common as to the other co-owners.
 
(d) [David and Denise Kim] shall own a one-half (1/2) share
of the [Property] as tenants in common to [Tina Kim] and [Oda],
and as tenants by the entireties as to each other.
 
Oda and Tina Kim's Divorce Decree divided and
 
distributed their respective interests in the Property in
 
accordance with the Buyout Agreement, except that it extended the
 date by which Oda needed to complete his negotiations with the
 tax authorities. The Divorce Decree also provided that the
 parties' mortgage loans with Finance Factors, and tax liabilities
 related to Oda's dissolved business would be governed by the
 terms of the Buyout Agreement, and that all other debts would be
 the sole responsibility of the party who incurred that debt,
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unless it was addressed in the Buyout Agreement. The Divorce
 
Decree further provided, however:
 
2) If Oda does not successfully negotiate agreements with
the tax authorities which satisfy the Tax Obligations and
result in the release of the Tax Liens, in accordance with
paragraphs 1-11 of the [Buyout Agreement], then, if and to
the extent that he makes or is required to make payments to
the tax authorities on account of the Tax Obligations after
the effective date of this Decree, [Tina Kim] shall
indemnify [Oda] and shall reimburse him in an amount, or in
such amounts, that total one-half (1/2) of any payments made
by [Oda] on account of the Tax Obligations.
 
D.	 Circuit Court Proceedings
 
On June 1, 2009, the Kims filed a complaint seeking a
 
partition sale of the Property pursuant to Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) §§ 668-7 (1993) and 668-13 (1993), including the
 
equitable apportionment of the sales proceeds, and an award of
 
attorneys' fees and costs. The other parties to the partition
 answered, and filed various affirmative statements of interest,
 counterclaims, and cross-claims.
 
At a November 18, 2009 hearing on the Kims' motion for
 
summary judgment and interlocutory decree of partition by sale,
 Finance Factors' limited cross-motion for summary judgment, and
 Oda's motion for summary judgment, the Circuit Court: (1)
 granted the Kims' motion, (2) denied Oda's motion, and (3)
 granted Finance Factors' cross-motion. The Circuit Court
 concluded that it had jurisdiction to hear the partition case and
 that the Kims had not waived their right to partition in the
 Buyout Agreement. 
On December 11, 2009, the Circuit Court entered its 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Order Granting Defendant Finance Factor, Limited's Cross Motion for Summary Judgment. Also on December 11, 2009, a separate Judgment was entered on the order in favor of Finance Factors, pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b). No appeal was taken from the 
December 11, 2009 Judgment. 
On December 22, 2009, the Circuit Court entered its
 
Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Summary Judgment and
 
Interlocutory Decree of Partition By Sale, as well as a separate
 order denying Oda's motion for summary judgment.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On February 25, 2010, a Commissioner's Report was
 
filed, seeking, inter alia, confirmation of the sale of the
 
Property to David Kim or his nominee for $500,000. 
On April 5, 2010, the Kims filed a motion, also
 
seeking, inter alia, confirmation of the sale of the Property,
 the apportionment of the net sales proceeds to the co-owners of
 the Property in accordance with their respective interests, the
 determination and distribution of the net sales proceeds in
 accordance with the priority of the other claims and liens,
 including a charge against the responsible owner's respective
 share of the net sales proceeds, and thereupon, the distribution
 to the co-owners of any surplus of their respective shares of the
 net sales proceeds. After various filings by other parties to
 the proceedings, on July 19, 2010, the Circuit Court entered its
 Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Confirmation of Partition
 Sale, Allowance of Costs, Commissions and Fees, Distribution of
 Proceeds, Directing Conveyance (Distribution Order).
 
In the Distribution Order, the Circuit Court ordered
 
payment of attorneys' fees and costs to the Commissioner in the
 amount of $3,174.80, the Kims' attorneys in the amount of
 $18,282.38, and Finance Factors' attorneys in the amount of
 $9,484.46. After the payment of the fees and costs, the Circuit
 Court ordered the apportionment and distribution of the net sales
 proceeds to Oda and the Kims in accordance with their respective
 interests (25% each),
 
to the extent such sale proceeds are available, according to
the following priority and charge against the responsible
owner's respective share of the net sales proceeds, and
thereupon distribute to the co-owners any surplus of their
respective apportioned share of the net sales proceeds:
 
1.	 FINANCE FACTORS, LIMITED's First Mortgage dated March
11, 1991, recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the
State of Hawaii as Document No. 91-033556, charged to
DAVID EDWARD KIM, DENISE NYUK LEN KIM, TINA JEAN KIM
and KEITH SHIGEAKI ODA;
 
2.	 FINANCE FACTORS, LIMITED's Second Mortgage dated
February 7, 1996, recorded in the Bureau of
Conveyances of the State of Hawaii as Document No. 96­018016, charged to DAVID EDWARD KIM, DENISE NYUK LEN
KIM, TINA JEAN KIM and KEITH SHIGEAKI ODA;
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3.	 DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION, STATE OF HAWAII's Certificate
of State Tax Lien dated August 10, 1994, recorded in
the Bureau of Conveyances of the State of Hawaii as
Document No. 94-134872, charged to KEITH SHIGEAKI ODA;
 
4.	 DEPARTMENT OF LABOR & INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, STATE OF
HAWAII's Certificate of State Tax Lien dated September
15, 1994, recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the
State of Hawaii as Document No. 94-154533, charged to
KEITH SHIGEAKI ODA;
 
5.	 DEPARTMENT OF LABOR & INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, STATE OF
HAWAII's Certificate of State Tax Lien dated October
 4, 1995, recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the
State of Hawaii as Document No. 95-128729, charged to
KEITH SHIGEAKI ODA;
 
6.	 DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION, STATE OF HAWAII's Certificate
of State Tax Lien dated December 11, 1995, recorded in
the Bureau of Conveyances of the State of Hawaii as
Document No. 95-160485, charged to KEITH SHIGEAKI ODA;
 
7.	 DEPARTMENT OF LABOR & INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, STATE OF
HAWAII's Certificate of State Tax Lien dated August 8,
1996, recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the
State of Hawaii as Document No. 96-115269, charged to
KEITH SHIGEAKI ODA;
 
8.	 DISCOVER BANK's, through its servicing agent, DISCOVER
FINANCIAL SERVICES, INC., Judgment dated October 24,
2001, recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the
State of Hawaii as Document No. 2008-139445, charged
to KEITH SHIGEAKI ODA; and
 
9.	 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY,
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE's Notice of Federal Tax Lien
 dated November 3, 2006, recorded in the Bureau of
Conveyances of the State of Hawaii as Document No.
2006-208753, charged to KEITH SHIGEAKI ODA[.]
 
The Judgment was entered on July 30, 2010. On August
 
18, 2010, Oda timely filed a notice of appeal. On September 1,
 
2010, the Tax Department timely filed a notice of cross-appeal.
 II.	 POINTS OF ERROR
 
Oda identifies seven points of error on appeal,
 
contending that the Circuit Court erred when it: (1) permitted
 the Kims to proceed with a partition action because the Kims had
 waived their right to file and proceed with the partition case;
 (2) permitted the Kims to proceed with a partition action because
 the Kims acted in bad faith in violation of an agreement and the
 implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing; (3) permitted
 the Kims to proceed with a partition action because the Family
 Court, rather than the Circuit Court, had jurisdiction over the
 Property and the parties; (4) permitted Finance Factors to
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
foreclose on its mortgage because there was no default other than
 
the partition action; (5) allocated the proceeds from the
 partition sale because Oda had to pay a note he did not sign or
 
4
receive any benefit from;  (6) allocated the proceeds from the
partition sale because Tina Kim did not have to pay a state lien
 that she was obligated to pay under the Family Court's ordered
 
5
indemnity agreement;  (7) granted attorneys' fees to the Kims and
Finance Factors because the attorney fees claims were not
 supported in the record and had over billing, block billing, and
 billing in fifteen minute increments.
 
The Tax Department contends that the Circuit Court
 
erred by concluding that Finance Factors' second mortgage had
 priority over the Tax Department's liens with respect to Oda's
 share of the sale proceeds.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"Partition is an action in equity, and we review that 
action under the abuse of discretion standard." Curtis v. Dorn, 
123 Hawai
'i 301, 307, 234 P.3d 683, 689 (App. 2010) (citations 
omitted). In a partition action, a circuit court has the power, among other things: 
[T]o sell the whole, where for any reason partition in kind
would be impracticable in whole or in part or be greatly
prejudicial to the parties interested, and by judgment or
judgments to invest the purchaser or purchasers with title
to any property sold, and use the proceeds to equalize the
general partition[.]
 
HRS § 668-7(6) (1993).
 
More generally,
 
[t]he relief granted by a court in equity is discretionary
and will not be overturned on review unless the circuit
 court abused its discretion by issuing a decision that
clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment
of the appellant.
 
Curtis, 123 Hawai 'i at 306, 234 P.3d at 688 (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
4
 Oda is referring to Finance Factors' second mortgage.
 
5
 Oda is referring to Tina Kim's indemnity obligation under
paragraph M of the divorce decree.
 
9
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In addition,
 
[w]e review a circuit court's grant or denial of summary
judgment de novo under the same standard applied by the
circuit court. As we have often articulated: summary
judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions,
answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together
with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine
issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material
 if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing
or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of
action or defense asserted by the parties. The evidence
 must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving
party. In other words, we must view all of the evidence and
the inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable
to the party opposing the motion.
 
Haw. Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai 'i 213, 221, 11 
P.3d 1, 9 (2000) (internal citations, quotation marks, brackets, 
and ellipsis omitted; format altered). IV. DISCUSSION
 A. DLIR's Argument
 As a preliminary matter we note that, although the DLIR 
"substantively joined" in the Tax Department's opening brief, the 
record does not include a notice of cross-appeal filed by the 
DLIR from the July 30, 2010 judgment. "An appellant's failure to file a timely notice of appeal is a jurisdictional defect that can neither be waived by the parties nor disregarded by the court in the exercise of judicial discretion." Enos v. Pac. Transfer & 
Warehouse, Inc., 80 Hawai
'i 345, 349, 910 P.2d 116, 120 (1996) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Hawai 'i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4.1(b)(1) governs the time for 
filing a notice of cross-appeal: 
A notice of cross-appeal shall be filed within 14 days after
6
the notice of appeal is served on the cross-appellant,[ ] or
within the time prescribed for filing the notice of appeal,
whichever is later.
 
Here, a jurisdictional defect bars appellate review of
 
the DLIR's assertions of error with respect to the priority of
 
its claims because the DLIR failed to timely file a notice of
 cross-appeal.
 
6
 A certificate of service dated August 18, 2010 certified that
Oda's notice of appeal was served on DLIR.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. The Circuit Court Properly Allowed Partition
 
HRS § 668-1 (1993) governs partition of jointly-owned
 
real estate and provides as follows:
 
§ 668-1 Actions for partition.  When two or more
 
persons hold or are in possession of real property as joint
tenants or as tenants in common, in which one or more of
them have an estate in fee, or a life estate in possession,
any one or more of such persons may bring an action in the
circuit court of the circuit in which the property or some
part thereof is situated, for a partition of the property,
according to the respective rights of the parties interested
therein, and for a sale of the same or a part thereof if it
appears that a partition cannot be made without great
prejudice to the owners. The several circuit courts shall
 have power, in any action for partition, to proceed
according to the usual practice of courts of equity in cases
of partition, and according to this chapter in enlargement
thereof.
 
The general rule in jurisdictions where partition is
 
provided for by statute, such as Hawai 'i, is: 
Where a case is fairly brought within the law authorizing a
partition, it is generally conceded that the right to
partition is imperative and absolutely binding upon courts
having jurisdiction of such proceeding, and they are not
clothed with such discretion that, under a given state of
facts, they may grant the relief or refuse it, and yet
commit no error.
 
Henmi Apartments, Inc. v. Sawyer, 3 Haw. App. 555, 562, 655 P.2d
 
881, 886 (1982) (citations omitted).
 
"[N]otwithstanding the non-discretionary nature of a
 
partition action, the right to partition may be waived by express
 or implied contract." Id. at 562, 655 P.2d at 887 (citations
 
omitted). 
Here, the Circuit Court found that it had jurisdiction
 
over the partition action, stating:
 
This Court is as a Court of equity, under HRS 668-1, actions
for partition. Partition is properly relegated to this
particular Court, and not the Family Court. The divorce
 decree had entered on June 4, 2008. More than a year has
passed. The divorce decree does not mean that the parties
have waived any partition action. There is no contractual
 obligation imposed upon plaintiffs[.]
 
We agree. The Kims had an absolute right to partition,
 
which they did not waive by virtue of the Divorce Decree or the
 
Buyout Agreement. There is no evidence in the record indicating
 that the Kims and Oda agreed to hold the Property for a
 particular period of time or that it was the parties' intent and
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
understanding that they could not divest of their interest in the
 
Property. Under the Buyout Agreement, Oda was obligated to
 attempt to negotiate a release of his tax liens, but he was
 unable to do so. The Kims were not obligated to assist Oda in
 negotiating with the tax authorities. Under the circumstances
 here, the fact that the Kims pursued their statutory right of
 partition is not evidence of either a violation of the implied
 covenant of good faith and fair dealing with respect to the
 Buyout Agreement, or the Family Court's decree.
 
Oda argues, in particular, that the Family Court's
 
retention of jurisdiction over the parties to the Divorce Decree
 deprived the Circuit Court of jurisdiction over this partition
 action. Oda relies on paragraph 4.C. of the Divorce Decree,
 which approved the Buyout Agreement, as amended by the Family
 Court (by extending the date by which Oda needed to complete his
 negotiations with the tax authorities to July 1, 2008), and which
 stated:
 
Except as otherwise limited by Statute, Court Rule, or
Case Authority, the Family Court shall retain jurisdiction
over the parties with respect to the provisions of this
paragraph no. 4.C. in order to enforce the same.
 
We reject the Kims' argument that the Family Court was 
divested of jurisdiction by HRS § 580-56(d). See Reithbrock v. 
Lange, 128 Hawai 'i 1, 3, 282 P.3d 543, 545 (2012). Nevertheless, 
nothing in the Divorce Decree or the Buyout Agreement bars, 
waives, or otherwise limits, the exercise of the Kims' statutory right of partition in the Circuit Court, notwithstanding the Family Court's retention of jurisdiction to enforce its decree. Accordingly, we reject Oda's arguments that the Circuit Court erred in permitting the Kims to proceed with the partition action. 
C. Finance Factors's Foreclosure
 Oda argues that the Circuit Court erred when it allowed
 
Finance Factors to foreclose on its mortgages because there was
 no default. However, Oda's argument is untimely and must be
 dismissed.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As stated above, on December 11, 2009, pursuant to HRCP
 
Rule 54(b), the Circuit Court entered a judgment on a decree of
 
foreclosure in favor of Finance Factors and against the Kims and
 Oda. Oda failed to appeal from the December 11, 2009 judgment
 within thirty days after its entry, as HRAP Rule 4(a)(1)
 requires.
7 Accordingly, we conclude that we lack appellate
 
jurisdiction to review Oda's argument that Finance Factors was
 not entitled to foreclose on the mortgages.
 
D. The Charge to Oda for the Second Mortgage
 Oda argues, in effect, that his interest in the
 
proceeds of the sale of the Property was improperly charged with
 respect to debt underlying the second mortgage in favor of
 Finance Factors. We agree.
 
The evidence submitted into the record in this case
 
clearly establishes that: David and Denise Kim were the
 borrowers on the promissory note secured by the second mortgage;
 David and Denise Kim were the mortgagors with respect to the
 second mortgage; and Oda and Tina Kim were accommodation
 mortgagors with respect to the second mortgage. Although the
 Buyout Agreement specified various agreements amongst the parties
 thereto if David and Denise Kim elected to complete a buyout as
 set forth in that agreement, clearly, David and Denise Kim did
 not elect to complete a buyout in accordance with the terms and
 conditions in the Buyout Agreement, and elected instead to file
 this partition action. Nothing in the Buyout Agreement purports
 to modify the parties' respective obligations to Finance Factors,
 as set forth in the various notes and mortgages. No declaration
 or evidence contrary to the obligations set forth in the
 promissory notes and mortgages was submitted in this case.
 
HRS § 490:3-419(b) (2008) states that an accommodation
 
party "is obliged to pay the instrument in the capacity in which
 the accommodation party signs . . . whether or not the
 
7
 HRAP Rule 4(a)(1) (2010) provides, in relevant part:
 
When a civil appeal is permitted by law, the notice of appeal
shall be filed within 30 days after entry of the judgment or
appealable order.
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
accommodation party receives consideration for the 
accommodation." However, HRS § 490:3-419(e) states that "[a]n accommodation party who pays the instrument is entitled to reimbursement from the accommodated party and is entitled to enforce the instrument against the accommodated party." Further, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held that "the accommodated party 
upon whom the law casts the implied obligation of reimbursing the accommodation party is the party who, in accordance with the prior understanding of the parties, receives the direct benefit from the accommodation paper or its proceeds[.]" Dillingham v. 
Scott, 19 Haw. 421, 426 (Haw. Terr. 1909). 
Thus, with respect to Finance Factors, the property
 
interests of all mortgagors, including the accommodation
 mortgagors (Oda and Tina Kim), were subject to Finance Factors's
 security interest in the Property created by the second mortgage
 (and thus subject to foreclosure of that interest). In other
 words, all of their interests in the Property were burdened by
 this liability, and Finance Factors was entitled to payment of
 its secured debt, in accordance with its priority, prior to the
 distribution of any surplus to Oda and/or the Kims. 
Nevertheless, as an accommodation party on the second mortgage,
 Oda is entitled to "reimbursement from the accommodated party,"
 in this case, David and Denise Kim. In other words, with respect
 to reconciliation of the interests of the parties in relation to
 one another, the debt related to the second mortgage was David
 and Denise Kim's debt, not Oda's, and should have been treated as
 such. Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in
 charging Oda's interest in the proceeds of the sale of the
 Property with any portion of the debt secured by the second
 mortgage.
8
 
E. The Tax Obligations
 Oda argues, in effect, that his interest in the
 
proceeds of the sale of the Property was improperly charged with
 
8
 Tina Kim did not appeal the Circuit Court's charge against her
respective share of the proceeds of the sale of the Property.
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
100% of the Tax Obligations (evidenced by the Tax Department and
 
IRS liens) because, under the terms of the Divorce Decree, Tina
 is responsible for 50% of those obligations. Paragraph M of the
 Divorce Decree provides:
 
1) If Husband successfully negotiates agreements with the
tax authorities which satisfy the Tax Obligations and result
in the release of the Tax Liens, in accordance with
paragraphs 1-11 of the [Buyout Agreement], then Husband
shall be solely responsible for paying the Tax Obligations
without contribution from Wife.
 
2) If Husband does not successfully negotiate agreements
with the tax authorities which satisfy the Tax Obligations
and result in the release of the Tax Liens, in accordance
with paragraphs 1-11 of the Aiea Property Settlement [Buyout
Agreement], then, if and to the extent that he makes or is
required to make payments to the tax authorities on account
of the Tax Obligations after the effective date of this
Decree, Wife shall indemnify Husband and shall reimburse him
in an amount, or in such amounts, that total one-half (1/2)
of any payments made by Husband on account of the Tax
Obligations.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in rejecting
 
Oda's argument that paragraph M.2. of the Divorce Decree required
 
Tina Kim to indemnify or reimburse Oda for 50% of the Tax
 Obligations. Paragraph M.1. is plainly inapplicable, as Oda did
 not successfully negotiate an agreement with the tax authorities. 
As a result of this partition action filed by Tina Kim (and the
 other Kims), Oda was effectively "required to make payments to
 the tax authorities on account of the Tax Obligations after the
 effective date of [the Divorce] Decree."
 
The Kims claim that, as stated in a Declaration filed 
by Tina Kim, it was the parties' intent and understanding that Tina Kim would reimburse Oda for his payment of his tax obligations only if they continued to co-own the Property. We conclude, however, that the language in paragraph M of the Divorce Decree is controlling and Oda is entitled to indemnification. Tina Kim's explanation of the parties' intent is irrelevant because paragraph M clearly and unambiguously states what would happen if Oda successfully negotiated agreements with the tax authorities, or, on the other hand, if Oda did not successfully negotiate agreements with the tax authorities. See Rosales v. Rosales, 108 Hawai
'i 370, 374, 120 
15
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d 269, 274 (2005); Jendrusch v. Jendrusch, 1 Haw. App. 605,
 
609, 623 P.2d 893, 897 (1981). The language of paragraph M does
 
not specify a particular time frame or condition indemnification
 on the parties' continued joint ownership, which was terminated
 by the Kims' filing of this suit. Accordingly, because Oda
 "d[id] not successfully negotiate agreements with the tax
 authorities which satisfy the Tax Obligations and result in the
 release of the Tax Liens" in accordance with the Buyout
 Agreement, Tina Kim "shall indemnify Husband and shall reimburse
 him in an amount, or in such amounts, that total one-half (1/2)
 of any payments made by Husband on account of the Tax
 Obligations." (Emphasis added).
 
F.	 The Attorneys' Fees
 The Circuit Court awarded the Kims' attorneys' fees
 
9
under HRS § 668-17 (1993),  which "gives the judge the discretion
of allowing fees to attorneys for any of the parties in a
 partition proceeding and of apportioning such fees for payment by
 the parties, 'as to the judge shall seem equitable in the light
 of the services performed and the benefits derived therefrom by
 the parties.'" The Nature Conservancy v. Nakila, 4 Haw. App.
 
584, 601, 671 P.2d 1025, 1037 (1983) (quoting HRS § 668-17). 
Additionally, the supreme court has stated that 
the judge is an expert herself and knows as well as a legal
expert what are reasonable attorney fees, and that the
amount of attorney's fees is within the judicial discretion
of the court, and in fixing that amount the trial court may
proceed upon its own knowledge of the value of the
solicitor's services.
 
Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai 'i 286, 
306, 141 P.3d 459, 479 (2006) (citation and brackets omitted). 
Oda argues that the Kims' claim for attorneys' fees 
under HRS § 668-17 was defective because the Kims' attorney: (1) 
9
 HRS § 668-17 provides, in relevant part:
 
In addition to costs of the proceeding the judge may allow any fee
or fees for legal services rendered by the attorneys for any of
the parties, and apportion the same for costs for payment by and
between the parties or any of them, all as to the judge shall seem
equitable in the light of the services performed and the benefits
derived therefrom by the parties, respectively.
 
16
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"did nothing more than attach the bills to the motion;" (2) used
 
block billing; (3) "spent more time on various tasks that clearly
 were uncalled for;" (4) took an unreasonably long time to draft
 the complaint; and (5) spent time preparing for motions that were
 not filed.
 
We cannot conclude that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in its award. It appropriately reduced the Kims'
 attorneys' fees to $17,000 from $19,100.
10 It assessed the
 
reasonableness of both the time spent and the rate charged. In a
 declaration, the Kims' attorney described his experience level
 and explained that the hourly fee of $250 was "on the lower end
 of the range of fees charged by partners/law firms in the State
 of Hawaii of like experience and for the same or similar of [sic]
 type of matters." 
In addition, block billing is not automatically
 
prohibited by courts:
 
Unlike vague or generic task entries, block billing entries
do not always suffer from inadequate description. Their
 infirmity sterns [sic] from the fact that they represent
activities lumped together in a single entry with no
indication how much time was spent on each task. In its
 review of these entries, the [c]ourt was left to approximate
the amount of time which should be allocated to each task
 and cannot determine with a high degree of certainty, as it
must, that the billings are reasonable.
 
Haw. Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 116 Hawai 'i 465, 475, 173 P.3d 
1122, 1132 (2007) (citation and emphasis omitted). Here, the 
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in determining that the billing entries provided by the Kims' attorney were adequate. The billing entries indicated the specific legal work completed and the amount of time spent on each task, and the entries allowed the Circuit Court to determine, with a high degree of certainty, whether the work and time spent were reasonable and necessary in the partition action. 
Similarly, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion in determining the reasonableness of
 Finance Factors's attorneys' fees. Finance Factors requested
 
10
 The Kims' attorney initially requested fees of $19,975 but reduced
it to $19,100 after withdrawing 3.5 hours of work on a motion. 
17
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
$9,583.75 in attorneys' fees, and the Circuit Court reduced its
 
award of attorneys' fees to $9,000. Oda argues that Finance
 
Factors's claim for attorneys' fees was defective for the same
 
reasons as with the Kims' claim and for some additional reasons. 
However, upon review, Finance Factors's attorneys indicated the
 specific legal work completed and the amount of time spent on
 each task, and the entries allowed the Circuit Court to
 determine, with a high degree of certainty, whether the work and
 time spent were reasonable and necessary.
11
 
G.	 The Tax Department's Appeal
 The Tax Department argues that, in determining priority
 
between Finance Factors's second mortgage and the Department of
 Taxation's tax liens, the Circuit Court erred when it relied on
 Sawada v. Endo, 57 Haw. 608, 561 P.2d 1291 (1977), rather than
 HRS § 231-33 (2001), which states, in relevant part:
 
(b) Any state tax which is due and unpaid is a debt
due the State and constitutes a lien in favor of the State
 
upon all property and rights to property, whether real or
personal, belonging to any person liable for the tax. The
 lien for the tax, including penalties and interest thereon,
arises at the time the tax is assessed, or at the time a
return thereof is filed, or at the time of filing by the
department of taxation of the certificate provided for by
subsection (f) whichever first occurs. From and after the
 time the lien arises it is a paramount lien upon the
property and rights to property against all parties, whether
their interest arose before or after that time, except as
otherwise provided in this section.
 
(c) The lien imposed by subsection (b) is not valid as
against:
 
(1)	 A mortgagee or purchaser of real property, or
the lien of a judgment creditor upon real
property, whose interest arose prior to the
recording by the department of the certificate
provided for by subsection (f)[.]
 
. . .
 
11
 Oda does not argue on appeal (nor did he argue in the court
below), that it was error for the Circuit Court to order payment of Finance
Factors's fees and costs as a cost of the partition, to be paid prior to the
payment of any of the recorded liens (including Finance Factors), instead of
as part of the indebtedness owed to Finance Factors, which was evidenced in
the promissory notes and secured by the first and second mortgages. Nor does
 Oda argue that a portion of Finance Factors's fees and costs should have been
attributed to the contractual debt obligation underlying the second mortgage.
Therefore, such arguments were waived and we do not address them.
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(f) The department may record in the bureau of
conveyances at Honolulu, or in respect of a lien on a motor
vehicle, file with the county director of finance, a
certificate setting forth the amount of taxes due and
unpaid, which have been returned, assessed, or as to which a
notice of proposed assessment has issued. . . .
 
Thus, HRS § 231-33(b) plainly provides that "from and
 
after the time" that the State tax lien arises, it is a paramount
 
lien upon the subject property, whether the interest of the
 person owing the tax "arose before or after that time, except as
 otherwise provided in this section." Here, the Tax Department's
 liens arose no later than August 12, 1994 and December 12, 1995. 
Thus, the Tax Department's liens were paramount liens on the
 Property from those dates, even assuming that Oda's attachable
 interest as a tenant in common did not arise until the effective
 date of Oda and Tina Kim's divorce, June 4, 2008. The only
 exception, set forth in HRS § 231-33(c), is applicable to
 mortgagees, purchasers, and judgment creditors whose interest
 arose prior to the Tax Department's recording of the subject
 lien, and clearly does not apply.
 Sawada v. Endo, 57 Haw. 607, 561 P.2d 1291 (1977), is
 
also inapplicable to this case. In Sawada, the determinative
 question was "whether the interest of one spouse in real
 property, held in tenancy by the entireties, is subject to levy
 and execution by his or her individual creditors." Id. at 610,
 
561 P.2d at 1294. Levy and execution are methods of enforcement. 
The supreme court held that "the interest of a husband or a wife
 in an estate by the entireties is not subject to the claims of
 his or her individual creditors during the joint lives of the
 spouses." Id. at 612, 561 P.2d at 1295. Here, although Oda and
 
Tina Kim originally held the Property in a tenancy by the
 entirety, their tenancy by the entirety converted into a tenancy
 in common upon their 2008 divorce; hence, Oda did not hold his 
19
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interest as part of a tenancy by the entirety at the time that
 
the Tax Department sought to enforce its lien.12
 
Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred
 
when it concluded that Finance Factors's second mortgage had
 priority over the Tax Department's liens with respect to Oda's
 share of the sale proceeds.
 
H. Kims' Mootness Argument
 Finally, we reject the Kims' argument that any relief
 
requested by Oda and the Tax Department is moot because the
 proceeds from the sale of the Property have been distributed. 
The Circuit Court has ample alternatives for fashioning suitable
 relief and this argument is wholly without merit.
 V. CONCLUSION
 
The Circuit Court's July 30, 2010 Judgment and the
 
Distribution Order are affirmed in part, and vacated in part,
 with respect to apportionment, priorities, and distribution of
 the net proceeds of the sale of subject Property, to the extent
 set forth herein. This case is remanded for further proceedings,
 to the extent necessary to correct the errors identified in this
 Memorandum Opinion and to provide suitable relief consistent
 herewith.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 20, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Edward C. Kemper
for Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Chief Judge 
Hugh R. JonesMary Bahng YokotaDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendant-Appellee/Cross-AppellantDEPARTMENT OF TAXATION,
STATE OF HAWAI
'I Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
12
 In addition we note that, unlike the wife in Sawada, Tina Kim (as
 
well as Finance Factors) expressly acknowledged and agreed that the second
mortgage was subject to certain prior interests, including the Tax
Department's lien, as set forth in Exhibit A to the second mortgage (which
Tina Kim executed).
 
20
 _______________________________NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Frances E.H. Lum
 
Deputy Attorney General
for Defendant-Appellee
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
Neal K. Aoki
 (KOSHIBA AGENA & KUBOTA)
for Plaintiffs-Appellees
 
NO. 30680; DAVID EDWARD KIM, DENISE NYUK LEN KIM, and TINA JEAN
KIM, Plaintiffs-Appellees, vs. KEITH SHIGEAKI ODA, Defendant­Appellant/Cross-Appellee, and DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION, STATE OF
HAWAII, Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant, and FINANCE FACTORS,
LIMITED, DISCOVER BANK, through its servicing agent, DISCOVER
FINANCIAL SERVICES, INC., UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, DEPARTMENT OF
TREASURY, INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR &
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, STATE OF HAWAII, Defendants-Appellees, and
DOE PERSONS 1-20, and DOE ENTITIES 1-20, Defendants; 
Memorandum
 
Opinion
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
22
 