NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30391
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
GERALD L. AUSTIN, Defendant-Appellant
and JOSEPH K. AUSTIN, Defendant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 07-1-1652)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Gerald L. Austin (Austin) appeals
 
from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (Circuit Court's)
 
March 3, 2010 order denying Austin's motion for reduction of
 
sentence.1
   
On July 2, 2008, the Circuit Court entered a judgment
 
of conviction and probation sentence against Austin for robbery
 
in the second degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) § 708-841 (1993 & Supp. 2011)2
 and sentenced Austin to a
1
 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
 
2
 HRS § 708-841 states, in relevant part:
 
§ 708-841 Robbery in the second degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of robbery in the second degree if, in the
course of committing theft or non-consensual taking of a motor
vehicle:
 
(a) 	The person uses force against the person of anyone
present with the intent to overcome that person's
physical resistance or physical power of resistance[.]
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
five-year term of probation that included certain mandatory
 
special terms and conditions including imprisonment for eighteen
 
months. 
Within approximately two months of his release from an 
eighteen month imprisonment, on June 18, 2009, Plaintiff-Appellee 
State of Hawai' i (State) moved to revoke Austin's probation due 
to his violation of certain terms and conditions of his 
probation. On October 28, 2009, the Circuit Court granted the 
State's motion, resentencing Austin to imprisonment for ten 
years. Austin did not appeal the resentencing order. 
On January 26, 2010, Austin filed a Hawai' i Rules of 
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 35 motion to reduce the sentence.3 
The Circuit Court entered an order denying his motion on March 3, 
2010. On March 18, 2010, Austin timely filed a notice of appeal. 
On appeal, Austin raises a single point of error,
 
contending that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in
 
denying his motion to reduce the sentence under the circumstances
 
here, principally because his probation violations were
 
nonviolent and drug-related and that he should have been allowed
 
to enter a drug treatment program rather than being sent (back)
 
to prison.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Austin's point of error as follows:
 
3
 HRPP Rule 35(b), entitled "Reduction of Sentence[,]" states in
relevant part:
 
The court may reduce a sentence within 90 days after the sentence
is imposed . . . . A motion to reduce a sentence that is made
 within the time prior shall empower the court to act on such
motion even though the time period has expired. The filing of a
notice of appeal shall not deprive the court of jurisdiction to
entertain a timely motion to reduce a sentence. 
Austin does not argue, pursuant to HRPP 35(a), that his sentence
was illegal or imposed in an illegal manner.
 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On June 18, 2009, the State moved to revoke Austin's
 
probation because he had failed to: (1) report to his probation
 
officer as instructed on June 3, 2009; (2) refrain from the
 
possession and use of alcohol and illegal drugs as ordered by the
 
Circuit Court; (3) obtain and maintain substance abuse treatment
  
until clinically discharged as ordered by the Circuit Court; and
 
(4) report for a review hearing on June 3, 2009.
 
At an August 19, 2009 hearing, the Circuit Court found 
that Austin had "inexcusably failed to comply with substantial 
conditions of his probation[.]" After Austin pleaded for a 
second chance, the Circuit Court continued the hearing until it 
could be determined whether Hawai' i's Opportunity Probation with 
4
Enforcement (HOPE) program  would accept Austin, explaining its
reasoning:
 
The Court: . . . You know, you've never made it under
court supervision or parole supervision. Right. And, you
know, I have serious doubts that you're going to make it
here. I think the only way you're going to make anything is
in something like the HOPE program. I try to run a review
hearing kind of situation with you, but you don't even show
up for the review hearing. Within two months -­
The Defendant: I'm sorry.
 The Court: -- of getting out of jail and you . . . you haven't
committed a crime in a while because you have been in jail for 18
months. But within two months of getting out, you -- you quit
reporting and you admit to doing drugs every day, drinking and
doing drugs every day. Whenever you can find them, wherever you
can find them, you'll do this. All right.
 
. . .
 And, you know, at this point you're asking me to give you another
chance. This is not a minor offense. This is robbery in the
second degree. It's a ten-year felony. Without something like
the HOPE program, I don't think you have any chance to comply. I
 don't think you're serious about complying. If you -- if you went
out today, you'd go and do the same things you've always done -­
The Defendant: No, I won't.
 
The Hawai' i State Judiciary website describes the HOPE program as
a "high-intensity supervision program," aimed at reducing
probation violations by drug offenders and others at high risk ofrecidivism. "HOPE Probation," Hawai' i State Judiciary,
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/special_projects/hope/about_hope_probation.html (last visited Feb. 20, 2013). 
3 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Court: -- drink, use drugs, and then eventually commit
another crime as serious or more serious than this one. And
 that's my fear.
 
So this is what I'm going to do. I'm going to continue it for -­
in the ordinary course, and I'm going to ask the probation office
to refer your case to Judge Alm in the HOPE program. If he takes
 you, fine. If he doesn't, we'll come back and decide what we're
going to do.
 
At a further hearing on October 28, 2009, the Circuit
 
Court noted that Austin was denied admission into the HOPE
 
program. Austin's counsel asked that the Habilitat drug
 
rehabilitation program (Habilitat) be considered as an
 
alternative to the HOPE program. However, finding that Austin
 
"has inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial requirement
 
of the Judgment setting forth the terms and conditions of
 
probation[,]" the Circuit Court granted the State's motion to
 
revoke Austin's probation and resentenced Austin to imprisonment
 
for ten years, with credit for the time already served. The
 
Circuit Court stated that: (1) Austin's robbery case was "a very
 
serious offense" and "not the only one on record"; (2) he was
 
"lucky to get probation the first time on this case" because his
 
"record is bad"; (3) "within two months of leaving custody [he
 
was] out there drinking and using drugs every single day"; (4) he
 
was given "the opportunity to try to get into the HOPE project,
 
and . . . they said no"; and (5) he would not be given "another
 
shot at probation."
 
As noted above, Austin did not appeal from the October
 
28, 2009 order of resentencing, but rather, on January 26, 2010,
 
he filed an HRPP Rule 35 motion to reduce his sentence "from ten
 
years imprisonment to probation with a special condition that he
 
enter Habilitat and remain there until clinically discharged[.]"
 
After a hearing, the motion was denied.
 
On appeal, Austin argues that, pursuant to HRS § 706­
625(7) (Supp. 2d.), he should have been resentenced to undergo
 
and complete a substance abuse treatment program rather than
 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
incarceration for ten years because his "nonviolent drug-related"
 
probation violations evidenced the severity of his substance
 
abuse problem and his need for treatment.
 
HRS § 706-625 provides, in relevant part:
 
HRS § 706-625 Revocation, modification of probation
conditions.  (1) The court, on application of . . . the
prosecuting attorney, . . . after a hearing, may revoke
probation except as provided in subsection (7), reduce or
enlarge the conditions of a sentence of probation, pursuant
to the provisions applicable to the initial setting of the
conditions and the provisions of section 706-627.
 
. . . .
 
(3) The court shall revoke probation if the defendant
has inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial
requirement imposed as a condition of the order or has been
convicted of a felony. The court may revoke the suspension
of sentence or probation if the defendant has been convicted
of another crime other than a felony.
 
. . . .
 
(5) When the court revokes probation, it may impose on
the defendant any sentence that might have been imposed
originally for the crime of which the defendant was
convicted. 
. . . .
 
(7)
 The court may require a defendant to undergo and
complete a substance abuse treatment program when the
defendant has committed a violation of the terms and
 conditions of probation involving possession or use . . . of
any dangerous drug, detrimental drug, harmful drug,
intoxicating compound, [or] marijuana. . . If the defendant
 fails to complete the substance abuse treatment program or
the court determines that the defendant cannot benefit from
 any other suitable substance abuse treatment program, the
defendant shall be subject to revocation of probation and
incarceration.
 
We agree with Austin that HRS § 706-625(7) was
 
applicable to the motion to revoke his probation.5 It plainly
 
was within the Circuit Court's discretion, pursuant to HRS § 706­
625(7), to have required Austin to undergo and complete a
 
substance abuse treatment program, rather than to send him back
 
5
 In light of our conclusion herein that the Circuit Court did not
abuse its discretion when it granted the motion to revoke, we need not
consider the distinction, if any, between a review of the trial court's ruling
on that motion on direct appeal and a review of an HRPP Rule 35(b) motion
seeking a subsequent exercise of the trial court's discretion, as is the case
here.
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to prison. The Circuit Court was not, however, required by the
 
statute in effect at the time of Austin's sentencing to do so. 
In 2002, HRS § 706-625(7) was amended, inter alia, to
 
require a court "not to revoke probation for the first violation
 of a nonviolent drug-related probation condition[.]" See Conf.
 
Comm. Rep. No. 96, in 2002 House Journal, at 1796, 2002 Senate
 Journal, at 986. In 2004, HRS § 706-625(7) was again amended to
 
restore the sentencing court's discretion in determining whether
 
to divert such a probation violator to substance abuse treatment. 
See H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 495-04, in 2004 House Journal, at
 
1605. Prior to the 2004 amendment, the last sentence of HRS §
 
706-625(7) was stated in the conjunctive: "If the defendant
 
fails to complete the substance abuse treatment program and the
 
court determines that the defendant cannot benefit from any other
 
suitable substance abuse treatment program, the defendant shall
 
be subject to revocation of probation and incarceration."
 
(Emphasis added.) After the 2004 amendment, the last sentence of
 
HRS § 706-625(7) was stated in the disjunctive: "If the
 
defendant fails to complete the substance abuse treatment program
 
or the court determines that the defendant cannot benefit from
 
any other suitable substance abuse treatment program, the
 
defendant shall be subject to revocation of probation and
 
incarceration." (Emphasis added.)
 
Here, it is undisputed that the first clause did not
 
apply as Austin had not yet entered and failed to complete a
 
treatment program. It appears from the record, however, that the
 
Circuit Court properly exercised the discretion provided to it in
 
the final clause of HRS § 706-625(7) by, in effect, determining
 
that Austin "cannot benefit from any other suitable substance
 
abuse treatment program." The Circuit Court, based on all of the
 
information available, determined that "something like the HOPE
 
program" was the "only way" that Austin might have a chance to
 
comply with the terms of his probation. The record shows that
 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7the court considered the appropriate factors, most especially
Austin's long-term and recent history, as well as the nature of
the offense and determined that, absent the intensive drug-
testing, monitoring, and swift and sure sanctions of the HOPE
program, Austin was likely to again violate the terms of his
probation.  Upon careful review, we cannot conclude that this
determination constituted an abuse of discretion.
Accordingly, the Circuit Court's March 3, 2010 order
denying Austin's motion for reduction of sentence is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 6, 2013.
On the briefs:
Benjamin R.C. Ignacio 
(Hawk Sing Ignacio &
  Waters)
for Defendant-AppellantPresiding Judge
Associate Judge
Brandon H. Ito
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge