NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30550
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE TAX APPEAL OF
 
BOBBY R. NARMORE, Taxpayer/Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI' I, DIRECTOR OF TAXATION, Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE TAX APPEAL COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
(TAX APPEAL CASE NO. 02-1-0066)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Taxpayer/Appellant Bobby R. Narmore (Narmore) appeals
 
pro se from the March 2, 2010 Judgment entered by the Tax Appeal
 
1
Court of the State of Hawai' i (Tax Appeal Court)  and challenges
two orders (1) granting Appellee State of Hawai' i Department of 
Taxation's (
Department) Motion for Summary Judgment, and (2) 
denying Narmore's Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
60(b) motion to set aside the summary judgment order. 
Narmore's points of error on appeal appear to be that
 
the Tax Appeal Court erred in granting the Department's motion
 
for summary judgment because:2
 
1/
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 
2/
 Narmore's opening brief fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4), which provides that an opening brief
shall contain: 
A concise statement of the points of error set forth in separately
numbered paragraphs. Each point shall state: (i) the alleged
error committed by the court or agency; (ii) where in the record
the alleged error occurred; and (iii) where in the record the
alleged error was objected to or the manner in which the alleged
error was brought to the attention of the court or agency. . . .
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1) the Department was barred by the statute of
 
limitations from collecting general excise taxes from Narmore for
 
the 1989 tax year;
 
(2) the Department was required, under Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) chapter 237 or otherwise, to audit Narmore's tax
 
information and make an assessment within three years of his
 
participation in the Department's Non-Filer's Program; and 
(3) the Department improperly and fraudulently altered
 
Narmore's 1989 tax return. 
Narmore also contends that the Tax Appeal Court erred
 
in denying his HRCP Rule 60(b) motion for reconsideration.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Narmore's points of error as follows:
 
(1) At times relevant to this case, HRS § 237-40(a)
 
3
(2001) provided:
§ 237-40 Limitation Period.  (a) General rule. The
 
amount of excise taxes imposed by this chapter shall be
assessed or levied within three years after the annual
return was filed, or within three years of the due date
prescribed for the filing of said return, whichever is
later, and no proceeding in court without assessment for the
collection of any such taxes shall be begun after the
expiration of the period.
 
(Emphasis added.) However, the exception to the general rule
 
explicitly provided, "[i]n the case of . . . a failure to file
 
2/(...continued)
Points not presented in accordance with this section will be
disregarded, except that the appellate court, at its option, may
notice a plain error not presented.
 
(Emphasis added.) Nevertheless, recognizing the Hawai' i appellate courts'
policy of having appeals heard on the merits where possible, Bettencourt v.
Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995), the issues raised
in Narmore's appeal will be analyzed and addressed to the extent possible. 
3/
 Unless otherwise specifically noted, all references to HRS chap.
237 refer to the provisions applicable to this case and do not include
reference to subsequent amendments.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the annual return, the tax may be assessed or levied at any
 
time[.]" HRS § 237-40(b) (2001) (emphasis added). 
Narmore contends that a limitation period began to run
 
when he provided his tax-related information to the Department as
 
part of the Department's "Non-Filer Program" in 1993, because, at
 
that time, the Department was given sufficient information to
 
complete his annual general excise tax return for the 1989 tax
 
year and/or to assess general excise taxes. The sworn
 
declaration of Ken Cook, the Department's Audit Branch Chief,
 
includes uncontroverted testimony that the Department did not
 
issue a general excise tax assessment against Narmore for the
 
1989 tax year. 
The language in HRS § 237-40 is not ambiguous, and
 
instead clearly articulates the period in which the Department
 
may assess or levy general excise taxes. Despite Narmore's
 
arguments to the contrary, there is no statutory provision or
 
other authority supporting the proposition that merely furnishing
 
tax-related information to the Department, rather than filing a
 
tax return, would begin the running of the statutory limitation
 
period. Accord Edwards v. C.I.R., 680 F.2d 1268, 1269 (9th Cir.
 
1982) (similarly interpreting parallel federal law). 
Accordingly, we reject Narmore's argument that the Department was
 
barred by the statute of limitations from collecting taxes from
 
Narmore for the 1989 tax year.
 
(2) Narmore asserts that both under the Department's
 
1993 Non-Filer Program, and under "normal 237 HRS audit
 
requirements," the Department was "required" to make an
 
assessment when it was given sufficient information to do so in
 
1993.
 
Narmore's reliance on "normal 237 HRS audit
 
requirements" as mandating a three-year statute of limitations
 
period is misplaced. The statutes governing the assessment and
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
audit of general excise taxes contain no such limitation period. 
HRS § 237-39 (2001), governing audits, provided:
 
§237-39 Audits; procedure, penalties. For the purpose
of verification or audit of a return made by the taxpayer
. . . or for the purpose of making an assessment where no
return has been made, the department of taxation . . . may
examine all account books, bank books, bank statements,
records, vouchers, taxpayer's copies of federal tax returns,
and any and all other documents and evidences having any
relevancy to the determination of the gross income or gross
proceeds of sales of any taxpayer as required to be returned
under this chapter . . . . 
If the department determines that any gross income or gross
proceeds of sales liable to the tax have not been assessed
the department may assess the same as provided in sections
237-36 and 237-38.
 
HRS § 237-39 authorizes the Department to access
 
information in order to make an assessment where no return has
 
been made, and to verify tax information where a return has been
 
made. Id. This provision, however, governs the procedure for
 
performing an audit and does not impose upon the Department a
 specific time period in which an audit must be completed. 
HRS § 237-38 (2001), entitled "Failure to make return,"
 
specifically governs the assessment of taxes where no return has
 
been made, and provided that 
[i]f any person fails, neglects, or refuses to make a
return, the department of taxation may proceed as it deems
best to obtain information on which to base the assessment
 of the tax. After procuring the information the department
shall proceed to assess the tax as provided in section 237­36.
 
This section does not impose upon the Department a time
 
specific in which taxes must be assessed following the
 
procurement or receipt of tax information. While Narmore claims
 
that the Department is required to make an assessment where no
 
return is filed, whether the Department "may" or "shall" proceed
 
to assess taxes where no return is filed is irrelevant, as,
 
pursuant to the statute, the Department is not subject to a
 
three-year period to complete such an assessment where no return
 
has been filed.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lastly, HRS § 237-36 (2001), outlines the procedures 
for tax assessments based on erroneous returns and the 
disallowance of exemptions. HRS § 237-36; Tax Appeal of Baker & 
Taylor, Inc. v. Kawafuchi, 103 Hawai' i 359, 363 n.10, 82 P.3d 
804, 808 n.10 (2004). HRS § 237-36 provides that where "any return made" is erroneous, deficient, or improperly disclaims 
liability or applies for an exemption, "the department of 
taxation shall correct the error or assess the proper amount of 
taxes." HRS § 237-36 further articulates the procedure required 
for the Department to assess taxes, and provides for both 
preliminary and final notices to the taxpayer of any taxes being 
assessed; however, "[n]o preliminary notice shall be necessary 
where the amount of the tax is calculated by the department from 
gross income returned by the taxpayer as subject to the tax[.]" 
Id. This statutory provision also does not provide a specific 
limitation period in which the Department is required to complete an assessment. See id. 
As discussed above, HRS § 237-40 (2001) imposed no
 
limitation period on the Department's assessment of taxes where
 
no return has been filed, and instead provided that absent a
 
return, taxes may be "assessed or levied at any time[.]" HRS
 
§ 237-40(b).
 
Narmore also argues that, in conjunction with the
 
Department's Non-Filer Program, the Department had an obligation
 
to prepare and file tax returns on behalf of those taxpayers who
 
have failed to do so. However, based on the applicable law and
 
the undisputed facts, the Non-Filer Program did not extend such
 
an obligation to the Department.
 
Pursuant to HRS § 237-33 (2001), entitled "Annual
 
return, payment of tax,"
 
On or before the twentieth day of the fourth month following
the close of the taxable year, each taxpayer shall make a
return showing the value of products, gross proceeds of
sales or gross income, and compute the amount of tax
chargeable against the taxpayer in accordance with this
chapter and deduct the amount of monthly payments (as
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hereinbefore provided), and transmit with the taxpayer's
report a remittance in the form required by section 237–31
covering the residue of the tax chargeable against the
taxpayer to the district office of the department of
taxation hereinafter designated.
(Emphasis added.) Based on this statutory provision, it remains
 
the responsibility of the taxpayer to make and file an annual
 
return. Id. 
The Non-Filer Program apparently was intended to "help
 
people who have not filed tax returns and want to get back into
 
the system." 
As indicated in an advertisement for the Non-Filer
 
Program, submitted into the record by both parties, non-filers
 were instructed to bring tax information "needed to help prepare
 
the tax return." There is no evidence in the record to support
 
the proposition that the Department's Non-Filer Program imposed
 
upon the Department, or that the Department undertook, a "duty"
 
to complete a return based upon the taxpayer's records or to make
 
an assessment within a particular period of time. 
On October 24, 1996, the Department's Collection
 
Division sent a notice to Narmore indicating that a general
 
excise return for the 1989 tax year had not been filed, and
 
requested that Narmore submit his 1989 return by November 4,
 
1996. After some communications between the Department and
 
Narmore regarding the tax information furnished in 1993, at some
 
time in December of 1996, Narmore submitted his "Annual Return
 
Reconciliation General Excise/Use Tax Return for Calendar Year
 
1989." Although there is some dispute as to the creation of a
 
second 1989 tax return, it is uncontested that Narmore filed a
 
return for the 1989 tax year in December 1996. On January 7,
 
1997, less than a month after Narmore's 1989 tax return was
 
filed, the Department credited Narmore's account in the amount of
 
$5,365.92 for general excise tax due for the 1989 tax year.
 
Accordingly, the only applicable statute of limitations
 
period began in December of 1996, when Narmore's 1989 tax return
 
was filed. 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) We reject Narmore's argument that the Circuit
 
Court improperly granted summary judgment on his allegation that
 
the Department improperly and fraudulently altered his 1989
 
general excise tax return. It appears that, after Narmore signed
 
the 1989 tax return, the Department corrected the return, by
 
zeroing out the interest and penalties to reflect that it had
 
waived interest and penalties for the 1989 tax year. HRS § 237­
36 provides that "[i]f any return made is erroneous . . . the
 
department of taxation shall correct the error or assess the
 
proper amount of taxes." Moreover, while notice must be given to
 
the taxpayer where the Department's recomputation results in an
 
additional tax liability, "[n]o preliminary notice shall be
 
necessary where the amount of the tax is calculated by the
 
department from gross income returned by the taxpayer as subject
 
to the tax[.]" Id. Accordingly, the Department was authorized
 
to correct Narmore's 1989 tax return, by waiving the interest and
 penalties and editing the return to reflect this waiver. The Tax
 
Appeal Court did not err when it rejected Narmore's assertion
 
that the Department's action was improper and fraudulent.
 
Relatedly, in his reply brief, Narmore challenges the
 
Department's re-allocation to other tax liabilities, rather than
 
refund to Narmore, of the "excess" payment made in conjunction
 
with the submission in December 1996 of the 1989 general excise
 
tax return. After the waiver of the penalties and accrued
 
interest, the total amount due from Narmore for the 1989 tax year
 
was $5,365.92. However, Narmore had remitted payment via a
 
cashier's check, dated December 16, 1996, for $13,000.
4 Narmore
 
maintains that he was told his 1989 tax liability "would be paid
 out of the $13,000 cashier's check[.]" Ken Cook averred that a
 
payment of $5,365.92 for the 1989 tax year was credited to
 
4/
 Prior to the waiver of accrued interest and penalties, the total
tax liability for 1989 reportedly was $12,179.93. Thus, even without
consideration of the waiver, the $13,000 represented an overpayment of
$820.07.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Narmore's account on January 7, 1997. The balance of the amount
 
was credited to Narmore's account for other outstanding tax
 
liabilities.
 
HRS § 237-37 (2001) provides, in part:
 
If the amount already paid exceeds that which should have
been paid on the basis of the tax recomputed as provided in
section 237-36, the excess so paid shall be immediately
refunded to the taxpayer in the manner provided in section
231-23©.
 
HRS § 231-23(c)(1) (2001), which by its terms applies
 
to all taxes, provides in relevant part: 
[I]f the person entitled to the refund is delinquent in the
payment of any tax, the comptroller, upon demand of the
collector and after notice to the delinquent taxpayer, shall
withhold the amount of the delinquent taxes, together with
penalties and interest thereon, from the amount of the
refund and pay the same to the collector.
 
The record indicates that Narmore was delinquent in the
 
payment of his general excise taxes for at least four other tax
 
years. An "Installment Plan Agreement" prepared by the
 
Department on December 17, 1996 for Narmore created a "payment
 
schedule" for all of Narmore's outstanding State taxes. A
 
"Detail Statement of Taxes Due" attached to the Installment Plan
 
indicated that Narmore owed $5,365.92 in taxes for the 1989 tax
 
year, not including the penalties and interest that were
 
subsequently waived. The Statement also indicated that Narmore
 
owed general excise taxes for the 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, and
 
1996 tax years in excess of $40,000, not including the applicable
 
penalties and interest charges.
 
We note that HRS § 231-23(c)(1) mandates "notice to the
 
delinquent taxpayer," before the refund is withheld. The record
 
is silent as to whether Narmore received prior notice that his
 
excess payment from the 1989 tax year would be applied to his
 
other tax delinquencies and as to specifically how the excess
 
payment was applied. However, there is nothing in the record to
 
indicate that this issue was raised and/or addressed in
 
conjunction with the Tax Appeal Court's ruling on the
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Department's motion for summary judgment. Accordingly, this 
issue was waived and we do not reach it on appeal. "Legal issues 
not raised in the trial court are ordinarily deemed waived on 
appeal." Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea 
Resort Co., 100 Hawai' i 97, 107, 58 P.3d 608, 618 (2002). 
Finally, Narmore seeks review of the Tax Appeal Court's 
order denying his HRCP Rule 60(b) motion. The disposition of an HRCP Rule 60(b) motion for reconsideration is reviewed for an 
abuse of discretion. Beneficial Haw., Inc. v. Casey, 98 Hawai' i 
159, 164, 45 P.3d 359, 364 (2002). The purpose of a motion for reconsideration is "to allow the parties to present new evidence 
and/or arguments that could not have been presented during the 
earlier adjudicated motion[,]" not "to relitigate old matters or 
to raise arguments or evidence that could and should have been 
brought during the earlier proceeding." Ass'n of Apartment 
Owners of Wailea Elua, 100 Hawai' i at 110, 58 P.3d at 621 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Narmore's 
motion fails to present new evidence and/or arguments, but merely 
reiterates facts and arguments previously presented. Therefore, 
the Tax Appeal Court was within its discretion to deny Narmore's 
HRCP Rule 60(b) motion. 
For these reasons, the Tax Appeal Court's March 2, 2010
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 21, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Bobby R. Narmore
Taxpayer/Appellant Pro Se Presiding Judge 
Hugh R. JonesDamien A. Elefante Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 