NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER

NO. 30141

IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
STATE OF HAWAI» I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.

JUAN CASTRO, JR., aka Kalani, Defendant-Appellant,
and JAYNE ORAVEC, aka Jayne Heater, Defendant.

APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

(CR. NO. 06-1-2393)

MEMORANDUM OPINION

(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

Defendant-Appellant Juan Castro, Jr. (Castro), aka 
"Kalani," appeals from the Judgment filed on October 22, 2009, in 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court). 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
» i (State) charged Castro by 
grand jury indictment with one count of Methamphetamine Trafficking in the First Degree in violation of Act 230, 
Section 4, Session Laws of Hawaii, Regular Session of 2006 (later 
codified as Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ÿÿ 712-1240.7 (Supp 
2006)).
1 After a jury trial, Castro was found guilty as charged, 
1
 HRS ÿÿ 712-1240.7 provides, in pertinent part, as follows:

Methamphetamine trafficking in the first degree. (1) A

person commits the offense of methamphetamine trafficking in the
first degree if the person knowingly:

(continued...)

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and the circuit court sentenced Castro to a term of twenty years

imprisonment with a mandatory minimum of two years. Castro filed

a timely Notice of Appeal on October 29, 2009.

On appeal, Castro asserts the circuit court erred by:

(1) admitting into evidence Exhibits 1 through 20, audio
 
recordings which include taped phone conversations, that deprived

Castro of his constitutional right to confront witnesses;

(2) admitting into evidence Exhibits 1 through 20 over Castro's
 
objections on grounds of relevance and surprise; (3) admitting

into evidence Exhibit 21, an audio recording, over Castro's

objection on grounds of relevance; (4) instructing the jury that

it could consider evidence, including Exhibits 1 through 20, on

the issue of Castro's state of mind as to the conduct charged;

and (5) committing plain error in allowing the prosecutor to make

an improper closing argument. 
 
We conclude that Castro's right under the Hawai» i 
Constitution to confront witnesses was violated by the admission 
of the audio recordings of telephone calls between an undercover 
police officer and witnesses who did not testify at trial, where 
the State made no showing that the witnesses were unavailable. 
The admission of these recordings was not harmless error and 
therefore we vacate the judgment and remand for a new trial. 
1(...continued)
(a) Possesses one or more preparations, compounds,
mixtures, or substances of an aggregate weight of one
ounce or more containing methamphetamine or any of its
salts, isomers, and salts of isomers;
(b) Distributes one or more preparations, compounds,
mixtures, or substances of an aggregate weight of
one-eighth ounce or more containing methamphetamine or
any of its salts, isomers, and salts of isomers; . . .

.

2

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER

I. BACKGROUND

Castro was indicted by a grand jury and charged as

follows:

On or about the 6th day of July, 2006, in the City and
County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, JUAN CASTRO JR., also
known as Kalani did knowingly distribute one or more
preparations, compounds, mixtures, or substances of an
aggregate weight of one-eighth ounce or more containing
methamphetamine or any of its salts, isomers and salts of
isomers, thereby committing the offense of Methamphetamine
Trafficking in the First Degree, in violation of Act 230,
Section 4, Session Laws of Hawaii, Regular Session of 2006.

The charges stem from a drug deal that took place on July 6,

2006. In the days prior to July 6, 2006, an undercover officer

with the Honolulu Police Department (HPD) posed as a drug dealer

named "Rocky" (undercover officer, officer, or Rocky) and

contacted Clinton Kalani Smith, who was known as "Kim Chee"

(Smith or Kim Chee), to purchase one ounce of crystal

methamphetamine. Kim Chee was in the hospital and unable to
 
complete the transaction, so he referred Rocky to co-defendant

Jayne Oravec (Jayne).2 Over the course of several days, there

were multiple telephone conversations between Rocky and Jayne. 
 
There were also telephone conversations between Rocky and Kim

Chee. As a result of these multiple telephone contacts, Rocky

and Jayne arranged to meet on July 6, 2006 to complete a drug

transaction. According to Jayne's telephone conversations with

Rocky, she and Rocky were to meet with a person who would deliver

the crystal methamphetamine. Appellee State contends that the
 
meeting occurred on July 6, 2006 and that, in exchange for

$3,200, Appellant Castro delivered 28.1 grams of crystal

methamphetamine to Rocky.

The undercover officer recorded his telephone

conversations with Kim Chee and Jayne. These taped conversations
 
2
 Co-defendant Oravec pleaded guilty on July 11, 2007 and did not
proceed to trial in this case.

3

  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
are part of Exhibits 1 though 20. The undercover officer also

recorded the conversations during the meeting on July 6, 2006,

which was admitted as Exhibit 21.

A. Pretrial Motion to Exclude Evidence

On June 19, 2008, Castro filed a "Motion to Exclude Use

at Trial of Certain Evidence" (Motion to Exclude), seeking to

prevent the introduction of the tape recorded conversations at

trial as inadmissible hearsay. After a hearing on August 1,
 
2008, the circuit court denied the motion and, on July 29, 2009,

entered the following findings of fact and conclusions of law

(Findings and Conclusions):3

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Between July 5, 2006 and July 6, 2006, [the
undercover officer] had several recorded conversations with
Co-Defendant Jayne Oravec (hereinafter "Oravec") and an
individual named Clinton Kalani-Smith (hereinafter "Kalani-
Smith") pursuant to the undercover drug buy operation which
gave rise to the above-captioned case.

2. During these recorded conversations, the parties
were negotiating the drug transactions charged in the above
entitled case and discussing the logistical details of those
transactions.

3. The State does not intend to call Oravec or

Kalani-Smith as witnesses at trial.

4. Defendant Juan Castro, Jr., in his motion,
sought an order excluding these recorded conversations as
testimonial hearsay.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. In order for proffered evidence to be excluded
by the general rule on hearsay it must be 1) an out of court
statement, and 2) offered for the truth of the matter
asserted. See HRE Rule 801 & 802.

2. As the recorded conversations consist of the

parties negotiations regarding the drug transactions charged
in the instant case and their discussions of the logistical
details of those transactions, to the extent the recordings
contain out-of-court statements, such statements are not
offered for the truth of the matter asserted but rather to

3
 The Honorable Steven S. Alm presided with regard to the Motion to
Exclude.

4

NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  The Honorable Karen S. S. Ahn presided at trial.4
5explain the subsequent actions of [the undercover officer]
and are not hearsay.  See State v. Feliciano, 2 Haw. App.
63[3] (1982).
3.Assuming arguendo, any statements contained in
the recorded conversations could be considered hearsay, such
statements were not made under circumstances which would
lead an objective witness to believe the statements would be
available for use at a later trial and are thus
nontestimonial hearsay, not subject to the Confrontation
Clause.  See State v. Fields, 115 Hawai# i 503 (2007).  See
also State v. Grace, 107 Hawai# i 133 ([App.] 2005).
4.To the extent the recorded conversations contain
such nontestimonial hearsay statements, these statements
were made by Defendant's coconspirators during the course
and in furtherance of the conspiracy and are thus vicarious
admissions, admissible under HRE Rule 803(a)(2)(c).
The case proceeded to trial on July 29, 2009.4
B.Trial
1.State's Case
The undercover officer was the key witness for the
prosecution.  He testified that on July 3, 2006, at around
6:50 p.m., he utilized his undercover persona, Rocky, and spoke
with Kim Chee about purchasing narcotics.  Kim Chee informed
Rocky that he was in the hospital but could still complete the
transaction.  In a conversation with Rocky on July 5, 2006,  Kim
Chee agreed to have Jayne meet Rocky to sell him one ounce of
"ice" (crystal methamphetamine) for $3,200.  Rocky gave Kim Chee
permission to pass his number on to Jayne.  Jayne and Rocky had a
series of conversations which culminated with them agreeing to
meet at a 7-Eleven store where Jayne's source for the drugs was
nearby.  
On July 6, 2006, Jayne and Rocky met at the 7-Eleven
store and agreed to drive separate cars to a nearby alley, where
Jayne's friend would be waiting with the drugs.  They drove their
respective cars through an alley to the parking lot of an
apartment, where they got out of their cars.  Rocky gave Jayne NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the bundled $3,200, and Jayne talked on her phone while they were

waiting for her friend to arrive. 
 
The undercover officer testified that he noticed a

large male, later identified as Castro, approaching them. Jayne
 
indicated that Castro was "my guy" and the officer understood

Castro to be the source of supply bringing the drugs. After

Castro spoke with Jayne and met "Rocky," they all got into

Rocky's car, with Jayne in the front passenger seat and Castro in

the back seat behind Jayne. The undercover officer testified

that in the car he saw Castro "with the wad of cash in his hand"

and, although he did not see her do it, assumed that Jayne had

handed the money to Castro. The officer testified that he

observed Castro quickly skimming through the money and believes

Castro put it in his pocket. Castro thereafter handed "Rocky" a
 
cigarette pack and the officer testified that "I open the

cigarette pack and I see the one ounce of ice in it." 
 
The undercover officer initially testified that Castro

had removed the cigarette pack from his pocket, but on cross-
examination admitted that he did not actually see that occur. 
 
Rather, the officer testified he concluded the cigarette pack

came from Castro's pocket because when Castro initially

approached by walking toward his vehicle, the officer did not see

anything in Castro's hands. On cross-examination, the officer
 
also testified that, as they were getting into his vehicle, which

was a Nissan Pathfinder, he walked around to the driver's seat

while Jayne and Castro entered from the passenger side. During
 
this time, for about seven or eight seconds, he lost sight of

Jayne and Castro.

During the undercover officer's testimony at trial, the

State played Exhibits 1 through 21 for the jury. Exhibits 1

through 19 included the recordings of telephone conversations or

attempted telephone conversations that the officer as "Rocky" had

6

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with Kim Chee and with Jayne. During some of these recordings,
 
Jayne refers to the individual that she and Rocky need to meet to

get the drugs, referring to this person as "my guy" or "my

friend." Jayne also indirectly indicates in the recordings that

this is someone who she has dealt with in the past.

In Exhibit 20, the undercover officer identifies

himself and explains that it is July 6, 2006 at approximately

4:15 p.m., and that he is headed over to the 7-Eleven store on
 
South King Street to meet with Jayne to complete a one ounce ice

deal with her. 
 
Exhibit 21 is an extensive recording of the meeting on

July 6, 2006, starting initially with Rocky and Jayne meeting at

the 7-Eleven parking lot and then driving separately to a nearby

location to meet another individual to complete the transaction. 
 
The undercover officer testified that the other voices on this

recording were Jayne and Castro.5

After the tapes were played for the jury, the court

gave the jury a limiting instruction, advising them as follows:

During this trial, you may have heard evidence that the
defendant allegedly may have committed some act or acts
other than what is charged in the indictment in this case.
You may consider this evidence, if it is believed by you,
solely and only on the issue of the defendant's state of
mind as to conduct charged in this case, and for no other

purpose. You cannot consider this evidence, if it is
believed by you, to show that the defendant committed any
other act or acts and so is a bad person and must have
committed the acts charged in this case. The defendant is

on trial here only on the charge contained in the indictment
in this case and for no other alleged acts.

In addition to the undercover officer, the State had

two other witnesses: a detective assigned to the HPD Narcotics

Vice Division, who supervised the undercover investigation in

this case and took photographs of Jayne and Castro during the

investigation; and a second officer, also assigned to the

5 The undercover officer testified that the voices on Exhibit 21 were

"[o]f course, myself, Jayne, and the defendant."

7

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Narcotics Division, who on July 6, 2006, received from the

undercover officer a cigarette pack and a ziploc packet

containing a white crystalline substance. The State entered into

evidence the cigarette pack (Exhibit 22), the ziploc packet

containing the white crystalline substance (Exhibit 23), and

photographs of Jayne and Castro taken on July 6, 2006.

The parties stipulated to, inter alia, the chain of

custody of the cigarette pack and the ziploc packet, that the

contents of the packet were tested by an HPD criminalist, that

the HPD criminalist had determined the contents to contain

methamphetamine with a net weight of 28.1 grams, and that one

ounce is equivalent to 28.3495231 grams.

2. Defense Case

The defense presented two witnesses. Hector Joseph
 
Cabregos (Cabregos), a licensed private investigator, was

retained by the defense. He testified, among other things, that
 
he was retained to take photos of Castro in the same area where

Castro had been photographed during the police investigation, for

the purpose of determining whether a cigarette pack could be seen

in Castro's pocket. Various photos taken by Cabregos, as well as
 
photos he had enlarged from the State's exhibits, were admitted

into evidence.

The other defense witness was a third officer who

participated in the police investigation. This officer was asked

to identify a photograph which included the vehicle operated by

the undercover officer and the photo was admitted into evidence.

3. Closing Arguments

In closing argument, the State relied heavily on the

recorded conversations with Jayne. In addressing the evidence
 
that Castro "distributed" an eighth of an ounce of

methamphetamine, the prosecution urged the jury "to listen to the

CD and listen to the different facts[.]" The prosecution pointed
 
8

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to Exhibit 6 as showing that Jayne made a deal with Rocky to sell

him an ounce of drugs, and then pointed to Exhibits 7 and 8 as

showing that Jayne had called "her guy" or "her source" and

confirmed that he was across the street from the 7-Eleven. The

prosecution referenced Exhibits 11 and 16 regarding Rocky and

Jayne's initial attempt to meet at the 7-Eleven, that Jayne was

angry when there was a mix-up and she had to wait along with "her

guy" who was waiting across the street. The prosecution further
 
argues that in Exhibit 21 (the taped conversation of the

meeting), Jayne confirms when Castro arrives that, in the words

of the prosecution, "this is the guy." Implicitly referencing
 
the prior taped conversations with Jayne, the prosecution argues

that Jayne confirms that Castro is the guy she had called earlier

in the day to do the deal and, in the words of the prosecution,

"is the guy we've all been waiting for."

In addressing whether Castro acted "knowingly," the

prosecution again relied on the taped conversations with Jayne. 
 
The prosecution urged the jury to "look at how [Castro]

interacted with Jayne" and that Castro acted knowingly because

"Rocky and Jayne are waiting, he knows they're waiting, he knows

they're waiting for him to arrive." The evidence that supports
 
these statements were the taped conversations with Jayne. The

prosecution also urged the jury to "listen to Jayne's phone

calls" when she was at the meeting site and calling someone on

the phone, telling that person, in the words of the prosecution,

that "we're waiting for you." The prosecution argued it was
 
reasonable to conclude "from those facts and from those

observations that [Jayne] was talking to the defendant on the

phone." 
 
Finally, in response to the defense's closing argument

that Castro was denied an opportunity to confront Jayne and Kim

Chee, the prosecution argued in rebuttal that: "The State is not

9

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required to call Jayne, the State is not required to call Kim

Chee. You have the recordings [of] her voice, you have [the

undercover officer] confirming that is her . . . that is enough." 
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW

A. Constitutional Law

"We answer questions of constitutional law by

exercising our own independent judgment based on the facts of the

case . . . . Thus, we review questions of constitutional law

under the 'right/wrong' standard." State v. Fields, 115 Hawai» i 
503, 511, 168 P.3d 955, 963 (2007) (citations omitted).

Violation of the constitutional right to confront adverse
witnesses is subject to the harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt standard. In applying the harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt standard[,] the court is required to
examine the record and determine whether there is a

reasonable possibility that the error complained of might
have contributed to the conviction.

State v. Pond , 118 Hawai» i 452, 461, 193 P.3d 368, 377 (2008) 
(quoting State v. Balisbisana, 83 Hawai» i 109, 113-14, 924 P.2d 
1215, 1219-20 (1996)). 
B. Hearsay

"Where admissibility of evidence is determined by 
application of the hearsay rule, there can only be one correct 
result, and the appropriate standard for appellate review is the 
right/wrong standard." State v. Fitzwater , 122 Hawai» i 354, 362, 
227 P.3d 520, 528 (2010) (citations omitted). 
C. Relevance

"A trial court's determination that evidence is 
'relevant' within the meaning of HRE [Hawaii Rules of Evidence] 
Rule 401 (1993) is reviewed under the right/wrong standard of 
review." State v. St. Clair , 101 Hawai» i 280, 286, 67 P.3d 779, 
785 (2003) (citations omitted). 
HRE Rule 401 defines relevant evidence as "evidence

having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of

10

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consequence to the determination of the action more probable or

less probable than it would be without the evidence." HRE Rule

402 provides that "[a]ll relevant evidence is admissible, except

as otherwise provided by the Constitutions of the United States

and the State of Hawai'i, by statute, by these rules, or by other

rules adopted by the supreme court. Evidence which is not

relevant is not admissible."

III. DISCUSSION

A. Constitutional Right to Confront Witnesses

Castro raises a constitutional challenge to his 
conviction, asserting that the circuit court's ruling that 
allowed admission of the undercover audio recordings deprived him 
of his right to confront witnesses in violation of the United 
States Constitution and the Hawai» i Constitution. 
Both the U.S. and Hawai» i Constitutions establish the 
right of an accused to confront witnesses against him or her. 
See U.S. Const. amend. VI ("In all criminal prosecutions, the 
accused shall enjoy the right . . . to be confronted with the 
witnesses against him[.]"); Haw. Const. art. I, ÿÿ 14 ("In all 
criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right . . . to 
be confronted with the witnesses against the accused[.]). 
The right of confrontation affords the accused both the
opportunity to challenge the credibility and veracity of the
prosecution's witnesses and an occasion for the jury to
weigh the demeanor of those witnesses. For this reason, the
admission of a hearsay statement as substantive evidence of
its truth raises special problems whenever the hearsay
declarant is unavailable for meaningful cross-examination on
the witness stand.

Fields, 115 Hawai » i at 512, 168 P.3d at 964 (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
"'Hearsay' is a statement, other than one made by the 
declarant while testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in 
evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted." 
Rule 801, 
Hawai» i Rules of Evidence (HRE). We conclude in this case that 
11

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the statements by Jayne and Kim Chee in the undercover audio

recordings were offered and argued by the prosecution at trial

for the truth of the matter asserted and therefore constitute

hearsay statements.

As the State correctly points out, the Confrontation

Clause under the U.S. Constitution does not bar the admission of

nontestimonial hearsay. Crawford v. Washington , 541 U.S. 36

(2004); Davis v. Washington , 547 U.S. 813 (2006). Hence, the
 
undercover audio recordings of Jayne and Kim Chee in this case

may very well not be barred under the Confrontation Clause of the

U.S. Constitution. See Crawford, 541 U.S. at 56 (noting that

"statements that by their nature were not testimonial" included

"statements in furtherance of a conspiracy."); United States v.

Allen, 425 F.3d 1231, 1235 (9th Cir. 2005) ("co-conspirator

statements are not testimonial and therefore beyond the compass

of Crawford 's holding.").

Since Crawford  and Davis were decided, however, the 
Hawai
» i Supreme Court has reaffirmed that the Confrontation 
Clause contained in the Hawai» i Constitution will continue to 
apply to nontestimonial hearsay and that the applicable test 
remains the one established in Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56 
(1980). In Fields , the Hawai» i Supreme Court noted that "we have 
long held that a trial court may, consistent with a criminal 
defendant's constitutional right of confrontation, permit a 
hearsay statement uttered by an unavailable declarant as 
substantive evidence if the statement satisfies the two-part test 
announced by the United States Supreme Court in Roberts
."6 115 
6
 The Roberts  test as applied under the Hawai »i Constitution requires: 
As regards the first part of the Roberts test, we have
remained resolute that, under the confrontation clause of
the Hawai »i Constitution, a showing of the declarant's
unavailability  is necessary to promote the integrity of the
(continued...)

12

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai» i at 512, 168 P.3d at 964. After analyzing Crawford  and 
Davis, the court in Fields ruled that: 
we are disinclined to alter our application of Roberts to

nontestimonial hearsay. Roberts embodies the commonsense

principle that, when face-to-face cross-examination cannot
be secured, extrajudicial statements are admissible as
evidence of their truth only when demonstrably more
"reliable" than the straightforward application of our rules
of evidence would normally require. In our estimation, the
fairness of criminal proceedings would be significantly
diminished were we to renounce Roberts in favor of

conditioning the admission of nontestimonial hearsay on the
vagaries of evolving rules of evidence.

We therefore reaffirm Roberts' continued viability with
respect to nontestimonial hearsay.

Fields, 115 Hawai» i at 516, 168 P.3d at 968 (citation omitted). 
The Hawai» i Supreme Court has also recognized the 
Roberts test as applicable in determining whether a co­
conspirator's hearsay statement is admissible. State v. McGriff ,

76 Hawai
» i 148, 871 P.2d 782 (1994). That is, before reaching 
the question of whether the co-conspirator hearsay exception

under HRE 803(a)(2)(C) applied, the supreme court in McGriff

6(...continued)
fact finding process and to ensure fairness to
defendants....

Upon demonstrating that a witness is unavailable,
under the second half of the 
Roberts test, only statements
that bear "adequate indicia of reliability " may be admitted
into evidence. "Reliability" may be shown in two ways.
First, reliability may be inferred without more if it falls
within a firmly rooted hearsay exception.....

Alternatively, reliability may be demonstrated upon a
showing of particularized guarantees of trustworthiness. The
United States Supreme Court has declined to endorse a
mechanical test for determining particularized guarantees of
trustworthiness under the Confrontation Clause. Instead, the
Court has determined that particularized guarantees of
trustworthiness must be shown from the totality of the
circumstances and that the relevant circumstances include

only those that surround the making of the statement and
that render the declarant particularly worthy of belief.

Fields, 115 Hawai
»i at 512-13, 168 P.3d at 964-65 (emphases added) (citations,
some quotation marks, brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Sua , 92 Hawai »i 61,
71-72, 987 P.2d 959, 969-70 (1999)). 
13

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
first determined that the declarant of the hearsay statements was 
unavailable, as required under Roberts. McGriff, 76 Hawai» i at 
156, 871 P.2d at 790. 
Here, under the first part of the Roberts test, the

State was required to show that the declarants - Jayne and Kim
 
Chee - were unavailable to testify at trial. In ruling on
 
Castro's motion to exclude the recorded conversations, the

circuit court made a finding that "[t]he State does not intend to

call Oravec or Kalani-Smith as witnesses at trial." In its

answering brief, the State concedes that it did not make a

showing that Jayne was unavailable, with which we agree. 
 
Further, the State also failed to show that Kim Chee was

unavailable.

Therefore, we hold, under the Hawai» i Constitution, 
that it was error for the circuit court to deny Castro's Motion 
to Exclude the recorded statements by Jayne and Kim Chee. Castro 
contends on appeal that the improperly admitted statements were 
contained within Exhibits 1 through 20. We agree that, to the 
extent statements by Jayne and Kim Chee are contained in these 
exhibits, they were improperly admitted without a showing that 
the requirements under Roberts  were met. 
B. Harmless Error Analysis

The State argues that, notwithstanding the violation of

Castro's right to confront witnesses by admitting the recorded

conversations, it was harmless error. The State asserts that

there was overwhelming evidence that Castro knowingly transferred

methamphetamine to the undercover officer because the officer saw

Castro holding the $3,200 and Castro handed the officer the

cigarette pack containing almost an ounce of crystal

methamphetamine. The State also points to evidence that, after
 
the exchange, Castro became suspicious and said he thought he saw

a vice officer in a nearby vehicle.

14

NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15We do not disagree that, outside of the improperly
admitted recorded conversations, there is compelling evidence
that Castro came into possession of the $3,200 while in Rocky's
vehicle and that Castro thereafter handed Rocky the cigarette
pack that contained almost an ounce of crystal methamphetamine. 
However, where the constitutional right of confrontation has been
violated, our review regarding harmless error goes beyond simply
whether there was sufficient evidence in support of the verdict. 
A violation of the constitutional right to confront adverse
witnesses is subject to the harmless
-beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard. In applying the
harmless-beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard, the court is
required to examine the record and determine whether there
is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of 
might have contributed to the conviction.
Mere sufficiency of the evidence to support the jury
verdict, apart from that aspect of the case affected by the
error, would not be enough.
State v. Peseti,  101 Hawai #i 172, 178, 65 P.3d 119, 125 (2003)
(emphases added) (citations, brackets and internal quotation
marks omitted); see also State v. Pokini,  57 Haw. 26, 30, 548
P.2d 1402, 1405 (1976).
The recorded statements by Kim Chee set out the terms
for the price and amount of the drug transaction, and also
explained Jayne's involvement.  In turn, the numerous recorded
statements by Jayne set out, inter alia , the context for how the
transaction would occur, where and when Rocky and Jayne would
meet, that Jayne had been in contact with "her guy" who would
supply the drugs, and that Rocky and Jayne would meet with
Jayne's "guy" who would be across the street from the 7-Eleven
store.  In sum, the recorded statements of Jayne and Kim Chee
provide significant factual context for Castro's eventual
appearance and involvement on July 6, 2006.
Indeed, the prosecution emphasized the recorded
statements of Jayne in making its closing argument, even urging    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the jury should review certain of the exhibits with Jayne's

recorded statements. The prosecution argued that Jayne's

recorded statements established "facts" that show Castro

"distributed" the methamphetamine and that he did so "knowingly." 
 
Having examined the record, we conclude that there is a 
reasonable possibility that the erroneous admission of the 
recorded statements by Jayne and Kim Chee might have contributed 
to the jury's verdict convicting Castro. Hence, the violation of 
Castro's right to confront witnesses under the Hawai» i 
Constitution was not harmless error. 
C. Relevance of Exhibits 1-20 and Exhibit 21

In addition to his right to confront witnesses, Castro 
contends that Exhibits 1 through 20 were improperly admitted on 
the further grounds that they are not relevant.7 We address this 
issue in the event, on remand, the State is able to make a 
showing to meet the requirements under Roberts  such that Castro's 
confrontation rights under the Hawai» i Constitution do not bar 
admission of Exhibits 1 through 20. In this regard, we conclude 
that Exhibits 1 through 20 are relevant to whether Castro 
knowingly distributed methamphetamine of an aggregate weight of 
one-eighth ounce or more. HRE Rule 401. 
Castro also challenges the relevance of Exhibit 21,

which is the audio recording on July 6, 2006 that contains

conversations initially between Rocky and Jayne, and then Rocky,

Jayne and Castro. In this regard, we similarly conclude that
 
Exhibit 21 is also relevant to whether Castro knowingly

distributed methamphetamine of an aggregate weight of one-eighth

ounce or more. HRE Rule 401. Castro has not challenged the

7
 Castro's points of error also assert that Exhibits 1 through 20 were
improperly admitted on the basis of "surprise." However, Castro's opening
brief contains no argument as to his contention about "surprise" and therefore
this point is deemed waived. Hawai »i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP),
Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
16

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
admission of Exhibit 21 as violating his right to confront

witnesses and we express no opinion on that issue.

D. Other Issues on Appeal

Given our rulings above, we need not reach the other

issues raised by Castro on appeal.

IV. CONCLUSION

For the reasons stated, we vacate the circuit court's

October 22, 2009 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, and we

remand this case for a new trial consistent with this opinion.

DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, August 8, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Walter R. Schoettle 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Brian R. Vincent 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

17

