NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30246
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI rI 
STATE OF HAWAI rI, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RANDY LOPAKA HANOHANO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0082)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Randy Lopaka Hanohano (Hanohano)

 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on
 
November 16, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(circuit court).1 A jury found Hanohano guilty of two counts of
 
Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree, in violation of
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-716(1)(e) (Supp. 2009), and
 
one count of Burglary in the First Degree, in violation of HRS
 
§ 708-810(1)(c) (1993). 
On appeal, Hanohano contends the circuit court erred by
 
denying his post-verdict Motion for Judgment of Acquittal or for
 
New Trial (Motion) as to his conviction for Burglary in the First
 
Degree. Hanohano challenges Finding of Fact (FOF) 2 and
 
1
 The Honorable Karen S. S. Ahn presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Conclusions of Law (COLs) 4 and 6 in the circuit court's Order 
Denying Defendant's Motion for Judgment of Acquittal and For New 
Trial, filed on January 13, 2010. Hanohano argues that when the 
evidence is viewed in the light most favorable to the State of 
Hawairi (State) and in full recognition of the province of the 
trier of fact, the evidence is insufficient to support a prima facie case of Burglary in the First Degree. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On January 21, 2009, the State charged Hanohano with
 
one count of Burglary in the First Degree and two counts of
 
Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree. Hanohano's jury
 
trial commenced on August 27, 2009.
 
Mary Hanohano (Mary) testified that she had lived in
 
the same house on Nanakuli Avenue in Nanakuli, Oahu, for all of
 
her life and was living there on Christmas of 2008 with her
 
boyfriend, Ernest Auwae (Auwae). Hanohano is her son; he had
 
been living at her house in 2008 until she asked him to leave.
 
Mary stated that on December 25, 2008 she went to
 
dinner at her daughter's house up the road. She came home with
 
Auwae and was surprised to see Hanohano in the house. Hanohano
 
made a verbal remark to her, and she told him to leave. Hanohano
 
was in bedroom #3, which was his bedroom, packing his bag when
 
she asked if she could check his bag. When she went to look in
 
his bag, Hanohano pushed her away from the bag and into the
 
hallway. She lost her balance and fell down on her butt. 
According to Mary, Auwae came around the corner and tried to get
 
Hanohano "off of her"; however, Hanohano was not actually
 
physically holding her down.
 
Mary testified that Auwae had physically contacted
 
Hanohano to get Hanohano "off of [her]," and Hanohano became
 
angry. Hanohano and Auwae exchanged words, and she went to the
 
bedroom she shared with Auwae. Hanohano left and returned with a
 
sledgehammer. She and Auwae were in the bedroom, and Hanohano
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
began hammering at the bedroom door. Auwae was holding the door
 
shut when Hanohano was hammering it. Hanohano made a hole in the
 
door large enough for him to come through, but he then stopped
 
hammering and left the house. She called the police after
 
Hanohano left.
 
After reviewing her statement made to the police on
 
December 25, 2008, she agreed that in her statement she said that
 
while Hanohano was hammering on the door, he stated he was going
 
to kill her; however, she now does not recall him saying that.
 
Auwae testified that he currently lives with Mary at
 
her house on Nanakuli Avenue and was living there in December
 
2008. Hanohano was living there too, but Mary had asked Hanohano
 
several times to leave.
 
Auwae stated that when he and Mary came home from her
 
daughter's house on December 25, 2008, he was surprised to see
 
Hanohano outside the house because Mary had told Hanohano not to
 
come to the house anymore. Auwae noticed that the door to the
 
house was open, even though he had closed and locked it before he
 
and Mary left. They all went inside together. Auwae went
 
straight to the bathroom, and he could hear Hanohano and Mary
 
"grumbling" in the hallway. When Auwae came out of the bathroom,
 
he saw Mary on her knees and Hanohano holding down Mary by her
 
neck and shoulders with one hand. Auwaee heard Hanohano ask Mary
 
if "she like lickens for Christmas." Hanohano was yelling at
 
Mary. Auwae then punched Hanohano in the head because he thought
 
Hanohano was hitting Mary, but Hanohano never hit her. After
 
Auwae hit Hanohano, Hanohano told Auwae that he was going to hit
 
Auwae in the head. Hanohano was mad because Auwae had hit him,
 
and Hanohano's voice was raised.
 
Auwae testified that he took Mary into their bedroom, 
shut the door, and told Hanohano "enough already." Hanohano
 
began banging on the door with a sledgehammer. He was trying to
 
hold the door closed. Hanohano hit the door several times. Mary
 
was screaming and upset. The door broke and there was a big hole
 
in it.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After Mary and Auwae's testimonies, Hanohano made an
 
oral motion for judgment of acquittal as to all charges. The
 
circuit court denied the motion, and Hanohano then testified at
 
trial. After Hanohano's testimony, he renewed his motion for
 
judgment of acquittal, which the circuit court again denied. 
That same day, the jury returned a guilty verdict on all charges.
 
On September 8, 2009, Hanohano filed his Motion. On
 
September 22, 2009, the State filed a memorandum in opposition to
 
the Motion. On October 12, 2009, the circuit court held a
 
hearing on the Motion. At the hearing, Hanohano's counsel
 
clarified that the Motion pertained only to the Burglary in the
 
First Degree charge and not the Terroristic Threatening charges.
 
Hanohano argued that he did not enter into the house with any
 
criminal intent and it was only in the house that something
 
happened. Hanohano's counsel argued that "[t]he point is the
 
requisite state of mind, specific intent to burglarize, was
 
certainly lacking, because [Hanohano] was in the home when 
he --." The circuit court stated that "I believe you can commit
 
burglary even though you enter without intent to commit a crime
 
therein, but you form that intent while you're on the property."
 
Hanohano's counsel argued that there was no intent to commit an
 
offense because the fight was over a bag or the fact that Auwae
 
had punched Hanohano in the face. The circuit court denied the
 
Motion and entered the judgment on November 16, 2009.
 
On December 16, 2009, Hanohano filed a Notice of
 
Appeal. On January 13, 2010, the circuit court filed an Order
 
Denying Defendant's Motion for Judgment of Acquittal and for New
 
Trial (Order), which stated in relevant part:
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
1. Witnesses for the [State] testified at trial
herein that, on or about December 25, 2008, in the City and
County of Honolulu, [Hanohano] arrived at a residence
situated at . . . Nanakuli Avenue. [Mary], [Hanohano]'s
Mother, testified that she and [Auwae], her boyfriend,
resided at that address, and that she had the authority to
determine who resided or was welcome therein. She testified
 that [Hanohano] did not reside at that address at the time.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2. Trial testimony was that Mary Hanohano initially
permitted [Hanohano] into the residence, but then ordered
him to leave. [Hanohano] did not leave the residence. He
 was putting some items into a bag when he physically pushed
[Mary]. Soon thereafter, he obtained a sledgehammer and
pursued within the residence [Mary] and Auwae, who locked
themselves in a room in the house, at which time [Hanohano]
used the sledgehammer to try to break the room door.
 
3. [Hanohano] elected to testify before the jury.
 
4. After due deliberation, a jury convicted
[Hanohano] as charged of Burglary in the First Degree and
two counts of Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree,
each count for which named a different victim.
 
5. Any finding of fact which is a conclusion of law
shall be so deemed. Any conclusion of law which is a
finding of fact shall be so deemed.
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
1. A person commits Burglary in the First Degree if
he intentionally remains unlawfully, to wit, without license
or invitation, in a building, with intent to commit therein
a crime against a person or against property rights, and
recklessly disregards a risk that the building is the
dwelling of another, and the building is such a dwelling.
 
2. A person commits Terroristic Threatening in the
First Degree if he recklessly threatened, by word or
conduct, to cause bodily injury to another person with the
use of a dangerous instrument, in reckless disregard of
terrorizing that person. A dangerous instrument is any
material which in the manner it is used is known to be
 capable of causing death.
 
3. The standard to be applied by the trial court in
ruling upon a motion for judgment of acquittal is whether,
upon the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution and giving full recognition to the province of
the jury, a reasonable mind could fairly conclude guilty
[sic] beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Alston, 75 Haw.
 
517, 528 (1994). The jury's province includes determining
the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence
and drawing reasonable inferences from the credible
evidence. 
4. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable
to the prosecution, the Court must conclude that a
reasonable juror could have believed that . . . Nanakuli
Avenue was [Mary's] residence which she shared only with
[Auwau] and that she ordered [Hanohano], her adult son, to
leave her residence. Similarly, a reasonable juror could
have reasonably inferred that [Hanohano] knew or recklessly
disregarded the risk that . . . Nanakuli Avenue was his
mother's residence and that [Mary] did not give [Hanohano]
license or invitation to remain in her residence when she
 ordered him to leave and/or when he then pushed her and/or
pursued her, yelling, armed with a sledgehammer, then
damaged her room door. A reasonable juror could have
believed that [Hanohano] remained unlawfully within the
residence with the intent, which can be formed in a
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relatively brief period of time, to push [Mary] down, to
pursue her with a sledgehammer, or to damage the room door.
 
5. Further, a reasonable juror could have believed
that, when [Hanohano], yelling, damaged the door by striking
it numerous times with a sledgehammer, [Hanohano] recklessly
threatened by his words or conduct to cause at least
physical pain to [Mary] and [Auwae] with the use of a
dangerous instrument, and, in doing so, [Hanohano]
recklessly disregarded the risk of terrorizing [Mary] and
[Auwae]. Under the circumstances, and considering the
relevant attributes of [Mary] and [Auwae], a reasonable
juror could have found that these threats were objectively
capable of causing fear of bodily injury in a reasonable
person at whom the threat was directed and that the threat
on its face and under the circumstances was so clear,
unconditional, immediate, and specific as to the person
threatened, that the threat communicated a seriousness of
purpose and an imminent likelihood of being carried out. A
 reasonable juror also could have concluded that [Hanohano]
was aware that the sledgehammer, as he was using it, was
capable of causing someone's death via, for instance, a blow
to the head.
 
6. A new trial may be granted if required in the
interest of justice. Rule 33, Hawaii Rules of PenalProcedure. The granting or denial of a new trial is withinthe sound discretion of the trial court and will not be disturbed absent a clear abuse of discretion. State v. 
Hicks, 113 [Hawair i] 60, 69 (2006). The Court concludes,
based upon the totality of the trial proceedings, that a newtrial is not required in the interest of justice. 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
When reviewing the grant or denial of a post-verdict
 
motion for a judgment of acquittal, 
we employ the same standard that a trial court applies to
such a motion, namely, whether, upon the evidence viewed in
the light most favorable to the prosecution and in full
recognition of the province of the trier of fact, the
evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so that
a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to support a prima
facie case requires substantial evidence as to every
material element of the offense charged. Substantial
 evidence as to every material element of the offense charged
is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion. Under such a review, we give full
play to the right of the fact finder to determine
credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable
inferences of fact. 
State v. Timoteo, 87 Hawai ri 108, 112-13, 952 P.2d 865, 869-70 
(1997) (quoting State v. Jhun, 83 Hawai ri 472, 481, 927 P.2d 
1355, 1364 (1996)).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The circuit court erred by denying Hanohano's
Motion.
 
Even when the evidence is taken in the light most
 
favorable to the State, the State failed to prove a prima facie
 
case of Burglary in the First Degree. HRS § 708-810 provides:
 
§708-810 Burglary in the first degree.  (1) A
 
person commits the offense of burglary in the first
degree if the person intentionally enters or remains
unlawfully in a building, with intent to commit
therein a crime against a person or against property
rights, and:
 
(a)	 The person is armed with a dangerous instrument
in the course of committing the offense; or
 
(b)	 The person intentionally, knowingly, or
recklessly inflicts or attempts to inflict
bodily injury on anyone in the course of
committing the offense; or
 
(c)	 The person recklessly disregards a risk that the
building is the dwelling of another, and the
building is such a dwelling.
 
(2) An act occurs "in the course of committing the
offense" if it occurs in effecting entry or while in the
building or in immediate flight therefrom.
 
(3) Burglary in the first degree is a class B
felony.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Hanohano was charged with violating HRS § 708­
810(1)(c). Therefore, in order to convict Hanahano, the State
 
was required to prove that Hanohano (1) intentionally remained
 
unlawfully in Mary's house, (2) with the intent to commit therein
 
a crime against a person or against property, and (3) Hanohano
 
recklessly disregarded the risk that Mary's house was a dwelling
 
of another. There is no dispute that Hanohano remained at Mary's
 
house after she asked him to leave. There is also no dispute
 
that Hanohano recklessly disregarded the risk that Mary's house
 
was a dwelling of another, i.e. his mother, because he lived in
 
the same house with Mary. Thus, the only dispute is whether the
 
State demonstrated that Hanohano had an intent to commit a crime
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against a person or against property when he remained unlawfully
 
in Mary's house.
 
In State v. Mahoe, 89 Hawai ri 284, 972 P.2d 287 (1998), 
Mahoe appealed his conviction for Burglary in the First Degree. 
Id. at 285, 972 P.2d at 288. The Hawai ri Supreme Court quoted 
the prosecuting attorney's closing argument as follows:
 
There are four things that the State has to prove.
Each of them the State has to prove beyond a reasonable
doubt for the Defendant, Mr. Mahoe, to be guilty of this
crime. . . . [One element is] that he entered or remained in
that building, Kristy's house, with an intent to commit a
crime therein against either a person or property rights.
And it says enter or remain with that intent. It's one or
 the other. He either entered the house with the intent or
 while he was in the house he remained in the house, he
formed the intent. The State only has to prove one or the
other of those two elements that he either entered or he
 remained with the intent to commit a crime against a person
or property.
 
Id. at 286, 972 P.2d at 289. 
The court stated that "[t]he prosecuting attorney's
 
statement that the element of intent may be proven if it is shown
 
that 'while [the perpetrator] was in the house he remained in the
 
house, he formed the intent' is an incorrect statement of the
 
law." Id. at 290, 972 P.2d at 293. The court further stated:
 
The Hawair i Penal Code's definition of burglary was adopted
from the Model Penal Code. 
. . . . 
Pursuant to the commentary to the Model Penal Code,
the elements of the offense of burglary are established at
the moment that an unlawful entry or "remaining" with therequisite criminal intent is made. It would be an unwarranted extension of Hawair i's modern burglary statute
to expand the offense of burglary to include situations in
which the criminal intent develops after an unlawful entry
or remaining has occurred. 
Id. at 288, 972 P.2d at 291 (italics in original; footnote
 
omitted).
 
Thus, the State was required to prove that at the
 
moment Hanohano was asked to leave the house, Hanohano intended
 
to commit a crime against a person or property right. 
Development of an intent to commit a crime after Hanohano
 
remained unlawfully at the house is insufficient to convict
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Hanohano of Burglary in the First Degree. The State points to a
 
passage in Mahoe that states:
 
We have not previously addressed the meaning of
"unlawfully remain" in the context of the burglary statute.
We interpret this language, as have other courts that have
addressed similar language, as being inserted to cover
situations in which the initial entry was lawful, but the
presence later becomes unlawful and the perpetrator remains
with the intent to commit a crime.
 
89 Hawai ri at 289, 972 P.2d at 292. Thus, the State essentially 
argues that Hanohano's intent to commit a crime can arise at any 
time that he remained unlawfully in the house. However, the 
State's citation to Mahoe is incomplete and taken out of context. 
A careful reading of Mahoe indicates that this is the same 
interpretation of the law that was rejected. 
There was no evidence that when Hanohano was asked to
 
leave the house, he intended to threaten his mother or Auwae or
 
break down a door with a sledgehammer. Hanohano's mother
 
testified that Hanohano pushed her in reaction to her request
 
that she look into his bag. There was no evidence that Hanohano
 
intended to push his mother after she asked him to leave the
 
house.
 
After Auwae hit Hanohano, Hanohano became angry and
 
retrieved a sledgehammer. Although Hanohano did break a bedroom
 
door with the sledgehammer, there was no evidence that he
 
intended to do so when he was first asked to leave the house. 
Rather, the evidence suggests that Hanohano's intent to break
 
down the door arose after he was hit by Auwae. The evidence does
 
not support that a reasonable mind might conclude beyond a
 
reasonable doubt that when Hanohano was first asked to leave the
 
house, he intended to get into an argument with his mother and
 
push her, get hit by Auwae, and then retrieve a sledgehammer and
 
use it to break down a bedroom door. The circuit court erred by
 
denying Hanohano's motion to acquit him of the charge of Burglary
 
in the First Degree. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on
 
November 16, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 
affirmed in part and vacated in part. Hanohano's convictions for
 
Counts II and III, Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree,
 
are affirmed. Hanohano's conviction for Burglary in the First
 
Degree is reversed, and the case is remanded for resentencing.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai ri, December 20, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Chester M. Kanai
 
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Stephen K. Tsushima, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 Presiding Judge

Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge
 
10
 