NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30692
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
STATE OF HAWAI» I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
MARCO RODRIGUES, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0293)
 
AMENDED MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(Nakamura, C.J. and Fujise, J.,
with Reifurth, J. dissenting)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai
» i (State) appeals 
from the August 5, 2010 order issued by Circuit Court of the 
Fifth Circuit (circuit court)1 suppressing as evidence a clear 
plastic packet containing methamphetamine discovered by police 
during a search incident to arrest. 
I.
 
BACKGROUND
 
On November 25, 2008, Defendant-Appellee Marco Paulo
 
Rodrigues (Rodrigues) was charged by complaint with Promoting a
 
Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in violation of Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1243 (Supp. 2011). Subsequently,
 
Rodrigues moved to suppress evidence obtained from a warrantless
 
search of his pockets by Officer Scott Williamson (Ofr.
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Williamson) arguing it was in violation of his rights under 
article I, section 7 of the Hawai» i State Constitution and the 
Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States 
Constitution. 
The State opposed the motion, arguing that the drugs
 
discovered in Rodrigues's pocket were recovered during a valid
 
search incident to a lawful arrest. The State claimed that Ofr.
 
Williamson's practice, when conducting a search incident to a
 
lawful arrest in a known drug trafficking area, "to pull out an
 
arrestee's pockets from the top, visible area" was reasonable,
 
based on an officer's need for safety because syringes or razor
 
blades could be in the person's pockets and the officer "runs the
 
risk of puncturing his or her skin in a hazardous manner" or may
 
not be able to detect certain weapons or means of escape through
 
a pat-down of the person. In the alternative, the State also
 
argued that the packet would have been inevitably discovered
 
during a pre-incarceration search at Kauai Police Department
 
(KPD) cell block, during a custodial search to prevent
 
introduction of weapons and dangerous drugs into the custodial
 
environment.
 
Ofr. Williamson testified that he initially saw
 
Rodrigues asleep in his vehicle and the vehicle had an "expired
 
safety." When Rodrigues could not produce a driver's license, a
 
warrant check on the name he gave the officer revealed that
 
Rodrigues had outstanding bench warrants. Ofr. Williamson then
 
placed Rodrigues under arrest.
 
Ofr. Williamson conducted the search incident to this
 
arrest which yielded a clear Ziploc-type bag that appeared to
 
contain crystal methamphetamine out of Rodrigues's pocket, placed
 
Rodrigues in the officer's vehicle, and transported Rodrigues to
 
the cell block. Ofr. Williamson testified that at the cell
 
block, he conducted a complete inventory search to assure that no
 
contraband, weapons or dangerous instruments were taken into the
 
cell block, and inventoried all items. This search included
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
pockets and the insides of the person's shoes. After conducting
 
this search, Ofr. Williamson completed the required screening
 
forms, including an inventory of all Rodrigues's possessions, and
 
conducted a presumptive test of the contents of the bag he
 
recovered and obtained a positive result for methamphetamine.
 
Sergeant Eric Kaui (Sgt. Kaui) testified about the
 
procedures for handling incoming detainees into the cell block
 
area. Sgt. Kaui stated that officers bringing arrestees into the
 
cell block area are responsible for conducting a thorough search
 
of all areas of the arrestee's clothing, including pockets, as
 
"there are only certain things that they can enter the cell
 
with." He testified that cell block searches are conducted on
 
everyone brought into the cell block environment.
 
On March 17, 2009, the circuit court entered an order 
granting the Motion to Suppress. The State appealed and the case 
was assigned appeal No. 29759. On January 28, 2010, this court 
issued its opinion, State v. Rodrigues , 122 Hawai» i 229, 225 P.3d 
671 (App. 2010) (Rodrigues I), in which we vacated the circuit court's March 17, 2009 order granting Rodrigues's motion to 
suppress. This court held that the circuit court should have 
considered the State's argument that a packet containing drugs 
found in Rodrigues's pocket would have inevitably been 
discovered. The case was remanded to the circuit court to make 
additional findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding the 
State's inevitable discovery claim. 
On remand, both parties stated that they had no further
 
evidence to present, although the State filed 
a Supplemental Memorandum reiterating the testimony of Ofr.
 
Williamson and Sgt. Kaui concerning the procedures at the
 
cellblock and again argued that the packet would have been
 
"inevitably discovered pursuant to a lawful inventory search at
 
KPD cellblock."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The circuit court filed its August 5, 2010 Findings of
 
Facts, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Defendant's Motion
 
to Suppress Evidence (Order) stating, in pertinent part:
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
1.	 On November 23, 2009 at approximately 7:54 a.m.,
Kauai Police Department Officer Scott Williamson
saw Defendant Rodrigues sleeping in a silver
two-door Hyundai at Hanamaulu Beach Park.
 
. . . . 
6.	 Officer Williamson discovered that defendant
 
Rodrigues had three outstanding bench warrants
and handcuffed him.
 
7.	 Officer Williamson conducted a pat-down search
on Defendant's torso but when he got to
Defendant's shorts, Officer Williamson turned
the pockets inside out.
 
8.	 Officer Williamson testified that, for his
safety, it was his practice that when he
conducts a search of an arrestee, he pulls out
the arrestee's pockets from the top rather than
doing a pat-down search.
 
9.	 Officer Williamson testified that he had no
 reason to believe that Defendant Rodrigues was
concealing weapons, drugs, contraband or
needles.
 
10.	 As Officer Williamson turned Defendant's left
 shorts' pocket inside out, he found a clear zip-
lock baggie that contained a crystal-like
substance in Defendant's left front pocket.
 
11.	 Officer Williamson placed Defendant Rodrigues in
his police vehicle and transported him to police
cellblock in Lihue.
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
1.	 The Fourth Amendment to the United States
 
Constitution protects the rights of citizens to
be free from unreasonable searches and seizures.
 
2.	 Article 1, Section 7 of the Hawaii Constitution
is identical to the Fourth Amendment to the
 
United States Constitution.
 
3.	 Officer Williamson was entitled to a pat-down
search but he was not authorized to remove the
 zip-lock baggie from Mr. Rodrigues pocket unless
he had reason to believe that the items felt are
 
fruits or instrumentalities of the crime for
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
which the defendant is arrested, or to protect the
officer from attack, or to prevent the offender from
escaping. State v. Enos , 68 Haw. 509, 510-511; 720
P.2d 1012, 1013-1014 (1986).
 
4.	 Any warrantless search or seizure is presumed to
be illegal and the burden always rests with the
government to prove that such actions fall
within a specifically established and well-
delineated exception to the warrant requirement.
State v. Ortiz , 67 Haw. 181; 683 P.2d 822
(1984).
 
5.	 One such exception is the 'inevitable discovery'
rule adopted by the Hawaii Supreme Court in 1995
in State v. Lopez , 78 [Hawai
»i] 433; 896 P.2d
889 (1995). 
6.	 Regarding the 'inevitable discovery' rule, theHawaii Supreme Court "require[s] the prosecutionto present clear and convincing evidence thatany evidence obtained in violation of article I,
section 7 [of the Hawaii Constitution] would
inevitably have been discovered by lawful meansbefore such evidence may be admitted under the
inevitable discovery exception to theexclusionary rule[."] State v. Lopez , 78
[Hawai
»i] 433, 451; 896 P.2d 889 (1995). 
7.	 The Hawaii Supreme Court further noted that
"[c]lear and convincing evidence means evidence
that will produce in the mind of a reasonable
person a firm belief as to the facts sought to
be established.["] Id.
 
8.	 The 'inevitable discovery' rule is not
applicable because the state failed to produce
clear and convincing evidence which would
demonstrate that the defendant was incapable of
retrieving and discarding the contraband from
his person without an officer's notice between
the time of his arrest and the inventory search
and that the evidence would have been inevitably
discovered.
 
9.	 Officer Williamson failed to testify that Mr.
Rodrigues was restrained in such a way as to
make him incapable of discarding the zip-loc
baggie from his pocket between the time of his
arrest and the inventory search had the baggie
not been obtained via Officer Williamson's
 illegal search.
 
10.	 The State did not present any evidence that
Officer Williamson or another officer
 continuously observed Mr. Rodrigues after being
handcuffed or that Officer Williamson [n]ever
left Mr. Rodrigues unattended.
 
11.	 Additionally, unlike the defendant in State v.
Silva[,] 91 [Hawai
»i] 111; 979 P.2d 1137 (1999),
Mr. Rodrigues never testified or acknowledged 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that he was unable to retrieve the contraband
 
after being handcuffed.
 
ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT'S MOTION TO SUPPRESS EVIDENCE
 
Based on the foregoing Findings of Facts and
Conclusions of Law, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the
clear plastic baggie containing a crystal-like
substance that was removed from Defendant's left front
 shorts' pocket on November 23, 2008[,] is hereby
suppressed and precluded from use at trial.
 
The State timely filed its notice of appeal from this
 
Order.
 
II.
 
DISCUSSION
 
In this appeal, the State argues that the circuit court 
erred by (1) failing to make essential findings of fact regarding 
events that occurred after Rodrigues was placed in the police 
transport vehicle and relevant to the issue of whether the 
subject evidence was admissible under the inevitable discovery 
doctrine, (2) suppressing the evidence in light of the unrefuted 
testimony that the evidence would have been discovered during a 
routine inventory search at the KPD cell block based on its 
finding that Rodrigues could have discarded the packet before the 
inventory search was conducted where there was no evidence that 
he would have done so, (3) distinguishing this case from State v. 
Silva, 91 Hawai» i 111, 979 P.2d 1137 (App. 1999), because 
Rodrigues did not testify or acknowledge that he was unable to 
retrieve the packet from his pocket after being handcuffed 
although Rodrigues's whereabouts were unknown at the time of the 
hearing on remand, and (4) concluding that the State failed to 
present clear and convincing evidence that the packet would not 
have been inevitably discovered at the cell block, even if it was 
not removed from Rodrigues's pocket upon his arrest. 
In Rodrigues I , this court held that, "[w]ithout a 
doubt, Officer Williamson's actions in turning Rodrigues's 
pockets inside-out violated" the limited scope of a search 
incident to arrest. Rodrigues I , 122 Hawai» i at 235, 225 P.3d at 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
677. However, because the circuit court failed to make "findings
 
of fact regarding the credibility of the police officers or the
 
weight given to their testimony in light of the other evidence
 
and arguments related to the issue of inevitable discovery[,]"
 
and "reached no conclusions regarding whether the State met its
 
burden of proof, instead rejecting the applicability of the
 
inevitable discovery exception as a matter of law[,]" we remanded
 
the case for the circuit court to determine the factual basis for
 
the application of the inevitable discovery doctrine. Id., at
 
238, 225 P.3d at 680. 
As it "is not the role of the appellate
 
court, in the first instance, to make determinations as to the
 
credibility of the witnesses or the weight of the evidence[,]" we
 
specifically declined to say that the State either presented
 
clear and convincing evidence supporting the application of the
 
inevitable discovery rule or failed as a matter of law, in
 
meeting this burden. Id. at 238, 225 P.3d at 680.
 
On remand, the parties declined to present additional
 
evidence; Rodrigues himself did not appear for the three court
 
proceedings held on remand, and it appears from the record that
 
his counsel did not know his whereabouts. The circuit court did
 
not articulate any findings at any of these proceedings, but
 
rather, appears to have directed counsel to file 
further
 
submissions.2 The circuit court's Order does not contain either 
2 On the last of the three appearances, the following exchange occurred
between the circuit court and counsel:
 
[Prosecutor]: So, your Honor, just so I'm clear.
We're going to be preparing a memorandum of law?
 
THE COURT: Yes. It would be that or you could simply
address it in a proposed finding of fact or findings of
fact.
 
. . . .
 
THE COURT: And for [defense counsel], it's addressing
that finding of fact, because, [defense counsel] you had
previously concluded, and the Court had agreed with you,
that the State lacked the basis for stating that there was
inevitable -- basis for inevitable discovery and also the
(continued...)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
credibility or weight determinations and does not include
 
findings of fact regarding the events relevant to the inevitable
 
discovery rule.
 
Rather, it appears that the circuit court has again
 
ruled, as a matter of law, that the inevitable discovery
 
exception does not apply in this case. The circuit court
 
concluded that "the 'inevitable discovery' rule is not applicable 
because the state failed to produce clear and convincing evidence
 
which would demonstrate that the defendant was incapable of
 
retrieving and discarding the contraband from his person without
 
an officer's notice between the time of his arrest and the
 
inventory search[.]" The circuit court did not cite to any legal
 
authority for this requirement.
 
"We review the circuit court's ruling on a motion to 
suppress 
de novo to determine whether the ruling was 'right' or 
'wrong'." State v. Edwards , 96 Hawai» i 224, 231, 30 P.3d 238, 
245 (2001) (quoting 
State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai» i 87, 100, 997 
P.2d 13, 26 (2000)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
The "right/wrong" standard of review also applies to
the trial court's [conclusions of law], which allows the
appellate court to "examine the facts and answer thequestion without being required to give any weight to the
trial court's answer to it." State v. Lopez , 78 Hawai
»i 
2(...continued)
simple reference to State v. Lopez.
 
I think in your previous arguments, [defense counsel],
you had said that State v. Silva, basically, that there was
a problem with that decision by the Hawaii Supreme Court.
The Court carefully read that decision, and as I said, I'd
like to draw your attention to footnote number three on page
15. And the Court would agree with you -- I'm sorry, let me
just back up.
 
I think you had argued previously that perhaps State
v.
 Silva was not a good decision. I think it's more the
 
case can be distinguished from the instant case. And the
 
Court just needs you to simply address that.
 
On July 26, 2010, the State filed its supplemental memorandum, and
on August 5, 2010, Rodrigues filed proposed findings of facts and conclusions
of law. With the exception of finding of fact no. 9, the circuit court
adopted the Rodrigues's proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law, and
entered its Order on the same date.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
433, 440, 896 P.2d 889, 896 (1995) (quoting State v. Miller ,
4 Haw. App. 603, 606, 671 P.2d 1037, 1040 (1983)). "Thus,
'[a conclusion of law] is not binding upon the appellatecourt and is freely reviewable for its correctness.'" Id.(quoting State v. Bowe, 77 Hawai
»i 51, 53, 881 P.2d 538, 540
(1994)). 
State v. Kaleohano , 99 Hawai » i 370, 375, 56 P.3d 138, 143 (2002). 
The prosecution bears the burden of presenting "clear and 
convincing evidence that any evidence obtained in violation of 
article I, section 7 [of the Hawai» i State Constitution], would 
inevitably have been discovered by lawful means before such evidence may be admitted under the inevitable discovery exception 
to the exclusionary rule." 
State v. Lopez , 78 Hawai
» i 433, 451, 
896 P.2d 889, 907 (1995). "Clear and convincing evidence means such evidence as will produce 'in the mind of a reasonable person 
a firm belief as to the facts sought to be established.'" 
Id., 
at 451 n.30, 896 P.2d at 907 n.30 (quoting 
Almeida v. Almeida, 4 
Haw. App. 513, 518, 669 P.2d 174, 179 (1983) (internal quotation 
marks omitted). 
The uncontroverted evidence presented here showed that
 
Rodrigues was originally arrested based on three outstanding
 
bench warrants, was handcuffed, was searched incident to that
 
arrest, but that the search, which yielded a clear plastic bag
 
containing what appeared to be crystal methamphetamine, exceeded
 
the lawful scope of that search, was placed in Ofr. Williamson's
 
vehicle and was transported to police cell block, where an
 
inventory search was conducted on his person, including his
 
pockets, consistent with standard procedures prior to placement
 
into a secure environment. On this record, we conclude there was
 
clear and convincing evidence that the packet containing
 
methamphetamine would have been discovered when police conducted
 
their inventory search prior to admitting Rodrigues into police
 
cell block. 
Nor do we find the case of State v. Silva , 91 Hawai» i 
111, 979 P.2d 1137 (App. 1999), 
cert. granted on other grounds 
and aff'd, 91 Hawai» i 80, 979 P.2d 1106 (1999), to the contrary. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
There, we affirmed the circuit court's denial of a motion to
 
suppress and rejected Silva's argument that there was
 
insufficient evidence to support the trial court's finding that
 
"in--an inventory search, that the contents of [Defendant's]
 
pockets would have been revealed. And . . . there's nothing in
 
the record to suggest that the contraband was in a closed
 
container." Id. at 115, 120, 979 P.2d at 1141, 1146. 
There, we affirmed the circuit court's factual
 
findings. Here, the circuit court did not make factual findings
 
regarding the events relevant to the issue of inevitable
 
discovery. Rather, the circuit court appeared to require, as a
 
matter of law, that evidence excluding other possible scenarios
 
be presented by the prosecution (i.e., requiring the prosecution
 
to negate any possibility that the defendant could discard the
 
contraband without detection) in order to carry its burden of
 
proof. We decline to endorse such a requirement, absent any
 
evidence that those alternative scenarios could reasonably have
 
occurred.
 
Therefore, we vacate the Circuit Court of the Fifth
 
Circuit's Order and remand for proceedings consistent with this
 
opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, March 19, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Tracy Murakami,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Kauai,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 Chief Judge
James S. Tabe,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge
 
10
 