  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30080
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KELLY RIVERA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CRIMINAL NO. 09-1-1355)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kelly Rivera (Rivera) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) entered on
 
1
August 26, 2009 in the Family Court of the First Circuit  (the
family court). The family court found Rivera guilty of
 
Harassment, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 711­
1106(1)(a) (Supp. 2011).2
 
On appeal, Rivera contends: (1) the family court abused
 
its discretion and violated Rivera's constitutional rights when
 
1
 Except as otherwise indicated, the Honorable Wilson M.N. Loo
presided.
2
 HRS § 711–1106(1)(a) provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of harassment if, with
intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any other person, that person:
(a) Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches another
person in an offensive manner or subjects the other person to
offensive physical contact.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
it denied her motion to continue trial; (2) the family court's
 
Findings of Fact (FOFs) 7-19, 22, and 23 are clearly erroneous
 
because they are inconsistent with the sole act upon which the
 
family court explicitly based its finding of guilt; (3) the
 
family court's Conclusion of Law (COL) 3 is wrong because it is
 
inconsistent with the court's oral ruling and COLs 3 and 5 are
 
wrong because there was insufficient evidence to disprove the
 
parental discipline defense beyond a reasonable doubt; and
 
(4) the family court erred when it failed to afford Rivera her 
right to allocution under Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
Rule 32, and when it failed to request a pre-sentence report as required under HRS § 706-601 (1993 Repl. & Supp. 2011) because 
Rivera was only nineteen years old at the time of sentencing. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Rivera's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) The family court did not abuse its discretion when
 
it denied Rivera's motion to continue trial. At the first trial
 
setting, the defense requested a continuance in the normal
 
course, but the family court granted only a two-day continuance
 
because the complaining witness (Minor) was leaving the state on
 
the evening of May 8, 2009.
 
At trial on May 8, 2009, defense counsel again
 
requested a continuance to give him "time to prepare, to talk to
 
all the witnesses, to talk to the teachers to see what
 
information . . . could be used." Rivera contends that, in the
 
two-day span between May 6-8, 2009, "Rivera had subpoenaed
 
several witnesses from [Minor's] school including the principal,
 
vice-principal, and teachers; however, [defense counsel] had not
 
had a chance to talk to the witnesses." Defense counsel wanted
 
such information, in part, to cross-examine Minor and Minor's
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mother (Mother). On May 7, 2009, Rivera had also filed a "Notice
 
of Intent to Rely Upon Other Crimes, Wrongs, Acts" (Notice)
 
related to Minor's history of disruptive behavior and other
 
misconduct. The prosecution stated that it was willing to
 
stipulate to the facts in the Notice or to defense counsel's
 
offer of proof.
 
The family court denied the request to further continue
 
trial, noting that the "initial arraignment and plea in this
 
matter was set on April 6th, 2009. Trial was set for May 6th
 
. . . giving the defense approximately four weeks to prepare for
 
trial." Also influencing the family court's decision was the
 
State's representation that Minor was leaving the islands that
 
night. After cross-examining Minor and Mother, defense counsel
 
noted: 
let the record to reflect should we talk to [potential
defense] witnesses and should other information come out
that could have been used to cross-examine [Minor] as well
as [Mother] . . . defense counsel does not have that
opportunity to do so because [Minor and Mother are] flying
out tonight.
 
Under the circumstances of this case, the family court
 
did not abuse its discretion or deny Rivera her constitutional
 
rights. This court has previously noted that:
 
In moving for a continuance based on the unavailability of a
witness, the movant must generally show that:
 
due diligence has been exercised to obtain the attendance of
the witness, that substantial favorable evidence would be
tendered by the witness, that the witness is available and
willing to testify, and that the denial of the continuance
would materially prejudice the defendant.
 
State v. Lee, 9 Haw. App. 600, 604, 856 P.2d 1279, 1282 (1993) 
(quoting United States v. Walker, 621 F.2d 163, 168 (5th 
Cir.1980) cert. denied, 450 U.S. 1000, 101 S.Ct. 1707, 68 L.Ed.2d 
202 (1981)); see also State v. Billam-Walker, 121 Hawai' i 228, 
230-31, 216 P.3d 1251, 1253-54 (App. 2009). Here, although the 
defense had a month to prepare for trial, witnesses from Minor's 
school had only been subpoenaed on May 7, 2009, and there was no 
showing that these witnesses would provide substantial favorable 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence for Rivera, that they were available and willing to
 
testify, and that denial of a continuance would materially
 
prejudice Rivera.
 
Moreover, "[a]buse of discretion will not ordinarily be
 
found in the denial of a continuance to enable a temporarily
 
unavailable witness to be called whose testimony will not bear
 
directly upon the issue of guilt and who is called only for
 
purposes of impeachment." State v. Altergott, 57 Haw. 492, 508,
 
559 P.2d 728, 739 (1977). Here, the information about Minor's
 misbehavior in other situations did not bear directly on the
 
issue of Rivera's guilt, and thus under Altergott, denial of a
 
continuance in such circumstances was not an abuse of discretion.
 
We further note that, to the extent information about
 
Minor's misbehavior was important to the defense, the prosecution
 
was willing to stipulate to the facts in the Notice but the
 
defense declined to enter into such a stipulation. Also, trial
 
was subsequently continued several times and when trial commenced
 
again on August 26, 2009, defense counsel called several
 
witnesses but did not call any school personnel or behavioral
 
health staff, made no representation that the defense needed to
 
recall Minor or Mother, and did not claim that Rivera had been
 
unable to pursue her theory of the case due to the court's denial
 
of her request to continue trial on May 8, 2009.
 
Rivera also argues that in light of the State's
 
representation that Minor was leaving for the mainland the
 
evening of May 8, 2009, the State should have "file[d] a request
 
for firm trial setting under HRPP Rule 12.2." This argument
 
fails because a party is not required under HRPP 12.2 to file a
 
motion for firm trial setting under the circumstances of this
 
case, and Rivera cites to no authority to show otherwise.
 
Rivera's additional argument, that the State should
 
have shown a good-faith effort to secure Minor's presence, also
 
fails. Minor was available on the first day of trial, testified,
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and defense counsel cross-examined him. The State did not argue 
that Minor was unavailable on the day of trial and seek to admit 
an out-of-court statement from Minor. Thus, Rivera's reliance on 
State v. Lee, 83 Hawai' i 267, 925 P.2d 1091 (1996) and State v. 
Ortiz, 74 Haw. 343, 845 P.2d 547 (1993), which address the right to confront witnesses, is misplaced. 
Based on the circumstances in this case, the family
 
court did not abuse its discretion when it denied Rivera's motion
 
on May 8, 2009 to continue trial. 
(2) The family court did not err in its findings in
 
FOFs 7-19, 22, and 23. Rivera argues that the family court
 
"clearly identified that it was convicting Rivera for the evening
 
incident with the belt" and therefore, FOFs 7, 8, and 12-19 were
 
"irrelevant and immaterial" because they did not refer to the
 
evening incident, and as such, were "clearly erroneous and not
 
supported by substantial evidence." 
We do not agree with Rivera's narrow view of the family
 
court's ruling. In its oral rulings at the end of trial on
 
August 26, 2009, the family court noted that Rivera had used a
 
belt "on the day in question" and did not limit its ruling to
 
just the evening incident. In its subsequent written Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law and Verdict (FOF/COL/Verdict), the
 
family court set forth in detail the basis for its ruling and was
 
not constrained to limit its findings to the evening incident.
3
 
Although Rivera testified that the only time she had spanked
 Minor with a belt was during the evening incident, Minor
 
testified that Rivera had hit him with a belt during the morning,
 
afternoon, and evening incidents.
 
Rivera also challenges all or parts of FOF 7-19, 22,
 
and 23 on the basis that they are not supported by substantial
 
3
 Rivera does not challenge the family court's issuance of the
FOF/COL/Verdict, but rather the scope of the findings and, as discussed infra,
the content of the conclusions.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence. "Verdicts based on conflicting evidence will not be 
set aside where there is substantial evidence to support the 
trier of fact's findings." State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai' i 255, 
259, 978 P.2d 693, 697 (1999) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). Furthermore, "an appellate 
court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of 
witnesses and the weight of the evidence[.]" Id. 
In this case, the testimony by Minor, Mother, and
 
Rivera, as well as the State's Exhibits, support FOFs 7-19, 22,
 
and 23, and these findings were not clearly erroneous.
 
(3) Rivera challenges the family court's COLs 3 and 5,
 
which state:
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
.  .  . 
 
3. The State has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that
[Rivera], with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm [Minor],
did strike, shove, kick or otherwise touch [Minor] in an
offensive manner or subject [Minor] to offensive physical
contact. The court reaches this conclusion based upon the
totality of circumstances, including the nature and severity
of [Rivera's] conduct which caused multiple injuries to
[Minor].
 
.  .  .
 
5. The State has disproven beyond a reasonable doubt
the parental discipline defense. The court reaches this
 
conclusion based upon the totality of circumstances, and
find that the force used by [Rivera] was not reasonably
related to the purpose of safeguarding or promoting the
welfare of [Minor] and that the force used was excessive and
improper punishment on [Minor].
 
We are not persuaded by Rivera's arguments.
 
(a) At the conclusion of the trial, the family court
 
orally stated that Rivera's use of the belt on Minor "was
 
disproportionate to the size of [Minor]." Rivera contends that
 
COL 3 is inconsistent with the family court's oral ruling because
 
COL 3 made no reference to Minor's size. However, COL 3
 
addresses the elements for the offense of Harassment, whereas the
 
family court's statement about Minor's size is relevant to the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
separate issue of the parental discipline defense. Thus, COL 3
 
is not wrong simply because it failed to address Minor's size.
 
Rivera also argues that the family court's oral ruling
 
was wrong because there was no evidence presented as to Minor's
 
size or weight. Although there was no testimony specifically
 
establishing Minor's size, the court was able to discern Minor's
 
size from the photographs admitted into evidence and from
 
visually seeing Minor when he took the stand less than two months
 
after the alleged incidents. 
(b) In COL 5, the family court concluded that the
 
prosecution had disproved beyond a reasonable doubt the
 
application of the parental discipline defense, on the basis that
 
"the force used by [Rivera] was not reasonably related to the
 
purpose of safeguarding or promoting the welfare of [Minor] and
 
that the force used was excessive and improper punishment[.]" 
Rivera contends there was insufficient evidence to support these
 
conclusions. We do not agree.
 
The parental discipline defense is based on HRS § 703­
309 (1993 Repl. and Supp. 2011), which states in relevant part:
 
§703-309 Use of force by persons with special
responsibility for care, discipline, or safety of others. The use
 
of force upon or toward the person of another is justifiable under
the following circumstances:
 
(1) The actor is the parent or guardian or other person
similarly responsible for the general care and
supervision of a minor, or a person acting at the
request of the parent, guardian, or other responsible
person, and:
 
(a) The force is employed with due regard for the age
and size of the minor and is reasonably related to
the purpose of safeguarding or promoting the
welfare of the minor, including the prevention or
punishment of the minor's misconduct; and
 
(b) The force used is not designed to cause or known to
create a risk of causing substantial bodily injury,
disfigurement, extreme pain or mental distress, or
neurological damage.
 
Here, COL 5 is based on HRS § 703-309(1)(a). "Because the
 
requirements of HRS § 703–309(1) are set out in the conjunctive,
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rather than the disjunctive, the prosecution needed only to 
disprove one element beyond a reasonable doubt to defeat the 
justification defense." State v. Kiese, 126 Hawai' i 494, 503-04, 
273 P.3d 1180, 1189-90 (2012) (quoting State v. Crouser, 81 Hawai'i 5, 11, 911 P.2d 725, 731 (1996)). 
The reasonableness of force turns on the totality of
 
the facts and circumstances of each case, as explained in State
 
v. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i 149, 166 P.3d 322 (2007). "Clearly, 
there is no bright line that dictates what, under all circumstances, is unreasonable or excessive corporal punishment. 
Rather, the permissible degree of force will vary according to 
the child's physique and age, the misconduct of the child, the 
nature of the discipline, and all the surrounding circumstances." 
Id. at 165, 166 P.3d at 338 (emphasis omitted). 
Here, the surrounding circumstances included evidence
 
that: on the day of the incidents, Minor was nine years old; 
Minor was exposed in utero to drugs; he has behavior problems,
 
including diagnoses of post-traumatic stress disorder, attention
 
deficit hyperactivity disorder, oppositional defiant disorder,
 
and bipolar disorder; he received treatment from a psychologist
 
and psychiatrist; he needs medication to calm him down. Rivera
 
knew Minor had behavioral issues and was prescribed medication to
 
help him control his behavior, but Rivera chose not to give Minor
 
his medication because she did not believe it helped him and she
 
did not like "the way it makes him." 
Rivera testified that she usually disciplined Minor by
 
taking away things he liked to do, such as watching television or
 
playing Playstation. However, on the day in question, there is
 
sufficient evidence to establish that Rivera reacted to each
 
incident by striking Minor with the belt, over five times in the
 
morning, over five times in the afternoon, and over five times in
 
the evening. As to the morning incident, there is evidence that
 
Rivera referred to Minor as "fuckin' kid" and she "looked mad." 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As to the evening incident, there is evidence that after Minor
 
tried to grab the belt, Rivera again struck him with the belt and
 
later struck Minor in the face with her hand. After Minor called
 
Mother, Rivera took the phone from Minor and told Mother that she
 
would throw Minor out of the car if she had to take him home.
 
There is also sufficient evidence to establish that
 
when Minor returned to Mother the evening in question, Mother
 
observed marks on the side of his face, welts on his cheek bone,
 
redness on his eyelids, welts on the outer tricep areas of his
 
arms and on both sides of the middle of his back. When Minor was
 
taken to Kapiolani Hospital three days after the incidents,
 
Dr. Boychuk observed residual bruising around Minor's right eye
 
and Minor complained of pain.
 
Rivera argues that "use of a belt to discipline . . . 
has been deemed a permissible form of discipline" by the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court and this court, citing to State v. Deleon, 72 Haw. 241, 813 P.2d 1382 (1991) and State v. Robertson, No. 28683 (App. 
Nov. 30, 2009) (mem.). However, as noted in Matavale, each case 
turns on all of the circumstances and there are no bright lines 
delineating when force is unreasonable and excessive. 
We note that in Matavale, the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
agreed with other courts that "an isolated instance of moderate 
or reasonable physical force . . . that results in nothing more 
than transient pain or temporary marks or bruises is protected under the parental discipline privilege." 115 Hawai' i at 166, 
166 P.3d at 339. However, we conclude that such reasoning does 
not apply in this case, where Rivera: knew that Minor was 
prescribed medication to address his behavior problems but did 
not give him his medicine; struck Minor not in an isolated 
instance, but on three different occasions in the same day; hit 
Minor multiple times with a belt on each occasion; struck Minor 
in the face on one occasion; called Minor a "fuckin' kid" twice; 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and told Mother that if Rivera had to bring Minor home, she would
 
throw him out of the car. 
Considering the evidence in the light most favorable to 
the State, there was substantial evidence to support the family 
court's conclusion that the State disproved the parental 
discipline defense because the force used by Rivera when she 
struck Minor was not reasonably related to the purpose of 
safeguarding or promoting the welfare of Minor. See State v. 
Crouser, 81 Hawai' i 5, 911 P.2d 725 (1996); State v. Miller, 105 
Hawai'i 394, 98 P.3d 265 (App. 2004). 
(4) The family court erred by failing to accord Rivera 
her right to pre-sentence allocution. Rivera's right to 
allocution under HRPP Rule 32(a) and article I, section 5 of the 
Hawai'i State Constitution were violated when the family court 
imposed sentence without personally addressing Rivera and instead addressed Rivera through her counsel. See State v. Schaefer, 117 
Hawai'i 490, 498, 184 P.3d 805, 813 (App. 2008). 
The family court also erred when it failed to order a
 
pre-sentence diagnosis and report (PSI), in violation of HRS
 § 706-601, which provides that "the court shall order a pre-
sentence correctional diagnosis of the defendant and accord due
 
consideration to a written report of the diagnosis before
 
imposing sentence where: . . . (b) The defendant is less than
 
twenty-two years of age and has been convicted of a crime." HRS
 
§ 706-601(1)(b). Rivera was convicted of the crime of harassment
 
and was nineteen years old when sentence was imposed; thus, the
 
court was required to order a PSI and consider the report before
 
imposing sentence. 
Because the denial of allocution is reversible error, 
Rivera's sentence must be vacated and this case remanded for 
resentencing before a different judge to provide Rivera her right 
to allocution. Schaefer, 117 Hawai' i at 498, 184 P.3d at 813. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Additionally, prior to sentencing, the court must order a PSI and
 
consider it before imposing sentence. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT
 The Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered on
 
August 26, 2009 in the Family Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed in part and vacated in part. Rivera's conviction for
 
Harassment is affirmed. Rivera's sentence, however, is vacated,
 
and the case is remanded to the family court for re-sentencing
 
before a different judge. Prior to re-sentencing, the court must
 
order a PSI and consider it before re-sentencing.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 16, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Karen T. Nakasone 
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
11
 