  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30442
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v. ALBERT VILLADOS, JR.,
also known as ALBERTO VILLADOS, JR., Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0115(2))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Albert Villados, Jr. (Villados)
 
appeals from the Judgment Conviction and Sentence entered by the
 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court) on April 15,
 
2010.1
 
On February 25, 2008, in CR. No. 08-1-0115, Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged Villados by Felony 
Information with two counts: Promoting A Dangerous Drug in the 
Second Degree, in violation of Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
2
§ 712-1242(1)(b)(i) (Supp. 2010)  and Prohibited Acts Related to 
1
 The Honorable Shackley F. Raffetto presided.
 
2
 HRS § 712-1242(1)(b)(i) provides:
 
Promoting a dangerous drug in the second degree. (1)
A person commits the offense of promoting a dangerous drug
in the second degree if the person knowingly: 
. . . . 
(b) Possesses one or more preparations, compounds, mixtures,
or substances of an aggregate weight of: 
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Drug Paraphernalia, in violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (2010).3
 
After a jury trial, on December 2, 2009, Villados was found
 
guilty on both counts.
 
At the time of the offenses, Villados was on felony
 
probation in four prior drug-related cases. In light of the
 
prior convictions, on Count 1, the State filed a Motion for
 
Imposition of Mandatory Minimum Period of Imprisonment pursuant
 
to HRS § 706-606.5 (Supp. 2010), requesting that Villados be
 
sentenced as a repeat offender to a ten-year mandatory minimum
 
term of imprisonment without the possibility of parole. At the
 
sentencing hearing held on April 15, 2010, Villados stipulated
 
that he was subject to sentencing as a repeat offender. 
Additionally, the defense admitted the probation violations in
 
his four prior drug-related cases and stated "that [the defense
 
was] prepared to go forward with sentencing on everything." The
 
Circuit Court found that Villados "violated substantial
 
conditions of his probation" in four criminal cases: (1) CR. No.
 
03-1-0459, (2) CR. No. 04-1-0489, (3) CR. No. 04-1-0490, and (4)
 
CR. No. 04-1-0491.
 
Villados was sentenced to ten years of incarceration
 
for Count 1, with a mandatory minimum term of ten years, and five
 
years of incarceration for Count 2, terms to run consecutively,
 
with credit for time served. The Circuit Court also ordered that
 
2(...continued)
 
(i) One-eighth ounce or more, containing
methamphetamine, heroin, morphine, or cocaine or any
of their respective salts, isomers, and salts of
isomers; 
3
 HRS § 329-43.5(a) provides:
 
Prohibited acts related to drug paraphernalia.  (a) It
is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent
to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of this chapter. . . .
 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the sentence in this case was to run consecutively to the re­
sentencing for probation revocation in his four prior cases. The
 
Notice of Entry for the Judgment Conviction and Sentence was
 
filed on April 15, 2010. Villados timely appealed.
 
Defendant-Appellant Villados raises the following
 
points of error on appeal: 
1. The Circuit Court abused its discretion in
 
admitting testimony regarding Villados's prior bad acts;
 
2. The Circuit Court erred in admitting the hearsay
 
testimony of Villados's post-arrest statements;
 
3. Absent the inadmissible prior bad act and hearsay
 
evidence, there was insufficient evidence to support Villados's
 
convictions; and
 
4. The Circuit Court's consecutive term sentences,
 
with a potential maximum term of thirty-five years of
 
incarceration, violated Villados's right to a jury trial and his
 
due process rights where the court knew of the State's plea offer
 
and allegedly imposed a significantly harsher sentence upon
 
Villados because he exercised his right to a jury trial.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve
 
Villados's contentions as follows:
 
(1) Hawai'i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b)4 
prohibits the admission of evidence of other crimes, wrongs or acts introduced for the sole purpose of establishing criminal 
4
 HRE Rule 404(b) provides:
 
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not
admissible to prove the character of a person in order to
show action in conformity therewith. It may, however, be
admissible where such evidence is probative of another fact
that is of consequence to the determination of the action,
such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation,
plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of
mistake or accident. 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
propensity, but under certain circumstances allows such evidence 
to be offered to prove other facts of consequence. State v. 
Behrendt, 124 Hawai' i 90, 102, 237 P.3d 1156, 1168 (2010). Prior 
bad act evidence under HRE rule 404(b) may be admissible when it 
is (1) relevant, and (2) more probative than prejudicial. State 
v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai' i 390, 404, 56 P.3d 692, 706 (2002). Where 
evidence is offered for substantive reasons rather than 
propensity, HRE Rule 403 requires a trial court to weigh the 
potential prejudicial effects of the evidence against its 
probative value. Id. 
The State was required to prove that Villados knowingly
 
possessed at least one-eighth ounce of methamphetamine to
 
establish Count 1 Promoting A Dangerous Drug in the Second
 
Decree. See HRS § 712-1242(1)(b)(i) (Supp. 2010). Amy
 
Bautista's (Bautista) testimony was relevant to prove Villados's
 
knowledge of the methamphetamine and his intent to exercise
 
dominion and control over it. Bautista testified that she and
 
Villados had been living together for two or three months before
 
their residence was raided by the Maui County police on February
 
20, 2008. Bautista identified a fanny pack and a brown eyeglass
 
case found during the search, which contained methamphetamine, as
 
belonging to Villados and testified that she had accompanied him
 
when he purchased the fanny pack and eyeglass case. She also
 
identified a picture of herself and Villados in which Villados
 
was wearing the fanny pack. Bautista testified that while she
 
was living with Villados she saw him with methamphetamine at the
 
house, and that she would see Villados break down the
 
methamphetamine into smaller packets and then put the small
 
packets of methamphetamine into the fanny pack. This evidence
 
was probative of whether Villados had the knowledge of the
 
methamphetamine and that he exercised dominion and control over
 
it. Because Villados was not charged with the intent to
 
distribute the methamphetamine, this evidence was not being
 
4  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
offered to portray Villados as a drug dealer as Villados
 
contends, but rather to show that he knowingly possessed the
 
methamphetamine.
 
The Circuit Court explained its ruling to allow
 
Bautista's testimony, stating that the "evidence goes to show[]
 
that there was a plan, or he was preparing to possess the drugs
 
and that he had knowledge of the drugs." The court stated that
 
Bautista's testimonial evidence about Villados purchasing the
 
fanny pack and then using it to store methamphetamine was
 
relevant to show opportunity, plan, knowledge, etc. The Circuit
 
Court also noted that "certain types of evidence [] might reflect
 
upon [Villados] badly," but that they can be admitted "if they
 
are admitted for a different purpose," such as is the case here.
 
The State clearly articulated a legitimate purpose for
 
Bautista's testimony, other than to show character and
 
propensity, i.e., to establish knowledge, intent, modus operandi,
 
identity, plan, opportunity, and absence of mistake or accident. 
The Circuit Court did not err in determining that the evidence
 
was relevant and probative of facts other than character and
 
propensity.
 
Nor did the Circuit Court abuse its discretion in 
determining that the probative value of this evidence 
substantially outweighed the danger of unfair prejudice to 
Villados. The Circuit Court properly considered the factors set 
forth in State v. Steger, 114 Hawai' i 162, 172, 158 P.3d 280, 290 
(App. 2006): 
the strength of the evidence as to the commission of the
other bad acts, the similarities between the other bad acts
and the charged crime, the time that has elapsed between the
other bad acts and the charged crime, the need for the
evidence, the efficacy of alternate proof, and the degree to
which the evidence will probably rouse the jury to
overmastering hostility.
 
Here, Bautista's testimony was highly probative of
 
Villados's knowledge and intent to exercise dominion and control
 
over the methamphetamine. The need for the evidence was
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
heightened by the defense's theory of the case at trial, i.e.
 
that he was merely present in the residence and that mere
 
proximity to the fanny pack is not enough to prove that he
 
knowingly possessed more than one-eighth of an ounce of
 
methamphetamine. The potential prejudice argued by Villados,
 
that the evidence "compelled the jury" to conclude that he was a
 
drug dealer, was lessened by the fact that Villados was not
 
charged with a distribution offense. In addition, the court
 
specifically instructed that the jury "must not be
 
influenced . . . by passion or prejudice against the defendant"
 
in reaching their verdict. Accordingly, the Circuit Court did
 
not abuse its discretion when it concluded that the probative
 
value outweighed the prejudicial effects of the testimony. 
(2) Bautista testified that Villados told her on a
 
number of occasions to "take the blame for it," referring to "his
 
fanny pack." In addition, the Circuit Court allowed the
 
testimony of Melissa Montilliano (Montilliano), and a recording
 
of Villados's statements to Montilliano over the telephone, the
 
gist of which was to ask her to urge Bautista to take the rap for
 
him. Villados contends that this evidence was inadmissible
 
hearsay.
 
"Hearsay" is a statement, other than one made by the
 
declarant while testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in
 
evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted. HRE Rule
 
801. Hearsay is not admissible except as provided by the Hawai' i 
Rules of Evidence, or by other rules prescribed by the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court, or by statute. HRE Rule 802. An exception to the 
hearsay rule is an admission by a party-opponent, which is 
defined as "[a] statement that is offered against a party and is 
(A) the party's own statement, in either the party's individual
 
or a representative capacity[.]" HRE Rule 803(a)(1)(A). 
The State offered testimony by Bautista and Montilliano
 
that Villados stated a number of times that he wanted Bautista to
 
6  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
take the rap for him, and offered it as an admission on his part.
 
Bautista testified that Villados called her multiple times and
 
wanted her to "take the blame" and claim ownership over the fanny
 
pack because she would only "have to do drug court since it is
 
[her] first drug charge." The recording of Villados's call to
 
Montilliano was identified as such by Montilliano. Pressuring
 
Bautista to take the rap was an admission of guilt. Villados's
 
statement that he would take it "if worse comes to worse," was
 
also an admission of guilt. The Circuit Court did not err when
 
it admitted Villados's post-arrest statements as an admission by
 
a party-opponent.
 
(3) In determining the sufficiency of the evidence, 
the test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a 
reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to 
support the conclusion of the trier of fact. State v. Gaston, 
108 Hawai' i 308, 311, 119 P.3d 616, 619 (App. 2005). 
"Substantial evidence" as to every material element of the 
offense charged is "credible evidence which is of sufficient 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable 
caution to support a conclusion." Id. (citation omitted). When 
reviewing a jury trial, an appellate court will not pass upon the jury's decisions with respect to the credibility of witnesses and 
the weight of the evidence, because this is the province of the 
jury as the trier of fact. State v. Jhun, 83 Hawai' i 472, 483, 
927 P.2d 1355, 1366 (1996). 
As we have already concluded that the Circuit Court did
 
not err in admitting the prior bad acts testimony and his post-
arrest statements, Villados's argument that without this evidence
 
there is insufficient evidence to support his conviction is
 
without merit.
 
Even without this evidence, contrary to Villados's
 
assertion, while recognizing that mere proximity is not enough to
 
establish dominion and control, viewed in the light most
 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
favorable to the prosecution, there was sufficient evidence for 
the jury to infer that Villados had the power and intention to 
exercise dominion and control over the methamphetamine and drug 
paraphenalia even though he was not in actual possession of them 
at the time of his arrest. See State v. Moniz, 92 Hawai' i 472, 
475-76, 992 P.2d 741, 744-45 (1999). In addition to the above, the State introduced into evidence: (1) Villados's ID card found 
in the fanny pack with the cash; (2) the scales found in 
Villados's bedroom; (3) the picture of Villados taken one week 
before the raid depicting him wearing the fanny pack around his 
neck; and (4) a rental agreement showing Villados had the right 
of possession over the residence that the drugs were found in. 
Bautista testified that Villados owned the fanny pack, he alone 
handled the fanny pack and used it to store his supply of 
methamphetamine, Villados bought the fanny pack, and that she 
never saw the third occupant of the residence with the fanny 
pack. Unlike in Moniz, here, there was evidence showing that the 
drugs were found among Villados's personal belongings and that he 
had ownership and control over it. This evidence was of 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a reasonable 
juror to support a conclusion that Villados had constructive 
possession over the contents of the fanny pack. 
(4) Villados argues that his due process and jury
 
trial rights were violated by the Circuit Court's imposition of
 
the consecutive sentences in this case. Citing State v. Mata, 71
 
Haw. 319, 789 P.2d 1122 (1990), Villados contends that "[g]iven
 
the court's repeated warnings to Mr. Villados about the lengthy
 
sentence he could receive if he elected to go to trial," there
 
was "the distinct implication that [Mr. Villados] would be
 
sentenced more severely because [he] had demanded jury trial." 
However, the Circuit Court made no threat, express or implied,
 
that it would impose a more lenient sentence upon Villados if he
 
pled guilty. Instead, through its discussions with Villados, the
 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court informed Villados of the seriousness of the charges and the
 
risk of proceeding to trial. At the hearing, the court made it
 
clear to Villados that because of his prior convictions, "you're
 
facing a mandatory minimum of ten years if you're convicted," and
 
that if he rejected the plea agreement offering to lower the
 
mandatory minimum to five years,
 
it's going to be ten years if you're convicted. The judge
 
won't have any choice is what that means. So if you're
convicted, it's up to 15 years on the charges, but a
mandatory minimum of ten years. So you are guaranteed you
will stay ten years in prison if you're convicted.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The judge told Villados that, with the sentencing for
 
his prior drug-related cases, he could end up with a sentence far
 
longer than what was offered in the plea agreement. These
 
statements did not burden Villados's ability to exercise his
 
right to a jury trial, but rather fully informed Villados of the
 
potential ramifications if he chose to reject the plea agreements
 
and proceed to trial. Compare Mata, 71 Haw. at 325-26, 789 P.2d
 
at 1126 (trial judge informed defendants that in sentencing
 convicted DUI offenders, he would give consideration to whether
 
they had demanded jury trials). There is nothing in the record
 
to suggest that the Circuit Court expressly or impliedly
 
threatened to impose a more severe sentence if a jury trial were
 
demanded by Villados. 
Villados does not dispute that the Circuit Court 
properly considered the sentencing factors set forth in HRS 
§ 706-606 and stated its reasons for imposing consecutive 
sentences. See, e.g., State v. Tauiliili, 96 Hawai' i 195, 199, 
29 P.3d 914, 918 (2001); State v. Cornelio, 84 Hawai' i 476, 494, 
935 P.2d 1021, 1039 (1997). We cannot conclude that the Circuit 
Court abused its discretion in doing so. 
9  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's April 15, 2010
 
Judgment Conviction and Sentence is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 28, 2011 
On the briefs: 
Joyce K. Matsumori-Hoshijo
for Defendant-Appellant onthe Opening Brief Chief Judge 
Davelynn M. Tenganfor Defendant-Appellant onthe Reply Brief Associate Judge 
Renee Ishikawa Delizo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Apellee Associate Judge 
10 