FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--­
SCOTT E. SIMMONS, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
APRIL LEE SAMULEWICZ, Defendant-Appellee,
and DOES 1-50, Defendants.
 
NO. 30527
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0769)
 MAY 9, 2013
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, REIFURTH and GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Scott E. Simmons (Simmons) appeals
 
from the Final Judgment filed December 13, 2010 in the Circuit
 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).  Judgment was
 
entered in favor of Defendant-Appellee April Lee Samulewicz
 
(Samulewicz), pursuant to the (1) "Order Granting [Samulewicz's]
 
Motion for Summary Judgment" filed on April 28, 2010, and
 
1
 The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2) "Order Granting [Samulewicz's] Motion for Award of Attorney's
 
Fees and Costs" filed on December 13, 2010.
 
Simmons and Samulewicz were once involved in a romantic
 
relationship, which resulted in their cohabitation and subsequent
 
engagement. Following the dissolution of their relationship
 
after almost seven years, Simmons brought this action against
 
Samulewicz asserting, inter alia, that the parties had entered
 
into a joint-venture and/or joint enterprise, including the
 
purchase of real estate. Simmons's complaint asserted causes of
 
action against Samulewicz for: breach of contract (Count I);
 
breach of implied contract (Count II); promissory estoppel (Count
 
III); quasi-estoppel (Count IV); constructive trust (Count V);
 
unjust enrichment (Count VI); and civil conspiracy (Count VII). 
In this appeal, Simmons asserts that the circuit court
 
erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Samulewicz
 
because: (1) the doctrines of res judicata and collateral
 
estoppel do not apply; (2) the statute of frauds does not apply
 
to partnership or joint venture agreements, and Simmons is not
 
seeking enforcement of an agreement to transfer land;
 
(3) Samulewicz waived any statute of frauds defense to the breach
 
of promise to marry; (4) if the statute of frauds applies,
 
Simmons's part performance takes all oral agreements out of the
 
statute of frauds; (5) the parol evidence rule was not applicable
 
to a quitclaim deed; (6) there are genuine issues of material
 
fact as to whether or not the parties entered into an express or
 
implied partnership agreement, and if so, whether Simmons has a
 
right to damages; and (7) there are genuine issues of material
 
fact as to Simmons's claims for constructive trust, fraud,
 
estoppel, conspiracy and unjust enrichment. Simmons also
 
contends on appeal that the circuit court erred by awarding
 
excessive, unwarranted and improper attorneys' fees to
 
Samulewicz.2
 
2
 Simmons does not challenge the award of costs by the circuit court.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the reasons set forth below, we hold that (1) the
 
circuit court properly granted summary judgment as to Simmons's
 
express and implied contract claims; (2) the circuit court erred
 
in granting summary judgment as to Simmons's unjust enrichment
 
claim; (3) the circuit court erred in granting attorneys' fees;
 
and (4) all other points of error are either waived or moot.
 
We therefore vacate the Final Judgment with regard to
 
Simmons's claim for unjust enrichment and the award of attorneys'
 
fees, and we remand the case to the circuit court for further
 
proceedings.
 
I. Case Background
 
A. Relevant Facts
 
Simmons and Samulewicz began their romantic
 
relationship in June 2000 and thereafter began cohabitating and
 
planning their future together. On or about October 2001,
 
Simmons proposed marriage and the parties planned a wedding date
 
in August 2002. 
In the meantime, in May 2002, the parties purchased as
 
joint tenants a residence located on Kuupua Street in Kailua
 
(Kuupua Street Property), which also had a separate rental unit
 
(cottage). In a declaration supporting her summary judgment
 
motion, Samulewicz contends that she was thinking of buying a
 
house and when told by the bank that she would need a co-signor,
 
Simmons indicated he was willing to co-sign for the loan. 
Simmons, on the other hand, contends in a counter-declaration
 
that he co-signed because Samulewicz was to be his wife and the
 
Kuupua Street Property was to be their marital home. Simmons
 
further asserts that Samulewicz provided the money for the down
 
payment on the Kuupua Street Property, but that his credit
 
history and income allowed them to secure the mortgage. Simmons
 
asserts that the parties agreed to share financial responsibility
 
for the maintenance of the Kuupua Street Property, including,
 
among other things, the mortgage, utilities, property taxes, and
 
cost of improvements. They also agreed, he contends, that they
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
would share any equity, income or other benefits from that
 
property. 
In August 2002, the parties participated in a
 
"spiritual wedding ceremony," which involved traditional aspects
 
of a wedding ceremony, but they did not sign a marriage license. 
Although Simmons and Samulewicz had originally planned on getting
 
legally married, Samulewicz was concerned about Simmons's
 
business and financial situation and the potential financial
 
liability legal marriage could entail. The couple agreed to go
 
through with the ceremony and, according to Simmons, secure the
 
marriage license thereafter. However, a marriage license was
 
never signed. 
After the ceremony, Simmons contends that the couple
 
held themselves out as husband and wife. They continued to live
 
at the Kuupua Street Property.
 
Simmons further contends that, as Samulewicz was
 
frequently away on business, they agreed that Simmons would
 
manage and maintain the Kuupua Street Property including
 
maintaining the landscape, painting, making repairs, adding new
 
appliances, constructing fences, installing flooring, adding
 
storage and closet space, renovating bathrooms, and replacing the
 
cottage roof, along with other "handy-man" type responsibilities
 
as needed to preserve and protect the Kuupua Street Property. 
Moreover, Simmons asserts it was his job to find renters for the
 
cottage and to take care of Samulewicz's automobile. 
In August 2004, Simmons transferred his interest in the
 
Kuupua Street Property to Samulewicz. Simmons asserts this was
 
done in furtherance of their relationship and to protect the
 
Kuupua Street Property from potential creditors of his business. 
Samulewicz maintains that there was no agreement that she would
 
hold the Kuupua Street Property for the benefit of Simmons or
 
that he would have any interest in the Kuupua Street Property.
 
Simmons also contends that the Kuupua Street Property
 
was refinanced and that proceeds from the refinancing were used,
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
among other things, to purchase another property in Kailua to be
 
rented out (Rental Property) and to purchase property in Florida
 
(Florida Property). Simmons claims that due to continued
 
concerns about his potential business creditors, Samulewicz and
 
he agreed that he would not be on title to either the Rental
 
Property or the Florida Property, but instead title to those
 
properties would be held by Samulewicz, her mother, and her step­
father. He contends Samulewicz, her mother and her step-father
 
agreed to create a trust consisting of the Kuupua Street
 
Property, the Rental Property and the Florida Property, wherein
 
he would be a trustee and beneficiary and share equally in the
 
income, proceeds, disbursements, profits and assets of the trust. 
Samulewicz disputes that Simmons was involved in any way in the
 
purchases of the Rental Property or the Florida Property. She
 
also disputes that she agreed to set up a trust for Simmons or
 
that Simmons would have any ownership interest in property that
 
was in her name.
 
On or about June 2007, Samulewicz ended her
 
relationship with Simmons. On August 15, 2007, Samulewicz filed
 
an action in the District Court of the First Circuit (district
 
court) to eject Simmons from the Kuupua Street Property. Two
 
weeks later, on August 29, 2007, Simmons filed a Complaint for
 
Division of Quasi-Marital Property against Samulewicz in the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit (family court). On
 
September 12, 2007, the district court ruled that Samulewicz was
 
entitled to possession of the Kuupua Street Property and that
 
Simmons was not entitled to remain on the property. On
 
November 6, 2007, the family court granted Samulewicz's motion to
 
dismiss the family court action due to lack of subject matter
 
jurisdiction. 
B. Proceedings in the Circuit Court
 
On April 15, 2008, Simmons filed the complaint in this
 
action in the circuit court. On October 21, 2009, Samulewicz
 
filed a Motion for Summary Judgment arguing that there existed no
 
5
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
genuine issue of material fact and that she was entitled to
 
judgment as a matter of law because Simmons had no rights to
 
Samulewicz's property, and Simmons's claims were barred by res
 
judicata or collateral estoppel, the statute of frauds, and the
 
parole evidence rule. 
On April 28, 2010, the circuit court issued an Order
 
Granting Samulewicz's Motion for Summary Judgment. The Order
 
simply stated, "[a]fter considering the submitted memoranda,
 
exhibits, and representations made by counsel in the light most
 
favorable to Plaintiff, and being duly advised of the record,
 
files, and pleadings herein, the court finds there is no genuine
 
issue of material fact as to any of Plaintiff's claims." Thus,
 
the particular basis for the circuit court's ruling is unclear. 
On May 25, 2010, Simmons filed a Notice of Appeal. 
On May 25, 2010, Samulewicz filed a Motion for Award of
 
Attorney's Fees and Costs. On December 13, 2010, the circuit
 
court issued an order granting the motion and awarding Samulewicz
 
$29,800 in attorneys' fees and $1,025.56 in costs. On December
 
13, 2010, the circuit court entered Final Judgment in favor of
 
Samulewicz. 
On December 27, 2010, Simmons filed an Amended Notice
 
of Appeal. 
II.	 Standards of Review
 
A.	 Summary Judgment 
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
reviewed de novo. See State ex rel. Anzai v. City and 
County of Honolulu, 99 Hawai' i 508, [515], 57 P.3d 433,
[440] (2002); Bitney v. Honolulu Police Dep't, 96 Hawai' i 
243, 250, 30 P.3d 257, 264 (2001). 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
 proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
words, we must view all of the evidence and inferences
drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the
party opposing the motion.
 
Kahale v. City and County of Honolulu, 104 Hawai' i 341, 344,
90 P.3d 233, 236 (2004) (citation omitted). 
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai' i 90, 
96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008). 
B. Award of Attorneys' Fees
 
"The circuit court's grant or denial of attorneys' fees 
and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." 
Kahala Royal Corp. v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 113 
Hawai'i 251, 266, 151 P.3d 732, 747 (2007). 
III. Discussion
 
As an initial matter, although Simmons's points of 
error challenge the grant of summary judgment on his causes of 
action for constructive trust, fraud, estoppel, and conspiracy, 
he presents no argument as to these claims. Therefore, we deem 
Simmons's points of error regarding these claims waived. Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
Most of Simmons's remaining points of error are raised
 
because it is unclear on what basis the circuit court granted
 
summary judgment and Simmons thus attempts to address a variety
 
of arguments raised in Samulewicz's summary judgment motion. We
 
address below only those issues we deem necessary to resolve this
 
appeal.
 
A. Res Judicata and Collateral Estoppel
 
A primary basis for Samulewicz's summary judgment
 
motion was that res judicata and collateral estoppel barred the
 
instant action due to the two prior lawsuits involving Samulewicz
 
and Simmons, that is: the summary possession action brought by
 
Samulewicz in district court to evict Simmons from the Kuupua
 
Street Property; and the action brought by Simmons in the family
 
court asserting breach of a promise to marry and requesting
 
division of quasi-marital property.
 
7
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Neither the district court summary possession action
 
nor the family court action bar the instant lawsuit. The tests
 
differ with respect to whether res judicata (claim preclusion) or
 
collateral estoppel (issue preclusion) apply, but neither test is
 
met in this case.
 
[C]laim preclusion [or res judicata] prohibits a party from
relitigating a previously adjudicated cause of action.
Issue preclusion, or collateral estoppel, on the other hand,
applies to a subsequent suit between the parties or their
privies on a different cause of action and prevents the
parties or their privies from relitigating any issue that
 
was actually litigated and finally decided in the earlier
action.
 
Dorrance v. Lee, 90 Hawai' i 143, 148, 976 P.2d 904, 909 (1999). 
A party relying on claim preclusion has the "burden of 
establishing that (1) there was a final judgment on the merits, 
(2)
 both parties are the same or in privity with the parties in
 
the original suit, and (3) the claim decided in the original suit
 
is identical with the one presented in the action in question."
 
Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai' i 43, 54, 85 P.3d 150, 161 (2004). On 
the other hand,
 
the doctrine of collateral estoppel [or issue preclusion] bars
relitigation of an issue where: (1) the issue decided in the prior
adjudication is identical to the one presented in the action in
question; (2) there is a final judgment on the merits; (3) the
issue decided in the prior adjudication was essential to the final
judgment; and (4) the party against whom collateral estoppel is
asserted was a party or in privity with a party to the prior
adjudication[.]
 
Dorrance, 90 Hawai' i at 149, 976 P.2d at 910. 
Here, the summary possession action did not decide the
 
identical claims or the identical issues presented in this case. 
Rather, in the summary possession action, the issue was
 
entitlement to possession of the Kuupua Street Property, not
 
damages as in this case. Moreover, although Simmons generally
 
asserted a legal and equitable claim to the Kuupua Street
 
Property as a defense in the summary possession action (in part
 
because he had filed the action in family court), such defense
 
claims in the district court were not identical to the
 
affirmative claims or issues he raises in this lawsuit seeking
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
monetary damages and such claims or issues were not decided by
 
the district court. Samulewicz has failed to meet her burden of
 
establishing that the requirements for claim preclusion or issue
 
preclusion have been met.
 
Likewise, the family court action filed by Simmons does 
not preclude the claims or issues raised in this lawsuit. 
Although some of the claims asserted in Simmons's Complaint for 
Division of Quasi-Marital Property in family court are the same 
as those asserted in this action, the family court determined 
that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction because the parties 
did not obtain a marriage license. Given that the family court 
dismissed Simmons's complaint for lack of subject matter 
jurisdiction, there was no final judgment on the merits in the 
family court action. See Bush v. Watson, 81 Hawai' i 474, 480, 
918 P.2d 1130, 1136 (1996) (holding that dismissal of claims for 
lack of subject matter jurisdiction was not an adjudication on 
the merits for purposes of barring claims). 
Thus, claim preclusion and issue preclusion do not bar
 
Simmons's claims or the issues raised in this lawsuit.
 
B. No Express or Implied Partnership Agreement
 
In his appellate briefs, Simmons couches his breach of
 
express and implied contract claims as asserting a partnership
 
agreement between himself and Samulewicz. To the contrary,
 
although Simmons's complaint alleges that the parties entered
 
into a joint venture and/or joint enterprise, including the
 
purchase of real estate, his contract claims are based on alleged
 
breaches related to the promised trust; that is, that Samulewicz
 
failed to create the promised trust, to name Simmons as a trustee
 
and/or beneficiary of the trust, and to share equally the trust's
 
income, proceeds, disbursements, profits and/or assets. On
 
appeal, Simmons does not raise any point of error or argue that
 
his contract claims are based on an alleged agreement to create a
 
trust, and therefore, we address the question whether the
 
contract claims can go forward based on an alleged partnership
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
agreement, as addressed by both parties in the briefing on
 
appeal.
 
As noted by Simmons, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 425-101 (2004 Repl.) defines a partnership as "an association 
of two or more persons to carry on as co-owners a business for 
profit[.]" The Hawai' i Supreme Court has stated that a 
partnership "exists where the parties have contracted to share, as common owners or principals, the profits of a business and . . 
. whether an agreement creates a partnership or not depends upon 
the intention of the parties." Dang v. F and S Land Dev. Corp., 
62 Haw. 583, 589, 618 P.2d 276, 280 (1980) (quoting Barnes v. 
Collins, 16 Haw. 340, 342 (1904)); see also Winkelbach v. Honolulu Amusement Co., 20 Haw. 498, 502 (Haw. Terr. 1911). 
Based on the evidence adduced in regard to the summary judgment 
motion, there is no genuine issue of material fact that the 
parties did not enter into a partnership agreement. 
With regard to whether there was a partnership between
 
Samulewicz and Simmons, Samulewicz attested in her declaration
 
that when Simmons signed the quitclaim deed in August 2004
 
transferring his interest in the Kuupua Street Property to her,
 
"[t]here was no agreement that I would be holding the property
 
for his benefit or that he would have any equitable or other
 
interest in the property." Samulewicz further attested that
 
7. In December, 2004 and January, 2005, my parents
and I bought other property in Hawaii and in Florida.
Mr. Simmons was not involved in this in any way. There was
 no discussion that he had any ownership in the property.
 
.  .  .
 
14. There was never any agreement that Mr. Simmons
and I would form a partnership, a joint-venture, a joint-
enterprise, or any "enterprise." To the best of my
recollection, neither of us ever used the word "enterprise"
in our discussions. As my boyfriend living in the Kuupua
Street property, he did pay certain bills and do various
things for me, and I did various things for him. However,
this was not a part of any arrangement that he would have
any ownership interest or any rights against me.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In response, Simmons's declaration fails to establish
 
any genuine issue of material fact that he and Samulewicz had an
 
agreement to "carry on as co-owners a business for profit." 
Rather, Simmons attributes his actions to his romantic
 
relationship with Samulewicz rather than to a business for
 
profit. Simmons's declaration states in relevant part:
 
2.	 On or about November 2000, I began a romantic
relationship with Defendant April Lee Samulewicz
("Defendant"). We agreed to move in together and
cohabitate. We arranged our lives together, and were
known publically and among our friends and family as a
couple. We cared for each other and where [sic]
involved with each other's intimate personal and
financial affairs.
 
3.	 Over the course of time, I came to rely on Defendant,
loved her, trusted her and wanted to spend my life
with her. On or about October 2001, I proposed
marriage to her and she accepted.
 
4.	 We planned our wedding for August 2002.
 
5.	 Until then, we continued living together as a couple,
and continued making decisions in support of our
relationship and future together as husband and wife.
This included making financial plans and
arrangement[s], and the decision to purchase our
marital home.
 
6.	 In the meantime, Defendant seemed to prosper in her
career as an executive with BearingPoint Consultants.
Her work required her to travel frequently and for
extended periods. Her work and travel took her all
 over the world.
 
7.	 I was very supportive of her work, and endured her
lengthy trips because I was committed to our
relationship and a prosperous future together.
 
8.	 Towards that end, on or about May 2002, we purchased
the real property located at 169 Kuupua Street,
Kailua, Hawaii 96734 (the "Property"), which included
a main house and a separate rental unit. The deed to
 the Property reflected Defendant and me as joint-
tenants ("Deed").
 
. . .
 
11.	 I did not co-sign the Mortgage as a favor or courtesy
to Defendant. Rather, I co-signed because she was to
be my wife and this was to be our marital home, and
the start of a promising and prosperous life together.
 
. . .
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
14.	 Defendant and I agreed that we would share financial
responsibility for the maintenance of the Property,
including paying for the Mortgage, utilities, property
taxes, and the cost of any improvements, among other
 expenses. We also agreed that we would share any equity,
income, or benefits derived from the Property.
 
. . .
 
23.	 On or about August 2004, Defendant and I agreed to transfer
my title in the Property to Defendant ("Deed Transfer"). We
 
did this in furtherance of our relationship and as a
maneuver that we believed was prudent to protect the
Property.
 
. . .
 
29.	 Prior to the Deed Transfer, it was never our intent – it was
certainly never my intent – to simply forfeit my financial
interest in the Property. The Deed Transfer was solely a
maneuver to protect our assets and to stay on a path were
[sic] our relationship would prosper relationally and
financially. I relied on Defendant's promises, but she did
not and has not followed through.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
Similarly, in a second supplemental declaration,
 
Simmons attested:
 
3.	 On or about 2002, I cosigned mortgages, along with
Defendant April Lee Samulewicz ("Defendant"), for the
purchase of the real property and improvements located
at 169 Kuupua Street, Kailua, Hawaii ("Kuupua House").
The principal mortgage was approximately $450,0000.00
[sic] and the second mortgage was approximately
$140,000.00.
 
4.	 I did not cosign the mortgage merely as a "favor" to
Defendant, and at the time we executed the mortgages
and deed, I definitely had a financial, relational and
familial interest in the Kuupua House. That was my
intent all along, and Defendant knew that, and is the
reason why I executed those documents and exposed
myself to the significant financial and legal
obligations that came with them.
 
5.	 The use of refinance proceeds from the Kuupua House
was to benefit my relationship with Defendant to
improve our financial and material well-being as a
couple and family. These proceeds were not to be used
to enrich Defendant at my expense.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
The purported intent set out in Simmons's declaration
 
to promote a romantic and/or anticipated marital relationship,
 
although including financial decisions, does not constitute an
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
intent to create a partnership. "There are no specific indices
 
of partnership, although an agreement to share in the profits and
 
losses of a business is weighty evidence thereof." Buffandeau v.
 
Shin, 60 Haw. 280, 281, 587 P.2d 1236, 1237 (1978) (emphasis
 
added). There is no evidence that there was an agreement between
 
Simmons and Samulewicz to share in the profits and losses of a
 
business. Thus, the circuit court did not err when it dismissed
 
Simmons's express contract claim via summary judgment.
 
Likewise, summary judgment on the implied contract 
claim was also correct. Simmons claims that there is a genuine 
issue of material fact as to whether or not an implied contract 
existed based on the circumstances of his relationship with 
Samulewicz. This contention is without merit. "'Implied 
contracts arise under circumstances which, according to the 
ordinary course of dealing and the common understanding of men, 
show a mutual intention to contract.'" Durette v. Aloha Plastic 
Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai' i 490, 504, 100 P.3d 60, 74 (2004) 
(quoting Wall v. Focke, 21 Haw. 399, 404 (Haw. Terr. 1913)). 
Just as there is no evidence in the record that the couple 
expressly agreed to enter into a partnership, the evidence 
adduced before the circuit court does not give rise to an 
inference of an implied contract to share in the profits of a 
business. See also Aehegma v. Aehegma, 8 Haw. App. 215, 223, 797 
P.2d 74, 79 (1990) ("Cohabitation, no matter for how long, does 
not by itself prove the existence of a contract implied-in­
fact."). 
Therefore, the circuit court properly ruled that
 
Samulewicz was entitled to summary judgment on the implied
 
contract claim.
 
Because there is no genuine issue of material fact as
 
to whether an express or implied contract existed between Simmons
 
and Samulewicz, we need not address Simmons's points of error
 
related to the statute of frauds or the parol evidence rule.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C.	 The Circuit Court Erred in Granting Summary Judgment on
the Unjust Enrichment Claim
 
Simmons asserts that he provided evidence raising a
 
genuine issue of material fact as to whether Samulewicz has been
 
unjustly enriched. Simmons argues that he conferred a benefit on
 
Samulewicz and added to her advantage through expenses he
 
incurred and through services he rendered related to their
 
financial partnership to purchase, maintain, and share profits
 
from real estate. In opposing the summary judgment motion,
 
Simmons adduced evidence showing, inter alia, that he had paid
 
over $46,000 in mortgage payments for the Kuupua Street Property,
 
that he had spent tens of thousands of dollars related to the
 
Kuupua Street Property and for the benefit of the parties'
 
relationship, and that he had incurred significant sums related
 
to the Rental Property. 
In response, Samulewicz argues:
 
[Simmons] did favors for his lover just as she did favors
for him. He fixed up things around the house, made some
improvements, rented out the cottage, dealt with the
landscaper who was taking care of the yard, paid some of the
bills for the properties, and bought a lot of the food. So
 what? This does not make an unjust enrichment claim.
Otherwise, every couple that lives together will end up in
court seeking restitution.
 
Samulewicz does not dispute that she received benefits from
 
Simmons. What is contested is whether the retention of the
 
benefits conferred by Simmons upon Samulewicz is unjust given the
 
nature of their relationship and the circumstances of this case.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has recognized that "unjust 
enrichment" is a "broad and imprecise term defying definition." 
Small v. Badenhop, 67 Haw. 626, 636, 701 P.2d 647, 654 (1985). 
Unjust enrichment is an indefinable idea in the same way
that justice is indefinable. But many of the meanings of
justice are derived from a sense of injustice, and this is
true of restitution since attention is centered on the
 prevention of injustice. Not all injustice but rather one
special variety: the unjust enrichment of one person at the
expense of another.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at n.12 (quoting 1 G. Palmer, The Law of Restitution § 1.1
 
(1978)). The supreme court looked to the Restatement of
 
Restitution and adopted the truism that 
a person confers a benefit upon another if he gives to the
other possession of or some other interest in money, land,
chattels, or [choses] in action, . . ., or in any way adds
to the other's security or advantage. One who receives a
 benefit is of course enriched, and he would be unjustly
enriched if its retention would be unjust.
 
Durette, 105 Hawai' i at 502, 100 P.3d at 72 (quoting Small, 67 
Haw. at 635-36, 701 P.2d at 654) (citation, emphases, quotation 
marks and brackets omitted)). 
Hawai'i case law has primarily addressed what 
constitutes unjust enrichment in the context of a business 
relationship. See Durette, 105 Hawai' i 490, 505, 100 P.3d 60, 75 
(holding that a genuine issue of material fact existed as to 
whether the retention of the benefits of an employee's services 
by the employer was unjust); Small, 67 Haw. 626, 701 P.2d 647 
(remanding case to circuit court to fashion an equitable remedy 
for unjust enrichment claim against landowners, where landowners 
had obtained property for nominal consideration and were able to 
purchase another property for less than its actual value based on 
promises between the parties to jointly develop the properties); 
Porter v. Hu, 116 Hawai' i 42, 55-56, 169 P.3d 994, 1007-08 (App. 
2007) (holding that a tort claim did not preclude agents from 
also bringing an unjust enrichment claim for the deprivation of 
the agents' books of business). 
In this case, given that the parties were engaged, that
 
they resided together for a number of years at the Kuupua Street
 
Property, and that Simmons adduced evidence that they held
 
themselves out as husband and wife after their spiritual
 
ceremony, we must also consider the ruling in Holstein v.
 
Benedict, 22 Haw. 441 (Haw. Terr. 1915). In Holstein, the
 
plaintiff brought an action in assumpsit seeking recovery for the
 
support furnished and the services rendered to the grand-aunt of
 
the plaintiff's wife during the time that the grand-aunt had
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
moved into the plaintiff's home. In deciding the case, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court expressed the following principles: 
Ordinarily where services are rendered and voluntarily
accepted, the law will imply a promise on the part of the
recipient to pay for them; but where the services are
rendered to each other by members of a family living as one
household, there will be no such implication from the mere
rendition and acceptance of the services. On the contrary,
the presumption is that the services are intended to be
gratuitous. [A]nd in order to recover therefor the plaintiff
must affirmatively show either that an express contract for
remuneration existed or that the circumstances under which
 the services were rendered were such as exhibit a reasonable
 and proper expectation that there would be compensation. The
reason for this is that the household family relationship is
presumed to abound in reciprocal acts of kindness and good
will which tend to mutual comfort and convenience of the
 family; and the rule stated applies not only to members of a
family who are related by blood, but to those distantly
related, and to those who are in fact not related at all,
provided they live together as members of one family. The
presumption that services rendered by one member of a family
to another were gratuitous is not a conclusive one. It may
be overcome by showing an express agreement for payment, or
by showing circumstances which will support the implication
that the services were to be paid for. The burden is, of
course, on the person rendering the services to overcome the
presumption which the law raises that such services were
rendered gratuitously.
 
22 Haw. at 443-44 (emphases added) (quoting 15 A. & E. Enc. Law,
 
1083, et seq.).
 
Although not legally related, Simmons and Samulewicz
 
lived together as members of a family household; therefore,
 
Holstein is applicable. In light of the principles espoused in
 
Holstein, we hold that certain portions of Simmons's unjust
 
enrichment claim are precluded because he seeks compensation for
 
services provided to a household member which are presumed under
 
the law to be gratuitous, and Simmons has not presented evidence
 
to create a genuine issue of material fact that there was an
 
express contract for remuneration or a reasonable expectation of
 
compensation.
 
In particular, Simmons is precluded from seeking
 
compensation for any services he rendered to Samulewicz related
 
to maintaining their household and which "tend to [the] mutual
 
comfort and convenience of the family[.]" 22 Haw. at 444. For
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instance, Simmons's claim of compensation for maintaining
 
Samulewicz's automobile, or for purchasing food items or home
 
supplies, would be precluded. Likewise, any expenses for
 
services rendered by Simmons in maintaining the Kuupua Street
 
Property would be presumed to be gratuitous under Holstein
 
because that property was the parties' household residence and
 
they each shared in the comfort of residing there. Maintenance
 
expenses would include, for instance, Simmons's claims for
 
repayment of costs incurred in the renovation and upkeep of the
 
Kuupua Street Property, including the cottage.
 
We conclude, however, that Simmons is not precluded
 
from seeking compensation for the mortgage payments he made on
 
the Kuupua Street Property, where Samulewicz now claims full
 
title and ownership of the property. We deem such payments
 
beyond the scope of "services" for the "mutual comfort and
 
convenience of the family" contemplated in Holstein. Moreover,
 
because Samulewicz claims full ownership of the property, there
 
is a genuine issue of material fact whether it would be unjust
 
for her to retain the benefit of those mortgage payments. Thus
 
Simmons may pursue the mortgage payments as part of his unjust
 
enrichment claim.
 
Furthermore, Holstein does not preclude Simmons's
 
unjust enrichment claim for expenses he incurred and services he
 rendered related to the Rental Property, which is owned by
 
Samulewicz, her mother, and her step-father. We do not view the
 
Rental Property as a part of the parties' household, nor such
 
services or expenses as being contemplated as gratuitous under
 
Holstein.
 
Other jurisdictions have held that unjust enrichment
 
claims can properly arise between parties in a romantic
 relationship. See Cobren v. Anderson, 385 S.W.3d 319 (Ark. Ct.
 
App. 2011) (unjust enrichment claim was proper alternative basis
 
for judgment in favor of appellee against her former boyfriend
 
for the many loans she made him over the course of their
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relationship); Maglica v. Maglica, 78 Cal. Rptr. 2d 101 (Cal.
 
App. Dep't Super. Ct. 1998) (quantum meruit recovery allowed to
 
former girlfriend for the reasonable value of the services she
 
rendered to former boyfriend's company, provided such services
 
were of direct benefit to the boyfriend). 
The evidence proffered by Simmons establishes that
 
there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether
 
Samulewicz has been unjustly enriched. Hence, the circuit court
 
erred in granting summary judgment for Samulewicz on the claim
 
for unjust enrichment.
 
D. Circuit Court Erred in Granting Attorneys' Fees
 
The circuit court awarded $29,800 in attorneys' fees to
 
Samulewicz. The basis for the award is not specified in the
 
circuit court's order, however Samulewicz brought her motion for
 
fees pursuant to HRS § 607-14 (Supp. 2012), claiming that this
 
was an action in assumpsit and asserting that she was the
 
prevailing party.
 
"Assumpsit embraces quasi-contractual remedies such as 
unjust enrichment[.]" Porter, 116 Hawai' i at 59, 169 P.3d at 
1011. Therefore, because we vacate the circuit court's grant of 
summary judgment as to Simmons's claim for unjust enrichment, it 
remains unclear which party will prevail on the assumpsit claims. 
See Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 
126, 176 P.3d 91, 125 (2008) ("Although a plaintiff may not 
sustain his entire claim, if judgment is rendered for him, he is 
the prevailing party for purposes of costs and attorneys' fees[.]" (quoting MFD Partners v. Murphy, 9 Haw. App. 509, 514, 
850 P.2d 713, 716 (1992) (internal quotation mark omitted; some 
brackets omitted, some added))). The award of attorneys' fees 
pursuant to HRS § 607-14 is thus vacated. 
Upon a determination of Simmons's unjust enrichment
 
claim, it will be within the discretion of the circuit court to
 
determine whether attorneys' fees, if any, should be awarded at
 
that time.
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the reasons discussed above, the Final Judgment
 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on December 13,
 
2010 is vacated to the extent it enters judgment in favor of
 
Samulewicz on Simmons's claim for unjust enrichment and to the
 
extent that it awards attorneys' fees. The Final Judgment is
 
affirmed in all other respects. This case is remanded to the
 
circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this
 
opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Peter Van Name Esser
 
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Michael Jay Green
John Rapp
for Defendant-Appellee
 
19
 