NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30302
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
TSUTAE IWAMOTO, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
GLENN T. HIRONAGA, DONALD TANIDA, NEW CENTURY MORTGAGE
CORPORATION, HELEN BENCH REALTY INC., CHARLES BENCH,
YU NEU BENCH, HIRONAGA DEVELOPMENTS, INC., H & L
DEVELOPMENTS, LLC, TODD LEMKAU, KRC CONSULTING,
INC., KIMBERLY LEMKAU, AVIS MORTGAGE INCORPORATED
dba NAVE FUNDING, US BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION,
as Trustee Relating to the Asset-Backed Pass-Through
Certificates Series 2003-HE4, THE BANK OF NEW YORK
MELLON FKA THE BANK OF NEW YORK, TRUSTEE FOR THE
CERTIFICATEHOLDERS CWMBS, INC., ALTERNATIVE LOAN
TRUST 2006-OA1 MORTGAGE PASS-THROUGH CERTIFICATES,
SERIES 2006-OA1, Defendants-Appellees
and
 
JOHN DOES 2-10; JANE DOES 2-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 5-10;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10; and DOE
GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-2430)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Tsutae Iwamoto (Iwamoto or
 
Plaintiff) appeals from the (1) "Judgment Against Plaintiff
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Tsutae Iwamoto and in Favor of Defendant US Bank National 
Association, as Trustee Relating to the Asset-Backed Pass-Through 
Certificates, Series 2003-HE4 as to Counts I and III of Fourth 
Amended Complaint Filed on August 3, 2009," and (2) "Judgment 
Against Plaintiff Tsutae Iwamoto and in Favor of Defendant US 
Bank National Association, as Trustee Relating to the Asset-
Backed Pass-Through Certificates, Series 2003-HE4 as to Count IV 
of Fourth Amended Complaint Filed on August 3, 2009," both filed 
on December 17, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1 
(circuit court). The circuit court certified both judgments as final judgments pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 54(b). 
As to Counts I (Fraudulent Inducement), III
 
(Constructive Trust), and IV (Quiet Title) of Iwamato's Fourth
 Amended Complaint (FAC), the circuit court entered judgment in
 
favor of Defendant-Appellee US Bank National Association, as
 
Trustee Relating to the Asset-Backed Pass-Through Certificates,
 
Series 2003-HE4 (US Bank) and against Iwamoto and dismissed the
 
three counts with prejudice.
 
On appeal, Iwamato contends:
 (1) The circuit court erred in dismissing Counts I and
 
III as to US Bank by holding that US Bank had proven it was a
 holder in due course.
 
(2) The circuit court erred in dismissing Count IV as
 
to US Bank by holding that US Bank had proven it was an innocent
 
purchaser as a matter of law.
 
(3) The circuit court erred in dismissing Counts I,
 
III, and IV as to US Bank by holding that US Bank was not a party
 
to any claims under these Counts.
 
1
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) Although not explicitly relied upon by the circuit
 
court, US Bank's argument in its October 9, 2009 "Motion for
 
Summary Judgment as to Count IV of Fourth Amended Complaint" that
 
Count IV should be dismissed because Iwamoto had unclean hands as
 
a matter of law was in error.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Iwamoto's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) Iwamoto contends the circuit court erred in
 
dismissing Counts I and III by holding that US Bank had proven it
 
was a holder in due course. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 490:3-302 (2008 Repl.) defines a holder in due course:
 
§490:3-302 Holder in due course. (a) Subject to
subsection (c) and section 490:3-106(d), "holder in due
course" means the holder of an instrument if:
 
(1)	 The instrument when issued or negotiated to the
holder does not bear such apparent evidence of
forgery or alteration or is not otherwise so
irregular or incomplete as to call into question
its authenticity; and
 
(2)	 The holder took the instrument (i) for value,
(ii) in good faith, (iii) without notice that
the instrument is overdue or has been dishonored
 or that there is an uncured default with respect
to payment of another instrument issued as part
of the same series, (iv) without notice that the
instrument contains an unauthorized signature or
has been altered, (v) without notice of any
claim to the instrument described in section
 490:3-306, and (vi) without notice that any
party has a defense or claim in recoupment
described in section 490:3-305(a).
 
Iwamoto did not allege in the circuit court or contend on appeal
 
that Donald Tanida's mortgage, when taken by US Bank, showed any 
evidence of "forgery or alteration or is . . . otherwise so
 
irregular or incomplete as to call into question its
 
authenticity." HRS § 490:3-302(a)(1).
 
Iwamoto argues that US Bank's expert witness report,
 
authored by Mr. Sarsfield, cannot establish as fact that there
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was a $1,008,603,766 mortgage security transaction and that
 
Donald Tanida's mortage was part of the transaction. Iwamoto
 
cites to In re James Wilson Assocs., 965 F.2d 160 (7th Cir.
 
1992), for the proposition that expert testimony cannot establish
 
underlying facts not otherwise in evidence. The court in Wilson
 
stated:
 
Metropolitan [principal creditor and appellant]
objects bitterly, however, to the exclusion of evidence that
the building is in far worse state of repair than [James
Wilson Associates] acknowledges and is therefore worth much
less than the plan assumes. The evidence had been obtained
 by a consulting engineer retained by Metropolitan's expert
witness, an architect who planned to testify about the
physical condition of the building as reported to him by the
consulting engineer. The bankruptcy judge was entitled to
exclude the architect's evidence as hearsay.  An expert is
of course permitted to testify to an opinion formed on the
basis of information that is handed to rather than developed
by him -- information of which he lacks first-hand knowledge
and which might not be admissible in evidence no matter by
whom presented. And in explaining his opinion an expert
witness normally is allowed to explain the facts underlying
it, even if they would not be independently admissible. But
 the judge must make sure that the expert isn't being used as
a vehicle for circumventing the rules of evidence. The fact
 that inadmissible evidence is the (permissible) premise of
the expert's opinion does not make that evidence admissible
for other purposes, purposes independent of the opinion. If
 for example the expert witness (call him A) bases his
opinion in part on a fact (call it X) that the party's
lawyer told him, the lawyer cannot in closing argument tell
the jury, "See, we proved X through our expert witness, A."
That was the kind of hand-off attempted in this case. The
 issue was the state of the building, and the expert who had
evaluated that state -- the consulting engineer -- was the
one who should have testified. The architect could use what
 the engineer told him to offer an opinion within the
architect's domain of expertise, but he could not testify
for the purpose of vouching for the truth of what the
engineer had told him -- of becoming in short the engineer's
spokesman.
 
Id. at 172-73 (citations omitted). Wilson is distinguishable
 
from the instant case because Mr. Sarsfield was not basing his
 
opinion off of another expert's opinion. Mr. Sarsfield stated in
 
his report that he had formed his opinion based on his review of
 
certain documents, including the Pooling and Servicing Agreement. 
Wilson does not apply to the instant case because Mr. Sarsfield's
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
report is based upon first-hand knowledge received from
 
admissible documents, not hearsay as was the case in Wilson.
 
Next, Iwamoto argues that US Bank did not take Donald
 
Tanida's mortgage in "good faith" as required by HRS § 490:3­
302(a)(2)(ii). HRS § 490:3-103(4) (2008 Repl.) defines good
 
faith as "honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable
 
commercial standards of fair dealing." Iwamoto did not argue
 
that US Bank was dishonest concerning the asset-backed security
 
transaction and failed to establish a commercial standard of fair
 
dealing that contradicted either (1) the Comptroller of the
 
Currency's Handbook on asset-backed securitization and the
 
trustee's duties in relation therewith, or (2) Mr. Sarsfield's
 
expert opinion as to what US Bank's responsibilities were
 
concerning the asset-backed security transaction. Mr. Wheeler,
 
Iwamoto's expert witness on loan origination, admitted in his
 
deposition that he was not an expert qualified to render an
 
opinion on US Bank's role as trustee in relation to an asset-
backed security transaction. Iwamoto failed to "set forth
 
specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue" regarding
 
Mr. Sarsfield's expert opinion that, assuming arguendo, even if
 
US Bank were required to review Donald Tanida's mortgage, a
 
review would not have raised undue concern. HRCP Rule 56(e).
 
Furthermore, Iwamoto presents no evidence that US Bank
 
had any actual notice of the defects or claims enumerated in HRS
 
§ 490:3-302(a)(2)(iii)-(iv). Iwamoto argues that according to
 
Mr. Wheeler, US Bank had facts within its knowledge that "would
 
have and should have alerted them to the fact that this was [a]
 
fraudulent mortgage." Mr. Wheeler is an expert on loan
 
origination, not the trustee's role in an asset-backed security
 
transaction. Iwamoto fails to present a genuine issue concerning
 
whether US Bank was required to conduct a thorough underwriting
 
of Donald Tanida's mortgage. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Finally, the circuit court's dismissal of Count III,
 
Constructive Trust, is affirmed because a "constructive trust
 
arises where a person holding title to property is subject to an
 
equitable duty to convey it to another on the ground that he
 
would be unjustly enriched if he were permitted to retain it." 
Lee v. Wong, 57 Haw. 137, 139, 552 P.2d 635, 637 (1976). Iwamoto
 
did not raise a claim of unjust enrichment against US Bank, and,
 
as discussed above, US Bank is insulated from Iwamoto's
 
fraudulent inducement claim because it is a holder in due course;
 
therefore, the circuit court did not err when it dismissed Count
 
III of Iwamoto's FAC.
 
(2) Iwamoto contends US Bank waived its affirmative
 
defense of innocent purchaser because it was not pled in US
 
Bank's answer. Iwamoto cites to an unpublished opinion from
 
Massachusetts for her proposition that US Bank waived its
 
innocent purchaser defense:
 
Bona fide purchaser is an affirmative defense, and generally
a failure to plead an affirmative defense results in a
waiver and exclusion of the defense from the case. Here
 defendants Barbara and David Sprino did not plead as an
affirmative defense that they were bona fide purchasers, and
they never notified plaintiff otherwise of their intent to
rely on such a defense. Consequently, they waived the
defense.
 
Serrato v. Sprino, No. 001739, 2005 WL 503937, at *11 (Mass.
 
Super. Feb. 3, 2005) (internal quotation marks and citations
 
omitted). Serrato is distinguishable from the instant case
 
because US Bank pled in its answer the defense of holder in due
 course. 
The standards governing the pleading of affirmative defenses
under [Alaska R. Civ. P.] Rule 8(c) are no different than
the liberal approach taken for all pleadings. An
 affirmative defense is adequately pleaded if it provides the
opponent fair notice of the nature of the defense. Although
courts will give the pleadings a liberal construction, it is
important to note that such liberal construction does not
permit the pleader to unreasonably catch an unwary litigant;
and such liberality of construction must be circumscribed by
the plain requirements of the rules.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Gamble v. Northstore P'ship, 907 P.2d 477, 482 (Alaska 1995)
 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Iwamoto had
 
fair notice that US Bank would likely rely on innocent purchaser
 
because in its Sixth Defense, US Bank pled holder in due course,
 
which is the statutory equivalent of the common law innocent
 
purchaser defense.2
 
(3) Iwamoto contends the circuit court erred by
 
holding that US Bank was not a party to any claims under Counts
 
I, III, and IV. This court need not address this point because
 
the circuit court's decision concerning Counts I and III is
 
affirmed on the ground that US Bank is a holder in due course,
 
and the circuit court's decision on Count IV is affirmed because
 
US Bank was an innocent purchaser.
 
(4) Iwamoto contends US Bank's argument that Count IV
 
should be dismissed because Iwamoto had unclean hands as a matter
 
of law was in error. This point does not state that the circuit
 
court erred, which leaves nothing for this court to review.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Judgment Against
 
Plaintiff Tsutae Iwamoto and in Favor of Defendant US Bank
 National Association, as Trustee Relating to the Asset-Backed
 
Pass-Through Certificates, Series 2003-HE4 as to Counts I and III
 
of Fourth Amended Complaint Filed on August 3, 2009," and the
 
"Judgment Against Plaintiff Tsutae Iwamoto and in Favor of
 
Defendant US Bank National Association, as Trustee Relating to
 
the Asset-Backed Pass-Through Certificates, Series 2003-HE4 as to
 
Count IV of Fourth Amended Complaint Filed on August 3, 2009,"
 
2
 "An innocent purchaser is one who, by an honest contract or
agreement, purchases property or acquires an interest therein, without
knowledge, or means of knowledge sufficient to charge him in law withknowledge, of any infirmity in the title of the seller." Ka'u Agribusiness
Co. v. Heirs or Assigns of Ahulau, 105 Hawai' i 182, 193, 95 P.3d 613, 624
(2004) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
both filed on December 17, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 30, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Louise K.Y. Ing
Thomas E. Bush (Alson Hunt Floyd & Ing)for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Michael C. Bird Brandon U. Davidson Tami M. Yorimoto for Defendant-AppelleeUS Bank National Association,as Trustee Relating to theAsset-Backed Pass-ThroughCertificates Series 2004-HE4. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
8
 