NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30171
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MELCHOR B. ADVIENTO, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-2068)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Melchor B. Adviento (Adviento) was
 
charged with second-degree murder for stabbing his wife, Erlinda
 
Adviento (Erlinda), to death. The prosecution gave notice that
 it intended to introduce evidence at trial of incidents of abuse,
 violence, and threats by Adviento against Erlinda, including a
 conviction for third-degree assault. The trial court indicated
 that it may permit the prosecution to introduce Adviento's
 assault conviction if Adviento raised the affirmative defense of
 extreme mental or emotional disturbance (EMED) and if such EMED
 defense arose from the nature of Adviento and Erlinda's
 relationship. The trial court, however, withheld ruling on the
 admissibility of the assault conviction because it was not sure
 how Adviento was going to raise the EMED defense.
 
Two days later, after consulting with Adviento, defense
 
counsel placed on the record just before the commencement of
 trial that Adviento had decided not to assert an EMED defense. 
At trial, Adviento testified that he had killed Erlinda in self­ NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defense, after she had attacked him and stabbed him twice in the
 
stomach and in the shoulder. After Adviento completed his
 testimony, the trial court engaged Adviento in a colloquy
 concerning his decision to waive his right to assert an EMED
 defense and to a jury instruction on the EMED defense. Adviento
 confirmed that he had decided to waive those rights and was
 relying on the defense of self-defense. The prosecution did not
 introduce Adviento's assault conviction at trial. The jury found
 Adviento guilty as charged of second-degree murder.
 
On appeal, Adviento contends that: (1) the trial court
 
abused its discretion in ruling that Adviento's assault
 conviction would be admissible to rebut the defense of EMED; (2)
 his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance in advising
 Adviento to waive the defense of EMED; (3) the trial court
 plainly erred in permitting the prosecution to make arguments
 during closing argument that constituted misconduct, or,
 alternatively, trial counsel provided ineffective assistance by 
failing to object to the alleged improper arguments; and (4)
 trial counsel provided ineffective assistance by failing to
 adduce additional evidence to substantiate Adviento's claim of
 self-defense or to better establish Erlinda's alleged motive for
 being the first aggressor.
1 We affirm. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 A.
 
The prosecution adduced the following evidence at
 
trial. Erlinda and Adviento were married and had three children:
 a 26-year-old son (Elder Son), an 18-year-old daughter
 (Daughter), and a 13-year-old son (Minor Son).
2 Adviento worked
 
at a bakery as a baker's helper, while Erlinda was a registered
 
1
 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided over the proceedings
relevant to this appeal.
 
2 The referenced ages were the children's ages at the time of trial,
which took place about twenty months after Erlinda's death.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
nurse at a convalescent center. Erlinda, Adviento, Daughter, and
 
Minor Son lived in a downstairs unit of a two-story, three-unit
 residence in Kalihi.
 
Erlinda had a close relationship with her co-worker
 
Ricardo Dela Merced (Merced), whose wife and children were living
 in the Philippines. Erlinda and Merced spent a lot of time
 together and frequently spoke to each other on the phone. Merced
 testified that they had feelings for each other and would have
 been together if they had not already been married to others. On
 one occasion, Erlinda, Merced, Daughter, and Minor Son stayed
 overnight at a Waikîkî hotel.
 
Prior to Erlinda's death, Adviento took a three-week
 
trip to the Philippines. When he returned, Adviento and Erlinda
 argued and accused each other of infidelity. Adviento, Erlinda,
 and Elder Son had a meeting, during which Erlinda told Adviento
 she wanted a divorce. Elder Son indicated that Erlinda's family
 in the Philippines had called Erlinda to report that Adviento had
 been "cheating" while on his trip to the Phillippines. Adviento
 responded "it's okay" to Erlinda's request for a divorce. Elder
 Son suggested that one of his parents move out of their residence
 because he was concerned they would fight and someone would get
 hurt. However, Adviento and Erlinda assured Elder Son that
 "nobody will get hurt" and the "we're going to be fine."
 
Daughter testified that the "subject of divorce" had
 
been raised between Adviento and Erlinda, Adviento knew Erlinda
 wanted a divorce, and Daughter had seen divorce papers. Daughter
 was aware that Erlinda was spending a lot of time with Merced.
 
B.
 
On Sunday, the day of the fatal incident, Erlinda was
 
at home sick, and Adviento and Daughter had gone to work. 
Erlinda gave Minor Son permission to go to the upstairs unit to
 play with his friends. When Minor Son left, Erlinda was watching
 television in her bedroom.
 
Erlinda was talking to Merced on the phone when their
 
conversation was interrupted by someone banging on Erlinda's
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
bedroom door, who Erlinda said was her husband. Merced testified
 
that he heard a "screaming mad" male voice tell Erlinda that she
 was asking about the male's relationship in the Philippines, but
 that she was the one with the "boyfriend." Then the phone call
 was disconnected.
 
From upstairs, Minor Son heard his mother scream and
 
yell for him to "ah, ah, help me, . . . come downstairs, call
 911." Minor Son did not hear his father scream. Upstairs
 neighbor, Myrna Villaver (Villaver), also heard a female's "long,
 unusual scream that that person needed help," which startled
 Villaver. Villaver and Minor Son ran downstairs, and Villaver
 instructed her children to stay back. Villaver told Minor Son to
 find out if his mother was okay. The front door to Minor Son's
 unit was closed and locked. Minor Son testified that he went to
 the window outside his mother's room and asked if "everything was
 okay." Minor Son said his mother did not respond, but he heard
 his father say "Everything's fine." Villaver testified that
 Minor Son asked, "[M]om, are you okay[?]" and a female voice said
 to call 911. Villaver called 911. 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Nalei Sooto
 
(Officer Sooto) went to Adviento's residence in response to a 911
 call. Officer Sooto repeatedly knocked on the door and
 announced "police" several times. After a few minutes, Adviento,
 covered in blood, opened the door. Officer Sooto asked Adviento
 what happened, and Adviento said, "I killed my wife." Officer
 Sooto handcuffed Adviento, who seemed dazed and fatigued, and
 called for an ambulance. As Officer Sooto walked with Adviento
 outside the house, Adviento said that "his wife was cheating, she
 tried to stab him. So he killed her, and then he tried to kill
 himself after." Officer Sooto noticed that Adviento was bleeding
 from an injury to his collarbone area and that his wrists were
 slit and bleeding. 
HPD officers found Erlinda on the bedroom floor in
 
between the bed and dresser. She was covered in blood, had
 sustained cuts, and did not have a pulse. Two knives and a bent
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
curtain rod were found on the bedroom floor next to Erlinda. 
Dr. Kanthi De Alwis (Dr. De Alwis), the Chief Medical Examiner
 for the City and County of Honolulu, performed an autopsy on
 Erlinda. Dr. De Alwis testified that Erlinda sustained sixteen
 stab wounds and a cut to the face. Several of the stab wounds
 penetrated Erlinda's lungs and heart and were fatal. Erlinda
 also had several cuts to the palm side of her hands, the back of
 her hands, and her elbows, which Dr. De Alwis considered to be
 "defensive wounds." Dr. De Alwis explained that defensive wounds
 are caused when someone tries to grab or ward off a knife. Dr.
 De Alwis opined that the cause of death was "bleeding from the
 injuries to the heart and lung as a result of the stab wounds in
 the chest."
 
Adviento was transported from the scene to the Queen's
 
Medical Center emergency room. Dr. Hao Chih Ho (Dr. Ho), the
 trauma surgeon who treated Adviento, testified that Adviento had
 three open wounds to the front of his abdomen, an open wound to
 the right base of his neck, two open wounds to the left base of
 his neck, multiple lacerations to both wrists, a collapsed right
 lung with bleeding into the right chest, six perforations of his
 intestines, and an injury to his spleen. The three stab wounds
 to Adviento's abdomen would have caused a "great deal of pain." 
Dr. Ho operated on Adviento and repaired the injury to Adviento's
 bowels, removed his spleen, reinflated his right lung, and
 repaired his wounds. Adviento did not have any cuts or open
 wounds on his hands and did not receive any treatment for his
 hands.
 
II.
 
Adviento testified in his own defense at trial. 
According the Adviento, he and Erlinda had been having marital
 problems for about a year because Adviento suspected Erlinda
 might be "fooling around." Erlinda said she was working
 overtime, but when Adviento went to her workplace, she was not
 there and her co-workers said she went home. While recuperating
 from foot surgery due to a work injury, Adviento went to the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Philippines for three weeks and stayed with Erlinda's siblings. 
When he returned to Hawai' i, Erlinda said her sister had called 
and reported that Adviento was "having an affair and womanizing in the Phillippines[.]" Erlinda told Adviento that she wanted a divorce. They discussed Erlinda's request for a divorce with Elder Son two or three weeks before the fatal incident. Before that discussion, Erlinda had already told Adviento she wanted a divorce two or three times. 
Adviento stated that on the day of the incident, he 
went to work at 5:00 a.m. He returned home about noon, did
 chores, cooked, and took a nap. He did not realize that Erlinda
 was home. After getting up and taking a shower, he went toward
 Erlinda's bedroom to get a shirt. As he was entering the
 bedroom, he heard Erlinda say, "Sweetheart, will it be okay if I
 don't have any present to you?" Adviento felt "[f]rustrated"
 upon hearing this. He knocked on the bedroom door, went inside,
 and saw Erlinda taking on her cell phone. Adviento told Erlinda
 that although she was accusing him of having a "relationship" in
 the Philippines, she was the one "having a boyfriend over here." 
Erlinda threw the cell phone at Adviento. They argued and
 Adviento said he was going to call Erlinda's workplace to verify
 her overtime "that never show on her pay stub, and the five days
 and five nights that she never come home[.]"
 
Adviento testified that as he picked up a phone and
 
started to dial, he felt a pain in his stomach. He looked down
 and saw blood, and was surprised to see Erlinda with a knife in
 her hand. Adviento felt another stab to his stomach and pain. 
Adviento hit Erlinda with the phone, pushed her face, and then
 took her knife away from her. Adviento felt "another pain" to
 his shoulder, and he "was afraid [for his] life" and "thought
 [he] was going to die" because there was "plenty blood." 
Adviento stated that he then "just stab her, I don't know how
 many times. I don't know where, which part of her body I stab. 
I just kind of afraid that I would die." Adviento felt pain to
 his shoulder again and grabbed Erlinda's right arm. Adviento 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stabbed, and Erlinda fell on him. They struggled for a while and
 
then Erlinda stopped moving.
 
Adviento testified that he stood up, did not know if
 
Erlinda was unconscious or dead, and was shocked and confused. 
Adviento locked the front and back doors. Adviento went back to
 the bedroom and grabbed the knife from Erlinda's hand. Adviento
 cut his wrists because his wife tried to kill him, he wanted to
 die, and "[he] would rather be dead than her."
 
Eventually the police arrived. Adviento was feeling
 
dizzy. Adviento recalled telling the police, "My wife is
 cheating on me. She stabbed me. She tried to kill me. I killed
 her." According to Adviento, Erlinda had two knives in her hands
 when she attacked him. He did not know how the knives got into
 the bedroom, but noted that knives could be found outside the
 kitchen because sometimes Erlinda used them to sharpen her
 eyeliner and his son used them to sharpen pencils. Adviento
 denied stabbing Erlinda first. Adviento acknowledged that
 Erlinda had screamed and that he did not scream or call for help.
 Adviento did not try to get help for Erlinda after she stopped
 moving. 
III.
 
The jury found Adviento guilty as charged. The Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) sentenced Adviento to
 a term of life imprisonment with the possibility of parole. The
 Circuit Court filed its Judgment on October 21, 2009, and this
 appealed followed. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Adviento contends that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion "when it ruled" that Adviento's prior conviction for
 third-degree assault, which was committed against his wife,
 "would be admissible to rebut [an] EMED defense." Adviento
 argues that the Circuit Court's "erroneous ruling caused Adviento
 to forego the EMED defense" and did not constitute harmless error
 because "there was more than a reasonable possibility that the
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
lack of the EMED instruction contributed to Adviento's conviction
 
for second-degree murder . . . ." 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) counters 
that the Circuit Court did not rule that Adviento's prior assault conviction was admissible, but instead took the matter under advisement until the evidence necessary to determine the admissibility of the conviction was presented. The State argues that because Adviento decided not to pursue an EMED defense, the Circuit Court never issued a ruling on the admissibility of the assault conviction, and therefore, there is no ruling admitting evidence for this court to review. The State also asserts that the record does not support the conclusion that the Circuit Court's decision to reserve ruling on the admissibility of the assault conviction caused Adviento to forego an EMED defense. 
As explained below, we conclude that Adviento is not
 
entitled to any relief based on the manner in which the Circuit
 Court handled the issue of the admissibility of his prior assault
 conviction. 
A.
 
The parties dispute the proper characterization of what
 
the Circuit Court decided pre-trial with respect to the
 admissibility of Adviento's prior assault conviction. We begin
 with a discussion of facts relevant to that issue. 
1.
 
The State filed a notice of its intent to use evidence
 
at trial of incidents of abuse, violence, and threats by
 Adviento. The State identified numerous incidents, including (1)
 Adviento hitting Erlinda on the head with a phone, causing
 injuries, which resulted in his conviction for third-degree
 assault; (2) observations of Erlinda with bruises to her arms and
 face and bleeding allegedly attributable to abuse by Adviento;
 (3) a conviction for reckless endangering based on Adviento's
 firing a semi-automatic pistol into the ground and other alleged
 observations of Adviento shooting a handgun outside his
 residence; and (4) alleged threats by Adviento to hurt or kill
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Erlinda or members of her family after Adviento returned from a
 
trip to the Philippines. The State filed a separate motion in
 limine to permit the introduction of the alleged threats by
 Adviento, upon his return from the Philippines, to hurt or kill
 Erlinda or her family if she divorced him. Adviento filed a
 motion in limine to preclude evidence of the incidents of abuse,
 violence, and threats identified by the State.
 
Prior to trial, the Circuit Court held a hearing on the
 
parties' motions in limine. The Circuit Court first ruled that
 the gun-related incidents would be excluded. It also ruled that 
the evidence of Adviento's threats against Erlinda or her family
 if she divorced him would be admitted if based on personal
 knowledge, because it "goes to the defendant's motive and also
 possibly to rebut EMED." The Circuit Court then stated it was
 "going to withhold ruling on the other material." The Circuit
 Court noted that it would probably exclude the evidence related
 to the observation of bruises on Erlinda because the bruises
 might or might not have been caused by Adviento. 
The Circuit Court then turned to a discussion of the 
incident in which Adviento hit Erlinda with a phone that resulted
 in his conviction for third-degree assault. The Circuit Court
 expressed confusion over whether there was a second incident,
 different from the assault conviction, in which Adviento had
 allegedly hit Erlinda with a phone. However, counsel for
 Adviento and the State both advised the Circuit Court of their
 belief that there was only one phone-assault incident. 
Adviento's counsel argued that Minor Son was the only remaining
 witness to this incident, but that Minor Son had indicated
 difficulty in remembering or that he wanted to forget the
 incident. Adviento's counsel indicated that different issues
 were raised by proof of the incident through witness observations
 or through the conviction. In response, the Circuit Court
 stated:
 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3
The COURT: . . . Okay. If it's the same thing,[ ] my
preference would be to allow in the conviction; because we
don't have to fight about what really happened. There was a
 conviction. And this is why I'm withholding ruling on it.
Because I'm not sure how you're going to raise the EMED
defense. I can't, at this point, get it clear in my mind
how it's going to come up. 
(phonetic)I mean, if it depends on the
relationship, then Maelega and cases like Hiley
[ 4
] say it comes in.
Right?
 
If his defense arises from the nature of their
 
relationship, it may have to come in. If it doesn't, then
it won't. 
I think that -- I'm not convinced that -- let's
 
put it that way. I'm not convinced that it would come in
 
for anything other than rebuttal of the EMED defense. We're
 talking about that conviction, the hitting on the head with
the phone.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I just need to be clear. . . .
 
If we're talking about that, is it just going to
be the conviction? Or is it going to be the facts
underlying the conviction, as well?
 
THE COURT: 
Just the conviction.
 
. . . .
 
THE COURT: As far as the strength of the evidence
goes, the conviction is the strongest evidence. And if you
are -- if you are trying to establish in rebuttal of the
EMED defense that this marriage was not without its problems
and there was some violence in the past, to me the
conviction is your evidence, if the Defense raises that
defense. 
And, so, what I'm saying is, if that comes in, it
will come in on rebuttal, the conviction. And let's -- let
 
me rule now, that if it comes in, it will just be the
conviction of Assault in the Third Degree, assault against
the decedent and not the specific facts. Let's just wait on
that.
 
. . . . 
[PROSECUTOR]: 
Okay. As far as my opening statement,
then -­
THE COURT: 
Don't mention the conviction.
 
[PROSECUTOR]: Okay.
 
3 The Circuit Court was apparently referring to the parties' advisement
that there was only one incident involving Adviento assaulting Erlinda with a
phone, and not a second incident separate from the assault conviction.
 
4 The Circuit Court was apparently referring to State v. Maelega, 80
Hawai'i 172, 907 P.2d 758 (1995), and State v. Haili, 103 Hawai' i 89, 79 P.3d
1263 (2003). 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Because, again, I'm not sure how the EMED
defense will arise. I don't know what he's going to say.
 
[PROSECUTOR]: Okay.
 
THE COURT: Do you know?
 
[PROSECUTOR]: No.
 
THE COURT: It's got to be probative, okay, because it
is prejudicial. It's not just that he did the act. But if
 
a conviction comes in, it tends to indicate character.
That's what we're worried about, that the jury will misuse
the character evidence. So that's why we're going to wait
until I hear exactly how EMED comes up, if it comes up. Or
 
if it doesn't come up, then we've got more problems. But
 the motive stuff would come in, anyway, even if EMED wasn't
raised, in my view.
 
. . . .
 
THE COURT: So are we clear on this?
 Opening statement should not address anything other
than the motive evidence, the threat, you know, upon coming
back from the Philippines. If you're going to -- if you're
going to bring that in, then you can mention it in your
opening statement, but none of the other -- not the
conviction.
 
(Emphases added).5
 
2.
 
Two days later, just prior to opening statements,
 
defense counsel informed the Circuit Court that Adviento had
 
decided to waive any EMED defense:
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: . . . I want to put on the record
yesterday I met with Mr. Adviento, we discussed the Court's
pretrial rulings, defenses and the type of evidence and
things of that nature, and based on his decision, we are not
going to be asserting the . . . extreme emotional
disturbance defense, and this is his decision that he made
yesterday, so I just wanted to put that on the record.
 3.
 
After Adviento finished testifying in his own defense,
 
the Circuit Court engaged Adviento a colloquy to confirm his
 
decision to waive reliance on an EMED defense:
 
5 At trial, Elder Son testified that Adviento had made threats against
Erlinda's family members in the Philippines, who had accused Adviento of
infidelity while Adviento was in the Philippines. The Circuit Court, however,
later struck this testimony because of the lack of evidence that these threats
were related to Erlinda's request to divorce Adviento, and it instructed the
jury to disregard this testimony.
 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Earlier in this trial, [Defense counsel]
told me that you were not going to assert the defense of
extreme mental or emotional disturbance.
 
Do you remember that?
 
[ADVIENTO]: Yes, sir.
 THE COURT: Have you discussed the defense of extreme
mental or emotional disturbance with [Defense counsel]?
 
[ADVIENTO]: Yes, sir.
 THE COURT: Let me just tell you that I would, if
requested, instruct the jury on extreme mental or emotional
disturbance in this case.
 
Extreme mental or emotional disturbance is a defense,
it's an affirmative defense, that reduces the crime of
murder to manslaughter. Murder carries a maximum penalty of
life in prison with a possibility of parole. Manslaughter
carries a maximum penalty of 20 years.
 
Do you understand that?
 
[ADVIENTO]: Yes, sir.
 THE COURT: So do you understand that if I don't give
an instruction on extreme mental or emotional disturbance,
the jury will not be able to consider it, and you will be
giving up the opportunity to be convicted of the lesser
offense of manslaughter?
 
[ADVIENTO]: Yes, sir.
 
THE COURT: Do you have any questions at all about
this?
 
[ADVIENTO]: No.
 THE COURT: Do you give up your right to assert the
defense of extreme mental or emotional disturbance?
 
[ADVIENTO]: Yes, sir.
 
At this point in the colloquy, the prosecutor suggested
 
that Adviento be given additional time to consider his decision
 
and to consult with his lawyer. The Circuit Court called a
 recess to give Adviento additional time to think about his
 decision. The Circuit Court advised Adviento that he could
 change his mind if that is what he wanted to do. 
Upon reconvening after a short recess, Adviento
 
reconfirmed his decision to waive reliance on an EMED defense.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: And, Judge, before you continue, I
just want to put on the record, too, that we did discuss
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
this quite extensively prior to. He just had a few
clarification questions.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Well, Mr. Adviento, you've had ten
minutes or so to talk to [Defense counsel]. Was that
 sufficient time for you to -­
[ADVIENTO]: Yes.
 
THE COURT: -- get all the questions that you wanted
answered?
 
[ADVIENTO]: Yes, Your Honor.
 THE COURT: Do you have any questions you want to ask
me?
 
[ADVIENTO]: No, Your Honor.
 THE COURT: Have you made your decision about whether
or not to assert the defense of -­
[ADVIENTO]: Yes, sir, Your Honor.
 THE COURT: -- extreme mental or emotional disturbance?
 [ADVIENTO]: Yes, Your Honor.
 THE COURT: 
And what is your decision?
 
. . . .
 [ADVIENTO]: We will go for the self-defense.
 THE COURT: All right. But you will not raise the
defense of extreme mental or emotional disturbance?
 
[ADVIENTO]: Yes, Your Honor.
 THE COURT: All right. Then the Court will find that
 
the Defendant having been fully informed has knowingly,
intelligently and voluntarily waived any jury instruction on
extreme mental or emotional disturbance.
 
So that the Court's ruling as to the other incidents,
violence perhaps in relationship will not be allowed.
 
B.
 
Based on our review of the record, we conclude that the
 
Circuit Court did not rule that Adviento's prior assault
 
conviction would be admissible to rebut an EMED defense. 
Instead, the Circuit Court withheld its ruling on the
 admissibility of the assault conviction until it understood the
 nature and substance of any EMED defense that Adviento intended
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to raise.6 The Circuit Court indicated that only then would it
 
be able to determine whether the prior conviction was relevant
 
and balance its probative value against the risk of prejudice. 
When the Circuit Court withheld its ruling, Adviento had not even
 asserted that he intended to raise an EMED defense, much less
 proffered the details of any such defense. The Circuit Court
 stated, "I'm not sure how you're going to raise the EMED defense. 
I can't, at this point, get it clear in my mind how it's going to
 come up." 
Because the nature and substance of Adviento's possible
 
EMED defense was unclear and speculative, the Circuit Court
 declined to rule on the admissibility of Adviento's prior assault
 conviction. The Circuit Court simply advised the parties that if
 it later determined that the conviction was admissible, it would
 limit the evidence to the third-degree assault conviction and
 would not permit witnesses to testify about the specific facts on
 which the conviction was based. Adviento's subsequent decision
 to waive any EMED defense made it unnecessary for the Circuit
 Court to rule on the admissibility of the assault conviction, and
 evidence of this conviction was not presented at trial.
 
Accordingly, the posture of this appeal is that
 
Adviento is seeking to vacate his conviction based on a trial
 court's decision to withhold ruling on the admissibility of
 evidence (which was never actually admitted at trial) pending the
 receipt of additional information or evidence the court felt was
 necessary to make an informed decision. 
C. 
In Luce v. United States, 469 U.S. 38, 40-43 (1984),
 
the United States Supreme Court held that a defendant must
 testify in order to preserve his or her right to appeal a trial
 court's in limine ruling that a prior conviction was admissible
 
6
 The only definite ruling made by the Circuit Court was that if it
 
decided to permit evidence of the prior assault to rebut an EMED defense, only
the third-degree assault conviction, and not the specific underlying facts,
would be permitted. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for impeachment purposes. In support of its decision, the Court
 
reasoned:
 
A reviewing court is handicapped in any effort to rule
on subtle evidentiary questions outside a factual context.
This is particularly true under [Federal Rules of Evidence]
Rule 609(a)(1), which directs the court to weigh the
probative value of a prior conviction against the
prejudicial effect to the defendant. To perform this
balancing, the court must know the precise nature of the
defendant's testimony, which is unknowable when, as here,
the defendant does not testify.
 
Any possible harm flowing from a district court's in
 
limine ruling permitting impeachment by a prior conviction
is wholly speculative. The ruling is subject to change when
the case unfolds, particularly if the actual testimony
differs from what was contained in the defendant's proffer.
Indeed even if nothing unexpected happens at trial, the
district judge is free, in the exercise of sound judicial
discretion, to alter a previous in limine ruling. On a
 
record such as here, it would be a matter of conjecture
whether the District Court would have allowed the Government
 to attack petitioner's credibility at trial by means of the
prior conviction.
 
Id. at 41-42 (footnotes omitted).
 
In applying Luce, some courts have distinguished
 
between in limine evidentiary rulings where the determinative
 
issue was legal rather than factual, and thus the reviewing
 court's concerns about ruling in a factual vacuum were not
 present. See United States ex rel. Adkins v. Greer, 791 F.2d
 
590, 594 (7th Cir. 1986); see also Luce, 469 U.S. at 44 (Brennan,
 J., concurring) (stating that where "the determinative question
 turns on legal and not factual considerations, a requirement that
 the defendant actually testify at trial to preserve the
 admissibility issue for appeal might not necessarily be
 appropriate"). Courts have held that Luce is inapplicable, and
 the trial court's ruling is reviewable, where the trial court's
 decision turned on a legal question. See Adkins, 791 F.2d at
 
594; People v. Brown, 49 Cal. Rptr. 2d 652, 656-59 (Cal. Ct. App.
 1996).
 
In State v. Schnabel, No. SCWC-29390, 2012 WL 1981217
 
(Hawai'i May 11, 2012), the Hawai' i Supreme Court addressed the 
reviewability of a trial court's in limine decision regarding
 whether testimony from Schnabel's prior juvenile proceeding would
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be admissible to impeach Schnabel's testimony that he did not
 
know a single punch could cause the death of a person. Schnabel
 ultimately did not testify at trial. The supreme court held that
 the admission of testimony from a juvenile proceeding was
 statutorily prohibited and that the trial court's erroneous in
 limine decision harmfully infringed on Schnabel's right to
 testify. Schnabel, slip op. at 25-43, 2012 WL 1981217, at *10­
15. 
In support of its decision, the supreme court noted
 
that Luce has been subject to criticism, and it also
 distinguished
 Luce from Schnabel's case.
 
"Luce has been subjected to little but steady and
unrelenting criticism[.]" James Joseph Duane, Appellate
Review of In Limine Rulings, 182 F.R.D. 666 (1999). One
 criticism of Luce, out of many, is that it "forces upon an
accused what is arguably an unfair choice; testify under
circumstances where it is virtually certain the prosecutor
will regale the jury with tales of prior convictions, or
refrain from testifying, deprive the jury of the accused's
side of the story, and lose all chance to appeal." 28
 Charles Alan Wright, et al., Federal Practice and Procedure:
Evidence § 6119 at 123 n.49 (1st ed. 1993). Since Luce, the
Supreme Court has formally settled into the position that a
defendant has a right to testify in his own behalf, Rock v.
Arkansas, 483 U.S. 44, 49–51, 107 S. Ct. 2704, 97 L. Ed.2d
37 (1987), and "[i]n a host of other contexts, . . . has
held that a constitutional right may be violated, even where
the accused is not strictly forbidden from exercising that
right, as long as some trial ruling undermines the right by
 
improperly and unfairly making its exercise costly[,]"
 
Duane, Appellate Review of In Limine Rulings, 182 F.R.D. 666
(emphasis added) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Indeed, requiring the defendant to testify in order to
preserve the issue for appeal is wrong, since it fails to
recognize "the significance that such impeachment has on the
defendant's decision concerning the testimony." Paul F.
 Rothstein, Federal Rules of Evidence: A Fresh Review and
Evaluation, 120 F.R.D. 299, 363 (1987).
 
States declining to adopt Luce have reasoned that
 
the problem of meaningful review is unfounded when the
record sufficiently demonstrates, through an offer of
 
proof, the nature of the defendant's proposed
 testimony and that the defendant refrained from
 testifying when faced with impeachment by a prior
 conviction. Under such conditions, a reviewing court
would have a sufficient record to conduct a harmless
 error analysis.
 
Warren v. State, 121 Nev. 886, 124 P.3d 522, 527 (Nev. 2005)
(emphases added). In the instant case, it would be unwise
to "apply" a rule that, in effect compelled Petitioner to
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
make an "unfair choice" of either testifying under
circumstances where it was "virtually certain" the
prosecutor would "regale the jury" with Dr. Camara's
testimony [from Schnabel's juvenile proceeding], or remain
silent and "deprive the jury" of his testimony and "lose all
chance of appeal." 28 Charles Alan Wright, et al., supra, §
 6119 at 123 n.49. Of course, as noted previously, HRS
§ 571–84 bars the admission of evidence from a juvenile
proceeding in the instant case, precluding any effort to
"regale the jury" with Dr. Camara's testimony, further
underscoring the inapplicability of Luce's rationale to this
case.
 
Id., slip op. at 73-74, 2012 WL 1981217, at *24 (emphases and
 
some brackets in original).
 
The majority and dissenting opinions in Schnabel
 
disagreed over the certainty with which the trial court had ruled
 on the admissibility of the testimony from Schnabel's juvenile
 proceeding. The majority described the trial court as ruling
 that "it would allow the cross-examination [of Schnabel with the
 testimony from the juvenile proceeding] and [as having] later
 reconfirmed its ruling after the prosecution had rested its
 case." Id., slip op. at 72, 2012 WL 1981217, at *23. The
 
dissent, on the other hand, stated that the trial court "noted
 the need 'to take this under advisement and read over [sic]
 again[,]' but indicated its 'inclination . . . to give [the
 State] some latitude' if Schnabel responded in the negative to
 the question whether he knew that one punch could kill." Id.,
 
slip op. at 8, 2012 WL 1981217, at *31 (Recktenwald, C.J.,
 dissenting) (brackets and "[sic]" in original).
 
Adviento's case is somewhat different than Schnabel
 
because unlike Schnabel, the predicate evidentiary issue does not
 turn on a question of law and the nature of the defendant's
 likely testimony is not well defined. In any event, we need not
 decide whether these factors or whether any differences in the
 degree of certainty with which the trial court expressed its
 ruling on the admissibility of the challenged evidence affects
 the reviewability of the trial court's in limine decision.
 Assuming that we may review the Circuit Court's decision in this 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
case, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in rendering
 
its decision.
 
D.
 
EMED is an affirmative defense which, if satisfied,
 
reduces the offense of second-degree murder to manslaughter. HRS
 § 707-702(2) (Supp. 2011) provides:
 
(2) In a prosecution for murder or attempted murder in
the first and second degrees it is an affirmative defense,
which reduces the offense to manslaughter or attempted
manslaughter, that the defendant was, at the time the
defendant caused the death of the other person, under the
influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance for
 which there is a reasonable explanation. The reasonableness
 of the explanation shall be determined from the viewpoint of
a reasonable person in the circumstances as the defendant
believed them to be.
 
Because EMED is an affirmative defense, the defendant has the
 
burden of proving the defense by a preponderance of the evidence. 
HRS § 701-115(2)(a) (1993).
 
The Circuit Court considered the admissibility of
 
Adviento's prior assault conviction under Hawaii Rules of
 Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) (Supp. 2011), which provides in
 relevant part:
 
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence of other
 
crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the
character of a person in order to show action in conformity
therewith. It may, however, be admissible where such
evidence is probative of another fact that is of consequence
to the determination of the action, such as proof of motive,
opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident.
 
Under HRE Rule 404(b), "other bad act" evidence is
 
admissible when: 1) it is relevant to any fact of consequence
 
other than the defendant's propensity to commit the crime
 charged; and 2) its probative value is not substantially
 outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. State v. Renon, 73
 
Haw. 23, 31–32, 828 P.2d 1266, 1270 (1992). A trial court's
 determination that evidence is relevant turns on the application 
18
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
7
of HRE Rule 401 (1993)  and is reviewed under the right/wrong
standard. State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai' i 390, 404, 56 P.3d 692, 
706 (2002). The trial court's decision in balancing probative 
value against unfair prejudice involves the application of HRE 
8
Rule 403 (1993)  and is reviewed for abuse of discretion. 
Cordeiro, 99 Hawai"i at 404, 56 P.3d at 706. A trial court does
 not abuse its discretion unless it "clearly exceeds the bounds of
 reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to
 the substantial detriment of a party litigant." State v. Matias,
 
74 Haw. 197, 203, 840 P.2d 374, 377 (1992) (internal quotation
 marks and brackets omitted).
 
E.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in its 
decision to withhold its ruling on the admissibility of Adviento's prior assault conviction until the nature and substance of Adviento's possible EMED defense became clearer. The Hawai' i Supreme Court has concluded that prior bad acts 
involving domestic violence committed against the alleged victim may be admissible to rebut a defendant's EMED defense, where the EMED defense is based on the defendant's relationship with the alleged victim. See State v. Maelega, 80 Hawai' i 172, 183-84, 
907 P.2d 758, 769-70 (1995); cf. State v. Haili, 103 Hawai' i 89, 
106, 79 P.3d 1263, 1280 (2003) (indicating that evidence that the defendant had previously abused and threatened his wife supported 
7
 HRE Rule 401 provides: 
Definition of "relevant evidence". "Relevant evidence"
 
means evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any
fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action
more probable or less probable than it would be without the
evidence.
 
8
 HRE Rule 403 (1993) provides:
 
Exclusion of relevant evidence on grounds of prejudice,
confusion, or waste of time. Although relevant, evidence may be
excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the
danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading
the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or
needless presentation of cumulative evidence. 
19
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the conclusion that the defendant was not under the influence of
 
EMED at the time he shot and killed her).9 Depending upon the
 
nature and substance of Adviento's possible EMED defense,
 evidence of Adviento's prior conviction for assaulting his wife
 may have been relevant to illuminate and explain Adviento's
 relationship with his wife and to rebut an asserted EMED defense. 
Thus, it was important for the Circuit Court to understand the
 nature and substance of Adviento's possible EMED defense in order
 to rule on whether Adviento's prior conviction would be
 admissible to rebut such a defense. However, Adviento did not
 proffer or provide details of the possible EMED defense he might
 raise. Under these circumstances, we cannot say that the Circuit
 Court erred in declining to decide whether it would permit
 Adviento's prior assault conviction to be admitted until Adviento
 provided details of the nature and substance of the EMED defense
 he intended to raise. 
Adviento's own testimony at trial refutes any
 
substantial EMED defense arising out of Erlinda's alleged
 infidelity. Adviento admitted that for about a year, he had
 suspected that Erlinda was "fooling around" and that Erlinda had
 repeatedly requested a divorce -- with Erlinda's last request
 being made several weeks before the fatal stabbing. Adviento
 testified that prior to entering Erlinda's bedroom, he heard her
 speaking on the telephone and referring to the other person as
 "sweetheart." However, overhearing this conversation did not
 prompt Adviento to attack Erlinda. Rather, Adviento testified
 that it was Erlinda who attacked him first by stabbing him in the
 stomach and that he responded by stabbing her in self-defense to
 save his own life. Adviento's testimony refuted any claim that
 
9
 Courts from other jurisdictions have held that evidence of prior
domestic abuse committed by the defendant against the alleged murder victim
was admissible to illuminate the relationship between the defendant and the
alleged victim; to portray the history surrounding their relationship and
place the charged incident and the defendant's behavior in proper context; and
to show the defendant's motive and intent. See State v. Bauer, 598 N.W.2d
352, 364-65 (Minn. 1999); State v. Yoh, 910 A.2d 853, 863-64 (Vt. 2006); State
v. Jones, 955 A.2d 1190, 1195-97 (Vt. 2008). 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
he killed Erlinda "under the influence of extreme mental or
 
emotional disturbance for which there is a reasonable
 explanation" due to his discovery of her alleged infidelity. 
Adviento testified that Erlinda stabbed him twice in
 
the stomach, which took him by surprise, and that once he
 realized she was trying to kill him, he kept stabbing her until
 she stopped moving because he was afraid he was going to die. 
Adviento stated that when he got up after Erlinda stopped moving,
 he was shocked and confused. 
Based on this testimony, Adviento contends on appeal
 
that he had a viable EMED defense because he was shocked by his
 wife's attempt to kill him when he was confronting her about "her
 lies and her affair[.]" However, if Adviento sought to raise an
 EMED defense on this theory, we conclude it is clear from the
 record that the Circuit Court would have precluded the State from
 introducing Adviento's prior assault conviction. In its pre­trial discussion of the assault conviction, the Circuit Court
 plainly stated it would only consider admitting the assault
 conviction if Adviento asserted an EMED defense that was based on
 the nature of his relationship with his wife. The Circuit Court
 stated, "If his [EMED] defense arises from the nature of their
 relationship, it may have to come in. If it doesn't, then it
 won't." Adviento's trial testimony demonstrated that his
 purported EMED defense arose out of his shock at being stabbed
 and his fear of dying and that it was not based on the nature of
 his relationship with his wife. We conclude that the Circuit
 Court would not have permitted the admission of the assault
 conviction to rebut such an EMED defense. 
II.
 
Adviento contends that his trial counsel provided 
ineffective assistance in advising Adviento to waive the defense of EMED. We review claims of ineffective assistance of counsel to determine whether, "viewed as a whole, the assistance provided was within the range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases." Dan v. State, 76 Hawai' i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
528, 532 (1994) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets
 
omitted).
 
[T]he defendant has the burden of establishing ineffective
assistance of counsel and must meet the following two-part
test: 1) that there were specific errors or omissions
reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence;
and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
meritorious defense.
 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998). 
We conclude that Adviento has failed to meet his burden of 
showing that his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance. 
Adviento was charged with second-degree murder, a
 
charge which carried a penalty of life imprisonment with the
 possibility of parole. See HRS § 707-701.5 (1993); HRS § 706-656
 
(1993 & Supp. 2011). Self-defense is a complete defense that, if
 accepted by the jury, entitles a defendant to a verdict of not
 guilty. The affirmative defense of EMED, on the other hand, is
 not a complete defense but only a mitigating defense. Even if
 successful, the EMED defense results in the defendant being
 convicted of a class A felony and subject to imprisonment for
 twenty years. See HRS § 707-702(2) and (3) (Supp. 2011). 
The record reflects that Adviento made the decision to
 
waive reliance on an EMED defense; it does not show what advice
 Adviento's trial counsel gave Adviento regarding this decision or
 whether trial counsel even advised Adviento to forego asserting
 an EMED defense. Based on the record and under the circumstances
 of this case, we cannot say that it would have been unreasonable
 for competent defense counsel to advise Adviento to forego
 asserting a possible EMED defense and instead to rely solely on a
 claim of self-defense. There was substantial evidence to support
 a claim of self-defense, including evidence that Adviento
 sustained serious, painful stab wounds to his abdomen; that he
 suffered a collapsed right lung, six perforations of his
 intestines, and an injury to his spleen; and that he required
 emergency surgery. Adviento's trial counsel could have
 rationally concluded that a claim of EMED would have detracted
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
from or conflicted with a claim of self-defense and that Adviento
 
would be better off relying soley on a claim of self-defense.
 
Although we conclude that Adviento has failed to meet 
his burden of proving ineffective assistance of counsel in this appeal, the record, as noted, does not reflect the particular advice trial counsel gave to Adviento or the reasons for counsel's advice. Adviento's trial counsel apparently withdrew from representing Adviento after sentencing and thus Adviento may not have had a fair opportunity to develop the record to support his ineffective assistance of counsel claim. We therefore do not preclude Adviento from raising a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel with respect to the advice he received on asserting an EMED defense, in a Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 
40 proceeding based on a more fully developed record. 
III.
 
A.
 
We reject Adviento's claim that the Circuit Court
 
plainly erred in permitting the prosecution to make improper
 arguments during closing argument. 
"Prosecutorial misconduct warrants . . . the setting
 
aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of the
 prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant's right to a
 
to draw reasonable inferences from the evidence and wide
 fair trial." State v. Clark, 83 Hawai' i 289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 
209 (1996). 
[A] prosecutor, during closing argument, is permitted
latitude is allowed in discussing the evidence. State v. 
Apilando, 79 Hawai
'i 128, 141-42, 900 P.2d 135, 148 (1995)
(citing State v. Zamora, 247 Kan. 684, 803 P.2d 568 (1990)
(other citations omitted)). It is also within the bounds of legitimate argument for prosecutors to state, discuss, andcomment on the evidence as well as to draw all reasonable inferences from the evidence. See, e.g., State v. Abeyta,
1995 NMSC 52, 120 N.M. 233, 901 P.2d 164, 177-78 (1995)("Where the evidence presents two conflicting versions ofthe same events, 'a party may reasonably infer, and thus,argue, that the other side is lying.'" (Citationomitted.)); Ex parte Waldrop, 459 So. 2d 959, 961 (Ala.1984) ("During closing argument, the prosecutor as well asdefense counsel has a right to present his [or her]impressions from the evidence, if reasonable and may argueevery legitimate inference."); People v. Sutton, 260 Ill.App. 3d 949, 197 Ill. Dec. 867, 876, 631 N.E.2d 1326, 1335 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1994) ("The prosecution may base its closing argument on
the evidence presented or reasonable inference therefrom,
respond to comments by defense counsel which invite or
provoke response, denounce the activities of defendant and
highlight the inconsistencies in defendant's argument.").
 
Clark, 83 Hawai' i at 304-05, 926 P.2d at 209-10 (citation format 
changed, some brackets in original). 
Adviento identifies three alleged instances of
 
prosecutorial misconduct during closing argument: 1) the
 
prosecutor's "curtain rod" argument; 2) the prosecutor's opening
 remarks referring to Erlinda as someone who could have been a
 juror if Adviento had not killed her; and 3) the prosecutor use
 of the term "killing" rather than "force" or "deadly force" in
 discussing Adviento's claim of self-defense. Adviento did not
 object at trial to any of these remarks made by the prosecutor.
 We address each of Adviento's arguments separately.
 
1. The "Curtain Rod" Argument
 
During closing argument, the State argued that a bent
 
curtain rod found next to Erlinda's dead body served to
 contradict Adviento's claim of self-defense. The prosecutor
 argued:
 
There were some other things in the room. There was
 
this metal curtain rod.
 
This was found underneath Mrs. Adviento's body. And
 
ladies and gentlemen, this metal curtain rod doesn't lie.
It cannot lie. It has clearly been bent. It's missing,
according to the photos, from the window. And you know
what, this is what I was waiting for the Defendant to say
when he testified, I was waiting for him to say he grabbed
the metal curtain rod.
 
In other words, when he was stabbed, she came after
him like a banshee with two knives, and he reached up,
grabbed the metal curtain rod, blocked her move and then
flipped her hand in midair, which caused the knife to fly
out, he caught it and then was able to be in the game after
that.
 
But you know what, he never talked about that. He
 
never talked about this metal curtain rod, and that's a
problem for him.
 
Because if he did not have the metal curtain rod, then
she must have had the metal curtain rod.
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
And if she's holding this, then her hands are
occupied, which means her hands are no longer attacking him
with two knives.
 
Adviento contends that this argument was improper
 
because it was not based on the evidence presented. We disagree. 
The State presented testimony as well as photographs showing that
 a bent curtain rod, which appeared to have come from above a
 window in Erlinda's bedroom, was found on the floor by the police
 next to Erlinda's body. The prosecutor did not exceed his wide
 latitude to discuss and comment on the evidence by suggesting a
 scenario in which Erlinda grabbed the curtain rod to protect
 herself and thus could not have been attacking Adviento with two
 knives as Adviento claimed. In addition, contrary to Adviento's
 argument, the prosecutor did not make himself a witness by
 stating that he was waiting for Adviento to explain the curtain
 rod. Nor was it improper for the prosecutor to draw an adverse
 inference from Adviento's failure to account for the curtain rod,
 which clearly appeared to be out of place next to Erlinda's body. 
2. Remarks Regarding Erlinda Being a Juror
 
Adviento argues that the prosecutor engaged in an
 
improper emotional appeal to the jury through the following
 remarks made at the outset of his closing argument. 
Erlinda Adviento, mother of three, grandmother of
four, registered nurse, CNA Instructor. Really nice.
Wouldn't hurt others.
 
If this were two years earlier, she could have been
sitting right next to you in the jury pool, worrying about
being chosen, feeling uncomfortable, wondering how long it
was going to be, making small talk, sharing pictures of her
beautiful grandchildren with the people next to her.
 
The reference to Erlinda's family status, occupation, 
personality, and peaceful character were all based on testimony 
presented by witnesses at trial and were clearly permissible. We need not decide whether the prosecutor's remarks referring to Erlinda as someone who could have been a juror were improper because we conclude that any error concerning such remarks did not affect Adviento's substantial rights. See State v. Iuli, 101 
Hawai'i 196, 208, 65 P.3d 143, 155 (2003) (stating that where 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
there is no objection to the prosecutor's alleged misconduct, the
 
appellate court must, "as a threshold matter, determine whether
 the alleged misconduct constituted plain error that affected [the
 defendant's] substantial rights"). The jury was fully aware that
 Erlinda had been killed and was no longer alive; the evidence
 against Adviento was strong; and the Circuit Court had instructed
 the jury that in deciding the case, the jury "must not be
 influenced by pity for the Defendant or passion or prejudice
 against the Defendant." Under these circumstances, any error in
 the prosecutor's remarks did not rise to the level of plain error
 and did not prejudice Adviento's right to a fair trial. 
3. Use of the Term "Killing"
 
Adviento argues that the prosecutor's use of the word
 
"killing" instead of "force" or "deadly force" during his
 discussion of Adviento's claim of self-defense was improper and 
constituted a misstatement of the law. Adviento's argument is
 without merit. 
There was no dispute that Adviento had killed Erlinda. 
The dispute was over whether Adviento's killing of Erlinda was
 justified by self-defense. We conclude that there was no
 impropriety in the prosecutor's use of the terms "kill" or
 "killing" to describe what Adviento had done to Erlinda. The use
 of those terms was based on the evidence and accurately described
 what Adviento, by his own admission, had done. In the context of
 this case, the term "killing" was an appropriate synonym for the
 terms "force" and "deadly force." Accordingly, the prosecutor
 did not misstate the law by using the term "killing" in
 discussing Adviento's self-defense claim. 
B.
 
Based on the foregoing analysis, we reject Adviento's
 
alternative argument that his trial counsel provided ineffective
 assistance by failing to object to the prosecutor's remarks in
 closing argument.
 
26
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
Adviento argues that his trial counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance by failing to adduce additional evidence
 
to substantiate Adviento's claim of self-defense or to better
 establish Erlinda's motive for being the first aggressor. We
 disagree.
 
As Adviento acknowledges, evidence on both these points
 
was presented at trial. Dr. Ho, the emergency room trauma
 surgeon who operated on Adviento, testified to the numerous
 serious injuries Adviento sustained, including three open stab
 wounds to his abdomen and three open wounds to the base of his
 neck, a collapsed right lung, six perforations of his intestines,
 and an injury to his spleen. Adviento testified regarding
 Erlinda's alleged motive for being the first aggressor, namely,
 that she was attempting to prevent him from exposing her lies to
 him, which would have been revealed through his checking her work
 records. 
Adviento did not produce affidavits or sworn statements 
of witnesses to support his claim that additional favorable evidence was available. See Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 39, 960 P.2d 
at 1247 (concluding that an ineffective assistance of counsel claim based on the failure to obtain witnesses "must be supported by affidavits or sworn statements describing the testimony of the proffered witnesses"). Adviento's uncorroborated assertions regarding the availability of possible favorable evidence or testimony of witnesses "amounts to nothing more than speculation and . . . is insufficient to meet his burden of proving" ineffective assistance of counsel. State v. Reed, 77 Hawai' i 72, 
84, 881 P.2d 1218, 1230 (1994), overruled on other grounds by, State v. Balanza, 93 Hawai' i 279, 1 P.3d 281 (2000).
10 
10
 Because Adviento may not have had a fair opportunity to develop the
record regarding this claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, we do not
preclude him from raising this claim in an HRPP Rule 40 proceeding based on a
more fully developed record.
 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
28CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
Court's Judgment.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, July 10, 2012.
On the briefs:
Karen T. Nakasone
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-AppellantChief Judge
Donn Fudo
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-AppelleeAssociate Judge
Associate Judge