NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30397
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
MAUNA KEA ANAINA HOU; ROYAL ORDER OF KAMEHAMEHA I;
SIERRA CLUB, HAWAI' I CHAPTER; KAHEA; and CLARENCE CHING,
Petitioners/Appellants-Appellants,
v.
 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI' I and UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI' I
 
INSTITUTE OF ASTRONOMY,
Respondents/Appellees-Appellees,
and
 
BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES,
Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0336)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., and Circuit Judge Browning
and Circuit Judge Castagnetti in place of Nakamura, C.J.,
Fujise, Leonard, Reifurth, and Ginoza, JJ., all recused)
 
Petitioners/Appellants-Appellants Mauna Kea Anaina Hou
 
(MKAH); Royal Order of Kamehameha I (ROOK); Sierra Club, Hawaii
 
Chapter (Sierra Club); KAHEA (KAHEA); and Clarence Ching (Ching)
 
(collectively, Petitioners) appeal from the Final Judgment filed
 
on February 17, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit1
 
(circuit court). Pursuant to the January 27, 2010 "Order
 Granting Appellees University of Hawai' i and University of Hawai' i 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Institute for Astronomy's Motion to Dismiss Appeal Filed 
October 20, 2009" (Order Granting Motion to Dismiss), the circuit 
court entered judgment in favor of Respondents/Appellees-
Appellees University of Hawai' i Institute for Astronomy (UHIFA) 
and University of Hawai' i (UH) (collectively, University), and 
2
Appellee-Appellee Board of Land and Natural Resources (BLNR)  and
against Petitioners as to all of Petitioners' claims.
 
On appeal, Petitioners contend the circuit court erred
 
in
 
(1) finding it did not have jurisdiction, pursuant to
 
HRS § 91-14 (1993 & Supp. 2009), to review BLNR's approval of the
 
Mauna Kea Comprehensive Management Plan, UH Management Areas,
 
3
January 2009 (CMP)  when the court determined that the BLNR
hearing (held on April 8 and 9, 2009) was not a contested case
 
hearing;
 
(2) finding it did not have jurisdiction to review
 
BLNR's denial of Petitioners' request for a contested case
 
hearing in compliance with HRS Chapter 91 and DLNR regulations
 
when the court determined that, pursuant to HRS § 91-14, the
 
denial was not an appealable order;
 
(3) failing to consider whether it had jurisdiction to 
hear Petitioners' appeal pursuant to Hawai
'i Administrative Rules 
(HAR) § 13-5-3 by failing to address whether BLNR's decision to deny Petitioners' request for a contested case hearing was a 
final order; and 
(4) dismissing Petitioners' appeal for lack of
 
jurisdiction based on an incomplete record and misapplying the
 
standard of review for a motion to dismiss for lack of subject
 
matter jurisdiction.
 
2
 The BLNR is the executive board of the State of Hawai' i, Department
of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR). Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 171-3
(Supp. 2010).
3
 We take judicial notice of the CMP as a "matter of public record and
easily verifiable." Williams v. Aona, 121 Hawai' i 1, 11 n.6, 210 P.3d 501,
511 n.6 (2009); Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 201. The CMP may beaccessed at http://hawaii.gov/dlnr/occl/manuals-reports. 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
I.
 
A. Agency Proceedings
 
On April 8 & 9, 2009, BLNR held public hearings4
 
pursuant to HRS Chapter 92 on University's proposed CMP.
 
Petitioners individually testified at the hearing and each orally
 
requested a contested case hearing. At the close of the
 
hearings, BLNR approved University's CMP, subject to eight
 
conditions. On April 17, 2009, Petitioners each submitted a
 
written petition to BLNR requesting a contested case hearing on
 
the approved CMP. After an August 28, 2009 hearing, BLNR denied
 
the requests for a contested case hearing. BLNR reasoned that no
 
statute, rule, or constitutional due process requirement mandated
 
a contested case hearing on its decision to approve the CMP or on
 
the requests for the contested case hearing. On September 1,
 
2009, BLNR sent Petitioners written confirmation of its denial of
 
Petitioners' requests for a contested case hearing.
 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings
 
On September 28, 2009, Petitioners filed a notice of
 
appeal to the circuit court. Petitioners appealed BLNR's (1)
 
April 9, 2009 decision to accept and approve the CMP, alleging a
 
violation of their statutory and constitutional due process
 
rights, and (2) August 28, 2009 decision to deny Petitioners'
 
written requests for a contested case hearing.
 
On October 20, 2009, University filed a Motion to
 
Dismiss Appeal (Motion to Dismiss). On October 23, 2009, BLNR
 
filed a joinder in the Motion to Dismiss.
 
On December 29, 2009, in a memorandum decision, the
 
circuit court granted University's Motion to Dismiss. The
 
circuit court filed its Order Granting Motion to Dismiss on
 
January 27, 2010 and the Final Judgment on February 17, 2010.
 
On March 17, 2010, Petitioners timely appealed.
 
4
 We take judicial notice of the BLNR minutes as a "matter of public
record and easily verifiable." Williams, 121 Hawai' i at 11 n.6, 210 P.3d at
511 n.6; HRE Rule 201. The minutes may be accessed at
http://hawaii.gov/dlnr/chair/meeting/minutes/2009/090409-minutes.pdf. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
A. Mauna Kea Science Reserve
 
The summit area of Mauna Kea on the Island of Hawai' i, 
identified as the Mauna Kea Science Reserve (Science Reserve), is 
public land owned by the State of Hawai' i and subject to the 
jurisdiction of BLNR. In 1968, BLNR entered into a 65-year lease with University for the Science Reserve. The University has two 
telescopes in the Science Reserve and subleases portions of the 
land to other telescope facilities. At the time the CMP was 
written, the Mauna Kea summit was supporting twelve telescopes. 
Each facility is governed by a Conservation District Use Permit 
(CDUP). The University also leases from the BLNR the mid-
elevation telescope support facilities at Hale Pôhaku (around 19 
acres) and the Summit Access Road from Hale Pôhaku to the Science 
Reserve boundary. Together, these three leased areas (Management 
Area) are the focus of the CMP. 
The Management Area is located in a conservation
 
district resource subzone. Conservation districts are "those
 
lands within the various counties of the State bounded by the
 
conservation district line." HRS § 183C-2 (Supp. 2010). In
 
implementing the statute governing land use in conservation
 
districts, the legislature found that
 
lands within the state land use conservation district
 
contain important natural resources essential to the
preservation of the State's fragile natural ecosystems and
the sustainability of the State's water supply. It is
 therefore, the intent of the legislature to conserve,
protect, and preserve the important natural resources of the
State through appropriate management and use to promote
their long-term sustainability and the public health, safety
and welfare.
 
HRS § 183C-1 (Supp. 2010). HAR Chapter 13-5 provides the
 
regulatory scheme to implement HRS § 183C (Supp. 2010) and has as
 
its purpose the conservation, protection, and promotion of the
 
long-term sustainability of natural resources through appropriate
 
management and use. HAR § 13-5-1. HAR § 13-5-10 establishes
 
conservation district resource subzones -- areas with specific
 
boundaries and resource characteristics within a conservation
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
district. HAR § 13-5-2. The Management Area is encompassed in
 
"conservation district resource (R) subzone," described pursuant
 
to HAR § 13-5-13:
 
(b)	 The (R) subzone shall encompass:
 
(1)	 Lands necessary for providing future parkland
and lands presently used for national, state,
county, or private parks;
 
(2)	 Lands suitable for growing and harvesting of
commercial timber or other forest products;
 
(3)	 Lands suitable for outdoor recreational uses
 such as hunting, fishing, hiking, camping, and
picnicking;
 
(4)	 Offshore islands of the State of Hawaii, unless
placed in a (P) or (L) subzone;
 
(5)	 Lands and state marine waters seaward of the
 upper reaches of the wash of waves, usually
evidenced by the edge of vegetation or by the
debris left by the wash of waves on shore to the
extent of the State’s jurisdiction, unless
placed in a (P) or (L) subzone.
 
(c) Land uses permitted in the resource (R) subzone
are restricted to those listed in section 13-5-24.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
HAR § 13-5-24 provides for the land uses allowed in
 
resource (R) subzone and their required permits:
 
(c) Identified land uses in the resource subzone and
 
their required permits, (if applicable), are listed below:
 
(1)	 Identified land uses beginning with letter (A)
require no permit from the department or board;
 
(2)	 Identified land uses beginning with letter (B)
require a site plan approval by the department;
 
(3)	 Identified land uses beginning with letter (C)
require a departmental permit; and
 
(4)	 Identified land uses beginning with letter (D)
require a board permit, and where indicated, a
management plan.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Identified lands uses beginning with letter (D)
 
include, among others:
 
R-3	 ASTRONOMY FACILITIES
 
(D-1) Astronomy facilities under an approved management
plan.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HAR § 13-5-24 (emphasis added). Therefore, according to the
 
regulations, the proposed construction of new telescopes requires
 
a board permit and an approved management plan.
 
B. First Agency Appeal--Civil No. 04-1-397
 
In 2001, pursuant to HAR § 13-5-34, UHIFA submitted a
 
CDUP application to BLNR to construct and operate up to six 
Outrigger Telescopes on the summit. The proposed land use
 
required an approved management plan. BLNR determined the
 
proposed management plan to be inadequate, but rather than
 
denying the CDUP application, it remanded the case to a hearing
 
officer for further evidentiary hearings. The Mauna Kea
 
Appellants (comprised of MKAH, ROOK, Sierra Club, and Ching)
 
requested a contested case hearing.
 
Evidentiary hearings on the management plan were held
 
on October 29 and 30, 2003. On December 31, 2003, the hearing
 
officer provided his Proposed Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
 
Law and Decision and Order for Management Plan (FOF/COL and
 
Decision & Order for Management Plan). The hearing officer
 
concluded as a matter of law:
 
1. The BLNR has jurisdiction over UHIFA's request
for approval of a management plan.
 
2. Astronomy facilities require an approved
management plan. [HAR] § 13-5-24.
 
3. Management plan approvals are different from
board permit approvals. [HAR] § 13-5-30. Compare § 13-5-34
(board permits) with § 13-5-39 (management plan approvals).
Conservation district use permits are not required for
management plans.
 
4. Public hearings are not required for management
plan approvals. [HAR] § 13-5-40 (excluding management plans
from the list of applications requiring public hearings).
 
(Emphases added.)
 
On October 29, 2004, BLNR granted UHIFA's CDUP
 
application for the Outrigger Telescopes project. BLNR also
 
approved the management plan.
 
On November 29, 2004, the Mauna Kea Appellants appealed
 
BLNR's decisions to the circuit court. In the circuit court's
 
January 19, 2007 Decision and Order (Civ. No. 04-1-397 Decision
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Order), the court reversed BLNR's decision granting the CDUP
 
and found that the management plan did not satisfy the
 
requirements of HAR §§ 13-5-2 and 13-5-24 that the plan be
 
comprehensive. Therefore, the circuit court affirmed the
 
FOF/COL, Decision and Order for the Management Plan "subject to
 
[the circuit court's] decision that the Outrigger Management Plan
 
approved thereby is not a 'management plan' within the meaning of
 
HAR § 13-5-24 that is sufficient to support a [CDUP] for the
 
Project." The circuit court further stated that a "'management
 
plan' under [HAR] § 13-5-24 is a precondition to granting a CDUP
 
for the R3 Resource Subzone land use at issue here." The circuit
 
court also concluded that the "Mauna Kea Appellants' substantial
 
rights have been prejudiced by the BLNR's approval of CDUP for
 
UHIFA's Outrigger Telescopes Project and approval [of] the
 
Outrigger Management Plan without an approved comprehensive
 
management plan."
 
C. Mauna Kea Management Area Management Plans
 
The DLNR, BLNR, and University have developed, adopted,
 
and/or followed several management plans governing the Science
 
Reserve and other areas on Mauna Kea. The "1995 Revised
 
Management Plan for the UH Management Areas on Mauna Kea" (1995
 
Management Plan) was adopted by UH and DLNR to manage commercial
 
use on the summit. UH retained management responsibilities for
 
the astronomical facilities and the summit access road, and all
 
other management responsibilities reverted back to DLNR. In
 
2000, the UH Board of Regents adopted the "2000 Mauna Kea Science
 
Reserve Master Plan" (2000 Master Plan) -- "the policy framework
 
for the responsible stewardship and use of university managed
 
lands on Mauna Kea." At that time, the University established
 
the Office of Mauna Kea Management to manage the various
 
activities in the Management Area in accordance with 2000 Master
 
Plan. The Office of Mauna Kea Management turns to the Mauna Kea
 
Management Board, the Kahu Kû Mauna Council, and several advisory
 
committees for advice on environmental and cultural issues.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1. Development of the proposed CMP
 
Subsequent to the circuit court's decision rejecting
 
the management plan UHIFA had submitted with its board permit
 
application for the proposed Outrigger Telescopes project, the
 
University enlisted Ku' iwalu, a consulting company, to assist in 
preparing the CMP. The resulting document was envisioned as an
 over-arching management tool for balancing and guiding the
 
numerous activities carried out in the Management Area:
 
This CMP provides the framework for managing multiple
existing and future activities, such as astronomy,
recreational and commercial activities, scientific research,
and cultural and religious activities. More importantly,
the CMP provides a guide for protecting Mauna Kea's many
unique cultural and natural resources. Once the CMP is
 adopted by the BLNR, it will also provide management
guidelines and specific management recommendations to be
included in BLNR's CDUPs.
 
The CMP was intended to be "the approved management 
plan for UH Management Areas, supplementing, but at times 
superseding, the 1995 Management Plan." According to the CMP, 
the 2000 Master Plan would continue to serve as the policy 
framework for the stewardship and use of the Management Areas, 
but would incorporate the CMP into any updates. While drafting 
the CMP, Ku' iwalu held several public meetings on the Island of 
Hawai'i "to seek input on the development of a [CMP] for the 
Mauna Kea Science Reserve." After Ku' iwalu completed a draft 
CMP, it held another round of public meetings inviting the community to review the draft and offer comment. It also invited 
input online. Qmark Research conducted 635 telephone interviews 
of Hawai' i residents statewide to, among other things, "determine 
respondents' level of support of programs and management of Mauna Kea." 
2. BLNR hearing on the proposed CMP
 
On April 8 & 9, 2009, BLNR held a board meeting in
 
Hilo, pursuant to HRS Chapter 92 (sunshine law). Petitioners
 
contend this was not a Chapter 92 meeting, but, instead, was a
 
contested case hearing pursuant to Chapter 91. See E & J Lounge
 
Operating Co. v. Liquor Comm'n of City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 118
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hawai'i 320, 334 n.20, 189 P.3d 432, 446 n.20 (2008) ("[HRS] 
chapter 92, by its own terms is inapplicable to contested case 
hearings."). BLNR contends the meeting was a regular board 
5
meeting held under Chapter 92. The agenda  noted BLNR's right to
"go into Executive Session pursuant to [HRS §] 92-5(a)(4),"
 
indicating that this was a regular board meeting held pursuant to
 
HRS § 92-3 (1993).
6 One of the agenda items was the distribution
 
7
: 
 of the March 27, 2009 minutes. According to the DLNR website "In a regularly scheduled BLNR meeting, discussions are recorded
 
and later transcribed. All meeting minutes must be unanimously
 
approved at the subsequent BLNR meeting. 
The minutes will be
 
posted on this page once they are approved." The minutes of the
 April 8 & 9, 2009 meeting were transcribed and posted on the
 
website. The minutes were "approved as submitted" at the BLNR
 
board meeting on May 8, 2009.
 
The only substantive item on the April 8 & 9, 2009
 
agenda was the CMP 
for the Mauna Kea Science Reserve and UH Management Areas,
by the University of Hawaii, Island of Hawaii, TMKs; (3)
4-4-015:009&012, including portions of the summit access
road that extends from Hale Pohaku to the boundary of the
Mauna Kea Science Reserve, including a 400-yard wide
corridor on either side of the road, excluding those areas
within the adjacent Mauna Kea Ice Age Natural Area Reserve.
 
The transcribed minutes provide details of what
 
transpired at the meeting. DLNR staff member Sam Lemmo (Lemmo),
 
Administrator of the Office of Conservation and Coastal Lands
 
5 The agenda may be accessed at
http://hawaii.gov/dlnr/chair/meeting/agendas/090408-agenda.pdf/view.
 HRS § 92-3 provides in relevant part:
 
§ 92-3 Open meetings.  Every meeting of all boards shall be
open to the public and all persons shall be permitted to attend
any meeting unless otherwise provided in the constitution or as
closed pursuant to sections 92-4 and 92-5 . . . . The boards shall
afford all interested persons an opportunity to submit data,
views, or arguments, in writing, on any agenda item. The boards
 shall also afford all interested persons an opportunity to present
oral testimony on any agenda item.
7
 The DLNR website may be accessed at
http://hawaii.gov/dlnr/chair/meeting/minutes/2009.
 
9
 6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8
(OCCL),  presented first and explained his office's
responsibility to review the CMP and make recommendations to BLNR
 
regarding its adoption. Lemmo discussed the history of Mauna Kea
 
and the CMP and stated that the staff recommended the CMP be
 
approved subject to a number of conditions. Lemmo also reported
 
that an Environmental Assessment had been filed. When asked if
 
the CMP would satisfy the requirement set forth in the Civ. No.
 
04-1-397 Decision and Order to provide a comprehensive management
 
plan in conjunction with the CDUP petition for the Outrigger
 
Telescopes, Lemmo indicated that the CMP was "not being submitted
 
with a pending project" and he had not reviewed the CMP for
 
compliance with the Civ. No. 04-1-397 Decision and Order as
 
related to a specific project.9 Lemmo stated that the CMP
 
identified a number of issues as outside the scope of the CMP,
 but acknowledged that others might believe those issues should
 
have been addressed as part of a comprehensive plan.
10
 
8 The OCCL is an office within DLNR and, among other responsibilities,
oversees private and public lands in the State Land Use Conservation District
(http://hawaii.gov/dlnr/occl).
9 The CMP provides:
 
As defined by DLNR Administrative Rules (HAR § 13-5-2), a
management plan is "a comprehensive plan for carrying out multiple
land uses." This CMP specifically address multiple land uses and
resource values within the UH Management Areas. Pursuant to Judge
Hara's decision of January 19, 2007, [Civ. No. 04-1-397 Decision
and Order] BLNR shall approve a comprehensive management plan that
considers multiple uses as a precondition for any future
development on Mauna Kea (see [CMP] Section 3.2). This CMP is
 being prepared in accordance with Judge Hara's decision.
10 The CMP specifically identified policy topics it considered
outside the scope of the CMP, including:
 
•	 Termination of the State Lease between the University and
the BLNR
 
•	 Use of ceded lands for $1 a year or nominal consideration
•	 Subleases between the University and the observatories
•	 Extension of the State lease beyond 2033
•	 Decommissioning
•	 Proposed new development on Mauna Kea, including the Thirty
Meter Telescope (TMT) and Pan Starrs
•	 Community benefit package with increased educational
benefits
 
•	 Guaranteed employment opportunities for Native Hawaiians andthe people on the Island of Hawai' i 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Representatives from the University made presentations. 
In the presentation by Ku'iwalu, the consultant team hired to
 
develop the CMP, it was emphasized that the CMP was "not
 
proposing any land use in the Management Actions, but rather,
 
recommend[ing] actions for [the Office of Mauna Kea Management]
 
to consider as they implement the CMP which [the Office of Mauna
 
Kea Management] will be responsible for and any future land use
 
of conservation lands [which] will go before the BLNR for
 
approval." The CMP described itself as "an integrated planning
 
tool for resource management that reflects updated guidance,
 
supports the need for rule-making authority, and engages the
 
community." The CMP further stated: 
This CMP provides the framework for managing multiple
existing and future activities, such as astronomy,
recreational and commercial activities, scientific research,
and cultural and religious activities. More importantly,
the CMP provides a guide for protecting Mauna Kea's many
unique cultural and natural resources. Once the CMP is
 adopted by the BLNR, it will also provide management
guidelines and specific management recommendations to be
included in BLNR's CDUPs.
 
A BLNR member again raised a question about the
 
relationship between the CMP and the Civ. No. 04-1-397 Decision
 
and Order. As recorded in the minutes, the BLNR member
 
asked [Ku' iwalu] that the CMP does not propose any new land
uses, but your slide earlier talked about conclusion of law
from [the Civ. No. 04-1-397 Decision and Order] that saidthe management plan is the plan he called for and must covermultiple land uses within the larger overall area that UHcontrols. If you are not talking about land uses then howdoes it comply with his decision? [Ku'iwalu] explained that[the Office of Mauna Kea Management] viewed [the Civ. No.04-1-397 Decision and Order] to consider multiple land uses,not confined to astronomy, but to also consider theinfrastructure, recreational, commercial, all the multipleuses in developing a CMP. With respect to proposed uses,what [the Civ. No. 04-1-397 Decision and Order] did say wasapproval of a CMP was a pre-condition to any newdevelopment. The way they interpreted [the Civ. No. 04-1­397 Decision and Order] is the management plan addresses anddevelops management tools for existing and potential futureuses, but it does not authorize any future use. That will go through its own independent review process, throughChapter 343, through the CDUP process, but initially it mustbe in compliance with the CMP. The CMP is not proposingsubmitting an independent use in the plan other than a setof management recommendations of which [the Office of MaunaKea Management] can impose. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
UH confirmed that new developments would need to be in compliance
 
with the overarching principles of the CMP.
 
BLNR opened the meeting for public testimony. Many
 
members of the public testified, including Petitioners MKAH,
 
Sierra Club, KAHEA, ROOK, and Ching, each of whom orally
 
requested a contested case hearing.
 
BLNR closed public testimony around 12:30 p.m. on the
 
second day and entered into deliberations. A BLNR member asked
 
Lemmo to describe how a proposal for a new telescope would be
 
handled under this CMP. According to the minutes, "Lemmo said
 
any new telescope would be treated like any new proposals that
 
have been treated requiring them to file a conservation use
 
district application, an environmental document and a management
 
plan at his office at OCCL." The BLNR member asked if there
 
would be 
another management plan on top of the CMP. [Lemmo] said he
didn't know about that and emphasized a management plan.
Staff would process it like all applications, collect
community input, schedule a public hearing in Hilo, accept
public testimony on the matter, analyze all the issues and
make a recommendation to the Land Board who decides whether
 or not another telescope would be allowed or not.
 
The minutes reflect that the BLNR member then asked "[i]f [BLNR]
 
approves the CMP today does that mean they are approving more
 
observatories or telescopes going forward? [Lemmo] said
 
absolutely not."
 
At the end of deliberations, BLNR went into executive
 
session for approximately 20 minutes "to consult with [BLNR's]
 
attorney on [BLNR's] rights, duties, privileges, immunities and
 
liabilities." After BLNR reconvened the hearing, the BLNR
 
chairperson instructed the audience that anyone who wanted to
 
request a contested case hearing needed to do so verbally
 
(individual Petitioners already had) and then file a written
 
request with BLNR within ten days. The chairperson then
 
"summarized that [BLNR] approved the CMP subject to the following
 
conditions to provide four specific plans for public access,
 
natural resources, cultural resources and decommissioning of
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
telescopes, to bring it before [BLNR] by one year or prior to the
 
submission of the next CDUP." Specifically, BLNR approved the
 
CMP subject to the following conditions:
 
1)	 That the University of Hawaii Board of Regents (BOR)
is the entity responsible for the implementation of
the CMP, subject to the oversight of the BLNR. The
 
BOR may delegate its responsibility with the
accompanying authorities to another entity within the
University system, subject to the approval of the
BLNR;
 
2) 	That within one year of the BLNR approval of the CMP,
the BOR or its authorized designee shall provide the
BLNR in writing and in person with the following
information:
 • Status of the development of each sub plan;
• Status of the development of each management
action;
 
3)	 That the BOR or its authorized designee shall continue
to submit annual reports to the BLNR (in writing and
in person), which shall include the items listed in
condition No. 2;
 
4)	 That within one year of the BLNR approval of the CMP,
or the submission of a Conservation District Use
 Application, whichever occurs sooner, the University
shall submit for review and approval the following sub
plans:
• A cultural resources management plan;
• A natural resources management plan;
• A decommissioning plan, including a financial
plan; and
• A public access plan;
 
5)	 That amendments to the CMP shall be reviewed and
 approved first by the BOR, and second by the BLNR;
 
6)	 That the BOR recognizes that by approving the CMP, the
BLNR has not delegated any authority (not already in
existence) to the University with respect to land use
approvals, leasing, or public access at Mauna Kea;
 
7)	 That within one year of the BLNR approval the CMP, or
the submission of a Conservation District Use
 Application, whichever occurs sooner, the BOR or its
authorized designee shall provide the BLNR (for review
and approval) with a management and implementation
framework, that has been authorized by the BOR, for
project developments within UH Management Areas that
is consistent with the specific management actions,
conditions and policies of the CMP;
 
8)	 That failure to comply with these conditions may
subject the University to the imposition of additional
conditions to ensure compliance with the CMP and any
penalties allowed under the law.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Petitioners filed timely written requests for a
 
contested case hearing, which BLNR denied at its August 28, 2009
 
Board meeting. Petitioners filed their notice of appeal to the
 
circuit court from BLNR's decision to approve the CMP and to deny
 
Petitioners' request for a contested case hearing. The circuit
 
court held that Petitioners failed to show that a contested case
 
hearing was required, thus depriving the court of jurisdiction to
 
review BLNR's approval of the CMP. With no jurisdiction to hear
 
the agency appeal, the circuit court also held it had no
 
jurisdiction to review BLNR's decision to deny Petitioners'
 
request for a contested case hearing. The circuit court
 
dismissed the appeal for lack of subject matter jurisdiction, and
 
Petitioners timely appealed to this court.
 
III.
 
"The right to appeal is purely statutory and exists 
only when jurisdiction is given by some constitutional or 
statutory provision." Lingle v. Hawaii Gov't Employees Ass'n, 
AFSCME, Local 152, AFL-CIO, 107 Hawai' i 178, 184, 111 P.3d 587, 
593 (2005). As a threshold matter, "every court must . . . 
determine . . . whether it has jurisdiction to decide the 
issue[s] presented." Pele Defense Fund v. Puna Geothermal 
Venture, 77 Hawai' i 64, 67, 881 P.2d 1210, 1213 (1994). In the 
instant case, the question is whether the circuit court had 
subject matter jurisdiction to hear this case pursuant to HRS 
§ 91-14, the statute that provides for judicial review of a 
contested case. In order to invoke the circuit court's 
jurisdiction under HRS § 91-14, the appellant must meet four 
requirements: 
first, the proceeding that resulted in the unfavorable
agency action must have been a "contested case"
hearing -- i.e., a hearing that was (1) required by
law and (2) determined the "rights, duties, and
privileges of specific parties"; second, the agency's
action must represent "a final decision and order," or
"a preliminary ruling" such that deferral of review
would deprive the claimant of adequate relief; third,
the claimant must have followed the applicable agency
rules and, therefore, have been involved "in" the
contested case; and finally, the claimant's legal
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interests must have been injured -- i.e., the claimant
must have standing to appeal.
 
[Public Access Shoreline Hawai� i v. Hawai� i County Planning 
Comm'n (PASH)], 79 Hawai' i [425,] 431, 903 P.2d [1246,] 1252
[(1995)] (bold emphases added). 
Kaleikini v. Thielen, 124 Hawai' i 1, 16-17, 237 P.3d 1067, 
1082-83 (2010) (brackets omitted). 
"Contested case means a proceeding in which the legal 
rights, duties, or privileges of specific parties are required by 
law to be determined after an opportunity for agency hearing." 
HRS § 91-1(5); see also Pele Defense Fund, 77 Hawai' i at 67, 881 
P.2d at 1213. 
HAR §§ 13-1-28 through 39 provide rules relating to
 
contested case hearings for DLNR. Pursuant to HAR § 13-1-28, 
(a) When required by law, the [BLNR] shall hold a contested
case hearing upon its own motion or on a written petition
of any government agency or any interested person.
 
(b) The contested case hearing shall be held after any
public hearing which by law is required to be held on the
same subject matter.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
HAR § 13-1-29(a) requires that a petitioner must make
 
an oral or written request for a contested hearing "no later than
 
the close of the board meeting at which the subject matter of the
 
request is scheduled for board disposition." Additionally, the
 
petitioner must submit a "written petition with the board for a
 
contested case no later than ten calendar days after the close of
 
the board meeting." Id. There is no dispute that Petitioners
 
met the oral request and written petition requirements.
 
Pursuant to HAR § 13-1-29.1, BLNR, without a hearing,
 
may deny a petitioner's request for a contested case hearing 
when it is clear as a matter of law that the request
concerns a subject that is not within the adjudicatory
jurisdiction of the board or when it is clear as a matter of
law that the petitioner does not have a legal right, duty,
or privilege entitling one to a contested case proceeding. 
BLNR reviewed the written petitions for a contested
 
case hearing and took oral testimony at its August 28, 2009 board
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
meeting.11 Subsequently, BLNR issued a letter denying the
 
request for a contested case hearing.
 
Petitioners contend that BLNR was required to hold a 
contested case hearing before approving the CMP. They argue that 
the April 8 & 9, 2009 BLNR meeting was a contested case hearing, 
even if it did not have all the attributes of a contested case 
hearing. Petitioners cite to the following Hawai' i cases to 
support the proposition that the agency hearing need not comply with contested case requirements of HRS § 91-14 to still be 
considered a contested case hearing: E & J Lounge, 118 Hawai' i 
at 350, 189 P.3d at 462 (The supreme court held that a contested case hearing was required by law and the Liquor Commission's 
decision was subject to judicial review under HRS 91-14 even 
though the hearing had not complied with HRS Chapter 91 
provisions.); and Alejado v. City & County of Honolulu, 89 
Hawai'i 221, 231, 971 P.2d 310, 320 (App. 1998) (This court 
concluded "that Appellant is entitled to a contested case hearing with the full procedural protection afforded by [HRS Chapter 91]. 
The record indicates, however, that while the January 8, 1997 
rehearing constituted a contested case hearing, it did not comply 
with HRS Chapter 91."). These cases stand for the proposition 
that if a hearing is required by law, a hearing that was held 
could be classified as a contested case hearing even if not in 
compliance with the contested case hearing procedures established 
by statute. However, these cases do not stand for the 
proposition that the court has jurisdiction where a contested 
case hearing was not required by law. If a contested case 
hearing was not required by law, the circuit court does not have 
jurisdiction under HRS § 91-14. Pele Defense Fund, 77 Hawai' i at 
69 n.10, 881 P.2d at 1215 n.10. 
"In order for an agency hearing to be 'required by
 
law,' it may be required by (1) agency rule, (2) statute, or (3)
 
11 The board meeting minutes may be accessed at
http://hawaii.gov/dlnr/chair/meeting/minutes/2009/090828-minutes.pdf.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
constitutional due process." Aha Hui Malama O Kaniakapupu v. 
Land Use Comm'n, 111 Hawai' i 124, 132, 139 P.3d 712, 720 (2006). 
"[D]iscretionary hearings are not contested cases because they 
are not required by law." Lingle, 107 Hawai' i at 184, 111 P.3d 
at 593. If the regulations regarding approval of a management plan do not require a hearing before BLNR approves or denies the 
plan, then "the actions of the administrative agency are not 
'required by law' and do not amount to a 'final decision or order 
in a contested case' from which a direct appeal to circuit court 
is possible." Aha Hui Malama O Kaniakapupu, 111 Hawai' i at 132, 
139 P.3d at 720. 
When BLNR is considering an application for a board
 
permit for a proposed land use, the statutes and rules require a
 public hearing. Pursuant to HRS § 183C-6 (Supp. 2010), DLNR
 
"shall hold a public hearing in every case involving the proposed
 
use of land for commercial purposes, at which hearing interested
 
persons shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard."
 
"Land use" is defined by statute as:
 
(1)	 The placement or erection of any solid material on
land;
 
(2)	 The grading, removing, harvesting, dredging, mining,
or extraction of any material or natural resource on
land;
 
(3)	 The subdivision of land; or
 
(4)	 The construction, reconstruction, demolition, or
alteration of any structure, building, or facility on
land.
 
HRS § 183C-2. As defined in the statute, land use refers to
 
specific activities involving the building of structures, the
 
grading or otherwise moving of land or materials, or changing
 
boundaries. "Land use" does not refer to a management plan
 
devoid of a proposed use of land for specific commercial
 
purposes.
 
HAR § 13-5-31 provides the general specifications of
 
what to include in a permit application for a proposed land use
 
for commercial purposes:
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1) A draft environmental assessment, or environmental
impact statement, as applicable; 
(2) Associated plans such as location map, site plan,floor plan, elevations and landscaping plans drawn toscale; 
(3) The proposed land use shall address their relationshipwith county general plans and development plans; 
(4) Any other information as determined by the department; 
(5) Signature of the landowner; 
(6) Applicable fees; and 
(7) A minimum of twenty copies of the application and allattachments. 
HAR § 13-5-34 provides additional information specific
 
to board permits. HAR § 13-5-34 provides, in part:
 
§13-5-34 Board permits. (a) Applications for board
permits shall be submitted to the department in accordance
with section 13-5-31.
 
(b) A public hearing, if applicable, shall be held in
accordance with section 13-5-40.
 
. . . .
 
(d) Contested case hearings, if applicable, and as
required by law, shall be held as provided in chapter 13-1,
subpart 5. The aggrieved appellant or person who has
demonstrated standing to contest the board action may
request a contested case hearing pursuant to chapter 13-1.
 
HAR § 13-5-39 regulates the approval of management
 
plans. Specifically, the rule states:
 
§13-5-39 Management plan approvals. (a) Where
required, management plans shall be submitted with the board
permit application and shall include the requirements listed
in Exhibit 3, entitled "Management Plan Requirements, dated
September 6, 1994."
 
(b) An annual report to the department is required
which shall include the status of compliance of the permit
conditions and the implementation of land uses pursuant to
the approved management plan schedule.
 
The "Management Plan Requirements" set forth in Exhibit
 
3 to HAR § 13-5-39 are as follows:
 
1. General Description
 
-Proposed land use in general terms
 
-How proposed land use is consistent with the purpose
of the conservation district and the property's
subzone
 
-Location map, drawn to scale
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2. Existing conditions on parcel
 
-Ownership
 
-Resources (e.g. biological, archeological, geological)
 
-Presence of threatened or endangered species
 
-Constraints (e.g. flood plain, tsunami, volcanic,
topography)
 
-Existing land uses
 
-Existing Conservation District Use Permits (CDUPs)
 
-Access
 
-Soils
 
3. Proposed land uses on parcel
 
-	For each proposed land use:
 -Description of proposed land uses
 
-Site plan
 
-	Justification that it is an identified land use
 for the subzone
 
-Relationship to existing and other proposed land
 uses
 
-	Expected timing
 
-	Monitoring strategies
 
-	Environmental assessment
 
-Site plan showing location of all existing and
proposed land uses
 
-	Steps to ensure that historic preservation
concerns are met
 
4. 	Reporting schedule
 
-Time duration of management plan (start and end
dates)
 
-Annual reporting schedule
 
-Annual reporting requirements
 
The April 8 and 9, 2009 BLNR meeting agenda indicated
 
that the purpose of the meeting was to review and take comment on
 
the proposed CMP. The CMP was presented as a stand-alone
 
document unrelated to any specific proposed land use permit
 
application. HRS § 183C requires a public hearing on proposed
 
land uses, but does not require a public hearing on a proposed
 
management plan presented separately from a board permit
 
application. The land use regulations require a public hearing
 
on a board permit application, but again, there is no requirement
 
for a public hearing on a management plan proposed independent of
 
any proposed land use. We find nothing under the applicable
 
statute or rules to require a hearing on a comprehensive
 
management plan submitted for approval separately from a board
 
permit application. The April 8 & 9, 2009 hearing was not a
 
contested case hearing pursuant to any statute or rule, and a
 
hearing was not required by statute or rule.
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Without a statute or rule requiring BLNR to hold a 
contested case hearing prior to approval of a management plan, 
the remaining question is whether a contested case hearing was 
required by constitutional due process. Bush v. Hawaiian Homes 
Comm'n, 76 Hawai' i 128, 135, 870 P.2d 1272, 1279 (1994). 
Petitioners assert that "[t]he public, including 
[Petitioners], have a constitutionally protected interest in the lands within the Mauna Kea conservation district." Petitioners 
contend the CMP interferes with their constitutionally protected 
rights to traditional and customary native Hawaiian practices, 
but Petitioners do not demonstrate how the CMP would interfere 
with such rights. See State v. Hanapi, 89 Hawai' i 177, 970 P.2d 
485 (1998).
12 
A hearing is mandated whenever a claimant seeks to 
protect a property interest for which he has "more than an abstract need or desire" and "more than a unilateral 
expectation." Bush, 76 Hawai' i at 136, 870 P.2d at 1280. The 
property interest must be one to which the claimant is legitimately entitled, but has been denied. Id.
13 
12 In Hanapi, the Hawai' i Supreme Court stated: 
In order for a defendant to establish that his or her
 
conduct is constitutionally protected as a native Hawaiian right,
he or she must show, at minimum, the following three factors.
First, he or she must qualify as a native Hawaiian within the
guidelines set out in PASH.
 
Second, once a defendant qualifies as a native Hawaiian, he
or she must then establish that his or her claimed right is
constitutionally protected as a customary or traditional native
Hawaiian practice.
 
Finally, a defendant claiming his or her conduct is
constitutionally protected must also prove that the exercise of
the right occurred on undeveloped or less than fully developed
property.
 
89 Hawai' i at 185-86, 970 P.2d at 493-94 (internal quotation marks and
citation omitted).
13 Petitioners also cite to the Hawai' i Constitution, article XI,
section 1 and article XII, section 4, which provide that natural resources andceded lands are held in the public trust, and article XI, section 9, whichprovides for the public's right to a clean and healthful environment.
(continued...)
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The CMP does not implicate University's property rights
 
because no property rights are being granted or denied. The CMP
 
is not a board permit application and does not propose or approve
 
new land uses. Furthermore, the CMP does not affect the
 
constitutionally protected rights of Petitioners. To support
 
their contention that adoption of the CMP restricts their access
 
and regulates their cultural practices, Petitioners cite to CMP
 
Section 7-31. This section describes the "permitted uses,
 
restrictions and conditions" in place under the previously-
approved 1995 Management Plan, all of which are incorporated into
 
the proposed CMP. Citing to another section of the CMP,
 
Petitioners allege restrictions in the proposed "management
 
actions" related to access, parking, visitor traffic, off-road
 
vehicle use, hiking, hunting, etc. The CMP notes that many of
 
these suggested actions "cannot be implemented without [UH] rule-
making authority." As such, except for uses already in place
 
under the 1995 Management Plan, these "management actions" are
 
nothing more than considerations for the future.14
 
Petitioners' contention that the effect of the adoption
 
of the CMP is to restrict public access and regulate cultural
 
13(...continued)
However, it is not enough to identify a general public interest in the
management of public lands. A claimant must have a legitimate interest whichis being denied. Bush, 76 Hawai' i at 136, 870 P.2d at 1280.
14 We note that the CMP specifically protects Native Hawaiian cultural
observances and access:
 
Subject to compliance with the legal requirements for access to
traditional and customary practices of the State Constitution, no
restrictions shall be placed on any Native Hawaiian cultural
observance except those observances that are considered culturally
inappropriate by a collective consensus of Kahu Ku Mauna, the MKMB
Hawaiian Culture Committee, families with lineal and historic
connections to Mauna Kea, cultural practitioners, and other Native
Hawaiian groups. Access shall not be denied or unduly restricted
for Native Hawaiians wanting to visit sites such as burials or
shrines or exercise their religious and spiritual practices within
the UH Management Areas. Public tours of burial sites shall be
 prohibited. The rangers or other management staff shall be
notified of visits to burial sites prior to the visits for
security and safety reasons.
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
practices, affecting Petitioners' constitutionally protected
 
rights, is without merit. 
We conclude that a contested case hearing was not
 
required by law under statute, rule, or constitutional due
 
process. Because a contested case hearing was not required, the
 
circuit court did not err in dismissing Petitioners' appeal for
 
lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
 
IV.
 
Therefore, the Final Judgment filed on February 17,
 
2010 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 25, 2012. 
Martha Townsend
 
(Colin A. Yost and
Michael R. Cruise
 (Cruise & Yost, LLC)
on the briefs) for
Petitioners/Appellants-Appellants Mauna Kea
Anaina Hou; Royal Order
of Kamehameha I; Sierra
Club, Hawai' i Chapter;
KAHEA; and Clarence Ching.
 Presiding Judge
Acting Associate Judge
Lisa Woods Munger
(Lisa A. Bail and Carly J.
Minner-Cole (Goodsill
Anderson Quinn & Stifel) and
Darolyn H. Lendio, University
General Counsel, and Bruce Y. 
Acting Associate Judge
Matsui (Office of the General
Counsel) with her on the brief)
for Respondent/Appellees-Appellees
University of Hawai' i and University
of Hawai' i Institute for Astronomy. 
Julie H. China, Deputy Attorney General
(Donna H. Kalama, Deputy Attorney
General, with her on the brief)
for Appellee-Appellee Board
of Land and Natural Resources.
 
22
 