  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30646
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
WAN HO SO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1P110-00394)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Wan Ho So ("Defendant") appeals
 
from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order, filed on
 
July 1, 2010 in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
 Division ("District Court").
1 Defendant was found guilty of
 
Harassment, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes § 711­1106(1)(a) (Supp. 2010).
2 On appeal, Defendant contends that
 
there was insufficient evidence to prove that he (1) subjected
 Officer Jason Kubo to offensive physical contact, or (2) intended
 to harass, annoy, or alarm Officer Kubo.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Defendant's points of error as follows:
 
1 The Honorable Leslie A. Hayashi presided.
 
2 (1) A person commits the offense of harassment
if, with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any other
person, that person:
 
(a)	 Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches
another person in an offensive manner or
subjects the other person to offensive physical
contact[.]
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. 711-1106(1)(a).
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
There was substantial evidence to support Defendant's
 
conviction for Harassment. In reviewing for sufficiency of
 
evidence, we determine whether: 
upon the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the
trier of fact, the evidence is sufficient to support a prima
facie case so that a reasonable mind might fairly conclude
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to
 support a prima facie case requires substantial evidence as
to every material element of the offense charged.
Substantial evidence as to every material element of the
offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion. Under such a review, we
give full play to the right of the fact finder to determine
credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable
inferences of fact.
 
State v. Grace, 107 Hawai' i 133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 34 (App. 2005) 
(quoting State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai' i 409, 422, 23 P.3d 744, 757 
(App. 2001).
 
The District Court found that Officer Kubo's testimony
 
was more credible than Defendant's testimony and that Defendant
 
was guilty of the offense.3 To the extent that Defendant
 
contends that the State's evidence was not credible or not
 sufficiently credible, we generally do not pass upon that issue:
 
Verdicts based on conflicting evidence will not be set
aside where there is substantial evidence to support
the trier of fact's findings. We have defined
 substantial evidence as credible evidence which is of
 sufficient quality and probative value to enable a
person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion. . . .
 
. . . It is well-settled that an appellate court
will not pass upon issues dependent upon the
 
3 THE COURT: Okay. At this time then the Court is
 
ready to rule. Having heard the State's witnesses,
Officer Kubo and Officer Kimura, the defendant having
been given his Tachibana warning and electing to
testify, it is a matter of credibility.
 
And in this case I do find the State's witnesses to be
 
more credible with what occurred on the late evening of
December 19th, early morning of December 20th. . . .
 
I do believe that [Defendant], and perhaps rightfully
so, was angry about the situation in that he felt he was the
victim and that the officers were not helping him. However,
that does not excuse his behavior and what occurred
 afterwards with the exchange with Officer Kubo. He was
 instructed to return to his vehicle. He was upset about the
situation. And I do find that there was physical contact
that was made with the intent to harass Officer Kubo with
 respect to the elbow and the car door. So the Court does
 find the defendant guilty of this offense.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
credibility of witnesses and the weight of the
evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai' i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 697 (1999) 
(quoting State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai' i 85, 90, 976 P.2d 399, 404, 
1999)) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets 
omitted; block quote format changed). 
Officer Kubo testified that he responded to a call in
 
the area of Lewers Street in Waikiki. Upon arriving, Officer
 Kubo observed the Defendant arguing with several officers already
 present at the scene. Officer Kubo approached and attempted to
 calm the Defendant and get him to remove his vehicle from the
 heavily trafficked road. Instead, Officer Kubo testified, his
 efforts appeared to result in Defendant refocusing his anger
 towards Officer Kubo. 
Officer Kubo instructed the Defendant to get into his
 
car. After several requests, Defendant moved straight towards
 Officer Kubo and "thrusted" his elbow into Officer Kubo's chest,
 knocking him backwards and into the front fender of Defendant's
 vehicle. Officer Anson Kimura corroborated Officer Kubo's
 version of events: "[W]hen I looked over, I noticed that the
 defendant pushed past [Officer Kubo] and then I saw [Defendant's]
 elbow flare out." Officer Kubo testified that he regained his
 balance and approached the Defendant, who flung open his car
 door, hitting Officer Kubo in the thigh. Thus, there was
 substantial evidence that the Defendant struck Officer Kubo with
 both his elbow and his car door. 
The Defendant's intent to harass, annoy or alarm 
Officer Kubo can be inferred from his actions and circumstances of the incident. "[T]he mind of an alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances." State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai' i 85, 92, 976 P.2d 
399, 406 (1999) (quoting State v. Mitsuda, 86 Hawai' i 37, 44, 947 
P.2d 349, 356 (1997)) (internal quotation marks omitted). In light of the evidence and the inferences reasonably arising, it was reasonable to conclude that the Defendant intended to harass, annoy, or alarm Officer Kubo by striking him with both his elbow and his car door. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment and/or Order, filed on July 1, 2010 in the District
 Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 25, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Kainani C. Collins,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Anne K. Clarkin,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 