NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30565
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CAROL A. BROWN, M.D. and CAROL A. BROWN, M.D., INC.,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
HAWAII MEDICAL SERVICE ASSOCIATION, a mutual benefit
society; and ALAN VEN ETTEN, Arbitrator,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0288)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Carol A. Brown, M.D. and Carol A.
 
Brown, M.D., Inc. (Dr. Brown) appeal from the First Amended Final
 
Judgment (Amended Final Judgment), filed February 11, 2010 in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).  The circuit
 court entered judgment in favor of Defendants-Appellees Hawaii
 
Medical Service Association (HMSA) and Alan Van Etten (Van Etten)
 
and against Dr. Brown.
 
On appeal, Dr. Brown contends the circuit court erred
 
by:
 
(1) refusing to stay the arbitration proceeding and
 
instead ordering arbitration on the issue of whether the HMSA
 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2
QUEST Participating Physician Agreement (QUEST Agreement)
expired, was canceled, or ended;
 
(2)
 failing to decide the issue of whether HMSA is a
 
health care entity;
 
(3) failing to decide whether HMSA issues, denies, or
 
disciplines clinical privileges to physicians under its QUEST
 
Agreement;
 
(4) dismissing the Complaint; and
 (5) confirming the Arbitration Award.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve 
Dr. Brown's points of error as follows:
 
This appeal was timely filed and is not moot. HMSA
 
argues that the January 9, 2009 "Order Denying Plaintiffs' Motion
 
to Vacate Arbitrator's Award and Confirming Arbitration Award"
 
(Confirmation Order) was a final appealable order pursuant to
 
HRS § 658A-28(a)(3) (Supp. 2011). HMSA asserts that Dr. Brown
 
was required to appeal from the Confirmation Order by February 9,
 
2009, and the instant appeal from the February 11, 2010 Amended
 
Final Judgment is moot as the case was settled by the
 
Confirmation Order.
 
In cases involving arbitration, HRS § 658A-28 (Supp.
 
2011) allows for appeals from both an order confirming or denying
 
confirmation of an award, and from a final judgment. HRS § 658A­
28(a) provides that an appeal may be taken from:
 
(1) An order denying a motion to compel arbitration;
(2) An order granting a motion to stay arbitration;
(3) An order confirming or denying confirmation of an award;
(4) An order modifying or correcting an award;
 
2
 "QUEST" is a program under the Department of Human Services which
delivers medical, dental, and behavioral health services "to certain
individuals formerly covered by public assistance programs including the aid
to families with dependent children (AFDC) related medical programs, general
assistance (GA), and the state health insurance program (SHIP)." Hawaii
 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 17-1700-2
.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(5) An order vacating an award without directing a
rehearing; or
(6) A final judgment entered pursuant to this chapter.
 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4(a) 
requires that “[w]hen a civil appeal is permitted by law, the 
notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days after entry of the 
judgment or appealable order.” Thus, Dr. Brown's appeal would 
not be a timely appeal from the January 9, 2009 Confirmation 
Order, but it would be a timely appeal from the February 11, 2010 
Amended Final Judgment. This court has already answered the 
question of whether an appeal may taken from either an order 
granting confirmation or a final judgment. In Trustees of Don Ho 
Revocable Living Trust v. Demattos, 126 Hawai' i 179, 268 P.3d 432 
(App. 2011), this court held that an appeal is authorized for either a confirmation order under HRS § 658A–28(a)(3) or a final 
judgment under HRS § 658A–28(a)(6). 126 Hawai' i at 181, 268 P.3d 
at 434. In the instant case, Dr. Brown could challenge the propriety of the Arbitration Award by appealing from either the 
Amended Final Judgment or the Confirmation Order. Therefore, 
Dr. Brown's failure to appeal from the Confirmation Order did not 
preclude Dr. Brown from appealing from the Amended Final 
Judgment, and the instant appeal is timely and not moot. 
The termination of the QUEST Agreement did not
 
invalidate the arbitrability of the dispute. On appeal,
 
Dr. Brown argues that the circuit court erred by refusing to stop
 
the arbitration and by subsequently confirming the Arbitration
 
Award. Dr. Brown argues that the arbitration provisions
 
contained in the QUEST Agreement were no longer binding or
 
enforceable once the QUEST Agreement expired.
 
HRS § 658A-6 (Supp. 2011) renders arbitration
 
agreements enforceable. "An agreement contained in a record to
 
submit to arbitration any existing or subsequent controversy
 
arising between the parties to the agreement is valid,
 
enforceable, and irrevocable except upon a ground that exists at 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
law or in equity for the revocation of a contract." HRS 
§ 658A-6(a). 
In the instant case, it is undisputed that a valid,
 
enforceable arbitration agreement existed. The QUEST Agreement
 
states that "[d]ispute resolution related to termination of this
 
Agreement by HMSA based upon a recommendation of HMSA's
 
Credentialing Committee shall be in accord with HMSA's
 
credentialing policies and procedures." HMSA's
 
Recredentialing/Non-Compliance Appeal Policy states that
 
"Practitioners/Providers may request binding arbitration by
 
submitting a written request to Legal Services at HMSA in
 
Honolulu, Hawaii[,]" and that "[t]he decision of the arbitrator
 
shall be final and binding on both parties." Furthermore, the
 
QUEST Agreement specifically binds the parties to the agreement
 
even after termination. "As of the date of termination, this
 
Agreement shall be considered of no further force or effect
 
except that such termination shall not release Participating
 
Physician or HMSA from their respective obligations accruing
 
prior to the date of termination[.]" (Emphasis added.)
 
In the instant case, the dispute arose prior to the
 
termination of the QUEST Agreement. Because there was a valid
 
arbitration agreement which bound the parties to the agreement
 
after termination, and because arbitration arose out of actions
 
occurring prior to termination of the QUEST Agreement, the
 
circuit court did not err by refusing to stop the arbitration or
 
by confirming the Arbitration Award.
 
The circuit court did not err in declining to decide
 
the issue of whether HMSA is a health care entity. In
 
Dr. Brown's Complaint, she sought a declaratory judgment that
 
HMSA was not a health care entity under state and federal law.
 
The circuit court dismissed with prejudice all claims made in
 
Dr. Brown's Complaint in its January 14, 2009 "Order Granting
 
Defendant [HMSA]'s Motion to Dismiss With Prejudice all Claims
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Asserted in Plaintiffs' Verified Complaint Filed on February 11,
 
2008."
 
On appeal, Dr. Brown argues the circuit court erred by
 
not addressing this issue. Although the argument is somewhat
 
muddled, Dr. Brown essentially argues that Van Etten did not have
 
the authority, or at least not the exclusive authority, to decide
 
the issue of whether HMSA was a health care entity, which,
 
decided in the affirmative, triggered HMSA's obligation under 42
 
U.S.C. § 11133 (2011) and HRS § 671D-11 (Supp. 2011) to make a 
report regarding Dr. Brown to the State of Hawai' i Board of 
Medical Examiners and the National Practitioner Data Bank. 
Hawai'i case law is clear that "[t]he scope of an 
arbitrator's authority is determined by agreement of the parties. An arbitrator must act within the scope of the authority 
conferred upon him by the parties and cannot exceed his power by 
deciding matters not submitted." United Pub. Workers, AFSCME, 
Local 646, AFL-CIO v. Cnty. of Hawaii-Holiday Pay (2003-022B), 125 Hawai' i 476, 480, 264 P.3d 655, 659 (App. 2011) (citation 
omitted). In addition to the provision requiring arbitration for disputes involving decisions by HMSA's Credentialing Committee, 
the QUEST Agreement also contains the following arbitration 
clause: 
HMSA and Participating Physician agree that, except for
disputes related to . . . termination of this Agreement by
HMSA based upon a recommendation of HMSA's Credentialing
Committee, any and all claims, disputes, or causes of action
arising out of this Agreement or its performance, or in any
way related to this agreement or its performance . . . shall
be resolved by binding arbitration as set forth in this
Agreement. 
In the instant case, Van Etten was clearly within the
 
authority conferred upon him as arbitrator through the two
 
arbitration provisions in the QUEST Agreement. As set forth
 
above, the QUEST Agreement required arbitration of all claims
 
arising out of decisions by the Credentialing Committee, and the
 
arbitration clause required arbitration of all other claims
 
arising out of the QUEST Agreement. The question of HMSA's
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
status as a health care provider and, ultimately, whether it was
 
required to report Dr. Brown under 42 U.S.C. § 11133 and
 
HRS § 671D-11, certainly arises out of the QUEST Agreement and
 
the Credentialing Committee's decision. Because Van Etten was
 
clearly within his authority as arbitrator to decide the question
 
of HMSA's status as a health care provider, the circuit court did
 
not err in declining to answer that question, nor did it err in
 
confirming the Arbitration Award.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the First Amended Final
 
Judgment filed February 11, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 28, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
R. Steven Geshell
 
for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
 
Presiding Judge
Dianne Winter Brookins
 Peter Knapman
(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)
for Defendants-Appellees.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
6
 