NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30626
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
LASALLE BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, AS TRUSTEE FOR
MERRILL LYNCH MORTGAGE INVESTORS TRUST MORTGAGE
 
LOAN ASSET-BACKED CERTIFICATES 2006-OPT1,
Plaintiff-Appellee, v. MARLENE LYNN ROTH; 3M,
Defendant-Appellant, and 3M INVESTMENTS, INC.;
JOHN DOES 1-5; JANE DOES 1-5; DOE CORPORATIONS 1­5; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5; DOE ASSOCIATIONS 1-5; DOE
GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-5; and DOE ENTITIES 1-5,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0717)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Marlene Lynn Roth (Roth) appeals
 
from a March 29, 2010 Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
Court) Judgment in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee LaSalle Bank
 
National Association, as Trustee for Merrill Lynch Mortgage
 
Investors Trust Mortgage Loan Asset-Backed Certificates, Series
 
2006-OPTI (LaSalle Bank).1 Finding Roth in default of the terms
 
of a Confidential Settlement Agreement and Mutual Release
 
(Settlement Agreement)2
 entered into between Roth and Option One
1
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided. On September 14, 2010, the
case was reassigned to the Honorable Patrick W. Border.
 
2
 The Settlement Agreement is filed in this court under seal.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mortgage Corporation (Option One), the previous owner of the
 
Adjustable Rate Note (Note) and Mortgage (Mortgage), which
 
LaSalle Bank currently owns and holds, the Circuit Court granted
 
LaSalle Bank's January 21, 2010 Motion for Summary Judgment and
 
for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure. The Circuit Court
 
denied Roth's Motion for Rehearing/Reconsideration.3
 
On appeal, Roth maintains, in sum, that the Circuit 
Court erred in (1) granting LaSalle Bank's Motion for Summary 
Judgment and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure and (2) 
denying her Motion for Rehearing/Reconsideration because Option 
One was the "actual" originator of the loan, was not in good 
standing in the State of California, did not obtain a certificate 
of authority to transact business in the State of Hawai 'i 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 414-433 (2004) before entering into the mortgage loan transaction, and violated 
Hawai
'i's unfair and deceptive trade practice law, HRS Chapter 
480 (1993 & Supp. 2006), thereby rendering the Note and Mortgage void and not capable of being assigned to LaSalle Bank. 
After a careful review of the points raised and
 
arguments made by the parties, the record on appeal, and
 
applicable legal authorities, we resolve Roth's points on appeal
 
as follows and affirm. 
1. Summary judgment was properly entered in LaSalle 
Bank's favor. We review the grant of summary judgment de novo. 
Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai
'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 
(2005). As the moving party, LaSalle Bank had the initial burden 
to establish the absence of any genuine issue of material fact 
entitling it to judgment as a matter of law. IndyMac Bank v. 
Miguel, 117 Hawai 'i 506, 519, 184 P.3d 821, 834 (App. 2008). 
Where a mortgagor defaults, "[t]he circuit court may
 
assess the amount due upon a mortgage, whether of real or
 personal property, without the intervention of a jury, and shall
 
3
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
render judgment for the amount awarded, and the foreclosure of
 
the mortgage." HRS § 667-1 (1993).4
 
A foreclosure decree is only appropriate where all
four material facts have been established: "(1) the
existence of the Agreement, (2) the terms of the Agreement,
(3) default by [Appellants] under the terms of the
Agreement, and (4) the giving of the cancellation notice and
recordation of an affidavit to such effect."
 
IndyMac Bank, 117 Hawai 'i at 520, 184 P.3d at 835 (quoting Bank 
of Honolulu, N.A. v. Anderson, 3 Haw. App. 545, 551, 654 P.2d 
1370, 1375 (1982)). "The material inquiry relevant to a 
foreclosure decree is whether a default occurred[.]" IndyMac 
Bank, 117 Hawai 'i at 520, 184 P.3d at 835. Viewing the evidence 
in the light most favorable to Roth, IndyMac Bank, 117 Hawai 'i at 
519, 184 P.3d at 834, we conclude that LaSalle Bank met its burden and Roth did not. 
LaSalle presented documentary evidence, which Roth did
 
not dispute, that (1) Roth signed the Note and Mortgage, which
 
are currently owned and held by LaSalle Bank; (2) The terms of
 
the agreement are as stated in the Note and Mortgage and Roth is
 
in default under the terms of the Note and Mortgage; (3) Roth
 
entered into a March 12, 2008 Settlement Agreement with Option
 
One resolving her federal lawsuit to rescind the Note and
 
Mortgage; (4) Roth failed to make payment by the deadline
 
provided in the Settlement Agreement; (5) LaSalle Bank provided
 
Roth notice of her default, demanded full repayment of the amount
 
due under the Settlement Agreement and notified Roth of its
 
intent to foreclose if she did not cure her default; and (6) Roth
 
failed to cure her default.
 
After LaSalle Bank satisfied its initial burden, the 
burden of production shifted to Roth to demonstrate specific 
facts presenting a genuine issue worthy of trial. IndyMac Bank, 
117 Hawai
'i at 519, 184 P.3d at 834. 
Roth responded to LaSalle Bank's motion for summary
 
judgment in the form of "Defendant Marlene Lynn Roth's
 
4
 This language is now found in HRS § 667-1.5 (Supp. 2012).
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Declaration in Opposition to Plaintiff's Motion for Summary
 
Judgment and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure"
 
(Declaration) that was ordered sealed by the Circuit Court.5
 
Attached to the Declaration is a Memorandum in Opposition in
 which counsel alleged ten purported "material factual issues in
 
genuine dispute" but provided no argument in support of these
 
allegations nor did counsel specifically point to any evidence
 
that placed these "factual issues" in dispute.
 
On appeal, Roth argues that this Loan was "table­
funded," that the Circuit Court failed to determine whether 
Option One was authorized to do business in Hawai
'i when the Loan 
and Mortgage were executed, and that there were genuine issues of material fact. 
Even if we were to assume that the Loan was table-
funded, Roth fails to establish the materiality of this fact. As 
recognized by the court in Beneficial Hawaii, upon which she 
relies, even if Roth's loan was table-funded, "'a loan is "made" 
by the named creditor, even when the funds are actually provided 
by a third party.'" Beneficial Hawaii, Inc. v. Kida, 96 Hawai
'i 
289, 308, 30 P.3d 895, 914 (2001) (citation omitted). In this case, the Loan and Mortgage documents reveal that the creditor 
was "Meridian Mortgage Inc, a Hawaii Corporation" (Meridian). 
Next, Roth argues that there were genuine issues of 
material fact because, citing to HRS Chapter 414, (1) Option One 
was unauthorized to conduct business in Hawai
'i without a 
certificate of good standing (2) that Option One's Loan with Roth was "invalid at its inception" and (3) Option One engaged in 
unfair and deceptive business practices to entice Roth to enter 
into a loan transaction with a lender who was not licensed to do 
business in Hawai
'i. These arguments, which all depend on Roth's 
5
 The Circuit Court ordered the Declaration sealed upon Roth's
motion. The basis for this motion was the fact that the Circuit Court had
 
previously sealed Exhibit E, a copy of the Settlement Agreement, as attached
to LaSalle Bank's motion for summary judgment to preserve the confidentiality
of that Settlement Agreement, and that Roth had referred to the Settlement
Agreement "throughout" her Declaration.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
position that Option One was not authorized to do business in 
Hawai'i, are also without merit. 
First of all, as previously stated, the maker of the 
Loan was Meridian, not Option One. Roth does not argue that 
Meridian was not authorized to do business in Hawai 'i. Moreover, 
Option One was not required under Chapter 414 to obtain a certificate of authority from the State of Hawai
'i, to take 
assignment of the Loan and Mortgage. While Chapter 414 requires a certificate of good standing to "transact business" in Hawai
'i, 
conducting mortgage-related activities or enforcing its rights under the Note and Mortgage, do not constitute "transacting 
business" within the meaning of that chapter. HRS §§ 414­
431(b)(7) and (8) (2004).
6 
Roth also argues that, as Sand Canyon only assigned
 
servicing rights to LaSalle, the latter has no standing to bring
 
6	 HRS § 414-431 provides, in relevant part:
 
[§414-431] Authority to transact business required.
(a) A foreign corporation may not transact business in this
State until it obtains a certificate of authority from the
department director.
 
(b)  The following activities, among others, do not
constitute transacting business within the meaning of
subsection (a):
 
. . . .
 
(7) 	 Creating as borrower or lender, or acquiring, as
borrower or lender, indebtedness, mortgages, and
security interests in real or personal property;
 
(8) 	 Securing or collecting debts or enforcing mortgages
and security interests in property securing the
debts[.]
 
. . . .
 
(c) The list of activities in subsection (b) is not
exhaustive.
 Roth also argues that, "Option One's failure to comply with
statutory requirements set forth under HRS §414-433(b) raises a material
question of fact as to whether Option One could legally enter into the
mortgage transaction with Ms. Roth and whether said mortgage transaction
violated H.R.S. Chapters 480 and 481A[,]" making the same void. As we
 conclude Option One was not required to obtain a certificate of authority,
Roth's argument that there was a genuine issue regarding violations of HRS
Chapters 480 and 481A must also fail.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this law suit. For this assertion, Roth once again argues that 
Option One was not authorized to do business in Hawai 'i under HRS 
Chapter 414. As Chapter 414 does not apply to this transaction, Roth's argument is without merit. 
Roth also maintains, in conjunction with this standing
 
argument, that Sand Canyon "has no ownership to the note and 
mortgage" based on Exhibit 17 attached to the Declaration.
7 It
 
purports to consist of excerpts from H&R Block's quarterly filing
 for the period ending January 31, 2009, apparently from an online
 
source called "edgar-online.com". Roth argues that Exhibit 17
 
"raises a material question of fact that must preclude the
 
granting of summary judgment in favor of LaSalle." It does
 
nothing of the kind. Roth makes no argument that Exhibit 17 is
 
admissible evidence and the Declaration, although referring to
 
Exhibit 17, does not attest that the information contained
 
therein is within her personal knowledge.
 
More importantly, Exhibit 17 does not support Roth's
 
argument. Even if we were to assume the document was admissible,
 
it does not establish Sand Canyon did not own the Note and
 
Mortgage at the time it was transferred to LaSalle Bank. The
 
operative excerpts are merely descriptions of "Litigation and
 
Claims Pertaining to Discontinued Mortgage Operations" and
 
states, inter alia, that "Although mortgage loan origination
 
activities were terminated and the loan servicing business was
 
sold during fiscal year 2008, SCC remains subject to
 
investigations, claims and lawsuits pertaining to its loan
 
origination and servicing activities that occurred prior to such
 
termination and sale." Even if we were to infer this is a
 
reference to Sand Canyon's operations, this general statement
 
does not establish Sand Canyon formally divested itself of all
 
loans and mortgages it held before the end of fiscal year 2008. 
Although we must view the evidence in the light most favorable to
 
7
 Exhibit 17, although part of Roth's sealed filing, does not appear
to contain confidential information and Roth does not argue that it does. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the non-moving party, Querubin, 107 Hawai 'i at 56, 109 P.3d at 
697), Exhibit 17 simply fails to create a genuine issue regarding 
whether LaSalle obtained Roth's Note and Mortgage. 
We therefore conclude that Roth has not identified any
 
genuine issues of material fact that undermine the Circuit
 
Court's grant of summary judgment. 
2. Finally, the Circuit Court did not err in denying
 
Roth's motion for Rehearing/Reconsideration. "The purpose of a
 
motion for reconsideration is to allow the parties to present new
 
evidence and/or arguments that could not have been presented
 
during the earlier adjudicated motion." Amfac, Inc. V. Waikiki
 
Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 27 (1992). 
The only "new evidence" that Roth advanced in support of her
 
motion was that "evidence arrived" that Option One had been
 
suspended from conducting business in the State of California in
 
1993 for not paying state taxes. However, in her Declaration,
 
Roth had already advanced this argument that Option One was not
 
in good standing and thus did not have the authority to enter
 
into the Note and Mortgage. As such, Roth's "new evidence"
 
allegedly proving Option One's suspension, was in fact not "new." 
In any event, as discussed above, Option One did not have to
 
demonstrate it was in good standing when it obtained the Note and
 
Mortgage made by Meridian Mortgage. Consequently, we cannot
 
conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying
 
Roth's motion for Rehearing/Reconsideration. 
Based on the foregoing, the March 29, 2010 Judgment 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 28, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Presiding Judge
Keoni K. Agard
Dexter K. Kaiama,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Associate Judge
Jade Lynne Ching
Shellie K. Park-Hoapili,
(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing),
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
7
 