NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30654
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
DEUTSCHE BANK NATIONAL TRUST COMPANY,
AS TRUSTEE FOR HASCO 2007-NC1,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DEBRA LYNN TEJADA and ALEJANDRO MICHAEL TEJADA,
Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
MORTGAGE ELECTRONIC REGISTRATION SYSTEMS, INC.,
AMBER FINANCIAL GROUP, LLC, JOHN DOES 1-10,
JANE DOES 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10,
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, DOE ENTITIES 1-10
AND DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10,
Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-55)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Debra Lynn Tejada and Alejandro
 
Tejada (the Tejadas) appeal from the "Judgment on Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion
 
for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure Against All
 
Defendants on Complaint Filed February 20, 2009" (Judgment) filed
 
on August 17, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(circuit court).1 The circuit court entered summary judgment, a
 
degree of foreclosure, and an order of sale in favor of
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Deutsche Bank (Deutsche Bank) and against the
 
Tejadas. 
On appeal, the Tejadas argue that the circuit court
 
erred in 1) denying the Tejadas' Motion to Set Aside Entry of
 
Default (Motion to Set Aside Default), 2) issuing its Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion
 
for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure Against All
 
2
Defendants on Complaint  and 3) denying The Tejadas' Motion for
Reconsideration of the order denying the Motion to Set Aside
 
Default and granting summary judgment for Deutsche Bank (Motion
 
for Reconsideration). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, the
 
Tejadas' points of error are resolved as follows: 
(1)
 The circuit court did not err in denying the 
Tejadas' Motion to Set Aside Default. The circuit court denied 
the motion, stating: "[T]here was nothing of record showing why 
there was a failure to answer in a timely manner. So the court 
cannot find that the default was not the result of inexcusable 
neglect or a wilful act." Rule 55(c) of the Hawai' i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) provides that "[f]or good cause shown the court may set aside an entry of default and, if a judgment by 
default has been entered, may likewise set it aside in accordance 
with Rule 60(b)." Hawai' i courts apply the following test to 
determine whether to set aside a default judgment: 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided. 
2
 The Tejadas' points of error specify numerous findings of facts
(FOFs) and conclusions of law (COL) which they contend are erroneous.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
a motion to set aside a default entry or a default judgment
may and should be granted whenever the court finds (1) that
the nondefaulting party will not be prejudiced by the
reopening, (2) that the defaulting party has a meritorious
defense, and (3) that the default was not the result of
inexcusable neglect or a wilful act. 
BDM, Inc. v. Sageco, Inc., 57 Haw. 73, 76, 549 P.2d 1147, 1150
 
(1976). 
Deutsche Bank correctly points out that in their Motion 
to Set Aside Default, the Tejadas did not address the first or 
third prongs of the BDM test. The circuit court was warranted in 
denying the Tejadas' Motion To Set Aside Default because "if a 
movant fails to meet any one prong of the test, a trial court 
does not abuse its discretion in refusing to set aside a default 
judgment." Citicorp Mortg., Inc. v. Bartolome, 94 Hawai' i 422, 
439, 16 P.3d 827, 844 (App. 2000) (citations omitted). In addition to the Tejadas' failure in their motion to present 
relevant arguments or facts before the circuit court with respect 
to the first and third prongs, it is clear that even if such 
arguments were made, the Tejadas would not be able to show, with 
respect to the third prong, that their default was not the result 
of "inexcusable neglect or a wilful act." 
It is undisputed that the Tejadas failed to respond to
 
the complaint for ten months after receiving service of it and
 
for nine months after default was entered against them. The
 
Tejadas filed their Motion To Set Aside Default after Deutsche
 
Bank filed its Motion for Summary Judgment and the Tejadas had
 
filed an opposition to the summary judgment motion. In his
 
affidavit, Alejandro Tejada stated that sometime shortly after
 
April 17, 2009, he told Deutsche Bank's counsel that the
 
complaint had been served on him and that he did not know
 
Deutsche Bank or how Deutsche Bank was involved with the
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mortgage.3 Alejandro believed that his statements to Deutsche 
Bank's attorney constituted his response to the Complaint and he 
did not know that he was obligated to file an answer. Hawai' i 
courts have held that lack of legal knowledge or training, or ignorance of the law, does not constitute excusable neglect for 
purposes of the BDM test. See Bartolome, 94 Hawai' i at 439, 16 
P.3d at 844; Dillingham Inv. Corp. v. Kunio Yokoyama Trust, 8 Haw. App. 226, 797 P.2d 1316 (1990). Therefore, the circuit 
court did not err in denying the Tejadas' Motion to Set Aside 
Default. 
(2) The circuit court did not err in granting Deutsche 
Bank's Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure. 
First, because entry of default properly was not set aside, the 
Tejadas did not have standing to contest the merits of the 
summary judgment motion. The Hawai' i Supreme Court has held 
that, in a foreclosure action, once default is established, the mortgagor has no further standing to contest the factual 
allegations of the mortgagee's claim for relief; however, since a 
default does not extend to matters outside the issues raised by 
the pleadings or beyond the scope of the relief demanded in the 
complaint, the mortgagor has standing to assert a claim to the 
surplus proceeds of the public sale of the mortgaged property. 
See Bank of Hawai' i v. Horwoth, 71 Haw. 204, 214-16, 787 P.2d 
674, 680-81 (1990). 
Here, the Tejadas are not seeking relief as to "matters
 
outside the issues raised by the pleadings or beyond the scope of
 
3
 Alejandro Tejada's affidavit was not submitted until the Tejadas
brought their Motion for Reconsideration. Thus, it is questionable whether
even these alleged facts must be considered. The Tejadas made no showing that
Mr. Tejada's affidavit could not have been presented when the circuit court
first considered the Motion to Set Aside Default. Nonetheless, even if the
affidavit is considered, it fails to establish "that the default was not the
result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act." BDM, Inc., 57 Haw. at 76, 549
 
P.2d at 1150.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the relief demanded" by Deutsche Bank. See Horwoth, 71 Haw. at
 
215, 787 P.2d at 680 (citations omitted). Rather, the Tejadas
 
are raising alleged violations of the Truth in Lending Act (TILA)
 
and HRS Chapter 480 as defenses to the foreclosure action. 
Therefore, under Horwoth, they did not have standing to contest
 
the circuit court's entry of summary judgment. 
Similarly, the court in Kam Fui Trust v. Brandhorst 
held that entry of default precluded a defaulted defendant from 
contesting liability, although the defaulted defendant could 
still contest the amount of its liability. 77 Hawai' i 320, 324­
25, 884 P.2d 383, 387-88 (App. 1994) (noting that entry of default is an interlocutory order, not a judgment, but that the 
effect is to preclude the defendant from making any further 
defense in the case as far as liability is concerned). Since the 
Tejadas did not contest the amount of their liability in this 
action, or make any claims that are outside the scope of the 
relief demanded by Deutsche Bank in its foreclosure action, the 
Tejadas lacked standing to assert any arguments with respect to 
the orders granting summary judgment. 
Second, even assuming arguendo that the Tejadas had
 
standing, they fail to demonstrate any error by the circuit court
 
in granting Deutsche Bank's Motion for Summary Judgment and
 
Decree of Foreclosure. Apart from brief mention of Chapter 480
 
at the hearing on the motion, the Tejadas did not argue before
 
the circuit court that Chapter 480 was violated, or that it
 
presents a genuine issue of material fact such that it would
 
preclude summary judgment. While the Tejadas argued before the
 
circuit court that there were violations of federal statutes
 
including TILA, the Real Estate Settlement and Procedures Act
 
(RESPA), the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA), and the Fair
 
Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), the Tejadas did not cite any
 
specific statutory provisions or cite any applicable case law
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that supports their contention that the federal statutes were
 
violated or that such violations were a valid defense to the
 
foreclosure action. 
It is well established that if an argument is not 
raised below, then it is considered waived, and the appellate 
court may decide not to hear the matter further. See Bitney v. 
Honolulu Police Dept., 96 Hawai' i 243, 251, 30 P.3d 257, 265 
(2001). In addition, Hawai' i courts have held that general 
allegations of TILA and Chapter 480 violations are insufficient to challenge a judgment in a foreclosure action. See Bartolome, 
94 Hawai' i at 433, 16 P.3d at 838; see also Aames Funding Corp. 
v. Mores, 107 Hawai' i 95, 104, 110 P.3d 1042, 1051 (2005) 
(Appellants failed to make discernable factual or legal argument as to fraud in the mortgage context). Moreover, the Tejadas have 
failed to comply with Rule 28(b)(7) of the Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP), which states that "the appellant shall file an opening brief, containing . . . [t]he argument, 
containing the contentions of the appellant on the points 
presented and the reasons therefor, with citations to the 
authorities, statutes and parts of the record relied on. The 
argument may be preceded by a concise summary. Points not argued 
may be deemed waived." In other words, "[a]n appellate court 
does not have to address matters for which the appellant has 
failed to present discernible argument." Bartolome, 94 Hawai' i 
at 433, 16 P.3d at 838 (citation omitted). Therefore, for these reasons, we also reject the Tejadas' challenge to the circuit 
court's grant of summary judgment in favor of Deutsche Bank. 
(3) The circuit court did not err in denying the
 
Tejadas' motion for reconsideration. A motion for
 
reconsideration is meant to allow the movant to present new
 
evidence or new arguments that could not have been made in the 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
earlier proceeding. See Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua
 
v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai' i 97, 110, 58 P.3d 608, 621 
(2002) (citation omitted); Pancakes of Hawai' i, Inc. v. Pomare 
Props. Corp., 85 Hawai' i 286, 296-97, 944 P.2d 83, 93-94 (App. 
1997). The Tejadas make no argument as to any new evidence or 
arguments that they could not have made at the earlier 
proceeding. The Tejadas' Motion for Reconsideration was properly 
denied by the circuit court. 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Judgment filed on
 
August 17, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is
 affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 12, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Keoni K. Agard
Dexter K. Kaiama
 (Agard & Kaiama, LLC) for Defendants-Appellants
 Presiding Judge
Robert E. Chapman
Katie L. Lambert (Clay Chapman Iwamura
Pulice & Nervell)
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
7
 