NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30277
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
XANNA KIM-ALANIZ, a minor, by and through her
Guardian ad Litem, JOANNA KIM, XAVIER ALANIZ
and JOANNA KIM, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
EXECUTIVE CENTER AOAO, CERTIFIED MANAGEMENT, DALE ANZAI,
DOUG MATTOS, ROY HO, ART HEATH, JASON PRINCENTHAL, AIRCARE
ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES, INC., PAUL SHERIFF, JOSEPH HA,
WARREN WONG, GLENN WOO, JOHN HALL, JOE FADROWSKY, RON
BALDWIN, TOM ROESSER, ANTHONY RUSSO, DOE DIRECTORS 1-10,
DOE MANAGERS 1-10, COLOR DYNAMICS, INC., DOE COMPANIES 1-10,
AND DOE WORKERS 1-20, Defendants-Appellees
and
 
EXECUTIVE CENTER AOAO, Counterclaimant-Appellee,
v.
 
JOANNA KIM, Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant,
and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-50, Counterclaim Defendants
and
 
EXECUTIVE CENTER AOAO, CERTIFIED MANAGEMENT,
DALE ANZAI, PAUL SHERIFF and TOM ROESSER,
Cross-Claimants-Appellees,
v.
 
JASON PRINCENTHAL, AIRCARE ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES, INC.,
and COLOR DYNAMICS, INC., Cross-Claim Defendants-Appellees
and
 
COLOR DYNAMICS, INC., Cross-Claimant-Appellee,
v.
 
EXECUTIVE CENTER AOAO, CERTIFIED MANAGEMENT, DALE ANZAI, DOUG
MATTOS, ROY HO, ART HEATH, JASON PRINCENTHAL, AIRCARE
ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES, INC., PAUL SHERIFF, JOSEPH HA, WARREN
WONG, GLEN WOO, JOHN HALL, JOE FADROWSKY, RON BALDWIN, TOM
ROESSER, AND ANTHONY RUSSO, Cross-Claim Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0668)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant Joanna Kim,
 
her fiancé, Plaintiff-Appellant Xavier Alaniz, and their child,
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Xanna Kim-Alaniz, a minor, by and through her
 Guardian Ad Litem, Joanna Kim (collectively, "Plaintiffs­
1
Appellants"), appeal from sixteen orders  and the Final Judgment,
filed on December 9, 2009 ("Final Judgment") in the Circuit Court
 
1/
 Specifically, Plaintiffs-Appellants appeal from (1) the
September 7, 2007 order denying Plaintiffs-Appellants' motion to strike; (2)
the October 4, 2007 order granting Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants-Appellees
Jason Princenthal's and Aircare Environmental Services, Inc.'s (collectively,
"Aircare") motion to dismiss or, in the alternative, for summary judgment; (3)
the October 4, 2007 order granting Aircare's motion to dismiss Defendant/
Cross-Claim Defendant/Cross-Claimant-Appellee Color Dynamics, Inc.'s ("Color
Dynamics") cross-claim against Aircare or, in the alternative, for summary
judgment; (4) the September 10, 2008 order granting Defendant/Cross-Claimant/
Counterclaimant/Cross-Claim Defendant-Appellee Executive Centre AOAO's
("AOAO") motion for partial summary judgment as to Plaintiffs-Appellants'
claims for damages relating to mold; (5) the October 3, 2008 order granting
Color Dynamics' joinder to AOAO's motion for partial summary judgment as to
Plaintiffs-Appellants' claims for damages relating to mold; (6) the
February 5, 2009 order granting in part and denying in part AOAO's motion for
partial summary judgment on the breach of contract count of the counterclaim
(Count II) and for entry of decree terminating conveyance documents, or
partial summary judgment on the foreclosure count of the counterclaim (Count
I) and for interlocutory decree of foreclosure; (7) the February 20, 2009
order denying Plaintiffs-Appellants' oral motion for interlocutory appeal of
AOAO, Defendants/Cross-Claimants/Cross-Claim Defendants Certified Management,
Inc. ("Certified Management"), and Dale Anzai, Roy Ho and Doug Mattos'
(collectively, "AOAO Defendants") motion for partial summary judgment as to
Plaintiffs-Appellants' claims for damages related to personal injury; (8) the
February 20, 2009 order granting Color Dynamics' joinder to AOAO Defendants'
motion for partial summary judgment as to Plaintiffs-Appellants' claims for
damages related to personal injury and claim for emotional distress; (9) the
February 26, 2009 order granting AOAO Defendants' motion in limine no. 7 to
preclude any evidence or argument regarding Plaintiffs-Appellants' claims for
loss of income; (10) the February 26, 2009 order granting AOAO Defendants'
motion in limine no. 6 to preclude any evidence or argument regarding lawsuit
filed by Jon Dixon ("Dixon") or circumstances giving rise to the lawsuit; (11)
the February 26, 2009 order granting AOAO Defendants' motion in limine no. 4
to preclude any evidence or argument regarding Plaintiffs-Appellants' claims
for personal injury or emotional distress; (12) the March 3, 2009 order
granting AOAO Defendants' motion in limine no. 1 to preclude any argument that
they are liable for water damage or mold not caused by leaks from the common
element planter box; (13) the March 4, 2009 order granting AOAO Defendants'
motion for partial summary judgment as to Plaintiffs-Appellants' claims
related to personal injury and claim for emotional distress; (14) the
March 31, 2009 order granting in part and denying in part AOAO Defendants'
March 3 2009 oral motion for judgment as a matter of law; (15) the March 31,
2009 order denying Plaintiffs-Appellants' March 4, 2009 oral motion to amend
the complaint; and (16) the August 7, 2009 order granting AOAO's motion for
recovery of lease rents, maintenance fees, late charges and costs incurred by
the AOAO in enforcing provisions of the declaration and bylaws, collecting
delinquent assessments and responding to unsubstantiated claims.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
of the First Circuit ("Circuit Court"),  in favor of Aircare,
AOAO, and Color Dynamics. 
On appeal, Plaintiffs-Appellants argue that the Circuit
 
Court erred by (1) concluding that Aircare owed no duty of care
 
to Plaintiffs-Appellants; (2) concluding that chiller supply
 lines leading into Unit #202's air conditioning unit were not
 common elements and granting Color Dynamics' motion for joinder
 to the AOAO's motion for partial summary judgment as to
 Plaintiffs-Appellants' claims for damages relating to mold ("MPSJ
 re Mold"); (3) concluding that Plaintiffs-Appellants could not
 obtain relief absent expert medical testimony to substantiate
 their personal-injury and emotional-distress claims; (4) finding
 that Plaintiffs-Appellants and the AOAO lacked privity of
 contract; (5) denying Plaintiffs-Appellants' oral motion to
 reintroduce a breach-of-contract claim as brought under the
 incorrect rule; (6) issuing an ambiguous special-verdict form;
 (7)
 unjustly requiring Plaintiffs-Appellants to pay maintenance
 
fees for an apartment rendered uninhabitable by the AOAO's
 negligence; (8) failing to clarify or strike the AOAO's defense
 of privity of contract; (9) granting several motions in limine
 that were predicated on prior erroneous holdings; and (10)
 awarding attorneys' fees to the AOAO absent proof of the
 reasonableness of the fees incurred and despite the practice of
 "block billing."
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Plaintiffs-Appellants' points of error as follows:
 
(1) Plaintiffs-Appellants did not share a special 
relationship with Aircare such that Aircare had an affirmative duty to protect Plaintiffs-Appellants from harm. See Doe Parents 
No. 1 v. State Dep't of Educ., 100 Hawai' i 34, 71, 58 P.3d 545, 
582 (2002). A duty to warn or protect another from harm does not arise from mere awareness of a harmful or potentially harmful situation. See Lee v. Corregedore, 83 Hawai' i 154, 167, 925 P.2d 
2/
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided over all proceedings.
 
3
    
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
324, 337 (1996). Instead, a specific duty to safeguard another 
only arises when parties share a special relationship. Kaho'ohanohano v. Dep't of Human Servs., 117 Hawai' i 262, 287, 178 
P.3d 538, 563 (2008). 
Plaintiffs-Appellants assert no such special
 
relationship beyond Plaintiff-Appellant Kim's status as a member
 of the AOAO. They offer no argument, and we determine no basis
 for concluding, that this constitutes a special relationship in
 the context of a duty to safeguard.
3
 
The AOAO engaged Aircare to investigate Unit #202 for 
air-quality issues and the presence of mold. Upon inspection, while it was apparent that mold was present in Unit #202, Aircare had no duty to take any action to determine the extent or harmfulness of the mold infestation. Lee, 83 Hawai' i at 167, 925 
P.2d at 337; cf. Bennett v. MIS Corp., 607 F.3d 1076, 1099–1100 (6th Cir. 2010).
4 
Plaintiffs-Appellants, attempting to predicate a duty 
on the foreseeability of harm, cite Pulawa v. GTE Hawaiian Tel, 112 Hawai' i 3, 143 P.3d 1205 (2006), for the proposition that the 
existence of a legal duty is determined not just by whether a special relationship exists, but by evaluating a host of additional factors. Indeed, Pulawa specifies the general test for determining when a duty arises, see Pulawa, 112 Hawai' i at 
11–12, 143 P.3d at 1213–14, but Plaintiffs-Appellants make no distinction between its applicability for acts of omission and commission. While Pulawa states vaguely and parenthetically that "circumstances may warrant" a party taking affirmative steps to protect another, such vague and limited language does not abrogate the well-established (and recently-applied) tenet that 
3/
 Plaintiffs-Appellants also argue that Kim's membership makes her a
third-party beneficiary to any contract between the AOAO and another party,
such as Aircare, and confers standing to sue. True as this may be for an
action in contract, Plaintiffs-Appellants offer no discernible argument that
such an action also sounds in tort. Therefore, they have waived this
particular argument. Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7) (2009).
 
4/
 Had Aircare's services placed Plaintiffs-Appellants in danger by
creating or exacerbating a risk of harm, then it might have had a duty to
protect Plaintiffs-Appellants from that potential harm, but Aircare'sinspection services neither caused nor aggravated whatever risk of harm
persisted in Unit #202. See Touchette v. Ganal, 82 Hawai' i 293, 303, 922 P.2d
347, 357 (1996). 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the duty to act affirmatively arises only out of a special 
relationship. See Kaho' ohanohano, 117 Hawai' i at 287, 178 P.3d at 
563; Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314 (1965). 
Aircare's obligations were to the AOAO, not to
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants. We therefore conclude that the Circuit
 Court properly dismissed Plaintiffs-Appellants' claims against
 Aircare.
5
 
(2) There was no genuine issue of material fact
 
regarding liability for those portions of the chiller supply
 lines that were located within Unit #202. The AOAO's MPSJ re
 Mold sought to limit its potential liability to only those
 damages attributable to common elements. Therein, the AOAO
 argued that the air-conditioning unit, including the chiller
 supply lines, was not a common element. It presented the AOAO's
 condominium declaration ("Declaration"), which states, in
 relevant part:
 
2. Common Elements. One freehold estate is hereby
designated in all remaining portions of the Project, herein
called the "common elements," including specifically but not
limited to:
 
.  .  .  .
 
(e) All pipes, cables, conduits, ducts, vents, chutes,
electrical equipment, wiring and other central; and
appurtenant transmission facilities and installations over,
under and across the Project which serve more than one
 apartment for services such as power, light, gas, water,
sewer, ventilation, refuse, radio, telephone and television
signal distribution, if any[.]
 
The only evidence presented by Plaintiffs-Appellants in
 
support of the proposition that the chiller supply lines were
 
common elements was an excerpt from the Executive Centre Owner's
 Guide ("Owner's Guide"), which states, in relevant part:
 
One of the many features at Executive Centre is central air
conditioning. The cost for central air conditioning
maintenance is included in the regular monthly maintenance
fees. However, filters and repairs to each fan coil unit in
your apartment are at the owners [sic] expense. It is
 
recommended that the air conditioning filters be changed on
a semi-annual basis.
 
5/
 Plaintiffs-Appellants also contend that the Circuit Court erred by
dismissing Color Dynamics' cross-claim against Aircare. However, Plaintiffs-Appellants do not have standing to appeal the ruling as to the dismissal of
that cross-claim. See Abaya v. Mantell, 112 Hawai' i 176, 181, 145 P.3d 719,
724 (2006). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs-Appellants argued that, by inference, the Owner's
 
Guide communicates that the AOAO will perform maintenance on
 other components of the air-conditioning unit, including the
 chiller supply lines. Regardless of the reasonableness of that
 inference, however, that excerpt says nothing about, and is
 therefore not evidence of, whether chiller supply lines are
 common elements.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants further cite to a policy
 
statement issued by the AOAO to owners apprising them that the
 AOAO would, for a mandatory fee, assume inspection and
 preventative maintenance servicing duties of air-conditioning
 units. The statement enumerates several components as targets of
 these duties, but does not mention the chiller supply lines. It
 also states that "by offering this service [the AOAO is] not
 taking on the responsibility to maintain, repair or replace your
 unit if it fails," and that "[t]he air conditioning system is an
 integral part of your apartment and is solely the owner's
 responsibility for maintenance and replacement." Similarly, this
 statement is silent on the question of whether the chiller supply
 lines are common elements.
 
Evaluating the evidence and drawing inferences 
therefrom in the light most favorable to Plaintiffs-Appellants, they have failed to produce evidence demonstrating a genuine issue of material fact. See Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & 
Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). At most, a 
juror could reason that the AOAO had assumed some level of responsibility, apparently for a fee, for air-conditioning components apart from the fan coil and filters. But in light of the fee, the explicit language that the air-conditioning system remains the owner's responsibility, and above all, the Declaration limiting common-element piping to that servicing more than one unit, it would not be reasonable to then infer that the AOAO assumed such duties because they had ownership of them as common elements. The Circuit Court correctly concluded that there was no genuine issue of fact regarding the status of the 
6
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
chiller supply lines as non-common elements.6
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants further argue that whether the
 
non-common elements caused any of the mold and consequent damages
 
presented an issue of comparative negligence appropriate for the
 jury to hear. Regardless of the merits of that assertion, it has
 no bearing on the Circuit Court's determination that the AOAO
 cannot be held liable for damages arising from non-common
 
elements. Thus, this argument is without merit.
 
(3) The Circuit Court acted within its discretion in
 
declining to qualify Dr. Ewing as an expert witness regarding
 
non-allergic health complications from mold exposure. Dr.
 Ewing's qualifications as an allergen specialist and his limited
 knowledge of mold toxicity were insufficient "to make it appear
 that his opinion or inference-drawing would probably aid the
 trier of fact" in considering whether mold toxicity was the
 causation mechanism for Plaintiffs-Appellants' symptoms. Larsen
 
v. State Sav. & Loan Ass'n, 64 Haw. 302, 304, 640 P.2d 286, 288 (1982). The Circuit Court, therefore, correctly determined that it would be improper for an allergen specialist to introduce evidence regarding mold toxicity and its distinct injury mechanism where his only familiarity with the subject was having read some medically suspect studies. See Craft v. Peebles, 78 
Hawai'i 287, 301-02, 893 P.2d 138, 152-53 (1995). 
The Circuit Court was also correct in determining that
 
expert testimony regarding the mold toxicity causation mechanism
 was necessary to establish the causation element of Plaintiffs-
Appellants' claim. In determining whether expert testimony is
 required, other jurisdictions have considered whether the subject
 matter at issue was beyond the comprehension of the ordinary
 juror. See, e.g., Qualls v. State Farm Lloyds, 226 F.R.D. 551,
 
554–60 (N.D. Tex. 2005); 31A Am. Jur. 2d Expert and Opinion
 Evidence § 200 (2002). Here, because Plaintiffs-Appellants'
 symptoms were medically complex, and the mechanism by which mold
 
6/
 For this reason, Plaintiffs-Appellants' argument that the Circuit
Court's grant of Color Dynamic's motion for joinder to the MPSJ re Mold was in
error is without merit, as that argument is premised solely on the Circuit
Court's alleged error regarding the MPSJ re Mold. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
toxicity affects the human body is beyond the familiarity of the
 
ordinary juror, the jury would have been incompetent to determine
 the issue of causation. Consequently, expert testimony was
 essential to enabling the jury to determine causation.
 
Therefore, the Circuit Court did not err in declining
 
to qualify Dr. George Ewing as an expert witness regarding mold
 toxicity and in granting the AOAO's motion for want of such
 expert testimony. Summary judgment was properly granted in favor
 of the AOAO.
7
 
(4) The Circuit Court correctly determined that
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants had provided no evidence of a contractual
 relationship between the AOAO and Plaintiffs-Appellants
 obligating the AOAO to maintain the planter box. Plaintiffs-
Appellants rely instead on a letter from Certified Management
 stating: "It is [Certified Management's] business philosophy and
 responsibility to . . . [m]anage the maintenance of the common
 elements (unless excluded by terms of our contract with your
 association)." This letter, however, evinces, if anything, a
 contractual relationship between the AOAO and its apparent
 subcontractor, Certified Management—not between the AOAO and
 Plaintiffs-Appellants. 
Even if the AOAO had engaged Certified Management to 
maintain the planter boxes, that is not evidence of a contractual duty owed by the AOAO to its constituent owners. Essentially, Plaintiffs-Appellants would have this court infer that the AOAO would only engage a subcontractor to perform a service if it owed a contractual duty to the association's owners. Such an inference is not a legitimate one. See Toney v. Fauhiva, 109 
Hawai'i 96, 99, 123 P.3d 691, 694 (2005). Whether the AOAO's 
motivation for contracting with Certified Management was a distinct contractual obligation to its constituent owners, a 
7/
 Plaintiffs-Appellants also challenge orders denying a motion for
interlocutory appeal of the Circuit Court’s ruling, granting Color Dynamics’
request for joinder to the underlying motion, and granting a motion in limine,
but as Plaintiffs-Appellants indicate, these challenges rest on the alleged
impropriety of the grant of the instant motion. Because the grant of the
underlying motion is not in error, and Plaintiffs-Appellants make no
additional argument regarding these orders, these subsequent orders are also
not in error.
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
fiduciary duty, a more general duty of care owed to others, or
 
another reason altogether is entirely speculative.
 
The Circuit Court correctly found no evidence of a
 
contractual obligation owed by the AOAO to Plaintiffs-Appellants. 
Thus, it did not err in granting the oral motion for a directed
 verdict on Plaintiffs-Appellants' breach-of-contract claim.
 
(5) The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in 
rejecting Plaintiffs-Appellants' attempt, under Hawai' i Rules of 
Civil Procedure ("HRCP") Rule 15(b), to reintroduce their breach­of-contract claim, upon which the Circuit Court had already granted the AOAO Defendants a directed verdict. Even without the Circuit Court's stated rationale—that it was futile to amend the Complaint to add a claim already pled therein—Plaintiffs-Appellants' argument is without merit. 
Plaintiffs-Appellants argue that the Circuit Court
 
should have recognized the motion as though it were brought under
 HRCP Rule 60(b), which would have permitted the court to grant
 relief from its prior directed verdict. They do not argue,
 however, any specific basis under HRCP Rule 60(b) upon which the
 Circuit Court could have granted relief, and we discern none. 
Whether under HRCP Rule 15(b) or HRCP Rule 60(b), the Circuit
 Court acted within its discretion in denying Plaintiffs-
Appellants' oral motion.
 
(6) The jury instructions, including the Special
 
Verdict form, did not provide confusing or conflicting
 definitions of negligence, nor was the jury tasked with
 determining conclusions of law.
8
 
The Circuit Court issued the Special Verdict form that,
 
in relevant part, sought answers to two questions. The first
 question required the jury to determine whether the AOAO was
 "negligent in maintaining the planter box outside Plaintiff's
 apartment 202?" The form then instructed that if the jury's
 answer was "No," that jurors should not continue to answer any
 further questions. The second question asked the jury to
 
8/
 Plaintiffs-Appellants did not object to the jury instructions, and
thus we review for plain error. See Montalvo v. Lapez, 77 Hawai' i 282,
290–91, 884 P.2d 345, 353–54 (1994). 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
determine if the AOAO's negligence was "a legal cause of
 
Plaintiffs' damages?"
 
The Circuit Court also issued, in relevant part, the
 
following jury instructions:
 
Plaintiffs must prove . . . that defendant was
negligent and that such negligence was a legal cause of
plaintiffs' damages. 
. . . .
 
Negligence is doing something which a reasonable
person would not do or failing to do something which a
reasonable person would do. It is the failure to use that
 care which a reasonable person would use to avoid damage to
property.
 
In deciding whether a person was negligent, you must
consider what was done or not done under the circumstances
 as shown by the evidence in this case.
 
In determining whether a person was negligent, it may
help to ask whether a reasonable person in the same
situation would have foreseen or anticipated that damage
could result from that person's action or inaction. If such
 a result would be foreseeable by a reasonable person and if
the conduct reasonably could be avoided, then not to avoid
it would be negligence.
 
You must determine whether any of the parties in this
case were negligent and whether such negligence on the part
of a party was a legal cause of plaintiffs' damages. If you
find that more than one party was negligent and such
negligence was a legal cause of the damages, you must
determine the total amount of plaintiffs' damages, without
regard to whether plaintiffs' own negligence was also a
legal cause of the damages.
 
. . . .
 
An act or omission is a legal cause of damage if it
was a substantial factor in bringing about the damage.
 
When read as a whole, we find nothing confusing,
 
inconsistent, or otherwise erroneous with the jury instructions
 
and the Special Verdict form.  See State v. Gonsalves  , 108
 
Hawai'i 289, 292, 119 P.3d 597, 600 (2005). The jury was merely 
tasked with determining whether the AOAO was negligent, in terms
 of failing to adhere to a standard of care, and if so, whether
 such negligence was the cause of harm suffered by Plaintiffs-
Appellants. Dictionary definitions of negligence
 notwithstanding, we decline to interpret the jury instructions as
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
stating anything other than that which they state.9
 
(7) The Circuit Court correctly applied Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes ("HRS") § 514A-90 to enforce payments owed by
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants to the AOAO, despite Plaintiffs-Appellants'
 belief that they had been constructively evicted due to the mold
 infestation. 
Plaintiffs-Appellants' constructive-eviction argument
 
is without merit. Plaintiffs-Appellants do not suggest that HRS
 § 514A-90 is ambiguous, but rather that its application here is
 unjust and not compatible with the legislature's intent. HRS
 § 514A-90 is written as a "pay now, argue later" statute, see
 § 514A-90(d), applicable in all circumstances, see § 514A-90(c). 
Moreover, legislative history indicates that the specific
 motivation for adding subsections (c) and (d) to HRS § 514A-90
 was to encourage dispute resolution and discourage owners from
 withholding payments. H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 807, in 1991 House
 Journal, at 1119–20. Even if Plaintiffs-Appellants evacuated
 Unit #202 because of the AOAO's actions, there is nothing about
 HRS § 514A-90 that suggests that it authorizes withholding fees
 as the way to address a unit owner's complaint. See H
AW. REV.
 
STAT. § 514A-90(d) (Supp. 2012). 
The instant application of HRS § 514A-90 is not an 
"unjust result obviously inconsistent with the [statutory] purposes and policies[.]" Leslie v. Bd. of Appeals of Cty. of 
Haw., 109 Hawai' i 384, 393, 126 P.3d 1071, 1080 (2006). 
Therefore, the Circuit Court correctly granted partial summary judgment as to the AOAO's counterclaim for unpaid fees.
10 
(8) It was not error for the Circuit Court to deny
 
9/
 Plaintiffs-Appellants also claim that the jury was placed in the
judge's role because Question No. 2 of the Special Verdict form asked the jury
to find whether the AOAO's negligence, if any, was the "legal cause" of harmto Plaintiffs-Appellants. This, too, is without merit. The jury instructionsplainly define "legal cause" in terms of whether an act or omission "was a
substantial factor in bringing about" harm. See Aga v. Hundahl, 78 Hawai' i 
230, 236–37, 891 P.2d 1022, 1028–29 (1995). 
10/
 Plaintiffs-Appellants also argue that the AOAO could have limited
damages by exercising a right to terminate its sublease with Plaintiffs-
Appellants but elected not to. Plaintiffs-Appellants raise this argument forthe first time on appeal. Arguments raised for the first time on appeal are
deemed waived. See Price v. AIG Hawai' i Ins. Co., 107 Hawai' i 106, 111, 111
P.3d 1, 6 (2005). 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs-Appellants' motion under HRCP Rule 12(f)11 to strike
 
the sixth defense in AOAO's answer to Plaintiffs-Appellants'
 
Complaint, which alleged that there was "no privity of contract
 between [Plaintiffs-Appellants] and Defendants." In response to
 Plaintiffs-Appellants' HRCP Rule 12(e) motion for a more definite
 statement, the AOAO clarified that the defense asserted no
 privity of contract specifically between Certified Management and
 Plaintiffs-Appellants. 
The clarification did not assert anything about privity
 
of contract between the AOAO and Plaintiffs-Appellants. 
Moreover, at the hearing, Plaintiffs-Appellants conceded that the
 "evidentiary basis for [their] motion to strike [was]
 deficient[,]" insofar as it provided no evidence of any contract
 between themselves and the AOAO. Finally, the motion was denied
 without prejudice. In these circumstances, and in light of
 federal courts' reluctance to grant similar Federal Rule of Civil
 Procedure Rule 12(f) motions, see, e.g., Ollier v. Sweetwater
 Union High Sch. Dist., 735 F. Supp. 2d 1222, 1223–24 (S.D. Cal.
 2010), the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion.
 
(9) The Circuit Court did not err in granting the
 
AOAO's motion in limine no. 1, which sought to "preclude any
 argument that [the AOAO] was liable for water damage not caused
 by leaks in common elements[.]" Plaintiffs-Appellants' argument
 is predicated entirely on their argument that the Circuit Court
 improperly granted the AOAO's MPSJ re Mold. As we found no merit
 in Plaintiffs-Appellants' argument as to the MPSJ re Mold, we
 likewise find no merit to their argument here.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants also challenge the Circuit
 
Court's grant of the AOAO's motions in limine nos. 6 and 7.
 Motion in limine no. 6 sought to exclude the testimony of Dixon,
 a neighboring tenant. Plaintiffs-Appellants argued that Dixon's
 testimony would have "provided the jury with valuable insight
 regarding the difficulties of living in a mold infested
 environment" and "allowed [Plaintiffs-Appellants] to better prove
 
11/
 HRCP Rule 12(f) provides that “upon motion . . . the court may
order stricken from any pleading any insufficient defense or any redundant,
immaterial, impertinent, or scandalous matter.” Haw. R. Civ. P. 12(f).
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
their damages and show the necessity of [vacating Unit #202]."
 
Motion in limine no. 7 sought to exclude evidence related to
 Plaintiffs-Appellants' claims for loss of income.
 
Since the jury found that the AOAO was not negligent, 
and therefore not liable to Plaintiffs-Appellants for damages, any erroneous exclusion of evidence that was solely related to damages could not have affected the jury's verdict. Even if the Circuit Court erred in granting either motion in limine no. 6 or 7, such error was harmless. See Kuroda v. Kuroda, 87 Hawai' i 
419, 428, 958 P.2d 541, 550 (App. 1998). 
(10) The "[trial court] judge is an expert . . . and 
knows as well as a legal expert what are reasonable attorney fees, . . . and in fixing that amount the trial court may proceed upon its own knowledge of the value of the solicitor's services." Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai' i 286, 
306, 141 P.3d 459, 479 (2006) (quoting In re Estate of Thz Fo Farm, 37 Haw. 447, 453 (1947)) (internal quotation marks omitted). In applying his or her "personal knowledge of the complexity of the litigation and the nature and quality of . . . services rendered," a judge does not abuse his or her discretion by awarding an amount supported by fully itemized time entries and a sworn declaration attesting to the reasonableness and necessity of fees. Id. 
The facts of Stanford Carr are closely analogous to the
 
instant case. In Stanford Carr, the Circuit Court awarded nearly
 $782,000 in attorneys' fees and costs at the conclusion of a
 complex lawsuit presided over by a single judge. See id. at 290
 
n.1, 295, 141 P.3d at 463 n.1, 468. This amount was
 substantiated by "more than 190 pages of invoices including fully
 itemized time entries" accompanied by counsel's sworn declaration 
that "the time spent was reasonable and necessary under the
 circumstances." Id. at 306, 141 P.3d at 479. Likewise, the
 AOAO's attorneys submitted roughly sixty pages of invoices with
 detailed time entries to substantiate approximately $50,000 in
 fees and costs, along with accompanying declarations of necessity
 and reasonableness. As in Stanford Carr, the Circuit Court judge
 had presided over the entire litigation and was personally aware
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
of its complexity and the services rendered by the AOAO's
 
counsel. He was aware that counsel had over twenty-five years of
 experience. It was well within his expertise and discretion to
 conclude that "the sums being sought appear . . . to be
 reasonable in light of the duration and complexity of this case." 
Additionally, case law suggests, and Plaintiffs-
Appellants provide no authority otherwise, that $200 per hour is a reasonable rate. See, e.g., DFS Group L.P. v. Paiea Props., 
110 Hawai' i 217, 223, 131 P.3d 500, 506 (2006) (taking the 
average of the rates of four attorneys in a contract dispute case, the court concluded that $215 was a reasonable hourly rate). 
The fact that a limited number of the invoice time 
entries may have constituted block billing does not necessarily negate their substantiative value. Compare Haw. Ventures, LLC v. 
Otaka, Inc., 116 Hawai' i 465, 478, 173 P.3d 1122, 1135 (2007), 
with In re Application of Wai' ola O Moloka' i, Inc., 127 Hawai' i 
404, 410–11, 279 P.3d 69, 75–76 (App. 2012). In contrast to Hawaii Ventures, Plaintiffs-Appellants do not argue that there are non-compensable activities entwined and indistinguishable from compensable ones. Rather, they argue that the instances of block billing make it "impossible to determine whether the time spent on each sub-task was reasonable or necessary or excessive." However, after reviewing the invoicing, the limited instances of block billing do not impede a determination of reasonableness or necessity. As the Circuit Court assessed, "[t]he level of alleged block billing . . . is relatively nominal[, and t]he sum being sought is reasonable." In making this determination, the Circuit Court did not clearly exceed the bounds of reason or disregard principles of law. See First Ins. Co. of Haw. v. 
Dayoan, 124 Hawai' i 426, 432, 248 P.3d 358, 364 (App. 2010). 
The amount of the fee awarded by the Circuit Court
 
appears to equal the unreduced amount first requested by the
 AOAO, without any accompanying costs. Neither party has objected
 to the amount of the fee, however, and we deem the issue
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
waived.12
 
Therefore, the Circuit Court's December 9, 2009 Final
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 10, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Gary Victor Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer, and
Benjamin R. Brower(Dubin Law Offices)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants
and Counterclaim Defendant
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Jeffrey A. Griswold,
Steven Y. Otaguro, and
John D. Marshall
 for Defendants/Cross-Claimants/Cross-Claim
Defendants-Appellees and
Counterclaimant Executive
 Center AOAO, Certified
Management, Inc., Dale Anzai,
Roy Ho, and Doug Mattos
 
Lisa A. Bail,
Carly Minner-Cole, and
Abigail M. Holden
(Goodsill Anderson Quinn &
Stifel, a Limited Liability Law
Partnership LLP)
for Defendants/Cross-Claim
Defendants-Appellees
Jason Princenthal and Aircare
 Environmental Services, Inc.
 
12/
 Plaintiffs-Appellants add a final argument that even if this court
finds the fee award appropriate, it should "remand[] for redetermination
[given] that [the AOAO] did not fulfill its duty to mitigate its damages[,]"
referencing their argument regarding the sublease termination mitigation of
damages. See supra note 11. However, they make no argument and cite no
authority that the two issues should be linked; therefore, we deem this
argument waived as well. See Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7).
 
15
 