NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30070
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
COLLEEN P. COLLINS, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
JOHN A. WASSELL, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 07-1-0206)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley, J.,
with Reifurth, J., dissenting)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Colleen P. Collins (Collins) 
appeals from the September 9, 2009, Divorce Decree entered in the 
Family Court of the Third Circuit (Family Court).1 The crux of 
Collins's appeal is that the Family Court erred when it concluded that Collins and her ex-husband Defendant-Appellee John A. Wassell (Wassell) did not form a premarital economic partnership, within the meaning of Helbush v. Helbush, 108 Hawai' i 508, 122 
P.3d 288 (App. 2005). Specifically, Collins argues that the Family Court erred by: (1) concluding that the parties did not participate in a premarital economic partnership between June 18, 2000, the date of their initial wedding ceremony (Ceremony), and January 19, 2005, the date on which they were legally married (DOM); (2) finding that, following the Ceremony, Collins and 
1
 The Honorable Anthony K. Bartholomew presided .
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wassell agreed "that each of them would maintain separate 
financial identities, so that Ms. Collins could continue to qualify for the financial aid she needed to send her daughters to their schools of choice"; (3) finding that "Ms. Collins believed that the financial responsibility for sending her daughters to college was hers alone"; (4) finding that Wassell owed Collins $4,239.59 for the mortgage payoff on the Hawai' i Paradise Park 
residence owned by Wassell (HPP Residence); and (5) valuing Wassell's assets as of the DOM instead of the date of cohabitation (DOC) and dividing the assets and equalizing the parties' obligations using the DOM valuations. We affirm. 
I. 
A. 
After the parties' divorce trial, the Family Court
 
entered its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision of
 the Court, which made the following relevant findings of fact: 
On June 18, 2000, Collins and Wassell "met at the park
 
with their friends and their minister for the apparent purpose of
 getting married." The couple "exchanged their vows, and they and
 all those assembled believed they had participated in a valid
 marriage ceremony." After the Ceremony, Collins and Wassell
 "began to have second thoughts about the practical consequences
 of their union and asked the minister not to mail in the marriage
 license and certificate to the State Department of Health[.]" 
The minister gave Collins the documents "with an understanding
 that the newly married couple would mail them in themselves." 
The following day, "the couple went on a short honeymoon[.]"
 
The parties' second thoughts about the marriage arose
 
from the fact that Collins had two daughters attending expensive
 private mainland colleges, with tuition in excess of $30,000 per
 year for one daughter and approximately $22,000 per year for the
 other. Because "financial aid [was] calculated on the basis that
 Ms. Collins was a single parent, Ms. Collins actually paid
 approximately $8,000 a year for both daughters, a considerable
 savings over the full tuition." "Ms. Collins was concerned that
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
if financial aid for her daughters was calculated on the basis of
 
the joint income and assets arising from her marriage to Mr.
 Wassell, that it would become considerably more expensive to send
 her daughters to the schools they were then attending." "Ms.
 Collins believed that if she were to marry Mr. Wassell and
 disclose the financial information reflecting her change in
 financial status to the two colleges," the financial aid for her
 daughters would be reduced and "she would likely be unable to
 afford the resulting tuition, with the consequence that her
 daughters would not be able to attend those colleges." To avoid
 that consequence, Collins and Wassell agreed (1) not to mail
 their marriage license and certificate to the Department of
 Health; and (2) that "each of them would maintain separate
 financial identities, so that Ms. Collins could continue to
 qualify for the financial aid she needed to send her daughters to
 their schools of choice." 
Collins "believed that the financial responsibility for
 
sending her daughters to college was hers alone, and that Mr.
 Wassell did not share in that obligation[.]" Similarly, Wassell
 believed that he was not obligated "to assist Ms. Collins with
 the financial burden arising from her daughters' college
 education."
 
Collins and Wassell never mailed in their marriage
 
license or certificate. About four months after the Ceremony,
 they received a letter from the Department of Health inquiring
 about the marriage license and certificate. Collins and Wassell
 responded by sending "a letter to the Department of Health signed
 by both of them stating that they had decided not to get married
 after all."
 
After the parties' "honeymoon," they began living
 
together. Wassell owned the HPP Residence, while Collins owned a
 townhouse in Pacific Heights (Townhouse). Although the parties
 "went back and forth between the two residences" for a while,
 they eventually decided to live in the Townhouse. While they
 were living in the Townhouse, Wassell rented out the HPP
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Residence for some of the time, but never shared the rent with
 
Collins despite the fact that he did not pay Collins rent. Soon
 after the Ceremony, Wassell added Collins's name to one of his
 bank accounts (Joint Account). The parties "agreed that the
 
[J]oint [A]ccount would be used for household expenses; both were
 
to deposit funds in the account." The parties deposited the cash
 gifts they received at the Ceremony into the Joint Account. 
Collins made regular monthly deposits of $500.00 into the Joint
 Account while Wassell made "few, if any, deposits" into that
 account. Except for the Joint Account, between the DOC and the
 DOM, Collins and Wassell maintained separate bank and retirement
 accounts.
 
In 2001, Collins decided to sell the Townhouse. Before
 
the sale, Wassell made some minor improvements. Collins sold the
 Townhouse and received a check in the amount of $23,020.74 at the
 close of escrow, which was deposited into the Joint Account. 
Collins subsequently withdrew $13,647.26 to purchase a vehicle
 which was titled in her name only. A portion of the proceeds
 from the sale of the Townhouse, totaling $4,239.59, was used to
 pay off the remaining balance on Wassell's mortgage on the HPP
 Residence. Following the sale of the Townhouse, the parties
 moved into the HPP Residence.
 
Collins's youngest daughter finished college in 2005.
 
With no further need for Collins to apply for or receive
 financial aid toward her daughters' college educations, Collins
 and Wassell legally married on January 19, 2005. As of the DOM,
 Wassell owed Collins a $4,239.59 debt, the amount Collins used to
 pay off the remainder of Wassell's HPP Residence mortgage. 
The Family Court entered further findings regarding 
the value of the parties' assets on the DOM. 
B.
 
The Family Court concluded that between the Ceremony 
(which shortly preceded the DOC) and the DOM, "the parties did not participate in an 'economic partnership' within the meaning of Helbush v. Helbush, 108 Haw[ai' i] 508 (App. 2005), and the 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
division of their marital assets by the court must therefore be
 
based upon the date of their legal marriage." The Family Court
 provided the following detailed explanation of its rationale for
 this conclusion:
 
The court's determination that the parties'
relationship between June 2000, and January 2005, did not
amount to a Helbush economic partnership is based upon
several significant factors. The Helbush court stated its
 holding on this issue as follows:
 
We conclude that a "premarital economic partnership"
occurs when, prior to their subsequent marriage, a man
and a woman cohabit and apply their financial
resources as well as their individual energies and
efforts to and for the benefit of each other's person,
assets, and liabilities.
 
Helbush, supra, 108 Haw[ai' i] at 515. 
The first conclusion to be drawn from this language is
that cohabitation alone is clearly not sufficient to
establish an economic partnership -- there must be a
commingling of finances, assets, and energies sufficiently
comprehensive to establish a "partnership." Second, there
is no such thing, for these purposes, as a "partial
partnership." Parties who are emotionally involved with one
another and who are cohabiting must inevitably com[m]ingle
their energies and finances to some extent -- the exigencies
of normal life and collective activity could scarcely allow
it to be otherwise. Therefore, some measure of such
commingling is to be expected in every instance of
cohabitation, and does not by its mere existence rise to the
level necessary to establish a Helbush "economic
partnership."
 
The question is therefore whether the parties in this
case committed their energies and their assets to one
another's purposes to the extent necessary to warrant a
conclusion that they were engaged in a relationship akin to
that found in a business partnership. It is worth noting
that the parties in Helbush spent the period of their pre­marital cohabitation engaged in a joint farming enterprise
in which both of them commuted to and farmed 310 acres in
 Kau, a clear example of cohabitation joined to collective
financial enterprise. By comparison, the parties in this
case, although they quite explicitly commingled a portion of
their funds for housekeeping purposes, simultaneously
maintained distinct separate financial identities.
 
The most obvious example of this is clearly the
parties' conscious decision not to make their first
"marriage" legal for the express purpose of maintaining
separate financial identities. This was done in order to
 realize two separate motives. [On] the one hand, it was
done so that Ms. Collins could take full advantage of the
financial aid available to her with regard to her daughters'
college educations. On the other hand, it was done so that
Mr. Wassell could refrain from shouldering any share of that
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
not insignificant burden. Far from reflecting the parties'
intention to "apply their financial resources . . . to and
for the benefit of each other's persons, assets, and
liabilities," Helbush, supra, at 515, it reflects the
parties' express intention not to do so. As a consequence
of that express intention, Ms. Collins saved thousands of
dollars and was able to provide her daughters with an
education at their colleges of choice, while Mr. Wassell was
able to preserve any of his own assets from being expended
for that purpose.
 
It seems to the court not insignificant that Ms.
Collins, in a series of financial aid applications,
represented that she was single, a status she had preserved
with calculation by consciously deciding not to make her
apparent marriage to Mr. Wassell legal. Also, it is clearly
relevant in this regard that both parties signed a letter to
the State Department of Health in which they represented
that they had decided not to become married.
 
Further, at all times during the period of their pre­
marital cohabitation, in addition to their single joint
"housekeeping" account, each of the parties maintained
separate individual checking and savings accounts which
appear for each to have been the vehicle for the bulk of
their financial activity. In addition, each maintained
separate retirement accounts, and separate life insurance
policies. Each owned vehicles which appear from the
parties' financial disclosures to have been titled in their
individual names.
 
[Collins] attempts to deflect the import of these
realities by citing to Epp v. Epp, 80 Haw[ai' i] 79 (App.
1995), in which the court stated: 
[T]he fact that Husband and Wife conducted their real
property and financial affairs as if they were not
married is not a valid basis for deviating from the
Partnership Model because they were married. 80
 
Haw[ai'i] at 93 (emphasis added). 
The point of the emphasized language is obvious: when
parties are married, application of the Partnership Model is
necessary and automatic, regardless of their individual
financial conduct. But the parties in this case were not
married during the period at issue and the nature of their
economic conduct during the period of their pre-marital
cohabitation is clearly relevant. It is incongruous indeed
for [Collins] to argue that evidence that she did not act
like an economic partner during that period may not be
considered by the court as evidence that no economic
partnership existed.
 
[Collins] relies heavily on the existence of the
[J]oint [A]ccount which was used primarily for household
expenses in her argument that the parties were engaged in an
economic partnership. [Collins] testified pointedly that
she was the primary, if not the exclusive, contributor to
that account, a fact which the court is prepared to accept
at face value. However, it is [Collins's] clear inference
that the [J]oint [A]ccount was the primary means of payment
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for the bulk of the living expenses of both parties, an
inference the court . . . finds unreasonable.
 
The evidence was to the effect that this account was
 
maintained by monthly deposits of $500.00, an amount which
was obviously insufficient to pay the living expenses of two
adults. These apparently included food for two, utilities,
internet service, telephone, cable television, and the
operating expenses for two automobiles, not to mention
entertainment and incidental expenses. The court notes that
 income and expense statements signed by the parties (Ms.
Collins dated 9/26/08) and Mr. Wassell (dated 10/24/07)
reflect total living expenses for the parties (not including
rent paid by Ms. Collins) of $1,960.00, an amount almost
four times the monthly contributions to the [J]oint
[A]ccount.
 
The [J]oint [A]ccount no doubt reflected a measure of
financial cooperation by the parties, but it seems wholly
inadequate to carry the weight of establishing an economic
partnership between them. This conclusion is not undermined
 by [Collins's] evidence that she was substantially the sole
contributor to the [J]oint [A]ccount. Rather than
 suggesting an economic partnership, evidence of the one
sided nature of [Collins's] contributions makes clear that
the [J]oint [A]ccount was a "joint" account in name alone.
 
(Brackets in quotation from Epp v. Epp in original.)
 
C.
 
The Family Court divided the parties' assets and
 
concluded that under strict application of marital partnership
 
principles, Collins would owe Wassell an equalization payment of
 $11,807.85. However, finding that Wassell had wasted assets, the
 Family Court ordered a deviation in favor of Collins of
 $17,238.05. Therefore, the Family Court ordered Wassell to pay
 Collins an equalization payment of $5,430.20, the difference
 between $17,238.05 and $11,807.85, in final settlement of the
 property division in the case.
 
The Divorce Decree was filed on September 9, 2009. 
Collins filed a timely appeal.
 
II. 
"Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
 
in making its decisions and those decision[s] will not be set
 aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." 
Fisher v.
  
Fisher, 111 Hawai' i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006). We review 
the Family Court's findings of fact under the clearly erroneous
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
standard and its conclusions of law de novo, under the 
right/wrong standard. Jaylo v. Jaylo, 125 Hawai' i 369, 373, 262 
P.3d 245, 249 (2011). The Family Court's division of property in a divorce "is discretionary with the trial court and will not be disturbed on review unless abuse of discretion is clearly shown." Baker v. Bielski, 124 Hawai' i 455, 458, 248 P.3d 221, 224 (App. 
2011) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
III.
 
We resolve Collins's arguments on appeal as follows:
 
A. 
We decline to overturn the Family Court's 
determination, in its division of the parties' property, that no Helbush premarital economic partnership was formed. The Family Court properly recognized that Helbush set forth the legal standard it was required to apply in evaluating whether Collins and Wassell had formed a premarital economic partnership. The Family Court provided a detailed explanation of its reasoning in determining that no premarital economic partnership had been formed under the particular circumstances of this case. The factors it cited in support of its decision were relevant to evaluating the parties' intent and the degree to which they applied their financial resources and efforts "to and for the benefit of each other's person, assets, and liabilities." See 
Helbush, 108 Hawai' i at 155, 122 P.3d at 295. As the trier of 
fact, it was the prerogative of the Family Court to determine credibility and the weight of the evidence, see State v. Miller, 105 Hawai' i 394, 402, 98 P.3d 265, 273 (App. 2004), and the 
Family Court's decision was based on factual findings supported by substantial evidence. We conclude that the Family Court did not err in determining that no Helbush premarital economic partnership had been formed. 
B.
 
Collins challenges the Family Court's finding that the
 
parties had agreed that "each of them would maintain separate
 financial identities, so that Ms. Collins could continue to
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
qualify for the financial aid she needed to send her daughters to
 
their schools of choice." This finding is not clearly erroneous. 
Collins testified that the parties decided not to legalize their
 marriage in 2000 because she was afraid that her daughters might
 receive less financial aid for college. Thus, Collins's stated
 rationale for not getting married was to keep her legal financial
 identity separate and distinct from Wassell's. We conclude that
 the Family Court's finding was supported by substantial evidence
 and was not clearly erroneous.
 
C.
 
Collins argues that the Family Court's finding that
 
"Ms. Collins believed that the financial responsibility for
 sending her daughters to college was hers alone" was clearly
 erroneous because Collins testified that she shared this
 responsibility with her daughters. However, when viewed in
 context, it appears clear that the import of the Family Court's
 finding was that as between Collins and Wassell, the financial
 responsibility for sending Collins's daughters to college was
 Collins's alone. There was substantial evidence to support the
 finding that as between Collins and Wassell, it was Collins's
 responsibility alone to finance her daughters' educations. 
Indeed, Collins does not challenge the Family Court's finding
 that Wassell did not share in, and did not believe he had, the
 obligation to assist Collins in financing her daughters'
 educations.
2
 
D.
 
We conclude that the Family Court did not clearly err
 
in finding that as of the DOM, Wassell owed Collins a debt of
 $4,239.59, which was incurred when Collins used her funds to pay
 off Wassell's mortgage. The evidence showed that Wassell offered
 
2
 Moreover, it was the financial responsibility as between Collins and
Wassell for Collins's daughters' college educations, and not as between
Collins and her daughters, that was relevant to the Family Court's
determination of premarital economic partnership.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to repay the debt. We conclude that there was substantial
 
evidence to support the Family Court's finding.
 
E.
 
Collins argues that the Family Court erred in valuing
 
Wassell's assets as of the DOM, instead of the DOC, and dividing
 the assets and equalizing the parties' obligations using the DOM
 valuations. This argument is premised on her claim that the
 Family Court erred in determining that no premarital economic
 partnership was formed. Since we have already upheld the Family
 Court's determination that no premarital economic partnership was
 formed, it follows that Collins's argument that the Family Court
 erred in using the DOM in valuing Wassell's assets and dividing
 assets and equalizing the parties' obligations must fail.
 
IV.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Divorce
 
Decree. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 21, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Joy A. San Buenaventura
for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
Andrew S. Iwashita for Defendant-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
10
 