  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30525
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
GUY EDWARDS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ANGELO FLORIS and MARIA FLORIS Defendants-Appellants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
LAHAINA DIVISION
 
(DC-CIVIL NO. 09-1-1154)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Angelo and Maria Floris
 
(Florises) appeal from rulings by the District Court of the
 
1
Second Circuit, Lahaina Division (district court),  in favor of
Plaintiff-Appellee Guy Edwards (Edwards). In this civil action,
 
Edwards sought summary possession and rent in the amount of
 
$82,550 based on the Florises' alleged breach of an oral rental
 
agreement. 
In its March 11, 2010 findings of fact and
 
conclusions of law, the district court concluded that the
 Florises owed Edwards $23,200 in rent for their occupancy of an
 
ohana unit (ohana) that is part of a larger piece of property
 
located in Lahaina (Property).
2
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
 
2
 The district court also found that the Florises had already vacated
the Property.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, the Florises assert that: (1) the district
 
court erred in denying their motion to dismiss because they
 
raised a legitimate question of title; and (2) the district court
 
erred in denying their motion to join their son, Richard Floris
 
(Richard), as a necessary party. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised therein, we resolve
 
the Florises' appeal as follows: 
The Florises contend that because they raised an issue 
of title to the Property, the district court erred in denying 
their motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. 
We review the 
district court's exercise of jurisdiction de novo under the 
right/wrong standard. See Lingle v. Hawai' i Gov't Emps. Ass'n, 
AFSCME, Local 152, AFL-CIO, 107 Hawai' i 178, 182, 111 P.3d 587, 
591 (2005). 
Upon a de novo review, we hold that the district court 
had jurisdiction over this matter and did not err in denying the 
motion to dismiss. HRS ยง 604-5(d) (Supp. 2010) states that 
"[t]he district courts shall not have cognizance of real actions, 
nor actions in which the title to real estate comes in 
question[.]" Further, Hawai' i District Court Rules of Civil 
Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 12.1 states that: 
[w]henever, in the district court, in defense of an action
in the nature of an action of trespass or for the summary
possession of land, or any other action, the defendant shall
seek to interpose a defense to the jurisdiction to the
effect that the action is a real action, or one in which the
 
title to real estate is involved, such defense shall be
 asserted by a written answer or written motion, which shall
 
not be received by the court unless accompanied by an
 affidavit of the defendant, setting forth the source, nature
 and extent of the title claimed by defendant to the land in
 question, and such further particulars as shall fully
apprise the court of the nature of defendant's claim.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The affidavits attached to the Florises' motion to
 
dismiss are not sufficient to raise a question regarding title. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Deutsche Bank Nat'l Trust Co. v. Peelua, 126 Hawai' i 32, 37, 
265 P.3d 1128, 1133 (2011), the Hawai' i Supreme Court recently 
ruled that: 
the source, nature, and extent of title claimed by the
defendant, must be described to the court with some detail
and specificity. In addition to particularly describing the
source, nature, and extent of title, the defendant may also
include in the affidavit any other particulars, the
objective being to apprise the court fully of the nature of
the defendant's claim.
 
The Florises' affidavits attest that their son Richard entered
 
into an oral partnership with Edwards under which Edwards would
 
purchase the Property by making a substantial down payment and
 
carry the $4,000 monthly mortgage. In turn, the Florises attest
 
that Richard would pay Edwards $4,000 a month for the mortgage,
 
Richard "would obtain his ownership interest in the Property by
 
making the mortgage payments[,]" (emphasis added), and that
 
Richard made some payments and the Florises also made payments on
 
behalf of Richard. As a result, the Florises each attest that "I
 
will assert an ownership interest in the Property based upon cash
 
payments made by my son, Richard Floris, made to effectuate a
 
fifty per cent (50%) interest in the Property[.]" Thus, at most,
 
the Florises' affidavits attest that there was an agreement by
 
which Richard would obtain an interest in the Property, but
 
nowhere in their affidavits do the Florises attest that Richard
 
had acquired an interest in the title of the Property.
 
Moreover, inconsistent with their claim that Richard
 
had an ownership interest in the Property, the Florises each
 
submitted a second affidavit with their motion to dismiss in
 
which they attest that they were living in the ohana unit with
 
Edwards' permission while improving the Property and also after
 
they started providing property management services for Edwards. 
Although the Florises state in conclusory terms in
 
their respective affidavits that they are asserting an ownership
 
interest in the Property based on cash payments made by their
 
son, such conclusory statements in affidavits that "lack[] any
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
specificity with respect to the source of title" do not satisfy 
DCRCP Rule 12.1, and therefore the Florises fail to establish 
that title was in question in this case. Peelua, 126 Hawai' i at 
38, 265 P.3d at 1134. The district court therefore properly denied the Florises' motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. 
The Florises' second point of error on appeal is that 
the district court erred in denying their motion to join Richard 
as a necessary party. We review the district court's denial of 
this motion for an abuse of discretion. See UFJ Bank Ltd. v. 
Ieda, 109 Hawai' i 137, 142, 123 P.3d 1232, 1237 (2005). We 
conclude that the district court did not abuse its discretion in 
holding that Richard is not a necessary party in this case. 
DCRCP Rule 19(a) states that: 
(a) Persons to Be Joined if Feasible.  A person who is
subject to service of process shall be joined as a party in
the action if (1) in such party's absence complete relief
cannot be accorded among those already parties, or (2) such
party claims an interest relating to the subject of the
action and is so situated that the disposition of the action
in such party's absence may (A) as a practical matter impair
or impede such party's ability to protect that interest, or
(B) leave any of the persons already parties subject to
substantial risk of incurring double, multiple, or otherwise
inconsistent obligations by reason of such party's claimed
interest. If such a party has not been so joined, the court
shall order that such person be made a party. If such party
should join as a plaintiff but refuses to do so, such party
may be made a defendant, or, in a proper case, an
involuntary plaintiff.
 
With regard to DCRCP Rule 19(a)(1), "complete relief"
 
can be accorded to the Florises and Edwards without Richard being
 
joined as a party. Notwithstanding the Florises' assertion that
 
Richard would obtain an ownership interest in the Property by
 
making mortgage payments, they do not assert that Richard had
 
obtained an interest in the title, and thus no question of
 
existing title was raised. If the Florises had raised a
 
sufficient question about title, the district court would not
 
have had jurisdiction and the question of joining Richard as a
 
party in these circumstances would be moot.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
With regard to DCRCP Rule 19(a)(2), the Florises have
 
not demonstrated that: Richard claims an interest related to the
 
subject of the action; and that the disposition of this action in
 
the absence of Richard as a party may as a practical matter
 
impair or impede Richard's ability to protect any claimed
 
interest, or leave any of the existing parties subject to
 
substantial risk of incurring multiple or inconsistent
 
obligations by reason of any interest claimed by Richard. The
 
Florises have not shown how an adverse judgment in this case
 
would prevent Richard from asserting claims against Edwards for
 
any interest Richard may have in the Property, nor have the
 
Florises shown how Richard would be impaired by the application
 
of res judicata or collateral estoppel.
 
Richard testified at length in this case. Thus, the
 
Florises were able to present evidence from Richard without the
 
need to join him as a necessary party.
 
THEREFORE, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the district court's findings
 
of fact and conclusions of law filed on March 11, 2010, and the
 order granting Edward's motion for attorney's fees and costs
 
filed on April 29, 2010, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 14, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Hayden Aluli
for Defendants-Appellants Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
5
 