NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30383
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
CHARLES MEMMINGER and MARTHA MEMMINGER,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
THE SUMMIT AT KANEOHE BAY ASSOCIATION,
HAWAIIANA MANAGEMENT CO., LTD., Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
KANEOHE BAY VENTURE LP, SANDRA SMILEY, ERNEST
CASSELL and SUSAN CASSELL, and DOE ENTITIES 1-20,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-1253)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Charles Memminger and Martha
 
Memminger (the "Memmingers") appeal from the Final Judgment,
 
filed February 11, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 ("Circuit Court"),
1 in favor of Defendants-Appellees The Summit
 
at Kaneohe Bay Association (the "Association") and Hawaiiana
 
Management Co., Ltd. ("Hawaiiana") (collectively, "Defendants-
Appellees").
 
The Memmingers contend that on March 3, 2006, following
 
heavy rainfall, unstable soil on the uphill properties owned by
 Defendants Ernest and Susan Cassell and Defendant Sandra Smiley
 (collectively, the "Individual Defendants") became saturated and
 failed, resulting in a landslide onto the Memmingers' property
 causing significant damage. The Memmingers' property is located
 downhill and adjacent to The Summit at Kaneohe Bay condominium
 project ("The Summit") while the Individual Defendants' homes are
 
1/
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided over all proceedings.
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
within The Summit. The Memmingers settled with the Individual
 
Defendants. Several months prior to the scheduled trial, the
 Circuit Court granted petitions for determination of good faith
 settlement with regard to the Individual Defendants. 
On appeal, the Memmingers argue that the Circuit Court
 
erred by (1) granting summary judgment in favor of Defendants-
Appellees upon concluding that they had no duty to abate or warn
 of the potential for harmful erosion caused by water drainage
 from individual homes within The Summit
2 and (2) declining to
 
grant the Memmingers additional time for discovery.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve the Memmingers' points of error as follows:
 
(1) Defendants-Appellees owed no legal duty to the
 
Memmingers to either cause existing individual home drainage
 systems to be altered or to warn the Memmingers of potential
 downslope hazards posed by those systems.
 
Subject to relevant statutory provisions, a 
condominium's governing documents determine the relative rights and responsibilities of the association and its constituent owners.  See Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Maalaea Kai, v. Stillson, 108 Hawai» i 2, 9, 116 P.3d 644, 651 (2005). See 
generally H
AW. REV. STAT. chapters 514A, 514B et seq. (2006 & 
Supp. 2012). A condominium's declaration identifies those areas 
or elements that are common elements and limited common elements. 
Duties regarding each may be determined contractually in and by the governing documents. See Maalaea Kai, 108 Hawai» i at 9, 116 
P.3d at 651. 
Here, the Memmingers do not dispute what the
 
Associations's governing documents clearly establish  that the
 
2/
 The Memmingers make several arguments that summary judgment was
improper because genuine issues of material fact remained in dispute.
However, the essential predicate, and indeed, the major thrust of theirargument is that Defendants-Appellees owed them a legal duty of care. As the Circuit Court concluded otherwise, we focus our analysis on whether there
existed such a legal duty. To the extent that factual determinations inform 
our legal conclusions, we consider the evidence and all inferences drawn
therefrom in the light most favorable to the Memmingers. See Kahale v. City & 
Cnty. of Honolulu, 104 Hawai
»i 341, 344, 90 P.3d 233, 236 (2004). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
drain pipes at issue3 are limited common elements. Nor do they
 
directly take issue with those documents' express assignment of
 
liability for such limited common elements to The Summit
 homeowners. Rather, they advance various factual bases and legal
 theories upon which to hold the Association liable for the
 damages caused by the landslide. We do not find any of these
 persuasive.
 
First, they argue that the Association was negligent in
 
its operation and maintenance of The Summit's common element
 storm drain system because it unreasonably neglected to ensure
 that surface water from individual homes drained into that
 system. They fail, however, to explain why the 
Association had an affirmative duty (assuming for purposes of the
 
argument that it had the ability) to compel homeowners to fully
 utilize that system, even if doing so might have minimized the
 danger of erosion, cf. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314
 
(1965), or to explain why the absence of action should undo the 
governing documents' assignment of liability. 
Second, they contend that several factors together lead
 
to the inference that the Association, to some extent, caused or
 influenced the installation or use of individual drain pipes for
 homes on the perimeter of The Summit.
4 Even assuming the
 
validity of such an inference, however, the only authority they
 offer addresses the liability of an association for injuries to a
 
member owner, not to a neighboring land owner or other third
 party. Sevigny v. Dibble Hollow Condominium Ass'n, 819 A.2d 844,
 
856 (Conn. App. Ct. 2003). Thus, the Memmingers fail to provide
 
any appropriate basis for this court to upset the agreed-upon
 
division of liability established by the governing documents. 
3/
 Originally, the homes within The Summit did not have individual
drainage systems, such that surface water flowed unrestricted from the backs
of homes. Over time, many of the homeowners installed individual drainage
systems, including individual drain pipes, to channel surface flow away from
individual homes. These pipes and systems are distinct from The Summit's
storm drain system, which serves to channel surface water from its common
roadway. 
4/
 The Memmingers propose that this inference follows because these
drain pipes were not an original feature, the Association "had been involved
in making recommendations to homeowners regarding landslides and earth
movement," and most of the homes on the perimeter of The Summit utilized
identical piping. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Third, in a similar vein, the Memmingers contend that
 
the Association owed a duty of care because it exercised, or
 
could have exercised, some degree of control over the individual
 drain pipes. Their legal support, however, consists of citations
 to cases where associations were held liable for negligence
 regarding common elements within an association's exclusive
 control.  See Martinez v. Woodmar IV Condos. Homeowners Ass'n,
 
941 P.2d 218 (Ariz. 1997); see also Ritter & Ritter, Inc. v.
 
Churchill Condo. Ass'n, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d 389 (Cal. Ct. App. 2008)
 
(likening an association's duty of care over areas under its
 control to that of a landlord's).
5 Here, despite the
 
Association's right of approval over installation or alteration
 of drainage systems, the pipes at issue are limited common
 
elements and expressly the responsibility of the homeowner, not
 
the Association. 
Fourth, the Memmingers argue that the Association, 
given its particular awareness of erosion hazards at the development, had a duty to warn others about such hazards. It is well-established, however, that a party with the power to prevent harm to another standing in harm's way is only under a duty to exercise that power when it shares a special relationship with the other party. See Lee v. Corregedore, 83 Hawai» i 154, 158-59, 
925 P.2d 324, 328-29 (1996) (citing Restatement (Second) of Torts ÿÿÿÿ 314, 314A). Nevertheless, the Memmingers cite to Siddons v. 
Cook, 887 A.2d 689 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2005) as a basis 
for finding a duty here. Siddons involved an association's duty 
to warn its member owners of latent dangers within non-common 
elements. See 887 A.2d at 692, 694.  The fiduciary nature of the 
relationship between an association and its members, see id. at 
692, might, under some circumstances, provide a basis to impose an affirmative duty upon the association to safeguard its members. But we find no sort of special relationship between an association and abutting landowners to warrant such a duty of care. 
5/
 Similarly, the Memmingers' reliance on Rodrigues v. State is
 
misplaced, as Rodrigues' reasonable use rule addresses that which a possessor
of land may do with respect to the natural flow of surface water. See 52 Haw.
 
156, 164, 472 P.2d 509, 516 (1970). Here, it is, of course, the homeowner
that possesses the land; the Association is not similarly situated. 
4
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Fifth, the Memmingers contend that a letter from
 
Hawaiiana to all homeowners at The Summit more than a year after
 
the March 2006 incident establishes Defendants-Appellees'
 liability for the drain pipes. This letter, however, merely
 reiterated the Association's right to enforce certain provisions
 of its governing documents and its board of directors' obligation
 to The Summit's homeowners to do so, thereby protecting the
 homeowners' interests.
6 Indeed, such a duty is consistent with
 
statutory obligations, but the scope of that duty is limited to
 the homeowners. See H
AW. REV. STAT. ÿÿ 514A-82.4 (2012) ("Each
 
director shall owe the association of apartment owners a
 fiduciary duty in the performance of the director's
 responsibilities."). Thus, the letter does not constitute
 
evidence of a duty owed by Defendants-Appellees to the
 Memmingers, nor does it alter the fact that the individual
 homeowners of The Summit contracted to remain solely liable for
 any flooding caused by their respective drain pipes.
 
Finally, absent any duty owed by Defendants-Appellees
 
to the Memmingers, their claims of trespass and nuisance must
 fail. As the Restatement explains:
 
Tort liability is never imposed upon one who has
neither done an act nor failed to perform a duty.
Therefore, one whose presence on the land is not caused by
any act of his own or by a failure on his part to perform a
duty is not a trespasser. 
Restatement (Second) of Torts ÿÿ 158 cmt. f. While this tenet is
 
expressed in the context of trespass, we find it no less apposite
 for nuisance. 
We hold that the Circuit Court correctly granted
 
summary judgment for Defendants-Appellees because the Association
 owed no duty to the Memmingers. 
(2) The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion by
 
denying the Memmingers additional time for discovery under
 
6/
 The letter stated that:
 
The Board has a duty to enforce the Association's
governing documents. Among the purposes of these documents,
and more specifically, [certain sections concerning
landscaping], is to maintain the appearance of our project,
protect our collective property values and view planes, and
reduce our liability exposure to potential legal claims for
flooding due to erosion. . . ."
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai» i Rules of Civil Procedure ("HRCP") Rule 56(f).7 HRCP Rule 
56(f) "provides a mechanism for litigants to seek a continuance 
or avoid summary judgment when they 'need to discover essential facts' to justify their opposition." Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. 
v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., 116 Hawai» i 277, 307, 172 P.3d 
1021, 1051 (2007) (brackets omitted) (quoting Hall v. State of Hawai» i, 791 F.2d 759, 761 (9th Cir. 1986)). To garner relief, a 
litigant "must demonstrate how postponement of a ruling . . . will enable [the litigant] . . . to rebut the movant's showing of absence of a genuine issue of fact." Josue v. Isuzu Motors Am., 
Inc., 87 Hawai» i 413, 416, 958 P.2d 535, 538 (1998) (quoting 
Wilder v. Tanouye, 7 Haw. App. 247, 254, 753 P.2d 819, 821 
(1988)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Here, the Memmingers sought additional time only to
 
depose Defendants-Appellees' expert witness and HRCP Rule
 
30(b)(6) representative in order to "authenticat[e] . . . [the
 deponents'] testimony concerning the issues in this case." They
 argue that Defendants-Appellees had "challenged the authenticity
 of evidence relied on by the Memmingers," therefore claiming that
 further discovery would have benefitted them. 
Notwithstanding that relief under HRCP Rule 56(f) 
"should be applied with a spirit of liberality," Exotics 
Hawaii-Kona, 116 Hawai» i at 308, 172 P.3d at 1052 (quoting McCabe 
v. Macaulay, 450 F. Supp. 2d 928, 933 (N.D. Iowa 2006)), we fail 
to discern the necessity or utility of the additional discovery 
sought below, cf. Josue, 87 Hawai» i at 418, 958 P.2d at 540, 
particularly when the hearing on the motion for summary judgment 
was held less than two weeks before the scheduled trial date. 
Thus, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying relief. 
7/
 HRCP Rule 56(f) provides:
 
Should it appear from the affidavits of a party opposing the
motion that the party cannot for reasons stated present by
affidavit facts essential to justify the party's opposition, the
court may refuse the application for judgment or may order a
continuance to permit affidavits to be obtained or depositions to
be taken or discovery to be had or may make such other order as is
just. 
Haw. R. Civ. P. 56(f).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Final Judgment, filed
 
February 11, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, May 17, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
John F. Perkin,
Brandee J.K. Faria, and Presiding Judge
Soria M. Hirosane
 (Perkin & Faria)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
 
Associate Judge
 
Jonathan L. Ortiz and
 Wade J. Katano
 
(Ortiz & Katano Associate Judge
A Law Corporation)
for Defendants-Appellees
The Summit at Kaneohe Bay
Association and Hawaiiana
 
Management Co., Ltd.
 
7
 