NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30570
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CHARLES F. LEE, Claimant-Appellant,
v.
 
PROGRESSIVE COMMUNICATIONS LLC,
and
 
WORKCOMP HAWAII INSURANCE COMPANY OF HAWAII,
LTD., Employer/Insurance Carrier-Appellees,
and
 
FIRST INSURANCE COMPANY OF HAWAII, LTD.,
Insurance Adjuster-Appellee
 
LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(AB 2007-476 (2-03-10062))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Claimant-Appellant Charles F. Lee (Lee) appeals from
 
the Decision and Order (Order) entered on May 20, 2010 by the
 
Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board (Board).1 In its
 
Order, the Board affirmed the October 3, 2007 Decision (Decision)
 of the Director of Labor and Industrial Relations (Director) that
 
affirmed the denial by the Disability Compensation Division
 
Vocational Rehabilitation Branch (VR Branch) of Lee's 
1
 Lee's Notice of Appeal purports to appeal from the "Decision of the
Director, Department of Labor and Industrial Relations, Disability
Compensation Division, State of Hawaii, herein made and entered on May 20,
2010, attached as Exhibit "1". However, it is clear that Lee is appealing
from the Decision and Order of the Board, which appears as Lee's
Exhibit "1" and was filed on May 20, 2010.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
January 10, 2007 Vocational Rehabilitation Plan (VR Plan),
 
thereby resolving Lee's claim against Employer-Appellee
 
Progressive Communications LLC, Insurance Carrier-Appellee
 
Workcomp Hawaii Insurance Company of Hawaii Ltd., and Insurance
 
Adjuster-Appellee First Insurance Company of Hawaii
 
(collectively, Progressive).
 
On appeal, Lee contends the Board erred in affirming
 
the Director's Decision when
 
(1) the Board found that payment of money by
 
Progressive to Lee to be used as equity capital did not fall
 
within the statutory or regulatory definition of vocational
 
rehabilitation services (VR services) as set forth by Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 386-1 (Supp. 2011), and
 
(2) the Board found that payment of money was not among
 
the enumerated examples of VR services nor within the category of
 
"other goods and services" listed under the definition of VR
 
services in HRS § 386-1.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Lee's
 
points of error as follows:
 
The Board did not err in finding that payment of money
 
to be used as equity capital was not among the enumerated
 
examples of vocational rehabilitation services as set forth in
 
HRS § 386-1. HRS § 386-1 defines vocational rehabilitation
 
services as 
services provided in a rehabilitation program to assist an
employee in obtaining and maintaining suitable gainful
employment that may include but shall not be limited to
on-the-job training, job modification, vocational
evaluation, adjustment to disability, counseling, guidance,
vocational and personal adjustment, referrals,
transportation, training, supplies, equipment, appliances,
aid, occupational licenses, and other goods and services
needed to assist an employee in obtaining and maintaining
suitable gainful employment.
 
2
    
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lee argues that the surveillance supplies and equipment
 
included in his VR plan constituted "enumerated examples" under
 
HRS § 386-1. However, the VR Plan did not provide that the
 
requested $50,630.90 be specifically used to purchase supplies or
 
equipment; instead, the plan stated that the $50,630.90 would be
 
used as the equity required by the Small Business Administration
 
(SBA) for an SBA loan.
 
Furthermore, HRS § 386-25 (Supp. 2011) provides: 
(i) If the plan requires the purchase of any tools,
supplies, or equipment, the purchase deadline shall be
included in the plan. Tools, supplies, and equipment shall
be considered to be the property of the employer until the
plan is determined by the director to be successfully
completed, after which it shall become the property of the
employee. If the plan requires the purchase, etc., the
employer shall purchase the items prior to the purchase
deadline in the plan.
 
HRS § 386-25 (i). In the instant case, Lee's VR Plan did not
 
include a list of needed supplies and equipment or a purchase
 
deadline. The VR Plan stated that the objective of the plan was
 
"to receive sufficient start up cost funding" from Progressive
 
"to establish the necessary [SBA] loan participation of at least
 
10% equity[.]" Because Lee's VR Plan did not include a purchase
 
deadline nor require the employer to purchase goods, the cash
 
payment did not qualify as an enumerated example of HRS § 386-1
 
and the plan did not meet the requirements of HRS § 386-25.
 
The Board also did not err in finding that payment of
 
money did not fall within the category of "other goods and
 
services needed to assist an employee in obtaining and
 
maintaining suitable gainful employment." HRS § 386-1 
Cash payments can not be considered "goods" under HRS
 
§ 386-1. As stated above, HRS § 386-25 requires the employer to
 
purchase the goods needed in a vocational rehabilitation plan. 
The purchase of goods requires a purchase deadline and requires
 
the employer to purchase and hold the goods until the plan is
 
successfully completed. HRS § 386-25(i). These requirements
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
simply can not be accomplished with a cash payment; therefore,
 
cash payments are not goods.
 
Nor can a cash payment qualify as a "service" under
 
HRS § 386-1. Quoting Black's Law Dictionary 1399 (8th ed. 2004),
 
the Board defined the word "service" as "an intangible commodity
 
in the form of human effort, such as labor, skill, or advice[.]" 
Such a definition does not include a cash payment. 
Lee cites to no authority to refute the Board's
 
definition of service or support his contention that cash payment
 
can be considered goods or services. A plain reading of HRS 
§ 386-1 reveals no mention of cash payments as goods or services. 
Because the proposed cash payment does not meet the definition of
 
VR services set forth in HRS § 386-1 nor meet the requirements of
 
HRS § 386-25, the Board correctly affirmed the Director's
 
Decision, which affirmed the VR Branch's denial of Lee's VR Plan. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Decision and Order
 
entered by the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board on
 May 20, 2010 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 24, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Gary Y. Okuda
(Leu & Okuda)
for Claimant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Gary N. Kunihiro
Shawn L.M. Benton
 (Leong Kunihiro Lezy
& Benton)
for Employer/Insurance
Carrier-Appellee and Insurance Adjuster-Appellee.
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
4
 