NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30567
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE PROTECTION OF THE PROPERTY OF
 
VIRGINIA LARKIN, An Incapacitated Person
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(GUARDIANSHIP NO. 05-1-0054)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Conservator-Appellant Michael J. Park (Park) appeals
 
from a May 25, 2010 First Circuit Probate Court (Probate Court)
 
Order Denying Conservator's Petition to Reconsider (1) Order
 
Granting Petition for Approval of First Interim Account Covering
 
Period from September 30, 2004 to September 10, 2007, and for
 
Entry of Judgment, (2) Order Granting Petition for Approval of
 
Second Interim Account Covering Period From January 30, 2008 to
 
January 29, 2009, and for Entry of Judgment, and (3) Order
 
Granting Petition for Approval of Final Account, Termination of
 
Conservatorship and Discharge of Conservator (Order Denying
 
Petition).1 The Probate Court appointed the Master-Appellee
 
1
 The Honorable Colleen K. Hirai presided over Park's petitions for
approval of first interim account, second interim account, and final account.
Upon Judge Hirai's retirement effective December 31, 2009, the Honorable
Derrick H.M. Chan presided over Park's petition to reconsider.
 
Park appeals from four orders and four judgments, but we have
jurisdiction only over the order and judgment denying his petition to
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Elizabeth H. Jackson (Master) to review Park's accounting as
 
conservator of Protected Person Virginia Larkin (Larkin), and the
 
Master filed two reports regarding Park's petitions for approval
 
of accounting for three accounting periods, and requested a total
 
of $16,313.46 in fees and costs.
 
2
On appeal,  Park maintains that the Probate Court erred
by (1) failing to provide him with sufficient time to respond to
 
the Master's consolidated report and request for fees, (2)
 
awarding an unreasonable Master's fee, and (3) finding sufficient
 
evidence to support the Master's unreasonable fee.
 
After reviewing the parties' arguments, record on
 
appeal, and legal authorities, we affirm the Probate Court's
 
judgment. 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has often stated: 
[T]he purpose of a motion for reconsideration is to allow
the parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that 
1(...continued)
reconsider. Two of these orders and corresponding judgments, all filed onJanuary 20, 2010, were not final orders or judgments and were thus notappealable. 
See Hawai'i Probate Rules (HPR) Rule 34 and Jenkins v. Cades
Schutte Fleming & Wright, 76 Hawai' i 115, 119, 869 P.2d 1334, 1338 (1994).
The January 27, 2010 judgment on the order granting Park's petition forapproval of final account, termination of the conservatorship, and dischargeof the conservator is an appealable judgment pursuant to HPR Rule 34(c).However, Park did not file his notice of appeal within 30 days of thatjudgment as Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 4(a)(1) requires. The 
failure to file a timely notice of appeal in a civil matter is ajurisdictional defect that the parties cannot waive and the appellate courtscannot disregard in the exercise of judicial discretion. Bacon v. Karlin, 68 
Haw. 648, 650, 727 P.2d 1127, 1129 (1986). Therefore, this court does nothave jurisdiction over these orders and judgments. 
However, as the January 27, 2010 judgment was a final judgment,
the May 25, 2010 order denying Park's HPR Rule 36(b) February 9, 2010 petitionfor reconsideration appears to be an appealable post-judgment order as itfinally decided the matters raised in the petition. See Ditto v. McCurdy
, 103 
Hawai'i 153, 160, 80 P.3d 974, 981 (2003)("An order denying a motion for post-
judgment relief under [Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule] 60(b) is
an appealable final order under HRS ยง 641(1)(a)."). It is to this order that we confine this decision. 
2
 We note that both parties' briefs do not conform with HRAP Rule
32. Park's brief fails to provide a three-inch top margin on each initial
page, resulting in the file mark obscuring part of the material in his briefs.
HRAP Rule 32(a). The Master's brief does not conform with the requirement
that briefs must be printed with no less than one and one-half line spacing
except in headings, quotations, citations, indexes, footnotes, and appendices.
HRAP Rule 32(b). Both counsel are warned that future violations of court
 rules may result in sanctions, including striking of the nonconforming briefs.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
could not have been presented during the earlier adjudicated
motion. Reconsideration is not a device to relitigate old
matters or to raise arguments or evidence that could and
should have been brought during the earlier proceeding.
 
Sousaris v. Miller, 92 Hawai 'i 505, 513, 993 P.2d 539, 547 (2000) 
(internal citations and quotation marks omitted). 
The only new argument that Park advanced in support of
 
his petition3
 was that he "was not afforded a legitimate time in
which to prepare a proper response" to the Master's consolidated
 
report. 
However, this argument could and should have been made
 
by Park in his response to the Master's consolidated report. 
Park advanced his argument that the Master's fees and costs were
 
excessive in his response to the Master's consolidated report. 
The arguments raised in Park's petition for reconsideration are
 
matters which could and should have been raised in his
 
September 3, 2009 response to the Master's report or at the
 
September 4, 2009 hearing. Thus, we could affirm the Probate
 
Court's denial of Park's petition for reconsideration on this
 
basis alone.
 
3 The court may grant relief under HPR Rule 36(b). HPR Rule 36(b)
provides, in relevant part:
 
(b) Mistakes; Inadvertence; Excusable Neglect; Newly
 
Discovered Evidence; Fraud, Etc. Upon petition and upon
such terms as are just, the court may relieve an interested
person from an order or judgment for the following reasons:
 
(1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or
excusable neglect;
 
(2) newly discovered evidence which by due
diligence could not have been discovered in time
before the order was issued;
 
. . . or
 
(6) any other reason justifying relief from the
operation of the order. . . . A petition under this
subdivision (b) does not affect the finality of an
order or suspend its operation.
 
The official commentary to HPR Rule 36 states, "This rule complies
substantially with HRCP [Rule] 60." HRCP Rule 60 is entitled "Relief from
 judgment or order." HRCP Rule 60(b) is entitled "Mistakes; inadvertence;
excusable neglect; newly discovered evidence; fraud, etc."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Even if we consider the arguments Park raises on
 
appeal, it does not appear that the Probate Court abused its
 
discretion in denying Park's petition for reconsideration.
 
Initially, we conclude that Park waived his first
 
argument, that he was not given enough time to respond to the
 
Master's reports. Although the Master's reports were late, see
 
HPR Rule 29 and HPR Rule 10, the record reflects that Park did
 
receive the Master's reports prior to the hearing, and rather
 
than object to their untimeliness4
 or move for a continuance, he
chose instead to file a response to the reports, arguing, in the
 main, that the Master's fees were too high. HPR Rule 10(c)(5).
 
Nor can we agree with Park's second argument that the
 
Probate Court abused its discretion in approving the Master's
 
fees. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated: 
Pursuant to the Hawai' i Probate Rules, a court-appointed
master "serve[s] as a representative of the court[,]"
Hawai'i Probate Rules (HPR) Rule 28(a) (2004), whose role is
to, "[u]nless otherwise ordered by the court, . . . reviewthe operations of the fiduciary in light of the terms of thecontrolling document, as well as the financial transactionsof the trust or estate." HPR Rule 29 (2004). Additionally,"the master shall submit a written report of the master'sfindings to the [probate] court and serve a copy on allinterested persons." Id. It is in this capacity that the
master essentially "serves as the eyes and ears of thecourt," id. cmt., and "shall be a person who has no conflict
of interest with any party or issue in the proceeding." 
HPR 
Rule 28(a). 
In re Estate of Damon, 119 Hawai 'i 500, 506, 199 P.3d 89, 95 
(2008).
 
Regarding the Master's compensation and expenses:
 
The court shall set the compensation of masters . . . and
order the payment of such compensation from the assets of
the trust or estate or, when appropriate, taxed in whole or
in part to a party to the proceeding or to a party's
attorney. In setting compensation, the court may consider
the knowledge, skill, and expertise of the official; the
difficulty of the assignment; the quality of the work
performed; and the time spent by the official on the
assignment. The court shall also order the reimbursement of
 the reasonable expenses and costs of the master . . .
incurred in fulfilling the official's duties.
 
HPR Rule 31.
 
4
 Park did note in his response that he was not "waiving the notice
requirements of Rules 29 and 10(c) of the Hawaii Probate Rules" but made no
further argument on this basis in his response.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Although not directly on point, Hawaii Ventures, LLC v. 
Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai 'i 438, 164 P.3d 696 (2007) is helpful. In 
Hawai'i Ventures, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court discussed whether a 
receiver was entitled to the awarded compensation. 114 Hawai 'i 
at 489, 164 P.3d at 747. The court stated that "the amount of 
the [receiver's] award lies within the sound discretion of the 
circuit court."5 Hawai'i Ventures, 114 Hawai 'i at 490, 164 P.3d 
at 748. Similar to the award of fees to receivers, "[a]llowances of fees to masters . . . are largely discretionary with the trial 
judge." Hawai
'i Ventures, 114 Hawai 'i at 490, 164 P.3d at 748 
(quoting 2 Clark, A Treatise on the Law and Practice of Receivers ยง 641(f) at 1089) (internal quotation marks and brackets 
omitted)). 
Here, we do not agree that the Probate Court abused its
 
discretion in determining that the Master's fee was reasonable in
 
light of the factors set forth in HPR Rule 31. As the Master
 
points out, the Probate Court paid much attention to the HPR Rule
 
31 factors as evidenced by its "personal revisions and
 
initialing" of the orders approving the Master's fees. Even
 
Jacob M. Merrill, attorney for Park (Merrill) recognized "the
 
special expertise and qualifications of the Master" that would
 
allow her to "come in to sort of straighten" out his mistakes in
 
the accounting for Park.
 
The Master expressed the difficulty of her assignment
 
to review Park's accounting. In the Master's report for the
 
first accounting period, she stated:
 
The Master had a very difficult time trying to understand
the accounts, the inventory, and the several revisions to
 
5
 The court explained:
 
This is because the receiver acts under the authority of the
court and is considered to be an officer of the court. The
 court supervises her, knows her circumstances, the services
rendered by her, the amount of time she has expended, what
is reasonable, and can judge the value of those services.
 
Hawai'i Ventures, 114 Hawai' i at 490, 164 P.3d at 748 (citation and brackets
omitted). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
those documents. Several entries in the accounts were not
 
specific, figures did not match, totals were not accurate,
and the numbers kept changing in the revisions and
supplemental documents. Many deposits were not made in the
months the checks were received, and likewise many payments
do not correspond to the dates of service. In addition,
some of the questions posed by the Master were answered with
less than complete answers. It took months to get copies of
requested bank statements, and those that were turned over
to the Master often had the pages out of order or missing.
 
The Master further noted problems such as incorrect titling of
 
the conservator's bank accounts, discrepancies with the beginning
 
balances of the conservator's bank accounts, and multiple errors
 
with the Inventory of Larkin's assets. After meeting with Park
 
and Merrill, the Master decided that "it would save everyone a
 
lot of time" if she prepared revised accounts because it was
 
"clear that . . . neither [Park nor Merrill] would be able to
 
easily revise the accounts so that they were accurate and
 
readable."
 
In the Master's consolidated report, she again noted
 
the deficiencies and errors in accounting, including incorrect
 
dates for accounts, a one-year period missing from the accounts,
 
insufficient detail to account entries, and incorrect outstanding
 
debts and liabilities of the estate.
 
Despite the multitude of errors, the Master prepared
 
complete revised accounts for each of the three accounting
 
periods. The quality of her work is apparent in her detailed
 
reports and accounting that she prepared from the inaccurate
 
accounting of the conservator.
 
The Master set out the time spent in this case in her
 
declaration. She attached detailed time entries to show how she
 
expended about 75.20 hours reviewing and preparing her reports. 
The Master even discounted her time spent in this case by 20
 
hours, from 75.20 hours to 55.20 hours. Given all the
 
circumstances, it does not appear the Probate Court abused its
 
discretion when it determined the Master's fee request was
 
reasonable.
 
Finally, we reject Park's argument that there was not
 
substantial evidence supporting the Master's fees. The Probate
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court's award of the Master's fee can only be set aside if the 
court "bases its ruling on an erroneous view of the law or on a 
clearly erroneous assessment of the evidence." In re Estate of 
Damon, 119 Hawai 'i at 503, 199 P.3d at 92 (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). Based on the record, we conclude that 
there was substantial evidence in support of the Master's fee 
request. 
The record clearly evidences the amount of work
 
required by the Master to identify and correct the errors in
 
accounting committed by Park and Merrill. The Probate Court was
 
in a unique position to fully understand the problems caused by
 
Park and Merrill's accounting errors and omissions. In fact, the
 
Probate Court afforded them the opportunity to explain their
 
inconsistencies and errors and correct the accounting on their
 
own, but to no avail. The court reminded Merrill that "[i]t's
 
not the responsibility of the Master to file the accounting for
 
the conservator."
 
Based on the multitude of errors in Park's accounting
 
and the amount of time and effort required of the Master to
 
accurately identify and correct those errors, each of which is
 
documented in the Master's reports and supporting documents, we
 
reject Park's challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence in
 
support of the Master's fee award.
 
Therefore, the First Circuit Probate Court's May 25,
 
2010 Order Denying Conservator's Petition to Reconsider is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 12, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Jacob M. Merrill,
for Conservator-Appellant.
 
Elizabeth H. Jackson,
for Master-Appellee.
 
7
 