  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30332
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JOEL C. ALLEN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 08-1-1143)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
esiding Judge, Leonard an (By: 
Fujise, Pr d Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Joel C. Allen (Allen) appeals from
 
a January 27, 2010, Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
Court) Judgment of Conviction and Sentence for Murder in the
 
1
Second Degree,  in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 707-701.5 (1993).2
 
I. RELEVANT FACTS
 
A. Pretrial Inquiry Into Penal Responsibility
 On July 22, 2008, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i 
(State) obtained an indictment against Allen for murder in the 
second degree. The charge arose out of an incident in which 
Allen caused the death of Jason Namauu (Namauu) by 
1
 Except as otherwise noted, the Honorable Michael A. Town presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-701.5 states the following:
 
(1) Except as provided in section 707-701, a person commits the
offense of murder in the second degree if the person intentionally
or knowingly causes the death of another person.
 
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for which the
defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment as provided in
section 706-656.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stabbing/slashing him twenty times using a knife with a three­
and-one-half inch blade.
 
On March 3, 2009, the State filed a Motion for Mental
 
Examination of Defendant to Determine Penal Responsibility and
 Fitness to Proceed, which was granted. During June and July of
 2009, three doctors (John L. Wingert, PhD (Dr. Wingert); Dennis
 
R. Donovan, PhD, ABPP, CSAC (Dr. Donovan); and Martin Blinder, MD
 
(Dr. Blinder)) each submitted a letter to the court regarding
 
Allen's penal responsibility and fitness to proceed. All three
 
independent diagnoses concluded that Allen was fit to proceed and
 opined that penal responsibility should not be negated in this
 case. On September 1, 2009, a hearing on Allen's fitness to
 proceed was held, and the court ultimately found Allen fit to
 proceed.
3
 
On November 2, 2009, Allen filed a Motion to Strike
 
Three Panel and Appoint Three Qualified Examiners or Dismiss
 (Motion to Strike Examiners), arguing that the reports denied him
 
an affirmative insanity defense because they did not sufficiently
 
render an opinion regarding penal responsibility because they
 failed to adhere to the requirements of HRS § 704.
4 The court
 
subsequently denied the motion, concluding that any discrepancy
 "goes to the weight and not the admissibility of the doctors."
 
B. Voir Dire
 Jury selection took place from November 9-10, 2009. 
During jury selection, Allen's counsel was precluded from asking
 potential jurors certain questions regarding possible racial
 prejudices. The Circuit Court, after a discussion at the bench,
 cautioned Allen's counsel against particularized questioning
 regarding race, stating: "Counsel, the court's given an
 instruction earlier that everyone must be treated without bias,
 prejudice or favoritism on the grounds of race, sexual
 
3
 The Honorable Michael D. Wilson presided over the proceedings
related to Allen's mental fitness.
 
4
 HRS § 704 is entitled "Penal Responsibility and Fitness to
Proceed." Its subsections set forth the elements of the insanity defense
(§ 704-400), the required procedures and content for the reports (§ 704-404),
the form of experts' testimony (§ 704-410), as well as several related topics. 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
orientation, gender, religion, and you can inquire into that if
 
you wish. But other than that, let's move on." Allen's counsel
 also requested additional peremptory challenges based on the
 Circuit Court's refusal to allow voir dire on potential racial
 prejudice; however, the court denied that request.
 
C. The Jury Trial
 After the jury was empaneled, the trial began on
 
November 13, 2009. At trial, Allen, a Caucasian male, testified
 that he met the decedent, Namauu, who was a trans-gender Hawaiian
 or Hawaiian-Filipino and known to Allen as Lynette, approximately
 
two or three weeks prior to July 17, 2008. This testimony is in
 
conflict with the testimony of Lambert Kaleikini (Kaleikini),
 
also a self-identified transvestite, who claimed that he had
 
known Allen for over five years and Namauu since 2000, had seen
 Allen with Namauu at clubs and bars acting "lovey-dovey" and
 "intimate," and that Allen was actually in a relationship with
 Namauu for about two years. 
Allen, on the other hand, testified that he considered
 
Namauu an acquaintance, but he had not gone anywhere with her
 until July 17, 2008. On that date, Allen testified, while
 walking to his car in order to pick up his mail, he began talking
 to Namauu. He agreed to store Namauu's belongings in his car, as
 Namauu was homeless. Allen then let Namauu ride along with him 
to pick up the mail. Allen soon thereafter stopped the car at
 Cartwright Park to get a drink of water and use the restroom,
 while Namauu remained in the car. Upon returning to his car,
 Allen testified, he put his seatbelt on. He then allegedly saw
 Namauu "fidgeting with an ice pipe and a rag" and said "Is that
 ice? Is that drugs?" Namauu responded that "Yes, it is[,]"
 which prompted Allen to ask "Are you –- have you taken this
 today? Have you taken drugs already?" Namauu answered "yes" and
 asked for $250. Allen then allegedly stated that he didn't want
 drugs in the car and he again refused her request for money.
 
Allen testified that, following the exchange, he told
 
Namauu that he was going to take her "back," and Namauu responded
 in a loud voice, saying "Your driving irritates me." Namauu then
 
3
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
purportedly struck Allen above his left eye and continued asking
 
for money, at one point stating, "Give me the money or I'll kill
 you" and "You're not going until you give me the money." Allen
 testified that Namauu continued her assault by "clawing" at his
 hands and hitting him in the face, shoulders, arms, and back. He
 then attempted to get out of his vehicle, but could not unhook
 his seatbelt. Claiming fear for his life, Allen reached for a
 pocket knife that he kept on the driver's side door and told
 Namauu to stop. However, Namauu then allegedly grabbed for the
 knife and continued her assault, while Allen tried to fend her
 off.
 
Meanwhile, two neighbors, Herman Henry (Henry) and
 
Ilanlan Asher (Asher) were at Cartwright Field for their wives'
 
softball game when they heard loud shouting from a vehicle and
 
saw someone in the driver's seat apparently punching or stabbing
 the passenger, who was on his or her back "kicking" up at the
 driver. Henry and Asher approached the car and saw Allen throw a
 knife to the car's floor and observed that the passenger was
 bleeding. Henry grabbed the knife and threw it out the door,
 
while Asher tried to keep Allen in the car; however, Allen pushed
 
the car door open and fled. Both Henry and Asher testified that
 Allen did not have his seat belt on at the time of the incident.
 Another man who was at the scene, Jonathan Bargas (Bargas) also
 
testified that he never saw Allen wearing a seatbelt. When
 
Bargas observed that Namauu was bleeding profusely from the
 chest, he immediately ran back to the softball field to call the
 police. Asher, meanwhile, went over to Namauu (on the
 passenger's side) to help him out of the vehicle and apply
 pressure to the stab wound in his chest. Henry ran after Allen,
 eventually flagging down some police officers and pointing them
 in Allen's direction.
 
Allen testified that, upon exiting his car, he was
 
confused and did not want to be attacked again, so he began to
 run, eventually reaching Beretania Street. Allen explained that
 a police officer then told him to stop; he complied and went to
 the ground. Allen testified that he was not tripped by the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arresting officer; however, this is in conflict with what Officer
 
Steven Chun (Chun) described, which was that he caught up to a
 
fleeing Allen and did a "leg sweep," causing Allen to fall
 
forward onto the concrete. Officer Chun then arrested Allen.
 
During Namauu's transport to Queen's Medical Center she
 
was covered in blood, and at no point did Namauu recover
 consciousness or show any vital signs. Officers at the crime
 scene recovered several items, including: a handbag containing
 "two glass [drug] pipes and . . . various metal scrapers and
 straws," two duffle bags of men's clothes and other items in the
 trunk of Allen's car, and a blood-soaked seven-inch pocket knife
 with a three-and-one-half inch blade. One of the responding
 officers, Officer Noel Araki (Araki), testified that the front
 
driver's side seatbelt was fastened when he arrived on scene, and
 
another officer, Detective Theodore Coons (Coons) testified that
 
the driver's side seatbelt appeared "ironed . . . into the seat." 
Doctor William Goodhue (Dr. Goodhue) performed the 
autopsy, and the Circuit Court allowed him to testify as an 
expert in forensic pathology, over the objections of Allen's counsel. Before expounding on the case, Dr. Goodhue testified as to his qualifications as an expert, stating, among other things, that he: (1) is the Acting Chief Medical Examiner of the City and County of Honolulu; (2) has been licenced to practice medicine in Hawai' i since 1972; (3) earned his medical degree 
from Cornell University; (4) did his residency in anatomic pathology at the New York Hospital Cornell Medical Center; and (5) is board-certified in anatomic pathology (of which forensic pathology is a sub-speciality) by the American Board of Pathology. Additionally, Dr. Goodhue explained that he has conducted approximately 1,600 forensic autopsies and has previously been qualified to testify as a medical expert in forensic pathology in the Hawai' i state courts on about 80 
previous occasions in the past eight and a half years. 
On November 12, 2009, Allen's counsel made a motion to
 
preclude Dr. Goodhue from testifying as to whether Namauu's
 injuries were consistent with "defensive wounds;" nevertheless,
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Circuit Court allowed the testimony at trial. In his expert
 
testimony at trial, Dr. Goodhue explained that the stab wound to
 Namauu's chest was the fatal one and that the presence of
 methamphetamine in Namauu's body had little, if any, contribution
 to Namauu's ultimate demise. Goodhue also identified a number of
 wounds that were consistent with "defensive" wounds, including
 those to Namauu's legs, arm, and hand. 
D. Jury Instructions, Closing Arguments and End of Trial
 Over Allen's objection, the Circuit Court gave the
 
Hawai'i Pattern Jury Instruction (HAWJIC) self-defense
instruction, which states in relevant part: 
The use of deadly force upon or toward another person is justified
when a person using such force reasonably believed that deadly
force is immediately necessary to protect himself on the present
occasion against death, serious bodily injury or kidnapping. The
reasonableness of the defendant's belief that the use of such
 protective force was immediately necessary shall be determined
from the viewpoint of a reasonable person in the defendant's
position under the circumstances of which the defendant was aware
or as the defendant reasonably believed them to be.
 
Allen's counsel objected to the "immediate threat" language
 
contained in the HAWJIC instruction.
 
Prior to closing arguments, Allen's counsel objected to
 
the State's PowerPoint slide, which referred to Bargas's opinion
 that Allen was not acting in self-defense. The slide depicted
 Bargas stating, "In my opinion, no, it did not appear that
 defendant was acting in self-defense." The Circuit Court
 overruled this objection on the ground that the court would allow
 reference to the statement as it was the witness's perception.
 
During the closing argument, the State made several
 
religious references, including the recounting of the parable of
 the Good Samaritan. The defense objected; however, the Circuit
 Court overruled the objection, saying: "Aside from religious
 references, I will allow it as a historical example." Allen's
 counsel also objected to what he felt was a misstatement of law
 
5
by the State,  though the court overruled this objection, stating
5
 The State's alleged misstatement entailed the following: 
Now, the defense said, well, they tried to define reasonable doubt
(continued...)
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that "[t]he jury has the law" and that the prosecutor was only
 
trying to rebut something that the defense had previously stated. 
Similarly, the Circuit Court overruled a defense objection based
 on the State allegedly implying that Allen was lying and
 tailoring his testimony.
 
The defense moved for a mistrial (or, in the
 
alternative, to strike the allegedly improper arguments and give
 different jury instructions) several times near the end of the
 State's closing argument. The Circuit Court denied the motions
 for a mistrial and declined to provide any alternative relief. 
The jury was then allowed to deliberate, and on November 25,
 2009, they returned a unanimous verdict of guilty of the charged
 offense of murder in the second degree.
 
On January 27, 2010, the Circuit Court entered a
 
judgment of conviction against Allen for Murder in the Second
 Degree in violation of HRS § 707-701.5, sentencing him to life
 imprisonment with the possibility of parole, pursuant to HRS
 § 706-656 (1993 & Supp. 2012), and ordering him to pay $3,281.72in restitution and a crime victim compensation fee of $305.00.
 II.POINTS OF ERROR
Allen raises five points of error on appeal, contending
 
that the Circuit Court: (1) abused its discretion in denying
 Defendant's Motion to Strike Examiners; (2) abused its discretion
 in precluding Allen's counsel from examining the venire regarding
 possible racial prejudice; (3) abused its discretion by allowing
 testimony of the medical examiner to testify as to whether some
 of the decedent's wounds were consistent with defensive wounds; 
5(...continued)
for you. And he put a number of slides there. And he said one
slide and he made one representation that, well, it doesn't mean
that the defendant is most likely guilty. If you find the
defendant's most likely guilty, you must find him not guilty.
That's not in the instructions. 
The instructions read that you must find the defendant -- you must
not find the defendant guilty upon mere suspicion or upon evidence
which only shows that he is probably guilty. What the law requires
before the defendant can be found guilty is not suspicion, not
probabilities, but proof beyond a reasonable doubt. There is
nothing about most likely guilty. But he would like you to believe
that.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) erred by failing to properly instruct the jury regarding
 
justifiable use of force; and (5) denied Allen's request for a
 mistrial on the grounds that the prosecutor's misconduct deprived
 Allen of a fair trial.
 III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
The appointment of a panel of examiners is reviewed 
under the abuse of discretion standard of review. State v. 
Castro, 93 Hawai' i 424, 425-26, 5 P.3d 414, 415-16 (2000). "The 
trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." State v. Plichta, 116 Hawai' i 200, 214, 172 P.3d 512, 526 (2007) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
"Voir dire is conducted under the supervision of the
 
court, and a great deal must, of necessity, be left to its sound
 discretion. . . . This is so because the determination of
 impartiality, in which demeanor plays such an important part, is
 particularly within the province of the trial judge." State v.
 
Altergott, 57 Haw. 492, 496-97, 559 P.2d 728, 732 (1977)
 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). "[A]bsent
 abuse of his broad discretion, and a showing that the rights of
 the accused have been substantially prejudiced thereby, the trial
 judge's rulings as to the scope and content of voir dire will not
 be disturbed on appeal." Id. at 499-500, 559 P.2d at 734
 
(citation omitted).
 
"Whether expert testimony should be admitted at trial 
rests within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be overturned unless there is a clear abuse of discretion." State v. Maelega, 80 Hawai' i 172, 180, 907 P.2d 758, 766 (1995) 
(citation omitted). 
In articulating the standard of review regarding jury 
instructions, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated the following: 
The standard of review for a trial court's issuance or refusal of 
a jury instruction is whether, when read and considered as awhole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient,erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a ground for reversal unless itaffirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the error 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was not prejudicial. In other words, error is not to be viewed
 
in isolation and considered purely in the abstract . 
State v. Kassebeer, 118 Hawai' i 493, 504, 193 P.3d 409, 420 
(2008) (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets 
omitted). "[O]nce instructional error is demonstrated, [the appellate court] will vacate, without regard to whether timely objection was made, if there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the defendant's conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." State v. Pond, 118 Hawai' i 452, 462, 193 P.3d 368, 378 
(2008). 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has stated the following with 
regard to prosecutorial misconduct: 
Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed under the
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which requires anexamination of the record and a determination of whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might havecontributed to the conviction. Misconduct of a prosecutor mayprovide grounds for a new trial if the prosecutor's actions deniedthe defendant a fair trial. 
State v. Mainaaupo, 117 Hawai' i 235, 247-48, 178 P.3d 1, 13-14 
(2008) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
"In order to determine whether the alleged
 
prosecutorial misconduct reached the level of reversible error,
 
[the appellate court considers] the nature of the alleged
 misconduct, the promptness or lack of a curative instruction, and
 the strength or weakness of the evidence against defendant." 
State v. Agrabante, 73 Haw. 179, 198, 830 P.2d 492, 502 (1992).
 IV. DISCUSSION 
A. Allen's Penal Responsibility and Fitness to Proceed
 Allen argues that the Circuit Court's denial of his
 
Motion to Strike Examiners was an abuse of discretion and a
 violation of his state and federal constitutional rights. He
 contends that each of the three examiners failed to render an
 opinion as to the actual extent, if any, to which his capacity
 was impaired. Therefore, Allen argues, the medical reports did
 not allow him to properly assess whether he should present an 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
insanity defense, and his counsel could not properly advise him
 
regarding penal responsibility.
 
HRS § 704-404(4)(d) (Supp. 2012) provides that, when a
 
circuit court in a felony case appoints three qualified examiners
 to examine and report upon the physical and mental condition of a
 defendant, the report of the examination shall include, inter
 alia, "[a]n opinion as to the extent, if any, to which the
 capacity of the defendant to appreciate the wrongfulness of the
 defendant's conduct or to conform the defendant's conduct to the
 requirements of law was impaired at the time of the conduct
 alleged." The penal responsibility and fitness statute also
 states: 
When an examiner testifies on the issue of the defendant's
 
responsibility for conduct alleged or the issue of the defendant's
capacity to have a particular state of mind which is necessary to
establish an element of the offense charged, the examiner shall be
permitted to make a statement as to . . . the examiner's opinion
 of the extent, if any, to which the capacity of the defendant to
appreciate the wrongfulness of the defendant's conduct or to
conform the defendant's conduct to the requirements of law or to
have a particular state of mind which is necessary to establish an
element of the offense charged was impaired as a result of
physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect at that time.
 
HRS § 704-410(3) (1993) (emphasis added). Thus, we examine
 
whether the Circuit Court abused its discretion by declining to
 strike and replace all three examiners based on their purported
 failure to comport with these statutory requirements.
 
Allen argues that Dr. Wingert's letter report was
 
deficient because it failed to give an opinion about the extent
 to which Allen's capacity was impaired as required by HRS
 § 704-404(4)(d). However, in a section labeled "Penal
 Responsibility," Dr. Wingert's letter report states that "Mr.
 Allen's capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct
 and to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law were
 not substantially impaired by physical or mental disease, or
 defect at the time of the alleged conduct." The report also goes
 into rather deep and detailed analysis regarding the extent of
 Allen's capacity, stating observations such as him showing "no
 indication or endorsement of hallucinations, delusions, paranoia
 or other marked disturbance in [his] basic thinking or perceptual
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
processes" and referencing the fact that Allen "acknowledged" and
 
could articulate what happened on the day of the incident. 
Allen also asserts that Dr. Wingert only looked for "a
 
major mental disorder that substantially impaired" Allen's
 capacity, and HRS § 704 "has never required that the mental
 disease, disorder or defect be 'major.'" Although Dr. Wingert
 indeed stated that he could detect no "major" mental disorder, he
 also stated in plain terms the extent of Allen's capacity without
 the use of the "major" modifier. Thus, it appears that Dr.
 Wingert's use of the term "major" was for descriptive purposes,
 and it does not seem that he searched for only "major" disorders.
 
Allen similarly asserts that Dr. Donovan's letter
 
failed to render an opinion about the extent, if any, of his
 impaired capacity because, he argues, the letter simply states
 that "I do not have evidence to indicate that Mr. Allen's
 cognitive and volitional capacities were substantially impaired
 by reason of a mental disorder at the time of the instant
 offense." However, the substance of Dr. Donovan's letter does in
 fact provide sufficient substance and analysis to comply with the
 requirements of HRS § 704-404(4)(d). In addition to the remark
 quoted above, Dr. Donovan summarized Allen's clear articulation
 of the incident and noted that Allen denied having an impaired
 mental state prior to the moment he claimed Namauu attacked him. 
Moreover, Dr. Donovan makes it clear that, when analyzing Allen's
 recollection of the event, his prior mental history, and his
 present mental state, there was nothing to suggest that Allen was
 mentally impaired at the time of the incident. These
 professional observations and analyses reveal Dr. Donovan's
 opinion regarding the extent of Allen's impairment during the
 incident; namely, that he was not likely impaired in any
 substantial manner.
 
Finally, Allen also claims that Dr. Blinder failed to
 
render a sufficient opinion as to the extent, if any, that
 Allen's capacity was impaired because Dr. Blinder "merely
 conclude[d]" that "I could discern no psychiatric disability in
 this perplexed, moody, lonely man that would rise to the
 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
threshold negating penal responsibility nor competence to
 
proceed." Like Dr. Donovan's letter, though, Dr. Blinder did
 more than simply give an unqualified opinion. Rather, he also
 outlined Allen's psychiatric history and provided his
 observations from their meeting. He provided details, such as
 describing Allen's understanding of trial proceedings and the
 potential penalties he could face, as well as observations such
 as "no hallucinations or illusions," "normal limits," and "does
 not appear clinically depressed."
 
Based on the foregoing, and after reviewing and
 
analyzing the reports in their entirety, we conclude that the
 Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Allen's
 Motion to Strike Examiners.
 
B. Voir Dire Issue
 Allen maintains that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion when it precluded the defense from examining potential
 jurors about possible race-based prejudice and denied the
 defense's request for additional peremptory challenges, arguing
 that "[b]y precluding the defense from examining these jurors
 regarding possible prejudices against the defendant or bias
 towards the prosecution, the defense was unable to challenge
 these jurors for cause, [and] consequently the court effectively
 forced defense counsel to use two peremptory challenges."
 
"Both the federal and the state constitutions require,
 
as a basic protection of the individual in a criminal case, trial
 by an 'impartial jury.'" State v. Pokini, 55 Haw. 640, 641, 526
 
P.2d 94, 99 (1974) (footnotes omitted). HRS § 635-27 (1993)
 governs examination for cause, and states the following:
 
Each party shall have the right, under the direction of the court,
to examine a proposed juror as to the proposed juror's
qualifications, interest, or bias that would affect the trial of
the cause and as to any matter that might tend to affect the
proposed juror's verdict. Each party may introduce competent
evidence to show the disqualification, interest, or bias of any
juror.
 
"Refusal of the trial court to make or permit
 
sufficient inquiry into possible prejudices of prospective jurors
 
may infringe these [parties'] constitutional rights," and "[t]he
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances of a particular case may create a necessity for
 
questioning prospective jurors specifically about racial
 prejudice during voir dire." State v. Altergott, 57 Haw. 492,
 
495, 559 P.2d 728, 732 (1977) (internal citation omitted). On
 the other hand, the law is well established that the trial court
 is vested with the discretion to regulate voir dire examination
 "so as to keep the questioning by counsel within reasonable
 bounds and to confine it to assisting in the impaneling of an
 impartial jury." See id. at 499, 559 P.2d at 734; see also Haw.
 
R. Penal P. 24. "[A]bsent abuse of [the trial court's] broad
 discretion, and a showing that the rights of the accused have
 been substantially prejudiced thereby, the trial judge's rulings
 as to the scope and content of voir dire will not be disturbed on
 appeal." Altergott, 57 Haw. at 499-500, 559 P.2d at 734. 
Here, prior to the parties' voir dire, the Circuit
 
Court gave instructions to the prospective jurors about treating
 everyone in trial "without bias, prejudice or favoritism" on
 various grounds, including race and sexual orientation; the court
 asked whether anyone could not follow these rules. Allen's
 counsel, however, wished to go much further than this general
 inquiry, instead stating: "I should be able to voir dire on
 whether or not this juror, this –- and for the record here this
 juror appears to be Hawaiian, part Hawaiian. And the victim in
 this case is Hawaiian." The Circuit Court acknowledged Allen's
 objection, but nevertheless limited his inquiry, stating that
 "you can ask general questions . . . [y]ou can get into it
 without particularizing it as to Mr. Allen or the juror." The
 court then stated: "Counsel, the court's given an instruction
 earlier that everyone must be treated without bias, prejudice or
 favoritism on the grounds of race, sexual orientation, gender,
 religion, and you can inquire into that if you wish. But other
 than that, let's move on." Thus, the Circuit Court did not
 actually preclude the defense from examining potential jurors
 about possible race-based prejudice; rather, it simply limited
 the inquiry to that of a general nature and precluded the defense 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
from particularizing the racial differences between either Allen,
 
Namauu, or the juror. 
The Circuit Court's decision to limit the inquiry is in 
line with the Shabazz case, in which this court stated, inter alia, "[H]ighlighting racial differences, just because 'the evidence will show that[,]' lacks legitimate justification in the complete absence of relevance to the proof at trial. . . . That argument could be made for any racial reference, and any number of such references in a trial." State v. Shabazz, 98 Hawai' i 
358, 379, 48 P.3d 605, 626 (App. 2002) (citing State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai'i 405, 414, 984 P.2d 1231, 1240 (1999)). In the present 
case, Allen was not charged with a crime involving race, race was not raised as part of his defense, and there is no indication in the record that racial bias was an issue in the case. Thus, the Circuit Court's decision to limit the inquiry was proper. See 
Shabazz, 98 Hawai' i at 379, 48 P.3d at 626; see also Altergott, 
57 Haw. at 494-96, 559 P.2d at 731-32. 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court's decision in the Altergott 
case further supports the Circuit Court's exercise of its discretion to limit voir dire under these circumstances. The supreme court explained that "[v]oir dire is conducted under the supervision of the court, and a great deal must, of necessity, be left to its sound discretion." Altergott, 57 Haw. at 496, 559 
P.2d at 732 (internal quotations omitted). The court made clear that there exists no "per se rule that [requires] voir dire on racial prejudice in any case involving a crime of violence where the defendant was of a different race than the victim"; rather, the right to "examine into specific possible prejudices on voir dire" exists only where there is a "constitutionally significant likelihood" that the jurors will be prejudiced. See Altergott, 
57 Haw. at 497, 559 P.2d at 732-33. In the present case, the record contains nothing to show that the prospective jurors were racially prejudiced against Allen, and the defense offers none. Therefore, the Circuit Court's allowance of only generalized inquiries regarding race was constitutionally sufficient, and the 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in limiting voir dire
 
on the subject. 
Similarly, the Circuit Court also did not abuse its
 
discretion in denying Allen's request for additional peremptory
 challenges.
6 In addition to the high threshold for meeting abuse
 
of discretion for voir dire, once again, the record is silent as
 to any discernible prejudice or bias in either of the two jurors
 that Allen claims he was "effectively forced" to challenge. See
 
Altergott, 57 Haw. at 496-97, 559 P.2d at 732-33. Accordingly,
 we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion
 in limiting Allen's examination of potential jurors regarding
 racial prejudice, nor did it abuse its discretion in denying
 Allen's request for additional peremptory challenges.
 
C. The Medical Examiner's Testimony
 Allen also contends that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion by allowing Dr. Goodhue to testify as an expert
 regarding some of Namauu's wounds being consistent with
 "defensive wounds" because Dr. Goodhue was not a certified
 forensic pathologist. Hawai' i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 702 
governs the testimony of experts, stating:
 
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge
will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or
 to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an
expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or
education may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or
otherwise. In determining the issue of assistance to the
trier of fact, the court may consider the trustworthiness
and validity of the scientific technique or mode of analysis
employed by the proffered expert.
 
HRS § 626-1 (1993); see also Neilsen v. Am. Honda Motor Co., 92 
Hawai'i 180, 188, 989 P.2d 264, 272 (App. 1999) (citation 
omitted) ("[A] witness may qualify as an expert if he or she possesses a background in any one of the five areas listed under HRE Rule 702: knowledge, skill, experience, training or education."). Furthermore, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has noted: 
6
 The right to peremptory challenges for criminal cases in Hawai' i 
is primarily governed by HRS § 635-30 (1993), which states (in relevant part)
that "[i]n . . . criminal trials by jury each side is entitled to threeperemptory challenges." 
15
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
It is not necessary that the expert witness have the highest
possible qualifications to testify about a particular
matter, . . . but the expert witness must have such skill,
knowledge, or experience in the field in question as to make it
appear that his opinion or inference-drawing would probably aid
the trier of fact in arriving at the truth. . . . Once the basic
 requisite qualifications are established, the extent of an
expert's knowledge of the subject matter goes to the weight rather
than the admissibility of the testimony.
 
State v. Toyomura, 80 Hawai' i 8, 26 n.19, 904 P.2d 893, 911 n.19 
(1995) (footnote and citations omitted). 
We conclude that the Circuit Court was well within 
its discretion, as Dr. Goodhue demonstrated that he possessed 
extensive knowledge, skill, experience, training, and education in the field of forensic pathology. Dr. Goodhue testified that he: 1) was the Acting Chief Medical Examiner of the City and County of Honolulu; 2) has been licenced to practice medicine in Hawai'i since 1972; 3) earned his medical degree from Cornell 
University; 4) did his residency in anatomic pathology at the New York Hospital Cornell Medical Center; and 5) was board certified in anatomic pathology (of which forensic pathology is a sub-speciality) by the American Board of Pathology. 
Additionally, Dr. Goodhue explained that he had conducted 
approximately 1,600 forensic autopsies and had previously been qualified to testify as a medical expert in forensic pathology in the Hawai' i state courts on about 80 previous occasions over the 
past eight and a half years. Dr. Goodhue maintained his knowledge and skill in this area by "attending at least one annual, usually weeklong, meeting in the area of forensic pathology held by the National Association of Medical Examiners" and other similar agencies. Thus, despite Allen's claims otherwise, Dr. Goodhue demonstrated sufficient qualifications to testify as an expert in the field of forensic pathology, especially in light of Hawai' i's high deference to the trial 
court in these matters. See, e.g., State v. Torres, 60 Haw. 271, 
277, 589 P.2d 83, 87 (1978). 
Allen further contends that Dr. Goodhue offered no
 
"testimony or evidence" about his particular expertise "regarding
 identifying defensive wounds." This argument is without merit. 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Allen cites no authority in support of this argument and gives no 
reason as to why Dr. Goodhue's training and experience would not include identifying defensive wounds. While Hawai' i courts have 
not addressed the particular question in this case, experts in our courts have been allowed to testify as to specific matters falling under the scope of their expertise. See, e.g., Larsen v. 
State Sav. & Loan Ass'n, 64 Haw. 302, 305, 640 P.2d 286, 289 (1982) (noting that "[a]lthough [the proffered expert] has no experience in the manufacturing or design of champagne, champagne bottles, or stoppers, the subject matter of the case falls within his overall background"); Torres, 60 Haw. at 277-78, 589 P.2d at 87-88 (forensic pathologist provided sufficient testimony as to his expertise in the general areas of x-ray photography and ballistics; therefore, his opinion regarding the caliber of the bullet was within the scope of his expertise). 
Here, Dr. Goodhue's uncontroverted testimony was that
 
forensic pathology is "the study by laboratory methods of bodily
 illnesses and injuries as these pertain to the law," and "what
 this means is that forensic pathology principally involves itself
 with [conducting autopsies]." The purpose of these autopsies is
 "to come to a conclusion about the cause of death and the manner
 of death." In knife deaths, one important type of evidence of
 the death's homicidal character is the presence of defensive
 wounds, which occur when the decedent is trying to "ward off the
 knife." Thus, because defensive wounds relate to discovering the
 cause and manner of death, which is within the realm of forensic
 pathology, the matter falls within the scope of Dr. Goodhue's
 expertise. The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 allowing Dr. Goodhue to testify as a forensic pathologist and to
 address the topic of "defensive wounds."
 
D. The Challenged Jury Instruction
 Allen argues that the Circuit Court erred when it gave
 
the jury the HAWJIC self-defense instruction, stating in relevant
 part:
 
The use of deadly force upon or toward another person is justified
when a person using such force reasonably believed that deadly
force is immediately necessary to protect himself on the present
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
occasion against death, serious bodily injury or kidnapping. The
reasonableness of the defendant's belief that the use of such
 protective force was immediately necessary shall be determined
from the viewpoint of a reasonable person in the defendant's
position under the circumstances of which the defendant was aware
or as the defendant reasonably believed them to be.
 
Allen argues that the instruction should have, instead, tracked
 
the pertinent language of HRS § 703-304, which provides:
 
(1) Subject to the provisions of this section and of section
703-308, the use of force upon or toward another person is
justifiable when the actor believes that such force is immediately
 necessary for the purpose of protecting himself against the use of
unlawful force by the other person on the present occasion.
 
(2) The use of deadly force is justifiable under this section if
 this
the actor believes that deadly force is necessary to protect
himself against death, serious bodily injury, kidnapping, rape, or
forcible sodomy.
 
Specifically, Allen argues that the inclusion of the
 
term "immediately necessary" in the jury instruction, as opposed
 
to "necessary," as it relates to the use of deadly force, was
 erroneous, especially in light of the fact that the "court did
 not instruct the jury on the definition of 'immediately
 necessary.'" 
We disagree. A fair reading of HRS § 703-304 and its
 
commentary reveals no indication that the Circuit Court in this
 case erred when it used the words "immediately necessary" in its
 self-defense instruction. Allen cites no caselaw or other
 authority in support of the assertion that the instruction was in
 fact erroneous.
 
"The standard of review for a trial court's issuance or 
refusal of a jury instruction is whether, when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v. 
Kassebeer, 118 Hawai' i 493, 504, 193 P.3d 409, 420 (2008) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). In the present case, even assuming arguendo that the instruction was erroneous, there is no indication that the instruction was prejudicially erroneous; in other words, "considering the record as a whole, there is [no] reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the defendant's conviction." See Kassebeer, 118 Hawai' i at 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
504, 193 P.3d at 420; State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai' i 327, 329, 141 
P.3d 974, 976 (2006). Given Allen's assertion of the facts – 
namely, that he was stuck in the seatbelt with Namauu hitting him – it would make little difference to the jury whether his self-
defense argument was based on "necessary" as opposed to
 "immediately necessary" action because either way the harm was
 contemporaneous with Allen's alleged need to neutralize Namauu. 
Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court properly instructed
 the jury regarding self-defense; however, even if it did not, the
 instructions were not prejudicially erroneous under the
 circumstances of this case.
 
E. Alleged Prosecutorial Misconduct
 There are three factors to consider when evaluating 
prosecutorial misconduct: (1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction, if any; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238; State v. Mars, 116 
Hawai'i 125, 141-42, 170 P.3d 861, 877-78 (App. 2007). 
Allen asserts that the State committed prosecutorial
 
misconduct and violated his substantial rights when the
 prosecutor: (1) made references which were intended to inflame
 the passions of the jurors and prejudice them against him; (2)
 made egregious misstatements of the law during closing argument;
 (3) referenced Bargas's opinion that Allen was not acting in
 self-defense; and (4) suggested that Allen had lied and tailored
 his testimony based on his review of the discovery materials and
 testimony at trial. We will address each contention in turn.
 
We first consider Allen's argument that the State
 
committed prosecutorial misconduct when, in closing argument, the
 prosecutor referred to Jesus, God, the Bible, compassion, and the
 parable of the Good Samaritan. Allen's argument is that, in
 doing so, the prosecution was attempting to prejudice the jurors
 against him. However, a careful reading of this portion of the
 State's closing argument demonstrates that the prosecutor was
 trying to use this well-known story, albeit Biblically-based, to
 make the point that the jurors should not be prejudice for or
 
19
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against Allen or the other witnesses because of age, sexual-
orientation, life style, or poor English-speaking skills. The
 references to the story of the Good Samaritan were clearly
 intended to urge the jurors not to base their fact-finding on
 such potential prejudices. There is not even the slightest hint
 that this arguably religion-based reference, which the judge
 allowed only as a literary or historical reference, would tend to
 favor one side or the other in the prosecutor's plea to set aside
 all prejudice and only consider the evidence objectively.
 
Allen also alleges prosecutorial misconduct based upon 
the prosecutor "continuously" arguing that Allen was a liar, as 
well as the prosecutor showing two slides that called Allen "a 
liar five separate times."
7 However, "[w]here the evidence 
presents two conflicting versions of the same events, a party may reasonably infer, and thus, argue, that the other side is lying." State v. Clark, 83 Hawai' i 289, 304-05, 926 P.2d 194, 209-10 
(1996). Moreover, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has also held that 
"when a defendant takes the stand to testify, his or her credibility can be tested in the same manner as any other witness," and that, thus, it was not improper for the prosecutor in that case to comment that "because [the defendant] had the highest stake in the outcome of the case, he had the greatest motive to lie." State v. Apilando, 79 Hawai' i 128, 142, 900 P.2d 
135, 149 (1995). The State's actions in this regard were not improper. The State's remarks simply reference the conflicting testimonies and evidence at trial, inferring that Allen is lying, which is permitted by Clark. Additionally, as was permitted in Apilando, the prosecutor here pointed out that, in addition to the story not making sense, Allen also has the greatest motive to lie in the case. Thus, we reject Allen's first ground for asserting prosecutorial misconduct. 
7
 Although there was reference made to the PowerPoint slides being
made part of the record, Allen fails to cite to any part of the record that
would lead this court to a copy of the disputed slides, and an independent
examination of the record did not uncover them. 
20
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Allen next claims prosecutorial misconduct on the basis
 
that, "during rebuttal closing, the prosecutor made egregious
 
misstatements of the law, arguing to the jury that they could
 find [Allen] guilty if they believed that [he] [wa]s most likely
 guilty." However, the prosecutor never actually made any such
 statement. The statement the prosecutor made, as he discussed
 the burden of proof, was the following: 
The instructions read [to the jury] that you must find the
defendant –- you must not find the defendant guilty upon mere
suspicion or upon evidence which only shows that he is probably
guilty. What the law requires before the defendant can be found
guilty is not suspicion, not probabilities, but proof beyond a
 reasonable doubt. There is nothing about most likely guilty. But
 
he would like you to believe that.
 
It appears that the State merely asked the jury to find Allen
 
guilty based on proof beyond a reasonable doubt, subsequently
 telling them that they may not find Allen guilty based on "most
 likely guilty." Thus, Allen's argument on this point is without
 merit.
 
Allen also argues that the State committed
 
prosecutorial misconduct when it presented a PowerPoint slide
 "which referred to Bargas' opinion that [Allen] was not acting in
 self-defense," stating that "Bargas'[s] bald assertion . . . is
 an improper legal conclusion by an unqualified lay witness."
8
 
In support of his contention, Allen cites HRE Rule 701, which
 states: 
8 Allen's claim regarding Bargas's opinion that Allen was not acting
in self-defense appears to stem from a juror question asked at the conclusion
of Bargas's testimony:
 
THE COURT:  
Once you got to the car, did you ever see or did it
appear to you that Mr. Allen was defending himself from the
passenger?
 
[Bargas:] 
Well, that depends on each person's perspective. From
 
my opinion, it didn't look like he was defending himself because
it's like he's hitting down on someone. To me that's like they
have the advantage hitting down. But that's just my opinion.
 
THE COURT:  
Okay. So you didn't see Mr. Allen defending himself,
or you did?
 
[Bargas:]  
He didn't do any defensive moves. Like to me defense
 
is like blocking with your hands if someone is attacking you. So
 I didn't see that.
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
If the witness is not testifying as an expert, the witness'
testimony in the form of opinions or inferences is limited to
those opinions or inferences which are (1) rationally based on the
perception of the witness, and (2) helpful to a clear
understanding of the witness' testimony or the determination of a
fact in issue.
 
However, Allen does not explain how Bargas's testimony
 
violates this rule or how it constituted an abuse of discretion
 
for the Circuit Court to admit it. An examination of Bargas's
 testimony reveals that it complies with HRE 701. Bargas's
 comment that "it didn't look like he was defending himself" is
 rationally based on Bargas's perception of events because he
 based his conclusion on the fact that Allen appeared to be
 "hitting down on someone[,]" which, in his opinion, suggested
 that Allen had the "advantage" over Namauu. In addition, he
 stated that Allen "didn't do any defensive moves" (such as
 blocking with his hands), did not make any effort to leave his
 car or ask for help, and that Namauu was kicking up towards Allen
 with his arms and feet "wildly flailing." All of these
 assertions reveal that Bargas's opinion was rationally based on
 his perception of the incident. 
The second element of HRE 701 is also met because 
Bargas's opinion was helpful to the jury's determination concerning Allen's claim of self-defense. Additionally, rather than constituting a "legal conclusion," the statement "defending himself" in the present context refers to what Bargas personally saw and perceived. See generally State v. Post, 512 N.W.2d 99, 
102 (Minn. 1994) (showing that in Minnesota, which has evidentiary rules quite similar to those in Hawai' i, the 
Minnesota Supreme Court found that "[t]he word 'defending,' as used in the prosecutor's question [regarding a stabbing victim defending against an attack], was used in the sense that a lay person would use it, not to elicit a legal opinion but merely to elicit testimony as to what the witness saw"). Thus, as we have concluded that Bargas's testimony was properly admitted, we further conclude that the State did not commit prosecutorial misconduct by referencing it in closing argument. 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Finally, we consider Allen's contention of
 
prosecutorial misconduct based on the State's alleged suggestion
 
that Allen had and tailored his testimony based on his review of
 the discovery and trial testimony.
 
Under Article I, Section 14 of Hawai' i's Constitution, 
a defendant has the right "to be confronted with the witnesses against the accused . . . ." Haw. Const. art. I, § 14. In State v. Mattson, 122 Hawai' i 312, 226 P.3d 482 (2010), the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court, adopting the dissent in Portuondo v. Agard, 529 U.S. 61 (2000), recognized that generic accusations that the defendant has tailored his or her testimony based only on the defendant's presence at trial interferes with this right, holding that such comments "burden the defendant's constitutional right to be present at trial and could discourage a defendant from exercising his constitutional right to testify on his own behalf." Mattson, 122 Hawai' i at 326, 226 P.3d at 496. In this 
vein, generic tailoring comments occur when the prosecutor uses "the mere fact of a defendant's presence at his trial as the basis for impugning his credibility." Portuondo v. Agard, 529 
U.S. 61, 78 (2000) (Ginsburg, J., dissenting); see also State v.
 Walsh, 125 Hawai' i 271, 279, 260 P.3d 350, 358 (2011). 
In Mattson, however, the supreme court stopped short of
 
holding all tailoring accusations impermissible. Turning to the
 facts of Mattson, the court recounted the prosecutor's allegedly
 impermissible comments:
 
He told you he lied before. He had a chance to sit through
the evidence. He had to make his story gibe with what you've
heard. What is in evidence. What [Kumia] even had to admit to,
because she— . . . . He sat through the evidence. There is a 911
 
tape. [Kumia's] statement. [Hayashi's] statement. Based on all
 
that, he is not telling the truth. All of a sudden he remembered
 
that he grabbed that knife.
 
This case is about credibility. In order to believe the
 
defendant, you have to be able to answer why didn't [Kumia] just
give him the key? Why did [Kumia] lock him out of the house that
night? Why lie the day after the event?
 
Mattson, 122 Hawai' i at 326-27, 226 P.3d at 496-97. The court 
then acknowledged that the prosecutor: (1) drew attention to the 
defendant's presence throughout trial; and (2) made an accusation that he had tailored his testimony to the evidence presented. 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 327, 226 P.3d at 497. However, the court held that the 
defendant's constitutional rights were not violated because "the prosecution referred to specific evidence presented at trial in addition to referring to [the defendant's] presence at trial." Id. This reasoning echoed the court's opinion in Walsh, where it 
explained that "[t]he prosecutor may permissibly cast doubt about the substance of a defendant's testimony by referring to specific evidence suggesting that the defendant engaged in tailoring . . . [h]owever, the prosecutor cannot ask the jury to infer the defendant's lack of credibility from the manner in which he presented his testimony." See Walsh, 125 Hawai' i at 292, 260 
P.3d at 371 (internal citation and quotation marks omitted). 
In the present case, Allen refers to several instances 
in which the prosecutor allegedly suggested that Allen tailored his testimony, though in none of these instances did the prosecutor explicitly assert tailoring. We recognize, nevertheless, that the suggestion may be made implicitly, and that there are no "specific words or phrases" indicative of an accusation of tailoring; rather, the accusation may be implied. See Walsh, 125 Hawai' i at 285, 260 P.3d at 364. 
Allen's first contention regarding tailoring is that it
 
was improper for the prosecutor to state the following, in his
 closing argument: "Who has the most information before they
 testify and are they willing to use that information to their
 benefit," and who has the "[i]nterest in the result of the case." 
However, the context of these comments reveals that the
 prosecutor here was not referring (or drawing attention) "to the
 defendant's presence" at trial, but rather was simply explaining
 to the jury generally how to "determine the credibility of
 someone you don't know" by referring to the jury instructions and
 clarifying them. Furthermore, nothing in that context
 (explaining jury instructions and credibility generally)
 indicates or suggests (explicitly or implicitly) that Allen was
 tailoring his testimony. Therefore, the two Mattson factors
 (drawing "attention" to the defendant's presence and accusing the
 defendant of "tailoring") are not present, and the prosecutor's
 
24
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statements here were not improper, as they were removed from any
 
"tailoring" context or implication. 
Allen also asserts that the prosecutor's
 
characterization of his testimony as "convenient" was an improper
 suggestion of defendant tailoring, referring to the following
 statement by the prosecutor:
 
And maybe [Allen] was upset about -- maybe he was upset
about the drug use, maybe he was upset that she didn't have
any drugs for him. I don't know. We don't know what he was
 
upset about. All we have is his testimony, his convenient
 
testimony, about why he got upset, because he was being –
maybe he thought he was being robbed for $250 or maybe he
thought his eyes were going to be poked out.
 
(Emphasis added). Although the State's comments here clearly 
made reference to Allen, they did not draw attention to his presence at trial or accuse him of tailoring his testimony. Moreover, the State's comments were not improper because they "referred to specific evidence adduced at trial" that was related to Allen's testimony. See Mattson, 122 Hawai' i at 327, 226 P.3d 
at 497; see also Walsh, 125 Hawai' i at 281, 260 P.3d at 360. For 
instance, the State referred to Allen's allegations that Namauu was supposedly using drugs and attacking him. Accordingly, the State's comment that Allen's testimony was "convenient" was not an improper tailoring argument by the State. 
Finally, Allen argues that the prosecutor improperly
 
suggested tailoring when he portrayed Allen as a liar because he
 "has no other reason not to lie." However, as in the other
 instances alleged by Allen, the context here reveals that no
 improper tailoring occurred. Granted, the State drew attention
 to Allen's presence at trial because it stated that "he has lied
 to you today" (referring to Allen's actual testimony) and that
 suggested "[i]f I tell the truth, get convicted. . . . [i]f I
 lie, maybe I get off" (referring to Allen's supposed mindset in
 testifying). While this attacks Allen's motivation and
 credibility, it is not even an implied accusation that Allen
 tailored his testimony to the evidence presented. The prosecutor
 is simply arguing to the jury that Allen had lied in his
 testimony, not based on the fact that he tailored his testimony,
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
but rather based on "common sense, combined with the evidence"
 
against him, which, being substantial, would give him a motive to
 lie. 
Accordingly, we reject Allen's argument that he is
 
entitled to a new trial based on prosecutorial misconduct.
 V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's January 27,
 
2010, Judgment of Conviction and Sentence for Murder in the
 Second Degree is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 31, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Te-Hina Ickes 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
26
 