FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
–––O0O–––
 
ISIDRO OSWALDO CUN-LARA, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
' STATE OF HAWAII, Respondent-Appellee 
NO. 30497
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDING - PRISONER NO. 09-1-0008;
CRIMINAL NO. 06-1-0145)
 
MARCH 30, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., REIFURTH AND GINOZA, JJ.
 
AMENDED OPINION OF THE COURT BY REIFURTH, J.
 
Petitioner-Appellant Isidro Oswaldo Cun-Lara ("Cun-
Lara") appeals from the Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law;
 
Order Denying Petitioner Isidro Oswaldo Cun-Lara's Rule 40, HRPP
 Petition for Post-Conviction Relief filed in the Circuit Court of
 the Fifth Circuit ("Circuit Court") on May 4, 2010.
1 The Circuit
 
Court held that Cun-Lara's November 9, 2009 Petition to Vacate,
 Set Aside, or Correct Judgment ("Petition") failed to raise any
 colorable claims and denied the petition without a hearing. 
On appeal, Cun-Lara argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in concluding that the merits of his Petition were patently
 frivolous and without a trace of support in the record such that
 the Petition raised no colorable claim. Specifically, Cun-Lara
 contends that his no-contest plea was not entered in an
 intelligent, knowing, and voluntary manner because his attorney,
 Alfred B. Castillo, Jr. ("Attorney Castillo"), provided him with
 
1
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
   
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ineffective assistance of counsel and because he was not provided
 
with a Spanish interpreter at the July 23, 2007 hearing at which
 his change of plea from not guilty to no contest was accepted by
 the Circuit Court ("Change-of-Plea Hearing"). 
We affirm.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 A. Pre-Petition
 On June 14, 2006, Cun-Lara was charged by complaint in
 
Criminal No. 06-1-0145 ("criminal case") with: (1) Unlawful
 Methamphetamine Trafficking in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
2
Statutes ("HRS") § 712-1240.6(2);  (2) Promoting a Dangerous Drug
3
in the Third Degree in violation of HRS § 712-1243;  and (3)
Unlawful use of or Possession with Intent to Use Drug
 
2 At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 712-1240.6 provided in
relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of unlawful
methamphetamine trafficking if the person knowingly
manufactures, distributes, dispenses, or possesses with
intent to manufacture, distribute or dispense, one or more
preparations, compounds, mixtures, or substances of
methamphetamine, or any of its salts, isomers, and salts of
isomers.
 
(2) The manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of or
possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or
dispense one or more preparations, compounds, mixtures, or
substances of an aggregate weight of one-eighth ounce of
more of methamphetamine, or any of its salts, isomers, and
salts of isomers is a class A felony with a mandatory
minimum prison terms of five years[.]
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 712-1240.6 (Supp. 2005).
 
Subsections under HRS § 712-1240.6(2) provided for increased
maximum terms of imprisonment or mandatory minimum terms if certain
aggravating factors were established, such as the defendant having a prior
felony drug conviction or death or serious bodily injury to any person other
than the defendant resulting from the offense.
 
HRS § 712-1240.6 was repealed effective June 22, 2006. 2006 Haw.
 
Sess. Laws Act 230, § 50 at 1024.
 
3
 HRS § 712-1243 provided:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of promoting a
dangerous drug in the third degree if the person knowingly
possess any dangerous drug in any amount.
 
(2) Promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree is
a class C felony.
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 712-1243 (Supp. 2011).
 
2
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Paraphernalia in violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a)4. 
The Circuit Court made the following unchallenged
 
findings of fact  5
: 
On June 20, 2006, Cun-Lara appeared for arraignment on
 
the charges. 
The arraignment was conducted in English. Neither
 
Cun-Lara nor his original counsel, Attorney Castillo, requested
 
an interpreter during the hearing. 
On July 20, 2006, Cun-Lara appeared in court for a
 
preliminary hearing, at which time Cun-Lara and Attorney Castillo
 submitted a document, written in English and signed by Cun-Lara,
 waiving Cun-Lara's right to a preliminary hearing. At the
 hearing, the Honorable Judge Trudy Senda conducted a colloquy, in
 English, with Cun-Lara about the waiver document. Cun-Lara
 responded to all of Judge Senda's questions in English and did
 not inform Judge Senda that he did not understand the colloquy or
 the questioning. During the hearing, neither Cun-Lara nor
 Attorney Castillo requested an interpreter.
 
On August 21, 2006, Cun-Lara was arraigned in Circuit
 
Court before the Honorable Judge George Masuoka. The hearing was
 conducted in English. Neither Cun-Lara nor Attorney Castillo
 requested an interpreter. 
Thereafter, the trial was continued several times
 
through stipulations filed with the Circuit Court on August 2,
 2006, October 30, 2006, December 21, 2006, February 9, 2007 and
 
4 HRS § 329-43.5(a) states:
 
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess
with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this chapter. Any person who
violates this section is guilty of a class C felony and upon
conviction may be imprisoned pursuant to section 706-660
and, if appropriate as provided in section 706-641, fined
pursuant to section 706-640.
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 329-43.5(a) (2010).
 
5
 "Findings of fact that are unchallenged on appeal are the
operative facts of a case." Robert's Haw. Sch. Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe 
Transp. Co., 91 Hawai' i 224, 239, 982 P.2d 853, 868 (1999), superseded by 
statute on other grounds as recognized in Haw. Med. Ass'n v. Haw. Med. Serv. Ass'n, 113 Hawai' i 77, 107, 148 P.3d 1179, 1209 (2006). 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
April 18, 2007. All of the stipulations were written in English. 
Cun-Lara reviewed, approved, and signed the stipulations without
 assistance of an interpreter.
 
At the Change-of-Plea Hearing, Cun-Lara pleaded no
 
contest to Count 3, Unlawful Use or Possession with Intent to Use
 Drug Paraphernalia, and made a motion to defer acceptance of his
 no-contest plea. During the hearing, Cun-Lara submitted a form
 on which the basis for his proposed change of plea is explained
 ("No-Contest-Plea Form"). The No-Contest-Plea Form was signed by
 Cun-Lara, was written in English, and filed in open court on
 July 23, 2007. On the form, Cun-Lara stated that:
 
1.	 . . . 
I speak, read, write, and understand the
English language or this document has been read to me
or has been interpreted for me.
 
. . . .
 
5.	 I know I have the right to plead not guilty and have a
speedy and public trial by jury or by the court. I
 know in a trial the government is required to prove my
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. I know I can see,
hear, and question witnesses who testify against me,
and that I may call my own witnesses to testify for me
at trial. . . . 
. . . . 
10.	 I know that, if I am not a citizen of the United
States, a conviction or a plea of guilty or no
contest, whether acceptance of my plea is deferred or
not, may have the consequences of deportation,
exclusion from admission to the United States, or
denial of naturalization under the laws of the United
 States.
 
11.	 I am signing this [No-Contest-Plea Form] after I have
gone over all of it with my lawyer. I know I will not
 be permitted to withdraw my plea. I am signing this
form in the presence of my lawyer. I have no
 complaints about my lawyer and I am satisfied with
what he/she has done for me.
 
At the Change-of-Plea Hearing, Cun-Lara informed the
 
Circuit Court that, although English was his second language, he
 
was able to read and write in English and that he was not having
 any difficulty understanding what was being said in English. The
 Circuit Court informed Cun-Lara that it was not bound by his plea
 agreement with the State, and Cun-Lara acknowledged that he
 understood.
 
The Circuit Court further explained a number of rights
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
associated with a jury trial that Cun-Lara would waive if he
 
proceeded with the no-contest plea, including the right to a jury
 of twelve community members, that Cun-Lara could not be convicted
 unless the jury unanimously agreed that he was guilty beyond a
 reasonable doubt, and that Cun-Lara had a right to cross-examine
 the State's witnesses, call his own witnesses, and to testify or
 not testify at trial. Cun Lara acknowledged in English that he
 understood the court's explanations. 
The Circuit Court further informed Cun-Lara of the
 
possible consequences that a no-contest plea could have on Cun­Lara's immigration status if he was not a U.S. citizen. Cun-Lara
 again acknowledged in English that he understood. Cun-Lara
 further acknowledged that he was satisfied with Attorney
 Castillo's advice and that he did not have any complaints about
 the legal advice or legal representation provided by Attorney
 Castillo. 
At the beginning of the Change-of-Plea Hearing,
 
Attorney Castillo advised the Circuit Court that Cun-Lara
 understood English and did not require an interpreter. During
 the Circuit Court's plea colloquy, Cun-Lara answered the Circuit
 Court's questions in the affirmative or the negative depending on
 the question, and frequently responded with cogent sentences
 properly addressing the corresponding questions. The transcript
 of the Change-of-Plea Hearing ("COP Transcript") reveals the
 following pertinent dialogue: 
THE COURT: Now, your attorney talked ––
informed the Court that English is your second
language ––
 
[Cun-Lara]: Yes.
 
THE COURT: Is that correct?
 
But in spite of English being your second
language, do you read, write, and understand the
English language?
 
[Cun-Lara]: Yeah. I can read, write
(Indiscernible).
 
THE COURT: Are you having trouble understanding
me today?
 
[Cun-Lara]: No.
 
. . . .
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: I'm not going to ask you whether you
are a U.S. citizen, but let me just ask you this. Do
 
you understand that if you are not a U.S. citizen,
your no contest plea could have consequences of
deportation, exclusion from admission to the United
States, or denial of naturalization? Do you
understand that?
 
[Cun-Lara]: Yeah, I understand that.
 
[Attorney Castillo]: Excuse me, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Yes. 
[Attorney Castillo]: Just for –– just for the
record, I met with Mr. Cun-Lara at length yesterday,
and regarding that topic we just went over, we did
discuss it fully and I gave him full advice.
 
THE COURT: And I believe that's an important
topic that we need to raise this morning.
 
[Attorney Castillo]: Yeah.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Mr. Cun-Lara, your attorney
said he talked to you about the immigration issue
yesterday.
 
[Cun-Lara]: Yeah, he did.
 
. . . .
 THE COURT: Okay. And you understand that there
is risk to you?
 
[Cun-Lara]: Yeah.
 
One part of the COP Transcript reveals an irregularity:
 
THE COURT: And do you understand that if you
demand a trial, you would have the right to testify or
not to testify? If you choose to testify, no one can
prevent you from testifying, and if you choose not to
testify, no one can force you to testify.
 
[Attorney Castillo]: 
Say yes.
 
[Cun-Lara]: Okay. Yes, I understand.
 
The Circuit Court found that Cun-Lara knowingly and voluntarily
 
entered his plea of no contest to the charge that he violated HRS
 § 329-43.5(a) and accepted the plea. 
On November 8, 2007, the Circuit Court conducted a
 
hearing, in English, on Cun-Lara's sentencing and his pending
 motion to defer acceptance of the no-contest plea. At the
 hearing, Cun-Lara's motion was denied, and he was sentenced to
 five years probation. During the hearing, Cun-Lara responded in
 
6
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
English to questioning by the Circuit Court and made a statement
 
to the court in English. Neither Cun-Lara nor Attorney Castillo
 requested an interpreter. That same day, the Circuit Court filed
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence ("Judgment")
 
and the Order Denying Motion for Deferred Acceptance of Nolo
 Contendre Plea. 
On April 23, 2008, pursuant to an agreement between the
 
parties, the State dismissed the remaining charges against Cun-
Lara: Count 1, Unlawful Methamphetamine Trafficking; and Count
 2, Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree. 
According to Cun-Lara's new counsel, Walter J. Rodby 
("Attorney Rodby"), on August 5, 2009, the United States Department of Homeland Security ("DHS") issued a warrant for Cun­Lara's arrest pursuant to section 236 of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
6 Thereafter, on October 26, 2009, Cun-Lara 
filed a motion to withdraw his July 23, 2007 no-contest plea ("Motion to Withdraw Plea") under Rules 32(d) and 47, Hawai' i 
Rules of Penal Procedure ("HRPP"). 
Meanwhile, on November 9, 2009, Cun-Lara filed the
 
Petition initiating the instant case in Special Proceeding-
Prisoner No. 09-1-0008 ("S.P.P. case"). At that point, Cun-Lara
 was attempting to withdraw his no-contest plea in the criminal
 case, while at the same time trying to vacate the Judgment in the
 S.P.P. case. On January 5, 2010, however, Cun-Lara filed a
 Declaration In Lieu of an Affidavit Regarding the Withdrawal of
 Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment in the S.P.P.
 case, thereby withdrawing the Petition. 
On February 18, 2010, the Circuit Court held a hearing
 
on Cun-Lara's Motion to Withdraw Plea. Attorney Rodby informed
 the court that he would be withdrawing the Motion to Withdraw
 Plea, as it was untimely filed, and requested that the court
 reinstate Cun-Lara's Petition in the S.P.P. case. On
 
6
 Section 236 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, codified in 8
U.S.C. § 1226, gives the Attorney General of the United States ("Attorney
General") the power to take into custody any alien who is deportable as a
result of a conviction of an offense "relating to a controlled substance," as
provided for in 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(B) (2005). 8 U.S.C. § 1226(c)(1)(B)
(2005).
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
February 23, 2010, Cun-Lara filed a Notice of Withdrawal of the
 
Motion to Withdraw Plea. On March 3, 2010, the Circuit Court
 entered the Order Granting Oral Motion to Reinstate Petition to
 Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment in the S.P.P. case,
 thereby reinstating the Petition.
 
B. Cun-Lara's Petition
 In the Petition, Cun-Lara claimed that his no-contest
 
plea was invalid because it was not entered in an intelligent,
 knowing, and voluntary manner. Specifically, Cun-Lara claimed
 that his no-contest plea was invalid because he was not provided
 with a Spanish interpreter at the Change-of-Plea Hearing. In
 addition, Cun-Lara contended that his plea was the product of
 ineffective assistance of counsel because, among other things,
 Attorney Castillo failed to explain the immigration consequences
 of Cun-Lara's no-contest plea and failed to request a Spanish
 interpreter. 
In Exhibit "A" In Support of Petition for Post-
Conviction Relief ("Exhibit 'A'"), Attorney Rodby explains that
 Cun-Lara was born and raised in Guatemala and was not a citizen
 of the United States. Counsel further contends that Cun-Lara
 "works with his hands for a living, [and] has an extremely
 limited understanding of the English language, much less the
 written English language." Despite explaining that Cun-Lara
 could understand rudimentary words and phrases, Attorney Rodby
 also states that Cun-Lara was "absolutely incapable of
 understanding the complexity of the language and documents
 utilized every day by our courts when accepting Defendant's pleas
 of guilty or no contest." According to counsel, Cun-Lara's
 inability to speak and understand the English language rendered
 the Change-of-Plea Hearing unfair.
 
Attorney Rodby further states in Exhibit "A" that he
 
"does not believe that any type of colloquy was conducted
 regarding [Cun-Lara's] ability to speak English, or the waiver of
 [Cun-Lara's] right to a Spanish interpreter" during the Change­of-Plea Hearing. Counsel expresses the further belief that at
 various points during the court's colloquy with Cun-Lara, Cun­
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lara did not understand the nature of the proceedings and "rather
 
than attempt to advise [Cun-Lara] of the court's inquiry,
 [Attorney] Castillo simply instructed [Cun-Lara] to answer the
 court's questions with a 'yes' or a 'no' answer." 
Attorney Rodby contends that Cun-Lara expressed to
 
Attorney Castillo that because he did not have an interpreter,
 did not understand the nature of the Change-of-Plea Hearing, and
 did not understand the full effect that a plea of no contest
 would have on his immigration status, he had numerous unanswered
 questions regarding his court case. According to Attorney Rodby,
 Attorney Castillo instructed Cun-Lara that Cun-Lara "did not need
 a Spanish interpreter and that questions to the judge would make
 the judge angry." 
Attorney Rodby contends that Attorney Castillo did not
 
properly advise Cun-Lara of the immigration consequences of his
 plea. Specifically, Attorney Rodby states in Exhibit "A" that
 "[Cun-Lara] reports that [Attorney Castillo] instructed him that
 a paraphernalia charge would not trigger immigration
 consequences." "If [Cun-Lara] was so advised," Exhibit "A"
 concludes, "his plea of no contest was invalid." 
C. Attorney Castillo's Declaration
 In his declaration, filed on December 30, 2009, 
Attorney Castillo responds to the allegations in the Motion to Withdraw Plea ("Attorney Castillo's Declaration"). Attorney Castillo's Declaration was later made part of the record regarding Cun-Lara's Petition in the S.P.P. case. According to Attorney Castillo, Cun-Lara's wife is the daughter of a long-time personal and family friend, and an American citizen who speaks to her husband in English. Attorney Castillo states that it was important for him to establish Cun-Lara's understanding of English and, upon questioning, Attorney Castillo learned that Cun-Lara had lived on Kaua' i for more than ten years, was 
employed there, and that his employer instructed him in English. 
Attorney Castillo states that he had discussions with
 
both Cun-Lara and his wife, together and separately, at which
 time he observed that Cun-Lara's understanding of English was
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sufficient without the aid of an interpreter. Nevertheless, he
 
contends that he made sure that Cun-Lara understood their
 discussion. Attorney Castillo says that he specifically advised
 Cun-Lara to inform him immediately if he had any difficulty
 understanding what was being said and that Attorney Castillo
 would then obtain an interpreter.
 
Attorney Castillo relates that on July 26, 2006, the
 
day that Cun-Lara was to waive his preliminary hearing, he met
 with Cun-Lara before and after the hearing to make sure that Cun-
Lara understood the proceedings. Furthermore, Attorney Castillo
 states that he specifically told Cun-Lara that he should request
 assistance with translation if he had any difficulty
 understanding the proceedings. During the waiver of preliminary
 hearing, Attorney Castillo says, Cun-Lara did not express any
 difficulty in understanding the colloquy with the judge.
 
Attorney Castillo explained that he had several
 
occasions between the waiver of preliminary hearing and the
 Change-of-Plea Hearing to talk with Cun-Lara in English, and that
 at no time did Cun-Lara exhibit any difficulty in speaking and
 understanding English. Attorney Castillo and Cun-Lara had a
 lengthy meeting two days before the Change-of-Plea Hearing during
 which they reviewed the facts of the case, the basis for Cun­Lara's change of plea, and each item on the No-Contest-Plea Form. 
Attorney Castillo states that he clearly discussed item
 
7
10 on the No-Contest-Plea Form with Cun-Lara,  and takes special
care to discuss immigration issues with clients because he knew
 that non-citizens resort to claiming no understanding of English
 and either blame the court or their defense attorneys when
 subsequently faced with a harsh sentence or deportation. 
Attorney Castillo specifically contests Cun-Lara's
 
7
 Item 10 in the No-Contest-Plea Form states that:
 
I know that, if I am not a citizen of the United States, a
conviction or a plea of guilty or no contest, whether
acceptance of my plea is deferred or not, may have the
consequences of deportation, exclusion from admission to the
United States, or denial of naturalization under the laws of
the United States.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
allegations in paragraphs 16, 17, and 21 of the Motion to
 
Withdraw Plea. Attorney Castillo states that he told Cun-Lara
 that if at any time during the proceedings he needed a translator
 or if he did not understand what was being said, Cun-Lara should
 let him know and he would "let the court know and ask for further
 explanation from the Court, or ask for time to discuss the matter
 further with Mr. Cun-Lara." Attorney Castillo states
 specifically, "I did not tell [Cun-Lara] that 'the judge would be
 angry if [Cun-Lara] asked questions.'" 
Attorney Castillo explicitly denies instructing or
 
assuring Cun-Lara that a paraphernalia conviction would not
 trigger immigration consequences. Rather, "I told him that he
 would be lucky if he was not deported for this offense." 
In conclusion, Attorney Castillo notes that Cun-Lara
 
did not express any difficulty understanding the Change-of-Plea
 Hearing. Attorney Castillo met with Cun-Lara after the hearing
 "to make sure that he understood the foregoing proceedings and to
 make sure that he understood the judge's instructions regarding
 meeting with the probation department." According to Attorney
 Castillo, Cun-Lara expressed his understanding and successfully
 carried out the judge's instructions regarding meeting with the
 probation department.
 
D. Cun-Lara's Declaration
 Approximately two and one-half months after submitting
 
his Petition, and approximately one month after the filing of
 Attorney Castillo's Declaration, on January 28, 2010 Cun-Lara
 filed his Declaration In Lieu Of Affidavit Regarding Motion To
 Withdraw No Contest Plea ("Cun-Lara's Declaration"). Cun-Lara's
 Declaration was later made part of the record regarding his
 Petition in the S.P.P. case. In his declaration, Cun-Lara
 explains that he is "not able to speak and understand English
 fluently[,]" that English is a second language, and that he can
 only speak and understand English at an elementary level. The
 declaration was co-signed by a person identified as Cun-Lara's
 Spanish interpreter.
 
Cun-Lara further states that Attorney Castillo advised
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
him "that it was possible that I would not be deported even
 
though I plead [sic] no contest to the above referenced matter,
 and that it depended upon 'luck.'" Cun-Lara claims that he did
 not understand what a "Class C felony" was, the State's burden of
 proof, his right to testify or not testify, or the fact that his
 silence at trial could not be held against him. According to
 Cun-Lara, if he "understood the State's burden of proof, along
 with the fact that [he] did not have to testify, and that not
 testifying could not be held against [him, he] would not have
 entered a no contest plea" and "would have been more cautious
 about relying upon 'luck' to avoid deportation and/or removal
 from the United State's [sic] of America." 
On March 31, 2010, in the S.P.P. case, Attorney Rodby
 
and the State stipulated to the Circuit Court considering the COP
 Transcript, Attorney Castillo's Declaration and Cun-Lara's
 Declaration "as evidence . . . when rendering a decision as to
 whether Petitioner Cun-Lara should be granted a hearing on his
 request for post-conviction relief[.]" The Petition, which the
 Circuit Court deemed "patently frivolous and without a trace of
 support in the record," was denied without a hearing on May 4,
 2010. Cun-Lara's appeal was timely filed.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Denial of HRPP Rule 40 Petition Without Evidentiary Hearing
 
If a petition alleges facts that if proven would
entitle the petitioner to relief, the court shall grant a
hearing which may extend only to the issues raised in the
petition or answer. However, the court may deny a hearing
if the petitioner's claim is patently frivolous and is
without trace of support either in the record or from other
evidence submitted by the petitioner. The court may also
deny a hearing on a specific question of fact when a full
and fair evidentiary hearing upon that question was held
during the course of the proceedings which led to the
judgment or custody which is the subject of the petition or
at any later proceeding.
 
Haw. R. Pen. P. 40(f) (2012).
 
As HRPP Rule 40(f) applies to the trial court,
 
[a]s a general rule, a hearing should be held on a Rule 40
petition for post-conviction relief where the petition
states a colorable claim. To establish a colorable claim,
the allegations of the petition must show that if taken as
true the facts alleged would change the verdict[;] however,
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
a petitioner's conclusions need not be regarded as true.
Where examination of the record of the trial court
 proceedings indicates that the petitioner's allegations show
no colorable claim, it is not error to deny the petition
without a hearing.
 
Barnett v. State, 91 Hawai' i 20, 26, 979 P.2d 1046, 1052 (1999) 
(quoting Dan v. State, 76 Hawai' i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 
(1994)). If the trial court denies a HRPP Rule 40 petition 
without an evidentiary hearing and the petitioner appeals, "the appellate court steps into the trial court's position, reviews the same trial record, and redecides the issue" de novo. Id. 
(quoting Dan, 76 Hawai' i at 427, 879 P.2d at 532). 
Knowing, Intelligent, and Voluntary No-Contest Plea
 
Whether a defendant knowingly, intelligently, and 
voluntarily entered his or her no-contest plea is reviewed de novo based upon an examination of the entire record. State v. 
Topasna, 94 Hawai' i 444, 452, 16 P.3d 849, 857 (App. 2000). 
Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
 
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel, [the appellate court] looks at whether defense
counsel's assistance was within the range of competence
demanded of attorneys in criminal cases. The defendant has
 the burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel
and must meet the following two-part test: 1) that there
were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack
of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. To satisfy
this second prong, the defendant needs to show a possible
impairment, rather than a probable impairment, of a
potentially meritorious defense. A defendant need not prove
actual prejudice. 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 
(2003) (internal quotation marks, citations, and footnote 
omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Cun-Lara contends that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying his Rule 40 Petition without a hearing. Specifically, he
 
contends that his change of plea was not intelligent, knowing,
 and voluntary. In addition, he argues that he was denied
 effective assistance of counsel.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. Intelligent, Knowing, and Voluntary Change of Plea
 
1. Attorney Castillo's Deportation-Related Advice
 
Cun-Lara argues that because a conviction for
 
possessing drug paraphernalia would subject him to "automatic
 
deportation," and because Attorney Castillo instead advised him
 that he "might get lucky and not be deported[,]" Attorney
 Castillo's representation was constitutionally ineffective.
8 We
 
begin by examining counsel's obligation to provide effective
 assistance in the context of a non-citizen pleading guilty to a
 drug-related charge.
 
a . Padilla v. Kentucky
 
Cun-Lara relies on Padilla v. Kentucky, __ U.S. __, 130
 
S. Ct. 1473 (2010), to support his claim. In Padilla, the
 defendant, a citizen of Honduras, pleaded guilty to transporting
 a large amount of marijuana. Id. at __, 130 S. Ct. at 1477. 
Padilla's crime, "like virtually every drug offense except for
 only the most insignificant marijuana offenses, [was] a
 
8 Cun-Lara's characterization of Attorney Castillo's advice evolved
over time. At the Change-of-Plea Hearing, Cun-Lara delivered the No-Contest-
Plea Form in which he said that he knew, "if I am not a citizen of the United
States, a conviction or a plea of guilty or no contest, whether acceptance of
my plea is deferred or not, may have the consequences of deportation." In the
 colloquy between Cun-Lara and the court that same day, the court noted that
Cun-Lara's attorney had said that he talked to Cun-Lara about the immigration
issue, and Cun-Lara affirmed. The Circuit Court then asked, "And you
understand that there is risk to you?" Cun-Lara responded, "Yeah." In
 Exhibit "A", however, Attorney Rodby stated that "Petitioner reports that Mr.
Castillo instructed him that a paraphernalia charge would not trigger
immigration consequences." Finally, in his own declaration, Cun-Lara states
that "Mr. Castillo did advise me that it was possible that I would not be
deported even though I plead [sic] no contest to the above referenced matter,
and that it depended upon luck." In his opening brief, Cun-Lara claims that
Attorney Castillo told him that he "might get lucky and not be deported." 
In light of the relative similarity between the first, second,
fourth, and fifth characterizations offered above, and their similarity with
Attorney Castillo's own statement ("I told him that he would be lucky if he
was not deported for this offense"), we reject the characterization offered in
Exhibit "A" and accept, for purposes of evaluating whether Cun-Lara has stated
a colorable claim, that Attorney Castillo's advice was that "[Cun-Lara] would
be lucky if he was not deported for this offense." Even if we accepted the
characterization of Attorney Castillo's advice offered in Cun-Lara's
subsequent declaration, we view the statements as functionally equivalent, and
it would, therefore, not change our analysis or conclusion.
 
14
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
deportable offense under 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(B)(i)."9 Id. at
 
__, n.1, 130 S. Ct. at 1477 n.1. Despite the fact that the
 
guilty plea made his deportation "virtually mandatory," defense
 counsel told Padilla that he "did not have to worry about
 immigration status since he had been in the country so long." 
Id. at __, 130 S. Ct. at 1478 (quoting Commonwealth v. Padilla,
 253 S.W.3d 482, 483 (Ky. 2008)) (internal quotation marks
 omitted).
 
Padilla claimed ineffective assistance of counsel,
 
asserting that he would not have pleaded guilty but for the
 incorrect advice from his attorney. Id. The Supreme Court of
 
Kentucky denied Padilla's claim for post-conviction relief,
 holding that the Sixth Amendment "does not protect a criminal
 defendant from erroneous advice about deportation . . . ." Id.
 
The U.S. Supreme Court reversed, holding that advice
 
regarding deportation is a proper subject of an ineffective
 assistance of counsel claim. Id. at __, 130 S. Ct. at 1482. The
 
Court noted that
 
[u]nder contemporary law, if a noncitizen has committed a
removable offense after the 1996 effective date of these
 amendments, his removal is practically inevitable but for
the possible exercise of limited remnants of equitable
discretion vested in the Attorney General to cancel removal
for noncitizens convicted of particular classes of offenses.
See 8 U.S.C. § 1229b. Subject to limited exceptions, this
discretionary relief is not available for an offense related
to trafficking in a controlled substance. See
 
§ 1101(a)(43)(B); § 1228.
 
Id. at __, 130 S. Ct. at 1480 (footnote omitted). And, the Court
 
reasoned, although deportation is not a criminal sanction, it is
 a harsh penalty that almost inevitably flows from a conviction of
 a removable offense. See id. at __, 130 S. Ct. at 1481–82.
 
9
 Pursuant to 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(B)(i):
 
Any alien who at any time after admission has been convicted
of a violation of (or a conspiracy or attempt to violate)
any law or regulation of a State, the United States, or a
foreign country relating to a controlled substance (as
defined in section 802 of Title 21), other than a single
offense involving possession for one's own use of 30 grams
or less of marijuana, is deportable.
 
8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(B)(i) (2005).
 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Applying the federal test for ineffective assistance of
 
counsel under Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S. Ct.
 
2052 (1984), the Court held that 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(B)(i)
 clearly subjected Padilla to "presumptively mandatory"
 deportation and that defense counsel's advice was, therefore,
 incorrect. Padilla, ___ U.S. at __, 130 S. Ct. at 1483. The
 
Court stated:
 
In the instant case, the terms of the relevant
immigration statute are succinct, clear, and explicit in
defining the removal consequence for Padilla's conviction.
See 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(B)(i) ("Any alien who at any time
after admission has been convicted of a violation of (or a
conspiracy or attempt to violate) any law or regulation of a
State, the United States or a foreign country relating to a
controlled substance . . . , other than a single offense
involving possession for one's own use of 30 grams or less
of marijuana, is deportable"). Padilla's counsel could have
 easily determined that his plea would make him eligible for
deportation simply from reading the text of the statute,
which addresses not some broad classification of crimes but
 specifically commands removal for all controlled substances
convictions except for the most trivial of marijuana
possession offenses. Instead, Padilla's counsel provided
him false assurance that his conviction would not result in
 his removal from this country. This is not a hard case in
 which to find deficiency: The consequences of Padilla's plea
could easily be determined from reading the removal statute,
his deportation was presumptively mandatory, and his
counsel's advice was incorrect.
 
Id. at __, 130 S. Ct. at 1483. In sum, Padilla's counsel's error
 
was in not recognizing that Padilla's plea would "make him
 eligible for deportation," and advising him to the contrary "that
 his conviction would not result in his removal" from the country. 
The Court recognized that "[i]mmigration law can be
 
complex, and it is a legal specialty of its own." Id. The Court
 
noted: 
There will, therefore, undoubtedly be numerous situations in
which the deportation consequences of a particular plea are
unclear or uncertain. . . . When the law is not succinct and
 straightforward . . . , a criminal defense attorney need do
 
no more than advise a noncitizen client that pending
 criminal charges may carry a risk of adverse immigration
 consequences. But when the deportation consequence is truly
 clear, as it was in this case, the duty to give correct
 advice is equally clear.
 
Id. (emphasis added) (footnote omitted). The Supreme Court
 
remanded for consideration of the prejudice prong under
 Strickland. Padilla, ___ U.S. at ___, 130 S.Ct. at 1487.
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
This case differs from Padilla in two important
 
respects: the deportation consequence under the charge to which
 
Cun-Lara pleaded guilty was not "truly clear," and Attorney
 Castillo advised Cun-Lara correctly that it was possible that he
 would be deported if he pleaded guilty.
 
b.	 The deportation consequences of Cun-Lara's
plea were not "truly clear."
 
Cun-Lara pleaded no contest to one count of unlawful
 
use of, or possession with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to
 
pack, repack, store, contain, or conceal a controlled substance
 in violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a). In Padilla, on the other
 hand, the defendant pleaded guilty to the transportation of a
 large amount of marijuana in his tractor-trailer. Id. at ___,
 
130 S.Ct. at 1477.
 
Two immigration laws are implicated by Cun-Lara's plea
 
and his subsequent arrest by DHS. The first is the law addressed
 in Padilla which characterizes Cun-Lara's offense as
 "deportable." 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(B)(i). The second is the
 cancellation of removal statute, allowing the Attorney General to
 cancel a qualified alien's deportation.
10 8 U.S.C. § 1229b(a).
 
"Padilla's crime, like virtually every drug offense
 
except for only the most insignificant . . . offenses, is a
 deportable offense under 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(B)(i)." Padilla,
 
__ U.S. at __, n.1, 130 S. Ct. at 1477, n.1. Cun-Lara's
 conviction also fell under 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(B)(i) because a
 
10	 8 U.S.C. § 1229b(a) provides that:
 
(a) Cancellation of removal for certain permanent residents
 The Attorney General may cancel removal in the case of an
alien who is admissible or deportable from the United States
if the alien –­
(1) has been an alien lawfully admitted for permanent
residence for not less than 5 years,
 
(2) has resided in the United States continuously for
7 years after having been admitted in any status, and
 
(3) has not been convicted of any aggravated felony.
 
8 U.S.C. § 1229b(a) (2008).
 
17
  
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a) "relat[es] to a controlled
 
substance," and is therefore a "deportable" offense.11 8 U.S.C.
 
§ 1227(a)(2)(B)(i). As such, Cun-Lara is subject to deportation. 
In light of 8 U.S.C. § 1229b(a), however, the consequences of his
 conviction, unlike those in Padilla, are not "truly clear." 
Padilla was convicted of drug distribution, a drug-
trafficking crime and an "aggravated felony" under 8 U.S.C. §
 1101(a)(43)(B).
12 Padilla, ___ U.S. at ___, 130 S. Ct. at 1478,
 
1480. Because of the nature of his conviction, Padilla was not
 eligible for cancellation of removal under 8 U.S.C. 1229b,
 rendering his deportation "practically inevitable." Id. at ___,
 
130 S.Ct. at 1480; Lopez v. Gonzales, 549 U.S. 47, 50 (2006) (an
 aggravated felony has greater collateral effects than other
 felonies because, "for example, the Attorney General's discretion
 to cancel the removal of a person otherwise deportable does not
 reach a convict of an aggravated felony"); see also McNeill v.
 United States, No. A-11-CA-495 SS, 2012 WL 369471, at *4 n.2
 (W.D. Tex. Feb. 2, 2012) (had defendant been able to meet the 5­year residence requirement, the fact would have made him eligible
 to seek cancellation of his removal, "and thus would have made a
 difference to his immigration status"); Flores v. State, 57 So.
 3d 218, 220 n.4 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2010) (distinguishing
 Padilla on grounds that conviction for possession of drug
 paraphernalia is not an aggravated felony); People v. Cristache,
 907 N.Y.S.2d 833, 843 (N.Y. Crim. Ct. 2010) (distinguishing
 Padilla on the grounds that the defendant's convictions did not
 constitute an aggravated felony).
 
Exhibit "A" describes HRS § 329-43.5(a) as an
 
"aggravated drug felony," but Cun-Lara provides no basis for the
 
11 HRS § 329-43.5(a) "makes abundantly clear that an object is not
drug paraphernalia unless it is in some way linked to drugs." See Luu-Le v.
 
Immigration & Naturalization Serv., 224 F.3d 911, 915 (9th Cir. 2000)
(analyzing Arizona drug-paraphernalia statute); see also HAW. REV. STAT. § 329-1
(2010) (definition of "drug paraphernalia"); Bermudez v. Holder, 586 F.3d
1167, 1168–69 (9th Cir. 2009) (noting that HRS § 329-43.5(a) and the Arizona
statute in Luu-Le are "materially identical").
 
12 The Immigration and Nationality Act defines "aggravated felony" by
a list that includes "illicit trafficking in a controlled substance . . .
including a drug trafficking crime (as defined in § 924(c) of Title 18)."
U.S.C. § 1101(a)(43)(B). 
18
 8   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
characterization and does not address it in his brief. Although
 
the term "aggravated felony" is defined in 8 U.S.C. §
 1101(a)(43)(B) as including "illicit trafficking in a controlled
 substance (as defined in section 802 of Title 21), including a
 drug trafficking crime (as defined in section 924(c) of Title
 18)[,]" a conviction under HRS § 329-43.5(a) is not for "illicit
 trafficking in a controlled substance." See 21 U.S.C. § 863
 
(2000) (federal drug-paraphernalia offense prohibits the sale,
 offer to sell, import, or export of, or the use of the mails to
 transport, drug paraphernalia); Lopez, 549 U.S. at 53–54, 127 S.
 Ct. at 630 (2006) ("ordinarily 'trafficking' means some sort of
 commercial dealing"). Compare H
AW. REV. STAT. § 329-1 (2010)
 
(definition of "drug paraphernalia"), with 21 U.S.C. § 812
 (schedules of controlled substances).
 
Furthermore, the simple use of, or possession with
 
intent to use, drug paraphernalia is not a federal offense and,
 therefore, does not appear to be a drug trafficking crime as
 defined in 18 U.S.C. § 924(c). See 21 U.S.C. § 863 (federal
 
drug-paraphernalia offense prohibits the sale, offer to sell,
 import, or export of, or the use of the mails to transport, drug
 paraphernalia); see also Ramirez-Altramirano v. Holder, 563 F.3d
 800, 808 (9th Cir. 2009), overruled on other grounds by Nunez-
Reyes v. Holder, 646 F.3d 684 (9th Cir. 2011) (no federal statute
 criminalizing possession of drug paraphernalia).
 
Cun-Lara's conviction under HRS § 329-43.5(a) does not 
appear to constitute an aggravated drug felony under 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(43)(B). Moreover, he had lived for more than ten years on Kaua'i, and does not claim to have not been lawfully admitted 
for permanent residence for at least five years. Consequently, Cun-Lara appears to remain eligible for cancellation of removal. The deportation consequences of his plea, therefore, were not "truly clear." 
c. Attorney Castillo's advice
 
The question then is whether Attorney Castillo
 
sufficiently advised Cun-Lara of the potential deportation
 consequences associated with his plea. Our first task is to
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determine what Attorney Castillo said to Cun-Lara.
 
In reviewing a claim that a Rule 40 Petition was denied
 
without a hearing, we ordinarily accept as true the allegations
 
contained in the petition and proceed from there to examine the
 record to determine whether the allegations show a colorable
 claim. State v. Allen, 7 Haw. App. 89, 92–93, 744 P.2d 789,
 
792–93 (1987). Here, however, we are confronted with a case
 where the facts as alleged in the Petition are disputed elsewhere
 in the record by the petitioner himself. See, supra, n.8. Based
 
on our evaluation of the record, including Cun-Lara's own
 declaration, we accept as true for our purposes here Attorney
 Castillo's statement that he "told [Cun-Lara] that he would be
 lucky if he was not deported for this offense." 
"When the law is not succinct and straightforward
 
. . ., a criminal defense attorney need do no more than advise a
 noncitizen client that pending criminal charges may carry a risk
 of adverse immigration consequences." Padilla, ___ U.S. at ___,
 
130 S. Ct. at 1483. Since we conclude above that the immigration
 consequences of Cun-Lara's guilty plea to a paraphernalia charge
 under HRS § 329-43.5(a) are not truly clear, it follows that
 Attorney Castillo's advice was sufficient. Advising Cun-Lara
 that he would be fortunate if he was not deported if he pleaded
 no contest constitutes a sufficient warning that pleading no
 contest "carr[ies] a risk of adverse immigration consequences."
 
Unlike the circumstances in Padilla, where the defense
 
counsel erroneously told Padilla that he "did not have to worry
 about immigration status[,]" id. at __, 130 S. Ct. at 1478
 (internal quotation marks omitted), Attorney Castillo warned Cun-
Lara that it was possible that he would be deported if he pleaded
 no contest. Although Cun-Lara attempts to characterize Attorney
 Castillo's reference to "luck" as encouragement for him to roll
 the dice, Attorney Castillo sufficiently warned Cun-Lara of the
 likely immigration consequence of his no-contest plea — removal
 from the United States. Therefore, Cun-Lara's claim that his no-
contest plea was not knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily
 given due to a lack of understanding of the deportation risks
 associated with pleading no contest to the drug-paraphernalia
 
20
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
charge is not colorable, and the Circuit Court did not err in
 
denying this claim without a hearing.
 
2. Interpreter
 
Cun-Lara argues that, because he was not provided a
 
translator and because of the difficulty he had understanding
 English, he did not understand when the Circuit Court asked
 whether he understood his right to testify or not testify in his
 own defense, and only answered that he understood because
 Attorney Castillo told him: "Say yes." Cun-Lara argues that, as
 a result, his plea was not knowing, intelligent, and voluntary;
 he also claims that Attorney Castillo was ineffective for failing
 to request a translator. 
"A waiver is the knowing, intelligent, and voluntary 
relinquishment of a known right." State v. Friedman, 93 Hawai' i 
63, 68, 996 P.2d 268, 273 (2000). A defendant waives several constitutional rights when he pleads nolo contendre, including the privilege against compulsory self-incrimination. See Boykin 
v. Alabama, 395 U.S. 238, 243 (1969). "[T]o determine whether a waiver was voluntarily and intelligently undertaken, this court will look to the totality of facts and circumstances of each particular case." Friedman, 93 Hawai' i at 68-69, 996 P.2d at 
273-74 (quoting State v. Vares, 71 Haw. 617, 621, 801 P.2d 555, 557-58 (1990)) (internal quotation marks omitted). "[A]lthough no specific 'litany' or 'ritual' is required, the record on review must affirmatively show that the defendant's [no-contest] plea was voluntarily and understandingly given before the plea can be accepted." See State v. Vaitogi, 59 Haw. 592, 598, 585 
P.2d 1259, 1263 (1978). 
"It is general law that where a defendant cannot
 
understand and speak English, the judge is required to appoint an
 interpreter to aid a defendant." State v. Faafiti, 54 Haw. 637,
 
638, 513 P.2d 697, 699 (1973). However, "where a defendant has
 some knowledge of English and he is reasonably able to converse
 in English, it is within the discretionary power of the trial
 court whether to appoint or not to appoint an interpreter." Id.
 
at 639, 513 P.2d at 699. 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The totality of the record plainly demonstrates that
 
Cun-Lara sufficiently understood English and specifically, with a
 
single unexplained exception which could have had to do with any
 number of possible reasons other than an inability to comprehend
 the language, understood the Circuit Court's questions. At the
 Change-of-Plea hearing, Cun-Lara told the Circuit Court that he
 was not having difficulty understanding its questions and that he
 could read and write in English. Cun-Lara answered the Court's
 questions during the plea colloquy with yes or no answers,
 depending on the question, and frequently responded with
 coherent, full sentences. Cun-Lara was capable of asking, and
 did ask, the Circuit Court a question regarding a future court
 appearance. 
Cun-Lara informed the Circuit Court that he fully
 
understood the proceeding. The COP Transcript establishes that
 Cun-Lara understood the questions that the Circuit Court asked
 him. See Faafiti, 54 Haw. at 639, 513 P.2d at 699–700 (looking
 
at the transcript of defendant's testimony to determine whether
 the defendant "had sufficient command of the English language");
 accord People v. Osuna, 436 N.W.2d 405, 407 (Mich. Ct. App. 1988)
 (rejecting claim that the case should be remanded for hearing on
 whether defendant was sufficiently fluent in English to knowingly
 waive his rights upon pleading guilty because "the transcript of
 the plea proceedings indicates that defendant had no problem
 communicating in English with the lower court").
 
Furthermore, a waiver of rights in a plea agreement
 
signed by the defendant may cure deficiencies in the plea
 colloquy. Cf. United States v. Gillen, 449 F.3d 898, 904 (8th
 
Cir. 2006) (signature on plea agreement and indication at the
 plea hearing that he read and understood the plea agreement
 renders Rule 11 variance, at most, only harmless error); United
 States v. Hernandez, No. 05-3227, 2006 WL 1476136, at *1 (7th
 Cir. May 26, 2006) ("the information omitted by the district
 court in its Rule 11 colloquy . . . would be harmless error
 because each of those warnings was outlined in [the defendant's]
 written plea agreement"). Here, the No-Contest-Plea Form, signed
 by Cun-Lara, states: "I understand I have the right to take the
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stand to testify and I have the right not to testify at trial." 
The form states that Cun-Lara signed the form "after [he had]
 gone over all of it with [his] lawyer." At the Change-of-Plea
 Hearing, Cun-Lara confirmed that he reviewed the No-Contest-Plea
 Form with Attorney Castillo and that he did not have any
 questions because "[he] went over it with [Attorney Castillo]
 already." Cun-Lara told the court that no one forced him or put
 pressure on him to plead no contest. 
Admittedly, Attorney Castillo's imperative statement in
 
the COP Transcript — that Cun-Lara "[s]ay yes" to the Circuit
 Court's question — is highly irregular. This, however, does not
 overcome the entirety of the record, which clearly shows that
 Cun-Lara knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily relinquished
 his right to testify or not testify in his own defense at trial. 
Because of Cun-Lara's sufficient understanding of the English
 language, as evidenced by the record, Cun-Lara cannot show that
 his plea was not knowing, intelligent, and voluntary. 
B. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
 As discussed above, Cun-Lara argues that his no-contest
 
plea was not entered in an intelligent, knowing, and voluntary
 manner, in part, because, he contends, Attorney Castillo's
 deportation-related advice was ineffective. We concluded to the
 contrary, holding that Cun-Lara's plea was entered in an
 intelligent, knowing, and voluntary manner. 
It is the defendant's burden to show that counsel was 
ineffective under a two-part test: "1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 514, 
78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003) (quoting State v. Aplaca, 74 Haw. 54, 66­67, 837 P.2d 1298, 1305 (1992)) (internal quotation marks omitted). Nothing in the record indicates that Attorney Castillo's obligations extended any further than informing Cun-Lara that deportation was a possible consequence of his no-contest plea. Therefore, Cun-Lara did not state a colorable 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, and the Circuit Court
 
did not err when it denied the Petition without a hearing.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The May 4, 2010 Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law;
 
Order Denying Petitioner Isidro Oswaldo Cun-Lara's Rule 40, HRPP
 
Petition for Post-Conviction Relief of the Circuit Court of the
 Fifth Circuit is affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 
Walter J. Rodby,
for Petitioner-Appellant
 
Tracy Murakami,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Kaua' i,
for Respondent-Appellee
 
24
 