  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30702
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
PATRICK K. CUI, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CR. CASE NOS. 1P110-03217, 1P110-02141, 1P110-02140)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge and Ginoza, J.;
and Leonard, J. dissenting)
 
In this appeal, Defendant-Appellant Patrick K. Cui
 
(Cui) challenges two judgments, each entitled Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment and/or Order, filed on July 22, 2010 in the District
 
1
Court of the First Circuit (district court)  convicting Cui of
violating Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH) § 10-1.2(a)(9)
 
(2009). For each conviction, the district court sentenced Cui to
 
pay a $50 fine.
2
 
1
 The Honorable Catherine Remigio presided.
 
2
 Cui's notice of appeal also appealed a Notice of Entry of Judgment
and/or Order for violating Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 143-2 (Dog
License), but Cui's opening brief does not raise any point of error related to
this offense. Any issues related to HRS § 143-2 are thus waived.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Cui argues that the district court erred in
 
entering the judgment of conviction for violating ROH § 10­
1.2(a)(9) because: (1) the written and oral charges were fatally
 
insufficient for failing to properly allege the definition of
 
"public park"; (2) there was insufficient evidence; and (3) the
 
district court erroneously determined that Cui's dog was not a
 
service dog and that Cui's rights under the Americans with
 
Disabilities Act (ADA) were not violated.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Cui's points of error as follows:
 
The written and oral charges provided to Cui were
 
insufficient. On February 3, 2010, Cui was issued a Complaint &
 
Summons which stated that on that date at "Kuhio Beach Park" Cui
 
had committed the offense of "Dog in Park," referencing "Section
 
10-1.2(9) [sic]." On March 8, 2010, Cui was issued another
 
Complaint & Summons. Although difficult to decipher, it appears
 
that this complaint states that on March 8, 2010, at
 
"[undecipherable] 2500 Kalakaua Ave" Cui committed the offense of
 
"[undecipherable] dog ... public park ...." and references
 
"Section 10-1.2(9) [sic]."
 
On July 9, 2010, the State orally charged Cui as
 
follows:
 
[The State]: . . . 
So the charges are on or about February 3rd, 2010, as
well as March 8th, 2010, City and County of Honolulu, State
of Hawaii, you did within the limits of any public park
permit any animal to enter or to remain within the confines
of that public park is [sic] a violation of 10-1.2 of the
[ROH].
 
When the prosecutor asked if Cui understood the charges, Cui 
responded, "I don't understand what [the State's] saying about 
the law." Cui's counsel then asserted that the charge was 
defective under State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i 383, 219 P.3d 1170 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2009) because a material element had been left out of the
 
charge. The district court asked the State to restate the oral
 
charge, which the State did as follows:
 
[The State]: Okay. So that charge is on or about
February 3rd and March 8th, 2010, City and County of
Honolulu, State of Hawaii, [Cui], you did within the limits
of any public park permit any animal to enter and remain
within the confines of any public park as a violation of 10­1.2 of the [ROH].
 
Cui's counsel reiterated his objection to the charge,
 
particularly that "public park" has a specific statutory
 
definition, and requested that the charge be dismissed. The
 
State asserted that "public park" was not a term of art and is
 
easily comprehensible, and therefore, indicated it would leave
 
the charge as stated. The district court denied Cui's request to
 
dismiss the charge.
 
"Whether a charge sets forth all the essential elements 
of a charged offense is a question of law, which we review under 
the de novo, or right/wrong, standard." State v. Mita, 124 
Hawai'i 385, 389, 245 P.3d 458, 462 (2010) (internal quotation 
marks, brackets, ellipsis, and citation omitted). 
The offense in question is set forth in ROH § 10­
1.2(a)(9), which states:
 
Sec. 10-1.2 Park rules and regulations.
 
(a) Within the limits of any public park, it is
unlawful for any person to:
 
. . . .
 
(9)
 Permit any animal to enter and remain within the
confines of any public park area except as otherwise
provided in this article[.]
 
(Emphasis added). In turn, ROH § 10-1.1 (2009) defines "public
 
park" as follows:
 
"Public park" means any park, park roadway,
playground, athletic field, beach, beach right-of-way,
tennis court, golf course, swimming pool, or other
recreation area or facility under the control, maintenance
and management of the department of parks and recreation. 
(Emphasis added).
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court recently reiterated that: 
The sufficiency of the charging instrument is measured,
inter alia, by whether it contains the elements of the
offense intended to be charged, and sufficiently apprises
the defendant of what he or she must be prepared to meet. In
other words, the oral charge must be worded in a manner such
that the nature and cause of the accusation could be
 understood by a person of common understanding. The relevant
inquiry, therefore, is whether or not the charge provided
the accused with fair notice of the essential elements. 
Mita, 124 Hawai' i at 390, 245 P.3d at 463 (citations, quotation 
marks and brackets omitted). The supreme court held that the
 
circumstances in Mita were distinguishable from Wheeler:
 
There are two significant factors present in the instant
case that were not present in Wheeler, thus making it
readily distinguishable: (1) the definition of "animal
nuisance" in ROH § 7–2.2 does not create an additional
essential element of the offense; and (2) in any event, the
definition of "animal nuisance" is consistent with its
 commonly understood meaning and therefore Mita had fair
notice of the offense charged. Thus, the oral charge
against Mita, which tracked the language of ROH § 7–2.3,
sufficiently alleged all of the essential elements of the
offense of animal nuisance.
 
Mita, 124 Hawai' i at 391, 245 P.3d at 464.  The supreme court 
held that the definition of "animal nuisance" in ROH § 7–2.2 did 
not create additional elements to what was required by 
ROH § 7–2.3 because the definition provided an "inclusive, rather 
than exclusive, list of examples of what the term may include[.]" 
Id. 
In this case, the definition of "public park" in 
ROH § 10-1.1 creates an additional element, the attendant 
circumstance that the park in question be "under the control, 
maintenance and management of the department of parks and 
recreation." See Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i at 392, 219 P.3d at 1179 
("[a]n attendant circumstance is essentially a circumstance that exists independently of the actor's conduct.") (internal 
quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Moreover, "public park" as defined by ROH § 10-1.1 is
 
not necessarily consistent with its commonly understood meaning
 
in that it is limited to parks "under the control, maintenance
 
and management of the department of parks and recreation." In
 
short, it excludes all other public parks under the control or
 
management of other public entities, such as the state
 
government, the federal government, or even perhaps another
 
county department or agency.
 
The complaints and the oral charge did not provide any
 
notice to Cui that the public park in question must have been a
 
park "under the control, maintenance and management of the
 
department of parks and recreation" and thus, in this case, the
 
charge was insufficient.
 
We do not reach the other issues raised by Cui.
 Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the two judgments, each
 
entitled Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order, convicting Cui
 of violating ROH § 10-1.2(a)(9) and filed on July 22, 2010 in the
 
District Court of the First Circuit, are vacated. This case is
 
remanded to the district court with instructions to dismiss
 
without prejudice.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 30, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Jennifer D.K. Ng
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Anne K. Clarkin Deputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
5
 