NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30023
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE MATTER OF UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME,
Local 646, AFL-CIO (2008-007), Petitioner/Appellant-Appellant,
and KATHRYN S. MATAYOSHI, Superintendent, Department
of Education, State of Hawai 'i; RESHELA DUPUIS, Director,
Charter School Administrative Office; WENDY W. LAGARETA,
Director, Wai 'alae Elementary School; and NEIL DIETZ,
Chief Negotiator, Office of Collective Bargaining,
State of Hawai 'i, Intervenors/Appellees-Appellees, and
HAWAII LABOR RELATIONS BOARD; JAMES B. NICHOLSON; EMORY
J. SPRINGER; and SARAH R. HIRAKAMI, Agency/Appellees-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0501)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
In a secondary appeal arising out of a dispute over
 
collective bargaining, Petitioner/Appellant/Appellant United
 
Public Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO (
UPW), appeals from an
 
August 19, 2009 Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
Court) Judgment in favor of Intervenors/Appellees/Appellees
 
Patricia Hamamoto, Superintendent, Department of Education, State
 
of Hawai 'i (Superintendent), Rashela DuPuis, Director, Charter 
School Administrative Office (Executive Director), Wendy W.
 
Lagareta, Director, Wai 'alae Elementary School (Lagareta), and 
Marie Laderta, Chief Negotiator, Office of Collective Bargaining,
 
State of Hawai 'i (Chief Negotiator),1
 and Agency/Appellees/
1
 Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 43(c),
Kathryn S. Matayoshi and Neil Dietz are automatically substituted as the
(continued...)  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellees Hawai 'i Labor Relations Board, James B. Nicholson, 
Emory J. Springer, and Sarah R. Hirakami ("HLRB" or "Board").2 
On March 7, 2008, UPW submitted a Petition for Declaratory Ruling 
(Petition) to the HLRB seeking a definitive ruling on three 
issues relating to charter school collective bargaining. In HLRB 
Order No. 2585, issued February 2, 2009 (HLRB Order), the HLRB 
agreed with UPW on two issues, but disagreed on the third. UPW 
appealed to the Circuit Court, which affirmed the HLRB Order. On appeal to this court, UPW raises four points of error related to the Circuit Court's decision to affirm the HLRB Order. We affirm. I. BACKGROUND FACTS
 A. Statutory Framework
 "Collective bargaining" is governed by Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) Chapter 89, and is defined as: 
the performance of the mutual obligations of the public
employer and an exclusive representative to meet at
reasonable times, to confer and negotiate in good faith, and
to execute a written agreement with respect to wages, hours,
amounts of contributions by the State and counties to the
Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund, and other
terms and conditions of employment, except that by any such
obligation neither party shall be compelled to agree to a
proposal or be required to make a concession.
 
HRS § 89-2 (2012). An "exclusive representative" is the
 
"employee organization certified by the board under section 89-8
 as the collective bargaining agent to represent all employees in
 an appropriate bargaining unit[.]" Id. Pursuant to HRS § 89-5
 
(2012), the HLRB was established, inter alia, "to ensure that
 collective bargaining is conducted in accordance with" HRS
 Chapter 89.
 
Pursuant to HRS § 89-6(a) (2012), all employees
 
throughout the State, within specific enumerated categories, form
 the various collective bargaining units. HRS § 89-6(d) further
 
1(...continued)
Superintendent and Chief Negotiator, respectively. The Executive Director's
 
office was eliminated as of July 1, 2013. 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 130 §§ 3,
23.
 
2
 The Honorable Victoria S. Marks presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
specifies the "employers" for the purpose of negotiating
 
collective bargaining agreements for each bargaining unit.
 
The State of Hawai 'i Department of Education (DOE) is 
an executive department headed by an elected policy-making board, known as the Board of Education (BOE). HRS § 302A-1101(a) (Supp. 
2012). The BOE has the power "to formulate statewide educational 
policy, adopt student performance standards and assessments models, monitor school success, and appoint the superintendent of education as the chief executive officer of the public school system." Id. The DOE Superintendent shall have "jurisdiction 
over the internal organization, operation, and management of the public school system . . . and shall administer programs of education and public instruction throughout the State[.]" HRS § 302A-1111(a) (2007). While the charter school system is administratively attached to the DOE (see HRS § 302B-3(a) (Supp. 2011)), charter schools "operate independent educational programs from those provided by the department of education statewide." 1999 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 62, § 1 at 77. 
The Office of Collective Bargaining and Managed
 
Competition (OCB) was established to assist the Governor in,
 
amongst other things, "negotiations between the State and the
 
exclusive representatives on matters of wages, hours, and other
 negotiable terms and conditions of employment." HRS § 89A-1(a)
 (2012); see also HRS § 89A-2(3) (2012). The OCB is headed by the
 Chief Negotiator. HRS § 89A-1(b). Amongst other functions and
 duties, the OCB shall "[c]onduct negotiations with the exclusive
 representatives of each employee organization and designate
 employer spokespersons for each negotiation[.]" HRS § 89A-2. 
Charter schools were first authorized by the Hawai
'i 
State Legislature (Legislature) in 1999, pursuant to Act 62, in 
order to "increase the flexibility and autonomy at the school 
level by allowing existing public schools and new schools to be designated as new century charter schools." 1999 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 62, § 1 at 77. The Legislature's intent was to 
nurture the ideal of more autonomous and flexible decision-
making at the school level . . . free of bureaucratic red
tape and accommodating of the individual needs of students
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to allow the State to dramatically improve its educational
standards for the twenty-first century.
 
Id. In order to allow educators to better tailor the curriculum
 
to enhance student learning, each new century charter school 
shall have a local school board as a governing body, and
shall operate independent educational programs from those
provided by the department of education statewide.
 
Id. Schools designated as new century charter schools were to be
 
"exempt from all applicable state laws," except, in relevant
 
part, laws regarding
 
(1) Collective bargaining under chapter 89; provided that:
 
(A) The exclusive representatives defined in chapter
89 may enter into agreements that contain cost and
noncost items to facilitate decentralized decision-
making;
 
(B) The exclusive representatives and the local school
board of the new century charter school may enter into
agreements that contain cost and noncost items; [and]
 
. . . .
 (D) These agreements may differ from the master
contracts
[.]
 
Id., § 2 at 79-80 (HRS § 302A-1184). Act 62 of 1999 was
 
originally codified as HRS Chapter 302A-1181 through 1192, and
 was subsequently repealed and replaced in 2006. 2006 Haw. Sess.
 Laws Act 298, § 3 at 1216.
 
In order to "create consistency and to clarify laws
 
relating to the governance of charter schools," in 2006, the
 Legislature enacted Act 298, relating to charter schools. 
S.
 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2881, in 2006 Senate Journal, at 1402; 2006
 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 298, § 1 at 1200-01. Act 298 repealed HRS
 Chapter 302A §§ 1181 through 1192, and recodified and reorganized
 the statutes relating to charter schools into a new chapter,
 
codified as HRS Chapter 302B.3 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 298,
 
In 2012, the Legislature introduced Senate Bill 2115, which sought
to repeal HRS Chapter 302B and establish "a new charter school law that
creates a solid governance structure for Hawaii's charter school system with
clear lines of authority and accountability[.]" S.B. 2115, S.D. 2, H.D. 2,
C.D. 1, 26th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2012). Senate Bill 2115 was enacted into law
 on June 19, 2012 as Act 130. See 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 130. Senate Bill
 
2115 was set to "take effect upon its approval;" when the bill was signed into
law on June 19, 2012 as Act 130, HRS Chapter 302B was thereby repealed. 2012
 
(continued...)
 
4
 3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§§ 1-2 at 1201-16. In addition to providing general consistency
 
and clarity, Act 298 was intended to help "[c]larify[] collective
 bargaining provisions for charter school employees[.]" H. Stand.
 Comm. Rep. No. 1259, in 2006 House Journal, at 1580. 
Pursuant to Act 298, HRS Chapter 302B authorized the
 
establishment of a charter school system and set forth standards
 for the governance, administration, support, financing, autonomy,
 and accountability of charter schools. 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act
 298, § 1 at 1201. Pursuant to HRS Chapter 302B, operational
 control over charter school workers is vested with the local
 school board (LSB) of each charter school; a LSB is the 
governing body of its charter school and shall be
responsible for the financial and academic viability of the
charter school, implementation of the charter, and the
independent authority to determine the organization and
management of the school, the curriculum, virtual education,
and compliance with applicable federal and state laws. The
 local school board shall have the power to negotiate
supplemental collective bargaining agreements with the
exclusive representatives of their employees
.
 
2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 298, § 2 at 1209 (HRS § 302B-7(c));4 see
 
also id. at 1202 (HRS § 302B-1).
 
Act 298 also established a "charter school
 
administrative office" (CSAO), which was attached to the DOE "for
 
3(...continued)
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 130, § 23 at 474. For brevity's sake, a reference to the
chapter's repeal is not repeated with each citation to HRS Chapters 302A or
302B. Other statutes affected by Act 130 will be so noted. Act 130 has been
 codified at HRS Chapter 302D (Supp. 2012). In 2013, further changes were made
to HRS Chapter 302D with the passage of Act 159, which became effective upon
its approval on June 21, 2013. 2013 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 159, pp. 466-84. The
 effects of Act 159 are not addressed herein.
 
4
 Act 130 changed the nature of the LSBs and renamed them "governing
boards." 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 130, § 2 at 445. Pursuant to Act 130,
governing boards are defined as "the independent board of a public charter
school[.]" Id. The authority of the former LSBs "to negotiate supplemental
collective bargaining agreements with the exclusive representatives of their
employees" was preserved and given to the governing boards. Id. Moreover,
Act 130 added the provision that a governing board "is considered the employer
of charter school employees for purposes of Chapters 76, 78, and 89", thus
confirming and clarifying the authority of the governing board to enter into
HRS Chapter 89 [collective bargaining] agreements on behalf of their charter
school employees. Id.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
administrative purposes only."5 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 298,
 
§ 2 at 1209 (HRS § 302B-8).6 The CSAO is administered by the
 
Executive Director and, in consultation with the charter schools,
 
is responsible for, inter alia, representing charter schools and
 the charter school system in communications with the Board, the
 Governor, and the Legislature, "[c]omplying with applicable state
 laws related to the administration of the charter schools[,]" and
 "[u]pon request by one or more charter schools, assisting in the
 negotiation of a collective bargaining agreement with the
 exclusive representative of its employees." 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws
 Act 298, § 2 at 1210 (HRS § 302B-8(b)(3), (15) (Supp. 2011)).
 Act 298 also amended HRS Chapter 89 in order to "make
 
conforming amendments . . . in accordance with the provisions of
 the new charter school law." 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 298, § 4
 at 1216. A new section governing charter school collective
 bargaining was added in order to clarify ambiguity with regard to
 how charter schools "fit" into the scheme of collective
 bargaining over master collective bargaining agreements (CBA),
 
and provides:
 
(a) Employees of charter schools shall be assigned to an
appropriate bargaining unit as specified in section 89-6[.]
 
(b) For the purpose of negotiating a collective bargaining
agreement for charter school employees who are assigned to
an appropriate bargaining unit, the employer shall be
determined as provided in section 89-6(d).
 
(c) For the purpose of negotiating a memorandum of agreement
or a supplemental agreement that only applies to employees
of a charter school, the employer shall mean the local
 
5 As discussed by this Court in Water of Life Sch. Bd. v. Charter 
Sch. Review Panel, "[t]he charter school system . . . is administrativelyattached to DOE, one of the principal departments under the executive branchof the State. As part of a State entity administratively attached to DOE, theLSB is considered an arm of the State." 126 Hawai' i 183, 189, 268 P.3d 436,
432 (App. 2011) (citation omitted). 
6
 Pursuant to Act 130, "[a]ll rights, powers, functions, and duties
of the charter school administrative office as established pursuant to section
302B-8, Hawaii Revised Statutes, are transferred to the charter school
administrative office as established pursuant to section 3 of [Act 130]."
2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 130, § 18 at 473. The "new" charter school
 administrative office, however, is maintained only until July 1, 2013. 2012
 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 130, §§ 3, 23 at 467-69, 474. It appears from the Act
that once the "new" charter school administrative office is dissolved,
administrative functions will be turned over to the individual charter
 schools, a newly-formed charter school commission, and/or the DOE.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
school board, subject to the conditions and requirements
contained in the applicable sections of this chapter
governing any memorandum of agreement or supplemental
agreement.
 
(d) Negotiations over matters covered by this section shall
be conducted between the employer and exclusive
representative pursuant to this chapter. . . .
 
2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 298, § 5 at 1216-17 (HRS § 89-10.55)
 
(emphasis added).7 The 2006 amendments to HRS Chapter 89 made
 
clear, for the first time, that charter schools were subject to
 the master CBA negotiated by the State, and which apply generally
 to an entire bargaining unit (to non-charter school employees and
 charter school employees alike). The 2006 amendments also
 stated, for the first time, that LSBs were empowered to
 "negotiate memorandums of agreement or supplemental collective
 bargaining agreements with the exclusive representatives of their
 employees."
8 Id. § 1 at 1201 (HRS § 89-10.55(c)). Act 298
 
further provided that charter schools are required to adhere to
 collective bargaining laws under HRS Chapter 89:
 
(A) The exclusive representatives as defined in chapter 89
and the local school board of the charter school may enter
into supplemental agreements that contain cost and noncost
items to facilitate decentralized decision-making; [and]
 
. . . .
 (C) These supplemental agreements may differ from the master
contracts negotiated with the department [of education.]
 
2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 298, § 2 at 1211 (HRS § 302B-9).9
 
B. Proceedings Below
 
On October 20, 1971, UPW was certified as the exclusive
 
bargaining representative of blue collar non-supervisory
 
7 Act 130 amended HRS § 89-10.55 to change references from LSBs and
 
the charter school administrative office to "governing board" and "charter
school authorizer," respectively. See 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 130, § 6 at
 
470. 
8
 Act 130 transferred the authority to negotiate MOA or supplemental
agreements to the governing board of a charter school. 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws
 Act 130, § 6 at 470.
 
9
 Although Act 130 repealed HRS § 302B-9, this language remained
intact in § 302D-25 (except for a single reference to the "local school board"
which was changed to "governing board"). 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 130, § 2 at
462.
 
7
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
employees in bargaining unit 1 (Unit 1). As the exclusive
 
representative of all employees in Unit 1, UPW has "the right to
 
act for and negotiate agreements covering all employees in the
 unit[.]" HRS § 89-8(a) (2012). 
Prior to the repeal of HRS § 302A-1184, which extended
 
the provisions of HRS Chapter 89 to the charter schools, UPW
 negotiated a memorandum of agreement (MOA) with the State and the
 
DOE, signed on July 21, 2000. The July 21, 2000 MOA required the
 
charter schools to comply with the requirements of the Unit 1 CBA
 
"until it is replaced by a new Collective Bargaining Agreement,"
 and to negotiate supplemental agreements to modify the Unit 1 CBA
 "under the auspices of the Office of Collective Bargaining."
10
 
Pursuant to HRS § 89-10.55, UPW and the relevant Unit 1 employer
 group subsequently negotiated a Unit 01 Master CBA covering the
 period from July 1, 2007 through June 30, 2009 (Master
 
Agreement). The Master Agreement set forth the wages, hours, and
 
other terms and conditions of employment for employees in
 
bargaining Unit 1.
 
By letter dated December 12, 2007, addressed to the
 
Chief Negotiator, the UPW requested negotiations "with all New
 Century Charter Schools through the Office of Collective
 Bargaining on supplemental agreements modifying the current
 collective bargaining agreement with all public employees." UPW
 
indicated that its request was being made pursuant to HRS § 89­
6(d) and the July 21, 2000 MOA, because "since July 21, 2000 all
 MOA's have been extended to each successive term of the Unit 1
 
10 The July 21, 2000 MOA requires that charter schools negotiate via
the OCB. UPW asserts that the MOA has been extended by the parties since July
21, 2000. The existence of the July 21, 2000 MOA was not addressed by theHLRB or the Circuit Court. However, it is well-established in the Hawai' i 
courts that "parties may not do by contract that which is prohibited bystatute." SHOPO v. Soc'y of Prof'l Journalists - Univ. of Haw. Chapter, 83 
Hawai'i 378, 405, 927 P.2d 386, 413 (1996) (citations, internal quotation
marks, and brackets omitted). In SHOPO, the supreme court stated that "a courtmay not enforce a collective-bargaining agreement that is contrary to publicpolicy," as it is "elementary that parties to a collective bargainingagreement cannot bargain for provisions that are contrary to law." Id. 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Although UPW argues thatthe July 21, 2000 MOA continues to bind the charter schools to negotiate viathe OCB, to the extent that HRS § 89-10.55 grants that specific authority tothe LSBs, an MOA or supplemental agreement cannot divest the LSBs of thatauthority absent the specific authorization of each LSB. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Agreements to June 30, 2009 by mutual consent of the parties." 
UPW further requested that the OCB "designate one spokesperson
 for negotiations with all New Century Charter schools, and to
 submit all proposals (if any) from the New Century Charter
 Schools . . . to modify any section or provision of the existing
 Unit 1 Agreement[.]"
 
By letter dated January 15, 2008, Laderta responded to
 
UPW's request for negotiations over supplemental agreements by
 stating that HRS § 89-6(d) 
does not require that the Office of Collective Bargaining
handle negotiation of such supplemental agreements. On the
 contrary, by statute, it is entirely up to each of the local
school boards to determine for themselves who shall
 represent them in this regard. OCB has not been given such
authority at this time.
 
Laderta further stated that the OCB did not have the authority to
 
comply with UPW's request to designate one spokesperson for
 negotiations with all New Century Schools, as such authority
 "could only be granted by way of the unanimous consent of the
 respective local school boards of those Charter Schools[.]" In
 so concluding, Laderta pointed to HRS § 302B-9(1)(A) (2007),
 which provided:
 
The exclusive representatives as defined in chapter 89 and
the local school board of the charter school may enter into
supplemental agreements that contain cost and noncost items
to facilitate decentralized decision-making.
 
Accordingly, Laderta referred the UPW to the CSAO.
 
By letter dated January 30, 2008, UPW sent a request
 
for negotiations over supplemental agreements to the CSAO. In
 
the letter, UPW requested that the CSAO and each of the public
 charter schools "submit responses to the specific request for
 information . . . and have the representative contact the [UPW]
 to schedule negotiations."
 
On March 7, 2008, UPW filed a Petition for Declaratory
 
Ruling (Petition) with the HLRB, requesting a declaratory order 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
11
pursuant to HRS § 91-8  and Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR)
 
§ 12-42-912 that:
 
a.	 The authority to negotiate the terms and provisions of
the master unit 1 agreement for the period covered by
July 1, 2007 to June 30, [2009] rests exclusively with
the UPW, Governor, the mayors of the various counties,
the chief justice, and the Hawaii Health Systems Board
of Directors pursuant to Section 89-10.55, (b), HRS,
and in accordance with Section 89-6(d), HRS.
 
b.	 Local school boards of charter schools may not
repudiate the terms of said unit 1 master agreement or
supplemental agreements entered by and between the UPW
and the Department of Education pursuant to Section
89-6(e), HRS.
 
c.	 Although local school boards of charter schools may
negotiate memorandum of agreement or supplemental
agreements that apply only to employees of their
particular charter school under Section 89-10.55 (c),
HRS, such agreements may not be inconsistent (or in
conflict) with the master unit 1 agreement entered
pursuant to Section 89-6(d), HRS, or prior memoranda
of agreement or supplemental agreements entered by and
between the UPW, the State of Hawaii, and the
Department of Education entered pursuant to Section
89-6(e), HRS. 
On March 25, 2008, the DOE Superintendent, the CSAO
 
Director, the Director of Wai 'alae Elementary School, and the 
Chief Negotiator of the OCB (collectively "Intervenors"), filed
 
Petitions for Intervention with the HLRB, which were granted. 
At a March 31, 2008 hearing, the HLRB clarified the
 
three issues to be addressed in the requested declaratory ruling.
The parties ultimately stipulated to UPW's first issue, regarding
who has the authority to enter master CBAs, by agreeing that Act
 298 and the 2006 amendments "made it clear that the charter 
 
 
11	 HRS § 91-8 (2012) provides:
 
§ 91-8 Declaratory rulings by agencies.  Any
interested person may petition an agency for a declaratory
order as to the applicability of any statutory provision or
of any rule or order of the agency. Each agency shall adopt
rules prescribing the form of the petitions and the
procedure for their submission, consideration, and prompt
disposition. Orders disposing of petitions in such cases
shall have the same status as other agency orders.
 
12
 HAR Chapter 42 sets forth the rules of practice and procedure for
the HLRB. HAR § 12-42-9(a) pertains to declaratory rulings by the Board.
 
10
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
schools are bound by the master collective bargaining agreement."
 
On May 27, 2008, Intervenors filed a "Motion to Dismiss [UPW's 
Petition] and/or for Summary Judgement" requesting that the Board
 grant summary judgment against UPW on the two remaining issues:
 
1) Who has the authority and/or responsibility to negotiate
supplemental agreements on behalf of charter schools
pursuant to HRS Section 89-10.55(c), and
 
2) Whether HRS Section 302B-9(a)(1) permits charter schools
and public unions to enter into supplemental agreements that
deviate from master agreements entered into pursuant to HRS
Section 89-6(d) and/or supplemental agreements entered into
pursuant to HRS 89-6(e).
 
The Intervenors argued that these issues were purely
 
questions of law, not fact, and therefore summary disposition was
 
appropriate. On June 26, 2008, UPW filed its opposition to
 
Intervenors' motion. A hearing on the motion was held on July
 
10, 2008, and the matter was taken under advisement by the Board.
 
On February 2, 2009, the HLRB issued the HLRB Order,
 
concluding that it would not dismiss UPW's Petition due to
 "confusion in the past over the subject matter of the Petition
 and the risk of future dispute, as well as the existing dispute
 involving issues b and c raised in the Petition." The HLRB also
 concluded that summary judgment on the issues presented in UPW's
 Petition was warranted because "the issues presented by the UPW
 are primarily legal in nature such that a hearing is not
 required[.]"
 
As the parties had already agreed, the HLRB concluded
 
that:
 
The authority to negotiate the terms and provisions of the
master unit 1 agreement for the period covered by July 1
2007, to June 30, 2008, rests exclusively with the UPW,
Governor, the mayors of the various counties, the chief
justice, and the Hawaii Health Systems Corporation board of
Directors pursuant to Section 89-10.55(b), HRS, and in
accordance with Section 89-6(d), HRS.
 
In addition, the HLRB concluded that UPW is authorized
 
to negotiate a master CBA with the Unit 1 public employers, as
 
listed in HRS § 89-6(d)(1). 
The HLRB Order highlighted an apparent contradiction in
 
the use of the term "employer" throughout HRS Chapter 89.
 As
 
alluded to by the HLRB, this apparent contradiction stems from
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the different types of negotiations governed by Chapter 89: (1)
 
master CBAs, (2) supplemental agreements or MOAs of general
 applicability (applying to employees of more than just the
 charter schools), and (3) supplemental agreements or MOAs
 affecting only employees of the charter schools. Although HRS
 § 89-10.55(b) defines employer "[f]or the purpose of negotiating
 a collective bargaining agreement for charter school employees
 who are assigned to an appropriate bargaining unit," as provided
 in section 89-6(d), "[f]or the purpose of negotiating a
 memorandum of agreement or a supplemental agreement that only
 applies to employees of a charter school," HRS § 89-10.55(c)
 defines "employer" as the LSB. Based on this statutory language,
 the HLRB concluded that
 
the definition of the term "employer" as used in HRS § 89­
10.55, notwithstanding HRS § 89-2, depends on the type of
negotiation - such as a master agreement, or a supplemental
agreement or MOA applicable only to employees of a charter
school - and the meaning of the term "employer" will be
governed by the specific statutory provision (such as HRS
§§ 89-10.55(b) and 89-6(d), or § 89-10.55(c) relevant to
that type of negotiation.
 
With regard to the second issue, the HLRB concluded:
 
Local school boards of charter schools may not repudiate the
terms of said Unit 01 master agreement or the terms of the
memoranda of agreement or supplemental agreements entered by
and between the UPW and the Department of Education pursuant
to HRS § 89-6(e).
 
The HLRB noted that the Intervenors agreed with UPW
 
that "local school[] boards may not repudiate the terms of master
 
agreements negotiated by the employer group pursuant to HRS § 89­6(d)[,]" and therefore, the only remaining issue arose with
 respect to MOAs and supplemental agreements. The HLRB reasoned
 that HRS § 89-6 governs all public employees of the State, and
 therefore, MOAs and supplemental agreements negotiated pursuant
 to HRS § 89-6(e) apply to "employees of more than just the
 charter schools," and therefore includes the charter school
 employees, i.e., an MOA that is applicable to all Unit 1
 employees in the State. Although LSBs are not included in the
 definition of "employer" for the purpose of negotiating MOAs and
 supplemental agreements pursuant to HRS § 89-6(e), HRS § 89­10.55(c) authorizes a LSB to enter MOAs and supplemental
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
agreements "that only appl[y] to employees of a charter school." 
Accordingly, the HLRB concluded that following the 2006 enactment
 of HRS § 89-10.55, a charter school is bound by: (1) MOAs and
 supplemental agreements entered into by its own LSB pursuant to
 HRS § 89-10.55(c) and (2) MOAs and supplemental agreements
 entered into pursuant to HRS §§ 89-6(d) and (e), which are
 "applicable to employees of more than just the charter schools." 
With regard to the third issue, whether a LSB has the
 
authority to negotiate MOAs or supplemental agreements
 "inconsistent (or in conflict) with" a master CBA or a prior MOA
 or supplemental agreement entered by and between the UPW, the
 State, and the DOE pursuant to HRS § 89-6(e), the HLRB concluded:
 
Absent express delegation by another local school board or
statutory authority, local school boards may only negotiate
on behalf of, and contractually bind, their own charter
schools. However, the Board clarifies that more than one
local school board may be involved in negotiations that
affect more than one charter school (see HRS § 3-2B­8(b)(15)). Further, the Board concludes that MOAs or
supplemental agreements so negotiated may be inconsistent or
conflict with master agreements as well as supplemental
agreements or MOAs negotiated pursuant to HRS § 89-6(e),
subject to certain conditions and requirements contained in
chapter 89 governing any memorandum of agreement or
supplemental agreement, as discussed earlier.
 
With respect to the latter part of the ruling, the
 
Board stated that HRS § 89-10.55(c) provides a limitation on the
 
negotiation of an MOA or supplemental agreement, that such
 negotiations are "subject to the conditions and requirements
 contained in the applicable sections of this chapter governing
 any memorandum of agreement or supplemental agreement," but that
 there are few conditions and requirements contained in Chapter
 89. Accordingly, the HLRB concluded that "there are no statutory
 
provisions expressly prohibiting MOAs or supplemental agreements
 that are inconsistent or in conflict with the master agreements
 or subsequent MOAs or supplemental agreements entered into by the
 UPW, the State of Hawaii, and the DOE." The HLRB also pointed to
 HRS § 302B-9, which provides:
 
(a) Charter schools shall be exempt from chapters 91 and 92
and all other state laws in conflict with this chapter,
except those regarding:
 
13
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1) Collective bargaining under chapter 89; provided
that:
 
(A) The exclusive representatives as defined in
chapter 89 and the local school board of the
charter school may enter into supplemental
agreements that contain cost and noncost items
to facilitate decentralized decision-making
 
. . . .
 (C) These supplemental agreements may differ
from the master contracts negotiated with the
department[.]
 
(Emphasis added.) 
The HLRB concluded that HRS § 302B-9(a)(1)(C) "is
 
applicable to Unit 01 supplemental agreements, and that the
 
language referring to 'master contracts negotiated with the
 department' was perhaps unartfully drafted[.]"
13 The Board also
 
dismissed UPW's arguments that inconsistent or conflicting MOAs
 or supplemental agreements would contravene Article X, section 3
 of the Hawai
'i State Constitution.14 The HLRB also disagreed with 
UPW's argument that pursuant to the definition of the term
 "supplemental," a "supplemental agreement" may not subtract or
 deviate from a master agreement. The Board concluded that:
 
first, the express language of HRS § 302B-9(a)(1)(C)
indicates the Legislature's intent that "supplemental
agreements" may differ from master agreements; and second,
HRS § 89-10.55(c) contemplates both supplemental agreements
and MOAs - it would be mere semantics to hold that a charter
 school may negotiate a memorandum of agreement that
subtracts or deviates from a master agreement, but not a
supplemental agreement that does so.
 
Lastly, the Board clarified that it
 
identifies three types of negotiations at issue in this
proceeding: master agreements; MOAs or supplemental
agreements affecting employees of more than just charter
schools; and MOAs or supplemental agreements affecting only
 
13 The HLRB noted that HRS § 302B-9(a)(1)(C) provides that
supplemental agreements may differ from master contracts "negotiated with the
department"[,] which apparently refers to the Department of Education. The
 Board concluded that this provision was "unartfully drafted" because HRS
§§ 89-6(d) and 89-10.55(b) "does not include the DOE as part of that employer
group." The Board nevertheless concluded that the "apparent ambiguity does
not change the Board's conclusions herein, as the Board believes the statutory
provisions of chapter 89 . . . are clear."
 
14
 Article X, section 3 of the Hawai' i State Constitution provides
that the BOE shall have the power "to formulate statewide educational policyand appoint the superintendent of education as the chief executive officer ofthe public school system." H
AW. CONST. ART. X, § 3. 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
employees of charter schools. For master agreements,
negotiations shall be conducted by the employer group as
provided for in HRS § 89-6(b); for MOAs and supplemental
agreements affecting employees of more than just charter
schools, negotiations shall be conducted as provided for in
HRS § 89-6(e); and for MOAs and supplemental agreements
affecting only employees of charter schools, negotiations
shall be conducted as provided by HRS § 89-10.55(c).
 
UPW filed a notice of appeal from the HLRB Order with
 
the Circuit Court on March 3, 2009. UPW agreed with the HLRB
 
Order on the first two issues, but argued that the Board's third
 ruling, "that a local school board or a charter school may
 negotiate a supplemental agreement which is 'inconsistent or in
 conflict with' a master agreement entered with the State of
 Hawaii or a supplemental agreement entered with the Board of
 Education"[,] was in error.
 
Intervenors filed an answer on March 19, 2009 asking
 
the Court to affirm the HLRB Order in its entirety. On March 23,
 
2009, the HLRB also filed an answer. 
In its brief to the Circuit Court, UPW claimed that the
 
HLRB exceeded its authority by "amending the terms 'employer' and
 
'collective bargaining'" as set forth in HRS § 89-2 by allowing
 LSBs to enter into supplemental agreements which differed from
 master CBAs. UPW further claimed that the Board's Order is
 contrary to the collective bargaining process contemplated under
 HRS § 89-6(d) and HRS § 89-6(e) because it declares that LSBs
 "may negotiate supplemental agreements containing terms which
 'subtract or deviate' from a master agreement . . . and which may
 be 'inconsistent or in conflict with' the master agreement or
 supplemental agreements entered with the State of Hawaii or the
 Board of Education." Finally, UPW argued that the Board erred in
 relying on HRS § 302B-9, in concluding that LSBs may negotiate
 supplemental agreements and MOAs which differ from a master CBA,
 because HRS § 302B-9 conflicts with HRS Chapter 89 and is
 therefore preempted under HRS § 89-19.
 
In its answering brief, the HLRB argued that it
 
correctly found that MOAs or supplemental agreements may be
 inconsistent with or in conflict with master agreements, MOAs, or
 supplemental agreements. The HLRB contended that its conclusion
 
15
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
resulted from "a straightforward analysis of the statutory
 
framework regarding negotiations by local school boards" and
 based on the fact that:
 
[1]	 there were no provisions expressly prohibiting MOAs or
supplemental agreements which were inconsistent or in
conflict with the master agreements or subsequent MOAs
or supplemental agreement entered into by the UPW, the
State of Hawaii and the DOE. 
[2]	 HRS § 89-10.55(c) provides a limitation on the negotiation
of an MOA or supplemental agreement in that such
negotiations are "subject to the conditions and requirements
contained in the applicable sections of [HRS Chapter 89]
governing any memorandum of agreement or supplemental
agreement."
 
[3]	 the express language of HRS § 302B[-9](a)(1)(C) indicat[es]
the Legislature's intent [] that "supplemental agreements"
may differ from master agreement[.]
 
On July 20, 2009, the Intervenors filed an answering
 
brief contending, amongst other things, that HRS § 302B-9 permits
 
supplemental agreements to deviate from a master CBA and does not
 conflict with any provision of HRS Chapter 89. The Intervenors
 
highlighted that: (1) neither the charter schools nor the UPW
 
are required to enter into any supplemental agreement, and any
 such agreement "would exist only by the mutual consent of the
 
relevant parties"; (2) that the term "supplemental", by its very
 
nature, is something that differs from a master CBA; and (3)
 nothing in Chapter 89 prevents a supplemental agreement from
 deviating from a master CBA.
 
UPW filed a reply brief, raising for the first time its
 
"merit principle" argument. UPW argued, inter alia, that the
 
"merit system" is an "established policy of government" that has
 
"state-wide application," and because charter schools are not
 "public employers" within the meaning of HRS Chapter 89, "they
 lack the statutory authority to deviate or repudiate agreements
 negotiated by the Board of Education and the Governor on a
 statewide basis." UPW also proffered definitions of "deviate"
 and "supplemental" in support of its argument that LSBs "may
 negotiate additions to what is lacking [in a master CBA] through
 supplemental agreements" but that it may not "subtract" or
 "deviate" from what has already been negotiated into the master 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
agreement. Lastly, UPW argued that the HLRB's conclusion that a
 
LSB may not "repudiate" an agreement, but may enter into a 
supplemental agreement that "differs" from an agreement, is
 "inherently inconsistent." 
A hearing was held on August 10, 2009. UPW essentially
 
reiterated the arguments in its briefs to the Circuit Court and
 clarified its argument relating to HRS § 302B-9.
15 Essentially,
 
UPW argued that because HRS § 302B-9 specifically references
 agreements negotiated with the DOE, and whereas Unit 1 does not
 negotiate with the DOE, HRS § 302B-9(a)(1)(C) does not apply to
 charter school collective bargaining for Unit 1 employees, and
 therefore, supplemental agreements pertaining to that bargaining
 Unit may not differ from the master CBA. The HLRB rested on its
 brief, but stressed that "any kind of supplemental agreement
 would be subject to the agreement of the exclusive representative
 which is the UPW." The Intervenors agreed with the HLRB and
 responded to UPW's arguments, urging the Circuit Court to read
 the "straightforward" and "well-written" HLRB Order. At the
 conclusion of the arguments, the Circuit Court declared that it
 was "going to affirm the board's decision"[,] concluding that
 "the board's findings were not clearly erroneous and it's
 conclusions of law are based on substantial evidence and the
 construction of the statutes within its jurisdiction."
 
15 THE COURT: Okay. And then how do you address or what is your
response to 302B-9 entitled Exemptions From State Lawswhich under A-1 says charter school shall be exemptfrom collective bargaining under Chapter 89 providedthat, and then in particular subsection C talks aboutsupplemental agreements may differ from the mastercontracts negotiated with the department. So you havethe word "differ." 
[UPW]: The department is the DOE. That's the Board of Education. . . . whereas they negotiatecontracts with the teachers union in unit 5. The DOE, the Board of Education does notnegotiate a master agreement with the UPW. . . .You have to apply those terms as they are, andthey are inapplicable because the DOE is not an-- an employer within -- for the purpose ofmulti-employer bargaining under 89- . . . 6(d)which leads to a master agreement. So that provision is inapplicable to us to unit 1. 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court filed its order on August 18, 2009
 
affirming the HLRB Order and finding:
 
After reviewing the entire record and considering the
written submissions of the parties and oral arguments
presented, the Court finds that the Board's findings of fact
in Order No. 2585, dated February 2, 2009, are not clearly
erroneous, and its conclusions of law are based upon the
substantial evidence in the record and the construction of
 statutes within its jurisdiction.
 
Judgment was entered on August 19, 2009. A notice of appeal to
 
this Court was timely filed by UPW. 
II.	 POINTS OF ERROR
 
UPW raises four points of error on its appeal to this
 
court, arguing that the Circuit Court erred when it affirmed the
 HLRB Order because: (1) the HLRB exceeded its statutory
 authority by amending the term "employer" and "collective
 bargaining" under HRS § 89-2; (2) the HLRB's Order is contrary to
 the collective bargaining process intended by HRS §§ 89-6(d) and
 89-6(e); (3) the HLRB Order allows a local charter school board
 to undermine a statewide merit system; and (4) the Board
 erroneously concluded that HRS § 89-19 did not preempt HRS
 § 302B-9 with respect to charter schools. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
This is a secondary appeal from the decision of an
 
administrative agency.
 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon its
review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal. The
 standard of review is one in which [the appellate] court
must determine whether the circuit court was right or wrong
in its decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS
§ 91-14(g) (1993) to the agency's decision.
 
HRS § 91-14, entitled "Judicial review of contested cases,"
provides in relevant part: 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may
reverse or modify the decision and order if the
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings,
conclusions, decisions, or orders are: 
(1)	 In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2)	 In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
(3)	 Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4)	 Affected by other error of law; or 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(5)	 Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the
whole record; or
(6)	 Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized
by abuse of discretion or clearly
unwarranted exercise of discretion.
 
Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are reviewable
under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding
procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact
under subsection (5); and an agency's exercise of discretion
under subsection (6).
 
United Pub. Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO, v. Hanneman, 106
 
Hawai'i 359, 363, 105 P.3d 236, 240 (2005) (brackets in original 
omitted) (quoting Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104
 Hawai
'i 412, 416, 91 P.3d 494, 498 (2004)). "Pursuant to HRS 
§ 91-14(g), an agency's conclusions of law are reviewed de novo." 
United Pub. Workers, 106 Hawai
'i at 363, 105 P.3d at 240 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
"Questions of statutory interpretation are questions of
 
law to be reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard." UPW
 
v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 124 Hawai 'i 367, 369, 244 P.3d 604, 
606 (App. 2010). Our statutory construction is guided by the
 following well-established principles:
 
our foremost obligation is to ascertain and give effect to
the intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained
primarily from the language contained in the statute itself.
And we must read statutory language in the context of the
entire statute and construe it in a manner consistent with
 its purpose.
 
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used in a
statute, an ambiguity exists.
 
In construing an ambiguous statute, the meaning of the
ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context, with
which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may be
compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.
Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids in
determining legislative intent. One avenue is the use of
 legislative history as an interpretive tool.
 
The appellate court may also consider the reason and spirit
of the law, and the cause which induced the legislature to
enact it to discover its true meaning. 
Id. (quoting Lingle v. HGEA, 107 Hawai 'i 178, 183, 111 P.3d 587, 
592 (2005)) (brackets omitted). 
Moreover,
 
[W]here an administrative agency is charged with the
responsibility of carrying out the mandate of a statute
 
19
 UPW contends that this ruling: (1) improperly amends
 
the definition of "employer" and "collective bargaining" under
 
HRS § 89-2; (2) is contrary to the collective bargaining process
 contemplated under HRS § 89-6; (3) undermines the statewide
 "merit system" policy; and (4) improperly relies on HRS § 302B-9.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
which contains words of broad and indefinite meaning, courts
accord persuasive weight to administrative construction and
follow the same, unless the construction is palpably
erroneous.
 
Morgan v. Planning Dept., Cnty. Of Kauai, 104 Hawai 'i 173, 180, 
86 P.3d 982, 989 (2004) (citing Ka Pa 'akai O Ka 'Aina v. Land Use 
Comm'n, State of Hawai 'i, 94 Hawai 'i 31, 41, 7 P.3d 1068, 1078 
(2000)). 
Stated differently:
 
Where an agency is statutorily responsible for carrying out
the mandate of a statute which contains broad or ambiguous
language, that agency's interpretation and application of
the statute is generally accorded judicial deference on
appellate review. However, an interpretation by an agency
of a statute it administers is not entitled to deference if
 the interpretation is plainly erroneous and inconsistent
with both the letter and intent of the statutory mandate.
 
TIG Ins. Co. v. Kauhane, 101 Hawai 'i 311, 321, 67 P.3d 810, 820 
(App. 2003) (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets
 
omitted).
 IV. DISCUSSION
 
UPW's points of error on appeal are ALL based on the
 
second half of the third conclusion stated in the HLRB Order:
 
Absent express delegation by another local school board or
statutory authority, local school boards may only negotiate
on behalf of, and contractually bind, their own charter
schools. However, the Board clarifies that more than one
local school board may be involved in negotiations that
affect more than one charter school (see HRS § 302B­8(b)(15)). Further, the Board concludes that MOAs or
supplemental agreements so negotiated may be inconsistent or
conflict with master agreements as well as supplemental
agreements or MOAs negotiated pursuant to HRS § 89-6(e),
subject to certain conditions and requirements contained in
chapter 89 governing any memorandum of agreement or
supplemental agreement, as discussed earlier.
 
First, UPW argues that the HLRB exceeded its authority
 
and jurisdiction by amending the definitions of "collective
 
bargaining" and "employer" in HRS § 89-2 by declaring that LSBs
 may negotiate MOAs and supplemental agreements that are
 "inconsistent" or in "conflict with" master agreements and other
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
preexisting MOAs and supplemental agreements. UPW claims that
 
pursuant to the HLRB Order:
 
local school boards of charter schools fall within the
 
meaning of the term "employer" under chapter 89 . . . and
may enter supplemental agreements which "differ," "subtract
or deviate" from master agreements . . . or are
"inconsistent" and "in conflict with" agreements negotiated
by the State of Hawaii and the Board of Education who are
the statutory employers of unit 1 employees in the
Department of Education[.]
 
UPW reasons that "[n]o where in [HRS § 89-2] do the
 
terms 'collective bargaining' and 'employer' make any reference
 
to 'local school boards of charter schools,' as having such broad
 authority and powers[.]"
 
Pursuant to HRS § 89-2, "Collective bargaining" is
 
defined, in relevant part, as:
 
the performance of the mutual obligations of the public
employer and an exclusive representative to meet at
reasonable times, to confer and negotiate in good faith, and
to execute a written agreement with respect to wages, hours,
amounts of contributions by the State and counties to the
Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund, and other
terms and conditions of employment, except that by any such
obligation neither party shall be compelled to agree to a
proposal or be required to make a concession. . . .
 
HRS § 89-2. "Employer" or "public employer," in relevant part,
 
refers to:
 
the governor in the case of the State, the respective mayors
in the case of the counties, the chief justice of the
supreme court in the case of the judiciary, the board of
education in the case of the department of education, the
board of regents in the case of the University of Hawaii,
the Hawaii health systems corporation board in the case of
the Hawaii health systems corporation, and any individual
who represents one of these employers or acts in their
interest in dealing with public employees. . . .
 
Id. Although UPW is correct in its general assertion that HRS
 
§ 89-2 does not refer to "local school boards of charter
 schools," its argument that the Legislature "chose not to include
 the local school boards of charter schools" in its definition of
 "employer" is misguided.
 
In 2006, the Legislature enacted HRS § 89-10.55, which
 
specifically governs charter school collective bargaining and 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
provides an instance where LSBs are considered "employers."
 
Pursuant to HRS § 89-10.55,
 
For the purpose of negotiating a collective bargaining
agreement for charter school employees who are assigned to
an appropriate bargaining unit, the employer shall be
determined as provided in section 89-6(d).
 
HRS § 89-10.55(b) (Supp. 2006). However, the statute goes on to
 
provide:
 
For the purpose of negotiating a memorandum of agreement or
a supplemental agreement that only applies to employees of a
charter school, the employer shall mean the local school
board, subject to the conditions and requirements contained
in the applicable sections of this chapter governing any
memorandum of agreement or supplemental agreement.
 
HRS § 89-10.55(c) (Supp. 2006) (emphasis added). 
The intent of Act 298 was to "[c]larif[y] collective
 
bargaining provisions for charter school employees." Conf. Comm.
 
Rep. No. 223, in 2006 House Journal, at 1885, 2006 Senate
 Journal, at 1025. Specifically, HRS § 89-10.55 was added in
 order to "make conforming amendments to various sections of the
 Hawaii Revised Statues in accordance with the provisions of the
 new charter school law." 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 298, § 4 at
 1216. HRS § 89-10.55, which by its plain language appears to
 authorize LSBs to negotiate a "memorandum of agreement or a
 supplemental agreement that only applies to employees of a
 charter school," is consistent with the Legislative purpose in
 authorizing the establishment of a charter school system, i.e.,
 to "nurture the ideal of more autonomous and flexible decision-
making at the school level." 1999 Haw. Sess Laws Act 62, § 1 at
 77. Authorizing LSBs to negotiate its own MOAs and supplemental
 
agreements, specific to its charter school employees, comports
 with the reason and spirit of the law to promote autonomy and
 flexible decision-making at the school level. 
Moreover, it is a cardinal rule of statutory
 
construction that 
where there is a "plainly irreconcilable" conflict between a
general and a specific statute concerning the same subject
matter, the specific will be favored. However, where the
statutes simply overlap in their application, effect will be
given to both if possible[.]
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mahiai v. Suwa, 69 Haw. 349, 356-57, 742 P.2d 359, 366 (1987)
 
(citations omitted). Additionally, "[l]aws in pari materia, or
 upon the same subject matter, shall be construed with reference
 to each other. What is clear in one statute may be called in aid
 to explain what is doubtful in another." HRS § 1-16 (2009). 
Here, HRS § 89-10.55 specifically governs charter school
 collective bargaining, as distinct from general collective
 bargaining, and provides that for the sole purpose of negotiating
 MOAs and supplemental agreements that apply only to employees of
 a charter school, that school's LSB is deemed to be the
 "employer." It is possible to give effect to the definitions of
 "employer" in both HRS § 89-2 and HRS § 89-10.55 because pursuant
 to HRS § 89-10.55, a LSB is considered an "employer" for the
 limited purpose of negotiating MOAs and supplemental agreements
 particular to the employees in its charter school, while the
 general "employer" definition under HRS § 89-2 is meant to apply
 to collective bargaining of general applicability. 
UPW's allegation that the HLRB "amended" the definition
 
of "collective bargaining" and "employer" by declaring that LSBs
 fall within the meaning of the term "employer" is misleading. In
 its Order, the HLRB did not attempt to add LSBs to the statutory
 definition of "employer" under HRS § 89-2 for the purpose of
 negotiating agreements of general applicability; instead, the
 HLRB interpreted the plain language and legislative intent of
 Chapter 89, focusing on the specific grant of authority given to
 LSBs under HRS § 89-10.55. Further, the HLRB Order did not
 conclude that LSBs are "employers" under HRS § 89-2, but rather,
 that under a separate limited-use statute, a LSB may be
 considered an "employer." Inasmuch as HRS § 89-10.55 authorizes
 LSBs to negotiate supplemental agreements directly with employee
 organizations, this statute is clear and unambiguous. 
Accordingly, we conclude that HLRB did not exceed its
 
authority and jurisdiction, nor did it improperly "amend" the
 definitions articulated in HRS § 89-2, as its conclusion that a
 LSB may negotiate MOAs or supplemental agreements that apply only
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to its respective employees is consistent with both HRS Chapter
 
89 and the laws governing charter schools.
 
Second, UPW contends that the HLRB Order is "contrary"
 
to the collective bargaining process set forth in HRS § 89-6(d)
 and (e), and is "contradictory" to the conclusions rendered on
 the first two issues of the Order, inasmuch as it allows LSBs to
 negotiate supplemental agreements which "subtract or deviate"
 from a master CBA or supplemental agreements entered with the
 State or the BOE. We disagree.
 
The ability of a LSB to negotiate MOAs and supplemental 
agreements does not in any way change or detract from the ultimate authority of the employer group, defined pursuant to HRS § 89-6(d), to negotiate master CBAs. In addition, while a LSB may negotiate an MOA or supplemental agreement that is "inconsistent with" a master CBA, MOA, or supplemental agreement entered by and between UPW and the DOE pursuant to HRS § 89-6(e), this does not authorize a LSB to "repudiate" the terms of any of those agreements. Although the difference between the terms "repudiate" and "inconsistent" has not been discussed by the Hawai
'i courts, nor are these terms defined by any relevant 
statute, generally, "repudiate" means "[t]o reject or renounce (a duty or obligation); esp., to indicate an intention not to perform (a contract)." Black's Law Dictionary 1418 (9th ed. 
2009). "Inconsistent," on the other hand, is defined as "[l]acking agreement among parts; not compatible with another fact or claim[.]" Id. at 834. Based on the nature of collective 
bargaining and the definitions of "inconsistent" and "repudiate," the negotiation of a subsequent inconsistent agreement does not amount to a repudiation of an initial agreement where the parties continue to adhere to their contractual duties and obligations, albeit, upon different agreed-upon terms. Indeed, the parties must mutually agree to any memorandum of agreement or supplemental agreement that only applies to employees of a charter school. 
There are no statutory restrictions or conditions in
 
HRS Chapter 89 that expressly prohibit MOAs or supplemental
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
agreements that are "inconsistent" or "in conflict with" existing
 
master CBAs, MOAs, or supplemental agreements. The 2006
 enactment of HRS § 89-10.55 made clear that "[e]mployees of
 charter schools shall be assigned to an appropriate bargaining
 unit as specified in section 89-6," and are therefore subject to
 the CBA negotiated pursuant to HRS § 89-6(d). See HRS § 89­
10.55(a), (b). Moreover, HRS § 89-6(e) provides that in addition
 to negotiating CBAs under HRS § 89-6(d), 
each employer may negotiate, independently of one another,
supplemental agreements that apply to their respective
employees; provided that any supplemental agreement reached
between the employer and the exclusive representative shall
not extend beyond the term of the applicable collective
bargaining agreement and shall not require ratification by
employees in the bargaining unit.
 
HRS § 89-6(e), therefore, provides that each of the
 
public employers listed in HRS § 89-6(d) may negotiate
 
supplemental agreements with the exclusive representative of a
 particular bargaining unit and that such supplemental agreements
 apply only "to their respective employees." Accordingly, a
 charter school will be bound by master CBAs, MOAs, and
 supplemental agreements negotiated pursuant to HRS § 89-6(d) and
 (e) that generally apply to all employees in a particular
 bargaining unit, if it employs members of that unit. 
HRS § 89-10.55 provides an additional mechanism,
 
specifically for LSBs, to negotiate charter school-specific MOAs
 and supplemental agreements. Pursuant to HRS § 89-10.55(c), "for
 the purpose of negotiating a memorandum of agreement or a
 supplemental agreement that only applies to employees of a
 charter school, the employer shall mean the local school board." 
Therefore, it is clear that LSBs are specifically granted the
 authority to negotiate MOAs and supplemental agreements that
 apply to their respective charter school employees.
 
Most importantly, HRS § 89-10.55(c) provides that MOAs
 
or supplemental agreements negotiated between a LSB and the
 exclusive representative of a bargaining unit remain "subject to
 the conditions and requirements contained in the applicable
 sections of [HRS Chapter 89] governing any memorandum of
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
agreement or supplemental agreement." Id. The only "conditions
 
and requirements" contained in HRS Chapter 89 that can be
 
construed as governing MOAs and supplemental agreements include:
 
(1) HRS § 89-2, which defines "collective bargaining,"
 
provides that "by any such obligation [to meet at reasonable
 times, to confer and negotiate in good faith, and to execute a
 written agreement] neither party shall be compelled to agree to a
proposal or be required to make a concession. (Emphasis added.) 
See also HRS § 89-9(a) (governing the scope of negotiations, and
 
articulating the same "obligation").
 
(2) HRS § 89-6(e), requires that "any supplemental
 
agreement reached between the employer and the exclusive
 representative shall not extend beyond the term of the applicable
collective bargaining agreement and shall not require
ratification by employees in the bargaining unit." (Emphasis
 added).
 
(3) HRS § 89-10(a) (2012), governing written
 
agreements, provides that "[r]atification is not required for
 
other agreements effective during the term of the collective
 
bargaining agreement, whether a supplemental agreement, an
 agreement on reopened items, or a memorandum of agreement, and
 any agreement to extend the term of the collective bargaining
 agreement." (Emphasis added). Moreover, HRS § 89-10(a) provides
 that such an agreement "shall be reduced to writing and executed
by both parties." Id. (emphasis added).
 
(4) HRS § 89-13 (2012), governing prohibited practices
 
provides that "[i]t shall be a prohibited practice" for a public
 employer or its designated representative, or for an employee
 
organization or its designated agent to willfully "[r]efuse to
bargain collectively in good faith" with the exclusive
 
representative or the public employer as required under HRS
 
§ 89-9. HRS § 89-13(a)(5)&(b)(2) (emphasis added).
 
(5) HRS § 89-13 further mandates that a public
 
employer or its designated representative is prohibited from
 "[v]iolat[ing] the terms of a collective bargaining agreement." 
HRS § 89-13(a)(8)&(b)(5) (emphasis added). 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
There is nothing in these "conditions and
 
requirements," or elsewhere in HRS Chapter 89, that prohibits
 
MOAs or supplemental agreements which differ from, are
 inconsistent with, or are in conflict with a master CBA or any
 other preexisting agreement. The only statutory language in HRS
 Chapter 89 governing "inconsistent" proposals is provided for
 under HRS § 89-9(d) (emphasis added):
 
The employer and the exclusive representative shall not
 
agree to any proposal which would be inconsistent with the
merit principle or the principle of equal pay for equal work
pursuant to section 76-1 or which would interfere with the
 rights and obligations of a public employer to:
 
(1) Direct employees;
(2) Determine qualifications, standards for work, and the
nature and contents of examinations;
(3) Hire, promote, transfer, assign, and retain employees in
positions;
(4) Suspend, demote, discharge, or take other disciplinary
action against employees for proper cause;
(5) Relieve an employee from duties because of lack of work
or other legitimate reason;
(6) Maintain efficiency and productivity, including
maximizing the use of advanced technology, in government
operations;
(7) Determine methods, means, and personnel by which the
employer's operations are to be conducted; and
(8) Take such actions as may be necessary to carry out the
missions of the employer in cases of emergencies. 
This subsection . . . shall not preclude negotiations over
the procedures and criteria on promotions, transfers,
assignments, demotions, layoffs, suspensions, terminations,
discharges, or other disciplinary actions as a permissive
subject of bargaining during collective bargaining
negotiations or negotiations over a memorandum of agreement,
memorandum of understanding, or other supplemental
agreement.
 
This provision, titled "scope of negotiations," is
 
equally applicable to the negotiation of a master CBA as it is to
 
the negotiation of an MOA and/or supplemental agreement, and
 serves to require adherence to the merit principle in the
 negotiation of an agreement. While it mandates consistency with
 the merit principle, it does not prohibit an MOA or a
 supplemental agreement to deviate from a master CBA. Therefore, 
we conclude that an MOA and/or a supplemental agreement may be
 inconsistent with a master CBA, so long as the agreement
 continues to comply with the merit principle and other
 articulated rights and obligations of a public employer.
 
27
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
UPW argues that supplemental agreements entered into
 
pursuant to HRS § 89-10.55 "can only add new terms which have not
 
previously been negotiated into master agreements under Section
 89-6(d), HRS, or into DOE supplemental agreements by the Board of
 Education under Section 89-9(e), HRS." Such a limited
 construction of the legislative grant of authority to LSBs to
 enter into MOAs and supplemental agreements is not warranted nor
 provided for under the statutory scheme governing charter school
 collective bargaining. 
The HLRB Order concluded that LSBs may enter into MOAs
 
or supplemental agreements that are inconsistent or in conflict
 with master CBAs "subject to certain conditions and requirements
 contained in chapter 89[.]" Absent any articulable "conditions
 
and requirements " in HRS Chapter 89 prohibiting the negotiation
 
of an MOA or supplemental agreement that is inconsistent with a
 master agreement, we conclude that the HLRB's Order is consistent
 with both the collective bargaining process and the statutory 
scheme established under Chapter 89, and does not grant the LSBs
 any more authority than that which is granted by statute.
 
Third, UPW further argues that the HLRB Order, inasmuch
 
as it construes HRS § 89-10.55 to authorize LSBs to enter into
 supplemental agreements and MOAS that may differ from master
 CBAs, allows LSBs to "disregard agreements entered with the [DOE]
 restoring the merit principle to all public charter schools[.]"
16
 
HLRB's Order specifically provides:
 
Local school boards of charter schools may not repudiate the
terms of said Unit 01 master agreement or the terms of the
memoranda of agreement or supplemental agreements entered by
and between the UPW and the Department of Education pursuant
to HRS § 89-6(e).
 
16
 UPW refers to the "merit principle" established under HRS § 76-1.
See note 2, supra. With regard to such "agreements" entered with DOE
"restoring the merit principle to all public charter schools," UPW cites a
March 15, 2004 HLRB Stipulation and Order. The March 15, 2004 Order explains
that the Department of Human Resources Development informed BOE that employees
of public charter schools in the DOE do not have civil service status and are
no longer part of the merit system. The Stipulation and Order required the
BOE to "process all currently exempt public charter school employees in
classified positions through the statewide merit system and restore them to
civil service status."
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Moreover, the HLRB Order provides that 
MOAs or supplemental agreements [] negotiated may be
inconsistent or conflict with master agreements as well as
supplemental agreements or MOAs negotiated pursuant to HRS §
89-6(e), subject to certain conditions and requirements
contained in chapter 89 governing any memorandum of
agreement or supplemental agreement[.]
 
As noted above, HRS § 89-9(d) prohibits the employer
 
and the exclusive representative from agreeing to "any proposal
 
which would be inconsistent with the merit principle or the
 principle of equal pay for equal work pursuant to section 76­1[.]" Additionally, HRS § 89-1(b)(2) requires "public employers
 to negotiate with and enter into written agreements with
 exclusive representatives on matters of wages, hours, and other
 conditions of employment, while, at the same time, maintaining
 the merit principle pursuant to section 76-1[.]" Inasmuch as a
 LSB must negotiate MOAs and supplemental agreements "subject to
 certain conditions and requirements contained in chapter 89," any
 agreement negotiated must be consistent with the merit principle
 as required under HRS §§ 89-1 and 89-9. 
Based on the plain language of HRS § 89-10.55(c), and
 
the conditions imposed on collective bargaining negotiations
 under HRS §§ 89-1 and 89-9, LSBs, like other public employers,
 must maintain the merit principle in all negotiated agreements. 
Accordingly, UPW's third point of error on appeal is without
 merit.
 
Fourth, UPW argues that the HLRB "failed to give
 
[effect] to Section 89-19, HRS, that expressly states chapter 89,
 HRS, takes precedence over all conflicting statutes governing the
 same 'subject matter' and shall pre-empt other 'legislation . . .
 adopted by the State,'" and therefore, "[t]o the extent Section
 302B-9(a), HRS, would allow charter schools to negotiate 
conflicting or inconsistent terms, it is preempted under Chapter
 89, HRS."
17 Pursuant to HRS § 89-19, HRS Chapter 89
 
17
 Essentially, UPW is claiming that HRS § 302B-9, which allows a
supplemental agreement to differ from a master CBA, is in conflict with HRS
§ 89-10.55 and HRS § 89-6, governing the negotiation of MOAs and supplemental
agreements.
 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
shall take precedence over all conflicting statutes
concerning this subject matter and shall preempt all
contrary local ordinances, executive orders, legislation, or
rules adopted by the State, a county, or any department or
agency thereof, including the departments of human resources
development or of personnel services or the civil service
commission.
 
HRS § 302B-9(a) provides that charter schools are
 
subject to the collective bargaining laws under HRS Chapter 89,
 
but may enter into supplemental agreements with an exclusive
 representative, and that these supplemental agreements "may
 differ from the master contracts negotiated with the
 department[.]" HRS § 302B-9(a)(1)(C). As discussed supra, there
 is nothing in HRS Chapter 89 prohibiting the negotiation of an
 MOA or a supplemental agreement that is "inconsistent with" or
 which "differs" from a master CBA. Therefore, HRS § 302B-9 is
 not a "conflicting statute concerning [the same] subject matter"
 within the meaning of HRS § 89-19. Thus, HRS § 302B-9 is not
 preempted by HRS Chapter 89 or any collective bargaining
 agreement negotiated thereunder, and the HLRB's reliance on HRS
 § 302B-9 was not misplaced. Accordingly, this argument is
 without merit.
 V.	 CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's August 19, 2009
 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 6, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Herbert R. Takahashi Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Danny J. Vasconcellos
Rebecca L. Covert
 (Takahashi Vasconcellos &
Covert) 
for Petitioner/Appellant-
Appellant
 
James E. Halvorson 
Richard H. Thomason
 Deputy Attorneys General
for Intervenors/Appellees-
Appellees
 
Valri Lei Kunimoto
 
(Hawaii Labor Relations Board)
for Agency/Appellees-Appellees
 
30
 