NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30313
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CRANDALL PENAFLOR, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 90-0146(2))

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Crandall Penaflor (Penaflor)
 
appeals from the Amended Judgment filed on December 22, 2009, in
 
the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).1 For
 
the reasons set forth below, we affirm.
 
I.
 
The procedural history of this case that is relevant to
 
this appeal is summarized as follows. In 1990, a jury found
 Penaflor guilty of first degree burglary (Count I), first degree
 terroristic threatening (Counts II and III), kidnapping (Count 
1 The Honorable Shackley F. Raffetto presided over the
proceedings pertinent to this appeal.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IV); and first degree sexual assault (Count VI and VII).2 The
 
3
Circuit Court  sentenced Penaflor to consecutive terms of

 imprisonment totaling seventy years, and it denied the
prosecution's motion for extended terms of imprisonment. The
 Circuit Court entered its Judgment on September 10, 1991. 
Penaflor filed a direct appeal from the Circuit Court's 
Judgment. 
On August 26, 1992, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court filed a 
memorandum opinion affirming Penaflor's Judgment. 
On February 28, 2000, Penaflor filed a "Motion for 
Correction of Illegal Sentence Pursuant to HRPP [(Hawai 'i Rules 
of Penal Procedure)] Rule 35" (HRPP Rule 35 Motion). On October 
4
26, 2000, the Circuit Court  filed an Order denying Penaflor's
HRPP Rule 35 Motion. 
Penaflor appealed from the Circuit Court's Order 
denying his HRPP Rule 35 Motion. 
On October 21, 2002, this court 
issued a Summary Disposition Order resolving Penaflor's appeal. State v. Penaflor, No. 23939, 2002 WL 31375566 (Hawai
'i App. 
October 21, 2002). We concluded that there was "no merit" to the arguments Penaflor raised on appeal, and, accordingly, we affirmed the Circuit Court's Order denying Penaflor's HRPP Rule 35 Motion. Id., slip op. at 2. However, we further concluded 
that the Circuit Court had committed plain error in failing to merge the kidnapping charge with the first degree terroristic threatening charge that involved the same victim (Counts II and IV), pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 701-109(1)(a) and (4)(a) (1993). Id., slip op. at 2-3. We therefore 
2 The jury acquitted Penaflor of first degree robbery that
was charged in Count V. As to the Count IV kidnapping, the jury
found that Penaflor "released the person kidnapped alive and not
suffering from serious or substantial bodily injury in a safe
place prior to trial," thereby reducing that offense to a class B
felony pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
ยง 707-720(3) (1993).
3 The Honorable Boyd P. Mossman presided.
 
4 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"reverse[d] Penaflor's conviction for terroristic threatening
 
[(Count II)] against the kidnapping victim." Id., slip op. at 3.
 
On December 21, 2009, the Circuit Court held a
 
"resentencing" hearing. Penaflor, who was represented by
 counsel, appeared by telephone. Penaflor requested that his
 sentences be imposed to run concurrently. The Circuit Court
 denied Penaflor's request and sentenced Penaflor "in accordance
 with the opinion entered in this matter by the Intermediate Court
 of Appeals" to the same consecutive terms of imprisonment, minus
 the five-year term for the conviction on Count II that this court
 had reversed. The Circuit Court thereafter entered the Amended
 Judgment from which Penaflor appeals.
 
II.
 
Penaflor is represented on appeal by the Office of the
 
Public Defender. The Public Defender's opening brief argues: 
The circuit court abused its discretion in resentencing
Penaflor to consecutive sentences totaling sixty-five years
(a) without considering any of the HRS ยง 706-606 factors,
(b) without giving any reasons for the consecutive
sentences, and (c) without having ordered or considered an
updated presentence report containing information about
Penaflor's conduct, achievements, etc. during the
intervening eighteen years between his original September
1991 sentencing and his December 2009 resentencing, in
violation of his constitutional right to due process.
 
The arguments raised by Penaflor's counsel are based on 
the assumption that because this court reversed Penaflor's 
conviction on Count II in our 2002 Summary Disposition Order, the Circuit Court was required to resentence Penaflor on the remaining counts for which he had been convicted. This assumption is wrong. "When used in an opinion or dispositional order, the word 'reverse' ends litigation on the merits . . . ." Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 35(e) (2000). The 
effect of our reversing Penaflor's conviction on Count II was simply to remove the Count II conviction and sentence from Penaflor's Judgment. Our 2002 Summary Disposition Order did not 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
remand the case for resentencing or authorize resentencing, but
 
rather affirmed the Circuit Court's Order denying Penaflor's HRPP
 Rule 35 Motion. 
Under these circumstances, the Circuit Court was not
 
required to resentence Penaflor on the remaining counts and was
 not authorized to change Penaflor's sentence on these counts
 pursuant to his HRPP Rule 35 Motion. The Circuit Court could
 have entered an Amended Judgment that removed the conviction and
 sentence on Count II without holding a sentencing hearing. 
Accordingly, the arguments raised by Penaflor's counsel, which
 assume that Penaflor was entitled to be resentenced and entitled
 to the protections associated with sentencing, are without merit.
 
Although Penaflor was represented by counsel on appeal,
 
5
Penaflor filed his own brief  in addition to the briefs filed by
counsel. As a represented party, Penaflor was not entitled to
 file his own brief. In any event, the arguments in Penaflor's
 brief appear to challenge the Circuit Court's decision to deny
 Penaflor's second HRPP Rule 40 petition, which is not the subject
 of this appeal, but was previously affirmed by this court in
 Appeal No. 28527.
6 To the extent Penaflor's brief challenges the
 
Circuit Court's actions in rejecting his request for concurrent
 sentences, that challenge fails for the same reason that the
 arguments of his counsel fail. 
5 Penaflor filed his own "Petitioner's Opening Brief" and
"Petitioner's Addendum to Opening Brief," which we collectively
refer to as Penaflor's "brief."
6 On September 11, 2006, Penaflor filed his second HRPP Rule
40 Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment, which was
denied by the Circuit Court on April 17, 2007. In Appeal No.
28527, we affirmed the Circuit Court's denial of Penaflor's
second HRPP Rule 40 petition by Summary Disposition Order. State
 
v. Penaflor, No. 28527, 2008 WL 2503259 (Hawai
'i App. June 24,
2008). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
The Circuit Court's Amended Judgment that was filed on
 
December 22, 2009, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 25, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Phyllis J. Hironaka
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Richard K. MinatoyaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 