NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30068
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
HOLUALOA ALOHA, LLC, an Arizona limited
liability company, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ANEKONA ALOHA, LLC, a Hawaii limited
liability company, BRIAN A. ANDERSON;
and JOAN ANDERSON, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
DOE ENTITIES, 1-10, Defendants,
and
 
BRIAN A ANDERSON, Trustee for the Brian A. Anderson
Revocable Living Trust, dated September 18, 2001;
BRIAN A. ANDERSON, Trustee of the Brian A. Anderson
Revocable Living Trust; JOAN G. ANDERSON, Trustee of
the Joan G. Anderson Revocable Living Trust, dated
September 18, 2001; and JOAN G. ANDERSON, Trustee of
the Joan G. Anderson Revocable Living Trust,
Garnishees-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0474)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Garnishees-Appellants Brian A. Anderson, Trustee of the
 
Brian A. Anderson Revocable Living Trust, dated September 18,
 
2001; Brian A. Anderson, Trustee of the Brian A. Anderson
 Revocable Living Trust; Joan G. Anderson, Trustee of the Joan G.
 Anderson Revocable Living Trust, dated September 18, 2001; and
 Joan G. Anderson, Trustee of the Joan G. Anderson Revocable
 Living Trust
1
 (collectively, "the Andersons" or "the Trustees")
appeal from the Order on the Motion for Issuance of Judgment
 Against Garnishees, filed August 19, 2009 ("Garnishee Order"),
 
1/
 The trusts are referred to collectively as "the Revocable Trusts."
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
and the Final Judgment Against Garnishees, filed August 19, 2009
 
("Judgment"), in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ("Circuit
 Court").
2 The Judgment was entered in favor of Plaintiff-
Appellee Holualoa Aloha, LLC ("Holualoa") and against the
 Andersons in their capacities as trustees.
 
On appeal, the Andersons contend that the Circuit Court
 
erred (1) by compelling the revocation of the Revocable Trusts;
 (2) by garnishing the Revocable Trusts before all other
 traditional methods of enforcement had been exhausted; and (3) by
 entering its judgment against the Andersons without first
 conducting an evidentiary hearing on the issue of liability.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve the Andersons' contentions as follows:
 
(1) The Andersons contend that "the Circuit Court . . .
 
could not compel the Trustees to revoke the trust[s], which is
 precisely how its garnishee order and judgment appear to
 function." (Emphasis added.) The Andersons conclude that
 because the Garnishee Order and the Judgment "appear to allow
 Appellee to . . . reach [the Trusts'] corpus," the effect is to
 "judicially revok[e] . . . the Trusts[.]" They offer, however,
 no argument in support of nor an explanation for that conclusion.
 
Revocation, in fact, appears to be a non-issue in this 
case. "A man can not put his own property beyond the reach of creditors and at the same time reserve substantial interests or control over it." Cooke Trust Co. v. Lord, 41 Haw. 198, 202 
(Haw. Terr. 1955) (quoting Erin N. Griswold, Spendthrift Trusts Created in Whole or In Part for the Benefit of the Settlor, 44 Harv. L. Rev. 203, 208 (1930)) (internal quotation marks omitted). Under Hawai' i law, where the settlor creates a trust 
where the trustee has absolute discretion to pay the settlor (among others), the settlor's creditors "can reach his interest, and can compel the trustee to pay over so much as in his discretion he is authorized to pay to the settlor." Id. at 205 
2/
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(quoting 1 Austin Wakeman Scott, The Law of Trusts § 156.2, at
 
782 (1939)) (internal quotation marks omitted). Furthermore,
 "when a beneficiary of a spendthrift trust is also the settlor of
 that trust, creditors may reach both income and corpus in
 satisfaction of either prior or subsequent debts." Altman v.
 
Comm'r, 83 B.R. 35, 37 (D. Haw. 1988) (citing Cooke, 41 Haw. at
 198).
 
Here, Joan G. Anderson and Brian A. Anderson were both
 
the settlors and trustees of their respective trusts. They could
 either direct the trustee on how to dispose of the trust estate
 or allow the trustee to use his or her discretion to dispose of
 it for the benefit of the settlor or his or her spouse or
 dependent children. No limit is placed on the amount that either
 settlor could receive from their respective trusts. Thus, the
 Andersons either maintained absolute control over distribution,
 or were the potential beneficiaries, of the entire corpus of
 their respective trusts. Furthermore, while the terms of the
 Revocable Trusts include spendthrift provisions, the Andersons
 are both settlors and beneficiaries of their respective trusts.
 
The Andersons present no evidence that the Circuit 
Court's Garnishee Order or Judgment would revoke the Revocable Trusts or cause them to be revoked. Irrespective of that, the Circuit Court's Garnishee Order and Judgment allowed Holualoa to reach the settlors' assets in the Revocable Trusts in accordance with Hawai' i law. See Cooke, 41 Haw. at 198. In so doing, the 
court did not err. 
(2) The Andersons contend that "[t]he record on appeal 
. . . fails to demonstrate that Appellee's garnishment of the Trusts was a last resort remedy or that it had exhausted traditional enforcement methods." While conceding that Hawai' i 
law has long recognized that spendthrift trusts could be subject to garnishment by creditors "in certain circumstances," the Andersons' recommend that this court "should observe . . . reasonable limits" on the practice, such as those adopted by the Florida Supreme Court in Bacardi v. White, 463 So. 2d 218 (Fla. 1985). 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
We hesitate to impose restrictions on long-standing 
Hawai'i law on the basis of a single out-of-state case where the 
debtor was not the settlor of the trust, but rather only a 
beneficiary. Bacardi, 463 So. 2d at 220–23 (establishing a 
limited right of enforcement, "allow[able] only as a last resort[,]" to recover alimony from a debtor-beneficiary who was not the settlor of the trust). Hawai' i law does not require that 
garnishment be a "last resort remedy" or that Holualoa had to have first "exhausted traditional enforcement methods." 
(3) The Andersons contend that the Circuit Court erred
 
by entering the Judgment against them as garnishees-trustees
 without first conducting an evidentiary hearing. They argue that
 the disclosures they filed satisfied the requirements of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes ("HRS") Chapter 652, and that, therefore, they
 were entitled to an evidentiary hearing regarding their liability
 to Holualoa. We disagree.
 
The Andersons were judgment-debtors to Holualoa, and
 
settlors and beneficiaries under the Revocable Trusts with
 unlimited power to distribute or receive trust assets and income. 
As such, Holualoa is entitled to reach both the income and the
 corpus of the Revocable Trusts in satisfaction of the Andersons'
 debt. Altman, 83 B.R. at 37. 
Under the circumstances of this case, when the
 
liability between plaintiff and defendant is already established,
 where the asset is a Revocable Trust under which the defendant is
 the beneficiary, and where the garnishee is also the
 defendant/beneficiary, a hearing is sufficient to establish a
 creditor's right as against the garnishee and to satisfy any
 requirement for a "trial" referenced in HRS §652-8 (1993).
 
The Andersons, as garnishees, were afforded the
 
opportunity at and before the July 24, 2009 hearing on Holualoa's
 motion for issuance of judgment to offer any defense they had to
 the motion. The Andersons contended via written disclosures that
 the Revocable Trusts held nothing belonging to them, as judgment-
debtors. A disclosure alone, however, is insufficient to defeat
 a motion for judgment. See H
AW. REV. STAT. § 652-8.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the hearing, the Andersons' counsel contended that
 
"the trust beneficiaries are not the Andersons, but they're, in
 
fact, their sons[.]" The Circuit Court, however, correctly
 concluded that the terms of the Revocable Trusts established to
 the contrary. The Andersons raised no other argument below and
 did not proffer any evidence at the hearing. They never
 requested, or objected to the lack of, an additional evidentiary
 proceeding. 
On appeal, the Andersons raise the additional 
contention that "they would have presented evidence that at least some of the property in the Trusts was subject to other controlling legal documents, . . . and that one of the primary purposes of the Trusts . . . was to allow the passing of the family ranch to the settlors' sons[.]" The second of those arguments is irrelevant to Holualoa's entitlement to reach the Trust assets. The Andersons did not raise their first contention or proffer any evidence that would support it in the Circuit Court, and therefore that contention was waived. Hawaii 
Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai' i 438, 500-01, 164 P.3d 
696, 758-59 (2007). 
Therefore, the Order on the Motion for Issuance of
 
Judgment Against Garnishees, filed August 19, 2009, and the Final
 Judgment Against Garnishees, filed August 19, 2009, are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 27, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Gary Victor Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,Benjamin R. Brower, and
Richard L. Holcomb
 (Dubin Law Offices)
for Garnishees-Appellants. Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
Sharon V. Lovejoy,
Trevor A. Brown, andShyla P.Y. Cockett
(Starn, O'Toole, Marcus & Fisher)
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
5
 