NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30517
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
COLLEEN HANABUSA, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES OF THE CITY 
AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU; DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND
PERMITTING OF THE CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU; CITY
AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10; AND
ROE GOVERNMENT ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-2562)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise, J., and Circuit Judge Kim, in
place of Foley, Leonard, Reifurth, and Ginoza, JJ., all recused)
 
The City and County of Honolulu (City) owns two parcels
 
of land, consisting of approximately 200 acres, located at the
 
Waimanalo Gulch on O 'ahu (Property). Prior to 2009, the City was 
using 107.5 of its 200-acre Property to operate the Waim analo
 
Gulch Sanitary Landfill (WGSL), pursuant to a special use permit
 issued by the State Land Use Commission (LUC), County Special Use
 Permit File No. 86/SUP-5 (SUP-5). Under SUP-5, WGSL, the only
 public landfill on O
'ahu permitted to receive municipal solid 
waste, was to close and cease operations by November 1, 2009.
 
In December 2008, the City's Department of
 
Environmental Services (DES) filed an application with the City's
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP) for a new special use
 
permit, County Special Use Permit File No. 2008/SUP-2 (SUP-2). 
The application sought the use of an additional 92.5 acres of the
 200-acre site for expansion of the existing WGSL, and an
 extension of the time that WGSL could remain in operation. In
 August 2009, the City's Planning Commission (Planning Commission)
 approved SUP-2 for "the existing and proposed expansion of WGSL 
. . . totaling approximately 200.622 acres, until capacity as
 allowed by the State Department of Health is reached[.]" On
 October 22, 2009, the LUC adopted the Planning Commission's
 decision, subject to the imposition of additional conditions. 
In support of its application for SUP-2, the DES
 
prepared a final environmental impact statement (Final EIS),
 which it submitted to the DPP for approval in October 2008. The
 process of preparing the Final EIS included the DES's publication
 of an environmental impact statement (EIS) preparation notice on
 November 23, 2006, and a notice of the draft EIS (Draft EIS) on
 May 23, 2008. Plaintiff-Appellant Colleen Hanabusa (Hanabusa)
 submitted comments in response to both the EIS preparation notice
 and the Draft EIS. On October 13, 2008, the DPP accepted the
 Final EIS submitted by the DES.
 
This case arises out of the DPP's acceptance of the
 
Final EIS. Hanabusa filed an eighteen-count complaint in the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court), challenging
 the legal sufficiency of the Final EIS and seeking declaratory
 and injunctive relief. The complaint named as defendants the
 DES, the DPP, and the City (collectively, the "City"). Hanabusa
 and the City both filed motions for summary judgment. The
 Circuit Court granted the City's motion and denied Hanabusa's
 motion, and it entered final judgment in favor of the City.
1
 
Hanabusa's primary argument on appeal is that the Final
 
EIS was insufficient and not prepared in good faith because the
 scope of the landfill project described in the Final EIS was
 
1/ The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
different from the scope of the landfill project for which SUP-2
 
was sought and which the Final EIS was used to justify. In
 essence, Hanabusa argues that the Final EIS concealed and failed
 to adequately address the true nature of the project. 
Specifically, Hanabusa asserts that the Final EIS only addressed
 the impacts of a 92.5-acre expansion to WGSL, whereas SUP-2
 encompassed the use of the entire 200-acre site for landfill
 operations -- the continued use of the existing 107.5 acre WGSL,
 as well as the use of the area of the proposed 92.5 acre
 expansion. Hanabusa also asserts that assuming arguendo that the
 Final EIS can be viewed as covering the project sought by SUP-2,
 the Circuit Court erred in failing to address each of the
 allegations in her complaint regarding the insufficiency of the
 Final EIS.
 
As explained in greater detail below, we hold that
 
Hanabusa had fair notice that the Final EIS encompassed the
 entire WGSL site, and not just the area of the proposed
 expansion; that the Circuit Court did not err in denying
 Hanabusa's challenge to the sufficiency of the Final EIS; and
 that the Circuit Court did not err in granting summary judgment
 in favor of the City. We therefore affirm the Circuit Court's
 Judgment.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
WGSL is the only public landfill on O
'ahu permitted to 
receive municipal solid waste. WGSL is located on the Property, two adjacent parcels of land owned by the City in Waim
analo 
Gulch, O 'ahu, designated as tax map key (TMK) numbers (1)9-2­
003:072 and 073. The Property consists approximately of 200
 acres and is zoned for agricultural use. A special use permit is
 necessary to operate a landfill on the Property. 
In 1987, the City was first permitted to operate WGSL
 
on approximately 60.5 acres of the Property pursuant to SUP-5,
 which was issued in that year by the LUC. SUP-5 was amended in
 1989 to expand WGSL by approximately 26 acres, and was again
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
amended in 2003 to expand WGSL by an additional 21 acres,
 
resulting in a total approved area for WGSL of 107.5 acres. In
 support of the application for SUP-5 and its 1989 amendment, the
 City's Department of Public Works (now known as the DES) prepared
 a revised EIS which was accepted by the City's Department of Land
 Utilization (now known as the DPP) on October 17, 1985. In
 support of the application for the 2003 amendment to SUP-5, the
 DES prepared a final supplemental EIS which was accepted by the
 DPP on January 10, 2003. 
The 2003 amendment to SUP-5 was sought because the
 
existing WGSL was "quickly approaching its maximum capacity,"
 with "no feasible alternative that [could] be implemented in time
 to dispose [municipal solid waste] after the approved landfill
 capacity is exhausted." In granting the 2003 amendment to SUP-5,
 the LUC imposed various conditions, including that: (1) a "Blue
 Ribbon Site Selection Committee shall make its recommendation for
 a new landfill site to the [Honolulu] City Council by December 1,
 2003"; (2) the City Council shall select a new landfill site by
 June 1, 2004, and if a new site was not selected by that date,
 the special use permit (SUP-5) would immediately expire; and (3)
 by May 1, 2008, "the 200-acre property shall be restricted from
 accepting any additional waste material and be closed[.]" 
On May 10, 2004, the LUC extended the deadline for the
 
Honolulu City Council (City Council) to select a landfill site
 from June 1, 2004, to December 1, 2004. On December 1, 2004, the
 City Council adopted Resolution 04-348, CD1, FD1, calling for the
 selection of the WGSL site as the "new" landfill site. The
 Resolution noted, among other things, that "the [C]ity already
 owns the property" and that "[t]he site has over 15 years
 capacity left with further expansion." In 2006, the City Council
 passed a bill, Bill 37 (2005), C.D. 2, which limited the types of
 waste that could disposed of at WGSL after May 1, 2007, and
 required WGSL to be closed after May 1, 2008. On February 28,
 2006, the Mayor of the City vetoed Bill 37, C.D. 2, explaining
 that:
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
given the indisputable facts that (1) the City cannot have a
new landfill in operation by May 1, 2008, and (2) for the
foreseeable future, the City needs a landfill on island, the
Bill's requirement that the Waimanalo Gulch landfill be
closed after that date exposes the City to an untenable
choice in 2008 between (1) continued illegal operation of
the landfill, thereby subjecting the City to possible
regulatory fines, injunctions, and other lawsuits, or (2)
the cessation of any landfill activity, which will mean no
collection of municipal solid waste, island-wide. Neither
 alternative is acceptable to me, nor to you and your
constituents. As such, Bill 37, C.D. 2, cannot be allowed
to become law.
 
. . . [E]ven if a new landfill site is selected this
year, the reality of our current situation is that the City
will not be able to cease use of the Waimanalo Gulch
 landfill by May 1, 2008. The planning, permitting and
construction of an alternate landfill location will take
 longer than the two years remaining before that deadline.
Other alternatives such as shipping off-island or new
technologies have many issues, familiar to the Council,
which will not be resolved before May 1, 2008. However
 reluctantly, the City must therefore seek to extend the
permits for operating the Waimanalo Gulch landfill in any
event.
 

Mayor's Message No. 037, February 28, 2006 (footnote omitted). 
On March 14, 2008, the LUC extended the deadline for closing WGSL
 from May 1, 2008, to November 1, 2009.
 
In December 2008, the DES submitted an application for
 
a new special use permit, SUP-2, to authorize the expansion of
 the existing WGSL by an additional 92.5 acres so that the entire
 200-acre Property -- the 107.5 acres already being used by WGSL
 plus the proposed 92.5 acre expansion area -- could be used for
 landfill operations. The DES stated that it would withdraw the
 existing special use permit, SUP-5, which authorized the existing
 WGSL and accessory uses on 107.5 acres of the Property, if SUP-2
 was approved.
 
On August 4, 2009, the Planning Commission approved 
the DES's application for SUP-2 and approved "a new [special use
 permit] for the existing and proposed expansion of WGSL . . .
 totaling approximately 200.622 acres, until capacity as allowed
 by the State Department of Health is reached," subject to a
 
5

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
number of conditions.2 On October 22, 2009, the LUC adopted the
 
Planning Commission's decision and approved SUP-2, subject to the
 
imposition of additional conditions.3
 
II.
 
Prior to, and in support of its application for SUP-2,
the DES prepared a Final EIS. As part of the process for
 preparing the Final EIS, the DES, on November 23, 2006, published
 an EIS preparation notice to notify the public of its proposed
 expansion of WGSL and the 30-day consultation period. The EIS
 preparation notice stated: "The [DES] has submitted an EIS
 preparation notice for the Waimanalo Gulch Sanitary Landfill
 

 
2/ Concurrent with its application for SUP-2, the DES had submitted a
petition to the LUC for a district boundary amendment to reclassify the 200­
acre Property from Agricultural District to Urban District. The district
 boundary amendment was an alternative method (to SUP-2) to obtain approval to
expand the existing WGSL by an additional 92.5 acres so that the entire 200­acre site could be used for landfill operations. The application for the
district boundary amendment was subsequently withdrawn.
 
3/ Hanabusa, Maile Shimabukuro, and the Ko Olina Community Association
were allowed to intervene in the DES's application for SUP-2 before thePlanning Commission, and a contested case hearing was held. SUP-2 was the subject of additional litigation that culminated in a case before the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court. See Dep't of Envtl. Servs. v. Land Use Comm'n, 127 Hawai' i 5,
275 P.3d 809 (2012). The issue before the Hawai' i Supreme Court was whether
the LUC's imposition of Condition 14 to SUP-2 "was supported by substantialevidence in the record as whole." Id. at 14, 275 P.3d at 818. Condition 14 
prohibited WGSL "from accepting municipal solid waste (or any other wastebesides ash and residue from H-POWER) after July 31, 2012." Id. at 6, 10, 275 
P.3d at 810, 814. The supreme court held that "LUC Condition 14 is notsupported by substantial evidence in the record," and that the restrictionsimposed by Condition 14 were contrary to the findings of the PlanningCommission which the LUC had adopted. Id. at 17, 275 P.3d at 821. The court 
noted: 
the Planning Commission's Findings of Fact clearly demonstrate the
continuing need to dispose of municipal solid waste at WGSL beyond
July 31, 2012. For example, the Planning Commission acknowledged
[Chief of the DES, Refuse Division] Mr. Doyle's testimony that "it
would take more than seven years to identify and develop a new
landfill site." The Planning Commission also found that "a
landfill is currently necessary for proper solid waste
management," and that "WGSL is the only permitted public
[municipal solid waste] facility on the island of Oahu."
Moreover, the Planning Commission's Decision and Order expressly
provides that [municipal solid waste] may be deposited at WGSL's
expanded site "until capacity as allowed by the State Department
of Health is reached."
 
Id. (brackets omitted). The supreme court concluded that Condition 14 could
not stand, and it directed that the matter be remanded to the LUC for further
proceedings. Id. at 17-19, 275 P.3d at 821-823. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
expansion. It provides municipal and solid waste disposal for
 
all of O 'ahu, . . . including Municipal Solid Waste (MSW); 
recycling residue; and Honolulu Program of Waste Energy Recovery
 (H-POWER) ash, residue, and unacceptable waste." The EIS
 preparation notice further stated:
 
The landfill has been in operation since 1989 and has
capacity remaining for at least 15 years. The [City]
proposes to expand the use of the Waimanalo Gulch Sanitary
Landfill beyond May 1, 2008, when the approved State Special
Use Permit calls for the closure of the landfill from the
 acceptance of municipal waste (excluding H-POWER ash,
residue, and unacceptable waste). 
. . . Approximately 92.5 acres of the 200 acre
property is unused and is proposed for landfill expansion. 
On May 23, 2008, the DES published notice of the Draft
 
EIS, thereby commencing the 45-day review period. The public
 
notice of the Draft EIS provided in relevant part: 
The Draft EIS reports that the proposed expansion to
Waimanalo Gulch Sanitary Landfill (WGSL) is anticipated to
generate potential adverse impacts as follows: modification
to the existing landforms, dust, mud tracking onto highway,
noise and odors and other air emissions, cultural resources,
views, windblown litter, possible release of leachates into
the brackish groundwater, perception of environmental
injustice, and traffic hazards. The [Draft EIS] contains
measures to mitigate the potential for adverse impacts.
Regarding project benefits, the project will provide amunicipal solid waste disposal site for the next
approximately 15 years within the same valley thereby
precluding the Applicant from developing another site for
landfill purposes and thus avoiding impacts to other O' ahu 
communities if a new site were developed.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
Hanabusa submitted comments to the DES in an 8-page
 
letter dated August 30, 2006, submitted before the publication of
 
the EIS preparation notice; in a 6-page letter dated December 26,
 2006, submitted in response to the EIS preparation notice; and in
 a 24-page letter dated July 7, 2008, submitted in response to the
 Draft EIS. Hanabusa's letters containing her comments were
 included in the Final EIS along with the DES's response to the
 comments. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Both the Draft EIS and the Final EIS, in the "Executive
 
Summary" Section, under the heading "Proposed Action," describe
 
the proposed action as follows:
 
The Waimanalo Gulch Sanitary Landfill (WGSL) is an essential
and necessary City & County of Honolulu facility thatprovides municipal and solid waste disposal for all thecommunities of O' ahu. Refuse that is disposed of at the
landfill includes Municipal Solid Waste (MSW); recyclingresidue; and, Honolulu Program of Waste Energy Recovery (H­POWER) ash and residue. The landfill has been in operationsince 1989 and has capacity remaining with the unused 92.5acres of the approximately 200 acre property for anestimated minimum life of approximately 15 years. This will extend the use of the site beyond November 1, 2009, the datethe amended State Special Use Permit will prohibit thefurther acceptance of waste at the WGSL. 
In addition to the expansion of the area of landfilling, the
proposed project will involve the development of landfill
associated support infrastructure (e.g., drainage, access
roadways, landfill gas and leachate collection and
monitoring systems, stockpile sites and other related
features), a public drop off center, and a landfill gas to
energy (LFGTE) system.
 
(Footnotes omitted.)
 
The DES submitted the Final EIS, entitled "Final
 
Environmental Impact Statement, Waim analo Gulch Sanitary Landfill
 
Lateral Expansion, Waim analo Gulch, O 'ahu, Hawai 'i, TMKs: (1)9-2­
003: 072 and 073," which was dated October 10, 2008, to the DPP. 
By letter dated October 13, 2008, the DPP accepted the Final EIS. 
Notice of the DPP's acceptance of the Final EIS was published on
 October 23, 2008. 
III.

 
On December 11, 2008, Hanabusa filed a "Complaint for
 
Declaratory Judgment and Injunctive Relief" against the City in
 Circuit Court. In her complaint, Hanabusa alleged that "[a]t all
 relevant times, Hanabusa is a resident of the Leeward Coast in
 the City and County of Honolulu . . ., an owner of a home located
 across Waimanalo Gulch Sanitary Landfill . . ., as well as a duly
 elected State Senator for the 21st Senatorial District
 representing residents of the Leeward Coast." Hanabusa's
 complaint consisted of eighteen counts, which alleged that 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
numerous aspects of the Final EIS, including the manner in which
 
it was compiled, were "insufficient and unacceptable."
 
Hanabusa and the City filed competing motions for
 
summary judgment. After a hearing held on March 16, 2010, the
 Circuit Court granted the City's motion for summary judgment and
 denied Hanabusa's motion for summary judgment. The Circuit Court
 ruled, in relevant part, that: 
2. [Hanabusa] had ample notice that [the] 2008
[Final EIS] considered the entire 200-acre landfill property
and was not limited to just the 92.5-acre expansion area.
 
3. [Hanabusa] did not comment on the alleged
failure of the 2008 [Final EIS] to consider the entire 200­acre property in her written comments dated August 30, 2006,
in her written comments on the Environmental Impact
Statement ("EIS") Preparation Notice dated December 26,
2006, or in her written comments on the Draft EIS for the
2008 [Final EIS] dated July 7, 2008, or in the Complaint
filed herein.
 
4. [Hanabusa] lacks standing to challenge the
sufficiency of the 2008 [Final EIS] regarding its alleged
failure to address the entire 200-acre property, as she
failed to identify and discuss this matter in her written
comments, as required by [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)]
§ 343-7(c).
 
5. Alternatively, even if [Hanabusa] has standing
to challenge the sufficiency of the 2008 [Final EIS] for itsalleged failure to address the entire 200-acre property, the2008 [Final EIS] is legally sufficient, as it adequatelydiscloses facts to enable a decision-maker to render an informed decision under the "rule of reason." See Price v. 
Obayashi Hawaii Corp., 81 Hawai' i 171, 914 P.2d 1364 (1996). 
6. The 2008 [Final EIS] was compiled in good faith
and sets forth sufficient information to enable the
 decision-maker to consider fully the environmental factors
involved and to make a reasoned decision after balancing the
risks of harm to the environment against the benefits to be
derived from the proposed action, as well as to make a
reasoned choice between alternatives.
 
7. The 18 claims set forth in the Complaint,
alleging various insufficiencies in the 2008 [Final EIS],
are not supported by an examination of the 2008 [Final EIS],
which is thorough and was compiled through lawful procedure. 
The Circuit Court entered its Final Judgment in favor
 
of the City and against Hanabusa on April 21, 2010. This appeal
 
followed.
 
9

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
I.
 
An appellate court reviews the trial court's grant of
 
summary judgment 
de novo, under the same standard applied by the
 
trial court. Yoneda v. Tom, 110 Hawai 'i 367, 371, 133 P.3d 796, 
800 (2006).
 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with affidavits, if any, show that there is
no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A fact is
 material if proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a
cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the [inferences] drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Id. (brackets and citation omitted). In reviewing the trial
 
court's grant of summary judgment, an appellate court's
 consideration of the record is limited to those materials "that
 were considered by the trial court in its determination of the
 
motion." 
(1983). Munoz v. Yuen, 66 Haw. 603, 605-06, 670 P.2d 825, 827 
II. 
"[T]he sufficiency of an environmental impact statement 
is a question of law, which is properly addressed through the summary judgment procedure." 
Price v. Obayashi Hawaii Corp.,  81 
Hawai'i 171, 182, 914 P.2d 1364, 1375 (1996). "This is because 
the only question presented is whether the EIS complies with applicable statutory mandates, such as [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] chapter 343 and EIS Rules chapter 200. There are no factual determinations to be made regarding EIS adequacy." Id. 
In evaluating the sufficiency of an EIS, Hawai 'i courts 
apply the "rule of reason" standard to "determine whether an EIS is legally sufficient in adequately disclosing facts to enable a decision-making body to render an informed decision." Id. Under 
this standard: 
an EIS need not be exhaustive to the point of discussing all
possible details bearing on the proposed action but will be
 
10
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
upheld as adequate if it has been compiled in good faith and
sets forth sufficient information to enable the
 decision-maker to consider fully the environmental factors
involved and to make a reasoned decision after balancing the
risks of harm to the environment against the benefits to be
derived from the proposed action, as well as to make a
reasoned choice between alternatives.
 
Id. (quoting Life of the Land v. Ariyoshi, 59 Haw. 156, 164-65,
 
577 P.2d 1116, 1121 (1978)).
 
"[A] court's role, in evaluating whether the EIS 
complies with statutory requirements, is very narrow." Id. at 
182 n.12, 914 P.2d at 1375 n.12. In Price, the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court cited with approval the following principles for evaluating the sufficiency of an EIS that were set forth by the federal court in Stop H–3 Ass'n v. Lewis, 538 F.Supp. 149 (D. Haw. 1982): 
A court is not to substitute its judgment for that of
the agency as to the environmental consequences of its
action. Rather, the court must ensure that the agency has
taken a "hard look" at environmental factors.
 
If the agency has followed the proper procedures, its
action will only be set aside if the court finds the action
to be "arbitrary and capricious," given the known
environmental consequences.
 
The court should not be used as a quasi-legislative or
quasi-executive forum by those who are dissatisfied with
policy decisions made by governing bodies. The
 environmental laws were neither meant to be used as a
 "crutch" for chronic fault-finding, nor as a means of
delaying the implementation of properly accepted projects.
 
Price, 81 Hawai 'i at 182-83 n.12, 914 P.2d at 1375-76 n.12 
(brackets omitted) (quoting Stop H–3 Ass'n, 538 F.Supp. at 159). 
Neither HRS Chapter 343, nor the applicable rules,
 
"indicate the level of detail or specificity that should be
 
included [in an EIS] on any given subject. The statute and rules
 were designed to give latitude to the accepting agency as to the
 content of each EIS." Id. at 183, 914 P.2d at 1376.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Hanabusa's primary argument on appeal is that the Final
 
EIS was insufficient and not prepared in good faith because the
 scope of the project described in the Final EIS was different
 than the project for which SUP-2 was sought. Specifically,
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hanabusa claims that the Final EIS only addressed the impacts of
 
a 92.5 acre expansion to WGSL and therefore could not be used to
 support SUP-2, which encompassed the use of the entire 200-acre
 Property for landfill operations. In essence, Hanabusa argues
 that the Final EIS concealed and failed to adequately address the
 true nature of the proposed project. 
4
The City, citing HRS § 343-7(c) (2010),  argues that
Hanabusa lacks standing to challenge the Final EIS based on its
 alleged failure to address the impacts of the landfill operations

 
on the entire 200-acre Property because she did not identify this
 issue in the written comments she submitted during the EIS review
 process. Hanabusa counters that she had no notice during the EIS
 review process that the DES's proposed action encompassed the
 entire 200-acre Property and thus had no reason to submit
 comments challenging the scope of the EIS. 
The question of whether Hanabusa is barred from raising
 
a challenge to the scope of the Final EIS is dependent upon and

 
intertwined with our analysis of whether the EIS review process
 and the Final EIS sufficiently disclosed and addressed a proposed
 project that encompassed landfill operations on the entire
 Property. We therefore begin with this analysis.
 
II.
 
We conclude that the Final EIS sufficiently described
 
the proposed project as encompassing landfill operations on the
 entire Property and sufficiently addressed the impacts of
 landfill operations on the entire Property. We further conclude
 
4/ HRS § 343-7, entitled "Limitation of actions," provides in relevant
part:
 
(c) Any judicial proceeding, the subject of which is the

acceptance of an environmental impact statement required under
section 343-5, shall be initiated within sixty days after the
public has been informed pursuant to section 343-3 of the
acceptance of such statement. . . . Affected agencies and persons
who provided written comment to such statement during the
designated review period shall be adjudged aggrieved parties for
the purpose of bringing judicial action under this subsection;
provided that the contestable issues shall be limited to issues
identified and discussed in the written comment.
 
(Emphasis added.)

 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Hanabusa had fair notice that the DES was preparing the
 
Final EIS to support the use of the entire 200-acre Property for
 landfill operations.
 
A. 
The context in which the EIS review process was 
conducted is significant. The DES initiated the EIS review process with the publication of the EIS preparation notice in November 2006. At that time, pursuant to a special use permit, WGSL was authorized to conduct landfill operations on 107.5 acres of the 200-acre Property and was the only municipal landfill on O
'ahu permitted to receive municipal solid waste. In 2004, the 
City Council had selected the WGSL site as the "new" landfill site, noting that the City already owned the Property and that the site had "over 15 years capacity left with further expansion." In 2006, the Mayor vetoed a bill that would have limited the types of waste that could be disposed of at WGSL and would have required the closure of WGSL after May 1, 2008, explaining that a landfill was necessary on O
'ahu for the 
foreseeable future and that the City could not have a new landfill in operation by May 1, 2008. In March 2008, the LUC extended the deadline for the closure of WGSL from May 1, 2008, to November 1, 2009. 
Given this context, it is clear that the DES's proposed 
project to expand WGSL by 92.5 acres was to increase the extent
 of landfill operations on the Property from the existing 107.5
 acres to the entire 200-acre Property. In other words, the DES
 sought to continue the existing landfill operations and expand it
 to unused portions of the Property. Certainly, there was no
 suggestion or indication that the DES intended to abandon
 landfill operations on the 107.5 acres WGSL was already using,
 and that the proposed expansion project would result in a
 contraction of the landfill. Nor was there any indication or
 suggestion that the DES was proposing to create an entirely new 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
92.5-acre landfill that was not connected to the existing
 
landfill operations. 
B.
 
The Final EIS, as well as the other materials published
 
by the DES during the EIS review process, disclosed and provided
 fair notice that the proposed expansion project would encompass
 the entire 200-acre Property. The EIS preparation notice
 described the project as a proposal "to expand the use of the
 [WGSL]" beyond its then-existing May 1, 2008, closure date. Both
 the Draft EIS and the Final EIS, describe the proposed action and
 project in terms of expanding the use of the existing landfill to
 encompass the entire Property. 
For example, in both the Draft and Final EIS, the
 
"Executive Summary" Section, under the heading "Proposed Action"
 states: 
The landfill has been in operation since 1989 and has
capacity remaining with the unused 92.5 acres of the
approximately 200 acre property for an estimated minimum
life of approximately 15 years. This will extend the use of
 
the site beyond November 1, 2009, the date the amended State
Special Use Permit will prohibit the further acceptance of
waste at the WGSL.
 
(Emphasis added; footnote omitted.) The "Project Background"
 
Section also states that "[t]he proposed project to expand the
 use of the [WGSL] will extend the use of the site beyond November
 1, 2009[.]" (Footnote omitted.) Both the Draft and Final EIS,
 under the heading "Project Location and Area of Use," refer to
 the area of the site as 200 acres, comprised of 107.5 acres
 currently used for landfill operations and 92.5 acres "proposed
 to be used for the future expansion of the site." In addition,
 both the Draft and Final EIS are replete with references to the
 entire 200-acre Property and landfill operations relevant to the
 entire Property, not just the proposed 92.5-acre expansion.
 
C.
 
Comments received in response to the EIS preparation
 
notice and Draft EIS provide further proof of the general
 understanding that the proposed action encompassed the entire
 Property, and not just the 92.5-acre expansion area. These
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
comments referred to matters pertaining to the entire 200-acre
 
Property or the 107.5 acres already being used for landfill
 operations.
 
Moreover, as the City argues, "[a]n expansion, by its
 
very definition, is to increase in size or to enlarge or to
 spread out." The word "expansion" is defined as "the act or
 process of expanding," and the word "expand" means "to increase
 in extent, size, volume, scope, etc." Expansion Definition,
 
DICTIONARY.COM, http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/expansion
 (last visited May 29, 2014); Expand Definition, DICTIONARY.COM,
 http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/expand (last visited May
 29, 2014). Viewed in context, we conclude that the Final EIS,
 and the other materials published by the DES during the EIS
 review process, adequately disclosed that the proposed project to
 expand WGSL by an additional 92.5 acres encompassed landfill
 operations on the entire 200-acre Property.
 
D.
 
A review of the Final EIS reveals that it addressed the
 
impacts of landfill operations on the entire 200-acre Property. 
The Final EIS discussed practices and procedures applicable to
 activities at WGSL affecting the entire Property such as:
 procedures for excluding or controlling the dumping of hazardous
 material; the practices for the unloading and compaction of
 waste; and the special treatment of certain types of waste. It
 described the climate and rainfall, topography, geology, and soil
 composition of the entire site. It also discussed the existing
 and planned drainage control system and the surface water plan
 for the entire Property. The Final EIS provided a discussion of
 groundwater and air quality control, and mitigation measures, for
 both the existing site and proposed expansion area. The Final
 EIS also cited the previous environmental impact statements
 prepared with respect to SUP-5 and the amendments thereto.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E.
 
For all the foregoing reasons, we do not agree with 
Hanabusa's argument that the Final EIS concealed and failed to 
adequately address the true nature of the proposed project. We conclude that the Final EIS sufficiently described the proposed project as encompassing landfill operations on the entire 200­acre Property, and that it covered the project for which SUP-2 was sought. We also agree with the Circuit Court that Hanabusa had fair notice that the project under consideration included the entire 200-acre landfill property. We therefore conclude that Hanabusa's failure to contest the scope of the EIS in her written comments during the EIS review period bars her from raising the claim that the Final EIS was insufficient, and not prepared in good faith, because it described a project that was different than the project for which SUP-2 was sought. See HRS § 343-7(c); 
Price, 81 Hawai
'i at 183, 914 P.2d at 1376 (limiting judicial 
consideration of challenges to the sufficiency of an EIS to concerns listed in comments submitted during the review period). In any event, as our previous discussion reveals, even assuming arguendo that Hanabusa is not barred from raising this claim, we conclude that it fails on the merits. 
III.
 
Hanabusa argues that, in granting the City's motion for
 
summary judgment, the Circuit Court erred in failing to address
 each of the allegations regarding the insufficiency of the Final
 EIS raised in her eighteen-count complaint. Hanabusa, however,
 does not present any authority for the proposition that the
 Circuit Court was required to specifically address, or make an
 individual ruling on, each of the allegations of insufficiency in
 her complaint in order to grant summary judgment. Based on our
 review of the record, we conclude that in granting the City's
 motion for summary judgment, the Circuit Court properly and
 adequately considered the allegations in Hanabusa's complaint.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In her appeal, Hanabusa challenges the sufficiency of
 
the Final EIS in several respects. HRS § 343-2 (2010) defines an
 
EIS, in relevant part, as 
an informational document prepared in compliance with the
rules adopted under section 343-6 and which discloses the
environmental effects of a proposed action, effects of a
proposed action on the economic welfare, social welfare, and
cultural practices of the community and State, effects of
the economic activities arising out of the proposed action,
measures proposed to minimize adverse effects, and
alternatives to the action and their environmental effects. 
As previously noted, we apply the "rule of reason"
 
standard in evaluating the sufficiency of an EIS. Under this
 
standard:
 
an EIS need not be exhaustive to the point of discussing all
possible details bearing on the proposed action but will be
upheld as adequate if it has been compiled in good faith and
sets forth sufficient information to enable the
 decision-maker to consider fully the environmental factors
involved and to make a reasoned decision after balancing the
risks of harm to the environment against the benefits to be
derived from the proposed action, as well as to make a
reasoned choice between alternatives.
 
Price, 81 Hawai 'i at 182, 914 P.2d at 1375. 
The Final EIS was thorough and comprehensive,
 
consisting of 3 volumes and over 1900 pages. It discussed, among
 
other things, the setting and potential impacts of the proposed
 project with respect to the following topics: climate and
 rainfall, topography, geology, surface water, groundwater and
 hydrology, natural hazards, air quality, acoustic
 characteristics, flora and fauna resources, scenic and aesthetic
 environment, traffic and circulation, wastewater,
 potable/drinking water, power and communications, public
 services, socioeconomic characteristics, land use and ownership,
 historic and archaeological resources, and cultural impacts. The
 Final EIS was supported by numerous studies included in volumes 2
 and 3, and it cited the previous environmental impact statements
 prepared with respect to SUP-5 and the amendments thereto. 
Hanabusa argues that the Final EIS was inadequate
 
because it was "self-serving," the "outcome was predetermined,"
 and it failed to address alternatives. However, Section 9 of the
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Final EIS discussed alternatives to the proposed expansion of 
WGSL including: taking no action; the transshipment of waste off-island; the use of alternative technologies such as anaerobic digestion, aerobic digestion, hydrolysis, thermal technologies, waste to energy, and increased recycling; and alternative landfill locations
. The Final EIS concluded that taking no 
action would result in unacceptable health, safety, and economic impacts to O
'ahu communities, and that transshipment off-island 
could only reduce, but not replace, the need for a municipal landfill and also had "major issues" (discussed in the Final EIS) associated with it. The Final EIS noted that while some alternative technologies show promise, none "are capable of completely eliminating the need for a municipal landfill." As to alternative landfill locations, the Final EIS discussed in detail a selection process that began with 45 potential sites and was narrowed to 5 sites that included the WGSL site. The Final EIS also explained its conclusion that continued use of the WGSL site was the preferred alternative. 
Hanabusa also contends that the Final EIS was
 
inadequate and showed that "the City did not take a hard look at
 the environmental factors" because it failed to adequately
 address her claims regarding: (1) "the Notice of Violations,
 Schnitzer Steel case[,] and the Secondary Impacts of the landfill
 operations"; (2) "the concerns over the Economic Impact upon Ko
 Olina and the Cultural aspects"; (3) the stability of the
 landfill for which WGSL was cited in the Notice of Violations;
 (4) "the need to blast the mountain to create the air space"; (5)
 the cumulative impact of the project; and (6) public trust
 resources, cultural resources, and constitutional issues. 
However, Hanabusa does not provide significant details or
 argument with respect to these claims, or cite legal authority
 that persuades us. Based on our review of the record, we agree
 with the Circuit Court that the Final EIS was sufficient and that
 it "was compiled in good faith and sets forth sufficient
 information to enable the decision-maker to consider fully the
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
environmental factors involved and to make a reasoned decision
 
after balancing the risks of harm to the environment against the
 benefits to be derived from the proposed action, as well as to
 make a reasoned choice between alternatives." 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit 
Court's Final Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 30, 2014. 
On the briefs:

 
Colleen Hanabusa, 
Pro Se Plaintiff-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Acting Associate Judge
Gary Y. Takeuchi,

Jesse K. Souki, 
Sharon Lam Blanchard, and
Dana M. Viola,
Deputies Corporation Counsel,
City and County of Honolulu, for Defendants-Appellees
 
19
 