NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30464
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
RYOZO ARIYOSHI, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-09-05739)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ryozo Ariyoshi (Ariyoshi) appeals 
from the March 17, 2010 judgment entered by the District Court of 
the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court).1 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged Ariyoshi by 
complaint with operating a vehicle under the influence of an 
intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1)(Supp. 2008), as a first-time offender under 
HRS § 291E-61(b)(1) (Supp. 2008). 
Prior to trial, Ariyoshi moved to strike the penal 
summons and invalidate service (Motion to Strike) on the ground 
that the procedure used in issuing the penal summons violated 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 9(b)(2) (2007). The 
1 The Honorable William Cardwell presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
District Court denied the Motion to Strike. After a bench trial,
 
the District Court found Ariyoshi guilty as charged of OVUII in
 
violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) and (b)(1). 
On appeal, Ariyoshi asserts that the District Court
 
erred in denying his Motion to Strike for violation of HRPP Rule
 
9(b)(2). We affirm the District Court's judgment.
 
The District Court did not err in denying Ariyoshi's
 
Motion to Strike for violation of HRPP Rule 9(b)(2).2 The record
 
reflects that the penal summons was stamped filed on December 7,
 2009 by the clerk of the District Court and returned to the
 
prosecutor's office, but with the date of the required appearance
 
left blank. Thereafter, the prosecutor filled in the appearance
 
date of December 21, 2009, and served Ariyoshi on December 9,
 
2 HRPP Rule 9(b)(2) provides:
 
(b) Form.
 
. . . .
 
(2) SUMMONS. The summons shall be in such form as may be
prescribed in the issuing court and shall 
(i) contain the name of the defendant;
 (ii) describe the offense alleged in the charge;
 (iii) command the defendant to appear before the court at a
stated place and at a stated time, which shall be not less than 5
days from the time of service of the summons unless waived by the
defendant;
 
(iv) contain a prohibition against personal delivery of the
summons between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on premises not open to
the public, unless a judge of the district or circuit courts
permits personal delivery during those hours in writing on the
 summons.
 
(v) contain a warning to the person summoned that failure to
obey the summons will render the person subject to prosecution for
contempt;
 
(vi) state the date when issued and the court from which it
is issued; and
 
(vii) be signed by the clerk.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2009 with the penal summons. A proof of service was filed on
 
December 14, 2009. On December 21, 2009, counsel for Ariyoshi
 
appeared and requested waiver of Ariyoshi's presence,
 
acknowledged receipt of the complaint, waived reading of the
 
charge, and entered a not guilty plea.
 
In denying Ariyoshi's Motion to Strike, the District
 
Court entered the following findings of fact.
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
The facts as found herein were stipulated to by the parties
herein.
 
1.
 In this matter (as in hundreds of other cases), the original
complaint was filed in this court prior to November 17, 2009, the
date of the Supreme Court’s decision in State v.
 Wheeler, 121 Haw. 383 (2009). That original complaint did not
contain the language held by the Supreme Court to be necessary;
that is, that the offense took place "on a public way, street,
road or highway."
 
2. In anticipation of the dismissal of the original complaint as
defective, the State, by the prosecutor’s office, filed a new
complaint along with a penal summons. This new complaint was filed
as a new case in this court.
 
3. The penal summons was stamped filed by the clerk of this court
and either the original or a copy returned to the prosecutor’s
office with the date of defendant’s required appearance left
blank.
 
4. When the original case was called for trial, this court
dismissed the case without prejudice.
 
5. On or about the same time, the prosecutor filled in the
required appearance information on the penal summons and served
the complaint and penal summons on the defendant.
 
6. Thereafter, but prior to defendant’s required appearance, the
prosecutor filed the proof of service which was attached to the
penal summons.
 
7. At the required date and time, defendant or his attorney
appeared for arraignment and plea, entered a plea of not guilty
and the case was set for trial.
 
8. Prior to the date of trial, defendant filed the instant motion
to strike the penal summons as defective and improperly filed with
this court.
 
9. This court takes judicial notice of the undisputed fact that
the above basic procedure was followed by the State and this
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court’s office of the clerk in most, if not all, cases that were
 
dismissed without prejudice due to the Wheeler decision.
 
The District Court denied Ariyoshi's Motion to Strike,
 
concluding that the clerk of court's stamping the penal summons
 
as "filed" rather than "issued" before delivering it for service
 
to the prosecutor's office did not affect whether the clerk had
 
properly issued the summons and that "[t]he procedure followed in
 
issuing, delivering and serving defendant with the penal summons
 
did not prejudice the defendant's rights." 
On appeal, Ariyoshi asserts that the District Court
 
erred in denying his Motion to Strike because the procedure used
 
in issuing the penal summons and designating the appearance date
 
violated HRPP Rule 9(b)(2). In particular, Ariyoshi challenges
 
the summons being stamped "filed" as opposed to "issued." He
 
also argues that the clerk of court's provision of the penal
 
summons with the appearance date left blank and the prosecutor's
 
filling in that date upon serving the summons violated HRPP
 
Rule 9(b)(2).
 
Even assuming arguendo that the procedure followed in
 
issuing the penal summons and designating the appearance date
 somehow violates HRPP Rule 9(b)(2), we conclude that any
 
impropriety constituted harmless error and did not warrant the
 
dismissal of the complaint. The purpose of a penal summons is to
 
provide the defendant with notice of the date and time the
 
defendant must appear in court to answer to the charges filed
 
against the defendant. Here, Ariyoshi was served with a penal
 
summons and appeared in court through counsel at the designated
 
date and time to answer the complaint that had been filed against
 
him. Ariyoshi does not argue that he suffered any prejudice from
 
the alleged violation of HRPP Rule 9(b)(2). We conclude that the
 
alleged violation of HRPP Rule 9(b)(2) did not affect Ariyoshi's
 
substantial rights, and thus the District Court did not err in
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
denying his Motion to Strike. See HRPP Rule 52(a) (1977) ("Any
 
error, defect, irregularity or variance which does not affect
 
substantial rights shall be disregarded.").
 
In consideration of the foregoing, we affirm the
 
March 17, 2010 Judgment filed in the District Court.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 6, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
R. Patrick McPherson
 
(Law Office of R. Patrick McPherson)
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Presiding Judge
Donn Fudo
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
5
 