NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30142
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I
 
KAREN GOO, et al., Plaintiffs/Counterclaim­
Defendants/Appellants/Cross-Appellees
 
 
v.
 
MAYOR ALAN ARAKAWA, Successor-In-Interest to
Mayor Charmaine Tavares, WILLIAM SPENCE, Director of Planning,
County of Maui, Successor-In-Interest to Director Jeff Hunt,
County of Maui, Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants/
Appellees/Cross-Appellants/Cross-Appellees
 
and
 
VP AND PK(ML) LLC, KCOM Corp., Defendants/Intervenor­
Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants/ Counterclaimants/
Cross-Claimants/Appellees/Cross-Appellees/Cross-Appellants
 
and
 
KILA KILA CONSTRUCTION,
Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Cross-Claimant
 
and
 
(JOHN G.) JOHN G'S DESIGN & CONSTRUCTION, INC.,
Defendant/Cross-Claimant/Cross-Claim Defendant
 
and
 
NEW SAND HILLS LLC., Defendant/Intervenor­
Defendant/Counterclaimant/Cross-Claim Defendant/
Appellee/Cross-Appellee/Cross-Appellant
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and
 
DAVID B. MERCHANT; JOYCE TAKAHASHI; BRIAN TAKAHASHI,
Defendants/Intervenor-Defendants
 
and
 
DIANE L. REASER, et al.,
Defendants/Intervenor-Defendants/Counter-Claimants
 
and
 
HOOKAHI, LLC, SANDHILLS ESTATES COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION,
Intervenors/Appellees/Cross-Appellees/Cross-Appellants
 
and
 
CHERYL CABEBE, GERRY RIOPTA, and MELISSA RIOPTA,
Intervenor-Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellants
 
and
 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-100,
Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0258(1))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 This case relates to the development of the Sandhills
 
Estates (Sandhills Estates) and the Fairways at Maui Lani
 
(Fairways), which are residential projects in the Maui Lani
 
Project District on the island of Maui. 
This appeal arises from the Final Judgment (Final
 
Judgment) entered on September 30, 2009 by the Circuit Court of
 
the Second Circuit (circuit court).
1 The Final Judgment entered
 
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided. 
2
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2
judgment in favor of certain remaining Plaintiffs  (collectively
Homeowners) as to Counts I and II of the Fourth Amended Complaint
 
for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief and Damages (Fourth Amended
 
Complaint). Judgment on Counts I and II were entered against,
 
among others, Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellants Mayor Alan
 
Arakawa, Successor-in-Interest to Mayor Charmaine Tavares,
 
William Spence, Director of Planning, County of Maui, Successor­
3
in-Interest to Director Jeff Hunt,  and the County of Maui
4
(collectively the County)  ; and Intervenors/Cross-Appellants KCOM
Corp., Sandhills Estates Community Association (Association), and
 Hookahi, LLC. 
The circuit court entered judgment on Counts I and
 
II pursuant to its "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and
 Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment"
 
filed on December 31, 2008 (2008 Order). 
All other claims in the case were dismissed. 
Counterclaims by Intervenors/Cross-Appellants New Sand Hills, LLC
 
(New Sand Hills) and VP & PK (ML), LLC (VP&PK) were among the
 
claims dismissed by the circuit court.
 
In this appeal, KCOM Corp., New Sand Hills, VP&PK, and
 
the Association are represented by the same counsel. 
For
 
2
 While the case was before the circuit court, claims by some of the
plaintiffs were dismissed for various reasons. At the time Final Judgment was
entered in September 2009, the remaining plaintiffs were Karen Goo, Ron
Leinweber, Nancy Oshiro, Amber Torrecer-Paz, Reyn Tateyama, Larry Oshiro,
Adrienne Owens, Yoshi Sakuma, Jane Sakuma, Lillian Torrecer, Clark Nakamoto,
 
Scott Oshiro, Eric Engh, and Emily Engh. 
3
 Pursuant to Rule 43(c)(1) of the Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure, the names have been substituted to reflect the current parties.
4
 On July 15, 2008, the Homeowners' claims against Mayor Charmaine
Tavares, Successor-in-Interest to Mayor Alan Arakawa, and Jeff Hunt, Director
of Planning, County of Maui, Successor-in-Interest to Director Michael Foley
were dismissed as being duplicative of the claims against the County.
Nonetheless, these parties were named in the Final Judgment. 
3
   
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
purposes of this opinion, these parties will be referred to
 
collectively as "Developers."5
 
I. Issues Raised on Appeal
 
On appeal, Homeowners challenge the circuit court's
 
April 3, 2009 "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 
Plaintiffs' Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs"
 
(Fees/Costs Order), asserting that the circuit court "erred in
 
denying Homeowners' request for attorneys' fees against the
 
County under the private attorney general doctrine."
 
The County, in turn, cross-appeals and challenges the
 
circuit court's rulings regarding standing, injunctive relief,
 
indispensable parties, the interpretation of Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 46-4, the deference to be accorded to the
 
County's interpretation of the Maui County Code (MCC), and the
 
grant of summary judgment for Homeowners. 
The Developers also cross-appeal, collectively raising
 
challenges to the circuit court's rulings regarding exhaustion of
 
administrative remedies, vested rights, equitable estoppel,
 
interpretation of a unilateral agreement, summary judgment, a
 
laches defense, and a motion to intervene.6
 
II. Background
 
In Homeowners' initial Complaint filed on July 18,
 
2007, Homeowners asserted a total of twelve counts against the
 
County and various entities denominated as developers or
 
subcontractors. In Counts I and II of the Complaint, Homeowners
 
asserted that the County, the developers, and the subcontractors
 
of the Sandhills Estates and Fairways violated County zoning
 
ordinances by applying a pre-1991 definition of "building height"
 
5
 Hookahi, LLC dismissed its cross-appeal and is no longer party to
this appeal.
 
6
 The Association filed a separate opening brief from a brief filed by
New Sand Hills, VP&PK, and KCOM.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for the homes being built. In the subsequent counts, Homeowners
 
alleged, inter alia, various claims for negligence, nuisance,
 
emotional distress, and trespass related to the development-
related activities. The Complaint sought declaratory relief,
 
injunctive relief, and damages. Subsequently, Homeowners filed a
 
number of amended complaints adding parties, but the substantive
 
counts remained the same.
 
Over the objection of Homeowners, the circuit court
 
granted a motion to bifurcate Counts I and II of the Complaint
 
from the rest of the counts in the Complaint. As a result, this
 
case proceeded only as to Counts I and II, which sought
 
declaratory and injunctive relief related to the height
 
restriction.
 
At issue is whether a pre-1991 definition of "building
 
height" in a county ordinance applies to the Sandhills Estates
 
and Fairways subdivisions, or whether a 1991 revised definition,
 
contained in the MCC, applies. The 1991 definition provided a
 
more limited height restriction and Homeowners contend it
 
applied.
 
Zoning regulations are addressed in Title 19 of the
 
MCC. MCC Chapter § 19.78, which was enacted in 1990 by Ordinance
 
No. 1924 and Ordinance No. 1939, established the Maui Lani
 
Project District and provides development standards. This
 
chapter sets out the maximum building height of residential
 
buildings as "two stories, not exceeding thirty feet[.]" 
MCC §§ 19.78.020(B)(1)(b)(iv); 19.78.020(B)(2)(b)(iv). However,
 
MCC § 19.78 provides no formula for determining how the maximum
 
height of thirty feet is to be measured.
 
In September 1990, the Maui Planning Commission
 
approved a preliminary site plan, which the circuit court found
 
constituted Phase II approval for the Maui Lani Project District. 
At that time, "building height" was defined, in relevant part, as
 
"[t]he vertical distance from finished 'grade' to the highest
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
point of the finished roof surface . . . ." The Permanent
 
Ordinances of the County of Maui § 8-1.2 (1971) (emphasis added). 
In other words, if landfill was used to raise the elevation of a
 
lot and then a house was built, the height of the house would be
 
measured from the new elevation or "finished grade" created by
 
the addition of landfill.
 
On September 4, 1991, the County adopted Ordinance
 
No. 2031, which revised the definition of "building height" as
 
follows: "'Building height' means the same as 'height'" and
 
"'[h]eight' means the vertical distance measured from a point on
 
the top of a structure to a corresponding point directly below on
 
the natural or finish grade, whichever is lower." 
MCC § 19.04.040 (emphasis added). Under this new definition, if
 
fill has been added, the height of the building is measured from
 
the lower natural grade. 
The County and Developers contend that the pre-1991
 
height definition applies to Sandhills Estates and Fairways
 
because those subdivisions had received Phase I and Phase II
 
project district development approval by September 18, 1990,
 
approximately one year before the 1991 change of definition
 
restricted building height. 
The circuit court disagreed, and instead determined
 
that the 1991 definition applied to the two subdivisions. On
 
December 31, 2008, the court entered the 2008 Order, which
 
provides, in relevant part:
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that:
 
1.	 The Maui Lani Project District, as a whole, is subject
to the residential height restriction as determined in
1991 and codified at Maui County Code § 19.04.040,
which states that building height "means the vertical
distance measured from a point on the top of a
structure to a corresponding point directly below the
natural or finish grade, whichever is lower."
 
2.	 Defendant, County of Maui, is enjoined from taking any
action which conflicts with the Court's determination
 of the applicable height restriction relative to the
Sandhills project and the Fairways project including,
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
but not limited to, the issuance of building permits
the result of which would be inconsistent with Maui
 County Code § 19.04.04.
 
3.	 This Order shall remain in effect until further order
 of the Court.
 
As noted, Final Judgment was entered on September 30,
 
2009. Homeowners, the County, and Developers filed timely
 
appeals and cross-appeals.
 
On August 28, 2011, while this case was on appeal,
 
Ordinance No. 3848 was adopted, which further amended the
 
provisions related to "height" in MCC § 19.04.040. In
 
particular, Ordinance No. 3848 clarified that the pre-1991
 
definition of "height" –- utilizing finish grade -- applied to
 
certain development projects. Ordinance No. 3848 provides in
 
relevant part:
 
SECTION 1. Section 19.04.040, Maui County Code,
pertaining to comprehensive zoning provisions, is amended by
amending the definition of "height" to read as follows:
 
""Height" means the vertical distance measured
from a point on the top of a structure to a
corresponding point directly below on the natural or
finish grade, whichever is lower. For structures
 
within projects that received site plan approval in
association with a project district phase II approval,
step II planned development approval, or final
subdivision approval after September 4, 1991, building
height shall conform to the elevation as indicated on
the approved site plan, which may use finish grade to
measure height. For structures within project
districts that received phase II approval prior to
September 4, 1991, finish grade shall be used to
determine height.
"
 
SECTION 2.  New material is underscored. . . .
 
SECTION 3. This ordinance shall take effect upon its
approval and shall apply retroactively.
 
Ordinance No. 3848 (bold emphasis added).7
 
7
 As discussed earlier, September 4, 1991 was the date that Ordinance
No. 2031 was adopted, restricting the definition of height to the lower of the
natural or finished grade.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Oral argument was originally scheduled for March 30, 
2011, but was continued at the request of the parties and 
rescheduled for September 14, 2011. Prior to the rescheduled 
oral argument, the parties filed a stipulation to remand, seeking 
to remand the case to circuit court "for further proceedings in 
light of passage of Maui County Ordinance 3848." The stipulation 
to remand was disapproved by this court without prejudice to the 
parties filing a proper motion or stipulation. The County 
thereafter filed a motion for remand or alternatively to continue 
the oral argument in order for the parties to participate in a 
mediation conference pursuant to Rule 33 of the Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP). 
Oral argument was held as scheduled on September 14,
 
2011. The parties first argued the County's motion, which was
 taken under advisement. The parties then argued the merits of
 
the issues raised on appeal.
 
Subsequent to oral argument, Homeowners filed a letter
 
indicating that, due to misunderstandings of proposed settlement
 
terms, they now opposed the motion for remand, but did not oppose
 
an appellate conference. The County thereafter filed a Notice of
 
Withdrawal of Motion for Remand asserting that the relief sought
 
was now moot as far as remanding without oral argument,
 
continuing oral argument, or holding an HRAP Rule 33 appellate
 
conference in lieu of oral argument.
 
On September 20, 2011, this court referred the case to
 
the appellate conference program. On December 15, 2011, the
 
County submitted a report to this court advising that the parties
 
were unable to settle the case. No other party submitted a
 
report regarding the appellate conference.
 
On June 12, 2013, the parties were ordered to file
 
supplemental briefs as to their respective positions concerning
 
whether, in light of Ordinance No. 3848, any of the issues on
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeal are moot. Homeowners, the County, and the Developers
 
timely filed supplemental briefs.
 
III. Standards of Review
 
A. Mootness
 
"It is axiomatic that mootness is an issue of subject
 
matter jurisdiction." Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. Lethem, 119
 
Hawai'i 1, 4, 193 P.3d 839, 842 (2008). 
The duty of this court, as of every other judicial
tribunal, is to decide actual controversies by a judgment
which can be carried into effect, and not to give opinions
upon moot questions or abstract propositions, or to declare
principles or rules of law which cannot affect the matter in
issue in the case before it.
 
Courts will not consume time deciding abstract
propositions of law or moot cases, and have no jurisdiction
to do so.
 
Wong v. Bd. of Regents, 62 Haw. 391, 394–95, 616 P.2d 201, 204
 
(1980) (citations omitted).
 
"A case is moot if it has lost its character as a
 
present, live controversy[.]" Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Grp. v.
 
Lyman, 69 Haw. 81, 87, 734 P.2d 161, 165 (1987) (citation and
 internal quotation mark omitted). "Put another way, the suit
 
must remain alive throughout the course of litigation to the
 
moment of final appellate disposition." Wong, 62 Haw. at 394,
 
616 P.2d at 203. "The doctrine [of mootness] seems appropriate
 where events subsequent to the judgment of the trial court have
 
so affected the relations between the parties that the two
 
conditions for justiciability relevant on appeal-adverse interest
 
and effective remedy-have been compromised." Id. at 394, 616
 
P.2d at 203-204. 
Our courts, however, recognize three exceptions to the
 
mootness doctrine: (1) the public interest exception; (2) the
 "capable of repetition[,] yet evading review" exception; and
 
(3) the collateral consequences exception. State v. Kiese, 126 
Hawai'i 494, 508-09, 273 P.3d 1180, 1194-95 (2012). 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In determining whether the public interest exception 
applies, we look "to (1) the public or private nature of the 
question presented, (2) the desirability of an authoritative 
determination for future guidance of public officers, and (3) the 
likelihood of future recurrence of the question." Hamilton, 119 
Hawai'i at 6-7, 193 P.3d at 844-45 (citation and internal 
quotation mark omitted). 
Courts also recognize an exception to the mootness 
doctrine where the legal issues are capable of repetition, yet 
evade review. Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 99 
Hawai'i 191, 196, 53 P.3d 799, 804 (2002). 
"The phrase, 'capable of repetition, yet evading review,'
means that 'a court will not dismiss a case on the grounds
of mootness where a challenged governmental action would
evade full review because the passage of time would prevent
any single plaintiff from remaining subject to the
restriction complained of for the period necessary to
complete the lawsuit[,]'" [In re Thomas, 73 Haw. 223,]
226–27, 832 P.2d [253], 255 [(1992)] (quoting Life of the
 Land v. Burns, 59 Haw. 244, 251, 580 P.2d 405, 409–10
(1978)) (citation omitted).
 
Kaho'ohanohano v. State,  114 Hawai' i 302, 333 n.23, 162 P.3d 696, 
727 n.23 (2007).
 
Finally, the courts recognize the "collateral
 
consequences" exception to the mootness doctrine. Hamilton
, 119
 
Hawai'i at 7-8, 193 P.3d at 845-46. The collateral consequences 
exception arises when a party's reputation or legal record would
 
be harmed as the result of a judicial action otherwise
 
unreviewable for mootness. Id. 
To invoke the collateral consequences exception: 
[T]he litigant must show that there is a reasonable
possibility that prejudicial collateral consequences
will occur. Accordingly, the litigant must establish
these consequences by more than mere conjecture, but
need not demonstrate that these consequences are more
probable than not. This standard provides the
necessary limitations on justiciability underlying the
mootness doctrine itself. Where there is no direct
 practical relief available from the reversal of the
judgment, as in this case, the collateral consequences
doctrine acts as a surrogate, calling for a
determination whether a decision in the case can
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
afford the litigant some practical relief in the
future.
 
[Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. Lethem,] 119 Hawai' i [1,] 8, 193
P.3d [839,] 846, citing Putman v. Kennedy, 279 Conn. 162,169, 900 A.2d 1256, 1262 (2006) (emphasis omitted). 
Kiese, 126 Hawai' i at 509 n.11, 273 P.3d at 1195 n.11. 
B. Attorneys' Fees
 
"The trial court's grant or denial of attorney's fees 
and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." 
Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp., 120 Hawai' i 181, 197, 202 P.3d 
1226, 1242 (2009) (Sierra Club II) (citations, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). "The trial court abuses its 
discretion if it bases its ruling on an erroneous view of the law 
or on a clearly erroneous assessment of the evidence. In other 
words, an abuse of discretion occurs where the trial court has 
clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a 
party litigant." Maui Tomorrow v. State of Haw., Bd. of Land & 
Natural Res., 110 Hawai' i 234, 242, 131 P.3d 517, 525 (2006) 
(internal quotation marks, citations and brackets omitted). 
The supreme court recently held that "[w]e retain the
 
abuse of discretion standard, noting however that we review de
 
novo whether the trial court disregarded rules or principles of
 
law that arise in deciding whether or not a party satisfies the
 
three factors of the private attorney general doctrine." 
Honolulu Const. and Draying Co. v. State of Haw., Dept. of Land &
 
Natural Res., No. SCWC-30484, 2013 WL 4042662, at 7 (Haw.
 
August 9, 2013).
 
IV. Discussion
 
A. Mootness
 
Ordinance No. 3848 settles the question of whether the
 
pre-1991 definition of height or the more restrictive 1991
 
definition of height applies to the Sandhills Estates and the
 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fairways subdivisions within the Maui Lani Project District. The
 
Maui Lani Project District received Phase II approval on
 
September 20, 1990, almost a year prior to September 4, 1991 (the
 
date referenced in Ordinance No. 3848). Thus, pursuant to
 
Ordinance No. 3848, "finish grade shall be used to determine
 
height[,]" including as to the Sandhill Estates and Fairways
 
subdivisions which are part of the Maui Lani Project District.
 
Because the definition of height applicable to the
 
Sandhills Estate and the Fairways is settled, there is no present
 
or live controversy between the parties on that issue and it is
 
moot. Kona Old, 69 Haw. at 87, 734 P.2d at 165. 
The duty of this court, as of every other judicial
tribunal, is to decide actual controversies by a judgment
which can be carried into effect, and not to give opinions
upon moot questions or abstract propositions, or to declare
principles or rules of law which cannot affect the matter in
issue in the case before it.
 
Wong, 62 Haw. at 394-95, 616 P.2d at 204.
 
Homeowners do not dispute that the effect of the
 
enactment of Ordinance No. 3848 is to render moot the question of
 
height in this case. Indeed, they state in their supplemental
 
briefing that Ordinance No. 3848 "provides all of the relief
 
sought on appeal by the County and the [D]evelopers, thus
 
rendering those appeals moot." Homeowners contend, however, that
 
their appeal of the circuit court's denial of their request for
 
attorney's fees under the private attorney general doctrine
 
remains.
 
Consistent with the Homeowners, the County asserts that
 
the intervening legislation, Ordinance No. 3848, resolved the
 
issue in controversy by clarifying which height definition was
 
applicable to the two subject subdivisions. As stated by the
 
County, "Ordinance [No.] 3848 amended the height requirement at
 
issue so that the pre-1991 height requirements allowing height to
 
be measured based on finish grade are now unquestionably the
 
proper height requirements for the [Maui Lani Project District]." 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, contends the County, the parties no longer have adverse
 
interests and the appeal is moot. Contrary to the Homeowners'
 
assertion, however, the County contends that the Homeowners'
 
claim for attorney's fees has also been rendered moot.
 
The Developers, in turn, maintain that "the issues on
 
appeal are not moot because reversal of the 2008 Order is
 
critical to Developers." According to the Developers, the County
 
refuses to issue building permits until the 2008 Order is set
 
aside due to the conflict between the height definition in
 
Ordinance No. 3848 and the height definition in the 2008 Order. 
Developers more specifically contend the appeal is not moot for
 
the following reasons: 
(1) the County's unwillingness to implement the new
definition of "height", which conflicts with the definition
of height used in the 2008 Order; (2) the susceptibility of
Developers to future lawsuits being filed by other lot
owners based on the interpretation of the law--as
interpreted in the 2008 Order–-at the time of the sale; and
(3) the availability of reversal and/or vacatur of the 2008
Order as an effective form of relief for Developers and the
County.
 
Furthermore, the Developers contend that "questions of [the]
 
development agreement's application, jurisdiction, standing, and
 
statutory interpretation should be addressed even if the Court
 
determines that there is no live controversy, because those
 
issues clearly fall within the 'public interest' exception" to
 
the mootness doctrine. 
In Lathop v. Sakatani, 111 Hawai' i 307, 141 P.3d 480 
(2006), the Hawai' i Supreme Court dismissed an appeal as moot 
because the question of whether the circuit court erred when it 
expunged a lis pendens on certain property was mooted by the sale 
of the property during the pendency of the appeal. Id. at 310, 
141 P.3d at 483. 
Likewise, in Wong, the supreme court held that the
 
appellant's claims for injunctive and declaratory relief were no
 
longer viable because the relief the appellant requested – that
 
13
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the appellee comply with the Hawaii Administrative Procedure Act
 
– had been accomplished. 62 Haw. at 396, 616 P.2d at 204-05.
 
In the instant case, as conceded by Homeowners and the
 
County, Ordinance No. 3848 has resolved the issue of the
 
applicable height restriction for the Sandhills Estate and
 
Fairways subdivisions and thus the substantive controversy
 
between the parties is moot. Developers' concerns do not
 
undermine the mootness doctrine. Developers' primary concern in
 
challenging mootness appears to be how to deal with the circuit
 
court's 2008 Order.8 As will be addressed below, when a case
 
becomes moot on appeal, the lower court's rulings can be vacated
 to avoid any undue prejudice to the parties. Thus, the concerns
 
that the Developers raise can be addressed.
9
 
Developers also contend that certain points raised on
 
appeal by the Developers and the County fall within the public
 
interest exception to mootness. First, Developers argue that
 
they have raised the question on appeal of whether the Unilateral
 
8
 As earlier noted, the 2008 Order concludes by ordering that:
 
1. The Maui Lani Project District as a whole is
subject to the residential height restriction as determined
in 1991 and codified at Maui County Code § 19.04.040, which
states that building height "means the vertical distance
measured from a point on the top of a structure to a
corresponding point directly below on the natural or finish
grade, whichever is lower."
 
2. Defendant County of Maui, is enjoined from taking
any action which conflicts with the Court's determination of
the applicable height restriction relative to the Sandhills
project and the Fairways project including, but not limited
to, the issuance of building permits the result of which
would be inconsistent with Maui County Code § 19.04.04.
 
3. This Order shall remain in effect until further
 
order of the Court.
 
9
 Developers' concerns about future lawsuits should be assuaged by our
vacating of the circuit court's 2008 Order and the judgments below. Moreover,such lawsuits are too speculative to prevent this appeal from being moot,especially given that we will vacate the 2008 Order and the judgment below.See Queen Emma Foundation v. Tatibouet, 123 Hawai' i 500, 508, 236 P.3d 1236,
1244 (App. 2010). 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Development Agreement vested Developers with the rights to
 
develop projects in the Maui Lani Project District in accordance
 
with then-existing zoning ordinances. Second, Developers argue
 
that the County has challenged on appeal whether HRS § 46-4
 
grants standing to neighboring property owners to bring a civil
 
suit against the County to require the County to enforce zoning
 
ordinances.
 
As noted above, the County takes the position that the
 
appeal is moot. Indeed, the County's supplemental brief
 
regarding mootness expressly contends that the public interest
 
exception to mootness is inapplicable to this case. Therefore,
 
we will not address the Developers' contention that a point of
 
error raised by another party -- the County -- supports a public
 
interest exception to mootness.
 
As to the point of error raised by Developers related 
to their vesting rights under the Unilateral Development 
Agreement, in determining whether the public interest exception 
applies, we look "to (1) the public or private nature of the 
question presented, (2) the desirability of an authoritative 
determination for future guidance of public officers, and (3) the 
likelihood of future recurrence of the question." Hamilton, 119 
Hawai'i at 6-7, 193 P.3d at 844-45 (citation and internal 
quotation mark omitted). "[T]he cases in this jurisdiction that 
have applied the public interest exception have focused largely 
on political or legislative issues that affect a significant 
number of Hawai' i residents." Id. at 7, 193 P.3d at 845. Given 
these considerations, the public interest exception does not apply because the Developers' vesting rights under the Unilateral 
Development Agreement is an issue specific to the facts of this 
case and is of private concern to the Developers. 
The challenges raised on appeal to the circuit court's
 
grant of declaratory and injunctive relief to the Homeowners are
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
therefore moot. We address in the next section, the Homeowners'
 
claim for attorneys' fees.
 
As noted above, the Developers' primary concerns as to
 
mootness stem from the fact that the 2008 Order is still in
 
effect. Thus, the concern is not mootness per se, but rather,
 
how to appropriately dispose of a case that has been rendered
 
moot by intervening legislation when a contrary underlying court
 
order is still in effect. 
As recognized in Aircall of Haw., Inc. v. Home Props.,
 
Inc., 6 Haw App. 593, 733 P.2d 1231 (1987), "where appellate
 
review has been frustrated due to mootness[,]" the circuit
 
court's judgment, which is unreviewable because of mootness,
 
could lead to issue preclusion. Id. at 595, 733 P.2d at 1232. 
In Aircall of Haw., and subsequently, in Exit Co. Ltd. P'ship v.
 Airlines Capital Corp., 7 Haw. App. 363, 766 P.2d 129 (1988),
 
this court noted that such a result would be unfair and resolved
 
the potential for issue preclusion where a case is rendered moot
 
on appeal by adopting "the federal practice of having the
 
appellate court vacate the judgment of the trial court and direct
 
dismissal of the case." Exit Co., 7 Haw. App. at 367, 766 P.2d
 
at 131 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). We
 likewise apply this resolution to the present case.
 
Accordingly, without reaching the merits but because
 
the appeal is moot, we vacate the 2008 Order. We also vacate the
 
Final Judgments entered on January 12, 2009 and September 30,
 
2009 to the extent they adjudicate Counts I and II of the
 
operative Fourth Amended Complaint. We further remand the case
 
to the circuit court with directions to dismiss the action.
 
B.	 Attorneys' Fees and the Private Attorney General
Doctrine
 
On appeal, Homeowners raise a single point of error,
 
challenging the circuit court's April 3, 2009 Fees/Costs Order. 
Although the circuit court granted Homeowners' request for
 
16
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
declaratory and injunctive relief, it denied Homeowners' request
 
for attorneys' fees under the private attorney general doctrine.
 
The County asserts that the issue regarding attorneys'
 
fees is moot because the issue regarding the building height
 
definition is moot. On the other hand, Homeowners contend that,
 
although all the issues in the cross-appeals are moot, their
 
appeal from the Fees/Costs Order is not. They argue that this
 
court may consider, under the private attorney general doctrine,
 
whether the circuit court erred when it did not award attorneys'
 
fees to Homeowners. 
The County relies on Rapozo v. Better Hearing of Haw., 
LLC, 120 Hawai' i 257, 262, 204 P.3d 476, 481 (2009) for the 
argument that "[i]n the absence of a 'final decision from an appellate court' on the principal issues, attorney's fees are 
improper." Rapozo is inapposite to the present case because the 
petitioner in Rapozo was seeking attorney's fees and costs related to an appeal, not to the action below, id. at 261, 204 
P.3d at 480, and the circumstances in that case were far 
different than here. 
Although this court does not have jurisdiction to
 
address the declaratory and injunctive relief rulings that are
 
rendered moot by the intervening legislation, we do have
 
jurisdiction to rule on the circuit court's order regarding
 
attorneys' fees. This court has previously ruled that
 
[a]lthough a claim for attorney's fees does not preserve a
case which has otherwise become moot on appeal, . . . the
question of attorney's fees is ancillary to the underlying
action and survives independently under the Court's
equitable jurisdiction. Where the underlying controversy
has become moot, there is no right to review or redetermine
any of the issues in the underlying action solely for the
purpose of deciding the attorney's fees question. Instead,
the question of attorney's fees and costs must be decided
based on whether the recipient of the attorney's fees and
costs award can be considered to be the prevailing party in
the underlying action, without regard to whether we think
the [trial] court's decision on the underlying merits is
correct.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Queen Emma Found. v. Tatibouet, 123 Haw. 500, 510, 236 P.3d 1236,
 
1246 (2010) (citations, internal quotation marks and brackets
 
omitted).
 
First, we must determine whether Homeowners were the
 
prevailing party in the court below before considering whether
 
the private attorney general doctrine applies. Generally, a
 
party in whose favor final judgment is rendered is the prevailing
 
party in that court for purposes of attorney's fees. See Kamaka
 
v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 126, 176 
P.3d 91, 125 (2008). "Although a plaintiff may not sustain his 
entire claim, if judgment is rendered for him, he is the 
prevailing party for purposes of costs and attorneys' fees." Id. 
(quoting MFD Partners v. Murphy, 9 Haw. App. 509, 514, 850 P.2d 
713, 716 (1992) (internal citation, quotation mark and brackets 
omitted). Here, the circuit court granted Homeowners' request 
for declarative and injunctive relief, ruling in Homeowners' 
favor and against the County and certain of the Developer 
parties. No one argues that Homeowners were not the prevailing 
party below, nor that the intervening ordinance had any effect on 
Homeowners' status as the prevailing party in the circuit court. 
The next question is whether the private attorney 
general doctrine applies. Generally, under the "American Rule," 
each party pays his or her own litigation costs. Sierra Club II, 
120 Hawai' i at 218, 202 P.3d at 1263. "This general rule, 
however, is subject to a number of exceptions: attorney's fees 
are chargeable against the opposing party when so authorized by 
statute, rule of court, agreement, stipulation, or precedent." 
Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys. of State of Haw., 92 
Hawai'i 432, 439, 992 P.2d 127, 134 (2000) (citation, internal 
quotation mark, and brackets omitted). 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has recognized the private 
attorney general doctrine as a judicially-created exception to the American Rule, noting that the doctrine "is an equitable rule 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that allows courts in their discretion to award [attorney's] fees 
to plaintiffs who have vindicated important public rights." 
Sierra Club II, 120 Hawai' i at 218, 202 P.3d at 1263 (quoting 
Maui Tomorrow, 110 Hawai' i at 244, 131 P.3d at 527) (block quote 
format altered). 
In applying this doctrine, courts consider three
 
factors: "(1) the strength or societal importance of the public
 
policy vindicated by the litigation, (2) the necessity for
 
private enforcement and the magnitude of the resultant burden on
 
the plaintiff, [and] (3) the number of people standing to benefit
 
from the decision." Id.
 
The circuit court ruled that the private attorney
 
general doctrine did not apply because the first and third prongs
 
of the doctrine were not satisfied. Because we conclude that the
 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion, we limit our
 
consideration to the first and third prongs of the doctrine.
 
1.	 First prong: the strength or societal importance
of the public policy vindicated by the litigation
 
In regards to the first prong, Homeowners assert that
 
their lawsuit "vindicated the important public policy of the rule
 
of law," "clarified the County Charter," and "prevented the
 
dangerous precedent of allowing a mayor to become a one-man
 
county council, making the law by proclamation instead of by
 
democratic process." 
At a hearing on February 24, 2009, on Homeowners'
 
motion for attorneys' fees and costs, the circuit court initially
 
concluded that Homeowners met the first prong, reasoning that
 
Homeowners' suit "vindicated important public rights." The
 
circuit court also concluded that Homeowners met the second prong
 
regarding "the necessity for private enforcement and the
 
magnitude of the result and burden on the [Homeowners]." But the
 
circuit court did not find that Homeowners met the third prong,
 
the public benefit prong, reasoning that it was too expansive an
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interpretation to conclude "that everybody in the County gets to
 
benefit from clarification of or enforcement of a particular
 
ordinance." Therefore, the circuit court denied Homeowners'
 
motion for attorneys' fees pursuant to the private attorney
 
general doctrine. 
After the Hawai' i Supreme Court applied the private 
attorney general doctrine in Sierra Club II on March 16, 2009, 
Homeowners filed a motion for reconsideration of the circuit 
court's denial of attorneys' fees. Homeowners argued that the 
holding in Sierra Club II affirmed an expansive reading of the 
third prong and that, based on Sierra Club II, the circuit court 
should find that "the third prong of the doctrine is readily 
satisfied, justifying an award of attorneys' fees." 
The circuit court heard Homeowners' motion for
 
reconsideration on April 23, 2009. Based on Sierra Club II, the
 
circuit court now questioned whether Homeowners had met the first
 
prong after all. The court noted that "limited members of the
 
general public [were] represented by the [Homeowners'] counsel,
 
specifically the home owners whose view was impacted by an
 
adjoining development." The court also remarked that the view
 
planes in question were not ones statutorily protected under
 
HRS § 205A-2(c)(3)(B) (2001 Repl.), the environmental statute
 
protecting coastal zones. Moreover, noted the court, the effect
 
of the Mayor's interpretation of the height ordinance was limited
 
to the home owners living adjacent to certain projects within the
 
larger Maui Lani Project District. Finally, the court observed
 
that a number of people would have problems building houses on
 
their land given the court's ruling and thus there were
 
potentially more residents negatively affected by the circuit
 
court's ruling than there were people benefitting from the
 
ruling. 
Furthermore, it is worth noting that the Homeowners'
 
original complaint set out twelve counts, two of which sought
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
declaratory and injunctive relief against the County and most of
 
the remaining counts alleging impacts to the Homeowners due to
 
the development of the Sandhills Estates and Fairways and seeking
 
to recover damages. The case was later bifurcated, over the
 
Homeowners' objections, so that the declaratory and injunctive
 
relief claims were separated from the damage claims. In many
 
respects, therefore, this case was not brought to vindicate
 
public policy, but rather to recover damages which ultimately
 
were dealt with in a separate bifurcated proceeding. Even as to
 
the injunctive and declaratory relief claims, although the
 
Homeowners asserted that the Mayor had made an improper
 
administrative decision as to the applicable height restriction,
 
the ultimate goal of the claims was to protect the Homeowners'
 
view planes and properties. That is, the relief sought by the
 
Homeowners was focused on the effect of the County's
 
interpretation of the height restriction on their properties,
 
rather than on a broader issue of public policy.
 
Given the foregoing, we cannot conclude that the
 
circuit court abused its discretion in concluding that Homeowners
 
did not satisfy the first prong.
 
2.	 Third prong: the number of people standing to
benefit from the decision 
The Homeowners assert that the lawsuit will benefit the
 
entire Maui population by clarifying the role of county agencies
 
and officials and make clear which height restriction definition
 
applies in residential developments on Maui. 
At the hearing on Homeowners' motion for attorneys'
 
fees, the circuit court determined that the number of people who
 
would benefit from the circuit court's ruling that the 1991
 
height definition applied was "very unclear." Furthermore, the
 
court considered it to be too expansive to reason that all people
 
on Maui benefitted from Homeowners' lawsuit to clarify and
 
enforce an ordinance. 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
At the hearing on Homeowners' motion for
 
reconsideration, the court continued to be unconvinced that
 
Homeowners met the third prong. As earlier noted, the court
 
observed that a limited number of residents benefitted from the
 
ruling, and that there could be more residents hurt by the ruling
 
than benefitted from it.
 
We agree with the circuit court that the number of
 
people who benefitted from the circuit court's rulings is unclear
 
and that probably it is a limited number of people. Unlike other
 
cases where the private attorney general doctrine has been found
 
to apply, there is no broad ruling of generally applicable law
 
that will benefit large numbers of people. Moreover, the circuit
 
court's rulings affect private property and does not affect
 
public areas or public parks as in Honolulu Const. and Draying
 
Co.
 
As originally noted by the supreme court when it first 
considered the private attorney general doctrine, proponents of 
the doctrine "maintain that limiting the application of the 
doctrine to exceptional cases pursuant to the three-prong 
test . . . provides effective constraints on judicial 
discretion." In re Water Use Permit Applications, 96 Hawai' i 27, 
31, 25 P.3d 802, 806 (2001). 
Because Homeowners do not satisfy all three prongs of
 
the private attorney general doctrine in this case, the circuit
 court did not abuse its discretion in denying attorneys' fees.
 
V. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the following order and
 
judgments entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit are
 
hereby vacated:
 
(1) the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order
Granting Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
entered on December 31, 2008;
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) the Final Judgment entered on January 12, 2009, to
the extent that it entered judgment with respect
to Counts I and II in the "Fourth Amended
 Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief
and Damages"; and
 
(3) the Final Judgment entered on September 30, 2009,
to the extent that it entered judgment with
respect to Counts I and II in the "Fourth Amended
Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief
and Damages".
 
The case is further remanded to the circuit court with direction
 
that the case be dismissed.
 
The "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 
[Homeowners'] Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs,"
 
entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit on April 3,
 
2009, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 19, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
David J. Gierlach 
Lance D. Collins for Plaintiffs/CounterclaimDefendants/Appellants/Cross-Appellees Presiding Judge 
Madelyn S. D'EnbeauDeputy Corporation CounselDepartment of the Corporation Counselfor Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellants/Cross-Appellees 
Ronald T. Ogomori
Nathan H. Yoshimoto (Ogomori & Yoshimoto, LLP)for Defendants/Intervener-Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants/Counterclaimants/
Cross-Claimants/Appellees/Cross-Appellees/Cross-Appellants New Sand Hills, LLC,
VP&PK (ML), LLC and KCOM Corp.
and
 
for Intervenors/Appellees/Cross-Appellees/Cross-Appellants Hookahi, LLC and
Sandhills Estates Community Association
 Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 


23
 