NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30160
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
JAMES ARCIERO; LIONEL CAMARA, JR.; ADAM H. ENOS, JR.;
PETER GASKELL; WILLIAM K. KAAI, JR.; HIRAM KELIIPIO; SCOTT
LAWTON; PAUL LOUGHRAN; NATHAN RAMOS, JR.; RONALD RICO;
JAMES K. PERKINS; JAMES SKELLINGTON; and EDMUND SUZUKI,
Appellants-Appellees,
v.
 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU,
Appellee-Appellant,
and
 
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION, CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU,
Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0685)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
In this secondary appeal of an administrative agency
 
decision, Appellee-Appellant City and County of Honolulu (City)
 
appeals from the Partial Judgment for Appellants (Judgment) filed
 
on October 21, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 
(circuit court). The circuit court entered partial judgment in
 favor of Appellants-Appellees James Arciero; Lionel Camara, Jr.;
 
Adam H. Enos, Jr.; Peter Gaskell; William K. Kaai, Jr.; Hiram
 
1
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Keliipio; Scott Lawton; Paul Loughran; Nathan Ramos, Jr.; Ronald
 
Rico; James K. Perkins; James Skellington; and Edmund Suzuki
 
(collectively, Battalion Chiefs) and against City, pursuant to
 
the court's October 21, 2009 Decision and Order of Remand (Remand
 
Order).
 
On appeal, City contends:
 (1) The circuit court erred in reversing the
 
February 24, 2009 Findings of Fact/Conclusions of Law and Order
 entered by the City and County of Honolulu's Civil Service
 
Commission (the Commission).
 
(2) The circuit court's Judgment and Remand Order are
 
against public policy.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
The issue in this case is whether Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 89C-3 (Supp. 2010) requires City to ensure that
 
adjustments for excluded civil service employees result in
 
compensation and benefit packages that are at least equal to the
 
compensation and benefit packages provided under collective
 
bargaining agreements for counterparts and subordinates within
 
the employer's jurisdiction.
 
Battalion Chiefs are assigned to Honolulu Fire
 
Department (HFD) "Operations," are excluded civil service
 
employees, and are not members of Bargaining Unit 11 (BU 11). On
 
June 25, 2003, HFD implemented the "Rank for Rank Recall Program"
 
(Rank for Rank Program), which entitled HFD fire fighters to work
 
overtime to fill vacancies left by similarly ranked counterparts
 
who had taken vacation leave. The Rank for Rank Program modified
 
BU 11's collective bargaining agreement (CBA), which covers HFD
 
fire fighters. However, because Battalion Chiefs were not part
 
of BU 11, they were not eligible to participate in the Rank for
 
Rank Program.
 
On July 10, 2004, Battalion Chiefs sent a memorandum to
 
the Fire Chief asking him to pursue the Rank for Rank Program for
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"all 15 HFD Operational Battalion Chiefs." On July 23, 2004, the
 
Fire Chief forwarded the memorandum to the Director of City's
 
Department of Human Resources (DHR). The Director objected to
 
Battalion Chiefs' participation in the Rank for Rank Program. On
 
July 1, 2005, a new BU 11 CBA became effective that included a
 
provision continuing the Rank for Rank Program. Also on July 1,
 
2005, amendments to HRS § 89C-3 became effective. The amended
 
statute provides:
 
§89C-3 Adjustments for excluded civil service
employees. (a) Each jurisdiction shall provide adjustments
for its respective excluded civil service employees based on
recommendations from its respective personnel director.
 
(b) In formulating recommendations to the
appropriate authority, the respective director shall:
 
(1)	 Establish procedures that allow excluded civil
service employees and employee organizations
representing them to provide input on
adjustments that are relevant and important to
them for the director's approval;
 
(2)	 Ensure that adjustments for excluded civil
service employees result in compensation and
benefit packages that are at least equal to the
compensation and benefit packages provided under
collective bargaining agreements for
counterparts and subordinates within the
employer's jurisdiction; and
 
(3)	 Ensure that proposed adjustments are consistent
with chapter 76 and equivalent or not less than
adjustments provided within the employer's
jurisdiction.
 
"Adjustment" is defined as "a change in wages, hours, benefits,
 
or other term and condition of employment." HRS § 89C-1.5 (Supp.
 
2010). The purpose of the amendment was to require "excluded
 
employees to be compensated at a level that is at least equal to
 
the compensation and benefit packages provided under collective
 
bargaining agreements for their counterparts and subordinates." 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1857, in 2005 Senate Journal, at 1901. 
On July 13, 2005, Battalion Chief Paul Loughran wrote
 
to DHR asking why "'Bureau Opportunity Benefit Incentive' pay was
 
provided to Bureau Battalion Chiefs as an adjustment, but the 
Operational Battalion Chiefs did not receive an adjustment for
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Rank for Rank Program." DHR's Director responded on
 
October 25, 2005, but failed to provide an explanation. DHR's
 
Director did indicate that City would require Battalion Chiefs
 
who wanted to participate in the Rank for Rank Program to take a
 
cut in base pay.
 
DHR offered each Battalion Chief the opportunity to
 
participate in the Excluded Managerial Compensation Plan (EMCP)
 
schedule or BU 11's SR-28 salary schedule (BU Option). The BU
 
Option would have followed BU 11's salary schedule and would have
 
provided Battalion Chiefs with all the benefits included in BU
 
11's CBA, including participation in the Rank for Rank Program. 
However, Battalion Chiefs all chose the EMCP schedule because it
 
offered a larger monthly pay raise and substantial yearly step
 
increases in salary. In a letter dated April 18, 2007, Battalion
 
Chiefs, through counsel, asked DHR to provide the Rank for Rank
 
adjustment. DHR denied Battalion Chiefs the Rank for Rank
 
adjustment, and on May 30, 2007, Battalion Chiefs filed an appeal
 
with the Commission.
 
By a 3 to 1 vote, the Commission denied Battalion
 
Chiefs' appeal. The Commission concluded that the BU Option
 
satisfied the requirements of HRS § 89C-3(b)(2) because the
 
"compensation and benefit package was 'at least equal to the
 
compensation and benefit packages provided under the collective
 
bargaining agreement for counterparts and subordinates within the
 
employer's jurisdiction.'" The Commission then analyzed whether
 
the EMCP package satisfied the requirements under 89C-(b)(2).
 
50. With regard to the second requirement,
[Battalion Chiefs] first argue that because the members of
BU 11 have the benefit of Rank for Rank, Section 89C-3(b)(2)
requires the City to give the same benefit to the Battalion
Chiefs. This is simply not correct. The statute requires
that the Chiefs be provided with total compensation and
benefit "packages," not specific benefits, which are:
 
"at least equal to the compensation and benefit
packages provided under collective bargaining
agreements for counterparts and subordinates within
the employer's jurisdiction."
 
* * *
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
60. In evaluating a true base pay to base pay
comparison, it is clear that by choosing the EMCP schedule,
a Battalion Chief could safely earn more than his
subordinates who worked an equal number of base hours. In
 this regard, some individuals may simply not be interested
or able to consistently work extra hours, and therefore
might consider such a package to be superior for their
circumstances for this reason alone. The fact that none of
 the [Battalion Chiefs] claim to subscribe to this philosophy
does not extinguish the fact that a reasonable person could
find the EMCP package superior to the benefits afforded to
his or her subordinates for that reason alone. Accordingly,
this hypothetical example does not in and of itself denote a
violation of HRS § 89C-3(b)(2).
 
61. Moreover, Rank for Rank only affects overtime
opportunities arising when [Battalion Chiefs] take scheduled
vacation leave, and has no impact upon other overtime
opportunities that are available to [Battalion Chiefs].
. . . Thus, the fact that [Battalion Chiefs] are precluded
from earning more income by participating in Rank for Rank
misses the point that [Battalion Chiefs] have at all times
had the opportunity to earn additional income by taking
advantage of other forms of overtime available to them.
 
62. Accordingly, the Commission concludes that the
2005 EMCP adjustment complied with HRS § 89C-3(b)(2) and
resulted in a compensation and benefit package that
generally equaled or exceeded the compensation and benefit
package provided to subordinates.
 
(Footnote omitted.) In its Conclusions of Law, the Commission
 
held that DHR
 
did not fail to recommend adjustments to the benefits
available to the Battalion Chiefs as required by HRS 89C­3(b)(2) . . . . In particular, the Director was not
obligated to recommend that the Battalion Chiefs receive
Rank for Rank just because that benefit was available to the
members of the Collective Bargaining Unit they supervised.
The Director was obligated to provide [Battalion Chiefs]
with compensation packages that were at least equal to their
included subordinates and the Commission finds that [the
Director] did so in providing them with a choice between the
SR-28 and the EMCP options.
 
Battalion Chiefs appealed the Commission's decision to
 
the circuit court. The circuit court reversed the commission,
 
holding that
 
Section 89C-3 was amended in 2005 to require that
compensation and benefits packages for excluded managerial
employees such as the Battalion Chiefs must be "at least
equal to" the compensation and benefits packages of those
they supervise. In 2005, the City refused to adjust the
Battalion Chiefs' compensation and benefits packages to
allow the Battalion Chiefs to participate in Rank for Rank. 
* * *
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The construction of HRS § 89C-3 is a question of law
and the Commission's decision is reviewed de novo. Because
 
the Court finds that the Commission misinterpreted and
misapplied the applicable law, the Court is not required to
give any deference to the Commission's decision. 
HRS § 89C-3(b) provides in pertinent part:
 
In formulating recommendations to the appropriate
authority, the respective director shall:
 
. . . . 
(2) Ensure that adjustments for excluded civil
service employees result in compensation and
benefit packages that are at least equal to the
compensation and benefit packages provided under
collective bargaining agreements for
counterparts and subordinates within the
employer's jurisdiction.
 
HRS § 89C-(b)(2) . . . (emphasis added).
 
The Court finds that the law has been misinterpreted
and misapplied. As used in the statute, HRS § 89C-3(b), the
term "shall" is not a matter of discretion, but is a
directive. The Court further finds that Section 89C-3 was
 amended in 2005 to fix the very problem that still remains. 
The law required the City to offer [Battalion Chiefs]
the opportunity to participate in the Rank for Rank Program
at their existing level of base pay (i.e., the EMCP), and
not require or force a reduction in base pay, assuming that
every opportunity for overtime would be used in order to
make up the difference. The City was required by law to
give [Battalion Chiefs] the opportunity to take the overtime
that would be contemplated by Rank for Rank based on
scheduled vacations, so that if they so choose, [Battalion
Chiefs] could exceed the level of compensation package that
their subordinates were given under the Bargaining Unit SR
system plus Rank for Rank which, it is not disputed on the
record, is illustrated by, at least in some cases, a
$10,000.00 difference in pay over a year.
 
(Footnote and brackets in original omitted.) The circuit court
 
reversed the Commission and remanded for a determination of
 
damages. City timely appealed.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Administrative Agency - Second Appeal
 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon
its review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal.
In an appeal from a circuit court's review of an
administrative decision the appellate court will utilize
identical standards applied by the circuit court. Questions
of fact are reviewed under the "clearly erroneous" standard.
In contrast, an agency's legal conclusions are freely
reviewable. An agency's interpretation of its rules
receives deference unless it is plainly erroneous or
inconsistent with the underlying legislative purpose.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawaii Teamsters & Allied Workers, Local 996 v. Dep't of Labor &
 
Indus. Relations, 110 Hawaif i 259, 265, 132 P.3d 368, 374 (2006) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
 
B.	 Statutory interpretation
 
Questions of statutory interpretation are questions of
law to be reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard.
 
Our statutory construction is guided by the following
well established principles:
 
our foremost obligation is to ascertain and give
effect to the intention of the legislature, which is
to be obtained primarily from the language contained
in the statute itself. And we must read statutory
language in the context of the entire statute and
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.
 
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used
in a statute, an ambiguity exists.
 
In construing an ambiguous statute, the meaning
of the ambiguous words may be sought by examining the
context, with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and
sentences may be compared, in order to ascertain their
true meaning. Moreover, the courts may resort to
extrinsic aids in determining legislative intent. One
 avenue is the use of legislative history as an
interpretive tool.
 
[The appellate] court may also consider the reason and
spirit of the law, and the cause which induced the
legislature to enact it to discover its true meaning.
 
Lingle v. Hawaif i Gov't Employees Ass'n, AFSCME, Local 152, 107 
Hawaifi 178, 183, 111 P.3d 587, 592 (2005) (internal quotation 
marks, brackets and ellipses omitted) (quoting Guth v. Freeland,
 
96 Hawaif i 147, 149-50, 28 P.3d 982, 984-85 (2001)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The circuit court did not err when it reversed the
 
Commission's decision to deny Battalion Chiefs the
Rank for Rank benefit.
 
On appeal, City contends that "Battalion Chiefs'
 
attempt to obtain a benefit available to members of the
 
Bargaining Unit is not proper and contrary to the law. As such,
 
the [Commission's] decision should not have been reversed." City
 
quotes part of the Commission's decision, in which the Commission
 
concluded that "the 2005 EMCP adjustment complied with HRS
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Section 89C-3(b)(2) and resulted in a compensation and benefit
 
package that generally equaled or exceeded the compensation and
 
benefit package provided to subordinates."
 
As the circuit court noted, HRS §89C-3(b)(2) provides
 
that the Director of DHR "shall . . . [e]nsure that adjustments
 
for excluded civil service employees result in compensation and
 
benefit packages that are at least equal to the compensation and
 
benefit packages provided under collective bargaining agreements
 
for counterparts and subordinates within the employer's
 
jurisdiction[.]" The circuit court did not err when it concluded
 
that Battalion Chiefs did not receive a compensation and benefit
 
package at least equal to their counterparts and subordinates
 
because (1) the EMCP package provided to Battalion Chiefs did not
 
include the Rank for Rank benefit and (2) Battalion Chiefs'
 
subordinates' compensation and benefit package did include the
 
Rank for Rank benefit.
 
B.	 The circuit court's Judgment and Remand Order are
not against public policy.
 
Without citing to any case law in support of its
 
position, City argues that the circuit court's Judgment and
 
Remand Order violate "public policy because [they] gave
 
bargaining unit rights to excluded managers, in direct
 
contravention of HRS Chapter 89C." Moreover, City argues that
 
the circuit court "is impermissibly acting as a bargaining
 
representative for the Battalion Chiefs." HRS § 89C-3 does not
 
provide Battalion Chiefs with bargaining rights, but, as noted
 
above, it requires adjustments for excluded civil service
 
employees to "result in compensation and benefit packages that
 
are at least equal to the compensation and benefit packages
 
provided under collective bargaining agreements for counterparts
 
and subordinates." HRS § 89C-3(b)(2). Therefore, City's second
 
point on appeal is without merit.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The Partial Judgment for Appellants filed on
 
October 21, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, December 15, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
John S. Mukai and 
Elisabeth A.K. Contrades,Deputies Corporation Counsel,City and County of Honolulu,for Appellee-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Margery S. Bronster,Jeannette H. Castagnetti,Robert Hatch (Bronster Hoshibata)for Appellants-Appellees. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 