NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30153
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI rI 
FRANK DE GIACOMO, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
DOTTIE J. BROWN, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CIVIL NO. 1SS09-1-1100)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Frank De Giacomo (De Giacomo)
 
appeals from the December 23, 2009 Judgment entered by District
 
Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (district court).1
 
On appeal, De Giacomo raises the following points of
 
error: (1) the district court violated his procedural due
 
process rights under the state and federal constitutions by not
 
holding a hearing on Respondent-Appellee Dottie J. Brown's
 
(Brown) motion for costs and fees; (2) the facts did not support
 
the award of attorney's fees; (3) the district court "erred in
 
sanctioning an illegal contract;" and (4) the district court
 
erred in "not dismissing the motion for attorney [sic] fees based
 
1
 The Honorable Hilary Benson Gangnes presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on public policy grounds." Brown responds by arguing this court
 
lacks jurisdiction to consider De Giacomo's appeal.
 
After a careful review of the record, the issues raised
 
on appeal, the parties' arguments in support and in opposition
 
and the applicable law, we resolve this appeal as follows:
 
This court has jurisdiction over this premature appeal. 
De Giacomo filed his notice of appeal on November 2, 2009, 
stating that the district court had denied De Giacomo's petition 
for a "temporary restraining order," Brown's counsel orally moved 
for sanctions, the district court awarded sanctions, and 
"[De Giacomo] prays that the Court will reverse the order for 
sanctions." On December 23, 2009, the district court entered its 
Judgment in the amount of $750 in favor of Brown and stated that 
"DeGiacomo's Petition for TRO was denied at TRO hearing on 
October 1, 2009." Hawai ri Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
2
Rule 4  allows the filing of a notice of appeal in advance of the
entry of the judgment.
 
1. Contrary to his stated point of error that no

 
hearing was held on Brown's motion for costs and fees, De Giacomo
 
argues in support of this point that the district court denied
 
his motion to waive the cost of the "cds" of the hearing and
 
would not allow him to "transcribe the matters directly off [the
 
court's] computers." However, De Giacomo cites to no authority,
 
2HRAP Rule 4 provides, in pertinent part,
(a) Appeals in civil cases.
 
(1) TIME AND PLACE OF FILING . When a civil appeal is
permitted by law, the notice of appeal shall be filed within
30 days after entry of the judgment or appealable order.
 
. . . .
 
(2) PREMATURE FILING OF APPEAL . If a notice of appeal is
filed after announcement of a decision but before entry of
the judgment or order, such notice shall be considered as
filed immediately after the time the judgment or order
becomes final for the purpose of appeal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and this court is aware of none, that would allow the district
 
court to allow a party to either transcribe proceedings or
 
present the audio recordings of the proceedings to this court as
 
part of the record on appeal. Moreover, as De Giacomo argues
 
that the district court's denial of his requests prevented him
 
from showing making an argument that sufficient evidence in
 
support of his petition was presented to the district court, he
 
would have been required to cause a transcript of the proceedings
 
to be included in the record on appeal. See HRAP Rule 10(b)(3)
 
("If the appellant intends to urge on appeal that a finding or
 conclusion is unsupported by the evidence or is contrary to the
 
evidence, the appellant shall include in the record a transcript
 
of all evidence relevant to such finding or conclusion.")
 
2. Similarly, De Giacomo's claim that the "facts" did 
not support the district court's award of attorney's fees fails 
as he has not provided us with the record to review his claim. 
Thus, it is well settled that "'[t]he burden is upon appellant in 
an appeal to show error by reference to matters in the record, 
and he or she has the responsibility of providing an adequate 
transcript.'" Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai
ri 225, 230, 
909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted) (quoting Union Bldg. Materials Corp. v. The Kakaako 
Corp., 5 Haw. App. 146, 151, 682 P.2d 82, 87 (1984)). 
3. Likewise, De Giacomo's claim that the district
 
court "sanction[ed] an illegal contract" is dependent on his
 
representations regarding what evidence was and was not presented
 
to the district court is unavailing without a transcript of the
 
proceedings. Id.
 
4. Finally, De Giacomo argues that the award of
 
attorney's fees to the defendant in a restraining order case is
 
bad public policy. However, that policy choice has been made by
 
the legislature in providing for the award of costs and fees to
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the "prevailing party" in a case such as De Giacomo's. Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes ยง 604-10.5(g) (Supp. 2010).
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the December 23, 2009
 
Judgment entered by the District Court of the First Circuit,
 Honolulu Division, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
ri, March 7, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Frank De Giacomo,
Petitioner-Appellant, pro se.
 
Presiding Judge
 
William Fenton Sink,
for Respondent-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 