 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30285
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KYLE F.K. CORREA, Defendant-Appellant,
and RYAN C. PEREZ, Defendant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 09-1-0208)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Kyle F.K. Correa (Correa) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered on December
 
29, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
 court).
1 Correa was convicted by the jury on Count I, Promoting
 
a Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1242 (Supp. 2009), and on Count III,
 Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia in violation of HRS § 329­43.5(a) (1993). Correa was sentenced to ten years incarceration
 on Count I and five years incarceration on Count III, running
 concurrently, with credit for time served, and with a mandatory
 minimum term of two years and six months as a repeat offender.
 
On appeal, Correa contends that: (1) the circuit court
 
erred by failing to instruct the jury on a choice of evils
 defense; (2) his conduct was justifiable under either a choice of
 evils defense or duress defense, and thus there is insufficient
 evidence to support his conviction; (3) the circuit court abused
 its discretion in denying Correa's motion for a mistrial based on
 the prosecutor's misconduct; and (4) the prosecutor committed
 
1/
 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
misconduct during his cross-examination of Correa. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Correa's points of error as follows:
 
I.	 The Court Did Not Err in Failing to Give a Choice of Evils
Defense Instruction
 
Defendants have a right to jury instructions on any 
theory of defense that has support in the evidence, even if they 
fail to request it; nevertheless, defendants must overcome the presumption that an unobjected-to jury instruction is correct. State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai
'i 325, 333, 966 P.2d 637, 645 (1998); 
State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai 'i 327, 337, n.6, 141 P.3d 974, 984, 
n.6 (2006). On appeal, we "ascertain whether the jury 
instructions given by the circuit court, when read and considered as a whole, are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v. Stenger, 122 Hawai
'i 271, 
281, 226 P.3d 441, 451 (2010) (emphasis added). 
The circuit court instructed the jury that Correa had
 
2
raised the affirmative defense of duress,  and explained that the
defense had the following three elements. 
2/
 Duress is defined in the law as follows:
 
(1) It is a defense to a penal charge that the defendant
engaged in the conduct or caused the result alleged because he was
coerced to do so by the use of, or a threat to use, unlawful force
against his person or the person of another, which a person of
reasonable firmness in his situation would have been unable to
 resist.
 
. . . .
 
(4) When the conduct of the defendant would otherwise be
justifiable under section 703-302, this section does not preclude
the defense of justification.
 
(5) In prosecutions for any offense described in [The Hawaii
Penal] Code, the defense asserted under this section shall
constitute an affirmative defense. The defendant shall have the
 burden of going forward with the evidence to prove the facts
constituting such defense, unless such facts are supplied by the
testimony of the prosecuting witness or circumstance in such
testimony, and of proving such facts by a preponderance of the
evidence pursuant to section 701-115.
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 702-231 (1993).
 
2
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
1. The defendant engaged in the conduct or caused
the result alleged in the Complaint because the defendant
was coerced to do so by the threat to use or use of unlawful
force against the defendant's person or another person;
 
2. The unlawful force used or threatened to be used
 
was the type that a person of reasonable firmness in the
defendant's situation would have been unable to resist; 
3. The defendant did not recklessly place himself
in the situation in which it was probable that the defendant
would be subjected to duress.
 
Correa did not request that the circuit court issue a choice of
 
evils instruction and, in fact, approved the instructions as
 given. Correa contends now, however, that the circuit court
 erred in not also providing a choice of evils instruction.
 Duress and choice of evils are conceptually distinct
 
defenses with different elements.
3 Consistent with the foregoing
 
principles, Correa was entitled to an instruction on the choice
 of evils defense as long as some evidentiary support for the
 essential components of the defense was introduced. We examine,
 therefore, whether evidence was adduced below to support a choice
 of evils defense instruction.
 
The choice of evils defense requires that the defendant
 
reasonably believe that his conduct is "necessary to avoid an
 imminent harm or evil to the actor or to another[.]"
4 HAW. REV.
 
3/
 The United States Supreme Court explained the difference between
the duress and choice of evils defenses:
 
Common law historically distinguished between the defenses
of duress and necessity [or choice of evils]. Duress was said to
 
excuse criminal conduct where the actor was under an unlawful
 threat of imminent death or serious bodily injury, which threat
caused the actor to engage in conduct violating the literal terms
of the criminal law. While the defense of duress covered the
 situation where the coercion had its source in the actions of
 other human beings, the defense of necessity, or choice of evils,
traditionally covered the situation where physical forces beyond
the actor's control rendered illegal conduct the lesser of two
evils.
 
United States v. Bailey, 444 U.S. 394, 409-10 (1980).
 
4/
 Choice of evils is defined, in relevant part:
 
(1) Conduct which the actor believes to be necessary to
avoid an imminent harm or evil to the actor or to another is
 justifiable provided that:
 
(a) The harm or evil sought to be avoided by such
conduct is greater than that sought to be
(continued...)
 
3
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
STAT. § 703-302(1) (1993) (emphasis added). Correa contended
 
that he was selling drugs when he was arrested in February 2009
 
because the drug dealer for whom he was selling, Lance Bernard
 (Bernard), had put a gun to the head of Correa's infant daughter
 in November 2008 when Correa originally objected to selling for
 Bernard.
5 According to Correa, he owed $8,000 - $9,000 for drugs
 
"fronted" to him, but not paid for in approximately 2003, when
 Correa was last using drugs. According to Correa, he proceeded
 from that point to sell drugs because he was afraid that Bernard
 "was going to hurt [his daughter]." 
There was no evidence, however, that Correa or his
 
daughter were under an imminent threat of harm when Correa was
 arrested in February 2009, or at any time since the November 2008
 incident. Correa conceded that he could have borrowed the money
 to repay Bernard from his mother, his father, or his sister, but
 he did not because he was ashamed and scared. In addition,
 rather than sell all of the drugs that Bernard was providing him, 
thus paying Bernard off sooner and "get everything over with[,]"
 Correa began taking out a portion of each delivery for his own
 use. 
Since the essential elements of the choice of evils
 
defense are missing from the evidence, Correa failed to present
 sufficient evidence to overcome the presumption that the Court's
 unobjected-to jury instructions were correct. Although
 sufficient evidence was presented to support giving a duress
 
4/(...continued)
 
prevented by the law defining the offense
charged[.]
 
HAW. REV. STAT. § 703-302(1)(a) (1993).
 
Furthermore, "In this chapter, unless a different meaning is
plainly required: 'Believes' means reasonably believes." H AW. REV. STAT.
 
§ 703-300 (1993).
 
5/
 According to Correa, he and Bernard had gone out for the evening
to Waipio where they "drank, sang karaoke, and just talked story and cruised."
Thereafter, Correa drove himself and Bernard back to Correa's home. Correa
 went into his house and retrieved his daughter because he heard her crying.
Correa brought his daughter with him, back into his truck, and "showed
[Bernard] my daughter." At that point, Bernard reached into his pocket,
grabbed a bag of crystal methamphetamine, and threw it on Correa's lap, saying
"About the money that you owe." When Correa objected, Bernard "held a gun to
my daughter's head." 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
defense, there was no evidence adduced to support giving an 
instruction on choice of evils. C.f. State v. Ortiz, 93 Hawai 'i 
399, 408, 4 P.3d 533, 542 (App. 2000) (sufficient evidence to support choice of evils instruction, but insufficient to require giving duress instruction). 
In addition, there is no reasonable possibility that
 
the jury, having rejected the duress defense which, as applied to
 the facts of this case, incorporates no specific imminency
 requirement, could have found Correa's conduct justified under a
 choice of evils defense. As a result, the circuit court's
 failure to instruct the jury on a choice of evils defense,
 unobjected to by the defense, is not reversible error. 
II.	 There Was Sufficient Evidence to Support Correa's
Conviction, And Correa's Conduct Was Not Justified Under
Either the Duress or Choice of Evils Defense
 
In his second point of error, Correa contends that his
 
conduct was justifiable under either a duress or choice of evils
 
defense. As discussed above, a choice of evils defense was
 unwarranted under the circumstances. The remaining question then
 is whether there was substantial evidence to support the jury's
 conclusion that Correa did not prove duress. For reasons similar
 to those discussed above with regard to the choice of evils
 defense, we conclude that there was substantial evidence to
 support the jury's verdict and its implicit conclusion that
 duress had not been proven.
 
Evidence established that Bernard threatened Correa
 
once, in November 2008, and that he had not reiterated that
 threat prior to Correa's arrest in February 2009. Evidence
 further established that Correa understood that Bernard's threat
 related to an unpaid debt that had existed since approximately
 2003, and that Correa had the wherewithal to pay off the debt
 without undertaking to sell Bernard's drugs. According to
 Correa, he and Bernard never again discussed Correa's debt or the
 degree to which Correa had paid it off or down over the
 intervening months.
 
5
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be
 
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution when the
 
appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence
 to support a conviction. . . . The test on appeal is not whether
 guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there
 was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier
 of fact." State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248, 831 P.2d 924, 931
 
(1992) (citations omitted). The evidence adduced here at trial,
 when viewed in this light, was sufficient for the jury to
 conclude that Correa had failed to prove that he was possessing
 and selling drugs in February 2009 "because he was coerced to do
 so by the use of, or a threat to use, unlawful force against his
 person or the person of another[.]" H
AW. REV. STAT. § 702-231(1).  
III. The Court Did Not Abuse Its Discretion in Denying Correa's
Motion for a Mistrial Where the Basis for The Motion Was
 
Correa's Allegation of Prosecutorial Misconduct
 
Correa contends that the prosecutor committed
 
misconduct when, while cross-examining Correa, the prosecutor
 
questioned him as to when he first started selling "meth" and
 responded to defense counsel's objection by stating "Okay. Let's
 not talk about any prior instances." 
Correa argues that the effect of the prosecutor's
 
misconduct was to portray Correa as a long-time drug dealer, and
 that this "directly affected the jury's assessment of Correa's
 defense . . . [and] deprived Correa of his right to a fair
 
should be a time frame.
 trial[.]" Correa moved for a mistrial, which was denied.6 In 
6/ The motion and the court's ruling arose as follows: 
Q. [Prosecutor]:
sale of meth? So tell us, when was your first 
[Defense counsel]:
Honor, as to relevance. I'm going to object, your 
[Prosecutor]: It goes to –­
THE COURT: Overruled. 
[Prosecutor]: Thank you. 
[Co-defendant's counsel]: Your Honor, there 
(continued...)
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
his third point of error, Correa contends that the circuit court
 
6/(...continued)
 
THE COURT: From October of 2008.
 
Q. [Prosecutor]: Okay. Let's not talk about any
prior instances. Let's talk about –­
[Defense counsel]: I'm going to object to the
form of the question.
 
THE COURT: Sustained.
 
[Defense counsel]: Ask that the question be
stricken and he be cautioned not to make that sort of
 
accusation.
 
THE COURT: Correct, [Prosecutor].
 
[Co-defendant's counsel]: Your Honor, can we
approach the bench, please?
 
THE COURT: Yes.
 (A bench conference was had on the record as
follows:)
 
[Co-defendant's counsel]: Your Honor –­[Defense counsel]: I'll make a motion for
 
mistrial at this point with that question. It made the
 
implication that my client has dealt drugs for a long period
of time, and I think that's outrageous. I don't think the
 jury should have heard a question like that, and I'd ask for
that -– that you grant a mistrial.
 
[Co-defendant's counsel]: Your Honor,
unfortunately I feel like I'm obligated to join in the
motion, as well. . . .
 
[Prosecutor]: Your Honor, my response is that
-– my intention in asking the question was in response to
I'm not going to talk about anything else, I just want to
talk about in relation to this duress issue. But I've got
to understand how I did come across. But, nevertheless, I
do apologize to Defense counsel for the way it came out.
But I still don't believe it rises to the level of manifest
 injustice to warrant a mistrial at this juncture. And I do
 intend to cure it with my further questioning.
 
THE COURT: Court denies the motion for
 
mistrial. The jury's been instructed to disregard and
follow the Court's instructions. And the reason that the
 Court had overruled the objection was because it was
relevant to the duress defense in terms of when he was asked
 when was the first time, and that's relevant with respect to
the relevant time frame of this case, which is why the Court
said October 2008; then [Prosecutor] did not need to make
his comment, which has been stricken, he's been admonished
in front of the jury, and they will disregard that. But the
 first time he sold in relation to the affirmative defense of
 duress is relevant.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
abused its discretion in denying Correa's motion for mistrial.
 
The denial of a motion for mistrial is within the sound 
discretion of the trial court and will not be upset absent a 
clear abuse of discretion. State v. Loa, 83 Hawai 'i 335, 349, 
926 P.2d 1258, 1272 (1996). "'The trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.'" State v. Rogan, 91 
Hawai
'i 405, 411, 984 P.2d 1231, 1237 (1999) (quoting State v. 
Ganal, 81 Hawai 'i 358, 373, 917 P.2d 370, 385 (1996). 
Additionally, trial errors are not viewed in isolation. 
Rather, an error "must be examined in light of the entire proceedings and given the effect which the whole record shows it to be entitled. In that context, the real question becomes whether there is a reasonable possibility that error might have contributed to conviction." State v. Haili, 103 Hawai
'i 89, 100, 
79 P.3d 1263, 1274 (2003) (quoting State v. Heard, 64 Haw. 193, 194, 638 P.2d 307, 308 (1981). 
In this case, there was overwhelming and compelling 
evidence to prove Correa's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Moreover, immediately after the defense objected to the prosecutor's comment about when Correa started selling methamphetamine and "prior instances", the circuit court sustained the objection, struck the question, and cautioned the prosecutor about the form of the question. See State v. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai
'i 504, 516, 78 P.3d 317, 329 (2003) 
("Generally, we consider a curative instruction sufficient to cure prosecutorial misconduct because we presume that the jury heeds the court's instruction to disregard improper prosecution comments."). Given the overwhelming amount of evidence against Correa, there is no reasonable possibility that the prosecutor's single question and related comment contributed to Correa's conviction or prejudiced Correa. As a result, the Court did not abuse its discretion in denying the defense's motion for a mistrial. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.	 The Prosecutor Did Not Engage in Misconduct During His
Cross-Examination of Correa
 
Correa argues that the prosecutor's questions during
 
cross-examination, referred to above, were "designed to elicit
 
highly prejudicial responses that portrayed him as a high-level,
 long-time drug dealer." 
"Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed 
under the harmless beyond reasonable doubt standard, which requires an examination of the record and a determination of 'whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction.'" Rogan, 
91 Hawai
'i at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238 (quoting State v. 
Balisbisana, 83 Hawai 'i 109, 114, 924 P.2d 1215, 1220 (1996)). 
There are three factors to be considered in reviewing a claim of prosecutorial misconduct. First, "the nature of the prosecutor's misconduct," second, "the promptness of a curative instruction or lack of it," and third, "the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant." State v. Samuel, 74 Haw. 141, 148, 838 
P.2d 1374, 1378 (1992). 
In this case, the prosecutor stated, "Okay. Let's not
 
talk about any prior instances." The defense immediately
 objected to the form of the question. During a subsequent bench
 conference, the prosecutor explained that the question was
 intended to address the defense's claim of duress. The
 prosecutor went on to ask only about sales transactions that
 occurred after October 2008.
7 For example, Correa was asked "how
 
many baggies would you say you sold between October 2008 and
 February, when you were arrested?" 
"Once having taken the witness stand in his behalf, the
 
defendant may be cross-examined on collateral matters bearing
 upon his credibility, the same as any other witness." State v.
 
7/
 Correa's misconduct argument references two segments of the
prosecutor's cross-examination. The first segment is described above in
relation to Correa's third point of error (the circuit court's denial ofCorrea's motion for mistrial). The second segment incorporated more detailedquestions about the sales conducted by Correa from November 2008 to the timeof his arrest. Correa made no objection to this second set of questions. In 
the absence of an objection, we review for plain error. State v. Wakisaka,
102 Hawai' i at 513, 78 P.3d at 326 (2003). Because the prosecutor's questions
related directly to Correa's defense of duress, we find no error. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Napulou, 85 Hawai 'i 49, 57, 936 P.2d 1297, 1305 (App. 1997) 
(internal quotation marks and brackets omitted) (quoting State v. 
Pokini, 57 Haw. 17, 22, 548 P.2d 1397, 1400 (1976). Taken in context, the prosecutor's questions related to Correa's affirmative defense and did not exceed the scope of permissible conduct. 
Consequently, the prosecutor's cross-examination did
 
not constitute misconduct.
 
V. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, the circuit court's
 
December 29, 2009 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 1, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Jeffrey A. Hawk
(Hawk Sing Ignacio & Waters)for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10
 