NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30139
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ROBERT GRINPAS and ESTHER GRINPAS,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
KAPAA 382, LLC, A Hawaii Limited Liability Company,
KULANA PARTNERS, LLC, a Hawaii Limited Liability company,
WILLIAM R. HANCOCK, and DOES 1-10, Defendants-Appellees.
 
KULANA PARTNERS, LLC,
Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
WILLIAM R. HANCOCK, Trustee of the Hancock and Company, Inc.,
Profit Sharing Trust, under trust instrument dated 4/3/03,
Third-Party Defendant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0132)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Robert and Esther Grinpas (the
 
Grinpases) claim an access and utilities easement over property
 
owned by Defendant-Appellee Kulana Partners, LLC (KPL) known as
 
Remnant 3. 
Upon cross-motions for partial summary judgment, the
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1
Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit court)  issued an
order on August 3, 2009, granting KPL's motion for partial
 
summary judgment and denying the Grinpases' motion for partial
 
summary judgment, holding that no easement exists. On August 3,
 
2009, the circuit court also entered a Final Judgment in favor of
 
KPL and against the Grinpases. The Grinpases subsequently filed
 
a motion to alter and amend the summary judgment order and the
 
judgment, which was denied by the circuit court on October 6,
 
2009.
 
The Grinpases timely appealed on October 28, 2009.
 On appeal, the Grinpases raise a number of points of
 
error, which we summarize as follows:
 
(1)
 The circuit court erred in granting KPL's motion
 
for partial summary judgment because there were genuine issues of
 material fact:
 
(a) precluding application of the merger doctrine;
 (b) whether Kulana Condominium Property Regime
 
(Kulana CPR) documents established the easement, which could not
 be removed without the Grinpases' consent;
 
(c) whether the Grinpases were intended third-
party beneficiaries of provision C-67(A)(2) of a Deposit Receipt
 
Offer and Acceptance (DROA) and the recorded Kulana CPR
 
documents;
 
(d) whether KPL purchased the Remnant 3 parcel
 
with notice and thus subject to the easement;
 
(e) whether, at the time KPL purchased Remnant 3,
 
KPL understood that DROA provision C-67(A)(2) referred to an
 
easement rather than the License Agreement;
 
(f) whether the circuit court reached an
 
inequitable and unreasonable result;
 
1
 The Honorable Randall G.B. Valenciano presided. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(g) such that the circuit court erred in denying
 
the Grinpases' motion to alter or amend the summary judgment
 
order and the judgment;
 
(2) The circuit court erred in denying the Grinpases'
 
motion for partial summary judgment and in denying their motion
 
to alter and amend the summary judgment order and the judgement.
 
For the reasons discussed below, we vacate the judgment
 
filed on August 3, 2009, and remand for further proceedings.
 
I. Background
 
A. License Agreement
 
The Grinpases own and operate a tropical flower farm 
and flower marketing business in Kapahi, Kaua' i, which they 
initially operated on property they own, known as Lot 77J. In 
1998, the Grinpases sought to expand their farm business and 
assert that they had an agreement with defendants Kapaa 382, LLC 
(Kapaa 382) and William R. Hancock (Hancock) to purchase certain 
nearby property and that they would be granted a permanent access 
and utilities easement through property known as Remnant 3 to 
join the anticipated two portions of their farm properties. 
The Grinpases allege that they could not purchase the
 
nearby property until a subdivision and condominium property
 
regime were completed, and thus in the meantime they entered into
 
a fifteen year License Agreement with Kapaa 382 for use of
 
approximately nine acres. The License Agreement was dated
 
August 13, 1999 and subsequently recorded in the Bureau of
 
Conveyances on January 27, 2000. A map attached to the License
 
Agreement appears to show that the License Agreement covered
 
portions of a nearby property known as Lot 2 and access to Lot 2
 
over a remnant parcel, apparently Remnant 3. The access way
 
shown in the License Agreement map connects Lot 77J with Lot 2.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. Sale of Remnant 3 to KPL
 
At some point in time, William R. Hancock, Trustee of
 
the Hancock and Company, Inc. Profit Sharing Trust (Hancock
 
Trust) gained ownership of Remnant 3. On July 22, 2002, the
 
Hancock Trust and KPL entered into a DROA for the sale of Remnant
 
3 to KPL for $2 million. The DROA's "special term" C-67(A)(2)
 
stated: "[t]ransaction contingent upon Buyer's review and
 
approval by 7/29/02 of: . . . Grimpas [sic] Access Easement[.]" 
On July 24, 2002, Hancock sent correspondence to KPL
 
and attached "two of the due diligence items" which consisted of
 
a Seller's disclosure statement and, as to the "Grimpas [sic]
 
Easement," a "map of the current easement." With respect to the
 
easement, Hancock's letter stated in pertinent part:
 
We are working with Grimpas [sic] to reduce the easement
size by moving the fence closer and more parasailed [sic] to
the road. Originally, the fence was put up before the road
was installed to keep the cows out of the area.
 
Fidelity National promised to have the preliminary
title report to me tomorrow and I will fax or email it to
you as soon as I get it. Steve Lee promised the easement
document by Friday afternoon and I will likewise get it to
 you.
 
(Emphasis added). In the attached Seller's disclosure statement
 
executed by Hancock, he answered "yes" to the question "[a]re
 
there any easements affecting this Property" and further
 
explained "Grimpas [sic] access easement to flower farm unit
 
2x[.]" Hancock also answered "yes" to the questions "[a]re there
 
any roadways, driveways, walls, fences, and/or other improvements
 
which are shared with adjoining land owners" and "[a]re there any
 
written agreements concerning these items" and explained "written
 
Grimpas [sic] easement, written access easement[.]" The map
 
attached to Hancock's letter included a circled area and the
 
handwritten notation "area of Grimpas [sic] current easement[.]" 
KPL does not dispute that prior to purchasing Remnant
 
3, Hancock showed KPL members Curtis Crane and C. Dustin Crane a
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
roadway on Remnant 3 that Hancock referred to as an access
 
easement. However, the declaration of C. Dustin Crane further
 
elaborates that:
 
On or around August 6, 2002, KPL received a
Preliminary Report regarding Remnant 3 ("Preliminary
Report"). The Preliminary Report did not include any
reference to an "access easement". Mr. Hancock approved the
Preliminary Report and did not make any changes, supplements
or amendments to the Preliminary Report. Based on the
 Preliminary Report and Mr. Hancock's approval of the same,
KPL's members understood that there was no recorded easement
 encumbering Remnant 3.
 
There is nothing in the record evidencing that an
 
"easement document" as contemplated in Hancock's July 24, 2002
 
letter was created or executed.
 
By way of a Trustee's Deed dated August 12, 2002, and
 
recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances on August 28, 2002, the
 
Hancock Trust conveyed Remnant 3 to KPL. The Trustee's Deed did
 
not contain any provision concerning the Grinpases' alleged
 
easement. 
C. Settlement Agreement
 
On September 11, 2003, the Grinpases, Hancock, Kapaa
 
382 and James W. Lull ("Lull") entered into a Settlement
 
Agreement in order to settle various disagreements. Among other
 
things, the Settlement Agreement purported to require that Kapaa
 
382, Hancock and Lull provide the Grinpases with certain
 
easements. Only incomplete copies of the Settlement Agreement
 
are contained in the record and it is thus unclear what property
 
was affected by the Settlement Agreement. To the extent the
 
Settlement Agreement purported to provide an easement over
 
Remnant 3, KPL owned Remnant 3 when the Settlement Agreement was
 
executed and KPL was not a party to the agreement.
 
D. Condominium Declarations and Maps
 
On December 14, 2004, a "Declaration of Condominium
 
Property Regime of Kûlana and Condominium Map No. 3902" (CPR
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Declaration), executed by Hancock on behalf of Kapaa 382 as the
 
fee owner and developer, was recorded in the Bureau of
 
Conveyances.2 It is uncontested that Condominium Map No. 3902
 
includes a map entitled "Condominium Map for UNITS 26A TO 26E,
 
3
INCLUSIVE" (26A/26E Map),  which shows easements AU-26A and AU­
26E in favor of the Grinpases' Lot 77-J. As reflected in the
 26A/26E Map, Units 26A and 26E are part of Remnant 3.
 
At the time that the CPR Declaration and the 26A/26E
 
Map were recorded, KPL owned Remnant 3 and did not execute the
 
CPR Declaration. 
However, on either November 30, 2004 or
 
4
December 1, 2004  (prior to recording of the CPR Declaration and
the 26A/26E Map), C. Dustin Crane, as the Managing Member of KPL,
 
executed a "Consent and Joinder" which referenced Document No.
 
2004-252101 (the CPR Declaration). The Consent and Joinder was
 
then recorded at the Bureau of Conveyances on December 21, 2004
 
(one week after recording of the CPR Declaration and 26A/26E
 
Map).5 The Grinpases contend the Consent and Joinder is of
 
2
 The document reflects Hancock as the President of Kauai Lease and
 
Loan, Ltd., a Member of Kapaa 382.
3 It is unclear from the record what constituted the entirety of
Condominium Map No. 3902. However, the CPR Declaration states one-hundred and
eight units were being created.
4
 The Consent and Joinder indicates two different dates that it was
 
executed. Above the signature of C. Dustin Crane, the document reflects the
date of November 30, 2004. However, on the same page, the notary statement
below C. Dustin Crane's signature indicates that he signed the document on
December 1, 2004.
5 The Consent and Joinder provides:
 
WITHOUT RECOURSE OF ANY KIND AGAINST THE UNDERSIGNED, except
as to its own property subject hereto, and with the
intention of complying with Chapter 514A, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, the undersigned K
ÛLANA PARTNERS, LLC, a Hawaii
limited liability company, hereby consents to and joins and
subjects the interest of the undersigned in the property
identified by the TMK Number listed above, to the terms of
the recording of the DECLARATION OF CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY
REGIME OF KULANA, the BYLAWS OF KÛLANA, and the DECLARATION
(continued...)
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
particular significance and establishes KPL's intent to create
 
easements AU-26A and AU-26E reflected in the 26A/26E Map. KPL
 
contends the Consent and Joinder does not create any easements
 
because KPL was deceived as to its effect and, further, the
 
document itself was void for failing to properly describe the
 
subject property.6
 
On January 27, 2005, an "Amended and Restated
 
Declaration of Condominium Property Regime" (First Amended
 
Declaration) for Kulana was recorded. Based on the record, the
 
First Amended Declaration was executed by Hancock on behalf of
 
Kapaa 382. There is nothing in the record indicating that KPL
 
approved or consented to the First Amended Declaration.
 
On July 20, 2005, a document entitled "Amendment to
 
Declaration and to Condominium Map of the Condominium Property
 
Regime 'Kûlana' ... and Quitclaim Deeds" (Second Amended
 
Declaration) was recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances. KPL
 
contends that, even if easements were created by the prior CPR
 
5 (...continued)
OF COVENANTS, CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS FOR THE K
ÛLANA
 
SUBDIVISION, the DECLARATION OF GRANT AND RESERVATION OF
EASEMENTS FOR THE KÛLANA SUBDIVISION and its associated
 condominium map to be recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances
simultaneously herewith.
6 As noted by KPL, the property description for the Consent and Joinder
indicates "TMK (4)4-3-3:022," whereas the CPR Declaration referenced Remnant 3
 
as TMK number "4-4-3-3-021." The Grinpases contend the CPR Declaration
contained a scrivener's error, erroneously reflecting an incorrect TMK number
for Remnant 3, and that the TMK number contained on the Consent and Joinder
accurately referred to Remnant 3 at that time. Apparently consistent with the
Grinpases' argument, an "Amended and Restated Declaration of Condominium
Property Regime" by Kapaa 382, recorded on January 27, 2005, referenced
Remnant 3 as TMK No. "(4)4-3-003:022." Ultimately, however, the correct TMK
number for Remnant 3 is not apparent.
 
In identifying the subject property as Remnant 3, the Grinpases further
point out that the Consent and Joinder references Document No. 2004-152285
(alleged to be the Trustee's Deed conveying Remnant 3 to KPL on August 12,
2002) and Document No. 2004-252101 (the CPR Declaration). We note, however,
that the correct document number for the Trustee's Deed appears to be 2002­152285.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
documents (the CPR Declaration, the 26A/26E Map, and the Consent
 
and Joinder), the Second Amended Declaration withdrew Remnant 3
 
from the project and thus Remnant 3 was no longer burdened by the
 
CPR documents. The Second Amended Declaration was executed by
 
7
KPL as "Remnant 3 Owner"  and by Hancock on behalf of Kapaa 382. 
This document states, in part:
 
(a) Notice is hereby given that pursuant to Paragraph
20.5 of the Declaration that Remnant 3 (including for
purposes hereof, the condominium units designated as Units
26A through 26E, inclusive, being the condominium units
located on Remnant 3) is hereby removed and withdrawn from
the Project. Hereafter, except as hereinafter set forth,
neither Remnant 3 nor such condominium units shall be
 
burdened by nor receive the benefits of the Declaration,
Bylaws, or the Condominium Map[.]
 
(Emphasis added). As part of the "Quitclaim Deeds" contained
 
within this document, Kapaa 382 deeded to KPL certain of Kapaa
 
382's rights, title and interest in Remnant 3. In turn, KPL
 
deeded to Kapaa 382 certain of KPL's rights, title and interest
 
in the remaining Kulana CPR property (i.e., the property covered
 
by the CPR Declaration other than Remnant 3). The quitclaim deed
 
by Kapaa 382 states, in relevant part, that it does:
 
REMISE, RELEASE AND QUITCLAIM, unto Grantee [KPL], its
successors and assigns, absolutely and in fee simple
forever, all of [Kapaa 382's] right, title or interest in
Remnant Lot 3, subject, however, to the encumbrances,
exceptions, reservations and other matters, if any, set
forth therein or herein;
 
AND the reversions, remainders, rents, issues and
profits thereof, and all of the estate, right, title and
interest of [Kapaa 382], both at law and in equity therein
and thereto.
 
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the same, together with all buildings,
improvements, tenements, hereditaments, rights, easements,
privileges and appurtenances thereunto belonging or appertaining
or held and enjoyed therewith unto said [KPL], in the tenancy
aforesaid, absolutely and in fee simple[.]
 
(Emphasis added). 
7
 This document was signed by KPL's "Managing Member," C. Dustin Crane.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E.	 Grinpases' Purchase of Unit 2X
 
Subsequently, the Grinpases eventually purchased Unit
 
2X from Kapaa 382. A Kulana Apartment Deed transferring
 
ownership of Unit 2X from Kapaa 382 to the Grinpases was recorded
 
on July 16, 2007. Based on maps in the record and as is
 
undisputed by the parties, Unit 2X is property that would be
 
connected to Lot 77J if it is determined that easements AU-26A
 
and AU-26E exist. The Grinpases filed the Complaint in this
 
lawsuit approximately two months after the Kulana Apartment Deed
 
was recorded.
 
II.	 Standard of Review
 
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant
 
or denial of summary judgment de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107
 
Hawai'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (quoting Durette v. 
Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai' i 490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 
71 (2004)). Accordingly,
 
[o]n appeal, an order of summary judgment is reviewed under
the same standard applied by the circuit courts. Summary
judgment is proper where the moving party demonstrates that
there are no genuine issues of material fact and it is
entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. In other words,
summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is
entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.
 
Iddings v. Mee-Lee, 82 Hawai' i 1, 5, 919 P.2d 263, 267 (1996) 
(citation omitted). See also Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure 
Rule 56(c).
 
III. Discussion
 
A.	 The Issue of Merger Is Not Reached Because There Was No
Express Easement Created By DROA Provision C-67(A)(2)
 
As previously noted, the DROA between the Hancock Trust
 
and KPL contained provision C-67(A)(2), which stated:
 
"[t]ransaction contingent upon Buyer's review and approval by
 
7/29/02 of: . . . Grimpas [sic] Access Easement[.]" It appears
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
from the record that the circuit court granted KPL's motion for
 
summary judgment on grounds that the Trustee's Deed transferring
 
Remnant 3 to KPL did not contain the Grinpases' alleged easement
 
and thus the doctrine of merger applied to preclude said
 
easement.8
 
Under the doctrine of merger, "upon delivery and
 
acceptance of the deed, the provisions of the underlying contract
 
for conveyance are merged into the deed and thereby become
 
extinguished and unenforceable." S. Utsunomiya Enters., Inc. v.
 
Moomuku Country Club, 75 Haw. 480, 514, 866 P.2d 951, 968 (1994). 
The Grinpases argue that the doctrine of merger should not apply
 
to extinguish DROA provision C-67(A)(2) regarding the alleged
 
easement because it was a mistake not to include the easement in
 
the Trustee's Deed, and further, they had collateral rights under
 
provision C-67(A)(2). In short, the Grinpases claim an express
 
easement was created under DROA provision C-67(A)(2) to which
 
they contend the merger doctrine should not apply. KPL argues,
 
in turn, that there was no express easement across Remnant 3 and
 
the Trustee's Deed correctly reflected this fact.
 
We agree with KPL that DROA provision C-67(A)(2) did
 
not create an express easement. As a result, we need not reach
 
the question of merger.
 
An easement may be created by express grant. The
 
scope of such an easement is set forth in express terms,
either in the granting documents or as matter of
incorporation and legal construction of terms of relevant
documents, and the extent of the easement is fixed by the
 conveyance.
 
A grant of an easement should be drawn and executed
with the same formalities as a deed to real estate. Thus,
although one can grant an express, irrevocable easement, it
must be evidenced by a writing manifesting a clear intent to
create an interest in the land. An easement is created if
 
8
 The circuit court's August 3, 2009 order granting KPL's motion for
partial summary judgment is silent as to the basis for its ruling, however in
comments at the hearing on the Grinpases' motion to alter or amend, the
circuit court indicated it had relied on the merger doctrine.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the owner of the servient estate either enters into a
 
contract or makes a conveyance intended to create a
servitude that complies with the Statute of Frauds or falls
within an exception to the Statute of Frauds.
 
As a general rule, to constitute a grant of an easement, any
words clearly showing the intention to grant an easement are
sufficient. The intent to grant an easement must be so manifest
on the face of the instrument, however, that no other construction
can be placed on it. Thus, to create an easement by express
grant, there must be a writing containing plain and direct
language evincing the grantor's intent to create a right in the
nature of an easement rather than a license.
 
An acknowledgment in a deed of the existence of an easement
is not equivalent to an intent to create an easement. Language
stating that a conveyance is subject to an existing easement,
indicating that the grantor wishes to exclude the easement from
warranties of title, does not create an easement. However such
 language does not necessarily preclude the creation of an easement
if that is what the grantor intended.
 
25 Am. Jur. 2d Easements and Licenses § 15 (2004) (emphasis
 
added) (footnotes omitted).
 
Persons in possession of property may create express
easements by grant, for a consideration or by gift,
transferring away the right or rights represented by the
easement to another.... The person creating the easement
must intend to create such an interest and observe the
 proper formalities in the local jurisdiction for
transferring property by grant or by devise.
 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co.,
 
100 Hawai' i 97, 122, 58 P.3d 608, 633 (2002) (Ramil, J., 
concurring) (emphasis added) (quoting Thompson on Real Property
 
§ 60.03(a)(1) at 405 (Thomas ed., 1994 & Supp. 2000)).
 
[I]n interpreting an express grant, intent of the parties is
paramount:
 
[A]ny words which clearly show the intention to give
an easement, which is by law grantable, are sufficient
to effect that purpose, providing the language is
sufficiently definite and certain in its terms.
Neither words of limitation, nor words of inheritance,
nor technical terminology are necessary to create an
easement. If the language of the grant is free from
ambiguity, it is not the subject of interpretation,
and no resort to extrinsic facts and circumstances may
be made to modify the clear terms of the grant. 
To
determine whether an easement is the intention of the
 parties, courts will examine the language of the
grant, the circumstances surrounding its creation and
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the property involved, with construction in favor of
the grantee.
 
Id. at 123, 58 P.3d at 634 (Ramil, J., concurring) (emphasis
 
added) (quoting Thompson on Real Property § 60.03(a)(7) at 415);
 
see also Thompson on Real Property § 60.03(a)(7) at 485-86 (2nd
 
Thomas ed., 2006).
 
In this case, DROA provision C-67(A)(2) does not show
 
an intent by KPL to grant an easement over Remnant 3. Rather, it
 
states that the transaction between the Hancock Trust and KPL was
 
"contingent upon [KPL's] review and approval by 7/29/02 of: . . .
 
Grimpas [sic] Access Easement[.]" This language expressly
 
contemplates KPL's review and approval of another document
 
showing or establishing the Grinpases' easement. This is further
 
supported by Hancock's letter to KPL dated July 24, 2002, which
 
stated that "the easement document" would be provided to KPL. 
The record on appeal contains no such document. Instead, the
 
Grinpases rely on DROA provision C-67(A)(2) as creating the
 
easement, which it does not.
 
Given the record in this case, including the undisputed
 
language of DROA provision C-67(A)(2), we conclude that this DROA
 
provision did not create an express easement over Remnant 3. 
Because no express easement was created, there is no need to
 
consider whether the lack of an easement in the Trustee's Deed
 
triggers the merger doctrine. Rather, as KPL asserts, the
 
Trustee's Deed accurately reflects that there was no express
 
easement over Remnant 3 at that time. KPL is entitled to summary
 
judgment on this issue.
 
B.	 Genuine Issues of Material Fact Exist As To Whether the
 
Kulana CPR Documents Established An Easement Over
 Remnant 3
 
The Grinpases argue that the circuit court erred in
 
granting summary judgment because there were genuine issues of
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
material fact as to whether the Kulana CPR documents established
 
an easement. The Grinpases contend that the recording of the CPR
 
Declaration and the 26A/26E Map, along with the execution and
 
recording of KPL's Consent and Joinder, created easements AU-26A
 
and AU-26E over units 26A and 26E (which are part of Remnant 3)
 
in favor of Lot 77J. By their argument, the Grinpases assert the
 
existence of an express easement.
 
KPL argues, in turn, that because the CPR Declaration
 
and the 26A/26E Map were recorded on December 14, 2004, when KPL
 
owned Remnant 3, Kapaa 382 did not have any authority to plat an
 
easement over Remnant 3. As previously noted, KPL further argues
 
that its Consent and Joinder failed to create any easements
 
because KPL was misled as to the effect of the Consent and
 
Joinder. KPL further argues that, even if easements were
 
created, the Second Amended Declaration withdrew Remnant 3 from
 
the Kulana CPR and Remnant 3 is no longer burdened by any
 
easements under the CPR Declaration or the 26A/26E Map.
 
We conclude that there are genuine issues of material
 
fact as to whether KPL intended to create easements via the
 
Consent and Joinder. Moreover, if easements were created by the
 
Consent and Joinder, there are genuine issues of material fact as
 
to the intent and meaning of the Second Amended Declaration, and
 
further, no evidence that the Grinpases agreed to termination of
 
any easements.
 
1. The consent and joinder
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 514A governs 
Condominium Property Regimes (CPR) in Hawai' i. HRS § 514A-20 
(2006 Repl.) requires that for property to be subject to a CPR, all owners must expressly declare their desire to submit the 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
property to the CPR.9 In this case, in order to include Remnant 3
 
in the Kulana CPR, it was thus necessary for KPL (the owner of
 
Remnant 3 at the time) to expressly agree. On its face, it
 
appears that the Consent and Joinder executed by KPL was an
 
effort to satisfy this requirement. The parties, however, have
 
significant disagreement as to the import of the Consent and
 
Joinder with regard to whether it created easements AU-26A and
 
AU-26E over Remnant 3.
 
With respect to whether KPL's Consent and Joinder 
created the easements, KPL's intent is "paramount." AOAO of 
Wailea Elua, 100 Hawai' i at 123, 58 P.3d at 634 (Ramil, J., 
concurring). As noted earlier, "[t]he person creating the 
easement must intend to create such an interest and observe the 
proper formalities in the local jurisdiction for transferring 
property by grant or by devise." Id. at 122, 58 P.3d at 633 
(Ramil, J., concurring) (quoting Thompson on Real Property 
§ 60.03(a)(1) at 405). We also again note: 
An easement is created if the owner of the servient estate either
 
enters into a contract or makes a conveyance intended to create a
servitude that complies with the Statute of Frauds or falls within
an exception to the Statute of Frauds.
 
9 HRS § 514A-20 states:
 
§ 514A-20 Condominium property regimes.  Whenever the
 
sole owner or all of the owners including all of the lessees
of a property expressly declare, through the execution and
recordation of a master deed, together with a declaration,
which declaration shall set forth the particulars enumerated
by section 514A-11, the sole owner's or their desire to
submit the property to the regime established by this
chapter, there shall thereby be established a condominium
property regime with respect to the property, and this
chapter shall be applicable to the property. If the master
 deed is already recorded, the recordation of the declaration
is sufficient to achieve the same result.
 
Although the parties dispute whether the condominium documents created an
easement, and whether KPL's withdrawal of Remnant 3 from the condominium
regime would terminate any easement, the record does not reflect any party
challenging the validity of the Kulana condominium property regime.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
As a general rule, to constitute a grant of an easement, any
words clearly showing the intention to grant an easement are
sufficient. The intent to grant an easement must be so manifest
on the face of the instrument, however, that no other construction
can be placed on it. Thus, to create an easement by express
grant, there must be a writing containing plain and direct
language evincing the grantor's intent to create a right in the
nature of an easement rather than a license.
 
25 Am. Jur. 2d Easements and Licenses § 15 (footnotes omitted). 
"To determine whether an easement is the intention of the 
parties, courts will examine the language of the grant, the 
circumstances surrounding its creation and the property involved, 
with construction in favor of the grantee." AOAO of Wailea Elua, 
100 Hawai' i at 123, 58 P.3d at 634 (Ramil, J., concurring) 
(quoting Thompson on Real Property § 60.03(a)(7) at 415). 
A condominium declaration can establish an easement. 
See Garfink v. Cloisters at Charles, Inc., 897 A.2d 206, 213-18
 (Md. 2006) (holding that traditional easement law applies to
 
condominiums, the establishment of an easement in a condominium
 
declaration is analogous to the establishment of an easement by
 
deed, and the condominium declaration therein created an express
 
easement). Similarly, a map or plat setting forth an easement
 
and incorporated as part of a conveyance, including a condominium
 
declaration, can create an express easement, so long as that was
 
the intent of the grantor. See Application of Kelley, 50 Haw.
 
567, 577, 445 P.2d 538, 545 (1968) ("[I]f it clearly appears from
 the language of the conveyance or from any map or plat made a
 
part thereof or, perhaps from other circumstances, that it was
 
the intent of the grantor to convey only as far as and not
 
including the bed of the stream . . . the deed will be so
 
construed to carry out that intent.") (citation omitted); Conway
 
v. Miller, 232 P.3d 390, 395-96 (Mont. 2010); Bache v. Owens, 883
 
P.2d 817, 820-21 (Mont. 1994); Jon W. Bruce & James W. Ely, Jr.,
 
The Law of Easements and Licenses in Land § 3:5 (2011) ("a
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
condominium declaration, or a plat map may create an express
 
easement.") (footnotes omitted).
 
In this case, it appears clear from the 26A/26E Map
 
(recorded as part of Condominium Map No. 3902 and the CPR
 
Declaration) that it contains easements AU-26A and AU-26E over
 
Remnant 3 in favor of the Grinpases' Lot 77J. The notes on the
 
26A/26E Map state, in relevant part:
 
3. Easement AU-26A affecting Unit 26A, in favor of
TMK: (4) 4-6-007: 087, Lot 77-J, for access and utility
purposes. (0.090 Acre)
4. Easement AU-26E affecting Unit 26E, in favor of
TMK: (4) 4-6-007: 087, Lot 77-J, for access and utility
purposes. (0.209 Acre)
 
The point of contention in this case is whether by
 
executing the Consent and Joinder, KPL intended to create the
 
easements reflected in the 26A/26E Map. The undisputed state of
 
the evidence in the record is that: the CPR Declaration executed
 
by Kapaa 382 and the 26A/26E Map were recorded on December 14,
 
2004; and the Consent and Joinder by KPL was recorded thereafter
 
on December 21, 2004 (although it had been signed previously on
 
either November 30, 2004 or December 1, 2004).
 
In its opposition to the Grinpases' motion for partial
 
summary judgment, KPL submitted the declaration of C. Dustin
 
Crane dated May 6, 2009, which stated in part:
 
3. In 2004, Kapaa 382, LLC ("Kapaa 382") provided a
copy of the Consent and Joinder to KPL for KPL's execution. 
However, at no time did Kapaa 382, William R. Hancock
("Hancock") or anyone else: (a) notify KPL that Condominium
Map No. 3902 depicts Easement "AU-26A" and Easement "AU-26E"
on Remnant 3; (b) discuss Easement "AU-26A", Easement "AU­26E" or any other easement with KPL; or (c) discuss
Plaintiffs' alleged interest in Easement "AU-26A" and
Easement "AU-26E".
 
4. KPL would not have executed the Consent and
 
Joinder had it known that Kapaa 382, Hancock, Plaintiffs
Robert Grinpas and Esther Grinpas and/or anyone else would
use it to establish Easement "AU-26A" and Easement "AU-26E"
 over Remnant 3.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Moreover, in answers to the Grinpases' interrogatories, KPL
 
explained its claim that the Grinpases' conduct was wrongful
 
regarding the CPR Declaration, stating in relevant part:
 
In or around 2004, Plaintiffs, Kapaa 382, Mr. Hancock, Mr.
Hancock, Trustee . . . attempted to replace and or expand
the License Agreement with an access and utilities easement
over Remnant 3 in favor of [the Grinpases], Unit 3 and/or
Unit 2x without KPL's knowledge, authority or consent, by,
among other things, misrepresenting to KPL that KPL would be
able to subdivide and develop Remnant 3 if Remnant 3 was
included as part of the Project, and then improperly coerced
and/or induced KPL to include Remnant 3 in the Project by
the Declaration, Amended Declaration, the Project's
Condominium Map and/or Condominium File Plan No. 3902.
 
Given the evidence at this point, it is unclear if KPL was
 
somehow misled by others as to the effect of the Consent and
 
Joinder.
 
KPL argues, moreover, that the Consent and Joinder is a
 
nullity because it fails to properly describe its subject
 
property. That is, the TMK number on the Consent and Joinder –­
TMK (4)4-3-3:022 –- does not match the TMK number that the CPR
 
Declaration indicates is Remnant 3 –- TMK 4-4-3-3-021. The
 
Grinpases respond that the TMK on the Consent and Joinder was the
 
correct one for Remnant 3,10 that the CPR Declaration contained a
 
scrivener's error in how it described Remnant 3, and that in any
 event, the Consent and Joinder references the document numbers
 
for the CPR Declaration as well as the Trustee's Deed that
 
transferred Remnant 3 to KPL.
11 These arguments serve to further
 
underscore the factual disputes that exist and that the record is
 not sufficiently developed to warrant summary judgment relative
 
to the condominium documents.
 
10 Both parties, it appears, fail to adduce admissible evidence as to
the correct TMK number for Remnant 3. The correct TMK number remains unclear.
11 We again note, however, that the document number for the Trustee's
Deed affecting Remnant 3 is Document No. 2002-152285, whereas the Consent and
Joinder references a document number that is one digit different, Document No.
2004-152285.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Additionally, the declaration recorded on December 14,
 
2004 and the Consent and Joinder do not contain express language
 
that would, in and of itself, clarify the intent of KPL related
 
to easements 26A and 26E.
 
Ultimately, looking at the language of the relevant CPR
 
documents (the CPR Declaration, including the 26A/26E Map, and
 
the Consent and Joinder), the circumstances surrounding their
 
creation, and the property involved, there remain genuine issues
 
of material fact as to whether KPL intended to create easements
 
AU-26A and AU-26E by executing the Consent and Joinder. With
 
respect to each party's motion for partial summary judgment, they
 
have each failed to carry their respective burden of proof, and
 
viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
 
respective non-moving party, summary judgment was not proper for
 
either party relative to the condominium documents.
 
2.	 Second Amended Declaration – withdrawal of Remnant
 
3 from the Kulana CPR
 
It is KPL's position that, even if the condominium
 
documents created easements AU-26A and AU-26E, Remnant 3 was
 
withdrawn from the Kulana CPR by way of the Second Amended
 
Declaration and thus the easements no longer exist. 
KPL contends that they withdrew Remnant 3 from the
 
Kulana CPR in compliance with HRS § 514A-21(b) (2006 Repl.), the
 
CPR Declaration and the First Amended Declaration. Even if we
 
assume arguendo that there was compliance with HRS § 514A-21(b),12
 
it is unclear if, by way of the Second Amended Declaration, KPL
 
intended to extinguish easements AU-26A and AU-26E. The language
 
12 HRS § 514A-21(b) requires, in pertinent part, that "[a]ll of the
apartment owners may remove a property, or a part of a property, from this
chapter by an instrument to that effect, duly recorded, provided that the
holders of all liens affecting any of the apartments consent thereto, by
instruments duly recorded." KPL's answering brief contends Remnant 3 was not
subject to any lien when it was removed from the Kulana CPR, however the
record citation is to a non-existent volume in the record.
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in the Second Amended Declaration is less than clear on this
 
point and there is no specific reference to the easements in
 
question. The Second Amended Declaration states "except as
 
hereinafter set forth, neither Remnant 3 nor such condominium
 
units shall be burdened by nor receive the benefits of the
 
Declaration, Bylaws, or the Condominium Map[.]" (Emphasis added). 
The quitclaim deed by Kapaa 382, which is part of the same
 
document, thereafter states that Kapaa 382 deeds its interests
 
and rights in Remnant 3 to KPL, "subject, however, to the
 
encumbrances, exceptions, reservations and other matters, if any,
 
set forth therein or herein." (Emphasis added). The meaning of
 
this language is simply unclear.
 
Adding further to the confusion, KPL's interrogatory
 
responses do not suggest that removing the easements was part of
 
the intent behind the Second Amended Declaration. KPL's answer
 
to an interrogatory regarding the Second Amended Declaration
 
states, in part:
 
in and around 2005, Plaintiffs, Mr. Hancock, Mr. Hancock,
Trustee and/or Kapaa 382 represented to KPL that it would be
easier to finalize the Project's application for and/or
registration as a Condominium Property Regime pursuant to
Haw. Rev. Stat. Ch. 514A if Remnant 3 was removed from the
 Project. Thus, Plaintiffs, Mr. Hancock, Mr. Hancock,
Trustee, Kapaa 382 induced and/or coerced KPL into executing
the July '05 Amendment and/or Quitclaim Deeds without: (1)
explaining to KPL why removal of Remnant 3 from the Project
would make it easier to finalize the Project's application
for and/or registration as a Condominium Property Regime;
(2) explaining that Remnant 3 could not lawfully be included
in the Project because KPL owned Remnant 3, not the
Project's developer –- Kapaa 382; or (2) [sic] disclosing
any information to KPL regarding the purported easements
"AU-26A" and "AU-26E" in favor of Plaintiffs, Unit 3 and/or
Unit 2x, allegedly encumbering Remnant 3 pursuant to, among
other things, the Declaration, Amended Declaration, the
Project's Condominium Map and/or Condominium File Plan No.
3902.
 
In addition to the above, if the easements were created
 
by the earlier CPR documents, KPL adduces no evidence that the
 
Grinpases agreed or consented to the termination of the
 
easements.
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
An easement cannot be terminated or abridged at will by the
owner of the servient estate or his successors, or without
the consent of the owner of, or those persons entitled to,
the easement, unless the instrument by which the easement
was created clearly manifests an intention that the easement
shall be terminable at the will of the owner of the servient
 estate, or at the option of either or both parties. . . . An
easement created by reference to a filed map can be
extinguished only by the united action of all lot owners for
whose benefit the easement is created. . .
 
28A C.J.S. Easements § 140 (2008).
 
KPL has not carried its burden to show that it is
 
entitled to summary judgment on the alleged basis that it
 
withdrew Remnant 3 from the Kulana CPR.
 
C. Intended Beneficiary
 
We do not find merit in the Grinpases' argument that
 
they are intended third party beneficiaries of DROA provision C­
67(A)(2) and the recorded Kulana CPR documents. The authorities
 
cited by the Grinpases do not support their contention that they
 
are third party beneficiaries entitled to an easement, where it
 
is unclear if an easement was created. Rather, their entitlement
 
to the easements rests on the question of whether such easements
 
were intended and granted. As set forth above, the DROA
 
provision did not create an easement. With regard to the Kulana
 
CPR documents, genuine issues of material fact remain. 
D. Notice and the License Agreement
 
Likewise, we find no merit in the Grinpases' assertion
 
that they are entitled to the easements because KPL took title to
 
Remnant 3 with notice of the easements. Similarly, the
 
Grinpases' argument that KPL understood that DROA provision C­
67(A)(2) referred to an easement rather than the License
 
Agreement is not determinative. Rather, the question in both
 
respects is whether an easement actually existed. Based on the
 
evidence in the record, the DROA provision did not create an
 
easement and there was no easement when title to Remnant 3 passed
 
to KPL.
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E. Equity 
The Grinpases argue, without reference to any legal
 
authority, that the circuit court erred because it reached an
 
inequitable result. We reject this argument.
 
F. The Grinpases' Motion to Alter or Amend
 
We also do not agree with the Grinpases' contention 
that the circuit court erroneously denied their motion to alter 
or amend the partial summary judgment order and judgment, which 
was in essence a motion for reconsideration. "The trial court's 
ruling on a motion for reconsideration is reviewed under the 
abuse of discretion standard." Cho v. State, 115 Hawai' i 373, 
381, 168 P.3d 17, 25 (2007) (citation omitted). 
The Grinpases' motion asserted that the circuit court
 
should reconsider its summary judgment rulings in light of the
 testimony by Hancock at trial. The Grinpases' motion did not
 
submit actual evidence of Hancock's testimony, but simply
 
asserted in its memoranda his purported testimony.
 
Moreover, a motion for reconsideration is meant to 
allow the movant to present new evidence or new arguments that 
could not have been presented in the earlier proceeding. See 
AOAO of Wailea Elua, 100 Hawai' i at 110, 58 P.3d at 621 (citation 
omitted); Pancakes of Hawaii, Inc. v. Pomare Props. Corp., 85 
Hawai'i 286, 296-97, 944 P.2d 83, 93-94 (App. 1997) (citation 
omitted). The Grinpases made no showing why they could not have secured Hancock's testimony and presented it earlier in the 
summary judgment proceedings. 
G. The Grinpases' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
 
As discussed above, the Grinpases did not carry their
 
burden to show that they were entitled to partial summary
 
judgment. DROA provision C-67(A)(2) did not create an easement,
 
and thus summary judgment was proper in favor of KPL on this
 
point.
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
As to the Kulana CPR documents, there are genuine
 
issues of material fact concerning whether those documents
 
created easements AU-26A and AU-26E, as discussed above. 
Therefore, the circuit court did not err in denying the
 
Grinpases' motion for partial summary judgment on this point.
 
IV. Conclusion 
For the reasons set forth above, we vacate the judgment
 
entered by the circuit court on August 3, 2009, and we remand
 
this case for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 15, 2012. 
Robert Grinpas
for Plaintiffs-Appellants
 
Presiding Judge
Jade Ching
Shellie Park-Hoapili
(Jade Ching
Laura P. Moritz with her on the brief)
(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing) for Defendant/Third-Party
Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
22
 