NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30425
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
EDDIE SOLTREN and NANCY SOLTREN,
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants/Appellants,
v.
 
EDWIN SMITH, ERLETTE SMITH,
Defendants/Counterclaim Plaintiffs/Appellees
and
 
HENRIETTA PHILLIPS, Defendant/Appellee,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-10,
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0165)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim-Defendants/Appellants Eddie
 
Soltren (Eddie Soltren) and Nancy Soltren (collectively, the
 
Soltrens) appeal from the March 10, 2010 Judgment (Judgment) and
 
the April 19, 2010 Amended Judgment (Amended Judgment) entered in
 
the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit1
 (circuit court).
The Judgment was entered in favor of
 
Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/Appellees Edwin Smith and
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Erlette Smith (the Smiths) and Defendant-Appellee Henrietta
 
Phillips (Phillips) (collectively, Defendants/Appellees) and
 
against the Soltrens. The Judgment was granted in accordance
 
with an "Order Granting [the Smiths] and [Phillips'] Motion for
 
Summary Judgment" filed on January 22, 2010 (1/22/10 Order
 
Granting Summary Judgment).
 
The Amended Judgment further awarded
 
Defendants/Appellees their attorney's fees and costs, in
 
accordance with an order granting fees and costs filed on
 
April 19, 2010 (4/19/10 Order Granting Fees/Costs).
 
On appeal, the Soltrens contend that the circuit court
 
erred when it: (1) imposed sanctions against the Soltrens that
 
were not commensurate with the Soltrens' discovery and trial
 
setting order offenses, (2) denied the Soltrens' motion to extend
 
pretrial deadlines, and (3) denied the Soltrens' motion for leave
 
to file a first amended complaint.
 
Based on their first two points of error, the Soltrens
 
contend that this court should vacate the following and remand
 
for further proceedings: (a) an order granting the
 
Defendants/Appellees' motion for sanctions, filed on February 26,
 
2009 (2/26/09 Sanction Order); (b) an order granting
 
Defendants/Appellees' motion in limine precluding the Soltrens
 
from presenting evidence as to monetary damages, filed on
 
October 5, 2009 (10/5/09 Sanction Order re Monetary Damages);
 
(c) an order granting the Defendants/Appellees' motion in limine
 
precluding the Soltrens and any of the Soltrens' witnesses from
 
testifying at trial, filed on October 5, 2009 (10/5/09 Sanction
 
Order re Witnesses); (d) the 1/22/10 Order Granting Summary
 
Judgment; (e) the Judgment; (f) the 4/19/10 Order Granting
 
Fees/Costs; and (g) the Amended Judgment.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Based on their third point of error, the Soltrens
 
contend this court should remand the case and allow them to file
 
a first amended complaint. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm the Judgment
 
and the Amended Judgment.
 
Points of Error 1 and 2
 
As asserted by the Defendants/Appellees, the Soltrens 
do not raise a point of error contending that the circuit court's grant of summary judgment in favor of the Defendants/Appellees on 
the complaint and the counterclaim was erroneous. We thus do not 
reach the substantive question whether the circuit court's 
summary judgment ruling was correct. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) 28(b)(4) ("Points not presented in accordance with this section will be disregarded . . . ."). 
At most, and as noted above, the Soltrens' opening
 
brief indirectly contends that, because the circuit court erred
 
when it sanctioned the Soltrens and when it denied their motion
 
to extend pretrial deadlines, this court should inter alia vacate
 
the summary judgment order. However, nowhere in the opening or
 
reply briefs do the Soltrens argue or explain why their alleged
 
points of error warrant vacating the summary judgment ruling. 
The Soltrens have thus waived the issue of whether the circuit
 
court's sanction orders and refusal to extend deadlines somehow
 
affected the validity of the summary judgment ruling. HRAP
 
28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived.").
 
Even if we assume there has not been a waiver, the
 
issues raised by the Soltrens would not undermine the binding
 
effect of the summary judgment ruling and the Judgment entered
 
thereon. First, although the sanction orders issued by the
 
circuit court precluded the Soltrens from presenting any evidence
 
of monetary damages and any witnesses at trial, the circuit court
 
explicitly ruled with regard to the summary judgment motion that
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the court was not striking anything and that the court was
 
considering everything before it related to that motion.2 Thus,
 
even if the circuit court erred in issuing the sanction orders as
 
to what could be presented at trial, that ruling had no impact on
 
the summary judgment ruling. We need not address whether the
 
sanction orders were proper where the summary judgment is binding
 
and no trial will be held.
 
Second, and similarly, it does not appear that the
 
circuit court's refusal to extend pretrial deadlines had any
 
impact on the summary judgment motion or ruling. The Soltrens
 
filed an opposition to the summary judgment motion that included
 
inter alia the declaration of Eddie Soltren and various exhibits,
 
which were considered by the circuit court. Further, the
 
Soltrens do not raise on appeal any argument that they needed
 
more time for discovery to respond to the summary judgment
 
motion.
 
Even if the requested extension of pretrial deadlines
 
could have somehow affected the summary judgment motion, the
 
circuit court properly refused to extend the deadlines given the
 
Soltrens' dilatory conduct in this case. The Soltrens filed the
 
complaint in this case on October 31, 2007. On January 22, 2009,
 
the circuit court issued an order setting trial for the week of
 
September 21, 2009 and set related pretrial deadlines. Based on
 
the record, it appears that the Soltrens did not seek discovery
 
until one week before the discovery cutoff date of July 21,
 
2
 In support of their summary judgment motion, Defendants/Appellees
submitted the affidavits of Erlette Smith, Phillips and counsel, as well as
numerous exhibits, including the deposition of Eddie Soltren. The circuit
 court found Eddie Soltren's deposition testimony significant in resolving the
summary judgment motion. In opposition, the Soltrens submitted the
declarations of Eddie Soltren, Ashawna Hailey, Brysone Nishimoto and counsel,
as well as numerous exhibits.
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2009.3 Ten days after the discovery cutoff, the
 
Defendants/Appellees filed their motion for summary judgment on
 
July 31, 2009. On the same date, July 31, 2009, the Soltrens
 
filed a motion seeking to file a first amended complaint,
 
continue trial, and to extend the pretrial deadlines. The
 
Soltrens thus filed their request to extend the pretrial
 
deadlines approximately a month and a half before the scheduled
 
trial and after certain pretrial deadlines, such as the discovery
 
cutoff and the deadline to name witnesses, had passed. Given
 
these circumstances, the circuit court did not abuse its
 
discretion in refusing to extend pretrial deadlines. Thus, even
 
if we reach the issue of the circuit court's denial of pretrial
 
deadlines, it would not affect the validity of the summary
 
judgment ruling.
 
As with the summary judgment ruling, the Soltrens
 
provide no argument as to why their points of error 1 and 2
 
should impact the circuit court's award of fees and costs, nor do
 
they directly challenge the substantive ruling awarding fees and
 
costs. These issues are thus waived. Moreover, because the
 
summary judgment ruling is binding, we see no basis to vacate the
 
award of fees and costs.
 
Point of Error 3
 
In their third point of error, the Soltrens contend 
that the circuit court erred in denying their request to file a first amended complaint. "[T]he grant or denial of leave to 
amend under [Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP)] Rule 15(a) 
3
 Earlier in the case, the Soltrens had also demonstrated their lack
 
of diligence when they failed to respond to a document request from the
Defendants/Appellees. As a result, the circuit court issued an order
compelling the Soltrens to respond to the request and to produce documents.
The Soltrens violated the court's order and failed to produce any documents.
The circuit court thus issued a sanction order precluding the Soltrens from
utilizing as evidence any documents that should have been produced pursuant to
the court's prior order.
 
5
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is within the discretion of the trial court." Tri-S Corp. v. W. 
World Ins. Co., 110 Hawai' i 473, 490, 135 P.3d 82, 99 (2006) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). We conclude 
that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it 
denied the Soltrens' motion to amend. 
HRCP Rule 15 permits a party to amend its pleading by
 
leave of court and provides that "leave shall be freely given
 
when justice so requires." HRCP Rule 15(a)(2). However, the
 
circuit court may properly consider whether there are
 
circumstances weighing against granting leave to amend, such as
 
undue delay and whether allowing an amendment would result in
 
undue prejudice to an opposing party.
 
In the absence of any apparent or declared reason—such as
undue delay, bad faith or dilatory motive on the part of the
movant, repeated failure to cure deficiencies by amendments
previously allowed, undue prejudice to the opposing party by
virtue of allowance of the amendment, futility of amendment,
etc.—the leave sought should, as the rules require, be
"freely given."
 
Tri-S Corp., 110 Hawai' i at 490, 135 P.3d at 99 (quoting 
Associated Eng'rs & Contractors, Inc. v. State, 58 Haw. 187, 
218–19, 567 P.2d 397, 417 (1977)). 
The Soltrens proposed to amend their complaint by
 
dismissing the Smiths as defendants and alleging the following
 
causes of action against Phillips: breach of contract, breach of
 
covenant of good faith and fair dealing, fraudulent inducement
 
and/or negligent misrepresentation, tortious interference with
 
prospective economic advantage, and intentional infliction of
 
emotional distress.4
 
As noted above, the Soltrens did not seek leave to file
 
the amended complaint until July 31, 2009, which was fifty-two
 
(52) days prior to the scheduled trial. By the time the Soltrens
 
4
 The complaint filed on October 31, 2007 named the Smiths and
Phillips as defendants and alleged causes of action for breach of contract,
specific performance, equitable estoppel, fraud, and ratification/affirmation.
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sought to amend their complaint, the discovery cutoff date had
 
expired ten days before, on July 21, 2009, and numerous deadlines
 
set by the court had expired (such as the deadlines to submit
 
exhibits, proposed jury instructions, a proposed verdict form,
 
motions in limine, and designation of witnesses). Moreover, the
 
Soltrens filed their motion seeking to amend the complaint on the
 
same day that the Defendants/Appellees had filed their motion for
 
summary judgment.5
 
Under these circumstances, there was undue delay on the
 
part of the Soltrens and the Defendants/Appellees would have
 
suffered significant prejudice if leave was granted to amend the
 
complaint at that late date. Hence, the circuit court did not
 
abuse its discretion in denying the Soltrens' request to file an
 
amended complaint.
 
Conclusion
 
The Judgment entered on March 10, 2010 and the Amended
 
Judgment entered on April 19, 2010, in the Circuit Court of the
 Fifth Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 16, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Donna E. Richards 
Mark R. Zenger(Richards & Zenger)for Plaintiffs/Appellants Chief Judge 
Harold Bronstein for Defendants/Appellees 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
5 It is understandable that Defendants/Appellees would be filing their
summary judgment motion at this time because, pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(b), the
deadline for filing a motion seeking summary judgment on the complaint was due
fifty (50) days before trial.
 
7
 