 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30624
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MALAKI McBRIDE, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0114)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Malaki McBride (McBride) was
 
charged by indictment with: (1) second-degree murder for
 
intentionally or knowingly causing the death of Tyrone Torres
 (Torres), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707­
1
701.5(1) (1993)  (Count 1); (2) unauthorized control of a
propelled vehicle (UCPV), in violation of HRS § 708-836(1) (Supp.
 
2
2011)  (Count 2); (3) carrying or use of a firearm while engaged
in the commission of a separate felony, namely, second-degree
 murder and any included felony offense, in violation of HRS 
1
 HRS § 707-701.5 provides in relevant part that "a person commits the
offense of murder in the second degree if the person intentionally or
knowingly causes the death of another person."
 
2 HRS § 708-836 provides in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of unauthorized control of
a propelled vehicle if the person intentionally or knowingly
exerts unauthorized control over another's propelled vehicle by
operating the vehicle without the owner's consent . . . .
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
§ 134-21(a) (2011)  (Count 3); and (4) second-degree arson, in
4
violation of HRS § 708-8252(1)(b) (Supp. 2011)  (Count 4).
Because McBride was seventeen and a juvenile at the 
time of the alleged offenses, he was originally under the 
jurisdiction of the family court. However, the family court issued an order granting the petition for waiver of jurisdiction filed by Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State), and 
jurisdiction was transferred to the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).
5 
Prior to trial, McBride and the State entered into
 
stipulations which narrowed the issues for trial. The Circuit
 Court questioned McBride about the stipulations in order to
 confirm that McBride had entered into the stipulations knowingly,
 intelligently, and voluntarily.
 
With respect to the second-degree murder charged in
 
Count 1, McBride stipulated that he knowingly caused the death of
 Tyrone Torres with the use of a firearm. Therefore, the only
 remaining issue as to Count 1 was whether McBride was under the
 
3
 HRS § 134-21 provides in relevant part:
 
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly carry on
the person or have within the person's immediate control or
intentionally use or threaten to use a firearm while engaged in
the commission of a separate felony, whether the firearm was
loaded or not, and whether operable or not . . . .
 
(b) A conviction and sentence under this section shall be
 
in addition to and not in lieu of any conviction and sentence for
the separate felony; provided that the sentence imposed under this
section may run concurrently or consecutively with the sentence
for the separate felony.
 
4 HRS § 708-8252(1)(b) provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of arson in the second
degree if the person intentionally or knowingly sets fire to or
causes to be burned property and:
 
. . .
 
(b)	 Knowingly or recklessly damages the property of
another, without the other's consent, in an amount
exceeding $1,500. 
5
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided over the proceedings relevant to
this appeal.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance (EMED) for
 
which there was a reasonable explanation, when he caused Torres's
 death. McBride's stipulation that he knowingly caused the death
 of Torres with the use of a firearm was in essence an admission
 to carrying or use of a firearm while engaged in the commission
 of a separate felony, as charged in Count 3. In addition to his
 stipulation, McBride separately entered a guilty plea as to Count
 3, which was accepted by the Circuit Court.
 
With respect to the UCPV charged in Count 2, McBride
 
stipulated that he knowingly operated a motor vehicle owned by
 his sister, Puanani McBride (Puanani), without seeking her
 specific permission on the date charged. Therefore, the only
 issue as to Count 2 was whether McBride operated Puanani's
 vehicle knowing that she did not consent to his use of it. Prior
 to trial, the State apparently withdrew Count 4, which was not
 presented to the jury at trial. 
As the result of McBride's guilty plea to Count 3 and
 
the State's withdrawal of Count 4, the case proceeded to trial
 only on Counts 1 and 2. In addition, because of McBride's
 stipulations, the remaining issues at trial were limited to: (1)
 whether, as to Count 1, McBride could prove the affirmative
 defense of EMED, which would reduce the offense of second-degree
 
6
murder to manslaughter;  and (2) whether, as to Count 2, McBride
knew his sister had not consented to his use of her car. 
The jury found McBride guilty as charged of Counts 1
 
and 2. 
The Circuit Court sentenced McBride to life imprisonment
 
as to Count 1, five years of imprisonment as to Count 2, and
 
6
 HRS § 707-702(2) (Supp. 2011), which sets forth the affirmative
defense of manslaughter, provides in relevant part:
 
(2) In a prosecution for murder . . . in the first and
second degrees it is an affirmative defense, which reduces the
offense to manslaughter . . . , that the defendant was, at the
time the defendant caused the death of the other person, under the
influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance for which
 there is a reasonable explanation. The reasonableness of the
 explanation shall be determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable
person in the circumstances as the defendant believed them to be.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
twenty years of imprisonment as to Count 3. The Circuit Court
 
ordered Counts 2 and 3 to run concurrently to each other, but
 consecutively to Count 1. The Circuit Court filed its Judgment
 of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) on July 13, 2010.
 
On appeal, McBride contends that: (1) his trial counsel 
failed to provide effective assistance of counsel with respect to the presentation of McBride's affirmative defense of EMED; (2) the Circuit Court erred in instructing the jury on the EMED defense by giving an instruction that was confusing and misleading; and (3) the Circuit Court violated State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai' i 495, 229 P.3d 313 (2010), by failing to state its 
reasons for imposing consecutive rather than concurrent sentences. 
As explained below, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
erred in instructing the jury on McBride's EMED defense and that
 this error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. We
 therefore vacate McBride's conviction on Count 1 and remand the
 case for a new trial on Count 1. In light of our decision, we
 need not address McBride's other points of error. Because
 McBride does not challenge his convictions on Counts 2 and 3, we
 affirm those convictions. In addition, our decision to vacate
 Count 1 eliminates the consecutive sentences imposed by the
 Circuit Court, and we affirm the concurrent sentences of
 imprisonment imposed on Count 2 (five years) and Count 3 (twenty
 years). 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Prior to jury selection, the Circuit Court advised the
 
prospective jurors of the charges in Counts 1 and 2 and, pursuant
 to McBride's stipulation with the State, also informed the
 prospective jurors as follows:
 
[I]n this case, the defendant has stipulated and agreed that
on or about February 25, 2007, in Puna, County and State ofHawai'i, the defendant Malaki McBride knowingly caused the
death of Tyrone Torres with the use of a firearm. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Stipulations are conclusive statement of fact,
therefore, the only remaining issue as to Count 1 is whether
at the time Malaki McBride caused the death of Tyrone
Torres[,] Malaki McBride was under the influence of extreme
mental or emotional disturbance for which there is a
 reasonable explanation.
 
The reasonableness of the explanation shall be
determined from the view point of a person in the
defendant's situation under the circumstances as he believed
 them to be.
 
. . . .
 
. . . . [D]efendant Malaki McBride has stipulated and
agreed that on or about February 25, 2007, in Puna, County
and State of Hawai' i, the defendant McBride Malaki [sic]
knowingly operated a motor vehicle owned by sister PuananiMcBride without seeking her specific permission on thatdate. 
The stipulation is a conclusive statement of fact and,
therefore, the only remaining issue is whether Malaki
McBride operated Puanani McBride's vehicle knowing she did
not consent to the use of her vehicle.
 
("[sic]" notation added).
 
After opening statements and prior to the State calling
 
its first witness, the Circuit Court again advised the jury that
 
McBride had stipulated that he: (1) "knowingly caused the death
 of Tyrone Torres with the use of a firearm"; and (2) "knowingly
 operated a motor vehicle owned by his sister, Puanani McBride,
 without her specific permission."
 
II.
 
The following evidence was presented at trial. At the
 
time of the charged offenses, McBride was seventeen years old and
 his girlfriend, AS, was sixteen years old. According to Puanani,
 McBride had dropped out of school and after a fight with his
 father, had moved out of the house. McBride went to live with AS
 at the house of Steward Shepard (Shepard). McBride and AS were
 having problems in their relationship, which resulted in McBride
 becoming depressed and suicidal.
 
Robert Brockway, III (Brockway) was a friend of
 
McBride. According to Brockway, on the evening of February 24,
 2007, Brockway went to a party with McBride and other friends. 
Around midnight, Brockway left the party in AS's car along with
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
AS, AS's sister, and Tyrone Torres. Brockway was dropped off in
 
Nânâwale Estates, where McBride approached Brockway and asked
 what he was doing with AS. McBride appeared upset after Brockway
 identified the people in AS's car and Brockway said he thought
 "the two girls had too much to drink." Brockway accompanied
 McBride to Puanani's house, where McBride obtained the keys to
 Puanani's car. McBride drove Puanani's car to Brockway's house,
 where Brockway had been keeping guns that belonged to McBride. 
After McBride obtained the guns and put them in Puanani's car,
 McBride and Brockway got into the car and McBride began driving
 around looking for AS. McBride drove to Torres's house, where
 McBride got out and yelled for Torres, but was told that Torres
 was not there. McBride also drove by Shepard's house and the
 house of AS's parents.
 
Eventually, McBride drove to a dead end near Sea View
 
where he saw AS's car parked. The lights for AS's car were off
 and the windows were foggy. McBride got out of his sister's car,
 walked to the passenger side of AS's car, opened the door, took a
 step back, and fired one shot from a sawed-off shotgun.
 
AS was "[h]aving sex" with Torres when she saw
 
headlights approach her car. AS saw her car door open and heard
 a loud noise.
 
McBride shot Torres and killed him. After the 
shooting, AS got out of her car. Both AS and McBride were "freaking out." McBride told AS to get into Puanani's car and instructed Brockway to drive Puanani's car and to follow McBride. McBride got into AS's car and drove it with Torres's body still inside. Eventually, McBride drove to Wa' awa'a and abandoned AS's 
car. Brockway dropped AS off at a friend's house. AS told other people that McBride had told her to take off her clothing because there was blood on it. 
In the early morning on February 25, 2007, Puanani
 
called the police to report that her car had been stolen. She
 believed that her brother McBride had taken the car. McBride did
 not ask Puanani for permission prior to taking the car. Brockway
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
returned Puanani's car at about 4:00 or 5:00 a.m. Puanani and
 
her family looked for McBride and later found him in the attic of
 their house.
 
Both the State and McBride called experts to testify on
 
the issue of EMED. McBride called Dr. Sheila Wendler, a forensic
 psychologist, who opined that McBride was under the influence of
 EMED at the time he shot Torres. The State called Dr. Harold
 Hall, a neuropsychologist, who opined that McBride was not under
 the influence of EMED at the time of the shooting. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
We conclude that the dispositive issue in this case is
 
whether the Circuit Court erred in instructing the jury on the
 EMED defense. Based on the court reporter's transcription of the
 Circuit Court's oral instructions to the jury, which the State
 did not challenge but instead concedes was accurately
 transcribed, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in
 instructing the jury on the EMED defense and that this error was
 not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
The oral instruction given to the jury on the EMED 
defense differed from the written instruction the parties had agreed upon. McBride did not object to the Circuit Court's reading of the EMED instruction. However, based on State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai' i 327, 141 P.3d 974 (2006), a defendant need 
not object to a faulty jury instruction regarding the elements necessary to prove a charge or a permissible defense in order to preserve the issue for appeal. Under Nichols, once such instructional error is established on appeal, the appellate court will vacate the conviction "without regard to whether timely objection was made, if there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the defendant's conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." Id. at 337, 141 P.3d at 984. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
The Circuit Court orally instructed the jury on the
 
elements of second-degree murder as follows: 
In Count 1 of the Indictment, the Defendant MALAKI
MCBRIDE is charged with the offense of Murder in the Second
Degree.
 
A person commits the offense of Murder in the
Second Degree if he intentionally or knowingly causes
the death of another person.
 
There are two material elements of the offense
 
of Murder in the Second Degree, each of which the
prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
These two elements are:
 
1. That on or about the 25th day of February,
2007, in the County and State of Hawaii, the Defendant
intentionally or knowingly engaged in conduct; and
 
2. That by engaging in that conduct, the
Defendant intentionally or knowingly caused the death
of TYRONE TORRES.
 
(quotation marks omitted).
 
The Circuit Court then began reading the EMED
 
instruction agreed upon by the parties. The first part of the
 
EMED instruction read by the Circuit Court essentially tracked
 the language of the agreed upon written instruction, as follows:
 
If and only if you unanimously find that all of the
elements of Murder in the Second Degree have been proved
[sic] by the prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt, then you
must consider the affirmative defense of Extreme Mental or
 Emotional Disturbance.
 
Extreme mental or emotional disturbance has two
 
elements. 
These two elements are:
 
1. That the Defendant Malaki McBride was, at
the time he caused the death of Tyrone Torres, under
the influence of extreme mental or emotional
 disturbance; and
 
2. That there is [sic] a reasonable
explanation for the extreme mental or emotional
disturbance. The reasonableness of the explanation
shall be determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable
person in the circumstances as the Defendant believed
them to be.
 
The Defendant must prove an affirmative defense
by a preponderance of the evidence. This means that
 the Defendant must prove that it is more likely than
not, or more probable than not, that each element of
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Extreme Mental or Emotional Disturbance occurred. In
 
determining whether the Defendant has proven an
affirmative defense by a preponderance of the
evidence, you must consider all of the evidence that
has been presented to you regardless of who presented
it.
 
("[sic]" notations in original; quotation marks omitted).7
 
However, at this point, the instruction as read by the
 
Circuit Court departed significantly and materially from the
 
agreed upon written instruction. The written instruction
 provided:
 
If you unanimously find that the Defendant has proven
the elements of the affirmative defense by a preponderance
of the evidence, then you must find the Defendant guilty of
Manslaughter based upon Extreme Mental or Emotional
Disturbance. If you unanimously find that the Defendant has
not proven the elements of the affirmative defense by a
preponderance of the evidence then you must find the
Defendant guilty of Murder in the Second Degree.
 
If you are unable to reach a unanimous agreement as to
whether the affirmative defense has been proved or not been
proved, then a verdict may not be returned on the Murder in
the Second Degree charge.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Instead, the Circuit Court read the instruction as
 
follows:
 
If you are unable [sic] to find that the Defendant has
proven the element [sic] of the affirmative defense by a
preponderance of the evidence, then you must find the
Defendant guilty of Manslaughter based on [sic] Extreme
Mental or Emotional Disturbance. 
If you unanimously find
that the Defendant has not proven the elements of the
affirmative defense by a preponderance of the evidence then
you must find the Defendant guilty of Murder in the Second
Degree.
 
If you are unable to reach a unanimous verdict
[sic] as to whether the affirmative defense has been
proven [sic] or not been proven [sic], then a verdict
may not be returned on the Murder in the Second Degree
charge.
 
(Emphasis added.) ("[sic]" notations in original; quotation marks
 
omitted).
 
7 The "[sic]" notations were inserted by the court reporter to reflect
departures from the written instruction. There is a "[sic]" after "proved"
where the written instruction uses the word "proven" and a "[sic]" after "is"
where the written instruction uses the word "was."
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court completed its verbal instruction on
 
the EMED defense as follows:
 
An extreme mental or emotional disturbance is the
 
emotional state of an individual, who has an extreme
emotional reaction to an unusual and overwhelming stress as
a result of which there is a loss of self-control and reason
 is overborne by intense feelings, such as passion, anger,
distress, grief, excessive agitation or similar emotions.
 
The question of the Defendant's self-control, or
lack of it, at the time of the offense, is a
significant factor in deciding whether he was under
the influence of extreme mental or emotional
 disturbance.
 
(quotation marks omitted).
 
III.
 
The critical discrepancy between the EMED instruction
 
as read to the jury and the agreed upon written instruction is
 
that the written instruction correctly instructs the jury: "If
 you unanimously find that the Defendant has proven the elements
 of the affirmative defense by a preponderance of the evidence,
 then you must find the Defendant guilty of Manslaughter based
 upon Extreme Mental or Emotional Disturbance." (Emphasis added). 
On the other hand, the Circuit Court's verbal instruction, as
 transcribed by the court reporter, erroneously instructs the
 jury: "If you are unable [sic] to find that the Defendant has
 proven the element [sic] of the affirmative defense by a
 preponderance of the evidence, then you must find the Defendant
 guilty of Manslaughter based on [sic] Extreme Mental or Emotional
 Disturbance." (Emphasis added) ("[sic]" notations in original). 
We note that the difference between the correct phrase
 
"if you unanimously find" and the transcribed phrase "if you are
 unable to find" raises the possibility of a transcription error
 by the court reporter. In other words, that the Circuit Court
 read the phrase correctly but the Circuit Court's verbal
 statement was misheard or mis-transcribed by the court reporter. 
However, after the transcript was filed in this appeal, 
the State did not seek to challenge or move to correct the court reporter's transcription pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate 
10
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 10(e) (2010).8 Instead, in its answering
 
brief, the State asserts that it "agrees [with McBride] that the
 
court erroneously read the EMED instruction to the jury," thereby
 conceding that the court reporter's transcription was accurate. 
In light of the State's agreement and concession, we assume that 
the transcript accurately reflects the Circuit Court's oral
 instruction to the jury. Therefore, the only question for this
 court is whether the Circuit Court's erroneous reading of the
 EMED instruction was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
The Circuit Court's misreading of the EMED instruction
 
not only rendered the instruction wrong on the law, but also
 utterly confusing and misleading. The Circuit Court's misreading
 of the instruction resulted in the jury receiving an instruction
 on the law that was basically the opposite of the correct legal
 rule. Under the Circuit Court's oral instruction, the jury was
 directed that it must find McBride guilty of manslaughter if it
 was "unable to find" that he had proven the affirmative EMED
 defense. Moreover, at the same time, the jury was directed that
 it must find McBride guilty of second-degree murder if it
 unanimously found that he had failed to prove the EMED defense. 
These two directions are contradictory. Perhaps most
 significantly, because of the misreading of the instruction,
 
8
 HRAP Rule 10(e) provides, in relevant part: 
(e) Correction or modification of the record.
 
(1) If any differences arise as to whether the record
truly discloses what occurred in the court or agency appealed
from, the differences shall be submitted to and settled by that
court or agency and the record made to conform to the truth.
 
(2) If anything material to any party is omitted from the
record by error or accident or is misstated therein, corrections
or modifications may be as follows:
 
(A) by the stipulation of the parties; or
 
(B) by the court or agency appealed from, either before or
after the record is transmitted; or
 
(c) by direction of the appellate court before which the
case is pending, on proper suggestion or its own initiative. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
there was no verbal instruction by the Circuit Court on what the
 
jury must do if it unanimously found that McBride had proven the
 affirmative EMED defense. In other words, the Circuit Court's
 oral instructions to the jury failed to include an instruction
 directing the jury to find McBride guilty of manslaughter if it
 unanimously determined that he had successfully proven the EMED
 defense.
 
McBride's EMED defense was the key issue in dispute -­
indeed it was the only issue in dispute -- regarding the second-
degree murder charge. McBride had stipulated that he knowingly
 caused the death of Torres with the use of a firearm. Thus, the
 Circuit Court's error in instructing the jury went to the heart
 of the lead charge in the case. Although written jury
 instructions were passed out to the jurors during the Circuit
 Court's oral charge, the Circuit Court did not require the jurors
 to read along while it gave the instructions, but told the jurors
 that they "may simply just listen to the instructions as I give
 them to you." 
In addition, while the record reflects that written
 
jury instructions were provided to the jurors during the Circuit
 Court's oral charge, it does not clearly show that the jury was 
provided with written jury instructions during its
 deliberations.
9 Moreover, the record does not include the set of
 
written instructions that was provided to the jury while the
 Circuit Court orally gave its instructions. The record contains
 filed jury instructions proposed by the State, McBride, and the
 Circuit Court, with check marks indicating whether the
 instruction was withdrawn, refused, given by agreement, given 
9 The record reflects that the Circuit Court referred to having prepared
a set of instructions to be submitted to the jury, then passed out written
instructions to the jury during the first part of its oral charge, collected
the written instructions during the parties' closing arguments, then again
passed out the written instructions for the conclusion of its oral charge.
The record, however, does not contain a specific reference to the written
instructions being provided to the jury during its deliberations. 
12
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
over objection, given as modified by agreement, or given as 
modified over objection. However, a set of the actual written jury instructions submitted to the jury was not filed and is not included in the record.
10 Under the circumstances of this case, 
we cannot say that the error in the Circuit Court's oral instruction to the jury on the EMED defense was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. Iosefa, 77 Hawai' i 177, 181-84, 
880 P.2d 1224, 1128-31 (App. 1994) (concluding that the trial court's failure to read instruction on the burden of proof and reasonable doubt, which was included in the written set of instructions received by the jury, constituted error that was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt).
11 
In light of our decision, we need not address the other
 
issues McBride raises on appeal.
 
CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the Judgment with respect to McBride's
 
conviction on Count 1, and we remand the case for a new trial on
 Count 1. 
Our decision to vacate Count 1 eliminates the
 
consecutive sentences imposed by the Circuit Court. We affirm 
10 The State did not attempt to supplement the record with a set of the
instructions submitted to the jury pursuant to HRAP Rule 10(e).
 
11
 State v. Sale, 110 Hawai' i 386, 133 P.3d 815 (App. 2006), a case
cited by the State in support of its claim of harmless error, is
distinguishable. In Sale, this court, in a footnote, noted that thetranscript of the trial court's oral instructions to the jury on the UCPVcharge used the word "another" rather than the word "another's" that wascontained in the written instructions provided to the jury during itsdeliberations. Sale, 110 Hawai' i at 399 n.17, 133 P.3d at 828 n.17. Under 
the circumstances of that case, we stated that if the court had indeed misreadthe instruction, any error was cured or rendered harmless by the jury's beingprovided with the correct written instruction. Id. However, in Sale, unlike
in this case, the discrepancy, as transcribed, between the oral and writteninstruction was minor; Sale did not raise the discrepancy as an issue onappeal; the State did not concede that the trial court had misread theinstruction; the written instructions provided to the jury were included inthe record; and other portions of the trial court's oral instructionestablished and made clear that the charge required proof that "another's"propelled vehicle had been operated by the defendant. Accordingly, Sale doesnot compel the conclusion that the error in this case was harmless beyond areasonable doubt. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Judgment with respect to the convictions on Counts 2 and 3
 
and the concurrent sentences imposed on Counts 2 and 3. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 29, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Cynthia A. Kagiwada
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Michael S. Kagami
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
14
 