FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--­
GREGORY ALLEN SLINGLUFF, Plaintiff-Appellee, vs.
STATE OF HAWAII; STATE OF HAWAII DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
SAFETY; HALAWA CORRECTIONAL FACILITY; DR. PATEL; NURSE
MIKE; NURSE BARBARA; DR. ABBRUZZESE; DR. SISAR PADERES,
Defendants-Appellants, and DOE NURSES 1-10; DOE DOCTORS 1-10;
DOE HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS 1-10, AND DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
  
NO. 30233
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-1654)
 
DECEMBER 31, 2013
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
Defendants-Appellants State of Hawai
'i (State), 
Department of Public Safety (DPS), Halawa Correctional Facility 
(HCF), Dr. Salvatore Abbruzzese (Dr. Abbruzzese), and Dr. Sisar Paderes (Dr. Paderes) appeal from the November 12, 2009 Final Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
1
(Circuit Court)  on, inter alia, the Circuit Court's March 12,
 
1/
 The Honorable Victoria S. Marks presided.
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2009 order denying Dr. Abbruzzese and Dr. Paderes's motion for
 
summary judgment, and the court's findings of fact (FOFs) and
 
conclusions of law (COLs), which were entered after a bench trial
 in this case. In the Final Judgment, the Circuit Court entered
 
judgment in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Gregory Allen Slingluff
 (Slingluff), with respect to Counts I through IV of Slingluff's
 
2
Complaint, and against the Defendants-Appellants,  relating to
Slingluff's claims of negligence on the part of the Defendants-
Appellants. The Circuit Court entered judgment in favor of the
 Defendants-Appellants and against Slingluff on Counts V and VI of
 Slingluff's complaint, including Slingluff's claims of informed
 consent and deliberate indifference. The Circuit Court awarded
 Slingluff $983,395.29, including special damages, general
 damages, and costs.
 
In this appeal, Dr. Abbruzzese and Dr. Paderes argue 
that because they are State-employed physicians, they are shielded from Slingluff's medical malpractice claims by the doctrine of qualified immunity. As discussed below, we hold that physicians employed by the State, including prison doctors, exercising purely medical discretion in the diagnosis and treatment of potentially injured or sick people, are not protected from medical malpractice claims by the doctrine of qualified immunity under Hawai' i law. In this case, although Dr. 
2/
 In the Circuit Court's FOFs, COLs, and Final Judgment, the
defendants subject to the court's rulings include the State, DPS, HCF, Dr.
Abbruzzese, Dr. Paderes, Dr. Patel, "Nurse Mike," and "Nurse Barbara."
However, as discussed below, "Nurse Mike" and "Nurse Barbara" were never
served with the complaint and summons. Dr. Patel died during the pendency of
the case, and no substitution was made upon his death. 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Abbruzzese and Dr. Paderes were exercising professional judgment
 
and discretion, their actions in diagnosing and treating
 Slingluff were medical, not governmental. Therefore, their
 actions were not protected by a qualified immunity. In addition,
 for the reasons set forth herein, we reject the Defendants-
Appellants' contention that the Circuit Court clearly erred in
 finding that their negligence caused Slingluff's infertility.
 I. BACKGROUND
 
The Circuit Court's FOFs are unchallenged on appeal,
 
except with respect to the cause of Slingluff's loss of
 fertility. The FOFs are the basis for the following background
 facts. 
In September 2003, Slingluff was residing in the High
 
module of HCF. During this time, a doctor regularly visited the
 High module of HCF every Tuesday. September 9, 2003, was a
 Tuesday. 
Slingluff testified that, on Thursday, September 11,
 
2003, he complained about scrotal pain to Dr. Patel but the
 doctor did not examine him. 
On Saturday, September 13, 2003, Slingluff saw a nurse
 
regarding a three centimeter by three centimeter left scrotal
 abscess. He reported that his scrotal abscess started two days
 before as a small cyst. He grimaced in pain upon palpitation and
 was waddling in pain. The nurse contacted Dr. Paderes, who
 prescribed the antibiotic Keflex. 
On Monday, September 15, 2003, Slingluff went to "the
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
gate" within the module for medication. His scrotum, which was
 
red and grapefruit-sized, caused him apparent discomfort. The
 nurse contacted Dr. Abbruzzese who prescribed a painkiller,
 Vicodin, and said that he should be seen in the clinic the next
 day.
 
On Tuesday, September 16, 2003, Slingluff again went to
 
"the gate" in obvious discomfort. He was seen by Dr. Paderes who
 ordered him to the infirmary. Slingluff was taken to the
 infirmary in a wheelchair and started on 500 milligrams of the
 antibiotic Ancef. He was oozing blood and pus from his infection
 and again given Vicodin. Slingluff reported that his infection
 started six days before. That night, a nurse noted that
 Slingluff's scrotum was "grossly swollen, the size of a very
 large grapefruit . . . [, he] was pale, appeared in severe pain,
 and he was limited in his ability to move about." Dr. Saldana
 then ordered a urological consultation.
 
On Wednesday, September 17, 2003, Slingluff's scrotum,
 
which was now the size of a melon, was described as "swollen,
 purplish in color, [and] draining purulent fluid." Slingluff was
 taken to a urologist's office in a wheelchair where the urologist
 performed an incision and drainage (I & D). A scrotal ultrasound
 
performed at this time indicated that Slingluff's infection was
 
"suspicious of Fournier's gangrene." 
Slingluff underwent a total of six surgeries, including
 
the I & D on September 17, 2003. The surgeries subsequent to the
 I & D included: (1) on September 18, 2003, the "debridement of
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his scrotum"; (2) on October 14, 2003, the "debridement of his
 
scrotal area and covering with thigh flaps"; (3) on October 23,
 2003, the "debridement of necrotic scrotal flaps and closure of
 the thigh donor site"; (4) on October 29, 2003, the "debridement
 of his scrotum, with delayed primary closure"; and (5) on
 November 14, 2003, the "debridement of the thigh flap." 
Slingluff remained at Queens Medical Center until November 30,
 2003, before returning to HCF.
 
Slingluff's Complaint includes six counts: (1)
 
Negligent Care and Treatment (Count I); (2) Respondeat Superior
 and Agency (Count II) ; (3) Breach of Warranties (Count III); (4)
 Negligent Actions or Inactions (Count IV); (5) Informed Consent
 (Count V); and (6) Deliberate Indifference (Count VI). As found
 by the Circuit Count, Counts I through IV are basically medical
 malpractice claims.
 
On January 23, 2009, Dr. Abbruzzese and Dr. Paderes
 
moved for summary judgment, arguing that they have qualified
 immunity from Slingluff's claims. The Circuit Court denied Dr.
 Abbruzzese and Dr. Paderes's motion on March 10, 2009. The court
 then conducted a bench trial on Slingluff's claims, hearing
 testimony and taking evidence from September 1, 2009 through
 September 4, 2009. The court announced its decision orally on
 September 17, 2009 and issued its FOFs and COLs, along with the
 Final Judgment, on November 12, 2009.
 
The Circuit Court found, inter alia, that on September
 
13, 2003, "the proper dose of antibiotic was not given and this
 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fell below the applicable standard of care." The choice of
 
antibiotic, however, "did not fall below the standard of care." 
The Circuit Court also found that Slingluff "should have been
 seen before September 15, 2003, or at the latest September 16,
 2003, for an [I & D] of the abscess, and that delay in treatment
 fell below the standard of care." The Circuit Court further
 found that both the prescription of Ancef on September 16 and 17,
 2003, and the dose it was prescribed in, fell below the
 applicable standard of care and that the antibiotic should have
 been changed to a "different group or family when it was apparent
 that the original antibiotic was not working." 
The Circuit Court ultimately found that the Defendants-
Appellants' negligence was "the direct and proximate cause of
 Plaintiff's injuries and damages." The Circuit Court further
 found, inter alia, that as a result of the Defendants-Appellants'
 negligence, Slingluff suffered damages of "six surgeries . . . ,
 amputation of his scrotal sac, multiple skin grafts . . . ,
 hospitalization for two months, infertility, loss of production
 of male hormones, painful sexual erections," that Slingluff will
 further suffer future damages from the surgical removal of his
 skin tabs and surgical reconstruction "in order to get testicular
 function back," and that Slingluff has suffered lost earnings,
 and will suffer future lost earnings, as well as future medical
 costs.
 
As a result of the injuries caused by the Defendants-
Appellants' negligence (Counts I through IV), Slingluff was
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
awarded $306,188 for "the present value of Plaintiff's past and
 
future lost earnings," and $326,712 for "the present value of
 Plaintiff's future medical costs." Slingluff was also awarded
 $300,000 for his "past and future pain and suffering, mental
 anguish and disfigurement." Finally, the Circuit Court also
 awarded Slingluff $50,495.29 after granting Slingluff's motion
 for taxation of costs.
 
The Circuit Court entered judgment in favor of
 
Defendants-Appellants on Count V because Slingluff "failed to
 prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, this count of the
 Complaint." The Circuit Court also entered judgment in favor of
 Defendants-Appellants' on Count VI because the Defendants-
Appellants "did not intentionally ignore or maliciously ignore
 [Slingluff]." 
Defendants-Appellants timely filed an appeal. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Defendants-Appellants raise the following points of
 
error: (1) the Circuit Court erred by denying Dr. Abbruzzese and
 Dr. Paderes's motion for summary judgment on the grounds of
 qualified immunity; and (2) the Circuit Court erred by finding
 that Defendants-Appellants caused Slingluff's loss of fertility. 
Although not raised as a point of error, Defendants-Appellants
 also argue that the Circuit Court mistakenly entered judgment
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against certain non-parties, who were identified as Dr. Patel,
 
"Nurse Mike," and "Nurse Barbara."3
 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
An appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant 
or denial of summary judgment de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107 
Hawai'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (citation omitted). 
FOFs are reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard. 
Bhakta v. Cnty. of Maui, 109 Hawai' i 198, 208, 124 P.3d 943, 953 
(2005). "An FOF is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding or determination, or (2) despite substantial evidence to support the finding or determination, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made." Schiller v. 
Schiller, 120 Hawai' i 283, 288, 205 P.3d 548, 553 (App. 2009) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). "Substantial evidence" is defined as "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Inoue v. Inoue, 118 
Hawai'i 86, 92-93, 185 P.3d 834, 840-41 (App. 2008) (citations 
and internal quotation marks omitted). 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness. [The appellate]
court ordinarily reviews COLs under the right/wrong
 
3/
 Defendants-Appellants' points of error are woefully noncompliant
with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4), and, although
argued by appellants and agreed to by Slingluff, the third issue is not evenidentified in the points of error. Such omissions may result in points oferror being disregarded. However, in the interest of justice, we haveexercised our discretion to address the merits of the appeal. O'Connor v. 
Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawai' i 383, 386 n.5, 885 P.2d 361, 364 n.5 (1994);
Sprague v. Cal. Pac. Bankers & Ins. Ltd., 102 Hawai' i 189, 196, 74 P.3d 12, 19
(2003). 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
standard. Thus, a COL that is supported by the trial
court's FOFs and that reflects an application of the correct
rule of law will not be overturned. However, a COL that
presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under
the clearly erroneous standard because the court's
conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances
of each individual case.
 
Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys. of State of Haw., 106
 
Hawai'i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) (citations, internal 
quotation marks, and brackets in original omitted) (quoting
 Allstate Ins. Co. v. Ponce, 105 Hawai' i 445, 453, 99 P.3d 96, 104 
(2004)).
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court, in Okada Trucking Co., Ltd., 
v. Bd. of Water Supply, stated the following regarding plain
 error: 
[T]he plain error doctrine represents a departure from
the normal rules of waiver that govern appellate review,
and, as such, [] an appellate court should invoke the plain
error doctrine in civil cases only when justice so requires.
As such, the appellate court's discretion to address plain
error is always to be exercised sparingly. And, indeed, in
civil cases, we have taken three factors into account in
deciding whether our discretionary power to notice plain
error ought to be exercised: (1) whether consideration of
the issue not raised at trial requires additional facts; (2)
whether its resolution will affect the integrity of the
trial court's findings of fact; and (3) whether the issue is
of great public import.
 
97 Hawai' i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002) (citations, internal 
quotation marks, ellipsis, and original brackets omitted; format
 
altered).
 IV. DISCUSSION
 A. Whether State Prison Doctors Are Immune from Suit
 Dr. Abbruzzese and Dr. Paderes argue that the Circuit
 
Court erred by rejecting their argument that, in their individual
 capacities, they were protected from liability by qualified
 immunity.
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Hawai'i appellate courts have recognized a limited 
immunity protecting government officials from being sued in their 
individual capacities. See, e.g., Towse v. State, 64 Haw. 624, 
631-32, 647 P.2d 696, 702 (1982). The Towse plaintiffs were comprised of prison guards and their wives who brought action against state officials for defamation, false imprisonment, and loss of consortium. Id. at 625, 647 P.2d at 698. The court held 
that the defendants were not liable for their comments
4 because 
"non-judicial governmental officials, when acting in the performance of their public duty, enjoy the protection of what has been termed a qualified or conditional privilege." Id. at 
631-32, 647 P.2d at 702. Quoting the United States Supreme Court, the supreme court reasoned that: 
[O]fficials of government should be free to exercise their
duties unembarrassed by the fear of damage suits in respect
of acts done in the course of those duties-suits which would
 consume time and energies which would otherwise be devoted
to governmental service and the threat of which might
appreciably inhibit the fearless, vigorous, and effective
administration [of] policies of government.
 
Towse, 64 Haw. at 631 n.8, 647 P.2d at 702 n.8 (quoting Barr v.
 
Matteo, 360 U.S. 564, 571 (1959)); see also Medeiros v. Kondo, 55
 Haw. 499, 504, 522 P.2d 1269, 1272 (1974) (Kondo) ("We hold that
 
the best way to balance the interests of the maliciously injured
 
party against the innocent official is to allow the action to
 proceed but to limit liability to only the most guilty of
 officials by holding plaintiff to a higher standard of proof than
 
4/
 Notably, the false imprisonment and loss of consortium claims were
determined on grounds unrelated to the question of qualified immunity. See
 
Towse, 64 Haw. at 634-36, 647 P.2d at 704-05.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in a normal tort case. To this end we allocate to plaintiff the
 
burden of adducing clear and convincing proof that defendant was
 motivated by malice and not by an otherwise proper purpose.").
 
It is undisputed that Dr. Abbruzzese and Dr. Paderes 
were employees of the State, carrying out the duties they were employed to perform, when the negligence occurred.
5 However, no 
Hawai'i case has held (or examined) whether a doctor, by virtue 
of employment by the State, is shielded from liability for his or her medical malpractice by the doctrine of qualified immunity for government officials that was promulgated in Towse. For the reasons discussed below, we conclude that physicians employed by the State, specifically including prison doctors, are not shielded from personal liability for medical malpractice claims by the doctrine of qualified immunity. 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court initially crafted the 
position that non-judicial governmental officers enjoy qualified, rather than absolute, immunity for their tortious acts in Kondo. Towse, 64 Haw. at 630, 647 P.2d at 701. The rationale for this jurisprudence was the court's "desire to effectuate a balance between the interest of a maliciously injured plaintiff and a good faith public official." Id. Presently, the State seeks to 
focus attention on the "maliciously injured" aspect of this doctrine, but it is critical that we focus first on who was 
5/
 On appeal, Defendants-Appellants do not challenge or dispute the
trial court's findings and conclusions establishing that their negligence, or
medical malpractice, proximately caused injuries and damages suffered by
Slingluff, although they do dispute that the resulting injuries include
Slingluff's infertility.
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
considered a "public official" or "government officer" in the
 
development of this rule. As noted above, in Towse, the Hawai' i 
court quoted the United States Supreme Court's explanation in
 Barr for protection of "responsible governmental officers:"
6
 
The reasons for the recognition of the privilege have been
often stated. It has been thought important that officials
of government should be free to exercise their duties
unembarrassed by the fear of damage suits in respect of acts
done in the course of those duties-suits which would consume
 time and energies which would otherwise be devoted to
governmental service and the threat of which might
appreciably inhibit the fearless, vigorous, and effective
 administration [of] policies of government.
 
Id. n.8 (quoting Barr, 360 U.S. at 571) (emphasis added).
 
The preceding passage in Barr, a quotation from a prior
 
Supreme Court case, illuminates the crux of the role of the
 
governmental officer that is sought to be protected:
 
In exercising the functions of his office, the head of
an executive department, keeping within the limits of his
authority, should not be under an apprehension that the
motives that control his official conduct may, at any time,
become the subject of inquiry in a civil suit for damages.
It would seriously cripple the proper and effective
administration of public affairs as entrusted to the
executive branch of the government, if he was subjected to
any such restraint. He may have legal authority to act, but
he may have such large discretion in the premises that it
will not always be his absolute duty to exercise the
authority with which he is invested. But if he acts, having
authority, his conduct cannot be made the foundation of a
suit against him personally for damages, even if the
circumstances show that he is not disagreeably impressed by
the fact that his action injuriously affects the claims of
particular individuals.
 
Barr, 360 U.S. at 570 (emphasis added; citation, footnote, and
 
internal quotation marks omitted).
 
6/
 Our reference to the term "responsible governmental officers" is
taken from Barr, 360 U.S. at 565. In that case, the responsible government
officer in question was the acting director of a federal agency who had been
sued for libel by former employees of that agency as a result of a press
release issued at the acting director's direction. Id. 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The question addressed by the Supreme Court in Barr was
 
whether the protections given to high officials, i.e., "executive
 
officers of cabinet rank," should be extended to other government
 officials who set and carry out governmental policies, while
 acting within the scope of his or her powers as a government
 official. Id. at 572. Answering this query in the affirmative,
 
the Supreme Court made clear that the act of governing – not the
 mere fact of government employment – was the properly protected
 activity:
 
We do not think that the principle announced in Vilas
can properly be restricted to executive officers of cabinet
rank, and in fact it never has been so restricted by the
lower federal courts. The privilege is not a badge or
emolument of exalted office, but an expression of a policy
designed to aid in the effective functioning of government.
The complexities and magnitude of governmental activity have
become so great that there must of necessity be a delegation
and redelegation of authority as to many functions, and we
cannot say that these functions become less important simply
because they are exercised by officers of lower rank in the
executive hierarchy.
 
To be sure, the occasions upon which the acts of the
head of an executive department will be protected by the
privilege are doubtless far broader than in the case of an
officer with less sweeping functions. But that is because
the higher the post, the broader the range of
responsibilities and duties, and the wider the scope of
discretion, it entails. It is not the title of his office
 but the duties with which the particular officer sought to
be made to respond in damages is entrusted -the relation of
the act complained of to 'matters committed by law to his
control or supervision,' -which must provide the guide in
delineating the scope of the rule which clothes the official
acts of the executive officer with immunity from civil
 defamation suits.
 
Barr, 360 U.S. at 572-74 (emphasis added; citations, footnotes,
 
and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
Although the Hawai' i Supreme Court has struck a 
different balance, opting for qualified immunity rather than
 absolute immunity, it is clear that this jurisprudence was
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
intended to protect actions taken by government officials in
 
furtherance of governing. In Kondo, the supreme court adopted
 Judge Learned Hand's characterization of the "immunity problem":
 
It does indeed go without saying that an
 
official, who is in fact guilty of using his powers to
 
vent his spleen upon others, or for any other personal
motive not connected with the public good, should not
escape liability for the injuries he may so cause;
and, if it were possible in practice to confine such
complaints to the guilty, it would be monstrous to
deny recovery. The justification for doing so is that
it is impossible to know whether the claim is well
founded until the case has been tried, and that to
submit all officials, the innocent as well as the
guilty, to the burden of a trial and to the inevitable
danger of its outcome, would dampen the order of all
but the most resolute, or the most irresponsible, in
the unflinching discharge of their duties. Again and
again the public interest calls for action which may
turn out to be founded on a mistake, in the face of
which an official may later find himself hard put to
it to satisfy a jury of his good faith. There must
indeed be means of punishing public officers who have
been truant to their duties; but that is quite another
matter from exposing such as have been honestly
mistaken to suit by anyone who has suffered from their
errors. As is so often the case, the answer must be
found in a balance between the evils inevitable in
 either alternative.
 
Although we agree with Judge Hand's conception of the
problem we disagree with his conclusion of complete
immunity. 
Kondo, 55 Haw. at 501, 522 P.2d at 1270 (emphasis added; citation
 
omitted).7 Thus, the primary purpose of immunity is to ensure
 
7/
 See also Runnels v. Okamoto, 56 Haw. 1, 4-5, 525 P.2d 1125, 1128­
29 (1974), another defamation action in which the court addressed the issue of
who is entitled to qualified immunity:
 
We find the rule of law enunciated earlier this term
 
by this court in Medeiros v. Kondo, 55 Haw. [499], 522 P.2d
1269 (1974) controlling and dispositive on the issues here
presented.
. . . .
 This greater burden of proof requirement [announced in
Kondo] is applicable to lawsuits against those officials who
were formerly within the parameters of Barr v. Matteo, 360
U.S. 564, 79 S.Ct. 1335, 3 L.Ed.2d 1434 (1959). Defendants
Okamoto and Heen fall into this category. Defendant Heen was
an elected councilman for the City and County of Honolulu.
Defendant Okamoto was the city council auditor who was
charged with the overall responsibility for directing the
(continued...)
 
14
   
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that public officers and employees are not "unduly hampered,
 
deterred and intimidated in the discharge of their duties" by the
 threat of lawsuits. 63C A
M. JUR. 2D Public Officers and Employees
 
§ 298 (2009) (footnote omitted). It seeks to avoid making public
 officials "unduly fearful in their exercise of authority" and to
 avoid "discourag[ing] them from taking prompt and decisive
 action." George A. Bermann, Integrating Governmental and Officer
 Tort Liability, 77 C
OLUM. L. REV. 1175, 1178 (1977) (footnote
 
omitted).
 
In considering whether physicians employed by the State
 
to diagnose and treat potentially injured or sick persons, in
 this case prison doctors who treated an inmate suffering from a
 serious infection, are entitled to the immunities granted to the
 governmental officers identified in Towse, Kondo, and Barr, we
 conclude that the exercise of purely medical judgment is not
 entitled to the shield of qualified immunity. In short, although
 Dr. Abbruzzese and Dr. Paderes were exercising professional
 judgment and discretion, their actions in conjunction with the
 diagnosis and treatment of Slingluff were medical, not
 governmental. No public affairs, public planning, policy-making,
 
7/(...continued)
post-audit, the fiscal, budgetary and management analyses,
and the general research programs in behalf of the city
council. Her duties included analyzing budgetary requests,
budget management and controls, and management compliance of
city council approved programs. She was the adviser to the
city council on fiscal matters and performed other related
duties as required. Guided by the general policies of the
city council, she possessed a wide range of discretion in
carrying out the functions of her office.
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
public duty, or governmental discretion were involved. Rather, 
in this medical malpractice case, the issues involve: (a) the appropriate standard of medical care; (b) whether a defendant­physician's conduct fell below such standard; and (c) whether such conduct was the legal cause of plaintiff's injury. See 
Craft v. Peebles, 78 Hawai' i 287, 299, 893 P.2d 138, 150 (1995). 
Many courts in other jurisdictions have similarly held
 
that state-employed physicians working at public hospitals,
 clinics, and other non-correctional facilities are not entitled
 to official immunity. See, e.g., Davis v. Knud-Hansen Mem'l
 
Hosp., 635 F.2d 179, 187-88 (3d Cir. 1980); Jackson v. Kelly, 557
 F.2d 735, 738-39 (10th Cir. 1977); Henderson v. Bluemink, 511
 F.2d 399, 402-03 (D.C. Cir. 1974); Ex parte Cranman, 792 So.2d
 392, 403-06 (Ala. 2000); Jinkins v. Lee, 807 N.E.2d 411, 420-21
 (Ill. 2004); Gould v. O'Bannon, 770 S.W.2d 220, 221-22 (Ky.
 1989); Kelley v. Rossi, 481 N.E.2d 1340, 1344 n.6 (Mass. 1985);
 Terwilliger v. Hennepin Cnty., 561 N.W.2d 909, 913-14 (Minn.
 1997); Kassen v. Hatley, 887 S.W.2d 4, 9-12 (Tex. 1994),
 superseded by statute as recognized in Franka v. Velasquez, 332
 S.W.3d 367, 381-85 (Tex. 2011); James v. Jane, 282 S.E.2d 864,
 867-70 (Va. 1980). We recognize, however, that among the
 relatively few cases addressing prison physicians, there is a
 divergence of opinions as to whether immunity applies. See Ross
 
v. Schackel, 920 P.2d 1159, 1165 n.5 (Utah 1996) (recognizing a
 "split of authority on this issue"). Those jurisdictions
 granting immunity to prison physicians have generally done so on
 
16
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the basis of two rationales: (1) a literal interpretation of the
 
"discretionary function" analysis applied in many immunity cases;
 and (2) the policy considerations relative to the unique prison
 environment.
 
In adopting the first rationale for granting immunity
 
to prison physicians, several courts have relied, in whole or in
 part, upon a literal interpretation of the term "discretionary"
 without regard to the underlying purpose of official immunity. 
See Cantrell v. Thurman, 499 S.E.2d 416, 421 (Ga. Ct. App. 1998);
 Gillam v. Lloyd, 432 N.W.2d 356, 365-66 (Mich. Ct. App. 1988);
 Ross, 920 P.2d at 1164-65. They reason that because medical
 treatment and diagnosis involve discretionary skills and
 independent judgment, they constitute discretionary functions. 
Cantrell, 499 S.E.2d at 421 (stating that "the determination of
 what medical treatment to provide is an act of discretion subject
 to official immunity") (citation and emphasis omitted); Gillam,
 432 N.W.2d at 365 (stating that "medical decisionmaking is
 inherently discretionary" (citation omitted)); Ross, 920 P.2d at
 1165 (stating that "a great deal of judgment and opinion are
 involved in making a diagnosis and prescribing appropriate
 medical treatment"). 
We conclude, however, that this approach is flawed in
 
several respects. First, it obscures the difference between
 medical discretion and governmental discretion. In so doing, it
 vitiates the policy reasons justifying official immunity and the
 delicate balance it seeks to preserve. As physicians are held to
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an independent standard of conduct (namely, that governing the
 
medical profession), denying them immunity for medical
 malpractice would not hinder the execution of their duties. On
 the contrary, granting prison physicians immunity would undermine
 their adherence to professional standards. Furthermore, as we
 concluded above, medical judgment is not the type of governmental
 discretion entitled to protection under the official immunity
 doctrine. See also Ross, 920 P.2d at 1173 (Stewart, C.J.,
 
dissenting) ("There is nothing whatsoever about the rendition of
 medical treatment that involves governmental decision-making."). 
Nor does a separation-of-powers rationale support extending
 immunity to physicians, as their exercise of medical discretion
 does not implicate the independence of coordinate branches of
 government. Thus, a literal application of the discretionary
 function requirement "far exceeds what is necessary or reasonable
 to further" the policies justifying official immunity. Id. at
 
1172 (Stewart, C.J., dissenting).
 
We also reject the second rationale for generally
 
extending immunity to prison doctors.
8 Several courts have
 
8/
 As this is a "classic" medical malpractice case, we do not reach
the question of whether there might be some circumstances in which a State-
employed physician, including a prison doctor, would be entitled to qualified
immunity. See, e.g., Kassen, 887 S.W.2d at 9-11 (concerning physicians in a
public hospital), and Jolly, 923 F. Supp. at 948-50 (applying Kassen to prison
physicians). Texas courts adopted a middle ground, recognizing the
distinction between governmental and medical discretion, while at the same
time recognizing the constraints unique to government employment. In Kassen,
the court recognized that state-employed physicians encounter concerns that
are absent in the private sector. 887 S.W.2d at 10. For example, they may
face constraints arising from compulsory medical care, policy-making and
administrative responsibilities, and the necessities of conserving public
resources. Id. These constraints are often magnified in the prison context.
Jolly, 923 F. Supp. at 949. Thus, Kassen held that where prison physicians
(continued...)
 
18
     
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasoned that the policy considerations unique to the prison
 
environment justify granting immunity to prison medical
 personnel. Schmidt v. Adams, 438 S.E.2d 659, 660 (Ga. Ct. App.
 
1993) (reasoning that prison physicians serve "the governmental
 function of caring for persons confined in the jail"); Sparks v.
 Kim, 701 So.2d 1113, 1115-16 (Miss. 1997); Ross, 920 P.2d at
 1165-66. 
In Sparks, the Mississippi Supreme Court outlined the
 
factors that distinguish prison physicians from those practicing
 in public hospitals and clinics, for whom prior case law had
 denied immunity. 701 So.2d at 1115-16. First, it reasoned that
 "[t]he medical treatment afforded to prisoners involves
 governmental and public policy considerations to a greater degree
 than similar treatment issues involving non-inmates." Id. at
 
1115. Inmates are not only patients, but "security risks whose
 treatment also involves considerations unrelated to medical
 
8/(...continued)
exercise governmental discretion, they are entitled to official immunity. Id.
 
at 949-50; Kassen, 887 S.W.2d at 10-11. On the other hand, the court
concluded that where state-employed physicians exercise purely medical
 
discretion (as in the diagnosis and treatment of patients), the purpose of
official immunity no longer applies. See Kassen, 887 S.W.2d at 10-11. A
 
physician's exercise of purely medical discretion thus does not warrant
official immunity. In 2003, the Texas Legislature superseded Kassen by
extending official immunity to all employees acting within the scope of their
employment. Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code Ann. § 101.106 (West 2013); see
Franka, 332 S.W.3d at 381-85 (recognizing abrogation of Kassen). Prior to its
 abrogation, several commentators advocated Kassen as the most well-reasoned
and logically consistent approach toward applying the policies and purposes of
official immunity. See, e.g., Paxton R. Guymon, Utah Prison Physicians: Can
 
They Commit Malpractice with Impunity or Does Their Official Immunity Violate
the Open Courts Clause?, 1997 U
TAH L. REV. at 873, 895-97 (1997) (noting that
Kassen "struck a remarkable balance" between conflicting policies); Chad O.
Propst, Dethroning Gould v. O'Bannon: A Lone Star State Solution for
 Qualified Official Immunity Cases Involving Government-Employed Medical
Professionals in the Bluegrass State, 48 U. L
OUISVILLE L. REV. at 351, 373-84
(2009).
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
necessities." Id. Their medical needs must be weighed against
 
concerns regarding prison administration, security, and limited
 
public resources. Id. Second, denying immunity to prison
 
physicians would have an adverse affect on the state's ability to
 hire competent medical personnel, as prisons "clearly do[] not
 offer the most desirable working environment for a doctor." Id.
 
at 1116. Third, the court was reluctant to "grant[] inmates
 access to yet another outlet for the exercise of creative
 litigation." Id. It opined that prison physicians were at
 
greater risk for vexatious litigation than those employed
 elsewhere in the public and private sectors. Id. 
Similarly, in Ross, the Utah Supreme Court reasoned
 
that "[t]here is a vast difference between the operation of a
 state-owned hospital, where patients are voluntarily admitted as
 they are at private hospitals, and the operation of a prison,
 where its residents are kept involuntarily and the state must
 provide for their every need." 920 P.2d at 1165 n.6. Unlike
 physicians in public hospitals, the official duties of prison
 physicians "are integral to the performance of a uniquely
 governmental function." Id. at 1165.
 
The dissenting opinions in Sparks and Ross set forth
 
the flaws detracting from these rationales. In both cases, the
 dissenters decried the practical effect of the majority opinions
 as sanctioning a lower standard of medical care for prisoners. 
See Sparks, 701 So.2d at 1117 (McRae, J., dissenting), 1120
 (Banks, J., dissenting in part); Ross, 920 P.2d at 1168 (Stewart,
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C.J., dissenting) ("The majority holds that . . . . incarcerated
 
persons are not entitled to competent medical treatment."). They
 reasoned that "[d]octors, like attorneys and other medical
 personnel who serve the prison population, are expected to
 exercise the same level of professional care as those who serve
 the general population." Sparks, 701 So.2d at 1118 (McRae, J.,
 
dissenting); see Ross, 920 P.2d at 1174-75 (Stewart, C.J.,
 dissenting) ("state health care professionals owe their patients
 the same duty that private medical professionals owe theirs"). 
Providing immunity for medical malpractice of prison physicians
 effectively denies prisoners "reasonable, competent medical
 care." Ross, 920 P.2d at 1168 (Stewart, C.J., dissenting). 
The dissenters also criticized the conclusion that
 
concerns for security or prison administration could color purely
 medical decisions to such a great extent as to require immunity. 
Sparks, 701 So.2d at 1118 (McRae, J., dissenting); Ross, 920 P.2d
 at 1171 (Stewart, C.J., dissenting) ("The majority does not
 explain how requiring a doctor to meet accepted standards of
 medical care in diagnosing and treating a patient can adversely
 affect prison discipline."). To the extent that medical
 decisions are "always affected by the conditions attendant to the
 patient's environment," professional standards are adequate to
 take those conditions into account. Sparks, 701 So.2d at 1120-21
 
(Banks, J., dissenting in part). 
Finally, the dissenters observed that affording
 
immunity for medical discretion abrogates the fundamental purpose
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of official immunity: to preclude liability only "where
 
necessary to protect the government's capacity to perform its
 traditional functions." Id. at 1121 (Banks, J., dissenting in
 
part); see Ross, 920 P.2d at 1172 (Stewart, C.J., dissenting). 
Medical discretion is simply "not the sort of individual judgment
 sought to be protected by the qualified immunity bestowed upon
 public officials." Sparks, 701 So.2d at 1118 (McRae, J.,
 
dissenting) (citation omitted). Fostering a lower standard of
 medical care among prison physicians "is clearly not necessary,
 let alone effective, in promoting a rational prison objective." 
Ross, 920 P.2d at 1176 (Stewart, C.J., dissenting) (citations
 omitted). 
Other courts have echoed these sentiments in denying
 
official immunity to prison physicians. See, e.g., U.S. ex rel.
 
Fear v. Rundle, 506 F.2d 331, 335-36 (3d Cir. 1974); Smith v.
 Franklin Cnty., 227 F. Supp. 2d 667, 681 (E.D. Ky. 2002); Jolly
 v. Klein, 923 F. Supp. 931, 949-50 (S.D. Tex. 1996) (applying
 Texas law); Madden, 372 N.E.2d at 1134-35; Cooper v. Bowers, 706
 S.W.2d 542, 543 (Mo. Ct. App. 1986). These courts recognize that
 medical professionals owe the same duties of professional care to
 prison inmates as they do to any other patient. See Smith, 227
 
F. Supp. 2d at 681; Jolly, 923 F. Supp. at 949; Cooper, 706
 S.W.2d at 543 ("The [prison] physician provides the same services
 to patients in state institutions as he does in practice in the
 private sector."). Such duties, unlike most other discretionary
 functions, do not arise "solely by virtue of holding a public
 
22
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
office." Madden, 372 N.E.2d at 1134 (citations omitted). 
Allowing prison physicians immunity for medical malpractice does
 
not "promote smooth and effective government." See Cooper, 706
 
S.W.2d at 543 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted);
 see also Madden, 372 N.E.2d at 1135 ("There is nothing unduly
 burdensome in holding that [prison physicians] owe inmates whom
 they treat the same duty of care which they owe their patients in
 private practice."). We agree. Prisoners should not be denied
 recovery "for the sole reason that the doctor or nurse is a
 government employee." Jolly, 923 F. Supp. at 949 (citation and
 
internal quotation marks omitted).
 
In the case now before this court, the Circuit Court
 
found, inter alia, that the defendant physicians were negligent
 in: (1) failing to promptly treat Slingluff in order to apply I
 & D treatment to the abscess, and that the delay in treatment
 fell below the standard of care; (2) prescribing the wrong dosage
 of antibiotic; and (3) failing to prescribe a different
 antibiotic when it became apparent that the original antibiotic
 was not working. These findings all pertain to the exercise of
 
purely medical discretion because they involved strictly medical
 
diagnosis and treatment. The decisions made did not involve
 policy making or any other type of governmental discretion. As a
 result, Dr. Abbruzzese and Dr. Paderes are not entitled to
 qualified immunity, and the Circuit Court did not err when it
 denied their motion for summary judgment.
 
23
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. Findings re Loss of Fertility
 
Defendants-Appellants contend that the Circuit Court
 
clearly erred in finding that their negligence caused Slingluff's
 infertility. They argue that Slingluff's "shifting and
 inconsistent testimony, coupled with the expert testimony" pushes
 the Circuit Court's FOFs into the realm of plain error. 
Defendants-Appellants request that the FOFs regarding Slingluff's
 fertility be vacated and that the damages awarded to Slingluff be
 amended to exclude compensation for his infertility. 
Because the Circuit Court's determination of the cause 
of Slingluff's infertility is a factual finding, we may only overturn it if the Circuit Court clearly erred. Bhakta, 109 
Hawai'i at 208, 124 P.3d at 953. An FOF is clearly erroneous if 
it is unsupported by substantial evidence in the record or the appellate court is "left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made." Id. 
In the present case, when asked whether "the scrotal
 
abscess that [Slingluff] had in September of '03 was a
 substantial factor that contributed to his infertility," Dr.
 Herbert Chinn (Dr. Chinn), Defendants-Appellants' expert
 
urologist, replied that, "[i]t would seem that this infection
 
played a significant role." Also, in his report, Dr. Chinn wrote
 that, "it is difficult to state without a doubt that his
 infertility is related directly to the infection or subsequent
 care provided[, but c]ertainly the circumstances suggest a
 relationship to the events, however."
 
24
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The testimony and medical reports of Dr. Joseph Schmidt
 
(Dr. Schmidt), Slingluff's expert urologist, also support the
 
finding that Slingluff's infertility was caused by Defendants-
Appellants' negligence. Dr. Schmidt testified that there were
 three different mechanisms stemming from Slingluff's infection
 and treatment that could have caused his infertility. Dr.
 Schmidt explained that: (1) "he had a massive infection which,
 as I said, required multiple removal of dead tissue and skin
 grafts and repositioning of his testes"; (2) "[h]e had
 epididymitis . . . [t]hat's the inflamation of the gland that
 stores the sperm next to the testes [-- a]nd that was on both
 sides";  (3) "the multiple surgeries themselves run the risk of
 
impairing the blood flow to the - to the testes." In his medical
 
reports, Dr. Schmidt wrote that Slingluff's infertility likely
 resulted "from his episode of Fournier's gangrene and the
 resulting surgical treatments." Dr. Schmidt also wrote, inter
 alia, that Slingluff's presentation on September 15, and 16,
 2003, "warranted immediate referral to a urologist and
 appropriate treatment" that would have prevented "the extensive
 scrotal resection required on September 18, 2003, which caused
 amputation of his scrotal sac, infertility, and loss of
 production of male hormones." 
Defendants-Appellants argue that Slingluff never took a
 
fertility test before the onset of his infection, and that his
 admitted drug and alcohol abuse could have also caused his low
 sperm count. Although Defendants-Appellants offer a different,
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
possible cause of Slingluff's infertility, the Circuit Court 
acted within its exclusive province as fact-finder in reconciling conflicting testimony. State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai' i 87, 101, 997 
P.2d 13, 27 (2000). Here, the testimonies and medical reports of multiple expert witnesses provided substantial evidence in support of the Circuit Court's FOFs. As such, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in finding that Defendants-Appellants caused Slingluff's infertility. 
C. The Additional Defendants
 Defendants-Appellants argue, and Slingluff agrees, that 
Final Judgment entered in favor of Slingluff and against Defendants-Appellants improperly included Dr. Patel, "Nurse Mike," and "Nurse Barbara" among the Defendants-Appellants. Defendants-Appellants have no standing to raise this issue on appeal because, inter alia, they are not aggrieved by the ruling. See, e.g., Abaya v. Mantell, 112 Hawai' i 176, 181, 145 P.3d 719, 
724 (2006) (identifying requirements of standing to appeal). Nevertheless, appellate courts "have the power, sua sponte, to notice plain errors or defects in the record affecting substantial rights [though they were] not properly brought to the attention of the trial judge or raised on appeal." State v. 
Iaukea, 56 Haw. 343, 355, 537 P.2d 724, 733 (1975) (citations omitted). 
Dr. Patel was served with process on September 28,
 
2006, but passed away on July 28, 2007, during the pendency of
 
26
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this action. Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
25(a)(1) states: 
If a party dies and the claim is not thereby
extinguished, the court may order substitution of the proper
parties. The motion for substitution may be made by any
party or by the successors or representatives of the
deceased party . . . . Unless the motion for substitution
 is made not later than 120 days after the death is suggested
upon the record by service of a statement of the fact of the
death as provided herein for the service of the motion, the
action shall be dismissed as to the deceased party.
 
A suggestion of death upon the record was entered on
 
August 16, 2007. Slingluff did not file a motion for
 
substitution within 120 days after the suggestion was entered (or
 
at anytime thereafter). As a result, pursuant to HRCP Rule
 25(a)(1), the present action must be dismissed as to Dr. Patel.
 
Slingluff acknowledges, and the record confirms, that 
"Nurse Mike" and "Nurse Barbara" were never served with process of any kind in this case. Even assuming that they could be properly identified, the entry of judgment against them is inconsistent with the most basic requirements of due process of law and is therefore void. See generally, City Bank v. Abad, 106 
Hawai'i 406, 411, 105 P.3d 1212, 1217 (App. 2005). 
Accordingly, we recognize plain error in this case and
 
reverse the Final Judgment entered against Dr. Patel, "Nurse
 Mike," and "Nurse Barbara."
 V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, we reverse the Circuit Court's
 
November 12, 2009 Final Judgment, in part, with respect to the 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
claims against Dr. Patel, "Nurse Mike," and "Nurse Barbara." In
 
all other respects, we affirm.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, December 31, 2013. 
Kendall H. Moser,
Deputy Attorney General,
(Mark J. Bennett, Attorney General,
and Caron M. Inagaki, Deputy
Attorney General, with her
on the briefs)
for Defendants-Appellants.
 
Richard Turbin and
 
Janice D. Heidt
 (Rai Saint Chu and
Francis L. Jung with
them on the briefs)
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
28
 