NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30156
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CERTAIN UNDERWRITERS AT LLOYD'S LONDON SUBSCRIBING
 
TO POLICY NO. LL001HI0300520, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
STEPHEN VREEKEN, an individual, PAMELA VREEKEN, an
individual, and COUNTRYWIDE HOME LOANS, a corporation,
and DOES 1-20, Defendants-Appellees
and
 
STEVEN VREEKEN AND PAMELA VREEKEN,
Third-Party Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
HARRY WENGLER AND BISHOP INSURANCE AGENCY, INC.,
Third-Party Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-0667)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
This case centers around two homeowners insurance
 
policies—the "Original Policy" and the "Second Policy"—issued by
 
Certain Underwriters at Lloyd's, London ("Lloyd's") Subscribing
 to Policy No. LL001HI0300520, through its broker Seacoast Brokers
 of Hawaii LLC ("Seacoast"), and placed by Third-Party Defendant
 Harry Wengler ("Wengler"), an insurance agent associated with
 Third-Party Defendant Bishop Insurance Agency, Inc. ("Bishop
 Insurance") (collectively, "Bishop Defendants"), on behalf of
 Third-Party Plaintiff Steven Vreeken ("Steven"), whose wife is
 Third-Party Plaintiff Pamela Vreeken ("Pamela") (collectively,
 "the Vreekens"). The policies purported to insure the Vreekens'
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
home in Hauula, Hawai 'i, (the "House" or the "Property") from 
March 3, 2004 through March 3, 2005, and from May 9, 2005 through 
May 8, 2006, respectively. 
The House, elevated approximately nine feet above the
 
ground since July 2004, collapsed on May 23, 2005, during an
 attempted structural renovation. Because the Original Policy had
 lapsed on March 3, 2005, and because the application used to
 procure the Second Policy (the "Second Application") stated that
 there was no renovation work underway on the Property, and thus
 contained a material misrepresentation which voided the Second
 Policy, the Vreekens were left without insurance on the House. A
 lawsuit followed, and a jury found Wengler and Bishop Insurance
 liable for general, special, and punitive damages.
 
The Bishop Defendants appeal from the Final Judgment in
 
Favor of Third-Party Plaintiffs Steven and Pamela Vreeken and
 Against Third-Party Defendants Harry Wengler and Bishop Insurance
 Agency, Inc., filed on August 6, 2009 ("Final Judgment")
 following a jury trial, and challenge six related orders, all
 entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ("Circuit
 Court").
1 On appeal, the Bishop Defendants raise thirteen points
 
of error ("POE") which we address below in an order that we deem
 conducive to addressing fundamental and related topics in order.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 affirm the Final Judgment and resolve Bishop Defendants' appeal
 as follows:
 
(1) Bishop Defendants contend that any agency
 
relationship between Wengler and Bishop Insurance was without
 foundation in the record. Therefore, they maintain that the
 
1/
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided over the trial and issued the
Final Judgment, the Order Denying Motion for Third-Party Defendants Harry
Wengler and Bishop Insurance Agency, Inc.'s Motion for Judgment as a Matter of
Law [("JMOL")], Filed July 10, 2009, filed August 6, 2009 ("Order Denying
Motion for JMOL"), and the Order Denying Third-Party Defendants Harry Wengler
and Bishop Insurance Agency, Inc.'s Renewed Motion for Judgment as a Matter of
Law and/or for New Trial and/or for Remittitur, Filed August 14, 2009, filed
October 16, 2009. The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided over the hearings from
which each of the other challenged orders were issued.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court erred in instructing the jury on the actual and
 
apparent authority of an agent and on whether Wengler was an
 agent or an independent contractor.
2 Furthermore, they argue
 
that the court erred in submitting questions to the jury in the
 special verdict as to any duty Bishop Insurance had to monitor or
 supervise Wengler. 
The Hawaii Rules of Evidence ("HRE") provide that
 
"[t]he court shall instruct the jury regarding the law applicable
 to the facts of the case[.]" Haw. R. Evid. 1102 (1993). Thus,
 we consider whether there were facts adduced by the Vreekens
 suggesting that Wengler was an agent of Bishop Insurance. 
"'An agency relationship may be created through actual 
or apparent authority.'" State v. Hoshijo ex rel. White, 102 
Hawai
'i 307, 76 P.3d 550 (2003) ((quoting Cho Mark Oriental Food, 
Ltd. v. K & K Int'l, 73 Haw. 509, 515, 836 P.2d 1057, 1061 (1992)) (other citations omitted)). "Apparent authority arises when 'the principal does something or permits the agent to do something which reasonably leads another to believe that the agent had the authority he was purported to have.'" Cho Mark 
Oriental Food, 73 Haw. at 516, 836 P.2d at 1062. "The critical focus is not on the principal's and agent's intention to enter into an agency relationship, but on whether a third party relies on the principal's conduct based on a reasonable belief in the existence of such a relationship." Id. at 516-17, 836 P.2d at 
1062 (emphases in original). 
Accordingly, in determining whether Wengler had
 
apparent authority as an agent with respect to the issuance and
 renewal of the Vreekens' policy, we consider whether the
 Vreekens, as a third party, relied on Bishop Insurance's conduct
 to reasonably conclude that an agent-principal relationship
 existed. See id.  Steven testified, for instance, that he went
 
to Bishop Insurance's office for his first meeting with Wengler. 
The Bishop Insurance receptionist summoned Wengler, who emerged
 from inside the Bishop Insurance office area, and Steven was
 
2/
 Since none of the parties object on appeal to the language of the
instructions, the variation from the Hawai' i Standard Civil Jury Instructions
is not addressed. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
directed by the receptionist to a room off to the side to discuss
 
insurance matters with Wengler. Further, Steven testified that
 he made his check out to Bishop Insurance and that Wengler
 accepted the check. Bishop Insurance then placed the Original
 Policy with Lloyd's.
 
We conclude that, based on the evidence, the jury could
 
reasonably find that Wengler had apparent authority to act on
 behalf of Bishop Insurance and that Bishop Insurance was liable
 to the Vreekens for Wengler's acts. Thus, the Circuit Court
 properly instructed the jury as to the actual and apparent
 authority of an agent.
 
Because the jury could conclude that an agent-principal
 
relationship existed on the basis of apparent authority, we need
 not address whether Wengler was an independent contractor, since
 Wengler's status in that respect was not dispositive of Bishop
 Insurance's liability. A principal can be liable even for the
 acts of an independent contractor, if they are done with actual
 or apparent authority. See Restatement (Third) of Agency §§
 
2.01, 2.03; Smith v. Jenkins, 718 F.Supp.2d 155, 165 (D. Mass.
 2010) (holding that whether defendants' independent contractors
 had real or apparent authority to bind the defendants, as
 principals, was an issue for the finder of fact). 
Additionally, having determined that the jury could
 
reasonably find that Wengler acted with apparent authority, any
 considerations with respect to the Special Verdict form question
 on Bishop Insurance's alleged negligent monitoring and
 supervision is moot. Based on the jury instructions given at
 trial as to apparent authority, there was a reasonable basis for
 the finding that Bishop Insurance bore liability for the
 Vreekens' damages. Therefore, we decline to address whether the
 evidence demonstrated that there was a duty to monitor and
 supervise Wengler, or whether that duty was breached. 
In sum, Bishop Defendants fail to show error in the
 
jury's consideration of a possible principal-agency relationship
 between Wengler and Bishop Insurance. Therefore, the Circuit
 Court did not err in instructing the jury or in the questions
 asked on the special verdict form. We address the remaining
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
arguments and points of error from the perspective that Wengler
 
had apparent authority to act on behalf of Bishop Insurance in
 his professional relationship with the Vreekens.
 
(2) Bishop Defendants maintain that the Circuit Court
 
erred in failing to grant judgment as a matter of law ("JMOL") on
 the Vreekens' claims that Wengler and Bishop Insurance failed to
 procure other insurance, and failed to notify or advise them
 after the Original Policy lapsed. Bishop Defendants allege that
 no duty was owed. 
In Hawai
'i, however, "[a]n insurance agent owes a duty 
to the insured to exercise reasonable care, skill and diligence in carrying out the agent's duties in procuring insurance." Quality Furniture, Inc. v. Hay, 61 Haw. 89, 93, 595 P.2d 1066, 1068 (1979). Such a duty is owed to "the extent of the responsibilities that the agent had in rendering help and providing advice to the insured." Macabio, 87 Hawai
'i at 318, 
955 P.2d at 111 (quoting Quality Furniture, 61 Haw. at 93, 595 P.2d at 1068) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
In the instant case, Steven contacted Wengler on
 
March 23, 2005 to "find out what I could do to make sure my
 policy would continue to be in force." Steven testified that
 Wengler told him that "he would take care of it." Wengler, with
 the assistance of Bishop Insurance employee, Carol Young,
 attempted to reinstate the policy, but learned that same day that
 the Original Policy would not be reinstated. Neither Wengler nor
 Bishop Insurance ever notified the Vreekens that the Original
 Policy had not been reinstated before the House collapsed two
 months later. Wengler also concealed from the Vreekens that he
 had submitted the Second Application with a material
 misrepresentation that resulted in voiding the Second Policy. 
Under these circumstances, Bishop Defendants owed
 
Steven a duty to inform him that Wengler's attempt to reinstate
 the Original Policy on March 23, 2005 had failed and of Wengler's
 actions in seeking the Second Policy. Wengler had taken on the
 responsibility of reinstating the policy, and Steven was not
 aware that his home would not be covered. See 3 Couch on
 
Insurance § 46:37, at 78 (3d ed.) ("Although, as a general rule,
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the agency relationship between an insurance broker and the
 
insured terminates upon procurement of the requested insurance
 policy, inherent in the obligation to seek continuation of an
 insurance policy is the duty to notify the applicant if the
 insurer declines to continue to insure the risk so that the
 applicant may not be lulled into a feeling of security or be put
 to prejudicial delay in seeking protections elsewhere." (emphasis
 added)); see also Harts v. Farmers Ins. Exch., 597 N.W.2d 47, 52
 (Mich. 1999) ("[T]he agent assumes an additional duty by either
 express agreement with or promise to the insured."). Thus,
 Wengler and Bishop Insurance owed the Vreekens a duty.
 
Relatedly, Bishop Defendants contend that the court
 
improperly instructed the jury by discussing agency relationships
 interchangeably, thereby confusing the jury as to what duty was
 owed to the Vreekens. As Bishop Defendants point out, the court
 did switch between instructing the jury on the duties of an
 insurance agent and the "agency" relationship between Wengler and
 Bishop Insurance. Taking the instructions as a whole, however,
 it would have been apparent to the jury that the relationship
 between an insurance agent and his customer involve
 considerations different from those regarding a principal-agent
 relationship. In the instructions discussing the role and duties
 of an insurance agent, the term "insurance agent" is used. 
Moreover, the instructions relating to the insurance agent-
customer relationship discuss duties, whereas the principal-agent
 instructions discuss whether a relationship existed. Therefore,
 Bishop Defendants fail to show how the instructions caused
 confusion or led the jury into "believing some additional duty
 had been breached." 
Bishop Defendants also challenge the instructions on
 
the duty of an insurance agent on the basis that they were
 contrary to law. However, in light of our holding that Wengler
 and Bishop Insurance had a duty to notify Steven that the
 Original Policy had not been reinstated and of Wengler's actions
 in seeking the Second Policy, Bishop Defendants have not
 established how the jury instructions concerning duties were
 prejudicial and have failed to show error.
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) Bishop Defendants argue that they should have been
 
granted JMOL on the Vreekens' negligence claim because the
 
Vreekens "failed to present any evidence that [they] could have
 obtained insurance to cover the risk of collapse." 
The Vreekens had the burden to prove that there was 
"[a] reasonably close causal connection between the conduct and the resulting injury[.]" Dairy Road Partners v. Island Ins. Co., 
92 Hawai
'i 398, 419, 992 P.2d 93, 114 (2000); see also Panion v. 
United States, 385 F. Supp. 2d 1071, 1089 (D. Haw. 2005) (applying Hawai
'i law to a negligence claim). For purposes of 
causation, 
"[t]he actor's negligent conduct is a legal cause of harm to
another if (a) his or her conduct is a substantial factor in
bringing about the harm, and (b) there is no rule of law
relieving the actor from liability because of the manner in
which his or her negligence has resulted in the harm." 
Taylor-Rice v. State, 91 Hawai 'i 60, 74, 979 P.2d 1086, 1100 
(1999) (original brackets omitted) (quoting Mitchell v. Branch, 
45 Haw. 128, 132, 363 P.2d 696, 973 (1961)). 
As discussed above, Wengler and Bishop Insurance owed
 
Steven a duty to notify him that the Original Policy had not been
 reinstated and of Wengler's actions in seeking the Second Policy,
 and failed to do so. The question then becomes whether the
 Vreekens presented sufficient evidence for the jury to conclude
 that Wengler and Bishop Insurance's failure to so notify Steven
 was a "substantial factor" resulting in the harm.
 
Case law from other jurisdictions on causation in the
 
context of the negligent failure to procure insurance is
 instructive. Several jurisdictions have concluded that if
 negligence were established on the part of an insurance broker
 for failure to procure a policy, the plaintiffs had to show, in
 order to establish proximate cause, that they could have procured
 the insurance they sought. See MacDonald v. Carpenter & Pelton,
 
Inc., 31 A.D.2d 952, 953 (N.Y. App. Div. 1969); see also
 Lifespan/Physicians Prof. Servs. Org. v. Combined Ins. Co. of
 America, 345 F. Supp. 2d 214, 228 (D.R.I. 2004) (applying Rhode
 Island law); Bayly, Martin & Fay, Inc. v. Pete's Satire, Inc.,
 739 P.2d 239, 244 (Colo. 1987); Russell v. Reliance Ins. Co., 672
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
S.W.2d 693, 694 (Mo. Ct. App. 1984). 
Several other jurisdictions, however, do not require
 
that the plaintiffs demonstrate the availability of alternative
 
insurance in an action for negligent failure to procure a policy,
 but instead, if the issue arises, shift the burden to the
 defendants to show the unavailability of alternate insurance. 
See, e.g. , Lowitt v. Pearsall Chem. Corp. of Md., 219 A.2d 67, 73
 
(Md. 1966); Boothe v. American Assurance Co., 327 So.2d 477 (La.
 Ct. App. 1976); Hans Coiffures Intern., Inc. v. Hejna, 469 S.W.2d
 38 (Mo. Ct. App. 1971). Maryland is one such state, and in
 United Capitol Ins. Co. v. Kapiloff, the Court of Appeals for the
 Fourth Circuit summarized Maryland law on this issue as follows:
 
[W]hen an agent undertakes to procure insurance and fails to
do so, or when he fails to inform the principal of the
 nonavailability of insurance from a prospective insurer so
 
that the principal can obtain insurance from another
 insurer, the agent may be liable. See Lowitt, 219 A.2d. at
73; Patterson Agency Inc. v. Turner, . . . 372 A.2d 258, 262
([Md. Ct. Spec. App.] 1977). The burden of proving the
 
nonavailability of insurance coverage is on the insurer or
 the broker, because it is an affirmative defense that is
 within the peculiar knowledge of those familiar with the
 market. See Patterson, 372 A.2d at 261. Furthermore, a
broker cannot meet its burden of showing a lack of proximate
cause between its failure to properly procure insurance and
the insured's lack of coverage merely by showing that the
insurer which it approached would not supply the insurance
in question. Testimony that a particular insurer cannot
supply insurance "is a far cry from evidence demonstrating
that such insurance is not elsewhere available." Id. at
 
261-62.
 
155 F.3d 488, 499 (4th Cir. 1998) (emphases added).
 
Although Hawai 'i law has not yet addressed the specific 
question, Maryland's approach appears to be consistent with 
Hawai'i's law on causation. In Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel, 
Inc., the Hawai 'i Supreme Court rejected the concepts of 
"proximate causation" and "foreseeability", instead adopting the test articulated supra, that the breach at issue must be a "[s]ubstantial factor in bringing about the harm." 69 Haw. 376, 390, 742 P.2d 377, 386 (1987). To require plaintiffs to establish the availability of alternative insurance coverage in all cases involving negligent failure to procure a policy would require more than what the "substantial factor" test requires. Even if a plaintiff would have been unable to obtain alternative 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
coverage, an insurance agent's failure to notify the plaintiff
 
that the agent was unable to obtain coverage, or that the agent
 had engaged in conduct resulting in the policy becoming void,
 could still be a "substantial factor" causing the plaintiff's
 damages.
3
 
Therefore, we conclude that the Vreekens were not
 
required to demonstrate that alternative insurance was available
 as part of their prima facie case. Accordingly, the fact that
 the Vreekens did not introduce evidence that they could have
 procured an insurance policy does not require the entry of JMOL
 in favor of Bishop Defendants.
 
(4) Bishop Defendants argue that they were entitled to 
JMOL on the Vreekens' Negligent Infliction of Emotional Distress ("NIED") claim because the claim arises solely out of the damage to the Property and no evidence was presented that the Vreekens suffered serious emotional distress. The general rule in Hawai
'i 
had been that "recovery for the NIED of one not physically injured is only allowed where there has been some physical injury to property or a person." Guth v. Freeland, 96 Hawai
'i 147, 150, 
28 P.3d 982, 985 (2001) (emphasis added) (quoting Chedester v. Stecker, 64 Haw. 464, 468, 643 P.2d 532, 535 (1982)) (internal quotation marks omitted). In 1986, the Legislature adopted Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 663-8.9, which states: 
(a) No party shall be liable for negligent infliction
of serious emotional distress or disturbance if the distress
 
or disturbance arises solely out of damage to property or
material objects.
 
(b) This section shall not apply if the serious
emotional distress or disturbance results in physical injury
to or mental illness of the person who experiences the
emotional distress or disturbance.
 
HAW. REV. STAT. § 663-8.9 (1993). As the language of the statute 
makes clear, HRS § 663-8.9 "abolished the claim where the 
underlying basis for the action was property damage. However, the claim survived where the claimant's emotional distress resulted in physical injury or mental illness." Guth, 96 Hawai
'i 
3/
 For instance, in this case, Steven testified that if he had known
that the Original Policy had not been reinstated, he "definitely wouldn't have
continued on construction until [he] had the insurance." 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 150, 28 P.3d at 985. 
Here, sufficient evidence, in the form of testimony 
from Steven and Dr. Byron Eliashof, was presented for a jury to 
conclude that Steven suffered serious emotional distress and that this emotional distress resulted in mental illness — namely, clinically diagnosed depression and anxiety. See Tabieros v. 
Clark Equip. Co., 85 Hawai
'i 336, 361, 944 P.2d 1279, 1304 (1997) 
("Medical proof can be offered to assist in proving the 'seriousness' of the NIED claim . . . ." (quoting Campbell v. Animal Quarantine Station, 63 Haw. 557, 564, 632 P.2d 1066, 1071 (1981)) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)). Likewise, sufficient evidence, in the form of testimony from Pamela and Dr. Eliashof, was presented for a jury to conclude that Pamela suffered serious emotional distress, which caused her physical injury and mental illness — irritable bowel syndrome, depression, and anxiety. Therefore, HRS § 663-8.9 does not bar the Vreekens' claims, because the statute does not apply if the serious emotional distress or disturbance results in physical injury to or mental illness of the plaintiffs. 
(5) Bishop Defendants contend that they were entitled
 
to JMOL on the Vreekens' negligent-misrepresentation claim. The
 Circuit Court did not err, however, in sending the negligent
 misrepresentation claim to the jury on the basis of Wengler's
 alleged statement that he would "take care of" the Original
 Policy's reinstatement. 
Although, generally, statements that are promissory in
 
nature cannot support an action for negligent representation, see
 Honolulu Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. Murphy, 7 Haw. App. 196, 201­02, 753 P.2d 807, 812 (1998), there is an exception wherein "[a]
 promise relating to future action or conduct will be actionable
 . . . if the promise was made 'without the present intent to
 fulfill the promise.'" Id. (emphasis added) (quoting E. Star,
 
Inc., v. Union Bldg. Materials Corp., 6 Haw. App. 125, 140, 712
 P.2d 1148, 1159 (1985)).
 
Here, there was evidence adduced from which the jury
 
could conclude that Wengler made the statement that "I'll take
 care of it" without sufficient intent that he would be able to
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
renew the policy, despite Steven's reliance on the renewal. 
Wengler testified that when Steven telephoned, Wengler did not
 tell Steven that he would need a new policy, and did not tell
 Steven to make the insurance renewal payment by credit card or
 any other instantaneous means. Carol Young testified that she
 had reminded Wengler on several occasions between March 21, 2005
 and March 23, 2005 that the renewal payment was due from the
 Vreekens. Kenneth Kanehiro, an insurance educator and risk
 analyst who testified during the Vreekens' case-in-chief, stated
 that where an agent has concerns about timeliness of a policy
 renewal payment it is customary practice to obtain personal
 delivery of the payment. Wengler, however, told Steven to mail
 the payment instead. 
Accordingly, the jury could have found that Wengler
 
misled Steven through his statement that "I'll take care of
 it[,]" because he did not at that time believe that he would be
 able to "take care" of the policy renewal. Bishop Defendants
 were therefore not entitled to a JMOL as to the negligent
 misrepresentation claim.
 
(6) Bishop Defendants argue that they were entitled to
 
JMOL on the Vreekens' punitive-damages claim because "there was
 no evidence, let alone clear and convincing evidence, that Mr.
 Wenger and [Bishop Insurance]'s conduct was wilful, wanton,
 oppressive, malicious, or demonstrated a positive element of
 conscious wrongdoing." 
The jury found Wengler liable to the Vreekens for
 
$10,000.00 in punitive damages. Bishop Defendants contend that
 Wengler cannot be liable for punitive damages because Wengler had
 no reason to know that the House was under construction when he
 applied for the Second Policy. As discussed, however, Wengler's
 liability stems from his failure to notify Steven that his
 efforts to reinstate the Original Policy had failed and his
 concealment from Steven of his conduct that resulted in the
 Second Policy becoming void. 
Evidence showed that Wengler had knowledge that
 
Seacoast would not reinstate the Original Policy on March 23,
 2005. Wengler spoke to Pamela on March 25, 2005, and when Pamela
 
11
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
asked Wengler whether Steven should call him back, he said no. 
Instead of informing Pamela or Steven that the Original Policy
 had not been reinstated, he filled out the Second Application
 using the same information and the same photographs provided to
 him over a year before without consulting Steven. Wengler did
 this even though, as Steven testified, Steven had originally told
 him that he needed insurance to cover his planned construction. 
Although it was his responsibility to get Steven's
 
signature to submit the Second Application, Wengler admitted that
 he did not give Steven the application to sign. Instead, the
 evidence presented showed that Steven's purported signature on
 the Second Application was forged and that the Second Application
 falsely stated that there was no renovation work underway on the
 Property. Wengler used the refund check from Seacoast to procure
 the Second Policy and personally signed a check from "HW
 Insurance Serives [sic], Inc." to cover an additional $9.00, all
 without consulting with Steven. Thus, the evidence supports the
 jury's conclusion that Wengler acted wantonly, or with an "entire
 want of care which would raise the presumption of a conscious
 indifference to consequences[,]" or committed some willful
 misconduct.
4 Masaki v. Gen. Motors Corp., 71 Haw. 1, 16–17, 780
 
P.2d 566, 575 (1989).
 
The jury also found Bishop Insurance liable to the
 
Vreekens for $450,000.00 in punitive damages. Bishop Defendants
 argue that Bishop Insurance is entitled to JMOL on the punitive-
damages claim because there was no evidence that Bishop Insurance
 ratified Wengler's wrongful actions. 
On appeal, "[t]he trier of fact's decision to grant or 
deny punitive damages will be reversed only for a clear abuse of discretion." Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 
Haw. 85, 138, 839 P.2d 10, 37 (1992). The Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
has further explained that "[t]he deterrent or retributive effect of punitive damages must be placed squarely on the shoulders of 
4/
 Bishop Defendants also argue that there was no evidence that
Wengler acted "with the intent to harm or defraud the Vreekens." The intent
 
to cause harm is not, however, a necessary predicate to a punitive-damages
claim. See Masaki, 71 Haw. at 16-17, 780 P.2d at 575.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the wrongdoer." Lauer v. Young Men's Christian Ass'n of
 
Honolulu, 57 Haw. 390, 402, 557 P.2d 1334, 1342 (1976). "A
 
wrongdoer in this context includes a person superior in authority
 who expressly authorizes, ratifies or condones the tortious act
 of the employee." Id. The clear and convincing standard of
 
proof applies to punitive damages. Masaki, 71 Haw. at 16, 780
 
P.2d at 575. 
The two potential theories for punitive damages against
 
Bishop Insurance are that it (1) authorized or ratified Wengler's
 activities, or (2) was reckless in utilizing him as an agent. 
Although we have concluded that there was sufficient evidence to
 raise a question for the jury as to whether a principal-agency
 relationship had been established between Bishop Insurance and
 Wengler based on apparent authority, we find instructive cases
 discussing punitive damages in the context of the employer-
employee relationship. This is because the employer-employee
 relationship appears to provide the strongest basis for the award
 of punitive damages under the two potential theories. However,
 even if we were to assume for purposes of our analysis that
 Bishop Insurance and Wengler were in an employer-employee
 relationship, there would still be insufficient evidence to
 support an award of punitive damages against Bishop Insurance.
 
In this case, the Vreekens did not present evidence
 
that Bishop Insurance authorized or ratified Wengler's
 activities. Liability under a ratification theory requires that
 "the act complained of be done on behalf of or under the
 authority of the employer, and there must be clear evidence of
 the employer's approval of the wrongful conduct." Sharples v.
 
State, 71 Haw. 404, 406, 793 P.2d 175, 177 (1990) (citing Costa
 v. Able Distributors, Inc., 3 Haw. App. 486, 490, 653 P.2d 101
 105 (1982)). Here, there was nothing to indicate that Bishop
 Insurance knew of Wengler's alleged promise to "take care of" the
 reinstatement. The evidence also does not show that Bishop
 Insurance had the requisite knowledge to authorize or ratify
 Wengler's conduct vis-a-vis the Second Application. See id.; cf.
 
Jarvis v. Modern Woodmen of America, 406 S.E.2d 736, 743 (W.Va.
 1991) (awarding punitive damages against insurance company for
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the actions of its agent where the company knew of the wrongful
 
actions of the agent, continued to employ him and took no further
 investigation into his sales practices).
 
The R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 909 (1979) provides
 
that a principal can be held liable for punitive damages if "the
 agent was unfit and the principal or a managerial agent was
 reckless in employing or retaining him[.]" Although we did not
 need to address the inclusion of the question regarding Bishop
 Insurance's monitoring or supervision of Wengler on the Special
 Verdict Form, we address the issue here to the extent that it
 would provide a separate basis for punitive damages.
 
An award of punitive damages is appropriate "where 
there has been some wilful misconduct or that entire want of care which would raise the presumption of a conscious indifference to consequences." Masaki, 71 Haw. at 17, 780 P.2d at 575; Ditto v. 
McCurdy, 86 Hawai
'i 84, 91-92, 947 P.2d 952, 959-60 (1997); see 
also 2 P UNITIVE DAMAGES: LAW AND PRAC. 2d § 24.4 (2013 ed.) ("The 
agent is liable because of the agent's own vicious act and the principal because of recklessness in exposing others to that viciousness."). The evidence presented at trial does not support an award of punitive damages on this alternative theory either. 
The only evidence adduced suggesting that Bishop
 
Insurance was negligent in utilizing Wengler's services was
 Rosen's testimony that he knew that Wengler had been denied a
 discharge in bankruptcy. This alone is not enough to award
 punitive damages against Bishop Insurance. 
Other jurisdictions require more egregious conduct in
 
order to assess punitive damages against an employer based on the
 employer's hiring or retaining an employee. See, e.g., Boyd v.
 
L.G. DeWitt Trucking Co., 405 S.E.2d 914, 920 (N.C. Ct. App.
 1991) (trucking company could be liable for punitive damages
 where employee driver had violations in prior three years for
 failing to stop for a siren, reckless driving, speeding, and
 driving while intoxicated); Bryant v. Livigni, 619 N.E.2d 550,
 
558 (Ill. App. Ct. 1993) (punitive damages permitted where
 employer knew that employee had previously attacked a fellow
 employee and been convicted of aggravated battery, then later
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
attacked a child resulting in the child's hospitalization). 
Thus, in order to assess punitive damages against an employer for hiring or retaining, a showing beyond simple negligence is required. Here, however, the Vreekens did not adduce or refer us to any evidence suggesting that Bishop Insurance's actions were wilful or indicated an entire want of care raising a presumption of conscious indifference on the part of Bishop Insurance with respect to utilizing Wengler's services. See Ditto, 86 Hawai
'i 
at 91-92, 947 P.2d at 959-60. 
Accordingly, the evidence presented at trial does not
 
support an award of punitive damages against Bishop Insurance
 under a ratification theory or because Bishop Insurance was
 grossly negligent in utilizing Wengler's services. We therefore
 vacate the award of punitive damages against Bishop Insurance.
 
(7) Bishop Defendants contest the amount of the
 
punitive damages awarded against Wengler, alleging that "the
 [C]ircuit [C]ourt should properly have remitted the $10,000
 punitive award as excessive in light of [Wengler's] insolvency as
 requested by the [renewed motion for JMOL]." Prior to trial,
 Bishop Defendants filed a motion in limine asking the Circuit
 Court to exclude any reference to Wengler's 2009 bankruptcy
 filing as irrelevant and unduly prejudicial.
5 The Circuit Court
 
granted the motion. Thus, because of Bishop Defendants' own
 request to exclude the evidence, the jury was unaware of
 Wengler's financial status at the time of trial. Furthermore,
 Bishop Defendants pointed toward no evidence of Wengler's
 financial status at the time of trial in their request to reduce
 the damages award included in their renewed motion for JMOL. 
Therefore, Bishop Defendants' argument as to the reduction of
 Wengler's punitive damages is without merit.
6
 
(8) Bishop Defendants argue that the Circuit Court
 
5/
 As will be discussed infra, the Circuit Court allowed evidence
that an earlier bankruptcy filing by Wengler had been dismissed to come in at
trial.
 
6/
 Bishop Defendants also argue that the award of punitive damages
against Bishop Insurance was excessive. However, in light of our holding that
punitive damages should not have been awarded against Bishop Insurance, we do
not address this argument.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
erred in admitting evidence related to Wengler's prior, unrelated
 
bankruptcy case. Specifically, Bishop Defendants contest the
 court's decision to allow the Vreekens to question Wengler about
 the dismissal of a bankruptcy petition for failure to provide
 complete and truthful information about his financial affairs and
 about a judgment entered by a bankruptcy court which found that
 Wengler had incurred debts through false pretenses, false
 misrepresentations, and/or actual fraud. 
Bishop Defendants argue that such evidence was
 
irrelevant or, in the alternative, that the probative value of
 such evidence was substantially outweighed by the prejudicial
 effect on the jury. According to Bishop Defendants, the "mere
 allegations in a bankruptcy and/or civil action" did not serve to
 prove or disprove any disputed fact at trial.
 
Bishop Defendants argue that the dismissal of Wengler's
 
bankruptcy proceedings was because he provided "incomplete
 information", which they claim does not amount to an instance of
 untruthfulness. However, at trial, Wengler was asked: "And you
 remember in . . . February 21, 2007 your bankruptcy was dismissed
 because you failed to provide complete and truthful information;
 correct?". Wengler responded, "[t]hat's true, yes." In the
 context of bankruptcy, failing to provide complete information
 could clearly amount to a misrepresentation that would have
 bearing on truthfulness.
 
The Circuit Court admitted evidence regarding the
 
bankruptcy matter "as bearing upon Mr. Wengler's character for
 truthfulness[.]" The Vreekens argue that the evidence was
 properly admitted under HRE Rule 608. Pursuant to HRE Rule 608,
 "[s]pecific instances of the conduct of a witness, for the
 purpose of attacking the witness' credibility, if probative of
 untruthfulness, may be inquired into on cross-examination of the
 witness and, in the discretion of the court, may be proved by
 extrinsic evidence." Haw. R. Evid. 608(b) (1993) (emphasis
 added). 
The cases cited by Bishop Defendants in support of its
 
position are distinguishable. See Colburn v. Spitz, 11 Haw. 104,
 
104–05 (Haw. Rep. 1897) (old rule that "particular acts of
 
16
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
misconduct cannot be proved for the purpose of impeaching the
 
general credibility of a witness" plainly contradicted by HRE
 Rule 608(b) with respect to untruthfulness); Harsco Corp. v.
 Renner, 475 F.3d 1179, 1190–91 (10th Cir. 2007) (affirming
 district court's discretionary exclusion of evidence to avoid a
 mini-trial where the plaintiff had already conceded that she had
 signed forms without verifying their accuracy); United States v.
 Hawley, 562 F. Supp. 2d 1017, 1047–48 (N.D. Iowa 2008) (analysis
 does not consider Federal Rules of Evidence Rule 608).
 
The evidence that Wengler had a bankruptcy petition
 
dismissed due to his failure to provide "complete and truthful
 information" and that a bankruptcy court had found that he had
 incurred debts through false pretenses, misrepresentations, or
 fraud is probative of Wengler's character for untruthfulness.
7
 
Evidence is typically deemed relevant under HRE Rule 608 when it
 "involves fraudulent representations made to obtain money or
 other advantage to which the falsifier was not entitled." A.
 Bowman, Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual §§ 608-2[1][A] (3d ed.
 2006). The evidence here fits that description.  See also United
 States v. Jensen, 41 F.3d 946, 957 (5th Cir. 1994) (evidence of
 false statements made on a bankruptcy document probative of
 defendant's character for untruthfulness). Thus, the evidence
 was both relevant and probative.
8
 
Moreover, the probative value of the evidence was not
 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. Haw. R. Evid. 403. 
The Circuit Court gave a limiting instruction with respect to the
 evidence. Specifically, before the contested testimony was
 heard, the Circuit Court instructed the jury: "While you may
 consider this evidence as bearing upon Mr. Wengler's character
 
7/
 While trying to characterize the contested evidence as the result
of Wengler's poor knowledge of bankruptcy procedure, Bishop Defendants cite
only to their motion in limine no. 5 and the supporting memorandum. In those documents, Bishop Defendants' attorney simply characterizes the import of theevidence without citation. The argument of counsel is not evidence and does
not advance the appellants' cause. See Leis Family Ltd. P'ship v. Silversword 
Eng'g, 126 Hawai' i 532, 534 n.2, 273 P.3d 1218, 1220 n.2 (App. 2012). 
8/
 Bishop Defendants do not challenge the admission of the contested
evidence on the basis that it was inquired into on direct-examination, and we
do not consider this issue.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
for truthfulness, you may not consider this evidence for any 
other purpose." A jury is presumed to follow a trial court's instructions. State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai
'i 390, 413, 56 P.3d 
692, 715 (2002). On balance, even if there was some prejudice associated with the introduction of the evidence, Bishop Defendants have not established that the prejudice outweighs the probative value of the evidence. Therefore, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in admitting it. 
(9) Bishop Defendants contend that the Circuit Court
 
erred in admitting evidence that the signature on the Second
 Application was forged. Specifically, they argue that certified
 handwriting and document examiner Reed Hayes's expert testimony
 that the signature on the Second Application was not Steven's was
 either irrelevant or had probative value which was substantially
 outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the
 issues, or misleading the jury. They further argue that the
 Vreekens' contention that Wengler was the forger was without any
 basis. 
Under HRE Rule 401, relevant evidence "means evidence
 
having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of
 consequence to the determination of the action more probable or
 less probable than it would be without the evidence." Haw. R.
 Evid. 401. Contrary to Bishop Defendants' contention, evidence
 that Steven did not sign the insurance application supported the
 reasonable inference that Wengler had forged Steven's signature
 on the Second Application. Wengler personally signed a check
 from "HW Insurance Serives [sic], Inc." to pay for the extra
 costs for the Second Policy rather than contacting Steven. 
Furthermore, Wengler admitted that it was his responsibility to
 get Steven's signature, but that he did not believe that he ever
 gave it to Steven to sign. 
No evidence was offered that the insurance application
 
was ever out of the possession of Wengler or Bishop Insurance. 
Thus, the evidence that Steven's signature was forged on a
 document under the control of Wengler or Bishop Insurance was
 circumstantial evidence that Wengler had forged the signature and
 was relevant to the Vreeken's negligence claims, and to the issue
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
of punitive damages. Although evidence of the forgery may have
 
had some prejudicial effect, its probative value was not
 outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. See Haw. R. Evid.
 
403 (1993). Bishop Defendants have not shown that the Circuit
 Court abused its discretion in its application of HRE Rule 403.
 
(10) Bishop Defendants argue that the Circuit Court
 
erred in excluding evidence concerning the details of the House
 collapse because "[e]vidence of the series of mistakes and
 negligent actions taken" by Steven is relevant to Steven's
 credibility and the question of whether one of the insurance
 policies would have covered the collapse. Bishop Defendants
 present no argument on the question of how this evidence
 impeaches Steven's credibility; thus, the first argument is
 waived. Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7).
 
As to the second argument, Bishop Defendants appear to
 
allege that it was necessary for the specific facts surrounding
 the House collapse to be introduced into evidence at trial for
 Bishop Defendants to refute the causation element of the
 Vreekens' negligence action, and thus the evidence was
 erroneously excluded. 
Bishop Defendants argue that the cause of the collapse
 
was relevant to causation — specifically, whether the loss would
 have been covered under the Original Policy. However, the
 Original Policy had not been renewed and evidence related to the
 collapse would have created a coverage dispute within the trial
 that would have been confusing to the jury. Moreover, the
 negligence at issue was the failure to notify the Vreekens that
 they had no insurance coverage due to Wengler's actions, thereby
 depriving the Vreekens of the opportunity to secure alternate
 insurance protection. Evidence concerning the cause of the
 collapse would not have addressed whether the Vreekens suffered
 harm as the result of such negligence. Steven, in fact,
 testified that he would have stopped construction if he had known
 that he did not have insurance. Thus, Bishop Defendants have not
 shown error.
 
(11) Bishop Defendants failed to present any argument
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
in support of their point of error that the Circuit Court erred
 
in entering judgment or granting remittitur of the jury's general
 damages award because HRS § 663-8.9 "limits the award of general
 damages for claims arising exclusively from injury to property." 
This point appears to substantively duplicate the fourth point of
 error, which relates to the NIED claims. To the extent that this
 is a separate point of error, it is waived. Haw. R. App. P.
 28(b)(7).
 
(12) Bishop Defendants contend that the Circuit Court
 
erred in admitting evidence of the Vreekens' legal fees incurred
 in litigation with Lloyd's, and in failing to grant judgment or
 remittitur to Wengler or Bishop Insurance "in light of the
 substantial comparative negligence of the Vreekens and the
 affirmative waiver of fees and costs by all parties in the
 Lloyd's Final Judgment." The point of error, however, fails to
 comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4), which requires that each point of
 error shall state "where in the record the alleged error
 occurred; and . . . where in the record the alleged error was
 objected to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought
 to the attention of the court or agency." Haw. R. App. P.
 28(b)(4). In addition, to the extent that Bishop Defendants
 contend that the Circuit Court erroneously admitted evidence, the
 point of error must include "a quotation of the grounds urged for
 the objection and the full substance of the evidence admitted or
 rejected[.]" Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(4)(A). 
Even if we were to address the merits of the point,
 
Bishop Defendants' substantive arguments are insufficiently
 argued and therefore fail. First, Bishop Defendants argue that
 while Uyemura v. Wick, 57 Haw. 102, 551 P.2d 171 (1976), provides
 that a plaintiff can recover attorneys' fees from a defendant for
 attorneys' fees expended defending against a third-party's claim
 if the expenses were incurred as a result of the defendants'
 wrongful conduct, "this limited exception is not applicable in
 this case where the jury found the Vreekens 40% comparatively
 negligent. Uyemura, 57 Haw. at 108, 551 P.2d at 176." Bishop
 
Defendants' conclusion, however, is not directly supported by
 Uyemura, as that case does not address the issue of comparative
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
negligence. See State v. Vinuya, 96 Hawai 'i 472, 486, 32 P.3d 
116, 130 (App. 2001) (conclusory contentions do not constitute 
arguments). 
Second, Bishop Defendants contend that an award of fees
 
and costs was inappropriate in light of the court's order in the
 underlying Lloyd's litigation, holding that "each party shall
 bear its or their attorneys' fees and costs." Bishop Defendants
 did not provide any further analysis, failing to argue, for
 instance, why the language in the Lloyd's Judgment should be
 dispositive where, subsequent to the entry of that judgment, a
 jury found Bishop Defendants liable for a variety of torts. 
Bishop Defendants' arguments are not only insufficient for proper
 appellate review, they are unpersuasive.
 
(13) In brief argument that cites two out-of-state
 
cases, Bishop Defendants contend that a negligent insurance
 agent's liability for special damages, in an action for negligent
 failure to procure a policy, should be capped at the amount that
 the insured would have been entitled to under the policy. 
Although the basic legal proposition is potentially of some
 merit, Bishop Defendants fail to allege to what extent the
 "special damages" award should be reduced in this case. This is
 particularly problematic since, contrary to Bishop Defendants'
 allegation, the jury's award of $352,757.68 in special damages
 was not only "for coverage under the policy", but also included
 special damages related to the negligent misrepresentation
 claim.
9 Thus, we decline to address the point of error.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Final Judgment
 
in Favor of Third-Party Plaintiffs Steven and Pamela Vreeken and
 Against Third-Party Defendants Harry Wengler and Bishop Insurance
 Agency, Inc., filed on August 6, 2009 is reversed as to the award
 
9/
 The special verdict form did not differentiate between special
damages for negligence and special damages for negligent misrepresentation.
Moreover, the jury instruction as to special damages instructed the jury to
consider, inter alia, "[t]he insurance coverage [the Vreekens] should have
received, lost business income, [and] rental expenses[.]" Thus, even though
Bishop Defendants allege some dollar amounts with respect to the policy for
the first time in their reply brief, they do not address how the special
damages for negligence should be distinguished from special damages for
negligent misrepresentation.
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
of punitive damages against Bishop Insurance and affirmed in all
 
other respects.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 30, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
James H. Hershey and
Kathleen M. Douglas
(Fukunaga Matayoshi HersheyChung & Kop LLP)
for Third-Party Defendants-
Appellants.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Kevin W. Herring,

Paul S. Aoki,
Connie C. Chow, and
Gary P. Quiming(Ashford & Wriston)
for Defendants-Appellees/
Third-Party Plaintiffs-
Appellees.
 
22
 