NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30701
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BRANDY IWALANI C. AVILLA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-10-00518)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J. and Foley, J.;
Reifurth J., dissenting)
 
Defendant-Appellant Brandy Iwalani C. Avilla (Avilla)
 
appeals from the "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
 
1
Plea/Judgment" filed on June 9, 2010  (June 9, 2010 Judgment) in
the District Court of the First Circuit, Wai' anae Division2 
(district court). Avilla was convicted of operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2011).
3 
1
 Avilla's notice of appeal indicates she is appealing from her second
Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, filed July 7,
2010, which dismissed the charge of driving without motor vehicle insurance.
However, her opening brief clearly indicates her intent to appeal from her
June 9, 2010 Judgment in which she was convicted of OVUII.
2
 The Honorable Christopher P. McKenzie presided.
 
3
 HRS ยง 291E-61 provides in relevant part:
 
ยง291E-61 Operating a vehicle under the influence of an
intoxicant. (a) A person commits the offense of operating a
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Avilla contends the district court abused
 
its discretion when it admitted evidence of Avilla's performance
 
on the Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus test (HGN test) as substantive
 
evidence because 
(1) the State of Hawai' i (the State) failed to lay a 
proper foundation; 
(2) the results of the HGN test are admissible only as
 
evidence of probable cause for an arrest; and
 
(3) the admission of the HGN test as evidence was not
 
harmless because without the HGN test, there was insufficient
 
evidence to convict Avilla of OVUII.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Avilla's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) We agree with Avilla that the district court erred
 
when it admitted into evidence Avilla's performance on the HGN
 
test because a proper foundation had not been established, but we
 
conclude the error was harmless. 
"[T]he determination of whether proper foundation has 
been established [for the introduction of evidence] lies within 
the discretion of the trial court, and its determination will not 
be overturned absent a showing of clear abuse." State v. Assaye, 
121 Hawai' i 204, 210, 216 P.3d 1227, 1233 (2009) (internal 
quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted).  To admit the 
HGN test into evidence, "it must be shown that (1) the officer 
administering the test was duly qualified to conduct the test and 
grade the test results, and (2) the test was performed properly 
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 (1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
 sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and guard
against casualty[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in the instant case." State v. Ito, 90 Hawai' i 225, 244, 978 
P.2d 191, 210 (App. 1999) (citation omitted). In Ito, where 
there was no evidence as to what the Honolulu Police Department 
(HPD) training consisted of or that the training met the National 
Highway and Transportation Safety Administration (NHTSA) 
standards, this court had no way to evaluate (1) the extent and 
nature of the training, (2) whether the officer's training was 
supervised by certified instructors, (3) whether the officer was 
certified to administer the test, and (4) whether the officer 
received periodic retraining on HGN test administration skills. 
Id. at 244, 978 P.2d at 210. Because this evidence was lacking, 
the Ito court concluded the proper foundation was not established 
to admit the HGN test into evidence. Id. 
In the instant case, HPD Officer Daniel Cunningham 
(Officer Cunningham) testified that he was certified to conduct 
field sobriety tests (FSTs), he was familiar with the NHTSA 
manual, he was trained according to the manual, and he was 
trained through HPD to conduct FSTs based on the NHTSA manual. 
However, this testimony failed to address the extent or nature of 
his training, whether the trainers were certified, and whether 
Officer Cunningham received periodic retraining -- evidence Ito 
says is necessary to establish the proper foundation to admit the 
HGN test into evidence. Ito, 90 Hawai' i at 244, 978 P.2d at 210. 
Because the State failed to establish that Officer Cunningham "was duly qualified to conduct the test and grade the test 
results or that he properly administered the HGN test," the 
district court abused its discretion when it admitted the HGN 
test results into evidence. Id. 
Nonetheless, where an error is harmless, a conviction 
need not be set aside. Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
Rule 52(a) provides, in relevant part, that "[a]ny error, defect, irregularity or variance which does not affect substantial rights 
shall be disregarded." "Where there is a wealth of overwhelming 
and compelling evidence tending to show the defendant guilty 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
beyond a reasonable doubt, errors in the admission or exclusion 
of evidence are deemed harmless." State v. Toyomura, 80 Hawai' i 
8, 27, 904 P.2d 893, 912 (1995) (internal quotation marks, citation omitted). Such an error "must be examined in light of 
the entire proceedings and given the effect to which the whole 
record shows it is entitled." State v. Sprattling, 99 Hawai' i 
312, 320, 55 P.3d 276, 284 (2002) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets in original omitted). 
Here, we conclude that the district court's error in
 
admitting the HGN test into evidence was harmless. Officer
 
Cunningham testified that Avilla passed him at a high rate of
 
speed, after which he followed her without turning on his lights
 
or siren. For no apparent reason, Avilla suddenly slowed down,
 
pulled over, went over some train tracks and a curb, and stopped
 
in a school bus lane, even though there was a more usual way to
 
reach the bus lane. After Avilla's car came to a stop, Officer
 
Cunningham approached her and asked for her license. She gave
 
him an expired one and when he asked for her registration, she
 
started "slamming things" and becoming "a little more
 
aggressive." Officer Cunningham testified he smelled a "medium
 
to strong odor" of alcohol on her breath. His police report
 
described the odor as "strong." Officer Cunningham testified
 
that Avilla's eyes were red and watery and her speech was
 
slurred.
 
During the administration of the HGN test, Officer
 
Cunningham noticed Avilla was unable to stand still, had a
 
constant one-inch circular sway, and had to move her feet to
 
avoid losing her balance. Avilla refused to proceed with the
 
other FSTs and became verbally aggressive, yelling, "Do you know
 
who I am? Do you know who I'm related to?" After Officer
 
Cunningham concluded that Avilla "was under the influence of
 
alcoholic-type substance and that she was unsafe to drive," he
 
arrested her and took her to the police station.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In light of this overwhelming and compelling evidence 
tending to show beyond a reasonable doubt that Avilla was guilty 
of being under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient 
to impair her normal mental faculties or ability to care for 
herself and guard against casualty, we conclude that the district 
court's error in admitting the HGN test into evidence was 
harmless. HRS ยง 291E-61(a); Toyomura, 80 Hawai' i at 27, 904 P.2d 
at 912. 
Because we conclude the HGN test was erroneously
 
admitted into evidence, we need not address Avilla's contention
 that the HGN test results were admissible only as evidence of
 
probable cause rather than substantive evidence. And because we
 
conclude that any error in the admission of the HGN test was
 
harmless, we reject Avilla's third point of error. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Notice of Entry of 
Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment" filed on June 9, 2010 in the District Court of the First Circuit, Wai' anae Division, is 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 9, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Pamela I. Lundquist
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. 
Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
5
 