NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30491
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI fI 
MICHAEL S. FURTADO, Plaintiff-Appellant, v. AOAO GOLF VILLAS,
JOHN DOE ENTITIES 1-10, and DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0153(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Michael S. Furtado (Furtado)
 
appeals from a Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit
 
Court) April 9, 2010 Judgment in favor of Defendant-Appellee
 
Association of Apartment Owners of the Golf Villas (Golf
 
Villas).1 Furtado filed a complaint in Circuit Court alleging
 
two causes of action for breach of (1) an alleged employment
 
agreement in Furtado's capacity as Golf Villas's Maintenance
 
Supervisor and (2) a lanai retrofit bonus agreement. Golf Villas
 
filed a Motion for Summary Judgment (MSJ) on Furtado's complaint
 
and the Circuit Court granted Golf Villas's MSJ in its entirety.
 
On appeal, Furtado maintains that the Circuit Court
 
erred in granting Golf Villas's MSJ as to his two breach of
 
contract claims because for each claim (1) genuine issues of
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
material fact existed, and (2) Golf Villas was not entitled to
 
judgment as a matter of law.2
 
After a careful review of the record, the points raised
 
by the parties, their arguments and the applicable legal
 
authority, we resolve Furtado's appeal as follows and affirm.
 
1. The Circuit Court did not err by granting Golf 
Villas's MSJ as to Furtado's claim for breach of an employment 
agreement for permanent or life-long employment because viewing 
the evidence in the light most favorable to Furtado, there was no 
genuine issue of material fact for trial and Golf Villas was 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Thomas v. Kidani, 126 
Hawaifi 125, 129-30, 267 P.3d 1230, 1234-35 (2011). 
a. Golf Villas produced evidence of no genuine 
issue of material fact as to Furtado's at-will employment status. See Shoppe v. Gucci America, Inc., 94 Hawai
fi 368, 383, 14 P.3d 
1049, 1064 (2000) (In Hawai fi, the at-will employment doctrine 
prevails absent "a written employment agreement, a collective 
bargaining agreement, or a statutorily-conferred right[.]"). 
Neither Golf Villas's actions nor the language of Golf Villas's 
Employee Handbook can be said to have encouraged Furtado's 
reliance as to permanent or life-long employment as Maintenance 
Supervisor. 
Golf Villas produced evidence that all of Golf Villas's
 
employees were at-will, and Golf Villas never considered or
 
discussed whether to change Furtado's at-will status, much less
 
entered into a written agreement with him. Moreover, Golf
 
Villas's Employee Handbook clearly and unambiguously states that
 
2
 We note that Furtado's opening brief fails to properly cite to the
record on appeal. Hawaif i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(3)
provides that an appellant's opening brief shall include "[r]ecord
references," which "shall include page citations and the volume number, ifapplicable." Here, Furtado's opening brief does not cite to pages in the 547­page record on appeal, but only to the Circuit Court's docket numbers.Accordingly, counsel is reminded that "the appeal may be dismissed or thebrief stricken and monetary or other sanctions may be levied by the appellatecourt." HRAP Rule 30. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Furtado's employment was at-will and could be terminated at any
 
time with or without notice and with or without cause.
 
After Golf Villas produced sufficient evidence to 
establish no genuine issue of material fact, the burden shifted 
to Furtado to demonstrate specific facts presenting a genuine 
issue worthy of trial. Hawai fi Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 56(e); Exotics Hawai fi-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours 
& Co., 116 Hawai fi 277, 312, 172 P.3d 1021, 1056 (2007). Even 
when taking the evidence in the light most favorale to him, we conclude that Furtado failed to produce specific evidence of an 
agreement modifying his at-will employment. 
Furtado does not allege, and we do not find, any
 
evidence supporting the existence of a written agreement with
 
Golf Villas altering his at-will employment status. Furthermore,
 
we do not agree, as Furtado alleges, that his at-will status was
 
altered by (1) an oral promise, (2) detrimental reliance, (3)
 
continuous employment, or (4) Golf Villas's references to an
 
"agreement."
 
b. Golf Villas was entitled to judgment as a 
matter of law because it showed that based on the undisputed 
facts, Furtado could not meet his burden of proof at trial on his 
claim for breach of an employment agreement for permanent or 
life-long employment. See Thomas, 126 Hawai
fi at 130, 267 P.3d 
at 1235 (citing Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S.Ct. 2548 (1986)). 
2. The Circuit Court did not err by granting Golf
 
Villas's MSJ as to Furtado's claim for breach of a lanai retrofit
 
agreement because there was no genuine issue of material fact for
 
trial and Golf Villas was entitled to summary judgment as a
 
matter of law. Furtado argues that the terms of the lanai
 
retrofit agreement required that he retrofit all of Golf Villas's
 
lanais for $4000 each and that he was guaranteed work for up to
 
ten years. We disagree.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a. Golf Villas satisfied its burden of producing
 
support for its claim that there was no genuine issue of material
 
fact. The retrofit agreement did not guarantee that Furtado
 
would retrofit a certain number of lanais or that Furtado would
 
complete these lanai retrofits over a certain number of years.
 
After Golf Villas produced sufficient evidence to 
establish no genuine issue of material fact, Furtado did not meet 
his burden of producing specific evidence raising a genuine issue 
of material fact. HRCP Rule 56(e); Exotics Hawai fi-Kona, Inc., 
116 Hawai fi at 312, 172 P.3d at 1056. He failed to produce 
specific evidence of an agreement requiring that he retrofit all 
of Golf Villas's lanais over a period of approximately ten years. 
Furtado has not demonstrated that the terms of the lanai retrofit 
agreement were "sufficiently definite or reasonably determinable 
to withstand a motion for summary judgment." Hi-Pac, Ltd. v. 
Avoset Corp., 26 F. Supp. 2d 1230, 1236 (D. Haw. 1997). 
Furtado's reference to five separate documents in his
 
Opening Brief in support of his argument that Golf Villas
 "admitted in writing on many occasions that there was a Retrofit
 
Agreement that would last for up to ten years" is not helpful to
 
his case. The November 2, 2004 meeting in regards to "Furtado's
 
Agreement on Lanai Retrofit[,]" the November 15, 2004 and January
 
23, 2006 mortgage verification letters, and the two emails from
 
Joan Mayo do not discuss the number of lanais that Furtado would
 
retrofit or guarantee that Furtado would perform lanai retrofits
 
for a definite length of time.
 
b. Golf Villas was entitled to judgment as a 
matter of law because it showed that based on the undisputed 
facts, Furtado cannot meet his burden of proof at trial on his 
claim for breach of the lanai retrofit agreement. See Thomas, 
126 Hawai
fi at 130, 267 P.3d at 1235 (citing Celotex Corp., 477 
U.S. at 322, 106 S.Ct. 2548).
 
Based on the foregoing, Furtado is unable to meet his
 
burden to establish the existence of a lanai retrofit agreement
 
with the terms that he has alleged. Consequently, we conclude 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the Circuit Court did not err in granting Golf Villas's MSJ
 
as to Furtado's claim for breach of the lanai retrofit agreement.
 
Therefore,
  
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Circuit Court of the
 
Second Circuit's April 9, 2010 Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai fi, December 17, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
James Richard McCarty,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
 
Barbara A. Krieg
Zachary A. McNish
(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing),
for Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
5
 