NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30241
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ROBERT D. JOHNSON, JR., as co-guardian
of the person of MICHAEL A. JOHNSON,
an incapacitated adult, Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
v. STATE OF HAWAI' I, Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and RAINBOW REHABILITATION SERVICES, INC., a Hawai' i
 
Corporation, dba Rainbow House; JASON J. MOSSHOLDER-BROM,
Appellees, and JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE
CORPORATIONS 1-10; and DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-1855)
 
AMENDED MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee State of Hawai' i 
(State) appeals from the Final Judgment entered on November 17,
 
2009 (Judgment), by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court),
1
 in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant
Robert D. Johnson, Jr. (Plaintiff),2
 as co-guardian of Michael A.
Johnson (Michael), and against the State and Defendant-Appellee
 Jason J. Mossholder-Brom (Mossholder-Brom). The State contends
 
that Plaintiff's suit is barred by the applicable statute of
 
limitations. Plaintiff cross-appeals from the Judgment,
 
1/
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided.
 
2/
 Robert Johnson is Michael Johnson's father.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
challenging numerous factual findings and the Circuit Court's
 
award of only limited special damages, as well as the denial of
 
Plaintiff's request for attorneys' fees.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. Michael's Referral to Rainbow House
 
Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 334-2
 
(2010), the State's Department of Health (DOH) is mandated to
 
"foster and coordinate a comprehensive mental health system [.]" 
HRS chapter 334 further directs DOH to 
promote and provide for the establishment and operation of a
community-based mental health system responsive to the needs
of persons of all ages, ethnic groups, and geographical
areas of the State, reflective of an appropriate
distribution of resources and services, and monitored and
evaluated in terms of standards, goal attainment, and
outcomes.
 
HRS § 334-3(a) (2010). In 1974, the Hawai' i State Legislature 
(Legislature) enacted legislation that established the 
responsibility for children's mental health services with DOH. 
1974 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 211, § 1 at 469-72. The Child and 
Adolescent Mental Health Division (CAMHD) was established within 
DOH to "coordinate the effective and efficient delivery of mental 
health services to children and youth, including services 
provided by private nonprofit agencies under contract to the 
department of health, and be responsible for the development and 
implementation of centralized and highly specialized programs for 
children and youth." HRS § 321-172 (2010). 
Pursuant to the foregoing authority, in 1999, the State
 
entered into an agreement with Rainbow House to provide
 
"community-based treatment mental health services to children" as
 
part of the State's statutorily mandated community-based mental
 
health care system.
 
Michael was born on October 4, 1986, and suffers from,
 
inter alia, mild mental retardation, ADHD, Tourette's Disorder,
 
Oppositional Defiant Disorder, and Mood Disorder. From
 
kindergarten through the tenth grade, Michael was enrolled in
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
special education classes with the State Department of Education
 
(DOE). During Michael's tenth grade year, he experienced a series
 
of behavioral episodes that required hospitalization. 
Specifically, in October 2001, following an attempted suicide and
 
an argument with his father, Michael was admitted to Kahi Mohala
 
Acute Inpatient Services for psychiatric treatment. Michael's
 
treating physician completed a psychiatric evaluation and
 
recommended that Michael be placed in a structured group home
 
with ongoing individual therapy and medication management.
 
On November 5, 2001, DOE notified Michael's parents
 
that it was not able to meet Michael's needs and that his
 condition required monitoring and intervention by DOH. Michael
 
was registered with the Leeward Oahu Family Guidance Center
 
(LOFGC), a satellite office of CAMHD, and a team of individuals
 
recommended that the DOH provide assistance for Michael based on
 
his suicidal tendencies, his need for "continual monitoring
 
throughout a 24 [hour] period," his need for "an intense level of
 
medication monitoring," and the possibility that he may need
 
"cognitive restructuring therapy[.]" In response to the
 
recommendation, DOH indicated that it would review a copy of the
 
attending hospital's evaluation and make a determination of
 
Michael's level of need.
 
DOH subsequently developed a "Coordinated Service Plan"
 
(CSP) with the initial goal of putting Michael in a stable home
 
environment. In order to meet this goal, the CSP stated that DOH
 
would place Michael in a "group home placement" which provides
 
"intensive psychotherapy with a therapist" to help address
 
Michael's poor social skills with peers, oppositional behavior,
 
and his tolerance to frustration. On February 8, 2002, CAMHD
 
informed the LOFGC that referral of Michael to Rainbow House was
 
clinically appropriate.
 
3
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On February 13, 2002, Michael was admitted to Rainbow
 
House. While there, Mossholder-Brom acted as Michael's personal
 
and family therapist.3 Between November 23, 1999 and January
 
2002, Mossholder-Brom had been misrepresenting himself as a
 
qualified mental health care professional on treatment records
 
provided to CAMHD. When Michael was referred to Rainbow House,
 
CAMHD had not yet obtained documentation of Mossholder-Brom's
 
qualifications. Although Mossholder-Brom was given "full
 
credential status" based on a meeting of CAMHD's credentialing
 
committee, his credentialing status was rescinded on June 1,
 
2002, based on clear evidence regarding the misrepresentation of
 
his qualifications.
 
On April 11, 2000, approximately two years prior to
 
Michael's referral to Rainbow House, all referrals to Rainbow
 
House were suspended due to a lack of clinical oversight and
 
inadequate staffing. There are no records indicating that
 
Rainbow House corrected the clinical oversight and staffing
 
deficiencies leading to the suspension of referrals. Further
 
information received by CAMHD indicated that a staff member at
 
Rainbow House had engaged in inappropriate sexual misconduct with
 
a child, and that Rainbow House was in violation of its licensing
 
requirements because there were too many youths housed there. 
Moreover, during the time prior to and including the time period
 
when CAMHD determined it was clinically appropriate to refer
 
Michael to Rainbow House, Rainbow House was not in compliance
 
with CAMHD's reporting requirements. Michael's parents were not
 
informed of the deficiencies at Rainbow House or the allegations
 
of sexual assault by Rainbow House staff prior to CAMHD's
 
referral.
 
3/
 On April 2, 2009, the Circuit Court entered default judgment
against Mossholder-Brom pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP)
Rule 55(a). 
4
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Beginning approximately two months after Michael's
 
placement at Rainbow House, Mossholder-Brom engaged in sexual
 
acts with Michael that included multiple incidents of oral sex
 
and at least one instance of anal sex.
 
On May 16, 2002, Michael was examined by the clinical
 
director of the LOFGC, Dr. John Viesselmann (Dr. Viesselmann).
 
Dr. Viesselmann noted, amongst other things, that Michael was
 
preoccupied with getting out of the Rainbow House program and had
 
expressed concerns about his sexual interests.
 
On August 31, 2002, Michael was involved in a group-sex
 
incident, involving six youths residing at Rainbow House, in one
 of the facility's dormitory rooms. On September 26, 2002,
 
Michael reported to his LOFGC care coordinator what had happened
 
during the group-sex encounter, including information that
 
Rainbow House had consented to an unsupervised gathering in the
 
dormitory room, and that he had been forced to perform sex acts
 
with two other youths. No formal complaints were filed based on
 
information from Rainbow House that they had taken "appropriate
 
corrective action." Rainbow House's internal investigation of
 
the incident, and all interviews related to the incident, were
 
conducted by Mossholder-Brom. There is no indication in the
 
record that Michael was provided psychosexual counseling or
 
treatment relating to the group-sex incident. 
Mossholder-Brom was released from his employment at
 
Rainbow House on or about October 18, 2002.
 
On or about October 21, 2002, Michael was hospitalized
 
at Kahi Mohala after he attempted to run into traffic and kill
 himself. Medical records of Michael's hospitalization note that
 
he had become "quite attached" to his therapist at Rainbow House,
 
and that he was distraught that the therapist was no longer
 
working with Michael. A CSP, dated November 8, 2002, indicates
 
that Michael was returned to Rainbow House after the October
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hospitalization. It is not clear from the record when Michael
 
was ultimately discharged from Rainbow House.
 
Approximately one year later, on or about October 2,
 
2003, Michael reported to his then-psychotherapist, Carolyn
 
Carlson (Dr. Carlson), for the first time, that he had been
 
sexually assaulted by Mossholder-Brom on multiple occasions
 
during his residency at Rainbow House. Michael later testified
 
that he told Dr. Carlson about the sexual relationship with
 
Mossholder-Brom because he felt what had happened "was wrong,"
 
"[b]ecause I was a minor and he was an adult and – and I had like
 
. . . bad dreams about it." Dr. Carlson then relayed the
 
information about the sexual abuse to Michael's parents.
 
B.	 Proceedings Below
 
On October 3, 2007, Plaintiff filed a complaint with
 
4
the Circuit Court against Defendants Rainbow House,  Mossholder-
Brom, and the State.5 In the complaint, Plaintiff asserted a
 
claim of negligence against Rainbow House and the State for
 
"negligently hiring, training, retaining and supervising
 
Defendant Jason Brom[,]" and for providing "inadequate care and
 
treatment for Michael," "breaching standards of care," failing
 
"to provide effective oversight of the mental health care
 
services provided to Michael," and for "the failure of the State
 
4/
 On March 10, 2009, a stipulation for partial dismissal with
prejudice was filed as to all claims by Plaintiff against Rainbow House.
 
5/
 Pursuant to HRS § 671-12(a) (1993), "any person or the person's
representative claiming that a medical tort has been committed shall submit a
statement of the claim to the medical claim conciliation panel before a suit
based on the claim may be commenced in any court of this State." Plaintiff
 
submitted a claim with the medical claim conciliation panel (MCCP) on October
3, 2006. Pursuant to HRS § 671-18, the filing of a claim with the MCCP "shall
toll any applicable statute of limitations" for a maximum of twelve months
from the date the claim was filed. HRS § 671-18 (Supp. 2011). If a decision
 by the MCCP is not reached within twelve months, "the statute of limitations
shall resume running and the party filing the claim may commence a suit based
on the claim in any appropriate court of this State." Id. On October 1,
2007, the MCCP notified Plaintiff of its inability "to convene a hearing for
the matter before the tolling period lapses and the statute of limitations
recommences," and therefore, after October 3, 2007, Plaintiff was able to
"pursue any appropriate legal remedies through the judicial system." 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to provide safe and therapeutic mental health care for Michael
 
following the sexual assault by Defendant Jason Brom[.]"
 
Plaintiff sought general, special, and punitive damages, and
 
costs.
 
On December 6, 2007, the State filed a motion to
 
dismiss Plaintiff's complaint as barred by the expiration of the
 
statute of limitations under the State Tort Liability Act, HRS
 
Chapter 662. On April 8, 2008, Plaintiff filed their opposition
 
to the State's motion to dismiss, claiming that the claims are
 
"medical torts" governed by a six-year limitations period, and
 
therefore, the complaint is timely filed. A hearing on the
 
motion to dismiss was held on April 16, 2008. At the hearing,
 
the Circuit Court determined that "the law does define a medical
 
tort in the context which is applicable here to include Mr.
 
Mossholder-Brom as an employee of Rainbow [House,]" and the
 
State's motion to dismiss was denied as the complaint was filed
 
within the six-year limitations period governing medical torts.
 
The order denying the State's motion to dismiss was filed on
 
April 23, 2008.
 
A non-jury trial on the merits was held from September
 
14, 2009 through September 21, 2009. At the hearing, Plaintiff
 
presented testimony from nine witnesses, including Michael, his
 
parents, and expert testimony from Dr. Carlson, Dr. Daryl
 
Matthews (Dr. Matthews), and rehabilitation nurse Karen Klemme,
 
regarding Michael's injuries and recommendations for future
 
treatment. Following the close of Plaintiff's case, the State
 
did not present any evidence and, after the filing of certain
 
motions (which were denied), rested its case. After an oral
 
ruling on September 21, 2009, the Circuit Court entered its
 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law on October 20, 2009. 
The Circuit Court concluded that the State was required
 
by law to establish and operate a community-based mental health
 
care system, to monitor and evaluate the quality of health care,
 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and to ensure accountability for services provided through the
 
community-based mental health care system. The Circuit Court
 
further concluded that CAMHD is required by law to coordinate the
 
effective and efficient delivery of mental health services to
 
youths like Michael, and that it had a duty to "exercise ordinary
 
care in checking the credentials of care providers at Rainbow
 
House (including Mossholder-Brom) in referring Michael to Rainbow
 
House, and in providing oversight of the services provided by
 
Rainbow House." The Circuit Court also concluded that CAMHD had
 
a duty of care, as a health care provider, to meet the applicable
 
professional standard of care, to protect Michael from
 
foreseeable harm, and to promptly and fully investigate
 
allegations that Mossholder-Brom misrepresented his credentials
 
and engaged in misconduct.
 
Based on these findings and conclusions, the Circuit
 
Court determined that CAMHD was negligent and violated its duties
 
of care, and that this negligence was a legal cause of the
 
injuries suffered by Michael at Rainbow House. The Circuit Court
 
further determined that the damages suffered by Michael were
 
"reasonably foreseeable to the State" and that the State's
 
negligence "was a legal cause of the sexual assaults committed by
 
Mossholder-Brom, and the State and Mossholder-Brom are jointly
 
and severally liable for Michael's damages." The Circuit Court
 
further determined that Michael suffered "compensable
 
psychological injury and emotional distress resulting from
 
Mossholder-Brom abusing his position of trust and taking
 
advantage of Michael in an intimate and self-defining way," and
 
that Michael also suffered compensable psychological injury and
 
emotional distress "when he felt abandoned by Mossholder-Brom
 
after attempting unsuccessfully to locate him . . . resulting in
 
a feeling of unrequited love after Mossholder-Brom left Rainbow
 
House." The State does not challenge any of these findings
 
and/or conclusions.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court awarded Plaintiff $4,000 in special
 
damages for psychosexual or neuropsychological testing, but did
 
"not award other special damages for past or future treatment of
 
any kind." The Circuit Court further awarded Plaintiff $200,000
 
in general damages for Michael's psychological injury and
 
emotional distress. 
On October 6, 2009, Plaintiff filed a motion for
 
6
attorney's fees pursuant to HRS § 662-12 (1993)  and costs
pursuant to HRS § 662-9 (1993).7 Plaintiff sought attorney's
 
fees in the amount of $
74,184.82, or 25% of the total judgment,
 
and $18,554.48 in costs. On October 16, 2009, the State filed
 
its opposition to Plaintiff's request for costs and attorney's
 
fees, arguing that the request for fees should be denied in its
 
entirety as fees should be paid out of the judgment awarded to
 
Plaintiff, and that costs be adjusted to remove charges that are
 
"not awardable." On October 16, 2009, Plaintiff submitted a
 
supplemental memorandum to revise the requested cost award "based
 
on an additional cost item." The revised motion requested a
 
total of $19,466.43 in costs, reflecting the addition of $911.95
 
in witness travel costs.
 
On November 4, 2009, the Circuit Court filed its order
 
granting in part and denying in part Plaintiff's motion for
 attorney's fees and costs. The Circuit Court awarded Plaintiff
 
costs in the amount of $11,742.61, and denied the request for
 
attorney's fees pursuant to HRS § 662-12.
 
Final judgment was entered on November 17, 2009, in
 
favor of Plaintiff and against the State and Mossholder-Brom. 
6/
 HRS § 662-12 provides, in relevant part, that "[t]he court
rendering a judgment for the plaintiff pursuant to this chapter . . . may . .
. determine and allow reasonable attorney's fees[.]" 
7/
 HRS § 662-9 provides, "[i]n an action under this chapter, court
costs and fees as set by law may be allowed to the prevailing party."
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State filed its notice of appeal on December 15, 2009. On
 
December 28, 2009, Plaintiff filed a notice of cross-appeal.
 
II.	 POINTS OF ERROR
 
The State raises a single point of error, contending
 
that "[t]he trial court erred by denying the State's motion to
 
dismiss."8
 
Plaintiff raises three points of error: 
(1) contending that the Circuit Court clearly erred
 
when it entered Findings of Fact (FOFs) 67-74,
 
67.	 The Court finds that Michael does not require a course
of residential psychosexual treatment or any other
treatment for any injury resulting from the conduct of
Mossholder-Brom.
 
68.	 The Court finds that Michael is not now (and not
likely to become) a sexual predator.
69.	 The Court does not find Dr. Matthews' opinions
credible regarding Michael's need for future
residential psychosexual treatment or the likelihood
that without such treatment Michael will become a
 predator or be victimized himself.
70.	 The Court finds that Plaintiff has not proven by a
preponderance of the evidence that future residential
psychosexual treatment (or any other treatment that he
would not have needed in the absence of the torts at
 issue here) is appropriate or necessary.
71.	 The Court does not find Michael's testimony credible
regarding his desire for future treatment and his
willingness to go to California and be away from his
family.
72.	 The Court finds that there is no evidence Michael has
 any idea that residential psychosexual treatment would
mean that he essentially would be imprisoned for five
to eight years and maybe as much as ten years.
73.	 The Court finds it appropriate for the Court to
counsel Michael that there is nothing illegal, wrong
or bad about a) being attracted to other people his
age who are male or older or b) having a lot of sexual
contact, a lot of anal intercourse, a lot of oral
intercourse, but noting that as a matter of science
such conduct is one of the main ways of communicating
AIDS, which is a deadly disease.
74.	 The Court finds it appropriate for the Court to
counsel Michael that when he has unprotected sex or
engages the services of male or female prostitutes he
is putting himself, that person and anyone else they
contact at risk, and that right now there is nothing
 
8/
 We note that the State, although represented by the Department of
the Attorney General of Hawai' i, failed to comply with the requirements of 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4), merely stating the
alleged error and failing to address any of the other requirements of therule. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
available to cure AIDS, and the Court is personally
well aware of this fact as the presiding judge has
lost two friends to AIDS.
 
and oral findings that
 
So it comes down to [] Dr. Matthews who opined that this
young man is likely to become a predator.
 
I do not find the testimony of Dr. Matthews credible that
Michael is a predator who will act out.
 
(2) contending that, based on the foregoing erroneous
 
FOFs, the Circuit Court erred in Conclusion of Law (COL) 75,
 
The Court awards Plaintiff $4,000.00 in special damages for
psychosexual or neuropsychological testing as recommended by
Plaintiff's expert psychiatrist, Dr. Matthews. The Court
 does not award other special damages for past or future
treatment of any kind.
 
and
 
(3) contending that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion when it denied Plaintiff's request for an award of
 attorney's fees.
 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"In this jurisdiction, a trial court's FOFs are subject 
to the clearly erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly 
erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the 
appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction 
that a mistake has been committed." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the 
Employees' Ret. Sys. of the State of Hawai' i, 106 Hawai' i 416, 
430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) (citations, internal quotation 
marks and ellipses omitted) (quoting Allstate Ins. Co. v. Ponce, 
105 Hawai' i 445, 453, 99 P.3d 96, 104 (2004)). "An FOF is also 
clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding. [The Hawai' i Supreme Court has] defined 
"substantial evidence" as credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of 
reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Leslie v. Estate of 
Tavares, 91 Hawai' i 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 1225 (1999) 
11
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting State
 
v. Kotis, 91 Hawai' i 319, 328, 984 P.2d 78, 87 (1999)). 
Findings of fact are not to be viewed in isolation, but
 
are "to be construed so as to render them complete and internally
 
consistent, thus avoiding a reversal on purely technical
 
grounds." Iaea v. Iaea, 59 Haw. 648, 650, 586 P.2d 1015, 1016
 
(1978). Further, in examining allegedly inconsistent findings of
 fact, the appellate court will construe the circuit court's
 
findings, "where reasonably possible, to uphold rather than to
 
defeat its judgment." 
Id. 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness. [The appellate
court] ordinarily reviews COLs under the right/wrong
standard. Thus, a COL that is supported by the trial
court's FOFs and that reflects an application of the correct
rule of law will not be overturned. However, a COL that
presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under
the clearly erroneous standard because the court's
conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances
of each individual case.
 
Chun, 106 Hawai' i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353 (citations, internal 
quotation marks and brackets in original omitted) (quoting Ponce, 
105 Hawai' i at 453, 99 P.3d at 104). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 A. The Applicable Statute of Limitations
 
The State argues that Plaintiff's claims against the
 
State, which were first brought before the MCCP on September 25,
 
2007, are time-barred by Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 662-4
 
(1993), because Michael's injuries occurred in 2002 and were
 
discovered no later than October of 2003.
 
HRS § 662-4 provides:
§ 662-4 Statute of limitations. A tort claim
 
against the State shall be forever barred unless action is
begun within two years after the claim accrues, except in
the case of a medical tort claim when the limitation of
 action provisions set forth in section 657-7.3 shall apply.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State argues (1) that Plaintiff's claim is not a
 
medical tort and therefore HRS § 657-7.3 does not apply, and (2)
 
even if it is a medical tort, it is time-barred by the HRS § 657­
7.3. We address each of these in turn.
 
1. Medical tort
 
Plaintiff's claim is a medical tort. The term "medical
 
9
tort" is defined in HRS § 671-1(2) (1993)  as follows:
"Medical tort" means professional negligence, the
rendering of professional services without informed consent,
or an error or omission in professional practice, by a
health care provider, which proximately causes death,
injury, or other damage to a patient.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The term "health care provider" is defined in HRS
 
§ 671-1(1) (1993)10 as follows:
 
"Health care provider" means a physician or surgeon
licensed under chapter 453, a physician and surgeon licensed
under chapter 460, a podiatrist licensed under chapter 463E,
a health care facility as defined in section 323D-2, and the
employees of any of them. Health care provider shall not
mean any nursing institution or nursing service conducted by
and for those who rely upon treatment by spiritual means
through prayer alone, or employees of such institution or
service.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The term "health care facility" is defined in HRS
 
§ 323D-2 (2010) as follows:
 
"Health care facility" and "health care service"
include any program, institution, place, building, or
agency, or portion thereof, private or public, other than
federal facilities or services, whether organized for profit
or not, used, operated, or designed to provide medical
diagnosis, treatment, nursing, rehabilitative, or preventive
care to any person or persons. The terms include, but are
not limited to, health care facilities and health care
services commonly referred to as hospitals, extended care
 
9/
 HRS § 671-1(1), but not HRS § 671-1(2), was amended in 2009. See
 
2009 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 151, § 25 at 438; 2009 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 151, § 67
at 33.
 
10/
 In 2009, the definition of "health care provider" in HRS § 671-1
was amended to add "physician assistant" and "osteopathic physician," and to
omit "physician and surgeon licensed under chapter 460." See 2009 Haw. Sess.
 
Laws Act 151, § 25 at 438; 2009 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 151, § 67 at 33. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and rehabilitation centers, nursing homes, skilled nursing
facilities, intermediate care facilities, hospices for the
terminally ill that require licensure or certification by
the department of health, kidney disease treatment centers
including freestanding hemodialysis units, outpatient
clinics, organized ambulatory health care facilities,
emergency care facilities and centers, home health agencies,
health maintenance organizations, and others providing
similarly organized services regardless of nomenclature.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The State argues:
 
The State referred Michael to Rainbow House. Rainbow
 
House through Mossholder-Brom's actions were the proximate
cause of Michael's injury. The State's referral was not a
medical tort, thus HRS § 657-7.3 does not apply to
[Plaintiff's] claims against the State.
 
This argument is without merit. The Circuit Court 
found and concluded, and the State does not challenge, inter 
alia, that: (1) on or about January 23, 2002, "DOH assumed the 
responsibility of placing Michael in a structured group home 
capable of providing 'intensive psychotherapy with a therapist' 
and ongoing medication management by a psychiatrist"; (2) Michael 
was admitted to Rainbow House on February 13, 2002, with 
Mossholder-Brom acting as his personal and family therapist; (3) 
the State was required by law to coordinate effective and 
efficient delivery of mental health services to Michael; (4) the 
State had a duty to meet the applicable professional standard of 
care for the mental health treatment Michael received; and (5) 
the State's "negligence was a legal cause of the injuries 
suffered by Michael at Rainbow House, as it was not clinically 
appropriate to refer Michael to Rainbow House and Michael would 
not have been exposed to Mossholder-Brom or other inadequately 
supervised residents of Rainbow House if the necessary 
credentialing and oversight had been followed." These 
unchallenged findings and conclusions clearly indicate that the 
State was acting as a health care provider and that the 
allegations against the State constitute a medical tort pursuant 
to Hawai' i's statutes and as previously interpreted by Hawai' i 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
courts. See, e.g., Garcia v. Kaiser Found. Hosps., 90 Hawai' i 
425, 438, 978 P.2d 863, 876 (1999); Dubin v. Wakuzawa, 89 Hawai' i 
188, 194, 970 P.2d 496, 502 (1998); Doe v. City & Cnty. of 
Honolulu, 93 Hawai' i 490, 499-02, 6 P.3d 362, 371-74 (App. 2000). 
2. HRS § 657-7.3
 
When a claim asserted against the State alleges a
 
medical tort, HRS § 657-7.3 is applied. Having concluded that
 Plaintiff's claim is a medical tort, we review the State's
 
argument that Plaintiff's action is, nevertheless, time-barred by
 
11HRS § 657-7.3. HRS § 657-7.3 (1993)  provides: 

§ 657-7.3 Medical Torts; limitation of actions; time.
  
No action for injury or death against a [health care
provider] . . . shall be brought more than two years after
the plaintiff discovers, or through the use of reasonable
diligence should have discovered, the injury, but in any
event not more than six years after the date of the alleged
act or omission causing the injury or death. This six-year
time limitation shall be tolled for any period during which
the person has failed to disclose any act, error, or
omission upon which the action is based and which is known
to the person.
 
Actions by a minor shall be commenced within six years
from the date of the alleged wrongful act except the actions
by a minor under the age of ten years shall be commenced
within six years or by the minor's tenth birthday, whichever
provides a longer period. . . . 
The time limitation shall
 
also be tolled for any period during which the minor's
injury or illness alleged to have arisen, in whole or in
part, from the alleged wrongful act or omission could not
have been discovered through the use of reasonable
diligence.
 
Relying on the first paragraph of HRS § 657-7.3, and
 
dismissing the applicability of the second paragraph, the State
 
in effect argues that the statute bars all claims brought more
 
than two years after the discovery of the injury, notwithstanding
 
the minority of the injured person. We reject this argument. 
11/
 HRS § 657-7.3 was amended in 2010 to change a reference (omitted
here as irrelevant) from "naturopath" to "naturopathic physician." See 2010
 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 4, § 9 at 12-13.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The second paragraph of HRS § 657-7.3 specifically
 
applies to actions by minors and provides that an action "shall
 
be commenced within six years from the date of the alleged
 
wrongful act[.]" It is clear from the legislative history, as
 
well as the plain language of the statute, that injured minors 
have no less than six years to seek redress for their injuries. 
See 1986 Haw. Spec. Sess. Laws Act 2, § 15 at 9-10; S. Spec. Com.
 
Rep. No. S5-86, in 1986 Senate Journal, at 28. 
Michael's injuries occurred over the period
 
approximately ranging from February through October of 2002. 
Michael, who was fifteen when he was placed at Rainbow House, was
 
a minor when the wrongful acts occurred. The claims against the
 
State were asserted no later than September of 2007, well within
 
the six-year statute of limitations.
 
B. Plaintiff's Cross-Appeal
 1. The Challenged FOFs and COL
 
Plaintiff challenges eight written findings of fact,
 
FOFs 67-74, entered by the Circuit Court, two related oral
 
findings, and the Circuit Court's related conclusion, COL 75,
 
that, with the exception of certain psychosexual or
 
neuropsychological testing, Plaintiff should not be awarded any
 
special damages for past or future treatment. Because they are
 
inter-related, we consider these findings individually and
 
collectively, as well as in conjunction with the Circuit Court's
 
other findings and conclusions and the whole record of the
 
evidence presented at trial.
 
The challenged findings include the Circuit Court's 
rejection of Dr. Matthews's opinion, as not credible, that 
Michael was or was likely to become a sexual predator. It is 
well-established that "the credibility of witnesses and the 
weight to be given their testimony are within the province of the 
trier of fact and, generally, will not be disturbed on appeal." 
Tamashiro v. Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai' i 86, 92, 34 P.3d 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
16, 22 (2001). There is support in the record for the trial
 
court's finding including Dr. Matthews's testimony that he was
 
not aware of any incident in which Michael had sexually molested
 
someone since his release from Rainbow House. Accordingly, we
 
will not disturb the Circuit Court's assessment of this aspect of
 
Dr. Matthew's testimony.
 
The Circuit Court's findings and determination that
 
Michael did not require any treatment whatsoever for his injury,
 
however, are irreconcilably inconsistent with and contradictory
 
to the Circuit Court's unchallenged findings concerning the
 
injury he suffered, the overwhelming and uncontradicted evidence
 
in the record, the Circuit Court's "counseling" of Michael in
 
FOFs 73 and 74, the award of special damages for future
 
psychosexual or neurophysical testing, and the Circuit Court's
 
award of substantial general damages for Michael's suffering. 
The Circuit Court's unchallenged factual findings12
 
include that: (1) when Michael was referred by the State to
 
Rainbow House, Michael was a minor who suffered from mild mental
 
retardation, ADHD, Tourette's Disorder, and other mental and
 
behavioral problems and required intensive psychotherapy with a
 
therapist and ongoing medication management by a psychiatrist
 
(FOF 4); (2) at Rainbow House, Mossholder-Brom acted as Michael's
 
personal and family therapist (FOF 9); (3) beginning
 
approximately two months after Michael arrived, Mossholder-Brom
 
engaged in multiple instances of oral sex and at least one
 
instance of anal sex with Michael (FOF 24); (4) while Michael was
 
at Rainbow House, a clinical director for the State noted that
 
Michael seemed sluggish and drowsy, abnormal blood work had not
 
been addressed, Michael should have been seen by a clinical
 
12/
 These findings of fact are set forth in the Circuit Court's
October 20, 2009, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law. We note that some
 
of them are categorized by the Circuit Court as conclusions of law, but would
more accurately be considered findings of fact or mixed determinations of fact
and law. As none of the these findings and conclusions are challenged by the
State, and their characterization is not relevant to our analysis, we need not
address their specific designations.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
psychiatrist much sooner than he had, given the medication he was
 
receiving, that Michael was preoccupied with getting out of the
 
program, and that Michael was concerned about his sexual
 
interests (although no mention was made about the sexual contact
 
with Mossholder-Brom) (FOF 29); (5) while at Rainbow House,
 
Michael was also involved in a group-sex incident in which
 
Michael reportedly was forced to perform oral sex on at least two
 
other residents and after which Michael was physically assaulted
 
by one of the residents involved in the incident; Michael
 
received no psychosexual counseling or treatment relating to this
 
incident (FOFs 34 & 41); (6) several months into his residence at
 
Rainbow House, after the group-sex incident (and during the
 
period of Mossholder-Brom's sexual activities with Michael), it
 
was reported that Michael "had been redirected away from
 
sexually-oriented ideas and conversations on more than one
 
occasion" (FOF 38); (7) within days of Mossholder-Brom being
 
fired, Michael attempted to kill himself, had to be hospitalized,
 
and reportedly was distraught that his therapist was no longer
 
working with him (FOFs 44 & 45); (8) approximately one year
 
later, Michael told his new therapist, Dr. Carlson, that "he had
 
been sexually assaulted by Mossholder-Brom on multiple occasions
 
and that he knew what Mossholder-Brom had done was wrong" (FOF
 
48); (9) the State was negligent and the State's negligence was a
 
legal cause of injuries suffered by Michael at Rainbow House,
 
specifically including the sexual assaults committed by
 
Mossholder-Brom, who was "unqualified as a therapist and
 
committed repeated tortious acts of non-consentual sexual
 
touching, injurious mental health care treatment and infliction
 
of emotional distress" (COLs 60, 61, 63, 64); (10) that Michael
 
suffered compensable psychological injury and emotional distress
 
resulting from Mossholder-Brom abusing his position of trust and
 
taking advantage of Michael in an intimate and self-defining way
 
(COL 65); and (11) that Michael suffered compensable
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
psychological injury and emotional distress when he felt
 
abandoned by Mossholder-Brom (COL 66).
 
In addition, although not incorporated in the Circuit
 
Court's FOFs and COLs, the evidence in the record includes: (1)
 
prior to the sexual incidents with Mossholder-Brom and the group-
sex incident, Michael had never had sex with anyone; (2) since
 
then, Michael has reported "bad dreams" about what Mossholder-
Brom had done to him, which were continuing at the time of trial;
 
(3) Michael testified that he "really need[s] help" about his 
"sexual issues", that he has a "sex problem", that he looks for 
sex on the internet, that he goes to public bathrooms, beaches, 
video/porn shops, and that he wants to stop doing that; (4) 
Michael testified that he has unprotected sex because he asks the 
people if they have AIDS/HIV and they said no; (4) Michael's 
therapist, Dr. Carlson, testified that, because of his Tourettes, 
Michael can become overly focused and perseverate, "meaning that 
he becomes compulsive and obsessed with ideas, people, events, or 
things he wants" and is unable to stop; (5) Dr. Carlson, who 
worked with Michael over an 18-month period, testified that 
"because the [sexual] abuse happened when it did, it messed up 
[Michael's] perception of boundaries and what he has the right to 
say yes or no to and what adults want from him . . . it just 
lifted the sexual compulsions to a [] pathological level"; (6) 
Dr. Carlson further testified that Michael was perseverating 
about "getting out in the world and hooking up" and was 
repeatedly suicidal or threatened suicide; (7) Carlson testified 
that, for Michael to deal with his perseveration over sexual 
activity, he needs a comprehensive program "run by adults who 
have the ability to have significant boundaries with him and 
model for him appropriate ways of interacting"; she was not aware 
of any facilities like that in Hawai' i; (8) Dr. Matthews 
testified that, although Michael had behavioral problems prior to his admission to Rainbow House, there had been no indication of 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sexual misbehavior, sexual aggression, or sexual identity
 
confusion; (9) Dr. Matthews testified that Mossholder-Brom choked
 
and punched Michael during sexual activity and would undergo
 
"aggressive sexual behavior towards each other"; after that, on
 
one occasion that Dr. Matthews was aware of, Michael developed an
 
erection while he was being restrained, all of which Dr. Matthews
 
viewed as indicative of a paraphilic interest in violence (an
 
arousal pattern associated with violence); (10) Dr. Matthews
 
further testified that, after the sexual molestation incidents at
 
Rainbow House, Michael became "somewhat hypersexual," disregarded
 
any conventional sexual boundaries, was seeking sex in video
 
emporia, public restrooms, through the internet, and had
 
unprotected sex with adults and possibly youths; (11) Dr.
 
Matthews testified to the distinction between Michael's
 
underlying problems and the problems that flowed from the sexual
 
molestation; and (12) Dr. Matthews testified that the goals for
 
Michael's treatment included reducing the sexual acting-out
 
behavior and paraphilic behavior, to improve anger management
 
skills and relationship skills, to reduce Michael's tremendous
 
dependence on others for emotional support, and that without
 
"massive intervention" Michael's prognosis was poor.
 
The State called no expert witnesses, nor did it call
 
any other witnesses to testify about Michael's need for treatment
 
for the injuries resulting from the extended period of sexual
 
assaults by his trusted therapist. There were no records,
 
reports or exhibits in evidence contradicting Dr. Carlson's and
 
Dr. Matthews's testimony that Michael needed treatment. The
 
Circuit Court does not point to any evidence in support of the
 
finding that "Michael does not require a course of residential
 
psychosexual treatment or any other treatment for any injury
 
resulting from the conduct of Mossholder-Brom" and we find none.
 
Although concluding that Michael did not need any
 
professional treatment as a result of the sexual abuse and the
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"injurious mental health care treatment and infliction of 
emotional distress" suffered by Michael as a result of the 
State's negligence, the Circuit Court found it "appropriate" for 
the court to "counsel" Michael in FOFs 73 and 74 about the danger 
of AIDs stemming from high-risk behaviors such as "having a lot 
of sexual contact, a lot of anal intercourse, a lot of oral 
intercourse," and/or having "unprotected sex or engag[ing] the 
services of male or female prostitutes". While clearly well-
intended, the Circuit Court's counseling in these findings was 
based on the court's personal experiences and opinions, rather 
than any medical or other expert opinion delivered in this case. 
As Plaintiff argues, the court's substitution of these 
admonitions – given to a mildly retarded person who suffers from 
Tourette's disorder, other mental and behavioral maladies, and 
who has been adjudicated to be an incapacitated person under 
Hawai'i law – for professional treatment is ungrounded in the 
evidence in the record of this case and the law. Albeit in another context, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has noted that "mental 
health counseling, . . . like psychiatric care, is a professional realm beyond the expertise of the judiciary." Lee v. 
Corregedore, 83 Hawai' i 154, 169, 925 P.2d 324, 339 (1996); c.f., 
People v. Amaya, 42 Colo. App. 295, 297, 592 P.2d 1359, 1360 
(1979) (deferring to trial court decision that was supported by 
uncontradicted expert testimony, court held that "[j]udicial 
review of a treatment plan is of a limited nature" and "[l]acking 
expertise in the field of psychiatry, a court may not determine 
whether the best possible decision was made but rather only 
whether the treatment plan was rationally based on pertinent 
information and permissibly implemented"); Gorton v. Johnson, 100 
F.R.D. 801, 803 ("[t]he Court is not unmindful of the fact that
 
it lacks expertise in the area of mental health care, and does
 
not presume to have the ability to second-guess the
 
determinations of experts in the related fields"). In this case,
 
21
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
given the uncontradicted evidence that Michael's psychosexual
 
injuries required treatment, the Circuit Court erred when it, in
 
effect, found it sufficient to counsel Michael in lieu of
 
providing for professional mental health treatment.
 
Finally, we examine the alleged inconsistencies in the
 
damages award set forth in COL 75, wherein the Circuit Court
 
awarded Plaintiff $4,000 in special damages "for psychosexual or
 
neuropsychological testing as recommended by Plaintiff's expert
 
psychiatrist, Dr. Matthews", but did not award other special
 
damages for past or future treatment of any kind. As argued by
 
Plaintiff, the special damages award for testing is based on the
 
following testimony by Dr. Matthews:
 
Q. As a result of the sexual abuse Michael suffered
 
and the sexual aggressiveness that you've described, what
kind of diagnostic testing have you determine[d] that
Michael would need solely related to these issues arising
from sexual molestation?
 
A. Michael needs a thorough psychosexual
evaluation, which he has never had, and that would involve
not only detailed interviewing and psychological testing
related to sexual function issues . . .
 
Q. And what is the frequency of those types of
neuropsychological testing? I mean when is that done? Is
 it a one-time deal? How often is that done?
 
A. This particular testing needs to be done once.
I think that a future therapist may request it to be done
again, by my -- and it might be useful to be done again.
But I believe -- I think the treatment plan specifies that
we do that once.
 
. . . .
 
Q. And you mentioned the need for a full
neuropsychological testing at the outset. Is that something
that would be necessitated solely as a result of the sexual
molestation he suffered at Rainbow House?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And you mentioned that following his treatment
program, he might need again a neuropsychological testing.
Would that be solely related to his molestation while at
Rainbow House?
 
A. It would.
 
The cost of this testing was established through
 
the testimony of Karen Klemme, a board-certified rehabilitation
 
registered nurse and board-certified nurse life care planner, who
 
collaborated with Dr. Matthews "to determine how [Dr. Matthews's]
 
treatment plan could be implemented and the costs associated with
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his treatment plan." Karen Klemme testified that the costs for
 
the neuropsychological testing was $2,000 and the costs for the
 
psychosexual testing was in a range between $2,000 and $5,000.
 
Plaintiff submits that the award of special damages for
 
"psychosexual or neuropsychological testing as recommended by
 
Plaintiff's expert psychiatrist, Dr. Matthews" is completely
 
irreconcilable with the conclusion that Michael does not need any
 
future care or treatment whatsoever because Dr. Matthews's above-
referenced testimony, in conjunction of his other testimony and
 
the record as whole, can only be understood to require such
 
testing as a step in Michael's treatment. The State acknowledges
 
that Dr. Matthews's treatment plan included pre- and post­
treatment testing, but otherwise ignored the manifest
 
contradictions in the Circuit Court's findings and conclusions,
 
and the clear findings and overwhelming evidence of sexual abuse,
 
substandard care and resulting injuries, instead focusing on the
 
Circuit Court's rejection of Dr. Matthews's opinion that Michael
 
was not, and was not likely to become, a sexual predator or to be
 
victimized.
 
Finally, we take into consideration the Circuit Court's 
unchallenged award (in COL 76) of substantial general damages, in 
the amount of $200,000, for Michael's psychological injury and 
emotional distress. To recover as special damages the value of 
future medical expenses, a plaintiff must provide sufficient 
evidence to show that future medical expenses are necessary and 
the charges reasonable. See, e.g., Condron v. Harl, 46 Haw. 66, 
76, 374 P.2d 613, 619 (1962); Kometani v. Heath, 50 Haw. 89, 95, 431 P.2d 931, 936 (1967). Thus, an award of general damages does 
necessarily contradict a finding of no special damages. 
Hawai'i's appellate courts have, nevertheless, recognized that 
general damages for pain and suffering and special damages for medical expenses "are largely dependent on the same proof." 
Dunbar v. Thompson, 79 Hawai' i 306, 315, 901 P.2d 1285, 1294 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(App. 1995); Kanahele v. Han, 125 Hawai' i 446, 461 n.25, 263 P.3d 
726, 741 n.25 (2011). While the Circuit Court's award of general 
damages of this magnitude for, inter alia, Michael's 
"psychological injury" does not lead to the conclusion that 
Plaintiff is entitled to recover special damages for Michael's 
future treatment stemming from that injury, it adds further 
support to our conclusion that, based on the evidence presented, 
the unchallenged findings, the other special damages awarded, the 
Circuit Court's attempt to counsel Michael, and the entire record 
in this case, we are left with a firm and definite conviction 
that a mistake has been made and the Circuit Court erred in 
finding that Michael does not require a course of residential 
psychosexual treatment or any other treatment for any injury 
resulting from the sexual abuse and other torts established in 
this case. On remand, the Circuit Court shall decide the 
appropriate treatment and corresponding special damages Plaintiff 
is entitled to receive. 
C. Plaintiff's Attorneys' Fees
 Plaintiff contends that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion when it denied Plaintiff's request for attorney's
 fees. In light of our decision to vacate in part and remand this
 
case for further proceedings, we vacate the order denying
 
attorneys' fees to allow further consideration of the issue in
 
conjunction with the trial court's further ruling on the issue of
 
damages.
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate in part and remand
 
this case to the Circuit Court for further proceedings on the
 
issues of special damages and attorney's fees. In all other 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
respects, the Circuit Court's November 17, 2009 Judgment is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 7, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Caron M. Inagaki
Kendall J. Moser Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
James J. Bickerton 
Daniel A. Morris (Bickerton Lee Dang &
Sullivan)
for Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant Associate Judge
25
 