 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30693
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CYNTHIA L. EDWARDS, aka CYNTHIA LYNNETTE EDWARDS, aka CYNTHIA
DESTINY THOMAS, aka DESTINY O'HARA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR NO. 09-1-0392)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Cynthia L. Edwards (Edwards), also 
known as Cynthia Lynnette Edwards, Cynthia Destiny Thomas, and 
Destiny O'Hara, appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence (Judgment) entered on July 30, 2010, by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawaii (State) charged Edwards by indictment with two counts of theft by deception. The indictment alleged that Edwards had committed: (1) second degree theft by obtaining food stamp benefits valued at more than $300 belonging to the State of Hawai' i (Count 1); and (2) first degree theft by 
obtaining supplemental security income benefits valued at more than $20,000 belonging to the United States of America (Count 2). Pursuant to a plea agreement, Edwards pleaded no contest to Count 
1 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1 in return for the State's agreement to dismiss Count 2 and to
 
recommend five years of probation, subject to one year of jail,
 with credit for time served and the remainder of the term stayed
 upon compliance with the conditions of probation. The Circuit
 Court accepted Edwards's no-contest plea and sentenced her to
 probation upon the recommended conditions.
 
On appeal, Edwards contends that: (1) the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion in accepting her no-contest plea without
 inquiring about whether she had a mental health disability; and
 (2) her trial counsel was ineffective for failing to properly
 address her psychological and mental health competency before
 allowing her to plead. We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment.
 
I.
 
Edwards was in custody in Florida when a Hawai' i grand 
jury returned her indictment. In December 2009, Florida authorities placed a detainer on Edwards pursuant to a request by the State. Edwards waived extradition in Florida and was returned to Hawai' i. On May 18, 2010, Edwards appeared in 
Circuit Court and was represented by a Deputy Public Defender (DPD). The DPD requested a bail study. A bail study dated May 18, 2010, stated that "[Edwards] claims to have no mental health, medical, nor physical issues." An updated bail study dated June 22, 2010, revealed that Edwards continued to have no claims regarding mental health, medical, or physical issues. 
On June 29, 2010, the DPD representing Edwards filed a
 
motion seeking an order releasing Edwards on supervised release
 or a reduction in her bail. In support of this motion, the DPD
 submitted the DPD's declaration, which stated, among other
 things:
 
c.	 On June 28, 2010 I personally spoke to Susan Segawa,
the psychiatric social worker at HCCC. Ms. Segawa
expressed her belief that [Edwards's] psychological
and medical condition cannot be adequately treated
while in custody. Ms. Segawa further expressed the
opinion that she does not think [Edwards] is a threat
to herself or others.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
About a month later, on July 26, 2010, Edwards entered
 
a no-contest plea to Count 1. During the plea colloquy, neither
 
Edwards nor the DPD expressed any concern with Edwards's mental
 competence to enter a no-contest plea or advised the Circuit
 Court that Edwards was suffering from a mental health disability
 or illness. Edwards informed the Circuit Court that she was
 thinking clearly, and she advised the Circuit Court that she
 understood the charges and the various matters the Circuit Court
 explained to her. The Circuit Court found that Edwards
 understood the consequences of her plea and that she had
 "knowing[ly], voluntarily, and intelligently entered into this
 plea and waived her right to trial." The Circuit Court accepted
 Edwards's no-contest plea and the parties agreed to proceed
 immediately to sentencing.
 
With respect to Edwards's sentencing, the Circuit Court
 
asked if there was going to be any issue about drug conditions
 and mental health conditions. The prosecutor asked for drug
 conditions "because of her prior" and the defense did not object. 
With respect to mental health conditions, the following
 discussion took place between the Circuit Court, the prosecutor
 and the DPD:
 
THE COURT: . . . [A]re you going to be asking for
mental health conditions? No?
 
[Prosecutor]: She'll probably benefit by an
assessment. I think she'd probably agree to that.
 
Uh, Ms. Segawa is in Court today. She's the social
 
worker in the jail, and I think she believes that [Edwards]
will probably benefit by some type of mental health
assessment.
 
THE COURT: So assessment and treatment?
 
[DPD]: Your Honor, we have no objections. She's been
 
suffering from some headaches and memory loss so she's gonna
be seeking that anyway.
 
THE COURT: Okay, all right.
 
3
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
We resolve Edwards's arguments on appeal as follows:
 
1. The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in 
accepting Edwards's no-contest plea without inquiring about whether she had a mental health disability. See State v. Davia, 
87 Hawai' i 249, 253, 953 P.2d 1347, 1351 (1998) (trial court's 
decision in accepting or rejecting a no contest plea is reviewed for abuse of discretion); State v. Janto, 92 Hawai' i 19, 28, 986 
P.2d 308, 315 (1999) (holding that a trial court's determination of whether a defendant is fit to proceed is reviewed for abuse of discretion). The Circuit Court's plea colloquy complied with Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 11 (2007). HRPP 
Rule 11 does not require that the court specifically inquire about whether the defendant is suffering from a mental health disability. 
Even if we accept that a trial court has a duty to
 
inquire about a defendant's mental competency if there is a good
 
2
faith reason to doubt the defendant's competency,  we conclude,
based on the record in this case, that the Circuit Court was not
 presented with information that created a duty to inquire about
 whether Edwards suffered from a mental health disability before
 accepting her no-contest plea. Edwards contends that the Circuit
 
2 See Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 704-404 (1993 & Supp.
2010) (authorizing a court to order a mental competency
examination if "there is reason to doubt the defendant's fitness to proceed"); Sailer v. Gunn, 548 F.2d 271, 275 (9th Cir. 1977)(holding "that under the due process clause[,] a hearing on adefendant's competence to plead guilty is required if the trialjudge entertains or should reasonably have entertained a good-faith doubt as to [the] competence of the defendant"); UnitedStates v. Denkins, 367 F.3d 537, 545 (6th Cir. 2004) (concluding,under federal statute, that the trial court has a duty to inquireinto a defendant's competency whenever there is reasonable causeto believe that the defendant is incompetent to stand trial);Biggs v. State, 642 S.E.2d 74, 78 (Ga. 2007) (concluding that atrial court has a duty to inquire into a defendant's competencywhen information becomes known to it sufficient to raise a bona 
fide doubt regarding the defendant's competence). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court's obligation to inquire was triggered by the DPD's
 
reference in Edwards's motion for supervised release to a prison
 social worker's belief that Edwards's "psychological and medical
 condition cannot be adequately treated while in custody." We
 disagree. Edwards's supervised release motion, which was filed
 almost a month before the plea hearing, did not identify
 Edwards's alleged "psychological and medical condition" and did
 not indicate that the condition interfered with her mental
 competence to enter a plea. Moreover, during the plea colloquy,
 neither Edwards nor the DPD raised any issue relating to
 Edwards's mental competence to enter a no-contest plea, and the
 plea colloquy does not suggest that Edwards was suffering from
 any mental health disability that would prevent her from entering
 a valid plea. Under these circumstances, the Circuit Court was
 not presented with information that created a duty to ask Edwards
 whether she was suffering from a mental health disability before
 accepting her plea.
 
2. Edwards has failed to meet her burden of showing 
that her trial counsel was ineffective in permitting her to plead no contest. See State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 
1227, 1247 (1998). The record does not reveal evidence that Edwards was suffering from a mental health disability or illness that would prevent her from entering a valid plea. As noted, the DPD's reference in Edwards's supervised release motion to Edwards's alleged psychological and mental condition was not specific and did not indicate that the condition would interfere with Edwards's ability to enter a valid plea. The same is true of the reference in the post-plea sentencing discussion to Edwards's willingness to undergo a mental health assessment because she had been "suffering from some headaches and memory loss." On this record, we cannot say that Edwards's trial counsel was ineffective in permitting Edwards to go forward with the no-contest plea. 
We note that appellate counsel was appointed and
 
substituted for trial counsel after the notice of appeal had been
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
filed. Thus, appellate counsel did not have the opportunity to
 
develop a record to support Edwards's claim of ineffective
 assistance of counsel. Our rejection of Edwards's claim of
 ineffective assistance of counsel is without prejudice to her 
developing an adequate record to support an ineffective
 assistance of counsel claim in subsequent proceedings under HRPP
 Rule 40 (2006). See State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864 P.2d
 
583, 592-93 (1993).
 
III.
 
We affirm the July 30, 2010, Judgment of the Circuit
 
Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 30, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Gale L.F. Ching
(Law Office of Gale L.F.Ching, LLLC)for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Ricky R. DamervilleDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 