FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--­
RICK RALSTON, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
ERROL Y. W. YIM, D.D.S., Defendant-Appellee.
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; and DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants.
 
NO. 30082
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0934)
 
JUNE 28, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., FUJISE and GINOZA, JJ.
 
AMENDED OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Rick Ralston (Ralston) appeals from
 
the Final Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the First
 
1
Circuit (circuit court)  on October 9, 2009.  In this case,
 
Ralston asserts a claim for dental malpractice against Defendant-
Appellee Errol Y.W. Yim, D.D.S. (Dr. Yim), from whom Ralston
 
1
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided.
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
received orthodontic dental care. The circuit court granted
 
summary judgment for Dr. Yim.
 
Plaintiff Ralston raises the following points of error
 
on appeal: (1) the circuit court erred in shifting the burden of
 
proof under the summary judgment standard to Ralston, the non­
moving party, and thus erred in granting Dr. Yim's motion for
 
summary judgment; (2) with respect to Dr. Yim's summary judgment
 
motion, the circuit court erred in failing to find any triable
 
issues in the submissions by the parties, including with regard
 
to the issue of informed consent; and (3) the circuit court erred
 
in granting costs to Dr. Yim because Dr. Yim should not have
 
prevailed on his motion for summary judgment.
 
For the reasons set forth below, we hold that summary
 
judgment was not proper and we therefore vacate the judgment in
 
favor of Dr. Yim.
 
I. Standard of Review
 
"An appellate court reviews an award of summary
 
judgment de novo under the same standard applied by the circuit
 court." Thomas v. Kidani, 126 Hawai' i 125, 127-28, 267 P.3d 
1230, 1232-33 (2011) (citations omitted). The standard for
 
granting a motion for summary judgment is settled: 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
 fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Tri-S Corp. v. W. World Ins. Co., 110 Hawai' i 473, 487, 135 P.3d 
82, 96 (2006) (citations and brackets omitted). 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
This court has further explained the burdens of the moving
and non-moving parties on summary judgment as follows:
 The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue
as to all material facts, which, under applicable
principles of substantive law, entitles the moving party
to judgment as a matter of law. This burden has two
components.
 First, the moving party has the burden of producing
support for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of
material fact exists with respect to the essential
elements of the claim or defense which the motion seeks
 to establish or which the motion questions; and (2) based
on the undisputed facts, it is entitled to summary
judgment as a matter of law. Only when the moving party
satisfies its initial burden of production does the
burden shift to the non-moving party to respond to the
motion for summary judgment and demonstrate specific
facts, as opposed to general allegations, that present a
genuine issue worthy of trial.
 Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving
party and requires the moving party to convince the court
that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that
the moving part is entitled to summary judgment as a
matter of law.
 
Id. at 488, 135 P.3d at 97.
 
II. Circuit Court Proceedings
 
Ralston's complaint was filed on May 9, 2008, with an
 
amended complaint filed on May 13, 2008.
 
On December 16, 2008, Ralston filed his pretrial
 
statement, which stated that "[a] dental expert will be
 
designated upon availability."
 
On April 1, 2009, a Trial Setting Status Conference 
Order was issued by the circuit court which set the trial date 
for September 27, 2010. In the order, deadlines for exchange of 
experts' reports was left blank. The deadline for discovery cut­
off under Rule 12(r) of the Rules of the Circuit Court of the 
State of Hawai' i (RCCH) was set for July 27, 2010. The deadline 
for filing pretrial motions that request entry of judgment or 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
dismissal of any claim, pursuant to RCCH Rule 7(f), was set for
 
August 6, 2010.
 
On April 22, 2009, less than a year after the lawsuit
 
was initiated, Dr. Yim filed a Motion to Dismiss and/or For
 
Summary Judgment. In addition to challenging the circuit court's
 
2
jurisdiction,  Dr. Yim argued that Ralston could not prove his
claim of dental malpractice because Ralston had not disclosed any
 
experts.
 
In opposition to Dr. Yim's motion, Ralston argued that
 
Dr. Yim had not met his initial burden of showing that no genuine
 
issue of material fact existed that his orthodontic care
 
comported with the accepted standard of care and that he had
 
properly obtained Ralston's informed consent. 
Ralston also
 
argued that discovery was ongoing, that the case was in the Court
 Annexed Arbitration Program (CAAP), and the CAAP deadline to
 
exchange expert reports was not until May 22, 2009.
 
An initial hearing on the motion was held on May 13,
 
2009, during which the circuit court noted that by agreement of
 
the parties and because expert reports were due under the CAAP
 
deadline on May 22, 2009, Ralston was allowed to file
 
supplemental briefing by May 27, 2009, Dr. Yim was allowed to
 
file a supplemental reply brief by June 3, 2009, and a further
 
hearing was scheduled for June 17, 2009.
 
On May 20, 2009, Ralston filed his supplemental
 
memorandum in opposition to Dr. Yim's motion. Attached thereto
 
was the declaration of his counsel, to which, in turn, was
 
attached an expert report from Harry Aronowitz, D.M.D.
 
2
 Dr. Yim asserted that the circuit court did not have jurisdiction
because Ralston's claim was not submitted for review to the Medical Claims 
Conciliation Panel (MCCP) under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 671-1 (1993Repl.) and § 671-12 (1993 Repl.). The circuit court denied Dr. Yim's motion 
in this regard and this ruling has not been appealed. From our sua sponte review, we determine that there is jurisdiction. See Williams v. Aona, 121
Hawai'i 1, 8, 210 P.3d 501, 508 (2009). 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(Dr. Aronowitz) and Dr. Aronowitz's curriculum vitae. 
Dr. Aronowitz's report stated in pertinent part:
 
It is my opinion that attempting an ambitious course of
treatment which included space closure following extraction
on a high risk patient such as Mr. Ralston is beneath the
standard of care. It is my opinion as well that treating
this patient without the benefit of periapical radiographs
is a departure from the standard.
 
. . . .
 It is my opinion that Dr. Yim is responsible for the loss of
Mr. Ralston's lower incisors. The combination of an
 aggressive treatment, on a high risk patient, with
significant bone loss, taking a bone altering drug and using
a challenging aligner was enough to cause the tooth loss.
 
On June 3, 2009, Dr. Yim filed his supplemental reply
 
in support of his motion. Therein, Dr. Yim cited to this court's
 
decision in Eddins v. Morrison, 105 Hawai' i 376, 98 P.3d 247 
(App. 2004) and argued that Dr. Aronowitz's opinions were not
 
contained in an affidavit or otherwise presented under oath or
 
penalty of perjury, such that his opinions were inadmissible and
 
summary judgment should be granted.
 
On June 16, 2009, the day prior to the continued
 
hearing, Ralston filed a supplemental exhibit in support of his
 
opposition to the motion. Attached to the declaration of
 
Ralston's counsel was a copy3
 of an affidavit by Dr. Aronowitz,
also signed June 16, 2009 before a notary public in California. 
The copy of Dr. Aronowitz's affidavit stated in pertinent part:
 
3. It is my opinion that attempting an ambitious course
of treatment which included space closure following
extraction on a high risk patient such as Mr. Ralston is
beneath the standard of care.
 
4. It is my opinion as well that treating this patient without
the benefit of periapical radiographs is a departure from the
standard of care.
 
5. It is my opinion that Dr. Yim's treatment of Mr. Ralston
was below the standard of care and this treatment resulted in the
 loss of Mr. Ralston's lower incisors.
 
3
 Dr. Aronowitz's affidavit appears to be a faxed copy.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
A further hearing was held on June 17, 2009, at which
 
the circuit court noted that it had given Ralston leeway, but
 
that under Eddins an attorney cannot authenticate a doctor's
 
opinions. On July 14, 2009, the circuit court entered its order
 
which: struck Ralston's supplemental exhibit filed on June 16,
 
4
 and granted Dr. Yim's
 2009 because it violated RCCH Rule 7(b);
motion for summary judgment "for lack of admissible expert
 
evidence[.]"
 
III. 
Discussion
 
A. Summary Judgment
 
In this appeal, Ralston argues that the circuit court 
erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Dr. Yim because it 
improperly shifted the burden of proof to Ralston, the non-moving 
party. We recognize that the circuit court gave considered 
thought to the matter and allowed Ralston additional time to 
submit his expert's opinion, which Ralston failed to do in a 
manner proper under Rule 56 of the Hawai' i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP). However, because Dr. Yim did not present any evidence as the movant regarding the dental standard of care, and 
because plaintiff Ralston was not yet required to name his 
experts or provide their reports under the circuit court 
deadlines, we conclude that the summary judgment burden was 
improperly shifted to Ralston in this case. Further, it was 
reasonable under the circumstances that Ralston was not yet ready 
to identify experts in response to Dr. Yim's interrogatories and 
thus Dr. Yim could not simply point to Ralston's interrogatory 
responses to satisfy his burden as the summary judgment movant. 
"It is well settled that in medical malpractice
 
actions, the question of negligence must be decided by reference
 
4
 Regarding motions, RCCH Rule 7(b) provides, inter alia , that "[n]o
party may file any papers less than 3 days before the date set for the hearing
unless otherwise ordered by the court."
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to relevant medical standards of care for which the plaintiff 
carries the burden of proving through expert medical testimony." 
Craft v. Peebles, 78 Hawai' i 287, 298, 893 P.2d 138, 149 (1995) 
(emphasis added) (citation omitted). As further explained, 
"[t]he standard of care to which a doctor has failed to adhere 
must be established by expert testimony because a jury generally 
lacks the requisite special knowledge, technical training, and 
background to be able to determine the applicable standard 
without the assistance of an expert." Id. (Citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
As plaintiff, Ralston would thus ultimately be required
 
at trial to present expert testimony in order to establish the
 
standard of care that Dr. Yim allegedly failed to meet. The
 
question in this appeal, however, is whether Ralston was required
 
to adduce such expert evidence in response to Dr. Yim's motion
 
for summary judgment when Dr. Yim did not present any evidence as
 
to the standard of care or that he met the standard of care. 
Instead, Dr. Yim's summary judgment motion simply pointed to
 
Ralston's failure to disclose any experts in response to two
 
discovery requests.
 
In support of his motion for summary judgment, Dr. Yim
 
argued that:
 
despite informal requests and interrogatories directed at
such experts and the opinions to be offered against Dr. Yim,
Plaintiff has disclosed neither the identity of any experts
nor the substance of any opinions to be offered against Dr.
Yim. Consequently, Dr. Yim is entitled to summary judgment
in his favor and against Plaintiff based on well-settled
Hawaii law.
 
Ralston's answers to Dr. Yim's requests for answers to
 
interrogatories, which were attached to Dr. Yim's summary
 
judgment motion, did not disclose any experts at that time and
 
instead stated that an "[e]xpert report will be provided upon
 
availability" and that Ralston "will defer to the expert's
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
opinions."5 Dr. Yim argued that summary judgment was proper
 
because "absolutely no information is disclosed as to any expert
 
or any substantive expert opinion." Dr. Yim also argued that
 
because Ralston "has filed his pretrial statement of readiness
 
and has proceeded to schedule a trial date, it is not premature
 
to hold [Ralston] to his proof."6
 
Throughout the summary judgment proceedings, Ralston
 
argued that Dr. Yim had not carried his burden as the movant
 
seeking summary judgment. Although the circuit court had allowed
 
Ralston additional time to submit his expert report, Ralston
 
argued at the continued hearing that Eddins was distinguishable
 
because, unlike this case, the defendant-movant in Eddins had
 
initially presented affidavits by defense experts opining that
 
there was no medical negligence.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court's rulings in French v. Hawaii 
Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai' i 462, 99 P.3d 1046 (2004) and Exotics 
Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 Hawai' i 
277, 172 P.3d 1021 (2007) are particularly instructive. We also 
agree with Ralston that this court's decision in Eddins is 
distinguishable. Finally, we conclude that the circumstances in 
this case are unlike the circumstances in Celotex Corp. v. 
Catrett, 477 U.S. 317 (1986). 
1. French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc.
 
In French, the plaintiff brought discrimination claims
 
against her employer, including a claim that she was
 
5
 Dr. Yim's first set of interrogatories was dated November 3, 2008
(approximately six months after the complaint was filed) and Ralston responded
on December 8, 2008. Dr. Yim's second set of interrogatories was dated
March 12, 2009 (approximately ten months after the complaint was filed) and
Ralston responded on April 13, 2009.
6
 As noted above, Ralston's Pretrial Statement, filed on December 16,
2008, did not name any expert witnesses. Rather, it stated that "[a] dental
expert will be designated upon availability."
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discriminated against because of a disability, i.e. a medical 
limitation not to lift over twenty-five pounds. The defendant 
filed a summary judgment motion, arguing that the plaintiff did 
not meet her burden of establishing that she was disabled, as 
that term was defined by statute and administrative rules. 105 
Hawai'i at 466, 470, 99 P.3d at 1050, 1054. Considering the 
respective burdens of proof between a summary judgment movant and the non-movant, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that it was the 
defendant's burden, as movant, to produce admissible evidence 
showing plaintiff was not disabled. Id. at 470-71, 99 P.3d at 
1054-55. 
The French court further elaborated that, although the
 
plaintiff may have the burden at trial to prove she suffered from
 
a disability, for purposes of summary judgment the defendant had
 
the burden to show the absence of any genuine issue of material
 
fact on this issue. Id. at 471, 99 P.3d at 1055. In this part
 
of its analysis, the French court distinguished Celotex and
 
relied on Anderson v. Radisson Hotel Corp., 834 F. Supp. 1364
 
(S.D. Ga. 1993), explaining:
 
"[a]lthough Celotex stands for the proposition that under
certain circumstances a summary judgment movant may carry
its burden without presenting evidence negating an element
 of the other party's claim, merely asserting that the
 non-moving party has not come forward with evidence to
 support its claims is not enough." Id. (emphasis in
original and emphasis added). As the court pointed out, "To
repeat: the movant must first demonstrate that the
 non-moving party cannot carry its burden of proof at trial." 
Id. (emphasis in original and emphasis added) (citation
omitted). "The distinction between not placing proof in the
record and not being able to offer proof at trial is
crucial." Id. As emphasized by Justice White in Celotex,
 
[a] plaintiff need not initiate any discovery or
reveal his witness or evidence unless required to do
so under the discovery Rules or by court order. Of
course, he must respond if required to do so; but he
need not also depose his witnesses or obtain their
affidavits to defeat a summary judgment motion
asserting only that he has failed to produce any
support for his case.
 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
477 U.S. at 328, 106 S.Ct. 2548 (White, J., concurring); see
 
also Anderson, 834 F.Supp. at 1368. 
French, 105 Hawai' i at 471-72, 99 P.3d at 1055-56 (underline 
emphasis added).7 
In the instant case, the record reveals that when the
 
summary judgment motion was filed on April 22, 2009 and when the
 
circuit court issued its order granting summary judgment on
 
July 14, 2009, Ralston was not yet required by any discovery rule
 
or by any court order to disclose his expert witnesses or provide
 
their reports or opinions to Dr. Yim. The record indicates that:
 
the scheduled trial date was over a year away, on September 27,
 
8
2010; under RCCH Rule 12(r)  the discovery cut-off deadline was
set for July 27, 2010; and, in turn, the deadline for final
 
naming of witnesses was in May 2010.9 Further, in Ralston's
 
response to Dr. Yim's interrogatories, he did not state he would
 have no experts, but rather that he would provide an expert
 
report upon availability. There is no contention by Dr. Yim
 
that, given the applicable deadlines, Ralston would not have been
 
able to ultimately offer proof at trial by presenting expert
 
testimony on the standard of care.
 
Under the analysis in French, and given the procedural
 
posture of the case when the summary judgment motion was
 considered and decided, Dr. Yim had the initial burden of
 
7 The French court also noted that, unlike in Celotex  where the 
defendant-movant had asked "the clinching question" in discovery and received
a favorable answer, the defendant in French had made no similar showing and
had not even argued that the plaintiff had no evidence to prove a disability.105 Hawai' i at 472, 99 P.3d at 1056.
8
 RCCH Rule 12(r) states that "[d]iscovery shall be cut off 60 days
before the assigned trial date."
9
 RCCH Rule 12(l) states, in relevant part, that "[s]ixty (60) days
prior to the discovery cut off date plaintiff must name all theretofore
unnamed witnesses." 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
presenting evidence showing that there was no genuine issue of
 
material fact that he met the dental standard of care.
 
2.	 Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De
Nemours & Co.
 
Subsequent to French, the Hawai' i Supreme Court decided 
Exotics Hawaii-Kona. There, the supreme court reviewed whether
 
summary judgment for a defendant was proper where the defendant's
 
motion was based on the plaintiffs' inability to prove damages. 
116 Hawai' i at 286-87, 172 P.3d at 1030-31. Given the 
plaintiffs' claims for settlement fraud in that case, the supreme
 court held that expert-lawyer testimony was required on the
 
element of damages. In turn, the supreme court held that the
 
reports by plaintiffs' expert-lawyers, submitted in opposition to
 
the defendant's summary judgment motion, were insufficient as a
 
matter of law to establish damages and thus summary judgment was
 
properly granted for the defendant.
 
The court in Exotics Hawaii-Kona discussed the parties'
 
respective burdens of proof as follows:
 
[a] summary judgment motion challenges the very
 
existence or legal sufficiency of the claim or defense
 to which it is addressed.  In effect, the moving party
takes the position that he or she is entitled to
prevail because his or her opponent has no valid claim
for relief or defense to the action. Accordingly, the
 moving party has the initial burden of identifying
 
those portions of the record demonstrating the absence
 of a genuine issue of material fact. The moving party
 may discharge his or her burden by demonstrating that
 [,] if the case went to trial[,] there would be no
 competent evidence to support a judgment for his or
 her opponent. Cf. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S.
 
317, 106 S.Ct. 2548, 91 L.Ed.2d 265 ... (1986) (a
 party moving for summary judgment under Federal Rules
 of Civil Procedure Rule 56 need not support his or her
 motion with affidavits or similar materials that
 
negate his or her opponent's claims, but need only
 point out that there is [an] absence of evidence to
 support the opponent's claims). For if no evidence
 
could be mustered to sustain the nonmoving party's
position, a trial would be useless.
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12  When a motion for summary judgment is made and supported,
an adverse party may not rest upon the mere
allegations or denials of his or her pleading, but his
or her response, by affidavits or as otherwise
provided in HRCP Rule 56, must set forth specific
facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.
If he or she does not so respond, summary judgment, if
appropriate, shall be entered against him or her.
HRCP Rule 56(e) (1998) (emphasis added).  In other words,
a party opposing a motion for summary judgment cannot
discharge his or her burden by alleging conclusions, nor
is he or she entitled to a trial on the basis of a hope
that he can produce some evidence at that time.  On
motion for summary judgment, the evidence is viewed in
the light most favorable to the non-moving party.
Young v. Planning Comm'n of the County of Kaua# i, 89 Hawai# i
400, 407, 974 P.2d 40, 47 (1999) (internal quotation marks,
citation, and original brackets omitted) (emphases added).
Moreover, "[t]he evidentiary standard required of a moving
party in meeting its burden on a summary judgment motion
depends on whether the moving party will have the burden of
proof on the issue at trial."  Ocwen Fed. Bank, FSB v.
Russell, 99 Hawai# i 173, 182, 53 P.3d 312, 321 (App. 2002)
(citation omitted).  Where the moving party is the
defendant, who does not bear the ultimate burden of proof at
trial, summary judgment is proper when the non-moving
party-plaintiff
fails to make a showing sufficient to establish the
existence of an element essential to that party's case,
and on which that party will bear the burden of proof at
trial.  In such a situation, there can be no genuine
issue as to any material fact, since a complete failure
of proof concerning an essential element of the nonmoving
party's case necessarily renders all other facts
immaterial.  The moving party is entitled to judgment as
a matter of law because the nonmoving party has failed to
make a sufficient showing on an essential element of her
case with respect to which she has the burden of proof.
Hall v. State, 7 Haw. App. 274, 284, 756 P.2d 1048, 1055
(1988) (emphasis added) (internal quotation marks and
citations omitted).
Id. at 301-02, 172 P.3d at 1045-46 (underline emphasis added).
Importantly, it was clear in Exotics Hawaii-Kona  that
when the circuit court had granted summary judgment, the
deadlines for the plaintiffs to submit their final expert reports
had passed  and that the experts would not be allowed to testify
at trial on matters beyond their reports.  Id.  at 287, 302-03,FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
172 P.3d at 1031, 1046-47. In its analysis, the supreme court
 
quoted for a second time a portion of the circuit court's ruling,
 
which stated:
 
[The p]laintiffs have not submitted the expert testimony
required to sustain their burden of proof on the proper
measure of damages in their cases. The deadlines for [the
p]laintiffs to submit their final expert reports and amend
their pleadings were October 15, 2004, and December 14,
2004, respectively. This court previously made clear that
expert reports were to be final and that the experts would
not be allowed to testify on matters beyond their respective
reports in its Order Related to Trial Procedures, filed May
6, 2004. [The p]laintiffs are therefore unable to prove the
fact or amount of settlement fraud damages as a matter of
law, and summary judgment is granted on all remaining claims
herein.
 
Id. at 302-03, 172 P.3d at 1046-47. The circumstances in Exotics 
Hawaii-Kona are thus an example of plaintiffs "not being able to offer proof at trial[.]" French, 105 Hawai' i at 472, 99 P.3d at 
1056. 
Although Dr. Yim relies on Exotics Hawaii-Kona, we 
conclude that the circumstances in this case are distinguishable. 
Even though the CAAP deadlines may have called for the parties to 
exchange their expert reports, CAAP is a separate albeit dual 
track with regard to the circuit court proceedings, and moreover, 
CAAP has the specific purpose "to provide a simplified procedure 
for obtaining a prompt and equitable resolution of certain civil 
matters[.]" Hawai' i Arbitration Rules (HAR) Rule 2(A); see also 
HAR Rule 7. "Arbitration hearings are intended to be informal, 
expeditious and consistent with the purposes and intent of these 
rules." HAR Rule 2(C). Moreover, pursuant to HAR Rule 14, only 
certain discovery is specifically allowed in CAAP proceedings and 
otherwise discovery is at the discretion of the arbitrator. HAR 
Rule 14(A) and (B). 
The only relevant reference to experts in the
 
arbitration rules requires that, in their respective prehearing
 
statements, the parties provide information and copies of reports
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for experts they intend to call as a witness or to use at the
 
arbitration hearing. HAR Rule 16(A)(3). Moreover, HAR Rule 7
 
addresses the relationship of CAAP proceedings to the circuit
 
court's jurisdiction and rules, and expressly maintains the
 
circuit court's jurisdiction and authority as follows:
 
(A) Cases filed in, or removed to, the Circuit Court
shall remain under the jurisdiction of that court for all
phases of the proceedings, including arbitration.
 
(B) Except for the authority to act or interpret these
rules expressly given to the arbitrator, the Arbitration
Administrator, the Judicial Arbitration Commission, or the
Arbitration Judge, all issues shall be determined by the
Circuit Court with jurisdiction.
 
(C) Before a case is submitted or ordered to the Program, and
after a Notice of Appeal and Request for Trial De Novo is filed,
all applicable rules of the Circuit Court and of civil procedure
apply. After a case is submitted or ordered to the Program, and
before a Notice of Appeal and Request for Trial De Novo is filed,
or until the case is removed from the Program, these rules apply.
 
. . .
 
(E) Circuit Court Rule 12(q), and all rules of court or of
civil procedure requiring the filing of pleadings, remain in
effect notwithstanding the fact that a case is under the Program.
 
(F) All dispositive motions shall be made to the Circuit Court
as required by law or rule notwithstanding the fact that a case is
under the Program.
 
HAR Rule 7 (emphasis added). Given HAR Rule 7, and consistent
 
with the distinct purpose of CAAP and its limitations on
 
discovery, an expert report deadline in a CAAP proceeding does
 
not, of its own accord, alter the deadlines for disclosing
 
experts and/or producing expert reports in the circuit court
 
proceedings. In short, expert deadlines set in the CAAP
 
proceeding do not, in the related circuit court proceeding,
 
supersede expert deadlines as ordered by the circuit court or as
 
determined pursuant to court rules.
 
In the circuit court's Trial Setting Status Conference
 
Order, filed on April 1, 2009, the deadline for exchange of
 
expert reports was left blank. Moreover, under the circuit court
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rules, the deadline for Ralston to name his witnesses, including
 
expert witnesses, was still far into the future in May 2010.
 
Therefore, unlike in Exotics Hawaii-Kona, it is not
 
possible to conclude that plaintiff Ralston would be unable to
 carry his burden of proof at trial on the standard of care with
 
expert testimony. At the time summary judgment was granted,
 
Ralston still had time to name his expert witnesses.
 
3. Eddins v. Morrison
 
As noted above, we agree with Ralston that Eddins is
 
distinguishable from the case at bar. In Eddins, this court
 
concluded that summary judgment was proper against a plaintiff in
 
a medical malpractice case because the plaintiff failed to adduce
 
admissible expert evidence on the standard of care. 105 Hawai' i 
at 376-77, 98 P.3d at 247-48. Importantly, however, the
 
defendant doctor in Eddins had met his initial burden as the
 
summary judgment movant by submitting his experts' affidavits on
 
the standard of care.
 
The affidavits attached to the [defendant's] MSJ, of
Torrey Goodman, M.D., and Maurice W. Nicholson, M.D., to the
effect that [defendant's] treatment and handling of Eddins
were reasonable and appropriate and met the applicable
standard of care, had "the effect of ... refuting one of the
essential elements of [Eddins' causes] of action" and thus
established prima facie that there was "no genuine issue as
to any material fact and that [Dr. Morrison was] entitled to
judgment as a matter of law." Id. (citations, internal
quotations marks and block quote formats omitted). See also
 
HRCP Rule 56(c).
 
Thereupon, it was incumbent upon Eddins to "come forward,
through affidavit or other evidence, with specific facts
showing that there is a genuine issue of material fact."
And Eddins had to do so via expert medical testimony, "as
would be admissible in evidence[.]" Eddins failed to do so.
 
Id. at 377, 98 P.3d at 248 (underline emphasis added) (internal
 
footnote, citations and parentheticals omitted). Hence, summary
 
judgment was affirmed in Eddins due to the plaintiff's failure to
 
submit admissible evidence to rebut the defendant doctor's
 evidence that he had met the medical standard of care. Id.
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The instant case differs from Eddins because Dr. Yim,
 
as the movant, did not submit any evidence on the standard of
 
care.
 
4. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett
 
Finally, we conclude that this case is unlike Celotex. 
In Celotex, the plaintiff claimed that her husband's death had
 
been the result of exposure to asbestos products manufactured or
 
distributed by various corporations, including the defendant. 
477 U.S. at 319. The defendant moved for summary judgment
 
asserting that the plaintiff failed to produce evidence of
 
causation because in response to specific interrogatories, the
 
plaintiff failed to identify any witness who could testify about
 
her husband's exposure to the defendant's asbestos products. Id.
 
at 319-20.
 
The United States Supreme Court reviewed whether
 
summary judgment had been properly granted to the defendant, and
 
particularly whether the defendant had met its initial burden as
 
the summary judgment movant without providing evidence negating
 
that the decedent had been exposed to its products. The court
 
explained, inter alia, that:
 
In our view, the plain language of Rule 56(c) mandates the
entry of summary judgment, after adequate time for discovery
and upon motion, against a party who fails to make a showing
sufficient to establish the existence of an element
 essential to that party's case, and on which that party will
bear the burden of proof at trial.
 
Id. at 322 (emphasis added). The U.S. Supreme Court, in effect,
 
held that the defendant had met its initial burden as summary
 
judgment movant. However, in that case, summary judgment had
 
been granted almost two years after the lawsuit had been
 
initiated and, moreover, the court specifically determined that
 
"no serious claim can be made that respondent was in any sense
 
'railroaded' by a premature motion for summary judgment." Id. at
 
326.
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In this case, when summary judgment was granted, the
 
case had only been pending for a little over a year and the case
 
was also assigned to CAAP, which provides a simplified procedure
 
and limited discovery. Under these circumstances, and because
 
preliminary discovery is often required before experts can be
 
considered or identified,10 we cannot conclude that Ralston had
 
adequate time to conduct the necessary discovery and then to
 consider and disclose his experts in response to Dr. Yim's
 
interrogatories, which were served six and ten months after the
 
complaint was filed. Hence, unlike in Celotex, Dr. Yim could not
 
satisfy his initial burden as the summary judgment movant by
 
simply pointing to Ralston's responses to the interrogatories.
 
5. Summary Judgment was not proper
 
Considering the analysis and rulings in French,
 
Exotics-Hawaii Kona, and Eddins, we conclude that it was not
 
proper in this case to shift the burden to Ralston as the non­
moving party to submit admissible evidence on the applicable
 
dental standard of care, because Dr. Yim did not submit any
 
evidence on the standard of care and the deadline for Ralston to
 
disclose his experts had not yet expired.
 
Moreover, unlike the determination in Celotex, we
 
conclude that Ralston did not have adequate time to conduct
 discovery and to consider and identify his experts in responding
 
to Dr. Yim's interrogatories. In this situation, for summary
 
judgment purposes, defendant-movant Dr. Yim could not shift the
 
burden to plaintiff non-movant Ralston by simply pointing to
 
Ralston's responses to the interrogatories.
11
 
10 The record indicates that, before Ralston's expert could prepare his
opinion related to the CAAP arbitration, Ralston's counsel deposed two
treating physicians and provided the transcripts to the expert for his review.
11 We do not reach the question of whether summary judgment may be
appropriate in a situation where the deadline for disclosing experts has not
(continued...)
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Therefore, we conclude that it was error to grant
 
summary judgment in favor of Dr. Yim.
 
Given our ruling above, we need not reach Ralston's
 
other point of error related to the circuit court's summary
 
judgment ruling.
 
B. Taxable Costs
 
Ralston argues that the circuit court erred in granting
 
costs to Dr. Yim because he should not have prevailed on his
 
motion for summary judgment. Dr. Yim requested taxation of costs
 
12
pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(d)(1),  and given the costs allowed
under HRS § 607-9 (1993 
Repl.).13 The circuit court awarded
 
Dr. Yim $3,878.36 in taxable costs.
 
Because we hold that Dr. Yim's motion for summary
 
judgment was improperly granted, Dr. Yim is not the "prevailing
 
party" entitled to costs. See HRCP Rule 54(d)(1). Accordingly,
 
we vacate the award of costs to Dr. Yim.
 
11 (...continued)
yet expired, but the non-movant plaintiff has had adequate time to conduct
discovery and to identify experts.
12 HRCP Rule 54(d)(1) states that "[e]xcept when express provision
therefor is made either in a statute or in these rules, costs shall be allowed
as of course to the prevailing party unless the court otherwise directs[.]"
(Emphasis added).
13 HRS § 607-9 states:
§607-9 Cost charges exclusive; disbursements.  No other
 
costs of court shall be charged in any court in addition to
those prescribed in this chapter in any suit, action, or
other proceeding, except as otherwise provided by law.
All actual disbursements, including but not limited to,
intrastate travel expenses for witnesses and counsel,
expenses for deposition transcript originals and copies, and
other incidental expenses, including copying costs,
intrastate long distance telephone charges, and postage,
sworn to by an attorney or a party, and deemed reasonable by
the court, may be allowed in taxation of costs. In
 determining whether and what costs should be taxed, the
court may consider the equities of the situation. 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the reasons stated above, we vacate the Final
 
Judgment entered on October 9, 2009 and we remand this case to
 
the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this
 
opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Sue V. Hansen
 
Charles W. Crumpton
(Crumpton & Hansen)
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
John Reyes-Burke
Steven E. Tom
 (Burke McPheeters Bordner & Estes)
for Defendant-Appellee
 
19
 