  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30041
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ZHUANG XIAN LIN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CRIMINAL CASE NO. 1P106-11491)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Zhuang Xian Lin ("Lin") appeals
 
from the October 26, 2009 Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or
 
Order of the District Court of the First Circuit ("District
 Court").
1 Following a bench trial, Lin was convicted of one
 
count of rendering a false alarm in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
2
Statutes ("HRS") § 710-1014 (1993),  and was sentenced to one
year of probation. 
On appeal, Lin contends that (1) there was no
 
substantial evidence to support her conviction, and (2) she was
 deprived of her constitutional right to effective assistance of
 
1
 The Honorable Leslie Hayashi presided.
 
2
 HRS § 710-1014 states:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of rendering a false
alarm if the person knowingly causes a false alarm of fire
or other emergency to be transmitted to or within an
official or volunteer fire department, any other government
agency, or any public utility that deals with emergencies
involving danger to life or property.
 
(2) Rendering a false alarm is a misdemeanor.
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 710-1014 (1993).
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel where her trial counsel failed to file a motion under 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure ("HRPP") Rule 9 to dismiss the 
case for a failure to timely execute the bench warrant against her. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Lin's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Lin argues that no substantial evidence supports
 
the District Court's finding that she knowingly caused a false
 alarm to be transmitted to a government agency in violation of
 HRS § 710-1014. Lin argues that she did not act knowingly
 because she "did not speak English," and had "physical and
 cognitive problems." Additionally, Honolulu Police Officer
 Patricia Doronella ("Officer Doronella") described Lin as
 nervous, panicked, and scared when she found Lin, and testified
 that Lin had a history of pushing seemingly random buttons in an
 attempt to gain entrance to the police station. We disagree with
 Lin's arguments.
 
"[I]t is not necessary for the prosecution to introduce 
direct evidence of a defendant's state of mind in order to prove that the defendant acted intentionally, knowingly or recklessly. State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai' i 131, 140–41, 913 P.2d 57, 66–67 
(1996). "Given the difficulty of proving the requisite state of mind by direct evidence in criminal cases, proof by circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences arising from circumstances surrounding the defendant's conduct is sufficient." Id. at 141, 913 P.2d at 67. "The mind of an alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances." Id. 
Here, Officer Doronella testified that on July 19,
 
2006, an alarm panel in the Honolulu Police Department at 801
 Beretania Street ("Police Station") activated and that, upon
 investigation, she observed Lin in the Police Station parking lot
 "pushing and pulling the fire alarm [lever]," a red handle "on a
 red panel that says fire alarm on it." This testimony shows that
 this fire alarm is distinctive from other buttons or switches; it
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
is reasonable to infer that someone who pulls a fire alarm knows
 
what it will do.
 
Although Lin used a Cantonese interpreter at trial and
 
Officer Doronella testified that she did not know if Lin
 understood English, no evidence was presented defining the extent
 to which Lin could not, in fact, read or understand English.
3
 
Lin failed to present evidence that she did not know that she was
 pulling a fire alarm that would alert the authorities. 
Furthermore, no evidence was presented at trial, nor was it
 argued, that Lin could not form the requisite mens rea due to a
 mental defect.
4 Finally, the fact that Officer Doronella
 
testified that Lin looked scared, or that she observed Lin
 pushing multiple buttons to gain entry to the Police Station in
 the past goes to the weight, not the sufficiency, of the
 evidence.
 
Lin had full opportunity to present witnesses and
 
evidence describing her limited linguistic or cognitive
 capabilities or that she, for some other reason, did not know
 that she was activating a fire alarm; instead, the only evidence
 Lin presented in her defense was her testimony that she had no
 memory of the incident taking place at all. Viewing the evidence
 in the strongest light for the prosecution, and giving the
 prosecution the benefit of all reasonable and rational inferences
 as we must, sufficient evidence was presented to support the
 conviction for rendering a false alarm. See State v. Batson, 73
 
3
 Lin points to a letter that she wrote to the District Court, dated
December 31, 2006, written partially in Chinese script and partially in
English, which states "I don't know English for me only can to you this
Chinese letter." The letter, however, was not admitted into evidence at
trial.
 
4
 Lin cites to a clinical assessment of Lin authored by Dr. Dennis
Donovan, entered into the record before trial for the purposes of determining
Lin's penal responsibility, for the proposition that Lin has "physical and
cognitive problems," "Adjustment Disorder with Mixed Disturbance of emotions
and mood[,]" and "mild mental retardation or borderline intellectual
functioning." However, as the State correctly points out, Dr. Donovan further
wrote that: "I do not think she is as cognitively impaired as she appears and
I think of her as being rather manipulative." Dr. Donovan also stated that,
in his opinion, Lin's "cognitive and volitional capacities were not legally
substantially impaired by reason of a mental disorder at the time of the
alleged offense" and that "her behavior was purposeful." Thus, the clinical
assessment does little to support Lin's position that she lacked knowledge due
to a cognitive disability. In any event, the assessment was not admitted into
evidence at trial.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992).
 
(2) "In criminal cases, the power of a court to 
dismiss a case on its own motion for failure to prosecute with 
due diligence is inherent." State v. Mageo, 78 Hawai' i 33, 37, 
889 P.2d 1092, 1096 (App. 1995) (quoting State v. Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 268, 625 P.2d 1040, 1043 (1981)) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). Whether to dismiss is a matter of judicial discretion, which requires a "balancing of the interest of the state against fundamental fairness to a defendant with the added ingredient of the orderly functioning of the court system." Id. (quoting State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 56, 647 P.2d 705, 712 (1982)). 
Pursuant to HRPP Rule 9(c)(3)(i), a bench warrant 
"shall be executed without unnecessary delay by the arrest of the defendant." The State's failure to promptly execute a bench warrant may merit dismissal. See State v. Lei, 95 Hawai' i 278, 
287, 21 P.3d 880, 889 (2001) (abuse of discretion not to dismiss for unnecessary delay in executing a bench warrant). 
Here, however, the issue was not raised before the
 
trial court. While we may consider ineffective-assistance-of­counsel claims for the first time on appeal,
 
[w]e acknowledge . . . that not every trial record is
sufficiently developed to determine whether there has been
ineffective assistance of counsel; indeed, a defendant is
often only able to allege facts that, if proved, would
entitle him or her to relief. Therefore, . . . where the
record on appeal is insufficient to demonstrate ineffective
assistance of counsel, but where: (1) the defendant alleges
facts that if proven would entitle him or her to relief, and
(2) the claim is not patently frivolous and without [a]
trace of support in the record, the appellate court may
affirm defendant's conviction without prejudice to a
subsequent Rule 40 petition on the ineffective assistance of
counsel claim.
 
State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 592–93 (1993)
 
(footnote omitted).
 
The record in this case does not contain any evidence 
on this point and is therefore insufficiently developed to establish ineffective assistance of counsel. A delay of over two years in the execution of the bench warrant could very well warrant dismissal. See Lei, 95 Hawai' i at 286 n.7, 21 P.3d at 
888 n.7. Furthermore, the allegations are not patently 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
frivolous.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the October 26,
 
2009 Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order of the District
 
Court is affirmed without prejudice to Lin bringing a subsequent
 HRPP Rule 40 proceeding alleging ineffective assistance of
 counsel.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 10, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Dean K. Young,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Anne K. Clarkin,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 