NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30158
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JOEL M.P. GIONSON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
'EWA DIVISION
 
(Criminal Case No. 1P309-0026)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Joel M. P. Gionson (Gionson) 
appeals the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order filed on October 7, 2009 in the District Court of the First Circuit, 
'Ewa 
Division (district court).1 
Gionson was convicted of Harassment of Melissa Gomes 
(Gomes) in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 711-1106(1)(a) (1993 & Supp. 2008)
2. 
On appeal, Gionson contends that (1) the district court 
erroneously admitted bad act evidence because (a) she was not 
given prior notice of the circumstances and general nature of the 
evidence under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b), 
(b) the evidence was not relevant to any material issue, and
 
1
 The Honorable Philip Doi presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 711-1106(1)(a) (1993 & Supp. 2008) provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of harassment if, with
intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any other person, that person:
 
(a) Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches
another person in an offensive manner or subjects the other person
to offensive physical contact[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(c) the evidence was more prejudicial than probative and (2) that
 
insufficient evidence existed for the conviction.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Gionson's points of error as follows.
 
(1) Gionson objected to testimony by Amanda Edayan
 
(Edayan) that, immediately after Gionson struck Gomes, Edayan
 
stepped between Gionson and Gomes and Gionson slapped Edayan. 
Gionson objected on the basis that "there's nothing in this
 
report that indicates anything to that effect. We've not given
 
[sic] notice of any allegations of any physical contact between
 
[Gionson] and [Edayan]."
 
On appeal, Gionson argues that she was entitled to
 
advance notice under HRE 404(b).3 However, based on this record,
 
it is not clear that this was the basis of Gionson's objection. 
See HRE Rule 103(a)(1).
4 A review of the district court's ruling
 
("Well, overruled. Reports often don't have everything in them,
 and it's one of the reasons why reports aren't in evidence,
 
3 HRE Rule 404(b) provides, 
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence of other
 
crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the
character of a person in order to show action in conformity
therewith. It may, however, be admissible where such
evidence is probative of another fact that is of consequence
to the determination of the action, such as proof of motive,
opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident. In
 criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be offered
under this subsection shall provide reasonable notice in
advance of trial, or during trial if the court excuses
pretrial notice on good cause shown, of the date, location,
and general nature of any such evidence it intends to
introduce at trial. 
4
 HRE Rule 103(a)(1) provides,
 
(a) Effect of erroneous ruling. Error may not be
predicated upon a ruling which admits or excludes evidence
unless a substantial right of the party is affected, and:
 
(1)	 Objection. In case the ruling is one admitting
evidence, a timely objection or motion to strike
appears of record, stating the specific ground
of objection, if the specific ground was not
apparent from the context[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
testimony is.") indicates that it understood the objection to be
 
one based on a lack of discovery and Gionson did not clarify or
 
otherwise disabuse the court of that notion. Consequently, we
 
could deem any objection based on HRE 404(b) waived. A. Bowman,
 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual 1-6 (2010-1011 ed.) ("An
 
opponent who fails to object is held to have waived the appellate
 
point. Waiver also occurs when an overruled trial objection is
 
abandoned and a different argument for exclusion is presented on
 
appeal."); see also State v. Matias, 57 Haw. 96, 101, 550 P.2d
 
900, 904 (1976) ("the making of an objection upon a specific
 
ground is a waiver of all other objections") (citation and
 
internal quotation marks omitted).
 
In any event, Edayan testified that she did not give a
 
written statement nor mention to the police that Gionson had
 
slapped her. Thus, there is nothing in the record that
 
establishes the prosecution had prior knowledge of this
 
testimony. More importantly, Gionson was present when the event
 
allegedly occurred and was able to cross-examine Edayan regarding
 
her failure to previously report Edayan's claim Gionson struck
 
her. Gionson does not identify how she was prejudiced by the
 
lack of prior notice. On this record, the district court would
 
have been within its discretion to allow the testimony over an
 
explicit HRE 404(b) lack-of-notice objection.
 
As to Gionson's substantive bad act evidence argument,
 
because the record does not reflect any objection whatsoever on
 
this basis, it is deemed waived. HRE Rule 103.
 
(2) In the instant case, without passing "upon issues
 
dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the
 
5
 "in the strongest light for the prosecution[,]"
 evidence,"
"[s]ubstantial evidence" existed "as to every material element of

 
the offense charged" "to support the conclusion of the trier of
 
5
 Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai' i 226, 239, 900 P.2d 1293, 1306 (1995). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
fact."6 Gomes testified that Gionson "followed us down from 
their apartment and continued to ask us why we were leaving" and 
was "yelling" and "balling her fists up and pacing back and 
forth." Gomes acknowledged that Gionson was yelling at her, but 
she did not yell back, and testified that "[Gionson] hit [Gomes] 
with a closed fist on [her] left cheek." Gomes testified that 
the punch hurt "[a] little bit at first" and confirmed that it 
was offensive. Gomes acknowledged that it made her more scared 
because she "didn't think she would stop." Gomes confirmed that 
she never gave Gionson permission to hit her. The district court 
"assessed the credibility of the various witnesses" and convicted 
Gionson of the offense. Thus, substantial evidence existed that 
Gionson struck Gomes, and it can be reasonably inferred from the 
circumstances that Gionson did so with the "intent to harass, 
annoy, or alarm" Gomes. HRS ยง 711-1106(1)(a); State v. Stocker, 
90 Hawai 'i 85, 92, 976 P.2d 399, 406 (1999) (circumstantial 
evidence and reasonable inferences from a defendant's conduct is sufficient to prove the requisite state of mind in criminal 
cases). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Notice of Entry of 
Judgment and/or Order entered on October 7, 2009 in the District Court of the First Circuit, 
'Ewa Division is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 31, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Jacquelyn T. Esser,
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
James M. Anderson,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31
(2007) (quoting State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931
(1992)). 
4
 