  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30205
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MARYANN ACKER, Defendant-Appellant
and
 
WILLIAM GERALD ACKER, Defendant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 056042)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Maryann Acker, now known as Maryann
 
Bray (Maryann), was convicted on retrial of the murder of
 
Lawrence Hasker (Hasker). 
She was sentenced to life
 
imprisonment, with the possibility of parole, by the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
On appeal, Maryann argues that she was denied her right
 
to a fair trial because: (1) the Circuit Court erred in ruling
 that, during her cross-examination of her ex-husband William
 Acker (William), she had opened the door to the admission of "bad
 acts" evidence concerning her involvement with William in the
 murder of Cesario Arauza (Arauza); (2) the testimony of Timothy
 Millard (Millard), Hasker's friend, concerning a police request
 that Millard take a lie detector test was an "evidentiary
 
1
 The Honorable Michael A. Town presided over Maryann's retrial.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
harpoon" requiring a mistrial; (3) the prosecutor improperly
 
cross-examined Maryann using information in her presentence
 report; (4) the Circuit Court mishandled William's refusal to
 testify when he was recalled as a witness in the defense case;
 and (5) the prosecutor engaged in misconduct in closing argument. 
Maryann also argues that the Circuit Court's jury instructions
 regarding the offense of murder and accomplice liability were
 erroneous. We affirm. 
BACKGROUND
 
This appeal concerns the retrial of Maryann for the
 
murder of Hasker. The indictment charged Maryann with committing
 the murder of Hasker between on or about June 18, 1978, and June
 20, 1978, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-701
 (1976).
2 On June 23, 1978, Hasker's dead body was discovered at
 
Hanauma Bay. The cause of death was a gunshot wound to the head. 
Other incidents that are relevant to Maryann's retrial include
 the kidnaping and robbery of Joe Leach (Leach) on June 10, 1978,
 and the murder of Arauza in California on June 25, 1978. At the
 time of Hasker's murder and the Leach and Arauza incidents,
 Maryann was married to William.
 
I. The Arauza Case
 
After Hasker was murdered, William and Maryann left 
Hawai'i and went to California. Within a week after Hasker's 
murder, Arauza's dead body was found. On June 28, 1978, Maryann was arrested while she was driving Arauza's car. William later turned himself in to California authorities on July 1, 1978. 
On July 20, 1978, William and Maryann were charged by
 
California authorities with the murder of Cesario Arauza. The
 murder charge alleged that on or about June 24, 1978, William and
 Maryann "did willfully, unlawfully, and with malice aforethought"
 murder Arauza. The murder charge further alleged that in the
 
2
 At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 707-701 provided, in relevant
part, that "a person commits the offense of murder if he intentionally or
knowingly causes the death of another person."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
commission of this offense, William and Maryann "personally used
 
a firearm, to wit a 38 calibre revolver, within the meaning of
 Penal Code Section 12022.5." California authorities also charged
 Maryann with committing three robberies and charged William with
 committing two robberies. 
The cases against William and Maryann were severed for
 
trial. After a jury-waived trial, Maryann was found guilty of
 the murder of Arauza, but the court found the use of firearm
 allegation to be "not true" and ordered that allegation stricken. 
Maryann was also convicted of three robberies. William later
 pleaded nolo contendere to the murder of Arauza and the use of
 firearm allegation. He also pleaded guilty to two robberies. He
 was sentenced to life imprisonment with the possibility of
 parole. The California judgments of Maryann and William were
 filed in July 1979. 
II. Maryann's First Trial in Hawai' i 
After William and Maryann had been convicted and 
sentenced on the California charges, they were indicted in Hawai'i. In an indictment filed on August 19, 1981, Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged Maryann with: 
kidnapping Leach (Count I); robbing Leach (Count II); exerting unauthorized control over Leach's car (Count III); kidnapping Hasker (Count IV); robbing Hasker (Count V); murdering Hasker (Count VI); exerting unauthorized control over Hasker's car (Count VII); and buglarizing Hasker's residence (Count VIII). The crimes against Leach were alleged to have occurred on or about June 10, 1978, and the crimes against Hasker "on or about the 18th day of June, 1978, through and including the 20th day of June, 1978." The murder count charged that "[Maryann] did intentionally or knowingly cause the death of Lawrence R. Hasker by shooting him with a firearm." 
William was also charged in the indictment with the
 
same offenses as Maryann, except that he was not charged with the
 murder of Hasker. Pursuant to a plea agreement, William pleaded
 guilty to robbing Hasker as charged in Count V; he was granted 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
transactional immunity for his testimony against Maryann; and the
 
other charges against him were dismissed. 
William subsequently testified as a prosecution witness 
at Maryann's first trial on the Hawai' i charges. Through 
William's testimony, the prosecution was permitted to present evidence of Maryann's involvement in the murder of Arauza. William testified that Maryann had shot and killed both Hasker and Arauza. With respect to Arauza, William testified that Arauza had picked up William and Maryann as they were hitchhiking. According to William, after stopping at a rest area that had a restaurant, Maryann and Arauza left William behind and drove off in Arauza's car. Maryann returned alone in Arauza's car about twenty to thirty minutes later, and she told William that she had left Arauza on an on-ramp. William stated that in February 1979, long after they had been charged with Arauza's murder, Marryann told him that she had shot Arauza. 
William also testified that based on his understanding
 
of the felony murder rule, he decided to enter his plea to the
 murder of Arauza even though Maryann had shot and killed Arauza. 
Through his testimony, William suggested that he had pleaded
 guilty or nolo contendere to felony murder with respect to
 Arauza, whereas he actually pleaded nolo contendere to murder and
 the use of firearm allegation. The State also did not disclose
 to the defense that William had been sentenced to life
 imprisonment with the possibility of parole for the Arauza
 murder. 
The jury found Maryann guilty as charged on all counts. 
The Circuit Court sentenced Maryann to a term of life
 imprisonment, with the possibility of parole, and a mandatory
 minimum term of term of ten years on the Count VI murder
 conviction; five years of imprisonment on Counts III and VII; ten
 years of imprisonment on Counts I and VIII; and twenty years of
 imprisonment on Counts II, IV, and V, all terms to be served
 concurrently. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On June 2, 1982, Maryann filed a direct appeal of her
 
convictions. As one of the points of error in her opening brief,
 
Maryann asserted that "[t]he trial court erred in permitting
 evidence of [Maryann's] prior crimes." Maryann's brief argued
 that 
the Arauza case was not relevant to establish any of the
exceptions to Rule 404. It did not prove motive . . . [i]t
did not prove opportunity . . . [i]t did not prove
preparation or plan . . . [i]t did not prove intent,
knowledge, or absence of mistake or accident . . . [i]t did
not establish identity . . . [and] [f]inally, it did not
prove modus operandi. . . .
 
Assuming arguendo that one or more exceptions were
relevant, the prejudice against [Maryann] far outweighed any
probative value in view of the issues and the evidence
available to the State.
 
On December 11, 1984, the Hawai' i Supreme Court issued 
a Memorandum Opinion affirming Maryann's convictions. State v. 
Acker, No. 8745 (Hawai' i Dec. 13, 1984). The supreme court's 
Memorandum Opinion states: "This is an appeal from a conviction 
for murder. Numerous grounds are argued by [Maryann] on appeal. On a review of the record, we find no merit to any of them. Affirmed." 
III. Maryann's Hawai' i Rules of 
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 Petition
 
Maryann filed a Petition for Post-Conviction Relief
 
pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 on August 15, 2000, an Amended Petition
 for Post-Conviction Relief on May 13, 2002, and supporting
 memoranda and exhibits (collectively, "Rule 40 Petition"). In
 her Rule 40 Petition, Maryann alleged, among other things, that:
 (1) her conviction for murder should be dismissed or a new trial held on this charge because William admitted during his May 2, 1991, California parole hearing that he was solely responsible for the murder in Hawai' i; and (2) her right to a fair and 
impartial trial had been violated by the suppression of information favorable to her that the State was required to disclose under Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963), namely, that William had pleaded nolo contendere to first degree murder 
5
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
with the use of a firearm in California and had been sentenced to
 
life imprisonment with the possibility of parole for that
 offense.
 
3
The Circuit Court  filed a Decision on January 21,
2005, and amended findings of fact and conclusions of law and order on March 7, 2005, which granted Maryann's Rule 40 Petition as to her claim regarding the prosecution's failure to disclose evidence about William's prior conviction and sentence. The Circuit Court vacated Maryann's convictions and ordered that she receive a new trial. The State appealed. This court affirmed the Circuit Court to the extent that it vacated Maryann's murder conviction on Count VI and ordered a new trial on that count. Acker v. State, No. 27081, 2007 WL 2800803 (Hawai' i App. Sept. 
27, 2007) (SDO).
4 
IV. Maryann's Retrial
 
A. Pretrial rulings
 
Prior to Maryann's retrial, the State filed a notice of 
its intent to introduce evidence of the Leach robbery in Hawai' i 
and the Arauza murder in California. Maryann opposed the State's use of this evidence. The Circuit Court ruled that it would allow the State to introduce evidence of the Leach robbery, but that it would not allow the State to introduce evidence of Maryann's complicity in the murder of Arauza in the State's case­in-chief. The Circuit Court acknowledged that the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court had upheld the State's introduction of the Arauza evidence at Maryann's first trial. The Circuit Court, however, declined to apply the "law of the case" doctrine to the Arauza evidence because it found cogent reasons for modifying the prior ruling. 
3 The Honorable Michael A. Town presided.
 
4
 We further held that the Circuit Court had erred to the extent it 
vacated and set aside Maryann's other convictions, and we remanded the case so
that the non-murder convictions would be reinstated. Acker v. State, No. 
27081, 2007 WL 2800803 (Hawai' i App. Sept. 27, 2007). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although ruling in Maryann's favor in excluding the
 
Arauza evidence, the Circuit Court warned defense counsel that
 
Maryann may open the door to the Arauza evidence through her
 cross-examination of William:
 
THE COURT: . . . . What worries me is if William
 
Acker gets on the stand and says he is pure as the driven
snow and he has constantly told the truth, we're going to
get into whether or not he lied in this Court [at the first
trial] . . . 26 years ago . . . .
 
[Defense counsel]: Yes.
 
THE COURT: And whether he -- or whether he lied up in
California and pled to being the shooter. And we'll get to
that. But if the door is opened, we're going to have to go
down that road, Mr. [Defense counsel]. Fair enough?
 
[Defense counsel]: Fair enough, Judge. 
Maryann filed a "Third Motion in Limine" to preclude
 
the State from calling William as a witness on the ground that
 
"the State is aware that [his] testimony is false," or
 alternatively, to permit Maryann to introduce evidence that
 William had failed a polygraph examination. In support of this
 motion, defense counsel asserted that: (1) William was found to
 be deceptive during a polygraph examination by the Honolulu
 Police Department; (2) William had falsely testified at Maryann's
 first trial that he had pleaded nolo contendere to felony murder
 regarding Arauza, rather than nolo contendere to murder and the
 use of firearm allegation; and (3) at William's 1991 California
 Parole Board hearing, William stated under oath that he had been
 the shooter in both the Hasker and Arauza murders. At this 1991
 Parole Board hearing, William was questioned by a California
 parole commissioner and answered as follows:
 
Q: Okay. Then answer me this: Did you commit the
murder for which you're in custody [(the Arauza murder)]?
 
A: Yes, I did. 
Q: Did you pull the trigger? 
A: Yes, I did. 
Q: What about the one in Hawaii? 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A: I committed them all and I want the woman behind
 
it [(referring to Maryann)], the woman that's incarcerated,
I would like her set free.
 
Q:
anything? Okay. So Marianne (phonetic) didn't do 
A: Nothing. Absolutely nothing. 
Q. And this is the first time you've said that? 
A: The very first time. 
The Circuit Court held hearings on Maryann's Third
 
Motion in Limine and also considered whether Maryann would be
 
permitted to cross-examine William about his 1991 statements to
 the California Parole Board. The State argued that if Maryann
 attempted to cross-examine William about these statements, it
 would open the door to the Arauza matter, which the Circuit Court
 had ruled was inadmissible. The State proffered that William
 would testify that he falsely took responsibility for being the
 shooter in the Hasker and Arauza murders because he was told by
 Maryann's attorney that the California Parole Board would "let
 [Maryann] out" if he made these statements. The State argued
 that William should be allowed to explain why he falsely took
 responsibility for being the shooter and that this would
 necessarily require getting into the Arauza case. 
At the initial hearing, the Circuit Court indicated
 
that if Maryann cross-examined William with his statements to the
 California Parole Board, it would "probably" open the door to the
 Arauza evidence. The Circuit Court warned defense counsel that
 if "we get into [the statements to the Parole Board], I'm
 probably going to let [William] give his reasons in his head why
 he did it[.]" It also advised defense counsel to "be prepared"
 for the possibility that the door to the Arauza matter could be
 opened. 
At a subsequent hearing, the Circuit Court again took
 
up the issue of whether cross-examining William on his statements
 to the California Parole Board would open the door to the Arauza
 matter, and defense counsel acknowledged his understanding that
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
such cross-examination may result in opening the door. Defense
 
counsel noted his understanding that if he attempted to use
 William's statements before the California Parole Board to show
 that William "committed perjury" at Maryann's first trial when he
 testified she had been the shooter, "then the door could be
 opened." Defense counsel stated:
 
[I]f I can't bring in the fact of [William's]
reputation and his admission of perjury, then I don't
think I'm doing my job. If the Court says that by
bringing that in, I open the door, then so be it, but
if that's what happens, that's what happens.
 
The State again argued that cross-examining William
 
about his statements to the California Parole Board would
 
necessarily open the door to the Arauza matter, which prompted
 the following responses from the Circuit Court and defense
 counsel:
 
THE COURT: That makes sense to me. How are we going
to get around that, the California situation?
 
[Defense counsel]: If California comes in, California
comes in for the whole thing, Judge. I'm not trying to -­
I'm not trying to, you know, just nip and tuck things. If
 it comes in, it comes in.
 
At the end of the discussion on this point, defense
 
counsel agreed with the prosecutor's understanding of the Circuit
 
Court's ruling.
 
[Prosecutor]: Just to clarify, the only way then that
California should come in, if at all, through [defense
counsel] is if he confronts William Acker with his statement
to the paroling authority at which point I get to bring in
evidence of [Maryann's] conviction because that goes to his
reason why he said that -- made that statement.
 
[Defense counsel]: That's my understanding.
 
THE COURT: Fair enough. Makes sense . . . .
 
The Circuit Court denied Maryann's motion in limine to
 
preclude William from testifying and her alternative request to
 
permit the introduction of evidence that William had failed a
 polygraph examination. With respect to Maryann's cross­
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
examination of William, the Circuit Court entered a written order
 
which stated:
 
[Maryann] may question William Acker on his 1991
statement to the California Parole Board, subject to proper
foundation being laid.
 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that should [Maryann] question
William Acker on his 1991 statement to the California Parole
 Board, the State may then introduce evidence of William
Acker's reasons for making that statement, including
[Maryann's] conviction and sentence for the murder of
Cesario Arauza in California.
 
B. Trial evidence
 
1.
 
At trial, the State presented evidence that Hasker's
 
body was found on June 23, 1978, in shrubbery off the side of the
 
road at Hanauma Bay. The cause of death was a gunshot wound to
 the head. Hasker had also been shot in the lower left leg. 
Hasker's sister, who had been sharing an apartment with him,
 testified that she last saw her brother on June 19, 1978. When
 she later returned to the apartment, it was in disarray and cash
 and jewelry were missing. 
2.
 
William testified as a witness for the State. William 
stated that pursuant to a plea agreement with the State, he had pleaded guilty to robbing Hasker, and all other charges against him were dropped. William had testified at Maryann's prior trial and had been granted immunity for this testimony. William had been sentenced to twenty years of imprisonment in Hawai' i and had 
completed his sentence. 
According to William, he met Maryann in early 1978, 
while they were working in Arizona. Maryann was 18 years old and William was 28 years old. Maryann and William married in Arizona in April of 1978. The couple flew to Hawai' i in June 1978. 
William brought a ".38 Special" handgun and a hunting knife with him to Hawai' i. William and Maryann stayed at the Makiki Arms 
apartment. Neither Maryann nor William worked, and they ran out of money. They came up with a plan to "sell bunk marijuana to 
10
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
tourists." The plan involved Maryann "get[ting] dolled up" and
 
approaching men in Waikîkî bars to identify their prospective
 
targets. 
On June 10, 1978, Maryann met Joe Leach at the Garden
 
Bar at the Hilton Hawaiian Village hotel. Leach bought drinks
 
for Maryann. William was introduced to Leach as Maryann's
 
brother. Leach was not their preferred target because he was
 local and not a tourist. Nevertheless, after determining that
 Leach was not interested in buying marijuana, William and Maryann
 decided to rob him. Leach, Maryann, and William left the bar in
 Leach's car. While Leach was driving, William "pulled the gun"
 on Leach, cocked the trigger, and told Leach that he was being
 robbed. William instructed Leach to give his wallet to Maryann,
 and Leach complied. 
William directed Leach to drive to Hanauma Bay. At
 
Hanauma Bay, they all got out of the car. William tied Leach up
 using Maryann's pantyhose while Maryann held the gun, and they
 left Leach bound and gagged. William and Maryann drove away in
 
Leach's car, went to their apartment, and took a camera, a tape
 
deck, and cigarettes from the car. William left the car next to
 a nearby park, and he called Leach's workplace to report that
 Leach was at Hanauma Bay. Maryann pawned items they had taken
 from Leach's car.
 
On June 19, 1978, Maryann got "dolled up," and she and
 
William again went to the Garden Bar. Maryann talked to Larry
 
Hasker. According to William, he got the impression that Hasker
 
was a drug dealer. William wanted Maryann to get rid of Hasker
 because he was not a tourist, but Maryann wanted to "take" Hasker
 because she thought he was a dealer and had "big money[.]" 
William and Maryann left the Garden Bar, but they later ran into
 Hasker at a different bar. 
Hasker gave William and Maryann a ride home in Hasker's
 
car, and Hasker accompanied them into their Makiki Arms
 apartment. In the apartment, Maryann again told William that she
 wanted to rob Hasker. William pulled the gun on Hasker and said,
 
11
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"This is a robbery, man." Hasker was tied up and Maryann drove
 
the three of them in Hasker's car to Hasker's apartment. William
 
gave the gun to Maryann and told her to go into the apartment to
 look for money and cocaine, while William remained in the car
 with Hasker. Maryann returned with money and a marijuana
 
cigarette, but no cocaine. When Maryann returned after a second
 
search of the apartment, she drove them to Hanauma Bay.
 
At Hanauma Bay, Hasker and Maryann got out of the car, 
and Maryann was holding the gun on Hasker. Hasker asked to use the bathroom. After urinating, Hasker turned toward Maryann. According to William, Maryann then shot the gun at Hasker three times from a distance of ten to fifteen feet. William did not know that Maryann was going to shoot Hasker, and William did not intend for Hasker to die. After they drove home, William told 
Maryann to get rid of the car, and she did so. William initially 
planned to leave Hawai' i without Maryann, but they eventually 
agreed to "fly back together." William denied threatening or 
forcing Maryann to participate in the incidents involving Leach and Hasker. 
On cross-examination, Maryann's counsel asked William
 
if he had "ever lie[d] under oath, commit[ted] perjury, as it
 pertains to Maryann." After William responded "Yeah I --", the
 prosecutor objected. At side bar, the State argued that the
 question "opens the door" to William's explaining his answer. 
The Circuit Court overruled the objection and allowed defense
 counsel to continue. When asked whether he had "ever committed
 perjury as it pertains to Maryann," William responded that he had
 "never lied in court." When asked if he had "ever lied under
 oath as it pertains to Maryann," William asked the trial judge,
 "Your Honor, does a board hearing count?" The trial judge
 responded, "If its under oath, yes. . . . I assume we are talking
 about a California board hearing; isn't that right?" 
A side bar was held, and the Circuit Court decided to
 
strike the preceding series of questions and answers relating to
 perjury pending the opportunity for a more thorough hearing. 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defense counsel opposed the striking of the testimony, arguing
 
that "[y]ou can just tell me to stop going any further, but I
 don't think you should strike it right now because I am entitled
 to open the door if I choose to open the door." The Circuit
 Court responded, "I'm going to strike it now, let you reinitiate
 it if need be." Defense counsel repeated that he was entitled to
 open the door, but claimed that he was "not going to open the
 door right now." The Circuit Court warned defense counsel, "But
 you are on the doorknob." The Circuit Court informed the jury
 that it was striking the preceding series of questions and
 answers about perjury and directed the jury to disregard it. 
In resuming his cross-examination, defense counsel
 
asked William about lying, and William admitted to lying
 sometimes, but not under oath. At side bar, defense counsel
 informed the Circuit Court that he planned to ask William "[i]f
 he's ever committed perjury, he's lied under oath." The Circuit
 Court told defense counsel that it "[s]ounds like you are going
 to open the door," and it permitted defense counsel to ask
 William about lying under oath. Upon resuming cross-examination,
 defense counsel and William went back and forth about William's
 understanding of the terms perjury and lying under oath. Defense
 counsel then elicited the following testimony:
 
Q. My question to you, Mr. Acker, have you ever lied
under oath as it pertains to anything about Maryann?
 
A. Probably.
 
Q. Probably. Does that mean yes?
 
A. Yeah. That means yes.
 
Q. Okay.
 
A. But not in court.
 
Q. And so when you lie -- I'm sorry. When you lied
under oath about Maryann, was there any repercussion to you?
 
A. No.
 
Q. No.
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. No, there wasn't because there wasn't a lie on
her. I'm trying to do something for her.
 
The trial then ended for the day.
 
The next day, the Circuit Court expressed its view that
 
the door may have been opened to the Arauza matter: "It strikes
 
me that the door may well have been opened for a variety of
 reasons to the California situation, either under the rule of
 completeness or the rule of relevance and under Rule 611." After
 discussion with the State and Maryann, the Circuit Court ruled
 that "[t]he door is open. Once it's open, it's going to be
 completely open . . . to the entire Cesario Arauza –- not about
 the incident, certainly the convictions. Because [the jurors]
 are going to need to have a context by which to operate." 
Based on the Circuit Court's ruling, the California
 
judgments of Maryann and William were admitted in evidence. The
 Circuit Court also gave the following limiting instruction to the
 jury:
 
[Y]ou are about to hear evidence that the defendant
and the witness at another time may have or have engaged in
and committed other crimes, wrongs or acts. You must not
 use this evidence to determine that the defendant or the
 witness are persons of bad character and, therefore, must
have committed the offense charged in this case.
 
Actually, I'm talking only about [Maryann], the
defendant is a person of bad character and must have
committed the offense charged in this case. Such evidence
 may be considered by you only on the issue of the
defendant's motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan,
knowledge, identity, modis operandi, absence of mistake or
accident, and for no other purpose.
 
So it doesn't go to propensity or character. It goes
to the specific reasons detailed in our statute and the
rules.
 
Defense counsel subsequently questioned William about
 
his 1991 statements to the California Parole Board. William
 
admitted that he had stated under oath that he had committed the
 murder of Cesario Arauza for which he was in custody; that he had
 pulled the trigger in the Arauza case; that he had also
 "committed the one in Hawaii"; and that Maryann had done
 "[a]bsolutely nothing" and deserved to be free. 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On redirect examination, William explained that he had
 
lied under oath to the California Parole Board "to try to free
 
Maryann." William testified that he admitted to shooting Arauza
 
and Hasker because some "student lawyers" from UCLA representing
 
Maryann had "told me that I could free her. She could go home if
 I said these things to the board." 
William testified that after Maryann shot Hasker,
 
William and Maryann caught a flight to California on June 20,
 1978. Between June 24, and June 25, 1978, Arauza was murdered. 
Arauza had given William and Maryann a ride. At one point,
 Maryann drove off with Arauza, leaving William behind. When
 Maryann came back, Arauza was not with her, and Maryann told
 William that she had left Arauza on an on-ramp. William did not
 learn that Maryann had shot Arauza until Maryann disclosed this
 to William after she had already been found guilty of Arauza's
 murder. 
Over Maryann's objection, William also testified about
 
California robberies that he and Maryann had committed shortly
 after Arauza's murder. The State argued that Maryann's
 California robberies were relevant and admissible to rebut her
 claim that she was forced to participate with William in
 committing crimes and had no opportunity to get away from him. 
William testified that he committed two robberies after the
 murder of Arauza and that Maryann participated in both of them. 
William also stated that Maryann committed a third robbery on
 June 26, 1978, by herself. Maryann was arrested after she had
 left the motel where she and William were staying to "get rid" of
 Arauza's car. William saw Maryann in police custody and left the
 motel. William later turned himself in to the police on July 1,
 1978. 
3.
 
Arauza's cause of death was two gunshot wounds to the
 
head. The four bullets recovered from the bodies of Hasker and
 Arauza were fired from the same .38 caliber revolver. Maryann
 was arrested on June 28, 1978, in Long Beach, California. She
 
15
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was the driver and sole occupant of a Chevy Blazer registered to
 
Arauza. .38 caliber revolver rounds were found in the motel room
 where Maryann had been staying. 
Los Angeles County Deputy Sheriff Wilbert Ahn (Sheriff
 
Ahn) was assigned to investigate the murder of Arauza. From 1978
 
to 1980, Ahn had contact with William approximately fifty to
 
seventy-five times, on an official basis.
 
Portions of Leach's testimony at Maryann's first trial
 
was read to the jury. Leach had testified that on June 9, 1978,
 while he was in the Garden Bar, a woman approached him and asked
 if she could join him. After they talked and danced, the woman
 introduced him to a male and asked Leach if he could give the
 male a ride home. While Leach was driving, the male pointed a
 pistol at Leach, told Leach to give the woman his wallet, and
 directed Leach to drive to Hanauma Bay. The woman checked
 Leach's glove box. At Hanauma Bay, they got out of the car, the
 woman used her pantyhose to tie Leach's hands behind his back,
 and then the woman held a gun on Leach while the male gagged
 Leach and retied Leach's hands more tightly with the pantyhose. 
At one point, Leach turned and looked at the woman. The woman
 was pointing the gun at Leach and told him to turn back around. 
The woman and male drove away in Leach's car. 
4.
 
Maryann testified in her own defense at trial. Maryann 
testified that she met William in March 1978, and he moved in about a month later. William wanted to get married, and because he was persistent, Maryann agreed. While living in Arizona, William broke into a neighbor's house and stole a .38 caliber revolver. It was William's idea to come to Hawai' i for a 
"delayed honeymoon." Maryann bought round-trip tickets, and they came to Hawai' i in June 1978. William brought the handgun and a 
knife with him. William wanted to stay in Hawai' i, so they 
cashed in the return-trip tickets. 
According to Maryann, William did not want her to work
 
and he was unable to get a job, so William "started talking about
 
16
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
this plan that he was developing to rob tourists[.]" Maryann did
 
not want to rob tourists and opposed William's plan. However,
 she ultimately agreed to help William because he started
 threatening her by holding the gun to her head or ribs and
 telling her that she "would do what he said." This terrified
 Maryann. On one occasion, when Maryann was arguing with William
 about his plan, William aimed and fired the gun at Maryann inside
 their Makiki Arms apartment. Maryann became "[e]ven more
 
scared," and she "believed his threats that if [she] went against
 
him, he would hurt [her]." 
It was William's idea to go to the Hilton Hawaiian
 
Village Garden Bar. William directed Maryann to talk to Leach. 
They eventually all left in Leach's car. William pulled a gun on
 Leach and told him it was a robbery. At William's direction,
 Leach gave his wallet to Maryann and drove to Hanauma Bay. 
William instructed Maryann to give him her pantyhose, and then he
 walked Leach down an embankment. Maryann tied Leach's hands with
 the pantyhose, "because [William] told [her] to." William later
 retied Leach's hands, while Maryann held the gun. William and
 Maryann took Leach's car, left Leach tied up at Hanauma Bay, and
 drove back to their Makiki Arms apartment. William and Maryann
 took items from Leach's car, and William had Maryann pawn the
 items. 
A few days later, William wanted to rob someone else. 
Although Maryann did not want to commit another robbery, she got
 dressed up and ready to repeat the plan. They went back to the
 Garden Bar, where Maryann met Hasker. William told Maryann he
 wanted to rob Hasker. Maryann tried to talk William out of it,
 
and he agreed to leave the bar. At another bar, Hasker
 
unexpectedly showed up and bought them drinks. William did not
 discuss with Maryann what he wanted to do with Hasker. William
 asked Hasker for a ride back to the Makiki Arms apartment, and
 Hasker agreed. William invited Hasker inside, and William pulled
 
Maryann aside to tell her that he wanted to rob Hasker. Maryann
 
tried to talk William out of it again, but he pulled the gun on
 
17
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hasker and said it was a robbery. Maryann drove the three of
 
them to Hasker's apartment. William told Maryann to go into the
 apartment and look for money and drugs. Maryann did not want to
 burglarize Hasker's apartment, but she complied with William's
 instructions to go into the apartment. Maryann returned to the
 car with money, but no drugs. William told her to go back to
 
look for cocaine. Maryann went into the apartment again, but did
 
not find any cocaine. 
With Maryann driving, they went in Hasker's car to
 
Hanauma Bay. Maryann pulled over to the side of the road, and
 William and Hasker got out of the car. William and Hasker walked
 
down an embankment out of Maryann's sight. Maryann heard two
 
gunshots, but did not see or know what had happened. When
 William came back to the car, Maryann asked him what had
 happened. William told her, "[D]on't worry about it. It's just
 something I had to do. You wouldn't understand. Let's go get
 something to eat." Maryann testified that she did not know that
 Hasker was going to be shot and killed, she did not intend for it
 to happen, and she did not help anyone cause it to happen. They
 drove back to their apartment, where William made flight
 reservations. 
They flew together to Los Angeles that same day. They
 
hitchhiked to Merced and stayed a couple of days. While
 hitchhiking back to Los Angeles, Arauza picked them up in a Chevy
 Blazer. During the ride, William pulled the gun on Arauza and
 told Arauza to pull over. William told Arauza to get out of the
 car, and William and Arauza walked down an embankment out of
 Maryann's line of sight, just as William did with Hasker. 
Maryann heard two gunshots. William walked back to the vehicle
 and told her "it was just something he had to do and [she]
 wouldn't understand," the same thing he said with Hasker. They
 drove to Los Angeles, where they participated in other robberies. 
Maryann was arrested by herself, while driving Arauza's Chevy
 Blazer. Maryann denied knowing that Arauza was going to be shot 
18
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and killed, and she stated that she did not want it to happen and
 
did not help cause it to happen.
 
Maryann testified that she had never been represented
 
by law students from UCLA, but had been represented by law
 students from the University of Southern California. The
 University of Southern California law students started to
 represent her in 1995, which was after William's 1991 statements
 to the California Parole Board.
 
On cross-examination, Maryann acknowledged that after
 
the Arauza incident, she committed three robberies. Two of the
 robberies were with William. She committed the third robbery by
 herself, during which she entered a store, pulled out a gun, and
 demanded money. Maryann also acknowledged that after she and
 William had been arrested and charged in California, Maryann sent 
"love letters" to William. 
5.
 
Maryann attempted to recall William as a witness in her
 
case (1) to explain why Sheriff Ahn met with William over fifty
 times and (2) to question William about his testimony that law
 students from UCLA contacted him and told him to take
 responsibility for shooting Hasker and Arauza so Maryann would
 get out of prison. Pursuant to a subpoena, William was
 
transported to the courthouse and held in the cellblock. William
 
knew he had been subpoenaed, but claimed that testifying in the
 defense case would jeopardize his safety. The sheriffs had an
 extraction process, taking one to two hours, that could be used
 to remove William from his cell and bring him into the courtroom. 
Maryann asked that William be extracted, but the Circuit Court
 refused the request because it did not believe "there would be
 any gain and it would be –- just wouldn't work and wouldn't be
 helpful for the jury." Maryann was permitted to call a deputy
 sheriff to testify that William was subpoenaed, transported to
 the courthouse, and told that there was a lawful court order
 requiring him to appear and testify, but that William refused to
 come to the courtroom and testify. 
19
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
6.
 
The jury found Maryann guilty as charged of murder, but
 
by special interrogatory found that the State did not prove
 
beyond a reasonable doubt "that [Maryann] actually possessed,
 used, or threatened to use a pistol during the commission of the
 Murder[.]" The Circuit Court sentenced Maryann to life in prison
 with the possibility of parole and entered its Judgment on
 November 9, 2009. This appeal followed.
5
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Maryann argues that the Circuit Court erred in ruling
 
that her cross-examination of William about his statements to the
 California Parole Board opened the door to "bad act" evidence
 regarding the Arauza incident. We disagree.
 
William's statements to the California Parole Board
 
that he had been the shooter in the Hasker murder and that
 Maryann did "nothing," was strong evidence in favor of Maryann. 
William's statements provided direct support for Maryann's
 defense that she did not shoot Hasker and had not intentionally
 participated in his murder. The statements also served to
 impeach William's trial testimony that Maryann had shot and
 killed Hasker. However, eliciting evidence of William's
 statements came with risks because it opened the door to the
 State being allowed to have William explain the context of and
 his motivation for the statements. The context of William's
 statements was that both he and Maryann were in prison for the
 Arauza murder. The motivation for the statements, according to
 William, was that he had been told by Maryann's student lawyers
 that she would be released on parole if he took responsibility
 for being the shooter, so he falsely said he was the shooter. 
William testified that Maryann had not been released after his 
5
 On August 8, 2012, the court granted Maryann's motion for retention of
oral argument, and oral argument was held on August 31, 2012.
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
statements, which William said was why he had reverted to telling
 
the truth about the incidents.
 
The record does not support Maryann's contention that 
the Circuit Court had ruled that defense counsel could question William in the manner he did without opening the door to the Arauza matter. The record shows that both prior to trial and during trial, the Circuit Court warned defense counsel that he risked opening the door to the Arauza incident by cross-examining William about his statements to the California Parole Board. We conclude that defense counsel's questions to William about whether he had ever lied under oath as it pertains to anything about Maryann, and whether that lie under oath had any repercussion to him, was a clear reference to William's statements to the California Parole Board. The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in ruling that these questions opened the door to William explaining why he lied under oath and to evidence of the Arauza incident. See State v. Viernes, 92 
Hawai'i 130, 133, 988 P.2d 195, 198 (1999) (noting that 
evidentiary rulings, "which require 'judgment calls' on the part of a trial judge," are reviewed for abuse of discretion); Green v. State, 831 S.W.2d 89, 94-95 (Tex. Ct. App. 1992) (stating that when the defendant opens the door, "the State is permitted to complete the picture by presenting evidence that would otherwise have been inadmissible"); Credille v. State, 925 S.W.2d 112, 116 (Tex. Ct. App. 1996) (applying Texas evidentiary rule permitting "the introduction of otherwise inadmissible evidence when that evidence is necessary to fully and fairly explain a matter 'opened up' by the adverse party"); State v. Malshuk, 857 A.2d 282, 286 (Vt. 2004) (stating that where defense counsel attempts to impeach a witness's credibility by painting an incomplete picture, "the State may complete the picture with 'appropriate detail'"); see also State v. Brooks, 125 Hawai' i 462, 469-74, 264 
P.3d 40, 47-52 (App. 2011) (applying rule of completeness to permit introduction of evidence that would otherwise be inadmissible where necessary to prevent misleading the jury). 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We also reject Maryann's claim that evidence regarding 
the Arauza incident was irrelevant and inadmissible under Hawaii 
Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) (Supp. 2011). The Arauza incident was relevant to providing a context and explanation for William's statements to the California Parole Board. It was also relevant to show Maryann's intent, motive, plan, and preparation, including the nature of the her relationship with William; to refute Maryann's claim that it was William who orchestrated and forced her to participate in criminal activity; and to show that she was an intentional and willing participant in Hasker's murder. In opening statement, Maryann's counsel stated that William had struck fear into Maryann by shooting at her to get her to participate in his plan to commit robberies; that William pressured Maryann, and she felt forced to go along with William; and that she did not shoot or kill Hakser, did not intend for that to happen, and did not know it would happen. The evidence of the Arauza incident supported the State's contention that Maryann was an intentional and willing participant in William's criminal activity and was a principal or accomplice in Hasker's murder. It also showed that Maryann had opportunities to leave and disassociate herself from William, but chose to remain with him. See State v. Clark, 83 Hawai' i 289, 300-01, 926 P.2d 194, 
205-06 (1996) (concluding that prior incidents of domestic violence was admissible under HRE Rule 404(b) to show the context of the relationship between the defendant and the alleged victim); State v. Iaukea, 56 Haw. 343, 348-54, 537 P.2d 724, 729­32 (1975) (concluding that evidence of the defendant's prior crimes, which explained and placed in context the complaining witness's statements and actions, was admissible); United States v. Zackson, 12 F.3d 1178, 1182-82 (2d Cir. 1993) (holding that
 evidence of the defendant's prior similar crime was admissible
 under federal counterpart to HRE Rule 404(b) to prove the
 defendant's criminal intent); United States v. Ceballos, 605 F.3d
 468, 469-71 (8th Cir. 2010) (concluding that evidence of prior 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
similar crimes was admissible under federal counterpart to HRE
 
Rule 404(b) to rebut the defendant's claim of coercion). 
The same analysis applies to the evidence of Maryann's
 
three robberies in California. Evidence of these robberies
 supported the State's contention that Maryann was a partner in
 crime with William and not an unwilling participant. It also
 provided insight into her intent, motive, and plan, as well as
 their relationship, by showing that she was capable of committing
 a robbery on her own. 
Maryann benefitted through her cross-examination of 
William about his statements to the California Parole Board. It permitted her to introduce a specific admission by William that he had been the shooter for the Hasker murder in Hawai' i. It 
also permitted defense counsel to mount a strong attack on William's credibility. 
Before the jury heard evidence regarding the California 
incidents, the Circuit Court gave them a limiting instruction to ensure that the evidence would only be considered for its proper purpose. The limiting instruction alleviated the risk of unfair prejudice, as a jury is presumed to follow the trial court's instructions. State v. Knight, 80 Hawai' i 318, 327, 909 P.2d 
1133, 1142 (1996). 
Given Maryann's actions in opening the door to the
 
Arauza incident through her cross-examination of William, the
 relevancy of the California incidents, and the limiting
 instruction given by the Circuit Court, we cannot say that the
 Circuit Court abused its discretion in permitting the challenged
 evidence. 
II.
 
Maryann argues that the testimony of Millard, Hasker's
 
friend, concerning a police request that Millard take a lie
 detector test was an "evidentiary harpoon" requiring a mistrial. 
See State v. Kahinu, 53 Haw. 536, 549, 498 P.2d 635, 643-44
 
23
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1972).6 We disagree. Millard testified that he and Hasker had
 
made plans to meet on June 19, 1978, but the two did not meet as
 
planned. A few days later, Millard was contacted by the
 Honolulu Police Department. Millard testified that "[t]hey asked
 me if I would take a lie detector test, asked me a lot of
 questions like where were you and all this and all that. And
 apparently, you know, I answered all the questions and everything
 to their liking."
 
At Maryann's request, the Circuit Court struck
 
Millard's testimony regarding the lie detector test as
 "irrelevant and inadmissible" and instructed the jury to
 disregard it. Despite the striking of Millard's testimony,
 
Maryann later moved for a mistrial. Maryann's contention was
 
that based on Millard's testimony, the jury would think the
 police were asking everyone who was a possible suspect to take a
 lie detector test, including William; that the State gave "a
 deal" to William; and therefore, the jury would infer that
 William must have passed a lie detector test. 
As the Circuit Court noted, Millard was an ancillary
 
witness. Moreover, it is not apparent that the multiple
 inferences argued by Maryann would be drawn by the jury. We
 conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 concluding that striking Millard's testimony and directing the
 jury to disregard it was sufficient to protect Maryann's right to
 a fair trial and in denying Maryann's motion for mistrial on that
 basis. 
6 In Kahinu, a police detective made gratuitous references to Kahinu
being in police custody on another case. Kahinu, 53 Haw. at 548-49, 498 P.2d
at 643-44. The Hawai' i Supreme Court stated that "the deliberate and
unresponsive injection by prosecution witnesses of irrelevant references to [adefendant's] prior arrests, convictions or imprisonment" could constitute an"evidential harpoon" requiring the declaration of a mistrial. Id. at 549, 498 
P.2d at 643-44. The court ultimately held that the detective's improperreferences were harmless and did not contribute to Kahinu's guilty verdicts.Id. at 549, 498 P.2d at 644. 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
Citing State v. Greyson, 70 Haw. 227, 768 P.2d 759 
(1989), Maryann contends that the prosecutor improperly cross-
examined her by using information in her Hawai' i presentence 
report. In Greyson, the Hawai' i Supreme Court determined that 
presentence reports were confidential under HRS § 806-73 (1985) and that the State could not use Greyson's statement contained in his presentence report to impeach him. Id. at 232-35, 768 P.2d 
at 762-64. We agree that the prosecutor's use of the presentence report was improper under Greyson, but conclude that the error was harmless. 
The prosecutor used Maryann's Hawai' i presentence 
report to question her about how soon she moved in with William after meeting him. The prosecutor also asked if seeing a statement she made that was in the presentence report would refresh her recollection about whether William gave her the gun to hold on Hasker while at the Makiki Arms apartment. At this point, Maryann objected, and the Circuit Court struck the testimony related to the State's use of the Hawai' i presentence 
report and instructed the jury to disregard it. We conclude that the State's references to the presentence report did not result in any significant prejudice to Maryann and did not affect her substantial rights. 
IV.
 
Maryann argues that the Circuit Court mishandled
 
William's refusal to testify, when he was recalled in the defense
 case, in a manner that denied her a fair trial. Maryann argues
 that she wanted to recall William to further impeach his
 credibility by questioning him about his interviews with Sheriff
 Ahn and his claim that his 1991 statements to the California
 Parole Board were prompted by his being contacted by Maryann's
 student lawyers. Maryann contends that the Circuit Court should
 have done more to require William to testify, such as order that
 he be extracted from the cellblock and brought to the courtroom,
 personally address William to order him to testify, and advise
 
25
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
William of the consequences for his refusal. We conclude that
 
the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in responding to
 William's refusal to testify.
 
Although Maryann asked that William be extracted and
 
forced to appear in court, the Circuit Court, based on its
 understanding of the circumstances, did not believe there would
 be "any gain" in doing so, and that "[it] just wouldn't work and
 wouldn't be helpful for the jury." Instead, the Circuit Court
 permitted Maryann to elicit testimony from a deputy sheriff that
 William had been subpoenaed, transported to the courthouse, and
 told that there was a lawful court order requiring him to appear
 and testify, but that William refused to go into the courtroom
 and testify. We cannot say that the Circuit Court erred in the
 
manner it chose to handle William's refusal to appear.
 
William was cross-examined thoroughly over a period of 
three days and his credibility was subject to extensive 
impeachment. During cross-examination of William, Maryann elicited the following information: William would lie in order to obtain favorable treatment; William received a favorable plea agreement from the State of Hawai' i; there was no objective way 
to determine if William was telling the truth; William lied to Sheriff Ahn; William is a convict and convicts don't tell the truth; when William talks to police, it is usually to improve his legal situation; and William lies to the police, prosecutors, and parole commissioners. Maryann also elicited testimony that William stated, under oath, to the California Parole Board that he was the shooter in the Hasker and Arauza murders, and that Maryann had nothing to do with those killings. Furthermore, Maryann was able to attack William's credibility based on his refusal to testify because the Circuit Court permitted Maryann to adduce evidence that William had been subpoenaed and brought to the courthouse, but had refused to appear for additional questioning. 
There was ample testimony and information through which
 
the jury could "gauge adequately" William's credibility and "to
 
26
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assess his . . . motives or possible bias." See State v. 
Balisbisana, 83 Hawai' i 109, 114, 924 P.2d 1215, 1220 (1996) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). We conclude 
that the manner in which the Circuit Court handled William's refusal to be recalled as a witness in the defense case did not deprive Maryann of a fair trial. 
V.
 
Maryann argues that the prosecutor engaged in
 
misconduct that violated her right to a fair trial by arguing in
 rebuttal closing that William did not ask for anything or get
 anything. We disagree.
 
During his rebuttal closing argument, the prosecutor
 
stated: 
[W]hen William Acker was shown Maryann Acker's
judgment on the stand, that was the first time he had ever
seen it. He did not know that she had her use allegation
stricken. And recall, the conviction happened in January.
William Acker didn't say anything to Wilbert Ahn until
March, after he had that meeting with [Maryann] on the bus
from court, where she said, "Have you snapped? I killed
 Cesario Arauza."
 
And at that point, he just gave up, ladies and
gentlemen. 
He pled nolo contendere, no contest. It's not
 
an admission, but the Court did find him guilty of
everything charged. There was no trial, no admission, but
he just gave up. He didn't ask for anything. He didn't get
anything. He's still in custody today.
 
The prosecutor's reference to William not asking for or 
getting anything was in the context of his plea to the California 
charges. William pleaded nolo contendere to all counts with which he was charged in the California case, including the murder of Arauza with the use of firearm allegation.
7 There was basis 
in the evidence for the prosecutor's argument. See Clark, 83 
Hawai'i at 304, 926 P.2d at 209. In addition, it was clear from 
the evidence that William had asked for and received substantial benefit in his plea agreement regarding the Hawai' i charges, 
7
 William's California judgment was admitted in evidence. William
 
acknowledged that he had pleaded nolo contendere to the murder of Arauza and
the use of firearm allegation, although he testified that when the plea was
entered, he thought he was pleading to felony murder. 
27
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
including all counts except one robbery count being dismissed and
 
William being granted transactional immunity for his testimony. 
The prosecutor's argument did not mislead the jury or violate
 Maryann's right to a fair trial.
 
VI.
 
Maryann argues that the Circuit Court's jury
 
instructions regarding the offense of murder and accomplice
 liability were erroneous. In particular, Maryann contends that
 because the indictment charged her with intentionally or
 knowingly causing Hasker's death "by shooting him with a
 firearm," she could only be convicted as a principal, and not as
 an accomplice. She argues that the instruction on the offense of
 murder should have required proof that she caused Hasker's death
 
8
by shooting him with a firearm  and that the Circuit Court should
not have given an accomplice liability instruction. We disagree.
 
It is well established that "one who is charged as a 
principal can be convicted as an accomplice without accomplice allegations being made in the indictment." State v. Fukusaku
, 85 
Hawai'i 462, 486, 946 P.2d 32, 56 (1997) (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted). Accordingly, it was not error for the Circuit Court to instruct the jury that Maryann could be convicted of murder as an accomplice. 
The inclusion of the firearm language in the indictment
 
was appropriate to give Maryann fair notice that she was subject
 to a mandatory minimum sentence if she was convicted as a
 principal. See State v. Apao 59 Haw. 625, 635-36, 586 P.2d 250,
 
257-58 (1978). In the special interrogatory regarding the
 enhanced mandatory minimum penalty for use of a firearm, the jury
 found that the State failed to prove that Maryann "actually
 possessed, used, or threatened to use a pistol" during the
 commission of the charged murder. The jury's rejection of the
 
8
 The Circuit Court's offense-of-murder jury instruction required the
State to prove, in relevant part, that Maryann (1) "intentionally or knowingly
engaged in conduct"; and (2) "[t]hat by engaging in that conduct, [Maryann]
intentionally or knowingly caused the death of Lawrence R. Hasker."
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
firearm enhancement makes clear that the jury convicted Maryann 
as an accomplice, and not as a principal. Because Maryann was not convicted as a principal, adding a requirement in the offense-of-murder jury instruction that Hasker's death was caused by his being shot with a firearm would not have affected the outcome of the case. 
See Fukusaku
, 85 Hawai' i at 487-90, 946 
P.2d at 57-60. 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit 
Court's Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 12, 2012. 
Keith S. Shigetomi
for Defendant-Appellant 
Brandon H. Ito 
(Delanie D. Prescott-Tatewith him on the brief)Deputy Prosecuting AttorneysCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
29
 