FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER»
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I »
---o0o---
IN THE MATTER OF THE
ELIZABETH J.K.L. LUCAS CHARITABLE GIFT
NO. 30306
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(TRUST NO. 08-1-0139)
JUNE 30, 2011
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
Petitioner-Appellant Hawaiian Humane Society ( HHS)
appeals from the following judgment and orders of the Circuit
Court of the First Circuit, sitting in Probate (Probate Court ):
(1) Order Denying Petition to Approve Land Exchange Free and
Clear of Use Restrictions ( Order Denying Petition), filed on May
18, 2009; (2) Order Denying Petition for Relief from Order
Denying Petition to Approve Land Exchange Free and Clear of Use
Restrictions and for Entry of Final Judgment, filed on December
21, 2009 ( Order Denying Relief ); and (3) Judgment Pursuant to
Order Denying Petition to Approve Land Exchange Free and Clear ofFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1/The Honorable Colleen K. Hirai presided.
2/The land consists of four parcels, identified by Tax Map Key Nos.
(1) 3-7-004-001, (1) 3-7-004-002, (1) 3-7-004-020, and (1) 3-7-004-021.  
2Use Restrictions (Judgment ), filed on December 21, 2009.1/  In
this case, the Probate Court declined to apply the doctrine of cy
pres to modify a charitable gift of land.  The position of all
parties on appeal is that the Probate Court erred in failing to
apply cy pres to approve the proposed land transaction.  We agree
and, accordingly, vacate the Judgment and remand with
instructions.
I. BACKGROUND
A. The Charitable Gift
The underlying petition in this case stems from HHS's
acquisition of an interest in certain land in the Niu Valley,
obtained through a charitable gift.2/  On December 28, 1976,
Elizabeth J.K.L. Lucas ( Mrs. Lucas ) granted HHS a 50.6183968%
undivided interest in the land by way of deed.  On December 30,
1982, she conveyed an additional 1.4% undivided interest in the
land to HHS by way of a second deed.  Both deeds contain the
following use restriction:
[F]or and as a charitable gift, [Mrs. Lucas] does hereby
grant, bargain, sell and convey the property hereinafter
described unto the HAWAIIAN HUMANE SOCIETY . . . so long as
the same shall be used for the benefit of the public for the
operation of an educational preserve for flora and fauna, to
be made accessible as an educational experience for the
public under the control and administration of said Hawaiian
Humane Society and its successors and assigns, and, if not
so used, then to State of Hawaii and its successors and
assigns, for and as a public park.
Upon Mrs. Lucas's death in 1986, her remaining
47.981603% interest in the land passed through her estate to her
daughter, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren (the Thompsons ),
all of whom have resided on the land for many years.  The
Thompsons formed a Hawai i general partnership, Respondent-
Appellee Tiana Partners, to which they transferred their interest
in the land.»FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3B. Attempts to Use the Gifted Land
After receiving the land, HHS made numerous attempts to
plan a feasible use for the land in furtherance of the deed
restrictions.  In consultation with Tiana Partners, HHS
considered many different ideas for effectuating the purpose
stated in the deeds, but ultimately rejected them as physically
or economically unfeasible. 
In 2003, HHS commissioned a feasibility study for a
proposed low-intensity development that would be accessible to
the public.  The study led HHS to conclude that using the land
for a public educational preserve would be extremely expensive
and impractical.  It would require disrupting the Thompson
residences and surrounding neighborhood. 
During 2004 and 2005,  HHS and Tiana Partners conducted
a series of meetings with various community organizations,
including the Honolulu Zoo, the Hawai i Nature Center, and the
Department of Education.  The purpose of the meetings was to
identify potential uses for the land that would be consistent
with the intent of the gift, beneficial to the community, and
physically and economically feasible.  Due to the residential
character of the surrounding neighborhood, an overriding
consideration was maintaining peaceful coexistence with the
Thompsons and other residents in the area.  Access to the
property was also a key consideration.  The land is remote; much
of it is steep; and it is accessible only by two residential
roads.  Using either road for public access would have a
disruptive impact on the neighboring residents.
»
The State of Hawai i ( State) Department of Land and
Natural Resources (DLNR) likewise determined that the land was
not suitable for use as a public park.  However, it determined
that a portion of the land, Parcel 2, was best-suited for
watershed and forest reserve purposes. »FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3/The parties based this purchase price on an appraisal report
completed in July of 2005.  The report valued HHS's interest in the land at
$462,100 subject to the use restriction, and at $1,703,600 free of the use
restriction.  The mid-point between these two values is $1,082,850.
4C.Land Exchange Agreement
HHS and Tiana Partners began considering other ways to
further the intent of the original gift.  On September 11, 2006,
after extensive negotiations, they signed a Memorandum of
Understanding ( MOU).  The MOU contemplates a three-way land
exchange and sale between HHS, Tiana Partners, and the State. 
HHS and Tiana Partners agreed to convey their interests in Parcel
2 to the State.  In exchange, the State would release its
executory interest in the remaining parcels.  HHS also agreed to
convey its interest in the remaining parcels (1, 20, and 21) to
Tiana Partners, free and clear of the use restriction, for
$1,082,850.3/  HHS would use the proceeds to establish a
segregated fund known as the "Charles and Clorinda Lucas
Educational Fund" ( Educational Fund ).  The principal and interest
would be dedicated exclusively to HHS's educational programs. 
These programs are designed to foster compassion and caring for
all life, focusing on the interdependent relationship between
animals, humans, and the environment and our role as stewards and
caregivers.
The MOU conditioned the proposed land exchange upon: 
(1) the agreement of the State Board of Land and Natural
Resources (BLNR ); (2) the approval of the Hawai i Legislature,
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) ÿÿ 171-50; and (3) the
approval of the Probate Court.  At board meetings on December 8,
2006 and December 14, 2007, the BLNR approved in principle the
land exchange transaction.  In December of 2007, the Legislature
also approved the transaction.  »
D. Petition to Approve Land Exchange
On October 28, 2008, HHS filed a Petition to Approve
Land Exchange Free and Clear of Use Restrictions ( Petition) withFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5the Probate Court.  The Petition sought an order approving the
proposed land transaction and eliminating the use restriction on
the land.  HHS maintained that the Probate Court had authority to
modify the terms of the charitable gift because its stated
purpose was impracticable and could not reasonably be
accomplished. 
The Attorney General, acting as parens patrie , filed a
response to the Petition on November 19, 2008.  He stated no
objection to the relief sought and affirmed that the use
restriction "has been proven demonstrably impracticable or
impossible and . . . the relief sought in the petition is fair
and reasonable and is consistent with the doctrine of cy pres." 
The State filed a joinder in the Petition on November 21, 2008. 
The Administrator of the Division of Forestry and Wildlife of the
DLNR filed a declaration attesting that the DLNR had inspected
and reviewed the properties described in the Petition.  The DLNR
"determined that these properties are not presently suitable for
use as a public park, and in particular that Parcel 2 is best
used for watershed and forest reserve purposes." 
Laura Thompson ( Thompson), Mrs. Lucas's daughter, filed
a declaration attesting that Mrs. Lucas would have fully
supported the land exchange "as a compromise necessary to further
her deep interest in all things natural and her strong commitment
to education, which can be accomplished far better through the
broad reach of the Hawaiian Humane Society than in a narrow urban
valley."  She attested that Mrs. Lucas "was actively involved
with the Hawaiian Humane Society throughout her life" and served
on its Board of Directors.  Mrs. Lucas fully supported its
mission "to promote the bond between humans and animals and to
foster the humane treatment of all animals."  Thompson believed
her mother was not aware of the obstacles preventing development
of the land in accordance with the deeds.  She believed her
mother's original intent in gifting the land was "to benefit the
people of Hawai i through the work of the Hawaiian Humane »FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6Society" and to "help the Society provide an educational
experience for the public."
E. Probate Court Order and Judgment
Following a hearing, the Probate Court entered the
Order Denying Petition on May 18, 2009.  The court stated the
following grounds as its basis for the denial:
1.  The deeds provide, ". . . for and as a charitable gift,
does hereby grant, bargain, sell and convey the property
hereinafter described unto the Hawaiian Humane Society, . .
. so long as the same shall be used for the benefit of the
public for the operation of an educational preserve for
flora and fauna, to be made accessible as an educational
experience for the public under the control and
administration of said Hawaiian Humane Society, . . . and if
not so used, then to State of Hawaii, its successors and
assigns for and as a public park, . . ."
2.  Even if the Court finds that the deeds create a
charitable trust, the Memorandum of Understanding does not
involve the use of the properties as stated in the deeds. 
The Memorandum of Understanding states that the Petitioner
will receive cash in exchange for conveying its interest in
the properties and will use the cash ". . . to establish a
segregated fund to be known as the 'Charles and Clorinda
Lucas Educational Fund,' the principle [sic] and interest of
which fund shall be used exclusively to pay the costs
associated with educational programs designed to foster
compassion and caring for all life, focused on the
interdependent relationship between animals, humans and the
environment and on our roles as stewards and caregivers."
3.  Mrs. Lucas' charitable purpose as stated in the deeds is
to use the properties for the operation of an educational
preserve for flora and fauna, to be made accessible as an
educational experience for the public.  The deeds also
provide that if the petitioner does not use the properties
for the stated charitable purpose, the properties would go
to the State of Hawaii.
4.  The doctrine of cy pres does not apply to the Petitioner
since the deeds provide for an alternative if the properties
are not used by the Petitioner as Mrs. Lucas intended.  
On August 3, 2009, HHS filed a petition for relief from
the Probate Court's Order Denying Petition.  The Attorney General
and Tiana Partners filed joinders in the petition for relief, and
the State filed a memorandum of no opposition.  All interested
parties agreed that the Probate Court misconstrued the cy pres
doctrine and that it should have approved the transaction. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7On December 21, 2009, the Probate Court entered the
Order Denying Relief and the Judgment.  HHS timely appealed.
II. POINTS OF ERROR
On appeal, HHS argues that the Probate Court erred in
denying the Petition and refusing to modify the terms of the
charitable gift to approve the proposed land exchange.  Tiana
Partners filed an Answering Brief in support of HHS's position. 
The State filed an Answering Brief expressing its non-opposition
and joinder in HHS's request for relief.
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
Hawai i courts have not addressed the applicable
standard of review for a lower court's refusal to apply the
doctrine of cy pres .  In applying an analogous doctrine to reform
the terms of a private trust, the supreme court analyzed the
issue as a question of law.  In re Estate of Chun Quan Yee Hop ,
52 Haw. 40, 45-46, 469 P.2d 183, 186-87 (1970).  Other
jurisdictions have held that whether cy pres  applies is a
question of law, reviewable de novo .  See, e.g. , Kolb v. City of
Storm Lake , 736 N.W.2d 546, 552-53 (Iowa 2007); In re R.B.
Plummer Memorial Loan Fund Trust, 661 N.W.2d 307, 311 (Neb.
2003); Puget Sound Nat'l Bank of Tacoma v. Easterday , 350 P.2d
444, 447 (Wash. 1960); ABC for Health, Inc. v. Comm'r of Ins.,
640 N.W.2d 510, 515 (Wis. Ct. App. 2001) .  Accordingly, we hold
that the issue of whether the doctrine of cy pres  is applicable
is a question of law, reviewable de novo .  Once cy pres  is
determined to be applicable, the lower court has discretion in
determining the appropriate modification of the charitable gift. 
Obermeyer v. Bank of America, N.A. , 140 S.W.3d 18, 22 (Mo. 2004).»FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4/The term cy pres originates from the French phrase cy pres comme
possible
, meaning "so nearly as may be."  Am. Jur. 2d ÿÿ 149. 
5/The Restatement (Second) of Trusts  ÿÿ 399 (1959) ( Restatement 2d)
sets forth the doctrine as follows:
If property is given in trust to be applied to a particular
charitable purpose, and it is or becomes impossible or
impracticable or illegal to carry out the particular
purpose, and if the settlor manifested a more general
intention to devote the property to charitable purposes, the
trust will not fail but the court will direct the
application of the property to some charitable purpose which
falls within the general charitable intention of the
settlor.
8IV.DISCUSSION
A.Cy Pres Generally
The doctrine of cy pres "permits a gift for a
charitable purpose which cannot, for one reason or another, be
carried out as directed by the donor, to be applied 'as nearly as
may be' to the fulfillment of the underlying charitable intent." 
15 Am. Jur. 2d Charities  ÿÿ 149 (2011) ( Am. Jur. 2d ).4/  Under the
doctrine's traditional formulation, three elements are required: 
(1) there must be property given in trust for a charitable
purpose; (2) it must be impossible, impracticable, or illegal to
carry out the specified charitable purpose; and (3) the settlor
must have manifested a general intent to devote the property to
charitable purposes.5/  Id.
 Hawai i courts have not directly addressed or applied
the cy pres doctrine.  However, the supreme court has recognized
the doctrine in dictum.  Chun Quan Yee , 52 Haw. at 45, 469 P.2d
at 186.  It noted that "[i]f it is impossible, impractical or
illegal to carry out the specific terms of a charitable trust in
which the settlor has indicated a general charitable purpose,
many courts will authorize the substitution of another charitable
scheme within the testator's general purposes."  Id.   The court
went on to apply an analogous doctrine to save a private trust
from failing due to its contravention of the Rule Against
Perpetuities.  Id. at 45-46, 469 P.2d at 186-87.  »FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6/A trust arises whenever property is conveyed to be held for the
benefit of another.  Ako v. Russell , 32 Haw. 769, 770 (1933); accord In re
Damon Estate, 76 Hawai» i 120, 125 n.4, 869 P.2d 1339, 1344 n.4 (1994).  A
charitable trust arises when the property is given "for a purpose beneficial
to a community[.]"  Banner Health System v. Long, 663 N.W.2d 242, 247 (S.D.
2003); accord Austin Wakeman Scott et al., Scott and Ascher on Trusts
ÿÿ 38.1.2, at 2502 (5th ed. 2006) ( Scott on Trusts).  No technical language or
separate trust instrument is required.  Ako, 32 Haw. at 770.  If it appears
from the whole instrument that the donor intended the property "to be held or
dealt with for the benefit of another, a court of equity will affix to it the
character of a trust[.]"  Id.  A trust arises so long as the subject matter,
beneficiaries, and terms are "reasonably certain as to be capable of
enforcement."  Damon Estate , 76 Hawai »i at 125 n.4, 869 P.2d at 1344 n.4. 
Here, the deeds conveyed property to HHS (or alternatively to the State) for
the use and benefit of the public for charitable purposes.
9Cy pres is only applicable to charitable trusts.6/ 
Restatement (Third) of Trusts  ÿÿ 67, cmt. a (2003) ( Restatement
3d); Am. Jur. 2d ÿÿ 149.  Various policy considerations underlie
its application.  First and foremost, the doctrine stems from the
inability of charitable settlors to foresee the future. 
Restatement 3d , Reporter's Notes, cmt. a (recognizing that
without cy pres, "many charities would fail by change of
circumstances and the happening of contingencies which no human
foresight could provide against").  Circumstances change and
contingencies frequently arise that the settlor did not or could
not anticipate.  This is particularly true for charitable trusts,
as they may be perpetual in duration.  Id. ; Ronald Chester,
George Gleason Bogert, and George Taylor Bogert, The Law of
Trusts & Trustees ÿÿ 431, at 117 (3d ed. 2005) ( Bogert on Trusts). 
The "needs and circumstances of society evolve over time,"
impacting the potential benefit of the trust.  Restatement 3d
ÿÿ 67, cmt. a.  Rather than allowing the trust to fail, cy pres
preserves the settlor's charitable intent by conforming the trust FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7/One commentator reasons that cy pres comports with most settlors'
probable intentions:
[S]ince no one can foresee the future, a rational donor
knows that his intentions might eventually be thwarted by
unpredictable circumstances and may therefore be presumed to
accept implicitly a rule permitting modification of the
terms of the bequest in the event that an unforeseen change
frustrates his original intention.
Restatement 3d  ÿÿ 67, Reporter's Notes, cmt. b (quoting Richard A. Posner,
Economic Analysis of Law  556-57 (5th ed. 1998)).
10to the contingencies that arise.7/  Thus "[j]ust as it is against
the policy of the trust law to permit wasteful or seriously
inefficient use of resources dedicated to charity, trust law also
favors an interpretation that would sustain a charitable trust
and avoid the return of the trust property to the settlor or
successors in interest."  Id. at cmt. b.  Similarly, because
charitable trusts impact a broad spectrum of the public and "are
allowed by the law to be perpetual," they often merit a greater
exercise of judicial discretion than a private trust.  Id. at
Reporter's Notes, cmt. a.
Courts widely recognize that the charitable purpose
need not be impossible to warrant applying cy pres .  It is
sufficient that achieving the settlor's stated purpose would be
impracticable or unreasonable to effectuate.  Restatement 3d
ÿÿ 67, cmt. c ("The doctrine of cy pres may also be applied, even
though it is possible  to carry out the particular purpose of the
settlor, if to do so would not accomplish the settlor's
charitable objective, or would not do so in a reasonable way .")
(second emphasis added); Bogert on Trusts  ÿÿ 438, at 194-96
(recognizing insufficiency of funds as basis for doctrine); Scott
on Trusts  ÿÿ 39.5.2, at 2717-20; ÿÿ 39.5.4, at 2740-41; Am. Jur. 2d
ÿÿ 151 (doctrine is applicable where donor's directions " cannot
beneficially be carried into effect") (emphasis added;
punctuation altered).  "An impractical restriction is one that isFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11not capable of being carried out in practice."  Am. Jur. 2d
ÿÿ 157.  If literal compliance would "defeat or substantially
impair" the purposes of the trust, cy pres is applicable. 
Restatement 2d  ÿÿ 399, cmt. a.  The purpose of the trust becomes
impaired if "the application of [trust] property to such purpose
would not accomplish the general charitable intention of the
settlor."  88 Am. Jur. Proof of Facts  3d 469, ÿÿ 10 (2006) ( Am.
Jur. Proof of Facts  3d). 
Thus, cy pres is applicable where a settlor creates a
charitable trust of real property to be used for a particular
purpose, but the property turns out to be unsuitable for that
purpose.  See Scott on Trusts ÿÿ 39.5.2, at 2724-25; Roberds v.
Markham, 81 F. Supp. 38, 40 (D.C. 1948) (recognizing that courts
may order sale of gifted land if conditions have drastically
changed or land otherwise becomes unsuitable for its dedicated
purpose); Bd. of Educ. of Rockford v. City of Rockford , 24 N.E.2d
366, 369-73 (Ill. 1939) (applying cy pres to allow sale of land
in charitable trust where its dedicated use as school became
impracticable due to shifting populations, deterioration of
existing building, and existence of another school that met needs
of the area).  In one case, for example, a settlor gifted certain
land to a charity for the purpose of building a public library
upon the land.  Bosson v. Woman's Christian Nat'l Library Ass'n ,
225 S.W.2d 336, 337 (Ark. 1949).  The land turned out to be
unsuitable for constructing a library.  Id.  The charity reached
an agreement with a county library board under which it would
sell the land and use the proceeds to build a public library upon
property owned by the county board.  Id.   The board agreed to
operate the library for the benefit and use of the public.  Id.
at 337-38.  On appeal, the court applied cy pres to approve the
transaction.  Id. at 338-39.  It noted that cy pres applies where
the circumstances "have changed to such an extent that in orderFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12to carry out properly the charitable intention of the donor, it
is necessary to dispose of the trust property and devote the
funds to the acquisition of a more suitable location[.]"  Id. at
338 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
Similarly, a California court applied cy pres where the
stated purposes of the gifted properties became impracticable. 
In re Estate of Zahn , 93 Cal. Rptr. 810 (Cal. Ct. App. 1971). 
There, the testatrix left two residential properties to the
Salvation Army.  Id. at 811.  She directed the Flower Street
property to be used as a home for Christian women, and the
Keniston Avenue property as a music home.  Id.  After her death,
the Flower Street property was taken pursuant to eminent domain
and the Keniston Avenue property was deemed unsuitable for
development due to zoning issues.  Id. at 813.  The Salvation
Army proposed to use the funds from the Flower Street property to
erect and furnish a new building on a different site.  Id.  It
further proposed to sell the Keniston Avenue property and use the
proceeds to either construct a music conservatory on another site
or endow a music room under construction at another Salvation
Army center.  Id.  
The court confirmed that cy pres was applicable.  Id.
at 814.  It concluded that because neither property was suitable
for carrying out the testatrix's declared intentions, the lower
court "properly directed that her charitable purposes be given
effect at some other suitable locations."  Id. ; see also  Bogert
on Trusts  ÿÿ 439, at 218-20 (noting that cy pres is applicable
where trust property is taken under eminent domain).
The third element -- general charitable intent -- has
been a source of uncertainty and reform.  Under the traditional
rule, cy pres may only be applied if the settlor possessed a
general charitable intent.  Am. Jur. 2d ÿÿ 153.  His or her intent
must have encompassed "something beyond the specific terms usedFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8/Despite requiring a general charitable intent, the Second
Restatement notes that cy pres  allows sale of the subject property even if
"the settlor in specific words directed that the land should not be sold and
that the institution should not be maintained in any other place." 
Restatement 2d  ÿÿ 399, cmt. p. 
13in designating the beneficiary or purpose of the gift or how it
shall be carried into effect."  Id. ; see also Restatement 2d     
ÿÿ 399; Bogert on Trusts  ÿÿ 431, at 119; ÿÿ 436, at 157-60.  The
donor must have had a general charitable intent, as opposed to a
narrow intent to benefit only a "particular project, objective,
or institution[.]"  Am. Jur. 2d  ÿÿ 153.   For example, where a
settlor's dominant intent is to restrict the charitable gift to
the exact purpose specified, courts may presume that the donor
would not have wanted the property to be applied to any other
purpose, however closely related, even if the original purpose
fails.  Restatement 2d  ÿÿ 399, cmt. d.8/  In such situations, cy
pres is not applicable because the settlor did not have a general
charitable intent.  Id.; see also Shoemaker v. Am. Sec. & Trust
Co., 163 F.2d 585, 588 (D.C. Cir. 1947) (noting that cy pres does
not apply if settlor's "dominant purpose has become altogether
impossible of achievement").  In contrast, if the settlor's
designation of a particular property or site is incidental to the
dominant charitable purpose, then courts will presume that the
settlor's primary intent was to dedicate the property to
charitable purposes.  Shoemaker , 163 F.2d at 589; see also In re
Wilkey's Estate , 10 A.2d 425, 428 (Pa. 1940) (recognizing that cy
pres applies where "the physical location of the edifice or
institution provided for in a charitable trust has been held to
be of secondary importance in comparison with the general purpose
for which the erection of the building or the carrying on of the
charitable activity was designed").  In such cases, cy pres  is
readily applicable to effectuate the settlor's general charitable
intent.  Shoemaker , 163 F.2d at 589.FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9/The Third Restatement of Trusts provides:
Unless the terms of the trust provide otherwise, where
property is placed in trust to be applied to a designated
charitable purpose and it is or becomes unlawful,
impossible, or impracticable to carry out that purpose, or
to the extent it is or becomes wasteful to apply all of the
property to the designated purpose, the charitable trust
will not fail but the court will direct application of the
property or appropriate portion thereof to a charitable
purpose that reasonably approximates the designated purpose.
Restatement 3d  ÿÿ 67 (emphasis added).
10/A number of courts have employed a presumption in favor of a
general charitable intent.  Smith v. Moore , 225 F. Supp. 434, 441-42 (E.D. Va.
1963) ("[C]haritable gifts are viewed with peculiar favor by the courts and
every presumption consistent with the language contained in the instruments of
gift will be employed in order to sustain them. All doubts will be resolved in
their favor."); accord  Trammell v. Elliott, 199 S.E.2d 194, 198-99 (Ga. 1973);
In re Kraetzer's Will, 462 N.Y.S.2d 1009, 1013 (N.Y. Surr. Ct. 1983)
("[A]bsent an express divesting condition, cy pres is almost invariably
applied."); Georgia O'Keeffe Found. (Museum) v. Fisk Univ. , 312 S.W.3d 1,
17(Tenn. Ct. App. 2009) ("[C]ourts generally favor a finding of general
charitable intent, and absent an express divesting condition, cy pres is
almost invariably applied.") (internal quotation marks, citations, and
emphasis omitted).  To date, twenty-three states have enacted the Uniform
Trust Code, including its presumption in favor of a general charitable intent. 
UNIF. TRUST CODE ÿÿ 413, 7C U.L.A. 509, cmt.; see Uniform Law Commission
Enactment Charts, available at
http://www.nccusl.org/Act.aspx?title=Trust%20Code .
14Increasingly, the "general charitable intent"
requirement has shifted to an "opt-out" framework under which the
settlor is presumed to have a general charitable intent unless
the terms of the trust provide otherwise.  See Restatement 3d    
ÿÿ 67, cmt. b; Reporter's Notes, cmt. b;9/ UNIF. TRUST CODE ÿÿ 413(a),
7C U.L.A. 509 (2006); Bogert on Trusts ÿÿ 436, at 160 (noting that
"it would seem preferable" either to employ presumption in favor
of general intent or apply cy pres  regardless of whether
settlor's charitable intent was general or specific); but see Am.
Jur. Proof of Facts  3d ÿÿ 6 (noting that "presumption of general
charitable purpose has not yet been discussed in the reported
decisions").10/  Commentators have noted that the "general intent"
requirement is vague and difficult to apply consistently.  Ronald
Chester, Cy Pres or Gift Over?: The Search for Coherence inFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15Judicial Reform of Failed Charitable Trusts, 23 Suffolk U. L.
Rev. 41, 45-46 (1989); accord  Bogert on Trusts  ÿÿ 436, at 159-60;
ÿÿ 437, at 183-89 (noting widespread inconsistency in applying
this requirement).  It turns on a fine, and often subjective,
distinction between a settlor's dominant and incidental or
subsidiary objectives.  See  Bogert on Trusts, ÿÿ 437 at 183-89. 
In contrast, the opt-out rule provides a clearer delineation that
avoids guesswork as to the subtleties of the settlor's intent.
Finally, in applying cy pres , courts must generally
seek a purpose that conforms to the donor's objective "as nearly
as possible."  Am. Jur. 2d  ÿÿ 157.  This may be attained by
limiting or modifying the objective; by diverting the funds to
another use in the "same generally contemplated field"; or by
directing sale of the subject property.  Id.; Am. Jur. Proof of
Facts 3d ÿÿ 10; Restatement 2d  ÿÿ 399, cmt. p ( cy pres allows sale
of land even if "the settlor in specific words directed that the
land should not be sold and that the institution should not be
maintained in any other place").  In the case of a sale, the
proceeds may be applied to purchase a new, more suitable site, or
to further the settlor's charitable intent in another manner. 
See Am. Jur. Proof of Facts 3d ÿÿ 21.  Where a charitable gift of
property is subject to use restrictions, the court may apply cy
pres to modify or eliminate those restrictions.  Id. at ÿÿ 22;
Bogert on Trusts  ÿÿ 431, at 115; Scott on Trusts ÿÿ 39.5.2, at
2716.
In determining the appropriate modification, courts
must consider a variety of factors and evidence to ascertain what
the settlor's wishes would have been had he or she anticipated
the circumstances.  Restatement 3d  ÿÿ 67, cmt. d.  Chief among
them is the settlor's probable intent.  Id.  Where the settlor is
deceased, this intent may be discerned from extrinsic evidence as
well as the language of the trust instrument.  Such evidenceFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
16includes the interests and attitudes that motivated the settlor's
gift; his or her involvement or interest in particular charitable
institutions; and the settlor's "relationships, social or
religious affiliations, personal background, charitable-giving
history, and the like."  Id.; accord Bogert on Trusts  ÿÿ 442, at
257-58.  The language of the trust instrument is also pertinent. 
Restatement 2d ÿÿ 399, cmt. d.  
The modern approach to cy pres  also emphasizes
considering the efficiency and beneficial impact of the proposed
use.  Restatement 3d  ÿÿ 67, cmt. d.  As the settlor's intent
cannot be known for certain, applying cy pres  necessarily
involves some level of speculation.  Id. ; accord Scott on Trusts
ÿÿ 39.5.2, at 2709 (noting that courts must make "an educated
guess" as to settlor's wishes).  Thus, it is generally
"reasonable to suppose that among relatively similar purposes,
charitably-inclined settlors would tend to prefer those most
beneficial to their communities."  Restatement 3d  ÿÿ 67, cmt. d
(emphasis omitted; punctuation altered).  To an increasing
extent, courts thus seek to apply the trust property toward "a
scheme which on the whole is best suited to accomplish the
general charitable purpose of the donor."  Restatement 2d ÿÿ 399,
cmt. b.  Finally, the wishes of the trustees, the Attorney
General as parens patrie , the beneficiaries, and other interested
parties also warrant consideration.  Id.  at cmt. f; Bogert on
Trusts ÿÿ 442, at 258. 
B. Gift over Rule
Having established the broad contours of the cy pres
doctrine, we now turn to the heart of the issue on appeal: 
whether the Probate Court erred in concluding that cy pres is not
applicable in this case.  The Probate Court reasoned that cy pres
does not apply because the deeds provide an alternative
distribution in the event that the primary charitable purposeFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11/As noted above, this requirement has increasingly been replaced by
a clearer, opt-out framework under which the settlor is presumed to have a
general charitable intent unless the trust instrument indicates otherwise. 
See supra  part IV(A).
17fails.  It concluded that "if [HHS] does not use the properties
for the stated charitable purpose, the properties would go to the
State of Hawaii."
The Probate Court's rationale appears to invoke the
gift over rule.  A gift over is a provision that sets forth an
alternative distribution in the event that the primary purpose of
the charitable gift fails.  Am. Jur. 2d  ÿÿ 151.  The presence of a
gift over provision may potentially preclude application of cy
pres in two ways:  (1) by negating the existence of a general
charitable intent, and (2) by providing an alternative
distribution in the event that the settlor's original purpose
fails.  Restatement 2d  ÿÿ 399, Reporter's Notes, cmt. c; Am. Jur.
2d ÿÿ 151; Scott on Trusts  ÿÿ 39.5.2, at 2710-13; ÿÿ 39.7.5, at
2795-97; 14 C.J.S. Charities ÿÿ 56 (2011).
The first application of the gift over rule is only
relevant to the traditional requirement that the settlor exhibit
a general charitable intent.11/  Under this reasoning, the gift
over confirms the settlor's narrow and specific intent.  14
C.J.S. Charities  ÿÿ 56.  This is especially true where the gift
over is to a non-charity, such as a possibility of reverter. 
Nelson v Kring, 592 P.2d 438, 444 (Kan. 1979); In re Goehringer's
Will, 329 N.Y.S.2d 516, 521 (N.Y. Surr. Ct. 1972) (noting that
presence of gift over provision "is a clear manifestation that
[the] testator had a particular rather than general charitable
intention"); Roberds, 81 F. Supp. at 40-42 (concluding that
because deed contained possibility of reverter if land ever
ceased to be used for its prescribed purpose, settlor's intent
was specific to that purpose).  Such a provision indicates that
the settlor only wished to dedicate the property to a specificFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
18purpose and, if that specific purpose failed, to not dedicate it
to charity at all.  In re Goehringer's Will, 329 N.Y.S.2d at 521
("[A] specific gift over will almost conclusively preclude any
determination that he had other than an intent to benefit the
particular charity.").
In contrast, where the gift over is to another charity
or charitable purpose, many courts recognize that it confirms a
general charitable intent.  See  Bogert on Trusts ÿÿ 437, at 165-
70; Scott on Trusts  ÿÿ 39.5.2, at 2713; First Nat'l Bank of
Chicago v. Elliott , 92 N.E.2d 66, 74 (Ill. 1950).  Such a
provision illustrates the settlor's intent to dedicate the
property to charity, even if the original purpose fails.  Bogert
on Trusts ÿÿ 437, at 165-70. 
Here, the deeds provide an alternative charitable
purpose:  for the land to be used by the State as a public park.
Under the traditional formulation of the charitable intent
requirement, the gift over in this case confirms Mrs. Lucas's
general charitable intent.  Thus, regardless of the continuing
viability of the general intent requirement, the gift over
provision does not prevent application of cy pres under the first
rationale.
In any event, it does not appear that the Probate Court
applied the first rationale of the gift over rule.  The Order
Denying Petition contains no mention of general charitable
intent.  Instead, the Court's reasoning conforms to the second
rationale.  It concluded that because the deeds direct an
alternative distribution, cy pres is inapplicable. 
This second application of the gift over rule provides
that cy pres is inapplicable as the trust property should be
applied toward its alternative purpose.  14 C.J.S. Charities
ÿÿ 56.  The rule reasons that the settlor foresaw the potential
failure of the first purpose and accordingly provided anFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
19alternative purpose.  Id.  Thus, effectuating the alternative
distribution matches the settlor's intent more closely than
applying cy pres to maintain the first, failed purpose.
A number of cases affirm the straightforward
application of this rule.  In Roberds v. Markham , for example,
the settlor conveyed property in trust to a church for its
continuing operation as a church or place of worship.  81 F.
Supp. at 39.  The deed provided that if the property ever ceased
to be used for church purposes, it would revert to the settlor's
heirs and assigns.  Id.   Many years later, when the character of
the surrounding neighborhood had changed and the church's
population had shifted, the trustees sought to sell the property
and re-erect the church at another, more suitable location.  Id.  
The court concluded that because the deed contained a possibility
of reverter, the settler had intended the land to revert to her
heirs and assigns if its use as a church ever became
impracticable or impossible.  Id.  at 40-42.  It therefore did not
apply cy pres to permit the sale.  Id. at 42; see also First
Nat'l Bank of Chicago v. Am. Bd. of Comm'rs for Foreign Missions,
66 N.E.2d 446, 448-49 (Ill. Ct. App. 1946) (declining to apply cy
pres where will impliedly provided for substitute distribution);
accord Conn. Bank & Trust Co. v. Cyril and Julia C. Johnson Mem'l
Hosp., 294 A.2d 586, 591-93 (Conn. 1972); Hail v. Cook , 294
S.W.2d 87, 88-89 (Ky. 1956).
Yet this application of the gift over rule is subject
to an important caveat.  Where the alternative distribution is
unfeasible, impracticable, or impossible, then the gift over rule
does not preclude the application of cy pres to save the first
charitable purpose.  Am. Jur. Proof of Facts  3d ÿÿ 19; 14 C.J.S.
Charities ÿÿ 56; Restatement 3d § 67, cmt. b.  In such cases,
applying the alternative purpose would likewise frustrate orFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
20substantially impair the settlor's intent.  Cy pres is thus
necessary to save the trust from failure.
It appears that only one reported case has addressed
this relatively rare scenario.  Burr v. Brooks , 393 N.E.2d 1091
(Ill. Ct. App. 1979), aff'd , Burr v. Brooks, 416 N.E.2d 231 (Ill.
1981).  In Burr, the testator bequeathed certain real property
and funds to the City of Bloomington for the construction and
operation of a memorial hospital.  Id. at 1093.  The will
directed the hospital to be constructed on the site where the
testator had resided.  Id.   It was to be operated especially for
the benefit of indigent accident victims.  Id.   The will also
directed an alternative distribution in the event that the City
declined the bequest.  Id.   The substitute purpose required the
trustees to construct and maintain an "Industrial School for
Girls" on the site of his former residence.  Id. 
The City adopted a resolution purporting to accept the
bequest.  Id. at 1094.  However, it determined that the site was
not suitable for construction of a hospital, that there were
already sufficient hospitals in the area, and that it could not
obtain the requisite permission from governing authorities.  Id. 
It thus sought to sell the real property and apply the proceeds
and remaining funds toward three related purposes that were more
suitable to the City's present needs:  (1) to provide health care
for indigent persons; (2) to establish a memorial family care and
diagnostic center that would offer free services to indigent
persons; and (3) to establish an emergency medical services
program.  Id.  
The intervenors, the city school district and a non-
profit successor to the county Women's Industrial Home, opposed
application of cy pres on the basis that the will provided for an
alternative charitable distribution.  Id.  They maintained that
because the first purpose was impracticable, the court shouldFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
21apply the funds toward housing and educational programs in
conformance with the alternative distribution.  Id. 
The parties agreed that neither proposed use of the
property effected literal compliance with the will; both the
primary and alternative distributions were impracticable or
impossible.  Id.  at 1095.  Because the alternative distribution
was also impracticable, the presence of the gift over provision
did not defeat application of the cy pres doctrine.  Id. at 1095,
1097.  The court noted that it would "make[] no sense" to apply
the gift over rule in cases where the alternative distribution,
like the primary one, is incapable of literal performance.  Id.
at 1097.  It concluded that cy pres  is applicable where a trust
instrument "(1) provides for a primary and alternate charitable
gift, neither of which can be carried out, and (2) also indicates
a strong desire that the charitable interest of the document be
followed."  Id.  at 1097 (punctuation altered).  The appellate
court thus held that the trust property should not be summarily
redirected to its alternative distribution because the
alternative beneficiaries, "like the City, would be unable to
comply with the terms of either charitable gift and could also
make only a [c]y pres use of the property."  Id.  It remanded for
the lower court to apply cy pres and determine which proposed use
"most nearly follow[s] the interest of the [testator]."  Id. at
1098.
Burr v. Brooks  thus recognizes that where the settlor
provides for an alternative charitable distribution, but that
secondary purpose is also impracticable or impossible, cy pres
may apply to save the first.  See Am. Jur. Proof of Facts 3d ÿÿ 19
("Where the donor provides that on failure of the primary
charitable purpose the gift shall be used for a second charitable
purpose, but makes no provision concerning the failure of the
second purpose, and both purposes fail, cy pres may be applied.")FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12/The Probate Court concluded that the "deeds also provide that if
the petitioner does not use the properties for the stated charitable purpose,
the properties would go to the State of Hawaii."  However, the deeds do not
(continued...)
22(citing Burr v. Brooks ); accord 14 C.J.S. Charities  ÿÿ 56 ("Where
the donor provides that on failure of the primary charitable
purpose, the gift will be used for a second charitable purpose,
but makes no provision concerning the failure of the second
purpose, and both purposes fail, cy pres may be applied.")
(citing Burr v. Brooks ).  As one commentator recognized, if the
alternative distribution "requires cy pres in order to be viable,
the presumption for saving the initial gift is strengthened. This
is because the second gift's only practical advantage over the
first -- that it can be plugged in automatically -- no longer
remains."  Chester, Cy Pres or Gift Over? , 23 Suffolk U. L. Rev.
at 62 (citing Burr v. Brooks ).  The Third Restatement of Trusts
has also expressly adopted this approach:
A trust provision expressing the settlor's own choice of an
alternative charitable purpose will be carried out, without
need to apply the cy pres doctrine, assuming not only that
the initially specified purpose cannot be given effect or
continued but also that the alternative purpose is one that
properly can be given effect.
Restatement 3d  ÿÿ 67, cmt. b (emphasis added).
The approach expounded in Burr v. Brooks  comports with
the policies underlying cy pres.  Fundamentally, the doctrine
exists to save a charitable trust from failure while preserving
the settlor's original, charitable intent.  Restatement 3d  ÿÿ 67,
cmt. b.  Thus where both the primary and alternative charitable
distributions are impracticable, courts may presume that the
settlor would have intended one or both purposes to survive under
application of cy pres. 
Here, the deeds provide that if the first purpose -- an
educational nature preserve operated by HHS -- fails, the
property passes to the State "for and as a public park."12/  ThisFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12/(...continued)
provide an outright transfer to the State for any purpose.  Rather, they
phrase the alternative distribution as a limited one, "to State of Hawaii and
its successors and assigns, for and as a public park."  (Emphasis added.)
13/The Probate Court also concluded that cy pres is inapplicable
because the proposed land transaction and use of the proceeds "does not
involve the use of the properties as stated in the deeds."  However, cy pres
necessarily involves modifying the settlor's stated purpose and restrictions
for the trust property.  Scott on Trusts  ÿÿ 39.5, at 2697; Restatement 2d ÿÿ
399, cmt. a (cy pres permits "application of the trust property to a different
charitable purpose from that designated by the settlor"); Restatement 3d  ÿÿ 67,
cmt. d. 
HHS also argues that the Probate Court may approve the land
exchange transaction, without applying cy pres, under the doctrine of
equitable deviation.  That doctrine, however, only allows modification of
administrative terms of the trust.  Am. Jur. 2d ÿÿÿÿ 155-56; Restatement 3d     
ÿÿ 67, cmt. b (noting that equitable deviation "modif[ies] the means by which
the purpose is to be accomplished) (emphasis added).  Where the proposed
modification impacts the charitable purpose, the doctrine is inapplicable. 
Am. Jur. 2d ÿÿ 155; Am. Jur. Proof of Facts  3d ÿÿ 7 (noting that equitable
deviation permits trustees to deviate "from the mechanical means" of
administering the trust); Burr , 393 N.E.2d at 1096-97 (holding that equitable
deviation was not applicable where trustees sought to sell subject property
and apply proceeds toward different, though closely related, purpose).  Here,
because the proposed modification alters the use of the properties, it does
not merely pertain to an administrative provision of the gift, but rather to
its charitable purpose.  Cy pres, and not equitable deviation, is thus
applicable.
23secondary purpose, however, is likewise impracticable.  The DLNR
determined that the land was unsuitable for use as a public park,
and that only a portion of the land could be used as a forest
preserve and watershed.  Thus, the Legislature approved the
proposed land exchange, and the State filed a joinder in HHS's
Petition.  Redirecting the land to the State would not effectuate
Mrs. Lucas's charitable intent.  Rather, it would result in the
failure of the trust.  As in Burr, both the primary and
alternative purposes of the gift are impracticable, as the land
cannot feasibly be used for either purpose.  Burr, 393 N.E.2d at
1095.  The Probate Court therefore erred in concluding that the
gift over rule precludes application of cy pres.13/  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
24C.Cy Pres Applies to Approve the Proposed Land Exchange
HHS, Tiana Partners, and the State request this court
to remand the case with instructions to apply cy pres to approve
the proposed land exchange free and clear of the use
restrictions.  We agree that cy pres so applies in this case.
As discussed above, cy pres applies where:  (1)
property is given in trust for a charitable purpose; (2) it is
impracticable to carry out the specified charitable purpose; and
(3) the settlor manifested a general intent to devote the
property to charitable purposes.  Supra part IV(A).  Here, those
elements are met.  Mrs. Lucas conveyed the land to HHS for
charitable purposes for the use and benefit of the public.  The
parties do not dispute, and the evidence readily establishes,
that Mrs. Lucas's specified purposes for the land are both
impracticable.
The conveyance also satisfies the traditional
requirement of general charitable intent.  In determining whether
the settlor possessed a general charitable intent, courts
consider the language of the instrument, the nature and duration
of the gift, the character of the recipient organization, the
presence or absence of a reversionary clause, and the mode for
effectuating the gift.  Am. Jur. 2d § 154.  Courts may also
consider extrinsic evidence of the settlor's probable intent. 
Am. Jur. Proof of Facts  3d § 20; accord Bogert on Trusts  § 437,
at 160-73.  If the settlor intended the gift to "be continued
within the limits of its general purpose" rather than cease upon
the failure of its specific purpose, this constitutes a general
intent.  Obermeyer , 140 S.W.3d at 24.  Gifts in support of
educational goals often demonstrate a general charitable intent
because there is a perpetual need and use for them.  Id. ; accord
Bogert on Trusts  § 436, at 157. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
25In this case, the deeds convey the land "for and as a
charitable gift" for the purpose of educating the public.  They
specify an alternative means of achieving the charitable purpose
in the event the first method fails.  The deeds thus confirm that
Mrs. Lucas did not intend the trust to fail should use of the
land become impracticable.  See Bogert on Trusts  § 437, at 165-70
(gift over to another charitable purpose confirms general
charitable intent); accord Scott on Trusts  § 39.5.2, at 2713;
First Nat'l Bank of Chicago, 92 N.E.2d at 74.  The declaration of
Mrs. Lucas's daughter, evidencing Mrs. Lucas's probable wishes
regarding the property had she been alive, further supports a
general charitable intent. 
Finally, the proposed land exchange closely conforms to
Mrs. Lucas's original purpose.  The deed restriction contemplates
a nature preserve to function "as an educational experience for
the public."  Mrs. Lucas's daughter attested that her mother
intended to generally benefit the people of Hawai i by enabling
HHS to provide "an educational experience for the public."  The
Educational Fund preserves those goals by promoting educational
programming that focuses on the natural environment.  This use of
the funds also comports with Mrs. Lucas's lifelong interest and
involvement with HHS.  It accomplishes her probable wishes
regarding the use of the land had she been aware of the obstacles
preventing its development.  Unlike in Burr v. Brooks , the
interested parties all agree that the proposed land exchange
effectuates Mrs. Lucas's charitable intent as nearly as possible. 
Cf. Burr, 393 N.E.2d at 1095.  This unanimous accord further
supports applying cy pres  to approve the transaction.  See
Restatement 2d  ÿÿ 399, cmt. f ; Bogert on Trusts  ÿÿ 442, at 258
(recognizing that wishes of trustees, beneficiaries, attorney
general, and other interested parties warrant consideration). »FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
26There is no evidence, either extrinsic or in the deeds
themselves, to support a contrary conclusion.
V. CONCLUSION
For these reasons, we conclude that the Probate Court
erred in concluding that cy pres is not applicable to approve the
proposed transaction on the basis that the deeds provide for an
alternative distribution.  Accordingly, we vacate the Judgment
and remand to the Probate Court to apply cy pres  consistent with
this Opinion.
On the briefs:
Nicholas C. Dreher
Rhonda L. Grisworld
Marion L. Reyes-Burke
(Cades Schutte LLP)
for Petitioner-Appellant
Randall L. Ishikawa
Deputy Attorney General
State of Hawai i
for Respondent-Appellee»