-------------------
-------------------NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30691
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CIVIL NO. 07-1-0070
 
SHIRLEY BEFITEL, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
HARRY N. LYCKMAN, Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee,
and
 
PRESTON S. ONOMURA; JOHN DOES 1-5; JANE DOES 1-5;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5; DOE ENTITIES 1-5; and
DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-5, Defendants-Appellees v.
DIANA KAINA, Third-Party Defendant-Appellant.
 
CIVIL NO. 09-1-1645
 
SHIRLEY BEFITEL, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DIANA KAINA; JOHN DOES 1-5; JANE DOES 1-5; DOE
PARTNERSHIPS 1-5; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5; DOE ENTITIES 1-5;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-5, Defendants-Appellants.
 
CIVIL NO. 09-1-2313
 
SHIRLEY BEFITEL, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JUNIOR L. STOWERS, JOHN DOES 1-5; JANE DOES 1-5; DOE
PARTNERSHIPS 1-5; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5; DOE ENTITIES 1-5;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-5, Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this appeal arising out of three consolidated
 
personal injury cases, Third-Party Defendant/Third-Party
 
Counterclaimant/Defendant-Appellant Diana Kaina (Kaina) appeals
 
from the "Order Granting Defendant and Third-Party Plaintiff
 
Harry N. Lyckman's Petition for Hearing on the Issue of Good
 
Faith Settlement" (Order), filed on August 18, 2010, in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).1 The circuit
 
court entered the Order in favor of Defendant/Cross-Claim
 Plaintiff/Cross-Claim Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff/Third-Party
 
Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee Harry N. Lyckman (Lyckman),
 
granting his motion for a good faith settlement determination
 
between Lyckman and Plaintiff-Appellee Shirley Befitel (Befitel),
 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 663-15.5 (Supp.
 
2012). 
On appeal, Kaina raises the following points of error:
 (1) The circuit court is required to apply the 
"totality of the circumstances" factors adopted in Troyer v. Adams, 102 Hawai' i 399, 77 P.3d 83 (2003). 
(2) The circuit court failed to apply the "totality of
 
the circumstances" factors, instead looking only to the absence
 
of evidence of collusion, fraud, or other wrongful conduct.
 
(3) In light of the Troyer factors, the circuit court
 
abused its discretion when it determined that a settlement of
 
$5,000 was a good faith settlement. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.
 
I. Background of the Case
 
This appeal arises from consolidated cases that deal
 
with three separate car accidents involving Befitel. The
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
accident that also involved Lyckman and Kaina was a four-car
 
collision in which Lynda Uyeda (Uyeda) stopped in the zipper lane
 
on the freeway, resulting in Lyckman rear-ending Uyeda, Befitel
 
rear-ending Lyckman, and Kaina rear-ending Befitel, pushing
 
Befitel's car further into Lyckman's car. Befitel initiated
 
three lawsuits related to the accidents, and various cross-
claims, third-party claims, and counterclaims were filed. The
 
three cases were ultimately consolidated by the circuit court.
 
Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
2
Rule 68,  Lyckman and Befitel agreed to settle.  Under HRS § 663­
15.5, Lyckman petitioned the circuit court for a hearing to
 determine that his settlement with Befitel was made in good
 
faith. 
On August 18, 2010, the court granted Lyckman's petition,
 
determining that the settlement with Befitel was made in good
 faith. 
II. Discussion
 A. Good Faith Settlement
 
"Public policy favors the settlement of disputes
 
without resort to the courts, provided such settlements are
 fairly reached." Matsuura v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co.
, 102
 
2 HRCP Rule 68 provides, in pertinent part:
 
Rule 68. OFFER OF SETTLEMENT OR JUDGMENT.
 At any time more than 10 days before the trial begins, any
party may serve upon any adverse party an offer of settlement or
an offer to allow judgment to be taken against either party for
the money or property or to the effect specified in the offer,
with costs then accrued. If within 10 days after the service of
the offer the adverse party serves written notice that the offer
is accepted, either party may then file the offer and notice of
acceptance together with proof of service thereof and thereupon
the clerk shall, in accordance with the agreement, enter an order
of dismissal or a judgment. An offer not accepted shall be deemed
withdrawn and evidence thereof is not admissible except in a
proceeding to determine costs. If the judgment finally obtained
by the offeree is not more favorable than the offer, the offeree
must pay the costs incurred after the making of the offer.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hawai'i 149, 175, 73 P.3d 687, 713 (2003) (quoting Gossinger v. 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of the Regency of Ala Wai, 73 Haw. 412, 
424 n.5, 835 P.2d 627, 634 n.5 (1992)). "[T]he good faith of the 
parties is substantially a function of their states of mind and 
the circumstances of which they are aware at the time of 
settlement[.]" Troyer, 102 Hawai' i at 430, 77 P.3d at 114. 
HRS § 663-15.5 provides that a good faith settlement
 
(1) discharges the settling party from liability for contribution
 
to other joint tortfeasors, (2) bars other joint tortfeasors from
 
any further claims against the settling joint tortfeasor, except
 
where there is a written indemnity agreement, and (3) results in
 
dismissal of all cross-claims against the settling joint
 
tortfeasor, except where there is a written indemnity agreement. 
HRS § 663–15.5(a) and (d).3
 
3 HRS § 663–15.5(a) provides:
 
§663–15.5 Release; joint tortfeasors; co-obligors; good
faith settlement. (a) A release, dismissal with or without
prejudice, or a covenant not to sue or not to enforce a judgment
that is given in good faith under subsection (b) to one or more
joint tortfeasors, or to one or more co-obligors who are mutually
subject to contribution rights, shall:
 
(1)	 Not discharge any other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor
not released from liability unless its terms so
provide;
 
(2)	 Reduce the claims against the other joint tortfeasor
or co-obligor not released in the amount stipulated by
the release, dismissal, or covenant, or in the amount
of the consideration paid for it, whichever is
greater; and
 
(3)	 Discharge the party to whom it is given from all
liability for any contribution to any other joint
tortfeasor or co-obligor.
 
This subsection shall not apply to co-obligors who have expressly
agreed in writing to an apportionment of liability for losses or
claims among themselves.
 
(continued...)
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In Troyer, the Hawai' i Supreme Court adopted a 
"totality of the circumstances" approach to interpreting the good 
faith language of HRS § 663–15.5. Troyer, 102 Hawai' i at 425, 77 
P.3d at 109. The supreme court recognized the legislature's intent to simplify procedures and reduce costs while still 
providing courts with the "opportunity to prevent collusive 
settlements aimed at injuring non-settling tortfeasors' 
interests[.]" Id. at 427, 77 P.3d at 111. 
If the non-settling tortfeasor objects to the
 
settlement, it is that party's burden to prove that the
 
settlement was not made in good faith. HRS § 663–15.5(b).
4
 
Further, "the question whether a settlement is given in good
 faith for purposes of HRS § 663–15.5 is a matter left to the
 
discretion of the trial court in light of all the relevant
 
3(...continued)
HRS § 663-15.5(d) provides:
 
(d) A determination by the court that a settlement was made
in good faith shall:
 
(1)	 Bar any other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor from any
further claims against the settling tortfeasor or
co-obligor, except those based on a written indemnity
agreement; and
 
(2)	 Result in a dismissal of all cross-claims filed
 against the settling joint tortfeasor or co-obligor,
except those based on a written indemnity agreement.
4 HRS § 663–15.5(b) provides, in relevant part:
 
(b) For purposes of subsection (a), any party shall petition
the court for a hearing on the issue of good faith of a settlement
entered into by the plaintiff or other claimant and one or more
alleged tortfeasors or co-obligors, serving notice to all other
known joint tortfeasors or co-obligors. . . .
 
The petition shall indicate the settling parties and . . .
the basis, terms, and settlement amount.
 
. . .
 
[A] nonsettling alleged joint tortfeasor or co-obligor may file an
objection to contest the good faith of the settlement. . . . A
 nonsettling alleged joint tortfeasor or co-obligor asserting a
lack of good faith shall have the burden of proof on that issue.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances extant at the time of settlement[,]" and therefore 
we review the trial court's good faith determination for abuse of 
discretion. Troyer, 102 Hawai' i at 434, 77 P.3d at 118. 
B.	 The Circuit Court Was Not Required To Consider Every
Troyer Factor
 
Kaina argues that the "totality of the circumstances" 
approach adopted in Hawai' i requires the circuit court to 
consider each of the following Troyer factors: 
(1) the type of case and difficulty of proof at trial, e.g.,
rear-end motor vehicle collision, medical malpractice,
product liability, etc.; (2) the realistic approximation of
total damages that the plaintiff seeks; (3) the strength of
the plaintiff's claim and the realistic likelihood of his or
her success at trial; (4) the predicted expense of
litigation; (5) the relative degree of fault of the settling
tortfeasors; (6) the amount of consideration paid to settle
the claims; (7) the insurance policy limits and solvency of
the joint tortfeasors; (8) the relationship among the
parties and whether it is conducive to collusion or wrongful
conduct; and (9) any other evidence that the settlement is
aimed at injuring the interests of a non-settling tortfeasor
or motivated by other wrongful purpose.
 
Troyer, 102 Hawai' i at 427, 77 P.3d at 111. We disagree. 
In deciding Troyer, the supreme court allowed for the 
circuit court's discretion by providing that "the trial court may 
consider the [Troyer] factors to the extent that they are known 
at the time of settlement[.]" Id. (emphasis added). 
Furthermore, the supreme court observed that the list of Troyer factors "is not exclusive, and the court may consider any other 
factor that is relevant to whether a settlement has been given in 
good faith." Id. Because "[t]he determination of good faith is 
left to the discretion of the trial court, based on all relevant facts available at the time of the settlement, and is not 
disturbed in the absence of an abuse thereof[,]" we conclude that 
Kaina incorrectly asserts that the circuit court must apply each 
of the Troyer factors in determining that a settlement was made 
in good faith. Troyer, 102 Hawai' i at 422, 77 P.3d at 106. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C. The Circuit Court Did Not Abuse Its Discretion
 
With regard to her second point of error, Kaina
 
contends that the circuit court simply "rubber stamped" the
 settlement agreement between Lyckman and Befitel, and that the
 
circuit court applied the "non-collusive" or "non-tortious
 
conduct" standard, which had been rejected by the supreme court
 
in favor of the "totality of the circumstances" approach.
 
Under the "non-collusive" or "non-tortious conduct" 
standard, "a settlement is deemed to be in good faith absent 
collusion, fraud, dishonesty, or other wrongful conduct." 
Troyer, 102 Hawai' i at 422, 77 P.3d at 106. However, under the 
"totality of the circumstances" approach, 
the legislature's goals of simplifying the procedures and
reducing the costs associated with claims involving joint
tortfeasors, while providing courts with the opportunity to
prevent collusive settlements aimed at injuring non-settling
tortfeasors' interests, are best served by leaving the
determination of whether a settlement is in good faith to
the sound discretion of the trial court in light of the
totality of the circumstances surrounding the settlement.
 
Id. at 427, 77 P.3d at 111. Both standards require the court to
 
consider whether there was evidence of wrongful conduct. Id. at
 
422, 427, 77 P.3d at 106, 111. Here, the information before the
 circuit court was not limited to potential wrongful conduct. 
Kaina further asserts that Lyckman failed to provide
 
evidence that would enable the circuit court to apply the
 
"totality of the circumstances" analysis to conclude the
 
settlement was made in good faith. Kaina argues further that she
 
submitted evidence establishing that the settlement was made in
 
bad faith. She argues that her evidence showed that Lyckman had
 
significant liability exposure, the settlement amount was far
 
less than the limits of Lyckman's insurance policy, and the
 
settlement amount was far less than the damages Befitel
 
originally sought. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kaina also asserts that the Order was "devoid of any
 
fact or conclusions evidencing the employment of the required
 
criteria under Troyer, or the employment of any criteria
 
whatsoever," and she points out that the circuit court failed to
 
respond to her request to provide findings of facts and
 
conclusions of law. 
First, we note that the circuit court has no duty to
 
enter findings of facts and conclusions of law. Kaina fails to
 
point to any rule, statute, or any other authority requiring the
 
circuit court to enter findings of fact and conclusions of law
 
related to its ruling on a petition for good faith settlement.
 
Next, the circuit court may determine the issue of good
 
faith based on affidavits or declarations served with the
 
petition, affidavits or declarations filed in response, and, at
 
its discretion, the court may receive evidence at the hearing. 
HRS § 663-15.5(c). Moreover, as the party challenging the
 
petition, it was Kaina's burden to prove that the settlement was
 
not in good faith. In the circuit court, Lyckman submitted his
 
petition, the memorandum in support of the petition, the
 
declaration of his counsel, the HRCP Rule 68 Offer of Settlement,
 
the "Joint-Tortfeasor Release and Indemnity Agreement," and a
 
reply memorandum to Kaina's memorandum in opposition. Kaina
 
submitted her memorandum in opposition, her counsel's
 
declaration, and several exhibits, including depositions of
 
Lyckman and Befitel, Lyckman's automobile insurance policy, and
 
Befitel's statement of the case. 
Based on the information provided to the circuit court,
 
the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in determining
 
that Lyckman and Befitel had entered into a good faith settlement
 
agreement. Of note, it is undisputed that Befitel rear-ended
 
Lyckman, and moreover, that Kaina rear-ended Befitel. 
Furthermore, Kaina's evidence and opposition did not provide a
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
clear indication of Lyckman's likely degree of liability or the
 
realistic approximate damages that Befitel sought resulting from
 
the accident with Lyckman and Kaina, as opposed to the other two
 
accidents. Moreover, the record does not support Kaina's
 
assertion that the circuit court only considered fraud, collusion
 
or other wrongful conduct.
 
Finally, with regard to Kaina's third point of error,
 
she argues that the settlement was not made in good faith because
 
Lyckman had greater liability than $5,000 and had a $100,000
 
insurance policy. She also suggests that Lyckman was responsible
 
for the entire accident because "but for" Lyckman hitting Uyeda,
 
there would have been no accident. 
As noted in Troyer, the legislative history of HRS 
§ 663-15.5 indicates that "the legislature[] . . . was more 
interested in encouraging settlements than ensuring the equitable 
apportionment of liability." Troyer, 102 Hawai' i at 426, 77 P.3d 
at 110. Further, given the legislature's intent to simplify procedures and reduce costs related to joint tortfeasor claims, a 
good faith settlement determination does not require the court to 
hold a "mini-trial" to ascertain a party's proportionate 
liability. Troyer, 102 Hawai' i at 426, 77 P.3d at 110. Finally, 
"the price of a settlement alone rarely appears to be the outcome-dispositive factor regarding a settlement's bad faith." 
Id. at 427, 77 P.3d at 111. 
Moreover, liability with regard to the subject accident
 
was far from clear. HRS § 291C-50(a) (2007 Repl.) provides that
 
"[t]he driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
 
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the
 
speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of
 
the highway." "In the absence of evidence of unanticipated
 
circumstances, contributory negligence, or great following
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
distance in relation to speed, the weight of authority holds the
 
driver of the following vehicle liable for rear-end collisions."
 
Tsugawa v. Reinartz, 56 Haw. 67, 73, 527 P.2d 1278, 1283 (1974)
 
(footnote omitted). Given the potential that Befitel, rather
 
than Lyckman, could be held liable for her impact with Lyckman's
 
vehicle, the circuit court could reasonably conclude that the
 
settlement was made in good faith. That is, it is reasonable to
 
believe that Befitel was unwilling to risk the possibility that
 
she would not get a better result at trial and would thus become
 
responsible for the costs incurred after the offer was made,
 
pursuant to HRCP Rule 68.
 
Based on the above, the circuit court did not abuse its
 
discretion when it determined that the settlement agreement
 
between Lyckman and Befitel was made in good faith.
 
III. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, the "Order Granting
 
Defendant and Third-Party Plaintiff Harry N. Lyckman's Petition
 
for Hearing on the Issue of Good Faith Settlement," filed on
 
August 18, 2010, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 18, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Dean E. Ochiai
 
Brenda E. Morris Randall Y. Kaya
Adrian Y. Chang
(Law Offices of Dean E. Ochiai)
for Defendant and Third-Party
Defendant-Appellant Diana Kaina Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 
Cary T. Tanaka
Greg H. Takase
(Law Offices of Cary T. Tanaka)
for Defendant and Third-Party Associate Judge
Plaintiff-Appellee Harry N. Lyckman
 
10
 