NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30212
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
RUSTY MAKUE, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
WHISTON MAKUE, Defendant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 

 (CR. NO. 08-1-1549)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth, and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Rusty Makue (Makue) appeals from
 
Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence (Judgment) entered
 
on November 24, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 
(circuit court). A jury found Makue guilty of Assault in the
 Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
ยง 707-711 (Supp. 2007).
2
 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 707-711 provides in relevant part:
 
ยง707-711 Assault in the second degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the second degree if:
 
(a)	 The person intentionally or knowingly causes
substantial bodily injury to another;
 
(b)	 The person recklessly causes serious or substantial
bodily injury to another[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Makue contends the circuit court erred in
 
excluding impeachment evidence on the grounds that it was more
 
prejudicial than probative and it was inadmissable as character
 
evidence. Makue further contends the error was not harmless.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Makue's
 
points of error as follows:
 
Makue sought to introduce photographs as evidence to
 
impeach Complainant's testimony that he was a coach, church
 
and/or church school volunteer, family member, and parent and to
 
impeach testimony by Complainant's step-father that Complainant
 
rarely drinks. The photographs were obtained from Complainant's
 
MySpace page, with some showing Complainant holding a beer
 
bottle, making an obscene hand gesture, and/or being in the
 
company of others who appeared to be drinking. Makue contended
 
that his punch to Complainant's eye was justified as self-
defense.
 
Assuming, arguendo, that the evidence was relevant, 
relevant evidence "may be excluded if its probative value is 
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, 
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by 
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless 
presentation of cumulative evidence." Hawaii Rules of Evidence 
(HRE) Rule 403; see also State v. Faria, 100 Hawai 'i 383, 391, 60 
P.3d 333, 341 (2002). "Unfair prejudice means an undue tendency to suggest decision on an improper basis, commonly, though not 
necessarily, an emotional one." Kaeo v. Davis, 68 Haw. 447, 454, 
719 P.2d 387, 392 (1986) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
In addressing Makue's attempt to admit the photographs,
 
the circuit court noted that it had allowed the question of beer
 
only for purposes of determining whether Complainant was drinking
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
beer at the time of the incident such that his perception of 
events was affected. The circuit court further noted that "the 
status of the testimony was that there was no drinking on the 
date in question" and "[t]here was no testimony that 
[Complainant] does not drink." Under these circumstances, the 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it denied Makue's 
request under HRE Rule 403, finding the photographs to be more 
prejudicial than probative. The circuit court did not clearly 
exceed the bounds of reason or disregard the rules of evidence to 
the substantial detriment of Makue. State v. Crisostomo, 94 
Hawai'i 282, 287, 12 P.3d 873, 878 (2000). 
Given our ruling above, we need not reach the question
 
of harmless error.
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Probation Sentence entered November 24, 2009 in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 21, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Stuart N. Fujioka
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge

Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge
 
3
 