 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30175
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JACQUELINE DYER, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
EWA DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTC-09-030900)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley, Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jacqueline Dyer (Dyer) was

 
convicted of excessive speeding, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 291C-105(a)(1) and (a)(2) (2007).1 The District
 
2
Court of the First Circuit (district court)  entered its Judgment
on October 12, 2009.

 
1
 HRS § 291C-105(a) provides: 
Excessive Speeding. a) No person shall drive a motor
vehicle at a speed exceeding:
 
(1)	 The applicable state or county speed limit by thirty
miles per hour or more; or 
(2) 	Eighty miles per hour or more irrespective of the
applicable state or county speed limit. 
2
 The Honorable Christopher P. McKenzie presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
Dyer was cited by Honolulu Police Department Officer
 
Benjamin Moszkowicz (Officer Moszkowicz) for driving her car at
 
least eighty-five miles per hour in a fifty-five miles per hour
 zone. Officer Moszkowicz was driving a patrol car that had
 previously been taken to a vendor for a speedometer calibration
 test, commonly referred to as a "speed check." At trial, over
 Dyer's objection, the district court admitted the speed check
 card for Officer Moszkowicz's patrol car in evidence and allowed
 Officer Moszkowicz to testify that the speed check card showed
 that his speedometer was "valid" up to ninety-five miles per
 hour.
 
Officer Moszkowicz testified that while driving on the
 
H-1 Freeway, he observed Dyer's vehicle passing other vehicles
 and pulling away from him. Officer Moszkowicz issued the
 citation to Dyer after pacing her car for at least three-tenths
 of a mile. Officer Moszkowicz testified that during this pacing, 
his speedometer showed that he was traveling at eighty-five miles
 per hour, and that the distance between his car and Dyer's car
 increased by two car lengths.
 
A passenger in Dyer's car testified that Dyer was
 
"going around" seventy-three to seventy-five miles per hour. 
Dyer testified and admitted that she knew she had been speeding,
 but denied that she had reached eighty miles per hour.
 
II.
 
On appeal, Dyer argues that: 1) the district court
 
erred in admitting the speed check card in evidence; 2) without
 the speed check card, there was insufficient evidence to support
 Dyer's conviction for excessive speeding; and 3) this court
 should not remand the case with instructions to enter judgment on 
2
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the non-criminal traffic infraction of regular speeding, in
 
violation of HRS § 291C-102(a)(1) (2007).3
 
We resolve the arguments raised by Dyer on appeal as
 
follows:
 
1. Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) 
concedes that: a) under State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai 'i 354, 227 
P.3d 520 (2010), the district court erred in admitting the speed check card in evidence, because the State failed to lay a sufficient foundation for its admission; and b) without this evidence, there was insufficient evidence to convict Dyer of excessive speeding. We agree with the State's concession of error. Based on Fitzwater, we vacate Dyer's excessive speeding conviction. 
2. We reject Dyer's contention that Fitzwater was 
wrong in remanding the case for entry of judgment for the non­criminal traffic infraction of regular speeding because a non­criminal traffic infraction cannot be a lesser included offense of a criminal offense. This court is not at liberty to overturn a decision of the Hawai
'i Supreme Court. 
We conclude that the admissible evidence presented at 
trial established that Dyer had committed the traffic infraction of regular speeding, in violation of HRS § 291C-102(a)(1), and that the erroneous admission of the speed check card was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt as to the lesser included regular speeding infraction. Accordingly, we remand the case for entry of a judgment against Dyer for regular speeding, in violation of HRS § 291C-102(a)(1). See Fitzwater, 122 Hawai
'i at 377-78, 227 
3
 HRS § 291C-102(a)(1) provides:
 
Non-compliance with speed limit prohibited. (a) A person
violates this section if the person drives:
 
(1)	 A motor vehicle at a speed greater than the maximum
speed limit other than provided in section 291C-105[.] 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d at 543-44; State v. Bullard, No. 30317, slip op. (Hawai 'i 
App. September 27, 2010). 
III.
 
We vacate the October 12, 2009, Judgment of the
 
district court, and we remand the case for entry of a judgment
 
that Dyer committed the traffic infraction of regular speeding,
 in violation of HRS § 291C-102(a)(1).
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 30, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Jennifer D.K. Ng
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 