NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30062
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI fI 
IN THE INTEREST OF MG
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 05-0025K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Mother appeals the Order Awarding Permanent Custody and
 
Establishing a Permanent Plan filed on September 2, 2009 by the
 
1
Family Court of the Third Circuit  (family court) that terminated
her parental and custodial rights over MG and awarded Petitioner-
Appellee State of Hawai fi Department of Human Services (DHS) with 
permanent custody over MG. 
BACKGROUND
 
MG was taken into police protective custody on June 1,
 
2005, amid allegations of neglect by Mother and Father. The
 June 5, 2005 petition for temporary foster custody reflected that
 
Mother had permitted MG to live for four years with another
 
couple, without providing legal or financial assistance; DHS had
 
other involvement with Mother's three older children by other
 
fathers that resulted in adoption or award of legal custody to
 
the other fathers; Mother and Father, who were not married, were
 
homeless; and Mother had a history of mental health issues,
 
substance abuse, and domestic violence issues. Temporary foster
 
custody was awarded to DHS. Subsequently, after a hearing on
 
1
 The Honorable Aley K. Auna, Jr., presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
July 1, 2005, MG was allowed to return home under family
 
supervision with a safe family home plan.
 
DHS was again awarded temporary foster custody of MG
 
effective as of July 24, 2007, after DHS reported that MG did not
 
have a stable residence, Mother was not living with MG, and
 
Mother had not been attending a mental health program in which
 
she claimed to have been participating. Later, DHS moved for
 
placement of MG with paternal grandmother and her husband in
 
Oregon, and such placement was granted effective March 6, 2009. 
Thereafter, Mother obtained housing and became pregnant with
 
another child with Stepfather, whom she married. The family
 
court joined Stepfather as a party to the case and Mother gave
 
birth to AL on March 14, 2009. Between April 2009 and
 
August 2009, consolidated hearings were held to address the
 
adjudication/disposition of AL as well as the permanent custody
 
of MG. The family court memorialized its award of permanent
 
custody of MG in its September 2, 2009 Order Awarding Permanent
 
Custody and Establishing a Permanent Plan, effective August 14,
 
2009. Subsequently, the family court issued its October 14, 2009
 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law. The instant appeal
 
followed.
 
ASSERTED ERRORS
 
Mother raises as points of error on appeal that the
 
family court erred in:
 
1. admitting and considering the psychological
 
evaluation and testimony of Franklin Acquaro, as reflected in the
 
family court's finding No. 64;
 
2. consolidating the hearings for
 
adjudication/disposition of AL and the permanent plan of MG;
 
3. taking judicial notice of the records and files of
 
AL's case; and
 
4. considering the Sperry affidavit.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
DISCUSSION
 
1. Admission of evidence.
 
a. Dr. Franklin Acquaro's report and testimony.
 
Mother contests finding No. 64 and asserts that the
 
psychological evaluation was required to be performed by a
 
licensed psychologist, that a license is required to engage in
 
the practice of psychology and that, as such, Dr. Acquaro's
 
report was improperly admitted and considered and that Dr.
 
Arquaro should not have been allowed to testify regarding his
 
"unlicensed conclusions and evaluations".
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 465 governs
 
psychologists, and although HRS § 465-2 (1993) generally requires
 
a license to hold oneself out as a psychologist or to practice
 
psychology, HRS § 465-3 (Supp. 2009) (footnotes added) exempts
 
(2) Any person who performs any, or any combination of
the professional services defined as the practice of
psychology[2] under the direction of a licensed psychologist
in accordance with rules adopted by the board; provided that
the person may use the term "psychological assistant", but
shall not identify the person's self as a psychologist or
imply that the person is licensed to practice psychology;
 
. . . .
 
2 HRS § 465-1 (Supp. 2009) states, in pertinent part:
 
"Practice of psychology" means the observation,
description, evaluation, interpretation, or modification of
human behavior by the application of psychological
principles, methods, or procedures, for the purpose of
preventing or eliminating symptomatic, maladaptive, or
undesired behavior and of enhancing interpersonal
relationships, work and life adjustment, personal
effectiveness, behavioral health, and mental health. The
practice of psychology includes, but is not limited to,
psychological testing and the evaluation or assessment of
personal characteristics, such as intelligence, personality,
abilities, interests, aptitudes, and neuropsychological
functioning; counseling, psychoanalysis, psychotherapy,
hypnosis, biofeedback, and behavior analysis and therapy;
diagnosis and treatment of mental and emotional disorder or
disability, alcoholism and substance abuse, and disorders of
habit or conduct, as well as of the psychological aspects of
physical illness, accident, injury, or disability; and
psychoeducational evaluation, therapy, remediation, and
consultation. Psychological services may be rendered to
individuals, families, groups, organizations, institutions,
and the public. The practice of psychology shall be
construed within the meaning of this definition without
regard to whether payment is received for services rendered.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(d) Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
provision of expert testimony by a psychologist[3] who is
 
otherwise exempted by this chapter.
 
At the time Dr. Acquaro conducted Mother's
 
psychological evaluation on May 1, 2008 (5/1/08 psychological
 
evaluation), Dr. Acquaro "was a doctoral student and doing [his]
 
work at Kapiolani as an intern[,]" in a "post-doc internship
 
[since 2006,]" and was supervised by Dr. Brenda Wong, Ph.D. (Dr.
 
Wong), a licensed clinical psychologist, along with psychologist
 
Dr. Choy. Dr. Wong also reviewed the 5/1/08 psychological
 
evaluation. Thus, at the time Dr. Acquaro wrote the report, HRS
 
§ 465-3 did not require his licensure.
 
At the permanency hearing, the family court qualified
 
Dr. Acquaro, who at that point had been a licensed psychologist
 
for five months, as an expert in psychology over Mother's
 
objection. In admitting the 5/1/08 psychological evaluation, the
 
family court stated, in pertinent part:
 
Dr. Acquaro authored this report, even though he was under
the supervision of another psychologist. He is here
testifying. He's subject to cross-examination of that
report, and so the Court will receive it into evidence as
exhibit, say, it's Exhibit 25.
 
Mother's counsel subsequently cross-examined Dr. Acquaro on the
 
circumstances surrounding the 5/1/08 psychological evaluation.
 
Consequently, the family court did not err in
 
4
permitting Dr. Acquaro's expert testimony  and in admitting the
5/1/08 psychological evaluation of Mother, and the family court
 
did not clearly err in its finding No. 64.
 
3 HRS § 465-1 (Supp. 2009) states, in pertinent part:
 
"Psychologist" means a person who offers to the public
or renders to individuals or to groups of individuals
services defined as the practice of psychology. A person
represents to be a psychologist if the person uses any title
or description of services incorporating the words
"psychology", "psychological", "psychologist", or
"psychotherapy", or if the person offers or renders to
individuals or to groups of individuals services defined as
the practice of psychology.
4
 "[T]he extent of an expert's knowledge of the subject matter goes to
the weight rather than the admissibility of the testimony." State v. Wallace, 
80 Hawaif i 382, 419 n.37, 910 P.2d 695, 732 n.37 (1996) (citation omitted). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
b. Judicial notice of AL's case.
 
Mother argues that the family court erred in taking
 
judicial notice of AL's records and files as reflected in finding
 
No. 35, where such records and files do not constitute facts that
 
are generally known or capable of accurate and ready
 
determination. Mother asserts that said judicial notice was
 
prejudicial because proof of harm in AL's case was utilized as
 
proof of harm in MG's case, where "[Stepfather] was found to
 
present a risk of harm to his newborn infant," and although no
 
evidence existed of such risk of harm to MG, the finding of harm
 
"becomes universally applicable to [MG]." Mother also states
 
that no opportunity was provided for objection where "this
 
determination was first announced in the post-hearing
 
announcement of decision".
 
The family court noted at the permanency hearing on
 
May 29, 2009 that it had "taken judicial notice of FC-S Number
 
05-0025K[,]" the case of AL. Mother failed to object at that
 
time, and thus Mother is mistaken in stating that she had no
 
opportunity to object prior to the family court's decision. 
Accordingly, this point is waived but for plain error review. As
 
MG's permanency hearing was consolidated, without objection,5
 
with AL's adjudication/disposition hearing and HRS § 587-25(a)
 requires consideration of, inter alia any history of family
 
members or those having access to the family home involving
 
abusive or assaultive behavior or substance abuse, no prejudice
 
to Mother's substantial rights has been demonstrated by Mother.
 
c. Sperry Affidavit.
 
Mother contends that social worker Timothy Sperry's
 
(Sperry) affidavit (Sperry Affidavit), that "outlined and
 
paraphrased 18 profane and derogatory phone calls allegedly made
 
by [Stepfather]" was not admitted into evidence by the family
 
court, but was nonetheless relied upon by the family court where
 
the family court referenced said affidavit in its findings.
 
5
 See discussion under section 2 infra.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Although it was error to reference the Sperry Affidavit
 
in its findings after excluding it at the hearing, the error was
 
harmless. The Sperry Affidavit was a part of the record prior to
 
the permanency trial, having been received in evidence on
 
February 20, 2009 without objection by Mother. At the permanency
 
trial the family court acknowledged as much, but welcomed cross-
examination of Sperry.
 
More importantly, Sperry testified at the permanency
 
hearing and was subject to cross-examination by Mother's counsel,
 
and Mother does not claim Sperry's testimony conflicts with the
 
statements in the Sperry Affidavit in any material respect. 
Therefore, the family court's reference to the Sperry Affidavit
 
was harmless error.
 
2.	 Consolidation of AL's adjudication/disposition
hearing with MG's permanent plan hearing.
 
Citing findings Nos. 35 and 61, Mother argues that MG's
 
hearing was overshadowed by issues of the
 
adjudication/disposition hearing and that the lack of
 
protectiveness involving AL and the actions of Stepfather
 
regarding threat of harm to AL were improperly applied to MG.
 
Mother does not demonstrate that she objected to
 
consolidation of the adjudicatory hearing for AL and permanency
 
hearing for MG. It is true, as Mother points out, that she
 
objected "to the time limitations" for the hearings, and asked
 
for more flexibility with regard to time. However, Mother did
 
not raise, as she now raises on appeal, that the consolidation
 
would create prejudice to her case insofar as evidence of the
 
risk of harm in AL's adjudication/disposition hearing would
 
overshadow evidence of the risk of harm to MG. Consequently, the
 
point is waived here.6 Moreover, where Stepfather (AL's father)
 
would be part of MG's family unit should MG return to Mother's
 custody, Stepfather's conduct as well as Mother's ability to
 
6
 See In re Doe, 99 Hawaif i 522, 537, 57 P.3d 447, 462 (2002) ("failure
to object amounts to a waiver of of claim on appeal") (citing, e.g., State v.
Staley, 91 Hawaif i 275, 284 n.7, 982 P.2d 904, 913 n.7 (1999)). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
protect AL from Stepfather was relevant to MG's permanency
 
decision.
 
3. Inappropriate service plan.
 
Citing finding No. 60, Mother also argues that DHS
 
"failed to create an appropriate service plan." Mother argues
 
that the plan did not require Mother to obtain a restraining
 
order against Stepfather, and it was held against her as an
 
inability to provide a safe home.
 
Mother's argument does not appear to relate to any 
raised point of error and, hence, is not "about [any] point of 
error[,]" as required under Rule 10(a)(iv) of the Child 
Protective Pilot Project Rules and, thus, is not properly before 
this court for decision. Moreover, as Mother does not otherwise 
establish that she objected to this alleged error below she has 
waived appellate reivew of the alleged error. Onaka v. Onaka, 
112 Hawai fi 374, 386-87, 146 P.3d 89, 101-02 (2006). 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Family Court
 
of the Third Circuit's September 2, 2009 Order Awarding Permanent
 Custody and Establishing a Permanent Plan entered on September 2,
 
2009.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
fi, October 28, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Julie Kai Barreto,
for Mother-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Mary Anne Magnier,Deputy Attorney GeneralRebecca A. Copeland,Deputy Solicitor General,for Petitioner-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 