  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30716
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
IN THE INTEREST OF KK
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 09-12317)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Father-Appellant (Father) appeals from the Order
 
Awarding Permanent Custody filed on August 31, 2010 in the Family
 
Court of the First Circuit (family court).1
 
On appeal, Father contends that Findings of Fact (FOFs) 
58, 60, 61, 63, and 702 are erroneous and Conclusions of Law 
(COLs) 9 and 11 are wrong. Although Father challenges specific FOFs and COLs from the September 15, 2010 Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law, he does not provide individual arguments as 
to each challenged FOF and COL. Instead, Father argues generally 
that the State of Hawai» i Department of Human Services (DHS) 
1
 The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided.
 
2
 In his Opening Brief, Father initially states that FOF 71 is
erroneous, but later in his brief he quotes FOF 70, not FOF 71, and argues
that FOF 70 is erroneous. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence that he was not,
 
and would not be within a reasonable period of time, able to
 
provide a safe family home for KK, even with the assistance of a
 
service plan. Father also argues that the family court should
 
not have considered what was in KK's best interest with respect
 
to the permanent plan until after the court found that Father
 
could not provide a safe family home. Lastly, Father argues that
 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ÿÿ 587-73(a)(2) (2006
 
Repl.), he should have up to two years to demonstrate that he
 
could provide a safe home for KK and permanent custody should
 
have been stayed until he completed his treatment program and
 
post-program services.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Father's
 
points of error as follows:
 
FOFs 58, 60, 61, 63, and 70 are not clearly erroneous
 
and COLs 9 and 11 are not wrong. DHS's expert witness (expert
 
witness) in clinical psychology testified that Father would need
 
individual therapy and parenting classes in order to reunify with
 
KK. The expert witness was not aware whether Father would
 
receive such services while participating in the substance abuse
 
treatment program at the Sand Island Treatment Center. 
A DHS social worker (Social Worker) and Father both
 
testified that Father was not participating in individual therapy
 
and parenting classes because such services were not offered at
 
the Sand Island Treatment Center. The Social Worker stated that
 
even after Father ended treatment in May 2011, he would not be
 
able to reunify immediately with KK because Father would have to
 
participate in parenting classes. The Social Worker did not
 
believe that the reunification process could be achieved by
 
August 2011, the two-year maximum period of time in which a
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parent must demonstrate that he/she could provide a safe family
 
home.
 
Father was previously provided services when DHS
 
intervened on behalf of KK's siblings in 2005-2006. Father's
 
past involvement with services may be considered when determining
 
whether Father can provide a safe family home. HRS § 587­
25(4)(D) (Supp. 2009). DHS intervened again in this case for the
 
same reasons it previously terminated Father's parental rights to
 
his other children. 
Contrary to Father's argument, there are no FOFs or
 
COLs that indicate the family court decided to terminate Father's
 
parental rights based on KK's best interest. COLs 8 through 11
 
demonstrate that the family court made a determination that
 
Father could not provide a safe family home and it was not
 
reasonably foreseeable that Father could provide a safe family
 
home within a reasonable period of time, even with the assistance
 
of a service plan, before considering whether the permanent plan
 
was in KK's best interest.
 
HRS ÿÿ 587-73(a)(2) does not state that Father must be
 
provided with a minimum period of two years to demonstrate that
 
he can provide a safe family home in the foreseeable future. The
 
statute states that the two-year time period is the maximum
 
amount of time that Father has to provide a safe family home.
 
[T]he family court's determinations pursuant to HRS § 587­
73(a) with respect to (1) whether a child's parent is
willing and able to provide a safe family home for the child
and (2) whether it is reasonably foreseeable that a child's
parent will become willing and able to provide a safe family
home within a reasonable period of time present mixed
questions of law and fact; thus, inasmuch as the family
court's determinations in this regard are dependant upon the
facts and circumstances of each case, they are reviewed on
appeal under the "clearly erroneous" standard. Likewise,
the family court's determination of what is or is not in a
child's best interests is reviewed on appeal for clear
 error. 
Moreover, the family court is given much leeway in its
examination of the reports concerning a child's care,
custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must
stand on appeal.
 
In re Doe , 95 Hawai» i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) (internal 
quotation marks, citations, and brackets in original omitted).
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order Awarding Permanent
 
Custody filed on August 31, 2010 in the Family Court of the First
 
Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai» i, May 27, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Wilfred S. Tangonan
for Father-Appellant.
 
Patrick A. Pascual
 
Mary Anne Magnier,
Deputy Attorneys General, 
for Petitioner-Appellee
Department of Human Services.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 