NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30707
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
SAINGOEN DAVIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
NICHOLLE DAVIS, Defendant-Appellee
 
GARY W. VANCIL, MARK VAN PERNIS,
VAN PERNIS-VANCIL, A Law Corporation, Defendants-Appellants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-352K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Gary W. Vancil, Mark Van Pernis,
 
and Van Pernis-Vancil, a Law Corporation (collectively "Defendant
 
Attorneys") appeal from the Order Granting the Petition of
 
Plaintiff Saingoen Davis for Determination of Good Faith
 
Settlement (Good Faith Order), filed on July 30, 2010, in the
 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 
On appeal, Defendant Attorneys assert, inter alia, that
 
the Circuit Court abused its discretion in issuing the Good Faith
 Order, which determined that the Settlement Agreement And Release
 
(Settlement Agreement) reached between Plaintiff-Appellee
 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Saingoen Davis (Plaintiff Saingoen) and Defendant-Appellee
 
Nicholle Davis (Defendant Nicholle) was entered in good faith.2
 
Defendant Attorneys contend that the Settlement Agreement is
 collusive and not in good faith under Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) § 663-15.5 (Supp. 2011) because: it requires that Defendant
 
Nicholle assign her claims against Defendant Attorneys to
 
Plaintiff Saingoen; and provides that Defendant Nicholle will
 
receive 15% of the proceeds for any recovery against Defendant
 
Attorneys.
 
Plaintiff Saingoen counters that the Settlement
 
Agreement is not collusive and provides Defendant Nicholle with
 
only 15% of the net proceeds of Defendant Nicholle's own claims
 
assigned to Plaintiff Saingoen, not 15% of the net proceeds of
 
Plaintiff Saingoen's claims against the Defendant Attorneys. 
Plaintiff Saingoen further argues that the cases relied upon by
 
Defendant Attorneys are distinguishable from the circumstances in
 
this case.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced, the issues raised by the parties and the
 
applicable statutes and case law, we resolve Defendant Attorneys'
 
points of error as follows:
 
We review the Circuit Court's issuance of the Good
 
Faith Order for abuse of discretion.
 
The determination of whether a settlement is in good
faith is left to the sound discretion of the trial court in
 
light of the totality of the circumstances surrounding the
settlement. On appeal, the trial court's determination will
 
2
 Defendant Attorneys also contend on appeal that the Circuit Court
failed to list the factors it considered in issuing the Good Faith Order, was
clearly erroneous in failing to find the Settlement Agreement was collusive or
wrongful, and was clearly erroneous in failing to find that the Settlement
Agreement was aimed at injuring the interests of Defendant Attorneys, the non-
settling defendant. We view the determinative issue in this appeal to be
whether the Circuit Court abused its discretion in issuing the Good Faith
Order and will thus address that issue.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be reviewed for abuse of discretion. An appellate court
should consider the decision in light of all of the relevant
circumstances extant at the time of settlement.
 
An abuse of discretion occurs when the decisionmaker
 
exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment
of a party.
 
Brooks v. Dana Nance & Co., 113 Hawai' i 406, 412, 153 P.3d 1091, 
1097 (2007) (brackets, ellipses, quotation marks and citations 
omitted). 
In Brooks, the Hawai' i Supreme Court noted that in 
Dubina v. Mesirow Realty Dev., Inc., 756 N.E.2d 836 (Ill. 2001) 
and In re Guardianship of Babb, 642 N.E.2d 1195, 1203-05 (Ill. 
1994), "the Illinois Supreme Court concluded that a settlement 
agreement that allowed a settling tortfeasor to accomplish 
indirectly what governing law expressly forbade was collusive 
and, hence, not in good faith." Brooks, 113 Hawai' i at 417, 153 
P.3d at 1102 (citations omitted). The Hawai' i Supreme Court 
adopted the reasoning of the Illinois Supreme Court and held that 
"a settlement, wherein a party seeks to accomplish indirectly 
that which it is expressly barred by applicable law from 
accomplishing directly, is not in good faith." Id. The supreme 
court thus held in Brooks that the trial court had abused its discretion by determining a settlement was in good faith when it 
precluded a cross-claim under an indemnity agreement that was 
expressly preserved under HRS § 663-15.5(d)(1). See id. In 
short, the trial court had "abused its discretion by disregarding rules or principles of law . . . to the substantial detriment of 
a party." Id. (brackets, internal quotation marks and citation 
omitted). 
In this case, the express terms of the Settlement
 
Agreement seek to indirectly allow Defendant Nicholle to obtain
 contribution from Defendant Attorneys, however such contribution
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to Defendant Nicholle (as the settling tortfeasor) is not allowed
 
under HRS § 663-12 (1993 Repl.).3
 
Provisions in the Settlement Agreement regarding
 
Defendant Nicholle's entitlement to recover from Defendant
 
Attorneys state:
 
3. Nicholle Davis hereby assigns to Saingoen Davis
any and all civil claims of Nicholle Davis, individually and
as personal representative, against lawyers in connection
with Probate of the R.K. Davis Estate. In the event such
 assigned claims are not considered legally assignable, to
that extent, Nicholle Davis agrees to permit Saingoen Davis
and her counsel to prosecute those claims against the
lawyers in Nicholle Davis' name, but without expense to her.
Nicholle Davis agrees that Saingoen Davis may assert against
lawyers both her claims and the above claims of Nicholle
Davis which Saingoen Davis' counsel deem fit for prosecution
within their discretion, and settle said claims on terms
deemed reasonable by her counsel, within their discretion.
 
4. Saingoen Davis and Nicholle Davis shall divide
any net recovery in the paragraph 3 claims of 
Saingoen Davis
 
and Nicholle Davis  against the lawyers, after attorneys'
fees and costs, 85% to Saingoen Davis and 15% to Nicholle
Davis.
 
(Emphasis added). Paragraph 4 clearly allows Defendant Nicholle
 
to recover 15% of not only her assigned claims against Defendant
 
Attorneys, but 15% of Plaintiff Saingoen's claims against
 
Defendant Attorneys as well. The latter component is
 
contribution based on Defendant Attorneys' wrongful conduct
 
toward Plaintiff Saingoen. Similar to Babb, this part of the
 
Settlement Agreement subverts HRS § 663-12 "by allowing the
 
settling tortfeasor to obtain contribution indirectly from the
 
nonsettling tortfeasor." See 642 N.E.2d at 1204.
 
Contrary to Plaintiff Saingoen's argument, we do not
 
view the instant case as similar to Schramm v. Cnty. of Monroe,
 
758 N.E.2d 880 (Ill. App. Ct. 2001), where the settling party
 
retained the right to pursue its own separate claim. Unlike in
 
Schramm, Defendant Nicholle obtained the right to receive 15% of
 
3
 HRS § 663-12 provides, in relevant part, that "[a] joint tortfeasor
who enters into a settlement with the injured person is not entitled to
recover contribution from another joint tortfeasor whose liability to the
injured person is not extinguished by the settlement."
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiff Saingoen's net recovery from Defendant Attorneys via
 
the Settlement Agreement.
 
As held in Brooks, a settlement agreement is not in 
good faith when "a party seeks to accomplish indirectly that 
which it is expressly barred by applicable law from accomplishing 
directly[.]" 113 Hawai' i at 417, 153 P.3d at 1102. The 
provisions in the Settlement Agreement allow Defendant Nicholle to recover contribution from Defendant Attorneys, which is barred 
by HRS § 663-12. Hence, the Settlement Agreement between 
Plaintiff Saingoen and Defendant Nicholle was not in good faith, 
and the issuance of the Good Faith Order was an abuse of 
discretion because it disregarded rules or principles of law to 
the substantial detriment of Defendant Attorneys. Id. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order Granting the
 
Petition of Plaintiff Saingoen Davis for Determination of Good
 Faith Settlement, filed on July 30, 2010, in the Circuit Court of
 
the Third Circuit, is vacated and the case is remanded for
 
further proceedings consistent with this decision.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 24, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
David M. Louie (on the Opening Brief)
Keith K. Hiraoka (on the Reply Brief)James Shin Jodie D. Roeca P
(Roeca, Louie & Hiraoka)for Defendants-Appellants 
residing Judge 
James J. Bickerton Daniel A. Morris (Bickerton Lee Dang & Sullivan)for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 