NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 NO. 30439
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
EDWIN GUNNER SCHULL, JR., Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1P109-10730)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Edwin Gunner Schull, Jr. (Schull) with
 
permitting a dog, of which he was an owner, to become a stray, in
 violation of Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH) § 7-4.2 (1990 &
 Supp. No. 19, 7-2011).
1 The charge also alleged that Schull was
 
subject to sentencing as a second-time offender, pursuant to ROH 
1
 ROH § 7-4.2 provides: 
Sec. 7-4.2 Strays prohibited.
 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, whether such
dog is licensed or not, to permit such dog to become a stray. 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 7-4.9 (1990 & Supp. No. 19, 7-2011, Supp. No. 17, 6-2010).2
 
After a bench trial, the District Court of the First Circuit
 
3
(District Court)  found that Schull had violated ROH § 7-4.2,
which the District Court found was Schull's "second offense," and
 fined him $100. 
Schull appeals from the Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment and/or Order (Judgment) filed on February 24, 2010, in
 the District Court. 
On appeal, Schull argues that: (1) the District Court
 
erred in ruling that the charge was sufficient; (2) the District 
Court erred in construing the charged violation of ROH § 7-4.2 
as not requiring proof of a mens rea or any action by the
 defendant to permit a dog to become a stray and in denying his
 motion for judgment of acquittal on that basis; (3) the District
 Court erred in admitting evidence of prior incidents concerning
 the two dogs involved in this case; and (4) ROH § 7-4.2, as
 construed by the District Court, is unconstitutionally overbroad
 and vague.
 
The decision in this appeal turns on the proof required
 
to establish the violation of ROH § 7-4.2 with which Schull was
 charged. Schull was charged with violating ROH § 7-4.2 and being
 
2
 ROH § 7-4.9 provides, in relevant part:
 
Sec. 7-4.9 Violation -- Penalty.
 
(a)	 The owner of a dog which has become a stray or any other
person convicted of a violation of this article shall be
punished for the offense as follows:
 
(1)	 A fine of $50 if the offense did not occur within two
 
years of the occurrence of a previous offense under
this article;
 
(2)	 A fine of $100 if the offense occurred within two
 years of the occurrence of one previous offense under
this article; or
 
(3)	 A fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both, if the
offense occurred within two years of the occurrence of
two or more previous offenses under this article or if
the person convicted has a previous conviction under
Section 7-7.2 involving the same dog.
 
3
 The Honorable T. David Woo, Jr. presided .
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
subject to punishment as a second-time offender pursuant to ROH 
§ 7-4.9(a)(2). We conclude that the charged violation of ROH 
§ 7-4.2 does not require proof of a mens rea. It does, however,
 for the conduct element of the offense, require proof that the
 dog's owner did permit the dog to become a stray. Therefore, the
 mere fact that a dog owned by the defendant became a stray is not
 sufficient; additional evidence showing that the defendant dog-
owner permitted the dog to become a stray is required. 
Based on our review of the record, we conclude that the
 
District Court decided this case based on the erroneous belief
 that proof that Schull was the owner of the dogs and that the
 dogs had become strays was sufficient to establish the charged
 violation of ROH § 7-4.2, without requiring proof that Schull had
 permitted the dogs to become strays. Because the District Court
 decided the case based on an erroneous view of the law, the
 District Court's decision that Schull violated ROH § 7-4.2 as
 charged cannot stand. We further conclude, however, that when
 viewed in the light most favorable to the State, there was
 sufficient evidence to prove that Schull committed the charged
 violation of ROH § 7-4.2, such that a new trial is warranted. 
Accordingly, we vacate the Judgment, and we remand the case for a
 new trial. 
With respect to Schull's other points of error, we
 
conclude that the charge was sufficient; that the District Court
 did not err in admitting evidence of prior incidents involving
 the two dogs; and that under our construction of ROH § 7-4.2, it
 is not unconstitutionally overbroad or vague.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The charge in the present case stemmed from an incident
 
that occurred on August 13, 2009. Schull's neighbor saw two
 dogs, which the neighbor identified as belonging to Schull,
 running loose beyond Schull's property. Schull had previously
 been found to have violated ROH 7-4.2, as reflected in a judgment
 entered on December 12, 2008. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Schull was orally charged in the present case as
 
follows:
 
[O]n or about August 13, 2009, on the island of Oahu, state
of Hawaii, Gunner Schull -- Edwin Gunner Schull, Jr., also
known as E. Gunner Schull, an owner of any dog, whether such
dog was licensed or not, did permit such dog to become
astray [sic], a violation -- in violation of Section 7-4.2
of the [ROH]. [Schull] is subject to sentencing under
Section 7-4.9 paren A paren 2 of the [ROH] where [Schull]
committed the instant offense within two years of the
occurrence of a previous offense under Section 7, Article 4
of the [ROH].
 
Schull moved to dismiss the charge on the ground that it was
 
insufficient on its face in that it failed to explain "what the
 defendant did and what he has to do in order to defend himself." 
The District Court denied the motion to dismiss. 
Prior to trial, the State filed a notice of its intent 
to use evidence of two prior incidents concerning the same two dogs involved in this case. The State proffered that one of the incidents took place between January 1 and February 28, 2009, and involved Schull exiting his house with the two dogs that were not on leashes. The other incident took place in July 2009 and involved the two dogs running loose on the street with Schull and a female 30 to 40 feet behind the dogs. The State offered the evidence pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) 
4
(Supp. 2012)  to prove identity and that Schull was the owner and
keeper of the dogs.
 
Schull objected to the State's introduction of evidence
 
regarding the prior incidents. 
Schull stated that he was
 
prepared to admit that "Charlie and Buster," the dogs in
 question, "are kept in the household of the defendant and that on
 
4
 HRE Rule 404(b) provides, in relevant part:
 
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence of other
 
crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character
of a person in order to show action in conformity therewith. It
 may, however, be admissible where such evidence is probative of
another fact that is of consequence to the determination of the
action, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation,
plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake
or accident.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
August 13 Charlie and Buster did escape and were on a public
 
street." Schull argued that his offer to stipulate obviated the
 necessity for evidence of the prior incidents "with respect to
 identifying the dogs or . . . the circumstances involved." In
 response, the District Court noted that HRE Rule 404(b) also
 permits the introduction of evidence to prove lack of mistake. 
The District Court also noted that the State had not accepted
 Schull's offer to stipulate and overruled Schull's objection to
 the evidence of the prior incidents. 
II.
 
A.
 
The State adduced the following evidence at trial:
 
Tom Ehlke (Ehlke), Schull's neighbor, lived three
 
houses away from Schull. Ehlke testified that on August 13,
 2009, he was in his garage when he saw two dogs belonging to
 Schull running up his street unleashed and without anyone
 accompanying them. The dogs veered onto the property of Ehlke's
 neighbor, stopped in another neighbor's driveway, then continued
 down the street. Ehlke and his wife walked to the Schull's
 driveway. About fifteen or twenty minutes later, Ehlke saw the
 dogs "hovering between -- on the public road and sometimes on the
 Schull property without leashes." 
Ehlke testified that he saw Schull waiting at the curb
 
of the public street for the dogs to come back to Schull's house:
 
Q. You testified that on August 13, early in the -­
well in the late afternoon that you saw Mr. Schull at the
back door of his house?
 
A. Yes also on the street.
 
Q. And you saw him on the street?
 
A. Um-hmm.
 
Q. And the dogs were where when you -- when you saw
them?
 
A. The dogs were on the public street . . . .
 
Q. And what did Mr. Schull do?
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. He was waiting there at the curb for the dogs to
more or less come back to the house.
 
Ehlke stated that the dogs eventually entered the Schull property
 
by way of the back door. 
Ehlke also testified about a prior incident involving
 
the two dogs. Ehlke stated that on one occasion between January
 1 and February 28, 2009, he saw the two dogs emerge from Schull's
 property onto the public street without leashes, with Schull
 following the dogs out.
 
Erica Luecke (Luecke), Ehlke's wife, testified to
 
another prior incident involving the two dogs. According to
 Luecke, on one occasion in July 2009, she saw the two dogs,
 without leashes, on her street with Schull and a woman walking
 about ten meters behind. Luecke described the dogs as "jumping
 along, running, [and] happy." These were the same dogs that she
 photographed on August 13, 2009. 
During the trial, the State offered a certified copy of
 
District Court records regarding Schull's prior violation of ROH
 § 7-4.2. The records reflected that on December 16, 2008, after
 a trial, Schull was found "guilty" as charged of violating ROH 7­4.2 and fined $50. The District Court took "judicial notice" of
 these records.
 
B.
 
After the State rested, Schull moved for judgment of
 
acquittal, which the District Court denied. Schull then
 testified in his own defense.
 
Schull testified that he has had the dogs, Buster and
 
Charlie, for eight years. Schull stated that once he learned of
 the dogs' propensity to run from his property, he made efforts to
 contain the dogs in his yard. These efforts included spending
 significant amounts of money to build a chain link fence, which
 he retrofitted with an electric fence system, and a brick wall,
 to install a gate that would close automatically, to pour
 concrete along the perimeters of all fences, and to rebuild and
 reinforce along the edges of his house. He testified that he had
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
done "everything I can to keep them in" and that anytime the dogs
 
escaped, it had been without his knowledge or permission. 
According to Schull, he was at work on the date of the
 
charged incident when he received a call from his wife. His wife
 reported that his son had taken the garbage out and had
 inadvertently left a gate open, which apparently resulted in the
 dogs getting loose. Schull testified that he immediately left
 his office and went home and "by the time I had come home, the
 dogs were back on the property." Schull stated that his son, who
 had been home on summer break from school on the mainland, was
 well aware that he was to keep the dogs on the property at all
 costs, but his son made a mistake. 
C.
 
At the conclusion of the evidence, the District Court 
rendered its verdict that Schull had committed the charged
 violation, finding as follows:
 
This is a -- this is a violation. And, uh -- and akin
to infraction. And basically the court finds that there is
no specific mens rea required for this offense. The court
 finds that the State has proven beyond a reasonable doubt
that these dogs were the property of the defendant [Schull],
and these dogs were loose, um, off leash on a public street.
And the court therefore finds [Schull] guilty as charged of
this offense.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Schull argues that the charge was insufficient because
 
it used the terms "owner" and "stray" that have statutory
 
definitions that do not mean what a person of common
 understanding would conclude. We disagree.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has provided the following 
guidelines for evaluating the sufficiency of a charge: 
The sufficiency of the charging instrument is measured,
inter alia, by whether it contains the elements of the
offense intended to be charged, and sufficiently apprises
the defendant of what he or she must be prepared to meet.
In other words, the . . . charge must be worded in a manner
such that the nature and cause of the accusation could be
 understood by a person of common understanding. The
 relevant inquiry, therefore, is whether or not the charge
 
7
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
provided the accused with fair notice of the essential
elements.
 
State v. Mita, 124 Hawai' i 385, 390, 245 P.3d 458, 463 (2010) 
(internal quotation marks, brackets, and citations omitted). 
"Whether a charge sets forth all the essential elements of a charged offense is a question of law, which we review under the de novo, or right/wrong, standard." Id. at 389, 245 P.3d at 462 
(internal quotation marks, brackets, ellipsis points, and citation omitted). Ordinarily, a charge which tracks the language of the statute proscribing the offense is sufficient. See State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai' i 390, 406, 56 P.3d 692, 708 
(2002); State v. Silva, 67 Haw. 581, 585, 698 P.2d 293, 296 (1985). 
As used in ROH § 7-4.2, the terms "owner" and "stray"
 
are statutorily defined in ROH § 7-4.1 (1990 & Supp. No. 19, 7­2011) as follows: 
"Owner" means and includes every person owning,
harboring or keeping a dog or having custody thereof.
 
. . . .
 
"Stray" or "stray dog" means any dog: (1) on the
premises of a person other than the owner of a dog, without
the consent of an occupant of such premises; or (2) on a
public street, on public or private school grounds, or in
any other public place, except when under the control of the
owner by leash, cord, chain or other similar means of
physical restraint; provided, that such leash, cord, chain
or other means is not more than eight feet in length; and
provided further, that this provision shall not be construed
to permit that which is prohibited by any other law.
 
The statutory definitions of the terms "owner" and
 
"stray" do not significantly depart from, and are not
 
inconsistent with, the commonly understood meaning of those
 terms. The dictionary definition of the term "owner" is "one
 that owns," Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1612
 (1986), and the term "own" is defined to include "belonging to
 oneself . . . possess . . . to have power over: control . . . ." 
Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 829 (10th ed. 2000)
 (capitalization altered). The term "stray" is defined by 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dictionary to include "a domestic animal that is wandering at
 
large or is lost." Id. at 1159.
 
We conclude that the statutory definitions of the terms
 
"owner" and "stray" do not depart from the common understanding
 of those terms to such an extent that charging Schull in the
 language of the statute failed to provide him with fair notice of 
the essential elements of the charge. Schull contends that the
 charge against him was deficient because certain aspects of the
 statutory definitions of "owner" and "stray" go beyond the common
 understanding of the terms. For example, he notes that the
 statutory definition of "stray" includes a dog on a leash more
 than eight feet long, and he argues that a person of common
 understanding would not consider such a dog to be a stray. 
Schull, however, cannot claim that the charge against him was
 deficient based on aspects of the statutory definitions that are
 inapplicable to his case. The charge against Schull was not
 based on evidence that his dogs became strays because they were
 on a leash that was too long, but was based on evidence that the
 dogs were running loose without any leash. Under the common
 understanding of the terms "owner" and "stray," the use of those
 terms in the charge against Schull clearly encompassed the
 conduct of which Schull was accused and gave Schull fair notice
 of the nature and cause of the accusation against him. 
In support of his claim that the charge was 
insufficient, Schull cites this court's decision in State v. Mita, No. 29347, 2010 WL 617628 (Hawai' i App. Feb. 23, 2010) 
(summary disposition order), in which this court concluded that the State's failure to include the statutory definition of the term "animal nuisance" in the animal nuisance charge against Mita rendered the charge deficient. However, this court's decision in Mita was subsequently overruled by the Hawai' i Supreme Court in 
State v. Mita, 124 Hawai' i 385, 245 P.3d 458 (2010). 
In concluding that the charge against Mita was 
sufficient, the Hawai' i Supreme Court distinguished and explained 
9
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
its prior decision in State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i 383, 219 P.3d 
1170 (2009): 
Wheeler does not require that the State provide statutory
definitions in every charge which tracks the language of astatute that includes terms defined elsewhere in the code. Requiring the State to do so would render charges undulycomplex, in contravention of the policy reflected in HRPP[(Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure)] Rule 7(d) that "[t]he
charge shall be a plain, concise and definite statement ofthe essential facts constituting the offense charged."Rather, as this court concluded in Wheeler, the State needonly allege the statutory definition of a term when itcreates an additional essential element of the offense, andthe term itself does not provide a person of commonunderstanding with fair notice of that element. 
Mita, 124 Hawai' i at 391-92, 245 P.3d at 464-65 (some brackets in 
original). Here, the statutory definitions of the terms "owner" 
and "stray" do not create any additional essential element of the offense, nor do the terms themselves fail to provide fair notice of the required elements. Thus, the State was not required to allege the statutory definitions of the terms "owner" and "stray" in its charge against Schull for the charge to be sufficient. 
II.
 
Schull argues that the District Court erred in denying
 
his motion for judgment of acquittal, because the State failed to
 present sufficient evidence to prove the charged offense. 
Schull's argument is premised on his interpretation of the
 charged violation of ROH § 7-4.2 as requiring proof of a mens rea
 and action by him to permit a dog to become a stray. Schull
 suggests that the District Court misconstrued the charged ROH 
§ 7-4.2 offense as not requiring any such proof, which resulted
 in the District Court's erroneous denial of his motion for
 judgment of acquittal. Schull asserts that there was no evidence
 of his state of mind or that he took, or failed to take, any
 action permitting the dogs to become strays.
 
Because Schull's insufficiency of evidence claim turns
 
on the proof required to establish the charged violation of ROH 
§ 7-4.2, we begin with an analysis of the proof required for the
 charge against Schull. Schull was charged with violating ROH 
10
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 7-4.2, which provides that "[i]t shall be unlawful for the
 
owner of any dog, whether such dog is licensed or not, to permit
 such dog to become a stray." The charge against Schull notified
 him that he was subject to sentencing as a second-time offender
 pursuant to ROH § 7-4.9(a)(2), which provides that the penalty
 for a second-time offender is a fine of $100. 
A.
 
Under the Hawaii Penal Code, the offense Schull was
 
charged with committing constitutes a violation, and not a crime,
 because the sentence for the charged offense was limited to a
 fine. See
 HRS § 701-107(5) (1993).5 "When the state of mind
 
required to establish an element of an offense is not specified
 
6
by the law," HRS § 702-204 (1993)  generally requires proof that
the defendant acted intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly with
 respect to the element. 
However, HRS § 702-212 (1993) provides
 
an exception to the state-of-mind requirement for an offense 
5 HRS § 701-107(5) provides: 
(5) An offense defined by this Code [(Hawaii Penal Code)] or
by any other statute of this State constitutes a violation if it
is so designated in this Code or in the law defining the offense
or if no other sentence than a fine, or fine and forfeiture or
other civil penalty, is authorized upon conviction or if it is
defined by a statute other than this Code which provides that the
offense shall not constitute a crime. A violation does not
 
constitute a crime, and conviction of a violation shall not give
rise to any civil disability based on conviction of a criminal
offense.
 
(Emphases added.) Under the Hawaii Penal Code, "unless a different meaning
plainly is required," the term "statute" includes "a local law or ordinance of
a political subdivision of the State[.]" HRS § 701-118(1) (1993).
 
6 HRS § 702-204 (1993) provides:
 
HRS § 702-204 State of mind required.  Except as provided
in section 702-212, a person is not guilty of an offense unless
the person acted intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or
negligently, as the law specifies, with respect to each element of
the offense. When the state of mind required to establish an
element of an offense is not specified by the law, that element is
established if, with respect thereto, a person acts intentionally,
knowingly, or recklessly.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
which constitutes a violation. HRS § 702-212 provides in
 
relevant part:
 
§ 702-212 When state of mind requirements are
inapplicable to violations and to crimes defined by statutes
other than this Code.  The state of mind requirements
prescribed by sections 702-204 and 702-207 through 702-211
do not apply to:
 
(1)	 An offense which constitutes a violation, unless
the state of mind requirement involved is
included in the definition of the violation or a
 legislative purpose to impose such a requirement
plainly appears[.]
 
The commentary to HRS § 702-212 includes an explanation of the
 
rationale behind HRS § 702-212(1):
 
This section provides for those instances when the
culpability provisions of §§ 702-204 and 207 through 211 are
not applicable.
 
Subsection (1) provides that the requirements of
culpability are not generally applicable to violations.
(Violations are the lowest grade of penal offenses and for
which conviction can only result, according to § 701-107 and
Chapter 706 in a fine, forfeiture or other "civil" penalty.)
An exception is made in two cases: (1) for violations which
by definition require culpable commission; and (2) for
violations with respect to which a legislative purpose to
impose one or more culpability requirements plainly appears.
Subsection (1) applies whether the violation is defined in
the Penal Code or in some other Title.
 
The assumption is that, with respect to violations, if
culpable commission is required, the relevant state of mind
will be stated in the definition of the violation whether
 the offense appears in the Penal Code or in some other
statute. If the law is silent, the court must make an
affirmative determination that the application of state of
mind requirements with respect to the violation is within
the Legislature's purpose. In the absence of such a
 determination the liability is absolute or strict.
 
As noted, the ROH § 7-4.2 offense that Schull was
 
charged with committing constituted a violation because the
 
sentence that could be imposed on Schull as a second-time
 offender was limited to a fine. ROH § 7-4.2 does not contain a
 specific state of mind requirement. Thus, absent a plain
 legislative intent to impose a mens rea requirement, HRS § 702­212(1) establishes that no mens rea was required for Schull's
 charged offense. Schull does not provide us with, and we are
 unable to find, any persuasive basis for determining that a
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
legislative purpose to impose a mens rea requirement plainly
 
appears. Accordingly, we conclude that the State was not
 required to prove a mens rea to establish that Schull committed
 the charged violation of ROH § 7-4.2.
 
Schull argues that the State was required to prove a
 
mens rea because a violation of ROH § 7-4.2 as a third-time
 offender would place a defendant "in jeopardy of imprisonment"
 pursuant to ROH § 7-4.9(a)(3). However, the charge against
 Schull did not subject him to imprisonment because as a second-
time offender, he could only be sentenced to pay a fine of $100. 
Because Schull was charged with an offense that constituted a
 violation, HRS § 707-212(1) controls and the State was not
 required to prove a mens rea. We do not address the question of 
whether the State would be required to prove a mens rea where a
 violation of ROH § 7-4.2 was charged against a defendant subject
 to sentencing as a third-time offender and thereby exposed to a
 possible term of imprisonment. 
B.
 
Although the State was not required to prove a mens rea
 
to establish the ROH § 7-4.2 violation charged against Schull, it
 was still required to prove the elements of the offense. HRS 
§ 702-205 (1993) provides, in relevant part, that "[t]he elements
 of an offense are such (1) conduct, (2) attendant circumstances,
 and (3) results of conduct as . . . [a]re specified by the
 definition of the offense[.]" The elements of ROH § 7-4.2 are:
 (1) the defendant did permit a dog (conduct); (2) of which the
 defendant was the owner (attendant circumstance); (3) to become a
 stray (results of conduct).
 
Schull argues that the ROH § 7-4.2 offense requires
 
proof that he did permit his dogs to become strays. We agree. 
A violation of ROH § 7-4.2 is not established simply by proof
 that the defendant was the owner of a dog that became a stray,
 but ROH § 7-4.2 additionally requires proof that the defendant
 permitted the dog to become a stray. The term "permit" is
 defined by dictionary to include "[t]o give opportunity for <lax
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
security permitted the escape>," Black's Law Dictionary 1255 (9th
 
ed. 2009), and "to make possible . . . allow." Merriam-Webster's
 
Collegiate Dictionary 863 (10th ed. 1993). Thus, to establish
 the conduct element of the offense, the State was required to
 prove that Schull made it possible for his dogs, allowed his
 dogs, or gave his dogs the opportunity, to become strays. 
This requires more than just evidence that dogs owned
 
by Schull had become strays. For example, a dog owner would not
 violate ROH § 7-4.2 if unbeknownst to the owner, his or her dog
 leaves the owner's property and becomes a stray as the result of
 a burglar cutting a hole in a fence enclosing the property. The
 dog owner in this situation would not have permitted the dog to
 become a stray. 
In rendering its verdict, the District Court indicated
 
its view that a finding that Schull was the owner of the dogs and
 that the dogs had become strays was sufficient to establish the
 charged offense. It appears that the District Court did not also
 require proof of the conduct element of the offense -- that
 Schull did permit the dogs -- to become strays. Based on our
 review of the record, we conclude that the District Court's
 determination that Schull had committed the charged offense was
 based on an erroneous view of the law. Thus, the District
 Court's verdict cannot stand.
 
Schull argues that there was insufficient evidence that 
he permitted the dogs to become strays. We disagree. When reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence, we must view the evidence in the strongest light for the prosecution. State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998). The 
State's evidence included Ehlke's testimony that while the dogs were loose on the public road, Schull was waiting at the curb for the dogs to come back to Schull's house and that the dogs eventually returned to Schull's property by way of the back door. We conclude that when viewed in the strongest light for the State, there was sufficient evidence that Schull permitted his dogs to become strays, i.e., that he made it possible for his 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dogs, allowed his dogs, or gave his dogs the opportunity, to
 
become strays. Therefore, remand for a new trial is warranted.
 
We vacate the District Court's Judgment because its
 
verdict was based on an erroneous view of the law, and we remand
 the case for a new trial. 
III.
 
Schull argues that the District Court abused its
 
discretion in admitting evidence of prior incidents concerning
 the two dogs involved in this case. Schull contends that the
 District Court should have excluded the evidence because he
 offered to stipulate to the identity of the defendant and the 
dogs and that on the date of the alleged offense, the dogs were
 running at large off his property. We disagree.
 
As a general rule, "the prosecution is entitled to
 
prove its case by evidence of its own choice," and the accused
 "may not stipulate or admit his [or her] way out of the full
 evidentiary force of the case as the Government chooses to
 present it." United States v. Sewell, 457 F.3d 841, 844 (8th
 
Cir. 2006) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). 
Schull cites no authority for the proposition that, under the
 circumstances of this case, the District Court was required to
 compel the State to accept Schull's offer to stipulate and to
 preclude the State from introducing evidence of the prior
 incidents involving Schull and the two dogs. In addition, the
 evidence of the prior incidents was not only relevant to proving
 the identity of the dogs and that Schull was the dogs' owner, but
 to proving that Schull permitted the dogs to become strays on the
 date of the alleged offense by providing evidence of motive,
 opportunity, and the absence of mistake or accident. See HRE
 
Rule 404(b) (providing that evidence of other acts is admissible
 where probative of facts other than criminal propensity that are
 "of consequence to the determination of the action, such as proof
 of motive, opportunity, . . . or absence of mistake or
 accident"). Therefore, the probative value of the prior 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
incidents went beyond the matters to which Schull offered to
 
stipulate. 
Moreover, this was a bench trial. "In a bench trial, 
we presume that the judge was not influenced by incompetent evidence." State v. Lioen, 106 Hawai' i 123, 133, 102 P.3d 367, 
377 (App. 2004). Thus, we presume that the District Court confined its consideration of the evidence of the prior incidents only to proper purposes. We conclude that the District Court did not abuse its discretion in allowing the State to present evidence of the prior incidents. 
IV.
 
Schull argues that if ROH § 7-4.2 is construed to mean
 
that for a first- or second-time offender, "[t]he owner of any
 dog that becomes a stray commits a violation[,]" then the statute
 would be unconstitutionally overbroad and vague. However, we
 have not construed ROH § 7-4.2 in this fashion for a first- or
 second-time offender, but have additionally required proof that
 the defendant did permit his or her dog to become a stray. Thus,
 Schull's arguments, which are based on an erroneous premise, are
 inapposite.
 
Legislative enactments are presumed constitutional and 
a party challenging the constitutionality of a legislative enactment has the burden of demonstrating its unconstitutionality beyond a reasonable doubt. See City and County of Honolulu v. 
Ariyoshi, 67 Haw. 412, 419, 689 P.2d 757, 763 (1984). As in this case, where the freedom of expression is not implicated, a defendant challenging a statute as being unconstitutionally overbroad or vague must show that the statute as applied to him or her is invalid. See State v. Gaylord, 78 Hawai' i 127, 142, 
890 P.2d 1167, 1182 (1995); State v. Kuhia, 105 Hawai' i 261, 271, 
96 P.3d 590, 600 (App. 2004). 
We conclude that under our construction of ROH § 7-4.2
 
for a first- or second-time offender, the statute is not
 unconstitutionally overbroad or vague. Based on our construction
 of ROH § 7-4.2, the State must prove that Schull did permit a dog
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that he owned to become a stray in order to establish the charged 
offense. ROH § 7-4.2 is not unconstitutionally vague because it provides people with fair notice of the conduct that is prohibited in a manner that does not encourage arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement. See State v. Pegouskie, 107 Hawai' i 
360, 368-69, 113 P.3d 811, 819-20 (App. 2005). Schull provides no basis for this court to conclude that the government may not constitutionally sanction a dog owner for conduct that permits a dog he or she owns to become a stray. We therefore reject Schull's claim that the statute is unconstitutionally overbroad or vague. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the District
 
Court's Judgment, and we remand the case for a new trial and for
 further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 30, 2013. 
E. Gunner Schull 
(Cades Schutte)for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Anne K. Clarkin Deputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
17
 