 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30104
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ESTELA PASCUA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR NO. 09-1-1621)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Estela Pascua (Pascua) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on September 3,
 
2009 in the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1
 
After a bench trial, Pascua was found guilty of Harassment, in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 711-1106(1)(a)
 
(Supp. 2010). The case involves an incident on May 31, 2009
 
between defendant Pascua and her husband, complaining witness
 
Victorino Pascua (Victorino).
 
On appeal, Pascua contends that the Family Court erred
 
by: (1) sustaining Appellee State of Hawaii's (State) objections
 
to evidence of Victorino's prior bad acts offered in support of
 
Pascua's self-defense claim; (2) denying Pascua's Motion for
 
1 The Honorable Gale L.F. Ching presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Judgment of Acquittal and adjudging her guilty of Harassment; and
 
(3) concluding that the State had proven facts negating Pascua's
 
assertion of self-defense.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted and having given due consideration to the arguments
 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve
 
Pascua's points of error as follows:
 
(1)
 During the State's case, Pascua sought to cross-
examine Victorino about an incident in 1996 where he was
 
allegedly charged with abusing Pascua. Pascua asserted that the
 
deputy prosecutor had asked Victorino whether he had ever hit
 
Pascua, thus opening the door to evidence of prior bad acts by
 
Victorino. However, as the Family Court explained and the record
 
reflects, the context of the deputy prosecutor's question was
 
whether Victorino had ever hit Pascua on the date of the
 
incident, which he denied. The prosecution did not open the door
 
to explore prior incidents. Moreover, given that it was a bench
 
trial, and the Family Court expressly stated that it understood
 
the deputy prosecutor's question and Victorino's answer as being
 
limited to the specific date of the incident, there was no
 
prejudice to Pascua.
 
Pascua also contends on appeal that, during the 
presentation of her defense, the Family Court erred by ultimately 
sustaining the State's objection to her testimony that Victorino 
had hit her on one prior occasion. A defendant claiming self-
defense is allowed to introduce evidence of the victim's violent 
or aggressive character "either to demonstrate the reasonableness 
of [defendant's] apprehension of immediate danger or to show that 
the [victim] was the aggressor." State v. Lui, 61 Haw. 328, 330, 
603 P.2d 151, 154 (1979); see also State v. Maddox, 116 Hawai 'i 
445, 457, 173 P.3d 592, 604 (App. 2007). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Where character evidence is offered to show that the
 
defendant had a reasonable apprehension of danger, the defendant
 
must lay a proper foundation that, at the time of the incident,
 
the defendant knew of specific acts of violence committed and
 
provide sufficient information about that knowledge. Lui, 61
 
Haw. at 329-30, 603 P.2d at 154. The foundation is required
 because the evidence is probative of the defendant's state of
 
mind, showing the defendant's belief or corroborating the
 
defendant's knowledge of the complainant's character and tending
 
to prove that the defendant acted as a reasonably prudent person
 
would under similar beliefs and circumstances. Id.
 
Alternatively, where the evidence of a victim's violent 
character is offered to show that the victim was the first 
aggressor, such evidence "is properly excluded where the evidence 
at trial does not support a factual dispute as to who was the 
aggressor." Maddox, 116 Hawai
'i at 457, 173 P.3d at 604. 
In this case, the Family Court took a cautious approach
 
by provisionally allowing Pascua to testify that Victorino had
 
hit her on one prior occasion, instructing defense counsel to
 
"tie it in," and taking the issue under advisement. After this
 
instruction by the Family Court, no further information was
 
provided by Pascua about the alleged prior incident. Following
 
completion of Pascua's testimony and closing arguments, the
 
Family Court took up the issue again. The Family Court concluded
 
that the defense did not "tie it up," and thus the court
 
sustained the State's objection to Pascua's testimony that
 
Victorino had previously hit her.
 
Given the record in this case, Pascua's testimony did
 
not provide any details about the alleged prior instance of
 
violence by Victorino and failed to lay any foundation to admit
 
such testimony. Moreover, the evidence at trial did not support
 
a factual dispute as to who was the aggressor in the subject
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
incident. Hence, the Family Court did not err in ultimately
 
sustaining the State's objection to Pascua's testimony about the
 
prior incident.
 
(2) Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to
 
the prosecution, there was substantial evidence as to every
 
material element of the offense charged, and there is credible
 
evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
 
enable a person of reasonable caution to support the conclusion
 
that Pascua was guilty of Harassment. Pascua admitted, and the
 
Family Court found, that she hit Victorino at least once with a
 
traffic cone. Pascua argues that the State failed to prove her
 
intent to harass, annoy, or alarm Victorino. 
[G]iven the difficulty of proving the requisite state
of mind by direct evidence in criminal cases, we have
consistently held that . . . proof by circumstantial
evidence and reasonable inferences arising from
circumstances surrounding the defendant's conduct is
sufficient . . . . Thus, the mind of an alleged offender may
be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn
from all of the circumstances.
 
State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai 'i 85, 92, 976 P.2d 399, 406 (1999) 
(citations, brackets, and quotation marks omitted). It can be 
reasonably inferred that Pascua intended to harass, annoy, or 
alarm Victorino when she struck him with the traffic cone because 
there was evidence that: she was angry at him for coming home 
late and not feeding their children; she had been waiting for him 
to come home and came out of the house when she saw him pull into 
his parking space; she swore at him; she picked up the traffic 
cone when Victorino showed his indifference at coming home late; 
and she hit him with the traffic cone because she was angry. 
The Family Court did not err in denying Pascua's Motion
 
for Judgment of Acquittal and in adjudging her guilty of
 
Harassment.
 
(3) Pascua's contention that the State failed to
 
disprove her claim of self-defense is without merit. Based on
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the evidence presented, there was substantial evidence that 
Pascua did not act in self-defense. It was within the province 
of the trial judge to assess the credibility of the witnesses and 
the weight of the evidence. See State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai 'i 
131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996). "The prosecution disproves a justification defense beyond a reasonable doubt when the trial 
court believes the prosecution's case and disbelieves the 
defendant's case." State v. Jhun, 83 Hawai
'i 472, 483, 927 P.2d 
1355, 1366 (1996) (citation omitted). 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence, filed on September 3, 2009 in the Family
 Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 7, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Emmanuel G. Guerrero 
(Law Offices of
Emmanuel Guerrero, LLLC)
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Anne K. Clarkin Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
5
 