NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30694
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
AOAO QUEEN EMMA GARDENS and TOUCHSTONE PROPERTIES, LTD.,
Appellants-Respondents/Appellees,
v.
 
TOMMY WAI HUNG MA and SINDY YEE MA,
Appellees-Petitioners/Appellants
and
 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS,
CONDOMINIUM DISPUTE RESOLUTION PILOT PROGRAM,
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS,
STATE OF HAWAI' I,
Appellees/Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-1257)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
This secondary appeal from a decision entered by the
 
State of Hawai' i Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs 
(DCCA) arises out of a dispute over the proper interpretation of
 
condominium bylaws raised by Petitioners-Appellants Tommy Wai
 Hung Ma and Sindy Yee Ma (collectively, the Mas) against their
 condominium association, Association of Apartment Owners of Queen
 Emma Gardens (Association), and the condominium's managing
 agency, Touchstone Properties, Ltd (Touchstone). The Mas appeal
 from the Amended Judgment entered August 5, 2010, and the "Order
 Reversing the Hearings Officer's Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Law, and Order Granting Appellees/Petitioners Tommy Wai Hung Ma
 
and Sindy Sin Yee Ma's Motion for Summary Judgment/Summary
 Adjudication Filed on April 13, 2009, Filed on May 13, 2009,"
 entered July 27, 2010 (Order Reversing the DCCA Decision).
1
 
The Mas filed a Request for Hearing with the DCCA 
against Respondents-Appellees Association and Touchstone (collectively, AOAO) alleging that the AOAO violated the condominium bylaws by failing to provide insurance which covered areas reserved for the individual unit owners' exclusive use or occupancy. On a motion for summary judgment, the DCCA found in favor of the Mas, and the AOAO appealed to the circuit court. The circuit court reversed the DCCA Decision, and the Mas appealed to this court. The Mas' primary argument on appeal is that the circuit court erred in reversing the DCCA Decision by improperly interpreting the bylaws - in conjunction with Hawai' i 
case and statutory law - to limit the AOAO's responsibility to provide insurance coverage for common areas, but not for areas under the Unit owners' exclusive use or occupancy.
2 
I. BACKGROUND
 
In October 2002, the Mas purchased unit 637 (the Unit)
 
located on the sixth floor of the Queen Emma Gardens condominium
 (Queen Emma Gardens). The Association is an association of
 
3
apartment owners  created to represent the apartment owners of
the Queen Emma Gardens and is governed by the "By-Laws of the
 
1 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided over the proceedings
relating to a motion to dismiss filed by the Mas. The Honorable Karl K.
 
Sakamoto presided over all other proceedings relevant to this appeal. 
2 The Mas present 14 different points of error on appeal challenging all
of the circuit court's Findings of Facts and all but three of its Conclusions
of Law. A majority of the Mas' points on appeal relate to the circuit court's
interpretation of the Bylaws and subsequent decision to reverse the DCCA's
Decision. The Mas also make two unrelated arguments: (1) the circuit court
erred in denying their motion to dismiss the AOAO's appeal to the circuit
court; and (2) the circuit court violated their rights to due process by
adopting the AOAO's misleading Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law. 
3
 The Queen Emma Gardens is a condominium established under and
governed by Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter 514A (Supp. 2012), the
Condominium Property Act. Under HRS § 514A-3 (Supp. 2012), "Association of
apartment owners" is defined as "all of the apartment owners acting as a group
in accordance with the bylaws and declaration."
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Association of Apartment Owners of Queen Emma Gardens" (Bylaws).4
 
5
Touchstone is the managing agent  for Queen Emma Gardens.  At the
 
time of the Mas' purchase and all times relevant to this appeal,
 
Article X, section 2 of the Bylaws provided:
 
The Association shall procure and maintain . . .
policies (collectively, the "Policy") of liability insurance
to insure the Board, the Association, each apartment owner,
the Managing Agent, and other employees of the Association
against claims for personal injury, death, property damage
and such broader coverage as the Board shall determine
arising out of the condition of the property [ 6
] or
activities thereon
, under an ISO Commercial General
Liability form. Said insurance shall provide combined
single limit coverage of not less than [$2,000,000] or such
higher limits as the Board may from time to time establish
with due regard to the then prevailing prudent business
practice in the state of Hawaii as reasonably adequate for
the Association's protection. . . .
 
(Emphases added.) Pursuant to this provision, the AOAO procured
 
an Insurance Service Organization (ISO) Commercial General
 Liability (CGL) policy from Insurance Associates, Inc. with a
 coverage limit for bodily injury of up to $1,000,000 for each
 occurrence with an aggregate coverage of $2,000,000, and an
 umbrella policy providing an additional $5,000,000 of coverage.
 Both the CGL and umbrella policies "insured each individual unit
 owner of the insured condominium, 
but only with respect to
  
liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance or repair of
 
4 HRS § 514A-81 (Supp. 2012) requires that the operation of condominium
properties be governed by established bylaws which must be recorded with the
bureau of conveyances or land court. 
5 "Managing agent" is defined as "any person employed or retained for
the purposes of managing the operation of the property." HRS § 514A-3. 
6 In the context of HRS chapter 514A:
 
"Property" means and includes the land, whether or not
contiguous and including more than one parcel of land, but
located within the same vicinity, whether leasehold or in
fee simple, to the extent of the interest held therein by
the owner or lessee submitting such interest to the
condominium property regime, the building or buildings, all
improvements and all structures thereon, and all easements,
rights, and appurtenances belonging thereto, and all
articles of personal property intended for use in connection
therewith, which have been or are intended to be submitted
to the regime established by this chapter.
 
HRS § 514A-3. 
3
    
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that portion of the premises which is not reserved for that unit
 
owner's exclusive use or occupancy." (Emphasis added).
 
After purchasing the Unit, the Mas leased it to the
 
existing tenant, Ronald Gomes (Gomes). On the night of December
 1, 2005, Gomes' body was discovered on the ground below the Unit.
 
7
The Estate of Ronald H. Gomes  brought a wrongful death action
(Civil No. 07-1-1292-07) against, among others, the Mas and the
 Association. The Mas tendered their defense and indemnity to
 Insurance Associates Inc., who subsequently provided a defense
 under a reservation of rights theory. Specifically, the insurer
 stated:
 
The Ma's [sic] are being sued for failing to warn of a
defective and dangerous condition in and at the unit. The
 defective and dangerous condition is not specified. Given
 the facts of the case, that defective and dangerous
condition could include the ledge outside the unit. . . .
To the extent that the ledge was reserved for the Mas'
exclusive use or occupancy, they would not appear to qualify
as "insureds" under the Associated policy for the claims
asserted in the Gomes complaint. Accordingly, Associated
reserves the right to deny coverage of the Ma's [sic] if it
is determined that the ledge outside their unit was reserved
for their exclusive use or occupancy.
 
Eventually the lawsuit was summarily adjudicated in favor of all
 
named defendants, including the Mas.8
 
While the wrongful death proceedings were ongoing, the
 
Mas filed a Request for Hearing with the DCCA's Office of
 Administrative Hearings.
9 According to their Request for
 
7 The lawsuit was filed by Phyllis L. Gomes, individually and as Special
Administrator of the Estate of Ronald H. Gomes and by Kimberly A.C. Jordao as
next friend of Gomes' minor daughter. 
8 Plaintiffs in Civil No. 07-1-1292-07 appealed to this Court in Appeal
No. 30036. The Court dismissed the appeal as to claims brought by the Estate
of Ronald H. Gomes by Order dated November 10, 2011. After the remaining
Plaintiffs-Appellants reached a settlement, the appeal was dismissed in its
entirety.
 
9 The Mas' Request for Hearing was made pursuant to HRS § 514A-121.5
(Supp. 2005), which provides:
 
§ 514A-121.5 Mediation; condominium management dispute
resolution; request for hearing; hearing. (a) If an
apartment owner or the board of directors requests mediation
of a dispute involving the interpretation or enforcement of
the association of apartment owners' declaration, bylaws, or
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hearing, the Mas discovered during the wrongful death action that
 
the AOAO failed to purchase liability insurance to cover areas of
 the condominium reserved for each owners' exclusive use or
 occupancy. The Mas sought an order: (1) declaring that the AOAO
 violated the Bylaws by providing insurance coverage for common
 areas only; and (2) requiring the AOAO to (a) procure the
 requisite insurance coverage, and (b) reimburse the Mas for any
 costs incurred as a result of under-insurance. On April 13,
 2009, the Mas filed a motion for summary judgment/summary
 adjudication and a hearing on the motion was held on April 24,
 2009. The DCCA granted the motion and issued the "Hearings
 Officer's Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order
 Granting Petitioners' Motion For Summary Disposition" (DCCA
 Decision), concluding that:
10
 
Article X, §2 is unambiguous and requires, at a minimum,
that Respondent AOAO procure and maintain liability
insurance coverage for the owners against claims for
personal injury, death, and property damage arising on the
premises. Respondents do not point to and the Hearings
Officer cannot find any language in the By-Laws that
authorizes Respondent AOAO to limit coverage to "liability
arising out of the ownership, maintenance or repair of that
portion of the premises which is not reserved for that unit
owner's exclusive use or occupancy". On this record, the
Hearings Officer must conclude that Respondent AOAO, under
 its By-Laws as currently written, is required to procure and
maintain liability insurance that insures each apartment
owner against claims of personal injury, death and property
damage, including claims arising out of the ownership,
maintenance or repair of that portion of the premises
reserved for the owners' exclusive use and/or occupancy.
 
(Italics in original; underscore added for emphasis.)
 
9(...continued)
house rules . . . the other party in the dispute shall be
required to participate in mediation.
 
(b)
 If a dispute is not resolved by mediation as
provided in subsection (a), in addition to any other legal
remedies that may be available, any party that participated
in the mediation may file a request for a hearing with the
office of administrative hearings, department of commerce
and consumer affairs[.]
10 Craig H. Uyehara served as the Hearings Officer in this case and
issued the DCCA Decision. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The AOAO appealed the DCCA Decision to the circuit
 
court on June 2, 2009. On June 16, 2009, the Mas filed a Motion
 
to Dismiss the AOAO's appeal contending that dismissal was
 appropriate because the AOAO failed to comply with Hawai' i Rules 
of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 72 in filing their appeal. The
 circuit court denied the Mas' Motion by minute order dated August
 6, 2009. After holding arguments on the merits, the circuit
 court reversed the DCCA's Decision concluding that the DCCA
 clearly erred in interpreting the Bylaws which only required the
 AOAO to provide coverage for the common elements. The circuit
 court entered Judgment on August 5, 2010, and later filed an
 Amended Judgment on August 23, 2010. The Mas timely appealed the
 circuit court's decision to this court on August 25, 2010.
II.
 STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon its
review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal. The
 
standard of review is one in which [the appellate] court must
determine whether the circuit court was right or wrong in its
decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91-14(g)
(1993) to the agency's decision.
 
HRS § 91-14, entitled "Judicial review of contested
cases," provides in relevant part: 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may
affirm the decision of the agency or remand the case
with instructions for further proceedings; or it may
reverse or modify the decision and order if the
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings,
conclusions, decisions, or orders are: 
(1)	 In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2)	 In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
(3)	 Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4)	 Affected by other error of law; or
(5)	 Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
(6)	 Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized
by abuse of discretion or clearly
unwarranted exercise of discretion.
 
Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are reviewable
under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding
procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact
under subsection (5); and an agency's exercise of discretion
under subsection (6).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
United Pub. Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO, v. Hanneman, 106 
Hawai'i 359, 363, 105 P.3d 236, 240 (2005) (brackets in original 
omitted) (quoting Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai'i 412, 416, 91 P.3d 494, 498 (2004)). "Pursuant to HRS 
§ 91-14(g), an agency's conclusions of law are reviewed de novo." United Pub. Workers, 106 Hawai' i at 363, 105 P.3d at 240 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). "A circuit court's conclusions of law are subject to de novo review." Paul's Elec. Serv., 104 Hawai' i at 420, 91 P.3d at 502. 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.
 
The crux of this appeal revolves around the
 
interpretation of Article X, section 2 of the Bylaws. The Mas
 contend the Bylaws require the AOAO to provide insurance coverage
 for damages arising out of the use of areas in the Queen Emma
 Gardens reserved for the exclusive use or occupancy of the owner,
 including the owners' individual units. On the other hand, the
 AOAO contends the Bylaws only require them to provide insurance
 coverage to the unit owners for damages arising out of the use of
 the common elements.
 
Generally, interpretation of the bylaws, a contract
 
between the apartment owners and an association of apartment
 
11
owners , is a question of law which this court reviews de novo. 
Koga Eng'g & Const., Inc. v. State
, 122 Hawai' i 60, 72, 222 P.3d 
979, 991 (2010); Hanagami v. China Airlines, Ltd., 67 Haw. 357, 364, 688 P.2d 1139, 1144 (1984) ("As a general rule, the construction and legal effect to be given a contract is a question of law."). "[T]erms of a contract should be interpreted according to their plain, ordinary, and accepted use in common 
11 See Casumpang v. ILWU Local 142, 108 Hawai' i 411, 422, 121 P.3d 391,
402 (2005) (holding that "the constitution, rules and bylaws of an
unincorporated association . . . constitute a contract between themembers[.]"). King v. Chism, 632 S.E.2d 463, 465 (Ga. App. 2006) ("The
condominium instruments, including the bylaws and the sales agreement, are acontract that governs the legal rights between the Association and unitowners."); but see Harbour Pointe, LLC v. Harbour Landing Condominium Ass'n,Inc., 14 A.3d 284, 293 (Conn. 2011) (Vertefeuille, J., dissenting) (noting thedifference between condominium bylaws and traditional contracts). 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
speech, unless the contract indicates a different meaning." 
Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 108, 839 P.2d 10, 24 (1992) (internal quotation marks omitted); Hart v. Ticor Title Ins. Co., 126 Hawai' i 448, 456, 272 P.3d 1215, 1223 
(2012). 
We must first determine whether the language of the 
Bylaws is ambiguous. Wittig v. Allianz, A.G., 112 Hawai' i 195, 
201, 145 P.3d 738, 744 (App. 2006) ("[T]he determination of whether a contract contains ambiguous terms is a threshold question of law for the court to decide."). The DCCA granted summary judgment in favor of the Mas concluding the Bylaws unambiguously required the AOAO to provide insurance coverage to unit owners for areas under their exclusive use or occupancy. The circuit court disagreed with the DCCA's conclusion and concluded the Bylaws were ambiguous. 
In determining whether an ambiguity exists, we are 
constrained by the four corners of the document. Williams v. 
Aona, 121 Hawai' i 1, 15, 210 P.3d 501, 515 (2009) (quoting United 
Pub. Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO v. Dawson Int'l, Inc., 113 Hawai' i 127, 140, 149 P.3d 495, 508 (2006)). "A contract 
term or phrase is . . . ambiguous when it is capable of being reasonably understood in more ways than one." Cho Mark Oriental 
Food, Ltd. v. K & K Int'l, 73 Haw. 509, 520, 836 P.2d 1057, 1063­64 (1992). The Bylaws state in relevant part: 
Section 2. Liability Insurance. The Association
 
shall procure and maintain . . . a policy or policies
(collectively, the "Policy") of liability insurance to
insure the Board, the Association, each apartment owner, the
Managing Agent, and other employees of the Association
against claims for personal injury, death, property damage
and such broader coverage as the Board shall determine
arising out of the condition of the property or activities
thereon[.]
 
(Emphases added.) The language of the Bylaws provides that the
 
Association is required to maintain insurance for "each apartment
 owner" for claims "arising out of the condition of the property
 or activities thereon." The Mas argue that "property" includes
 areas reserved for the exclusive use or occupancy of the
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
individual apartment owners. The AOAO contends that "property" 
as used in this provision is restricted to the common elements of the condominium. The Bylaws provide no guidance either expressly or contextually to assist this court in determining the proper interpretation of the term. See Hart, 126 Hawai' i at 457, 272 
P.3d at 1224 ("[A]mbiguity arises here simply because [property] is not defined in the [contract]."). We agree with the circuit court that the provision is ambiguous.
12 See Stewart v. Brennan, 
7 Haw. App. 136, 143, 748 P.2d 816, 821-22 (1988).
 "Where the terms in a contract are ambiguous, in order
 
to ascertain the parties' intent the trier of fact may consider
 evidence extrinsic to the written contract, including evidence of
 the surrounding circumstances and the parties' subsequent conduct
 in construing the contract." Id. at 143, 748 P.2d at 821. 
Because construing an ambiguity requires a factual determination
 of the parties' intent, summary judgment is generally
 inapplicable to resolving such disputes. Hanagami, 67 Haw. at
 
364, 688 P.2d at 1145 ("The intent of the parties is a question
 of fact, and '[i]nasmuch as the determination of someone's state
 of mind usually entails the drawing of factual inferences as to
 which reasonable men might differ, summary judgment often will be
 an inappropriate means of resolving an issue of that character.'"
 (quoting Bishop Trust Co. v. Central Union Church, 3 Haw. App.
 624, 628-29, 656 P.2d 1353, 1356 (1983)). 
The Mas filed a motion for summary judgment with the
 
DCCA on April 13, 2009. In support of their motion for summary
 
12 Although not explicitly announced in the Order Reversing the DCCA
Decision, the circuit court found the Bylaws to be ambiguous. In an oral
 
ruling, the circuit court stated:
 
With the existent language in the bylaws, both [parties']
positions could be argued because the language of the bylaws
does not specify whether it's limited to common elements or
to exclusive use . . . .
 
In that sense, the Court looks at it as the language
being ambiguous. The Court looks at then to determine what
 the bylaws intended by looking at the surrounding sections
of bylaws, by looking at the condominium HRS statutes, by
looking at Hawaii case law, and by looking at courts of
other jurisdictions.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment, the Mas attached the relevant Bylaw sections, statutory 
provisions, and insurance policies to support their position. In opposition, the AOAO presented evidence related to the underlying incident and lawsuits involving the death of Gomes (pleadings, HPD reports, etc.), complete copies of the insurance policies, and the Declaration of Sue Salvio (Salvio), an insurance agent with Insurance Associates Inc. According to Salvio, only two insurance companies in Hawai' i wrote ISO CGL policies for 
condominiums at the time, and she had "never seen an insurance company . . . issue individual insurance policies to each owner of a condominium under the Association of Apartment Owners's ISO Commercial General Liability . . . policies." The Mas replied with the Declaration of William Souza (Souza), an insurance claims supervisor and vice president at Hawaiian Insurance Group. Souza's declaration established that an ISO CGL form could have been used to provide each apartment owner with coverage for their individual units by writing separate policies for each owner (rather than adding them as additional insureds). 
The declarations of Salvio and Souza, provide
 
conflicting evidence as to the feasibility of providing the type
 of insurance under dispute, which is relevant to the intent of
 the parties in adopting the Bylaws. See Stewart, 7 Haw. App. at
 
143, 748 P.2d at 821 ("The course of dealing between the parties
 and the custom and usage of the trade at the time are two of the
 surrounding circumstances which the trier of fact may consider
 [in determining the parties' intent]."). Because the intent of
 the parties was essential in resolving the ambiguity of the
 language of the Bylaws, summary judgment by the DCCA was
 inappropriate. Bishop Trust Co., 3 Haw. App at 629-30, 656 P.2d
 
at 1357. The circuit court erred in not remanding this case to
 the DCCA for further proceedings to resolve this genuine issue of
 material fact as to the parties' intent.
B.
 
The Mas contend the circuit court erred in denying
 
their Motion to Dismiss the AOAO's appeal. HRCP Rule 72 provides
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the procedure for seeking judicial review from an agency
 
determination. According to HRCP Rule 72(a) and 72(b), an
 aggrieved party has 30 days from the issuance of a decision by
 the DCCA to file a notice of appeal. The notice of appeal should
 name as appellees every party to the agency proceeding and the
 governmental body that issued the decision from which appeal is
 taken. See Jordan v. Hamada, 62 Haw. 444, 447-48, 616 P.2d 1368,
 
1371 (1980). "[W]ithin the same time provided for filing the
 notice of appeal or within such further time. . . as may be
 allowed by the court for good cause shown," the aggrieved party
 
13
must file a designation of the record on appeal  (designation)
and a statement of the case.14 HRCP Rule 72(d) & 72(e). 
Certified copies of all three documents must be served upon the
 appellees. HRCP Rule 72(c), 72(d)(1), & 72(e). 
13 HRCP Rule 72(d)(1) provides:
 
(d) Record on appeal.
 
(1) Designation. The appellant shall, within the time
provided for filing the notice of appeal or within such
further time, not to exceed 30 days, as may be allowed by
the court for good cause shown, prepare and present to the
clerk of the circuit court a designation, which shall
specify the papers, transcripts, minutes and exhibits which
the appellant desires filed in the circuit court in
connection with the appeal. The clerk, in the name and
under the seal of the circuit court, shall endorse on the
designation an order, directed to the official or body whose
decision, order or action is appealed from, commanding the
latter to certify and transmit such papers, transcripts,
minutes and exhibits to the circuit court within 20 days of
the date of the order or within such further time as may be
allowed by the court. The clerk shall issue certified
 copies of such designation and order to the appellant for
service upon the official or body whose decision, order or
action is appealed from and for service upon any other
appellee. The appellant shall serve certified copies of the
designation and order and shall make due return of service
thereof to the clerk of the circuit court.
14 HRCP Rule 72(e) provides:
 
(e) Statement of case.  The appellant shall file in the
circuit court concurrently with the filing of appellant's
designation, a short and plain statement of the case and a prayer
for relief. Certified copies of such statement shall be served
forthwith upon every appellee. The statement shall be treated, as
near as may be, as an original complaint and the provision of
these rules respecting motions and answers in response thereto
shall apply. 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The DCCA issued its Decision on May 13, 2009, and the
 
AOAO filed its notice of appeal with the circuit court on June 2,
 
2009, naming the Mas as appellees. The notice of appeal did not
 name the DCCA as an appellee. The AOAO filed their statement of
 the case, and designation on June 9, 2009. All three documents
 were filed within the time allowed under HRCP Rule 72. 
Subsequently, the AOAO served a certified copy of their notice of
 appeal on the Mas, but only served uncertified copies of the
 their designation and statement of the case on the Mas. The AOAO
 did not serve any of their documents on the Attorney General (on
 behalf of the DCCA). 
On June 16, 2009, the Mas filed a Motion to Dismiss
 
seeking the dismissal of the AOAO's appeal because the AOAO
 failed to (1) name the DCCA as an appellee in their notice of
 appeal; (2) serve their notice of appeal on the Attorney General;
 and (3) properly serve their designation and statement of the
 case on the Mas or the Attorney General. On July 28, 2009, while
 the Motion to Dismiss was still pending, the AOAO filed an
 amended designation and amended statement of the case. The
 circuit court held a hearing on the Mas' motion on August 5,
 2009. At the hearing, the circuit court granted the AOAO leave
 to amend their notice of appeal. The AOAO submitted their
 amended notice of appeal on August 6, 2009, naming the DCCA as an
 appellee, and the circuit court denied the Mas' motion the same
 day by minute order.
15
 
On appeal, the Mas argue that the circuit court erred
 
in denying their Motion to Dismiss. Specifically, the Mas
 contend the AOAO's amended designation was void because it was
 filed outside of the allowable time, and the circuit court did
 not find good cause for the delay. See HRCP Rule 72(d)(1)
 
(requiring the designation to be filed within the same time
 
15 The Mas filed their notice of appeal to this court on August 25,
2010 and at that time a written order had not been entered denying their
Motion to Dismiss. On September 8, 2010, two weeks after the Mas filed their
notice of appeal, the circuit court entered the "Order Denying Appellees Tommy
Wai Hung Ma and Sindy Sin Yee Ma's Motion to Dismiss Appeal With Prejudice"
(Order Denying Motion to Dismiss). 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
allowed for filing the notice of appeal or within such further
 
time as allowed by the court for "good cause shown" not to exceed
 30 days).
16 We disagree and conclude the circuit court does not
 
need to find good cause in this case where the original
 designation, although defective, was timely filed. 
Although the AOAO initially failed to strictly comply 
with the requirements of HRCP Rule 72, the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
has recognized that the rules and statutes governing the right to appeal should be "liberally construed to uphold the right of appeal[.]" Jordan, 62 Haw. at 448, 616 P.2d at 1371 (internal 
quotation marks omitted). As such, HRCP Rule 72 is not "regarded as a road block to judicial review in any sense." Id. at 449, 
616 P.2d at 1372. The AOAO's original notice of appeal, designation, and statement of the case were timely filed. However, the AOAO failed to list the DCCA as an appellee and failed to properly serve their documents. After realizing these deficiencies, the AOAO cured the defects by filing an amended notice of appeal, an amended designation, and an amended statement of the case, which the circuit court allowed. Because the AOAO's designation was timely filed and because the defects in the notice of appeal, designation, and statement of the case were not jurisdictional, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in allowing the AOAO to amend these
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The July 27, 2010 "Order Reversing the Hearings
 
Officer's Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order
 Granting Appellees/Petitioners Tommy Wai Hung Ma and Sindy Sin
 
16 In their Motion to Dismiss, the Mas contend the circuit court did
not have subject matter jurisdiction over the appeal, presumably because of
the AOAO's failure to properly name the agency in the notice of appeal and/or
serve the notice of appeal on the agency. Although the Mas do not argue
jurisdiction on appeal, we note that the defects in the AOAO's notice of
appeal are not jurisdictional defects. See Life of the Land v. Land Use
Comm'n, 58 Haw. 292, 298, 568 P.2d 1189, 1194 (1977) (holding that failure to
serve the notice of appeal on all required parties is not a jurisdictional
defect which could not later be cured); see also Jordan, 62 Haw. at 445, 616
P.2d at 1370 (holding that the failure to include the name of the agency in
the caption of the notice of appeal from an agency decision did not render the
notice of appeal fatally defective). 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Yee Ma's Motion for Summary Judgment/Summary Adjudication Filed
 
on April 13, 2009, Filed on May 13, 2009," entered in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit is vacated. In all other respects,
 the August 23, 2010 Amended Judgment is affirmed and this case is
 remanded to the circuit court to remand to the DCCA for further
 proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 5, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Stephen M. Shaw
for Appellees­Petitioners/Appellants.
 
Presiding Judge
Keith K. Hiraoka
 Shannon L. Wack
 Jodie D. Roeca
 (Roeca Luria Hiraoka)
for Appellants-Respondents/Appellees.
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
14
 