NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1NO. 30365
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Respondent-Appellee,
v.
NICHOLAS DELYON, Petitioner-Appellant.
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. S5P204-00189 & CR. NO. KOC04-189)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
Petitioner-Appellant Nicolas Robert Delyon (Delyon)
appeals from the "Order Denying Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or
Correct Judgment Filed on July 09, 2009" entered on January 26,
2010 (January 26, 2010 Order) and the "Findings of Fact,
Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order Denying Petition to
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment", entered on August 7,
2009 (August 7, 2009 Order).  Both orders were entered in the
District Court of the Fifth Circuit (District Court).1
Delyon was eighteen years old and visiting Hawaii with
his parents when he was arrested for the offense in this case. 
1  The Honorable Walton D. Y. Hong presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2More than four years later, on July 9, 2009, Delyon
filed a Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment,
pursuant to Rule 40 of the Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP)
(Petition).  Delyon claimed in his Petition that (1) his plea was
not entered knowingly or voluntarily, and (2) he received
ineffective assistance of counsel.  The District Court issued its
August 7, 2009 Order, making findings of fact, conclusions of law
and denying the Petition without a hearing.  The District Court
thereafter also issued the January 26, 2010 Order, denying the
Petition pursuant to the August 7, 2009 Order.
On appeal, Delyon contends that the District Court
erred in denying his Rule 40 Petition without a hearing because
he established colorable claims that: (1) his no contest plea was
not knowingly made; and (2) his trial counsel provided
ineffective assistance of counsel by entering a plea agreement
without Delyon's knowledge or consent, obtaining Delyon's waiver
of rights and guilty plea without informing Delyon of the terms
of the plea agreement, failing to inform Delyon that the
consequence of his plea would be a judgment of conviction, and
failing to inform Delyon of the outcome of the plea and
sentencing hearings.2On September 2, 2004, Delyon was charged with Theft in the Fourth
Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-833(1)
(1993).  Pursuant to a "Waiver of Physical Presence [and]
Submission of Plea" (Waiver and Submission of Plea) signed by
Delyon and his trial counsel, the District Court accepted a no
contest plea on behalf of Delyon without Delyon's presence at the
hearing.  Delyon was convicted of Theft in the Fourth Degree and,
on February 3, 2005, sentenced to a $150 fine.
2  As part of his points of error, Delyon challenges
conclusions of law 3-4 and findings of fact 4, 6, 15, 17, 19, and
20 in the District Court's August 7, 2009 Order.  Because weNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
agree with the major points raised in Delyon's appeal, we need
not address his specific challenges to these findings and
conclusions by the District Court.
3Taking the allegations in Delyon's Petition as true, as
required by Rule 40(f) of the Hawai #i Rules of Penal Procedure
(HRPP), we conclude that it was error for the District Court not
to hold a hearing to consider and address Delyon's Petition.  We
express no opinion on the ultimate merits of the allegations in
the Petition, but determine that the Petition alleges sufficient
facts that a hearing should be held.
I.  Standards of Review
A. Hearing for Rule 40 Petition
HRPP Rule 40(f) addresses when a hearing should be held
for a Rule 40 petition.  It states, in relevant part:
(f) Hearings.  If a petition alleges facts that if
proven would entitle the petitioner to relief, the court
shall grant a hearing which may extend only to the issues
raised in the petition or answer.  However, the court may
deny a hearing if the petitioner's claim is patently
frivolous and is without trace of support either in the
record or from other evidence submitted by the petitioner. 
The court may also deny a hearing on a specific question of
fact when a full and fair evidentiary hearing upon that
question was held during the course of the proceedings which
led to the judgment or custody which is the subject of the
petition or at any later proceeding. 
(Emphasis added).
On appeal, we review de novo the question of whether a
hearing should have been held for Delyon's Rule 40 petition.
As a general rule, a hearing should be held on a Rule
40 petition for post-conviction relief where the petition
states a colorable claim.  To establish a colorable claim,
the allegations of the petition must show that if taken as
true the facts alleged would change the verdict, however, a
petitioner's conclusions need not be regarded as true. 
Where examination of the record of the trial court
proceedings indicates that the petitioner's allegations show
no colorable claim, it is not error to deny the petition
without a hearing.  The question on appeal of a denial of a
Rule 40 petition without a hearing is whether the trial
record indicates that Petitioner's application for reliefNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4made such a showing of a colorable claim as to require a
hearing before the lower court.
In this regard, the appellate court steps into the
trial court's position, reviews the same trial record, and
redecides the issue.  Because the appellate court's
determination of "whether the trial record indicates that
Petitioner's application for relief made such a showing of a
colorable claim as to require a hearing before the lower
court" is a question of law, the trial court's decision is
reviewed de novo. . . . Therefore, we hold that the issue
whether the trial court erred in denying a Rule 40 petition
without a hearing based on no showing of a colorable claim
is reviewed de novo; thus, the right/wrong standard of
review is applicable. 
Barnett v. State, 91 Hawai #i 20, 26, 979 P.2d 1046, 1052
(1999)(citations, brackets and ellipsis omitted; italicize
emphasis in original; underline emphasis added).
B. Withdrawal of No Contest Plea
"The standard of review for the withdrawal of a nolo
contendere plea after sentence is based on a showing of necessity
to avoid manifest injustice."  State v. Cornelio, 68 Haw. 644,
646, 727 P.2d 1125, 1126 (1986).
C. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
We apply the following standard in reviewing a claim of
ineffective assistance of counsel:  
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel, [the appellate court] looks at whether defense
counsel's assistance was within the range of competence
demanded of attorneys in criminal cases.  The defendant has
the burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel
and must meet the following two-part test:  1) that there
were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack
of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
impairment of a potentially meritorious defense.  To satisfy
this second prong, the defendant needs to show a possible
impairment, rather than a probable impairment, of a
potentially meritorious defense.  A defendant need not prove
actual prejudice. 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai# i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27
(2003) (internal quotation marks, citations, and footnote  
omitted).NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5II. Discussion
A. Petition Alleges a Colorable Claim Warranting a Hearing
That Delyon Did Not Knowingly Enter His Plea
In determining whether a hearing was required on
Delyon's Rule 40 Petition, we must consider whether the Petition
"alleges facts that if proven would entitle the petitioner to
relief[.]"  HRPP Rule 40(f) (emphasis added).   That is, "[t]o
establish a colorable claim, the allegations of the petition must
show that if taken as true the facts alleged would change the
verdict [or outcome], however, a petitioner's conclusions need
not be regarded as true."  Barnett, 91 Hawai #i at 26, 979 P.2d at
1052 (citation omitted)(emphasis added).
Here, Delyon contends, and we agree, that his Petition
states a colorable claim that he did not enter a knowing and
intelligent plea and thus the District Court should have held a
hearing to determine whether Delyon was entitled to withdraw his
plea to correct a manifest injustice.
The Waiver and Submission of Plea itself raises some
questions.  The document, signed by Delyon on October 18, 2004,
states that Delyon waived his right to be present at the
arraignment, pretrial proceedings, time of entering his plea, and
at his sentencing in this case.  However, in indicating his plea,
Delyon initialed two separate boxes, pleading both "guilty" and
"no contest" to the charge.3  The Waiver and Submission of Plea
further stated Delyon had reached a plea agreement, but the terms
of that plea agreement were not set out in the document signed by
Delyon.
3  At a hearing on October 28, 2004, Delyon's appearance was
waived and the District Court "deleted" the guilty plea and
accepted the no contest plea. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6Delyon alleges in his Petition that his parents
retained his trial counsel, Mark Zenger (Zenger), and that Delyon
had one meeting with Zenger after being released from jail and
prior to leaving Hawai# i.  The Petition alleges, in part:
On August 3, 2004, I was arrested by the Kauai police for
taking beer from the pool hut of the Grand Hyatt Kauai Resort
without permission while I was staying at the hotel with my
parents.  (See Appendix A: KPD report#04-19452)  I was eighteen
years old at the time and set to start college at the University
of San Francisco on a baseball scholarship.  My parents hired Mark
Zenger to represent me.  (See Appendix B: Mark Zenger time sheets)
When I met with Mr. Zenger along with my parents, he
told me that he was pretty sure that he could get the
conviction classified as a misdemeanor.  (See Appendix C:
Complaint) I told Mr. Zenger that I did not want to have a
criminal conviction which would negatively affect my college
scholarship and future career.  I had never been previously
arrested or subjected to criminal prosecution.  Mr. Zenger
informed me about a deferred acceptance of guilty plea which
would allow me to avoid having a criminal conviction after a
set period of time.  I later found out that this was never
asked for in spite of what I was told.  Mr. Zenger told me
that he had arranged with the prosecuting attorney to have
my presence waived so that I could return to start the fall
term of college at the University of San Francisco.  Mr.
Zenger did not advise me that I should be present for my
court appearances or of any negative consequence for not
appearing in person.
In his Petition, Delyon also contests certain
representations made by Zenger in the Waiver and Submission of
Plea.  Zenger had signed the Waiver and Submission of Plea on
October 28, 2004, certifying that:
1. I explained the defendant's right to be present.
2. The defendant represented to me that he/she does not
wish to be present and that he/she wishes the
proceedings to be conducted in his/her absence.
3. I read and explained this document to the defendant.
4. The statements contained herein conform with my
understanding of the defendant's position.
5. I believe the defendant understands the document in
its entirety.
6. The defendant's plea is voluntary.
7. The defendant understands the nature of the charge and
the possible consequences.
To the contrary, Delyon alleges in his Petition that he signed
the Waiver and Submission of Plea after returning to the mainlandNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7Our family returned home that same day, August
4, 2004.  On August 22, 2004, I entered the University
of San Francisco and moved into the college dormitory. 
In October, 2004, I received a "Waiver of Physical
Presence Submission of Plea" form ("waiver and plea
form") from Mr. Zenger's office in the mail at my
dormitory.  Mr. Zenger did not contact me about the
form.  I did not discuss the contents of the form with
him or the consequences of signing the form.  I signed
the form on October 18, 2004, believing that the case
would ultimately be disposed of without a criminal
conviction on my record.  (See Appendix D: Waiver of
physical presence submission of plea form) I did not
have any communication from Mr. Zenger after signing
the waiver and plea form. He did not send me any
further paperwork and did not inform me of the outcome
of the case.  (See Appendices E and F: calendar and
judgment)and that Zenger did not contact him about the form, did not
discuss the contents of the form with him, and did not discuss
the consequences of signing the form.  Delyon further alleges he
believed the case would be resolved without a criminal conviction
on his record, that he was not informed about the outcome of the
case and only learned about his conviction after a background
check for a new job.  His Petition alleges, in relevant part:
In 2008, after I graduated from the University of San
Francisco with a degree in finance, I interviewed for and
obtained a position with Edward Jones as a financial
consultant.  On August 27th, 2008, approximately three weeks
after beginning work with Edward Jones, I was informed I was
being terminated for not disclosing a criminal conviction
which appeared on a FBI background check.  This was the
first time I learned that I had a criminal conviction of any
kind.  I was told that I could not be rehired in the
financial services industry for 10 years from the date of
the conviction unless the charges were cleared on the
federal level.
Based on the facts alleged in the Petition, Delyon made
a showing of a colorable claim requiring a hearing.  Taking the
allegations as true, the Petition raises concerns that Delyon did
not understand the plea he was entering or the consequences of
it.  The Petition contends Delyon was informed by Zenger about a
deferred acceptance of guilty plea and that he signed the form
"believing that the case would ultimately be disposed of withoutNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8The State argues that Delyon has waived his rights
under HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) because he failed to timely appeal his
conviction and has not shown extraordinary circumstances
justifying this failure.  We disagree that Delyon has waived his
HRPP Rule 40 rights because, taking the facts in the Petition as
true, Delyon alleges he did not learn about his conviction until
August 2008.  Therefore, Delyon did not "knowingly and
understandingly" fail to raise the issues asserted in his
Petition at an earlier time.  See HRPP Rule 40(a)(3).a criminal conviction on my record."  The Petition further
contends that despite what he was told, a deferred acceptance of
guilty plea was never requested on his behalf.  A hearing is
necessary to properly consider these allegations and to determine
the merits of Delyon's claims.
The State also argues the District Court did not err
because the Waiver and Submission of Plea expressly states: "I
understand that the court is not required to grant any request
for a deferred acceptance of guilty or no contest plea." 
Nonetheless, there is an important and substantive difference
between knowing a court has discretion to grant a deferred
acceptance of a plea, as opposed to allegedly believing a
deferred acceptance of plea will at least be requested on your
behalf.
“Manifest injustice occurs when a defendant makes a
plea involuntarily or without knowledge of the direct consequence
of the plea.” Barnett, 91 Hawai‘i at 28, 979 P.2d at 1054
(citation omitted).  Manifest injustice occurs where a defendant
enters a no contest plea after being misinformed by the court
that he is eligible for a deferred acceptance of that plea. 
State v. Kimsel, 109 Hawai #i 50, 58-59, 122 P.3d 1148, 1156-57
(App. 2005).  Similarly, if the allegations in Delyon's Petition
are taken as true and he signed the Waiver and Submission of PleaNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9believing his counsel would seek a deferred acceptance of his
plea, he has raised a colorable claim as to manifest injustice
and a hearing is warranted.
B. Delyon's Petition Asserts Colorable Claims of
Ineffective Assistance of Counsel Warranting a Hearing
Delyon's second ground in support of his Petition was
ineffective assistance of counsel.  In this regard, he alleges
the following facts in his Petition:
As stated above, I only spoke with my attorney, Mr.
Zenger once on August 4, 2004.  At that time, I told Mr.
Zenger that I did not want to have a criminal conviction
which would negatively affect my college scholarship and
future career.  After I returned home to California on
August 4, 2004, my only contact with Mr. Zenger was a
telephone call with Donna Richards, who I believe was his
secretary.  We did not discuss the substance of the waiver
and plea form, only that I should fill it out and return it
to her office by mail.
I believed from my meeting with Mr. Zenger that
the conviction resulting from my execution of the
waiver and plea form would be erased from my record
after a period of time if I did not commit any crimes. 
I was never informed of any plea arrangement between
my attorney, Mark Zenger and the prosecution where Mr.
Zenger gave up my right to ask for a deferred
acceptance of guilty plea.  Mr. Zenger did not contact
me after the court appearance where he filed my form
and the judgment was entered, nor did he provide me
with any paperwork.  I was not aware that the
proceedings had resulted in a final conviction until I
was informed by my employer on August 27, 2008.  (See
Appendices A-F)
Taking these allegations as true, Delyon understood
from his trial counsel that a conviction from the plea would "be
erased from [his] record after a period of time if [he] did not
commit any crimes."  Because the plea agreement was not included
in the Waiver and Submission of Plea,4 these allegations raise a
colorable claim that absent counsel's alleged errors, Delyon
4  Without the plea agreement included in the Waiver and
Submission of Plea signed by Delyon, the record does not
establish what Delyon understood about his plea deal.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10would not have pleaded no contest to the theft charge and given
up his right to defend against the charge.  The no contest plea
resulted in Delyon's waiver of important constitutional
guarantees, including a right to trial, the privilege against
self-incrimination, and the right to confront his accusers.  See
Reponte v. State, 57 Haw. 354, 362, 556 P.2d 577, 583 (1976) 
"Such a waiver is not constitutionally acceptable unless made
voluntarily and with full understanding of the consequences." 
Id.
At this juncture in the Rule 40 process, we are
reviewing only the allegations asserted by Delyon in his Petition
to determine if they support colorable claims such that the
District Court should have held a hearing.  We conclude a hearing
is required to properly consider the allegations in the Petition. 
III. Conclusion
Based on the foregoing, the August 7, 2009 Order and
the January 26, 2010 Order entered by the District Court are
vacated.  The case is remanded to the District Court for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion, including a hearing on
Delyon's Petition.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 30, 2011.
On the briefs:
Deborah L. Kim
for Petitioner-Appellant
Chief Judge
Tracy Murakami
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Kaua #i
for Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge
Associate Judge