NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30432
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KENNETH L. WALLACE, Trustee of the Kenneth L. Wallace
Living Trust Dated June 20, 2001, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
HARLOW BURROWS, Defendant/Cross-claimant/
Cross-claim Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
LA BAHIA, 1993, INC., a Hawaii corporation,
Defendant/Cross-claim Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
SCOTT DEAN, ROBERT J. CELLA, CBIP, INC., dba COLDWELL
BANKER ISLAND PROPERTIES, Defendant/Cross-claim Defendant/
Cross-claimant-Appellee,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-20 and JANE DOES 1-20, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-0141)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
This appeal arises from a contract for the sale and
 
purchase of a home in Wailea, Maui (the "Home," or the
 
"Property"), entered into between Defendant-Appellee La Bahia
 1993, Inc. ("La Bahia") as seller and Plaintiff-Appellant Kenneth
 L.
 Wallace, Trustee of the Kenneth L. Wallace Living Trust Dated
 
June 20, 2001 ("Wallace") as buyer, on December 15, 2004. 
Defendant-Appellee Harlow Burrows ("Burrows") is the sole officer
 and director of La Bahia. Defendant-Appellee CBIP, Inc., dba
 Coldwell Banker Island Properties ("Coldwell Banker") entered
 into a dual agency agreement with Wallace and Burrows. In the
 Coldwell Banker Dual Agency Consent Agreement, under which
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Coldwell Banker represented both parties in the transaction,
 
Defendant-Appellee Scott Dean ("Dean") and Peter Gelsey
 ("Gelsey") were identified as the listing agent and selling agent
 respectively, and Defendant-Appellee Robert J. Cella ("Cella")
 was identified as the seller's broker-in-charge.
1/
 
Wallace appeals from the May 12, 2008 order denying his
 
motion for partial summary judgment ("Order Denying MPSJ"); the
 November 18, 2009 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
 Order; the March 9, 2010 Final Judgment; and the March 23, 2010
 final judgment in favor of Burrows and La Bahia, each entered in
 the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit ("Circuit Court").
2/
 
Wallace raises five points of error on appeal. He
 
contends that the Circuit Court erred in (1) denying his Motion
 for Partial Summary Judgment; (2) entering inadequate findings of
 fact ("FOF"); (3) entering clearly erroneous FOF and wrong
 conclusions of law ("COL"); (4) limiting cross-examination of
 defense witness James Worley; and (5) awarding attorneys' fees to
 Burrows without apportionment.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Wallace's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Under the "Morgan rule," see Morgan v. Am. Univ.,
 
534 A.2d 323 (D.C. 1987), "an order denying [a] motion [for
 summary judgment] could not be appealed if denial was based on
 the presence of factual questions for the jury, but could be
 appealed if based on questions of law." Larsen v. Pacesetter
 
Systems, Inc., 74 Haw. 1, 17-18, 837 P.2d 1273, 1282 (1992). 
Attempting to distinguish Morgan, Wallace contends that the Order
 Denying MPSJ "was based on legal error, and not 'on the presence
 of factual issues.'" Wallace further claims that "the trial
 court denied summary judgment based on the mistaken assumption
 
1/
 Although Gelsey was identified as the "selling agent" in the Dual
Agency Consent Agreement, Gelsey, in fact, served as Wallace's principal
Coldwell Banker contact and was not named as a defendant in the complaint. As
 such, Coldwell Banker, Dean, and Cella are referred to, collectively, as
"Defendant Realtors."
 
2/
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Wallace must show an intentional failure to disclose prior
 
repairs or defects in order [for Defendants-Appellees] to be
 found liable for breach of contract."
 
The Order Denying MPSJ, however, expressly states that
 
it is based on disputed issues of material fact. Indeed, the
 hearing transcript illuminates the court's thinking.
 
At the hearing, the Circuit Court identified two issues
 
raised by Wallace's motion: (i) whether the Deposit Receipt Offer
 
3/
and Acceptance ("DROA") and Hawaii Revised Statutes chapter
508D ("Chapter 508D") required the seller to disclose all
 
material facts concerning the Property; and (ii) whether the
 seller failed to disclose material facts to the buyer. As to the
 first issue, the court concluded, as a matter of law, that the
 seller was under an obligation to disclose all material facts
 concerning the Property under the DROA and Chapter 508D. As to
 the second issue, the court explained:
 
However, with respect to the second portion of this motion,
that is that the seller failed to disclose material facts to
 the buyer, including repairs to the roof of the residence on
the subject property, and repairs to the interior of the
property, the Court has determined that there are genuine
 issues of material fact that would prevent this Court from
entering judgment as a matter of law in this summary
fashion.
 
Although the Circuit Court did not elaborate further on 
the genuine issues of material fact, the transcript makes it 
clear that the court was referring to unresolved questions regarding whether Burrows actually disclosed material past defects. Here, as in Bhakta v. Cnty. of Maui, 109 Hawai
'i 198, 
124 P.3d 943 (2005), the Circuit Court separated out the issues in the motion into issues of law and issues of fact, and denied the motion based on the latter. Cf. Gump v. Walmart Stores, 
Inc., 93 Hawai
'i 428, 437-38, 5 P.3d 418, 427–28 (App. 1999), 
aff'd in part, rev'd in part sub nom. Gump v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 93 Hawai
'i 417, 5 P.3d 407 (2000) (allowing review on 
appeal because the trial court denied the motion for summary judgment based on an issue of law). Therefore, the Morgan rule 
3/
 The DROA was submitted by Wallace to Burrows on October 21, 2004.
On October 22, 2004, Wallace submitted a Counter Offer ("Counter Offer"),
which Burrows accepted on October 24, 2004, by signing and dating the DROA,
completing section D of the DROA, and attaching the Counter Offer.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
applies, and the Order Denying MPSJ is not reviewable by this
 
court.
 
(2) Wallace argues that the Circuit Court failed to
 
enter findings sufficient to explain its ultimate conclusions or
 to address almost a dozen critical facts allegedly established by
 the evidence.
4/
 
Where an appellant alleges that the trial court failed to
make adequate findings of fact, the appellate court will
examine all the findings, as made, to determine whether they
are (1) supported by the evidence; and (2) sufficiently
comprehensive and pertinent to the issues in the case to
form a basis for the conclusions of law. If those findings
include sufficient subsidiary facts to disclose to the
reviewing court the steps by which the lower court reached
its ultimate conclusion on each factual issue, then the
findings are adequate.
 
Nani Koolau Co. v. K & M Const., Inc., 5 Haw. App. 137, 140, 681
 
P.2d 580, 584 (1984) (citations omitted); see also Shannon v.
 Murphy, 49 Haw. 661, 668-69, 426 P.2d 816, 820 (1967) (holding
 that succinct FOFs were sufficient to determine the issues at
 hand, where the detailed FOFs that plaintiff desired were "either
 dependent upon the credibility of plaintiff or were immaterial
 and unnecessary for the determination of the issues before the
 court"). We address Wallace's contentions in turn.
 
Wallace asserts that FOFs 18–31 are inadequate because
 
the omission of portions of John Eddy's testimony "sanitizes the
 leak history." Eddy's testimony, however, is adequately
 reflected in FOFs 20–21.
 
Wallace contends that the Circuit Court made no finding
 
regarding (a) the Counter Offer, or (b) the allegedly false
 language in the Counter Offer representing to Wallace that there
 was another offer for the Property. FOF 38, however, explicitly
 addresses the Counter Offer and has sufficient support in the
 testimony of Wallace and Burrows and the DROA and Counter Offer
 themselves. In addition, Wallace fails to establish, in light of
 
4/
 Wallace also finds it "troubling" that the Circuit Court allegedly
entered "scripted findings nine months after the close of evidence in the
case"; he cites to In re Colony Square Co., 819 F.2d 272 (11th Cir. 1987) and
Bradley v. Md. Cas. Co., 382 F.2d 415 (8th Cir. 1967), asserting that
"[n]umerous jurisdictions 'have repeatedly condemned the ghostwriting of
judicial orders by litigants.'" These cases, however, are inapposite.
Wallace points to nothing in the record showing that the Circuit Court's
process was fundamentally unfair or denied him due process. Thus, Wallace has
not demonstrated that the Circuit Court erred. 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Burrows's ambiguous testimony, that another offer did not exist,
 
or that a finding relating to the allegedly false contention is
 necessary in order to explain the Circuit Court's ultimate
 conclusion.
 
Wallace claims that the FOFs inadequately describe the
 
October 16, 2004 Home Inspection Report ("HIR"), because there
 were:
 
[N]o findings regarding the undisputed testimony and
evidence that the [HIR] recommended obtaining the history of
roof and lanai repairs from Burrows and a complete roof
evaluation, that Burrows and Dean were aware of those
recommendations, that Burrows and Dean saw the Rainbow Roof
Repair Agreement that did not include a complete roof
evaluation, and that Wallace did not see the Repair
Agreement before the transaction closed. 
While the FOFs do not mention the HIR's recommendation for a
 
complete roof evaluation, they describe the extensive nature of
 the HIR and the fact that, less than three weeks later, Wallace
 signed the Addendum to the DROA ("Addendum") on November 6, 2004,
 effectively waiving his right to withdraw from the sale based on
 either the HIR or the October 29, 2004 Disclosure Statement
 ("Disclosure Statement") despite the fact that the Disclosure
 Statement did not address all the items mentioned in the HIR.
5/
 
The FOFs adequately describe that Wallace received the HIR,
 arranged for contractors to fix the most critical issues, signed
 the Addendum, and removed the Buyer's contingencies without
 following up on referenced documents that would have further
 clarified the nature of the repairs.
 
Wallace maintains that the Circuit Court's FOFs were
 
inadequate because "[t]he court made no findings on Burrows's
 attempt to repair the roof of a multimillion dollar home with 'no
 building skills.'" FOFs 23–26, however, were sufficient for the
 Circuit Court to conclude that Burrows believed that the problems
 with the roof had been resolved when he completed the Disclosure
 Statement. 
Wallace argues that the FOFs were inadequate because
 
they ignored Gelsey's "representations to Wallace that all
 critical issues in the [HIR] were being resolved . . . [i]n other
 
5/
 Wallace signed a Contingency Removal Certification Form on
December 7, 2004. 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
words, Wallace had no reason to walk away from the transaction."
 
FOF 86, however, explains that Wallace initially wanted all the
 items in the HIR to be covered, but the Addendum that Wallace
 subsequently signed did not address all of those items. Wallace
 testified that the items listed in the Addendum were "important,"
 that the Addendum did not contain all the items in the HIR, and
 that minor issues need not be included in the document.
 
Wallace asserts that the FOFs are inadequate because
 
the Circuit Court "ignored Gelsey's testimony that he believed
 and represented to Wallace that the lanai repair was cosmetic." 
Wallace, however, viewed the damage differently. FOFs 95–97
 specifically outline Wallace's pre-closing encounters with lanai-
related problems, and how he and others viewed the lanai repair.
 
Wallace contends that the Circuit Court "failed to make
 
findings on the candid admission by Gelsey that he failed to
 provide Burrows's handwritten disclosure to Wallace, and that he
 had [an] obligation to do so." FOFs 77–80, however, provide a
 sufficient basis for COL 20: "[a] seller's agent's duty [to
 disclose] is limited to where an agent has actual knowledge that
 the seller's disclosure is inaccurate or the seller has omitted
 material defects." The FOFs explain that Burrows disclosed the
 information to Dean, that Dean forwarded the information to
 Gelsey in a fax, and that Gelsey later informed Wallace of the
 information contained in Dean's fax.
 
Wallace claims that the FOFs are inadequate because
 
when the contingency period ended on December 7, 2004, "Gelsey
 believed that all critical items had been resolved, with the
 exception of the 'cosmetic' lanai repair, which would be
 completed shortly after closing[,]" and sent an email to Wallace.
 According to Wallace, this email "assured [him] that everything
 was fine and gave him no reason to walk away." Irrespective of
 what Gelsey thought, however, Wallace observed the problem
 himself. FOFs 100–102 describe Wallace's awareness of the lanai
 problem and its importance relative to other concerns regarding
 the sale, particularly Wallace's concern over the completion of
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
his section 1031 transaction.6/
 
Wallace maintains that the Circuit Court's FOFs were
 
inadequate because they did not incorporate the testimony of
 
several witnesses, including James Reinhardt ("Reinhardt"), Shawn
 
7/
Conners ("Conners"),  Kenneth Chong ("Chong"), and James Worley
("Worley"). The relevance of that testimony notwithstanding,
 
where the trial court's determinations of fact are largely
dependent upon the resolution of conflicting testimony,
great weight will be accorded its findings upon review. And
 while reasonable minds may fairly differ as to whether
certain evidence establishes a fact in issue, yet where
findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence the
findings of the trial court will be sustained. Substantial
 evidence is credible evidence which is of sufficient
 quantity and probative value to justify a reasonable man in
reaching a conclusion.
 
Shinn v. Edwin Yee, Ltd., 57 Haw. 215, 219, 553 P.2d 733, 737
 
(1976) (citations omitted). The Circuit Court's FOFs are
 adequate without the testimony of Reinhardt, Chong, or Worley
 because they are sufficiently comprehensive and pertinent to the
 issues to form a basis for the COLs. That one witness's
 testimony contradicts another's does not mean that the Circuit
 Court abuses its discretion in failing to reference each
 witness's testimony or finding one witness's testimony more
 credible.
 
In sum, the findings, as made, were supported by the
 
evidence and were sufficiently comprehensive and pertinent to the
 issues in the case to form a basis for the conclusions of law.
 
(3) Wallace asserts that a number of FOFs are clearly
 
erroneous and certain COLs are wrong. 
(a) The challenged FOFs are erroneous, Wallace
 
claims, because they are "against the clear weight of the
 
6/
 Section C-67 of the DROA described "Other Special Terms,"
specifically those regarding an Internal Revenue Code section 1031 exchange
("1031 Exchange") transaction: "Seller agrees to participate in Buyer’s 1031
exchange at no additional cost or obligation to seller, and completion of this
transaction is subject to completion of the corresponding 1031 transaction(s)
of Buyer." FOF 101, the substance of which Wallace does not challenge, finds
that Wallace believed that he would be faced with 1031 Exchange tax
implications of $600,000 if he pulled out of the sale. 
7/
 Wallace fails to direct us to Conners's testimony in the record;
thus, any argument relating to that testimony is waived. See Haw. R. App. P.
28(b)(7) (arguments must contain "citations to the authorities, statutes and
parts of the record relied on . . . . Points not argued may be deemed
waived").
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence or otherwise indicate a clear mistake has been made." 
An [FOF] is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to
support the finding, the appellate court is left with the
definite and firm conviction in reviewing the entire
evidence that a mistake has been committed. An [FOF] is
also clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial
evidence to support the finding. We have defined
 substantial evidence as credible evidence which is of
 sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support a conclusion. 
Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai 'i 43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 158 (2004) 
(quoting Ass'n of Apt. Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort 
Co., 100 Hawai 'i 97, 112, 58 P.3d 608, 623 (2002)). 
Wallace contends that numerous FOFs, including FOF 38,
 
53, 55, 59, 60, 63–68, 70,8/ 74, 77–80, 84–86, 99–102, and 122,
 
are erroneous because they are false, impossible, misleading or
 incomplete. Each of those findings, however, is supported by
 substantial evidence, and fails to leave us with the definite and
 firm conviction that a mistake has been committed. For instance,
 the failure to make any reference to Burrows's Counter Offer to
 Wallace or the allegedly "false language" in the Counter Offer
 regarding Burrows's receipt of another offer on the Home (FOF 38)
 is significant only if we accept Wallace's characterization of
 the false language. Rather than "false," Burrows's testimony was
 equivocal, and therefore the Circuit Court's disregard of it is
 not clearly erroneous. Similarly, FOFs 59 and 60 are not clearly
 erroneous merely because they fail to mention that Gelsey twice
 informed Wallace that the critical items in the HIR were being
 resolved. FOF 86, which is unchallenged, outlines that Wallace
 initially wanted each item in the HIR to be resolved, but later
 agreed with Gelsey to repair the most critical issues, and signed
 a subsequent Addendum that listed only four items to be repaired. 
FOFs 59 and 60, together with FOF 86, form a sufficient basis for
 the related COLs.
 
8/
 Wallace contends that the Circuit Court's "use of intent regarding
Burrows's contractual obligation to 'disclose all material facts relating to
the Property that . . . are within the knowledge or control of Seller' is
reversible legal error." The "use of intent" which Wallace refers to is
 contained in FOF 70, which does not limit itself to Wallace's contract claim.
Furthermore, the court's COLs regarding breach of contract do not mention
intent. Since Wallace does not demonstrate an improper "use of intent" in any
of the contract-based COLs, the claim is without merit.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court found various witnesses to be more
 
credible than other witnesses, observed that answers were
 
qualified where Wallace saw unambiguity, employed adjectives with
 which Wallace disagreed or failed to employ adjectives that he
 preferred, and interpreted counter-evidence differently than
 Wallace. It thus reached different conclusions than Wallace as
 to the significance of various pieces of evidence, facts, and
 arguments as they related to the ultimate conclusions in the
 case. None of this makes the predicate FOFs clearly erroneous.
 
(b) Wallace next argues that numerous COLs
 
concerning his breach of contract, negligence, unfair/deceptive
 acts, and vicarious liability claims are wrong.
9/ We address
 
those arguments in turn.
 
[The appellate] court reviews the trial court's COLs de
 
novo. A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness. Moreover, a COL that
is supported by the trial court's FOFs and that reflects an
application of the correct rule of law will not be
overturned.
 
Bhakta, 109 Hawai 'i at 208, 124 P.3d at 953 (brackets in 
original, citations, and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
Wallace asserts that COLs 15, 18, 25, and 40, regarding
 
his breach of contract claim, are wrong10/ because Burrows (i)
 
falsely reported the roof's repair history, and (ii) failed to
 
prepare the Disclosure Statement with due care because he did not
 disclose repairs done, initially, by some unknown person and,
 subsequently, by Burrows on the ceiling and roof.
11/  Burrows,
 
9/
 In his opening brief, Wallace challenged various COL related to
claims against the Defendant Realtors, including COLs 20, 41-45, 49, and 51.
Wallace, however, subsequently dismissed his appeal as to the Defendant
Realtors. Consequently, we deem those arguments to be withdrawn and do not
address them. 
10/
 Wallace summarily contends that there is a common law duty for
sellers and real estate agents to make full disclosure, citing Holmes v. 
Summer, 116 Cal. Rptr. 3d 419, 424 (App. 2010). Since Holmes purports only to
reflect California law, and since Wallace offers no argument tying California
common law to Hawai' i, or explaining how any of the identified COLs amount to
a breach of that common law, we reject the argument as unsupported by relevantauthority and unconvincing. 
11/
 Wallace notes that Burrows knew that the HIR asked for history of
repairs and recommended a complete roof evaluation, that Burrows agreed to
perform the repairs in the Addendum in accordance with the HIR, and yet "he
and his dual agent Dean approved the Repair Agreement knowing that it did not
include the evaluation." That claim, however, ignores the intimate
involvement of Gelsey in the discussions about which repairs would be made,
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
however, checked the boxes marked Ceilings and Roof under the
 
question: "Are you aware of any current or past
 defects/malfunctions/major repairs with respect to" on page one
 of the Disclosure Statement. On page two, Burrows explained,
 with respect to the aforementioned check marks: "Had roof
 problems. Fixed by Ram Roofing. (See John Eddy)." 
Wallace, nevertheless, objects that Burrows did not
 
disclose that Burrows was aware that there were multiple
 instances of roof repair and that Burrows and some unknown person
 had attempted repairs before Ram Roofing was involved. Burrows
 responded that he was in no rush to sell the Home, that he
 prepared the Disclosure Statement in good faith and to the best
 of his knowledge, that he explained the roof repair issue in
 further detail to Dean, that he did not know who or why someone
 had performed repair work in the upper front area of the roof,
 and that, because "I'm [only] supposed to report significant
 material things known to me," he did not report about anything
 which he "really [did not] have any knowledge [about] or history
 on []." As to not reporting that he had participated in any
 repair, Burrows explained that he worked alongside John Eddy. He
 further explained that "Ram Roofing came along, and so that's
 three people working up there, but it's not three repairs. It's
 one leak and still one incident." Based on the record, the
 Disclosure Statement was prepared with "due care" in accordance
 with HRS § 508D-9. 
In sum, the challenged COLs are supported by the
 
Circuit Court's FOFs and reflect the correct rule of law. 
Therefore, they will not be overturned.
 
(4) Wallace contends that the Circuit Court erred by
 
excluding a "critical admission of liability by Defendant’s
 expert Worley," when it barred both his opinion and the expert’s
 notes reflecting it. Wallace points to testimony by Worley
 regarding notes he took while observing standard-of-care expert
 Kenneth Chong’s deposition, in which Worley stated that "there
 
and the fact that, as Wallace argues elsewhere, Gelsey twice informed him that
the critical items in the Report were being resolved. Wallace's objection,
then, is with Gelsey, against whom he made no complaint, and not Burrows.
 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
may have been a failure to [protect] buyer's interest at the time 
of closing regarding repairs and concerns." Wallace asserts that the court should have followed Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence ("HRE") 
Rule 702.1.12/ 
In accordance with HRE Rule 703, the Circuit Court 
allowed cross-examination of Worley on his notes, in order to understand the basis of the expert's opinion. Once the cross-examination revealed that the notes did not reflect Worley’s final opinions, the Circuit Court properly limited the cross-examination. Tabieros v. Clark Equip. Co., 85 Hawai
'i 336, 383­
84, 944 P.2d 1279, 1326-27 (1997). Thus, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in its treatment of Exhibit 128 and Worley's testimony. 
(5) Wallace argues that the Circuit Court erred by
 
declining to apportion attorneys' fees between his assumpsit and
 non-assumpsit claims. We disagree.
 
In deciding whether to award fees under HRS § 607-14,
the court must determine the nature of the lawsuit
 where both assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims are
asserted in an action. 
. . . The character of the action should be determined from
 the facts and issues raised in the complaint, the nature of
the entire grievance, and the relief sought. . . .
Additionally, . . . in a case involving both assumpsit and
non-assumpsit claims, a court must base its award of fees,
if practicable, on an apportionment of the fees claimed
between assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims.
 
Blair v. Ing, 96 Hawai 'i 327, 332, 31 P.3d 184, 189 (2001) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The Circuit Court did not err in determining the
 
essential character of the case to be in assumpsit. In the
 
caption of his First Amended Complaint, Wallace characterized the
 action as a breach of contract, his first claim alleges that
 
12/
 HRE Rule 702.1 provides, in relevant part:
 
(a) General. A witness testifying as an expert may be
cross-examined to the same extent as any other witness and,
in addition, may be cross-examined as to (1) the witness'
qualifications, (2) the subject to which the witness' expert
testimony relates, and (3) the matter upon which the
witness' opinion is based and the reasons for the witness'
opinion.
 
Haw. R. Evid. 702.1(a) (1993). 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants "breached their respective contractual obligations to 
Plaintiff," and he sought damages. That Wallace sought attorneys' fees is also significant. See Leslie v. Estate of 
Tavares, 93 Hawai
'i 1, 6, 994 P.2d 1047, 1052 (2000) ("[A] 
plaintiff's prayer for attorney fees is a significant indication that the action is in assumpsit." (citing Helfand v. Gerson, 105 F.3d 530, 537 (9th Cir. 1997))). Moreover, the Circuit Court observed that the entire case "flow[ed] from the contractual agreements between the parties[.]" The Circuit Court, looking at the entire grievance, correctly determined that the "character of the action" was in assumpsit. See Blair, 92 Hawai
'i at 332, 31 
P.3d at 189. 
Nor did the Circuit Court err in declining to apportion
 
fees between claims. Wallace predicated his fraud and
 misrepresentation claim on a breach of contract, alleging that
 Burrows and Defendant Realtors made false representations in the
 Addendum and the Disclosure Statement. Wallace's negligence
 claim, alleging breach of duty related to disclosures in the DROA
 and Counter Offer, also derived from the breach of contract
 claim. As Wallace's additional claims derived from, and indeed,
 were "inextricably linked" to, the breach of contract claim, the
 Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in declining to
 apportion attorneys' fees. See id. at 333, 31 P.3d at 190
 
("Because the negligence claim . . . was derived from the alleged
 implied contract and was inextricably linked to the implied
 contract claim by virtue of the malpractice suit, we hold that it
 is impracticable, if not impossible, to apportion the fees
 between the assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims.").
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the May 12, 2008
 
Order Denying Plaintiff Kenneth L. Wallace's Motion for Partial
 Summary Judgment on Count I of the First Amended Complaint
 Against Defendants Harlow Burrows and La Bahia 1993, Inc.; the
 November 18, 2009 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
 Order; the March 9, 2010 Final Judgment; and the March 23, 2010
 Final Judgment in Favor of Defendants Harlow Burrows and La Bahia
 1993, Inc. Against Plaintiff Kenneth L. Wallace, Trustee of the
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kenneth L. Wallace Living Trust Dated June 20, 2001, entered in
 
the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 30, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Michael L. Lam and 
Mark G. Valencia 
(Case Lombardi & Pettit)
and Peter Van Name Esser 
(with them on the reply)for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Craig G. Nakamura and
Erika L. Lewis (Carlsmith Ball LLP)
for Defendant/Cross-claim
Defendant/Cross-claimant-
Appellee Harlow Burrows and
Defendant/Cross-claim
Defendant-Appellee
La Bahia, 1993, Inc.
 
13
 