NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30196
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
WENDELL HARRISON JENKINS, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 08-1-0025; CR. NO. 96-0127)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
Petitioner-Appellant Wendell Harrison Jenkins
 
("Jenkins") appeals from the Order Denying Motion to Amend Rule
 
40 Petition ("Order Denying Motion to Amend"), filed on
 October 29, 2009, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 ("Circuit Court").
1 In the Order Denying Motion to Amend, the
 
Circuit Court denied Jenkins' Motion to Amend Rule 40 Petition
 for Post-Conviction Relief ("Motion to Amend"), filed on
 September 14, 2009, on the basis that Jenkins failed to cite to
 any authority that would allow him to amend his Rule 40 Petition
 after judgment was entered "and after the deadline to appeal has
 passed." On November 24, 2009, Jenkins filed a timely notice of
 appeal. 
On appeal, Jenkins argues that the Circuit Court
 
erroneously denied his Motion to Amend where, at trial, the court
 erroneously instructed the jury that "a knife is a dangerous
 instrument," with regard to the Robbery I count, and failed to
 instruct the jury regarding the possible merger of the Robbery I
 and Kidnapping counts. He also argues that because his trial
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel did not object to the court's instructions, he was denied
 
effective assistance of counsel.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Jenkins' points of error as follows:
 
On January 23, 1996, the State of Hawai
'i ("State") 
charged Jenkins with one count of Robbery in the First Degree ("Robbery I") in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 708-840(1)(b)(i) (1993); one count of Kidnapping in violation of HRS § 707-720(1)(c) (1993); and one count of Burglary in the first Degree ("Burglary I") in violation of HRS § 708-810(1)(a) (1993). On June 18, 1998, after a jury trial, the court issued its Judgment, reflecting Jenkins' conviction on all three counts and sentencing him to terms of imprisonment on each count, with mandatory minimum terms because he was a repeat offender.
2 
On June 13, 2008, almost seven years after his re­
sentencing, Jenkins filed a Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or
 Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from Custody ("Rule 40
 Petition"). The Rule 40 Petition alleged:
 (1) ineffective assistance of trial counsel (as evidenced by a
private informal admonition issued by the Office of
Disciplinary Counsel to Jenkins' trial counsel, which notes
counsel's admission that Jenkins may have a basis for
claiming ineffective assistance of counsel for failure to
file a timely appeal);
 
(2) ineffective assistance of trial counsel (refusing to submit
an appeal as requested by Jenkins);
 
(3) ineffective assistance of appellate counsel (failure to
raise ineffective assistance of trial counsel on appeal);
and 
(4) ineffective assistance of trial and appellate counsel
(failing to challenge (unspecified) illegal convictions and
sentence).
 
2
 The Honorable Sandra A. Simms presided. Jenkins appealed from the
Judgment. On January 18, 2001, the Hawai' i Supreme Court issued a memorandum
opinion affirming Jenkins' conviction, but remanding the case on the basis
that the court's sentence was improper. On June 14, 2001, the Circuit Courtresentenced Jenkins to twenty years of incarceration on each of the Robbery Iand Kidnapping counts and ten years of incarceration on the Burglary I count,all terms to be served concurrently, and with no mandatory minimum terms. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 10, 2008, the Circuit Court filed its Order
 
Denying Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to
 
Release Petitioner from Custody ("Order Denying Rule 40
 Petition"). The Circuit Court concluded that the claims were
 previously ruled upon or were waived. In addition, the Circuit
 Court found that "the claims [were] patently frivolous and
 without a trace of support either in the record or from other
 evidence submitted by the petitioner and[,] therefore,
 [petitioner] has failed to state a claim upon which relief may be
 granted."
 
Nearly a year later, on September 14, 2009, Jenkins
 
filed the instant Motion to Amend. The Motion to Amend states
 three bases for relief, each of which is labeled as "Denial of
 Effective Assistance of Counsel." The specific claims raised in
 the Motion to Amend, however, are more specific and notably
 different than the claims raised in the Rule 40 Petition:
 (1) denial of effective assistance of counsel (counsel's failure
to object to the jury instruction that "a knife is a
dangerous instrument" because there was no tangible evidence
presented of a knife);
 
(2) denial of effective assistance of counsel (counsel failed torequest a jury instruction on the merger of the kidnappingand robbery charges; State v. Hoey, 77 Hawai
'i 17, 27 n.9,
881 P.2d 504, 514 n.9 (1994)); 
(3) denial of effective assistance of counsel (appellate counsel
failed to raise ineffective assistance of trial counsel, and
"failed to perfect appeal as requested by Defendant."
 
We exercise jurisdiction over the Order Denying Motion
 
to Amend because the order is an appealable post-judgment order
 
under HRS § 641-11 from which an appeal was timely taken. 
Specifically, it resolved all of the issues therein, leaving
 nothing further to be accomplished. 
Because the Order Denying Rule 40 Petition resolved all
 
of the issues in the Rule 40 Petition and left nothing further to
 be accomplished, it was a final order. Consequently, and since
 it raises different issues than those raised in the Rule 40
 Petition, we treat the Motion to Amend as a separate and non­conforming petition under Rule 40. Haw. R. Pen. P. 49(c)(2); see
 also Kaopua v. State, No. 28907, 2009 WL 192005, *1 (Haw. App.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Jan. 26, 2009).
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order Denying Motion to
 
Amend Rule 40 Petition, filed on October 29, 2009, in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit is vacated and the case is remanded
 for the Circuit Court to address the Motion to Amend on its
 merits as a separate and non-conforming petition under Rule 40.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 13, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Wendell Harrison Jenkins 
Pro Se Petitioner-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Donn Fudo,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Respondent-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 