NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30066
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
COREY J. GONSALES, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
'EWA DIVISION
 
(Case No. 1DTC-07-046866)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Corey J. Gonsales (Gonsales) 
appeals the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and 
Plea/Judgment filed on August 19, 2009 in the District Court of 
the First Circuit, 'Ewa Division (district court).1 Gonsales was 
convicted of Excessive Speeding in violation of HRS § 291C­105(a)(2) (2007). 
On appeal, Gonsales contends that (1) the district 
court abused its discretion in denying his motion to compel 
discovery and (2) there was insufficient evidence presented at 
trial, due to insufficient foundation for the introduction of the 
speed reading of the laser gun. 
1
 The Honorable Clyde E. Sumida presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Gonsales’s points of error as follows.
 
(1) Discovery.
 A ruling limiting discovery is reviewed for an abuse of 
discretion. State v. Peseti, 101 Hawai
'i 172, 178, 65 P.3d 119, 
125 (2003); see also Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 
16(d). 
On June 25, 2008, Gonsales filed a motion to compel
 
discovery (Discovery Motion). The Discovery Motion sought the
 following items:
 
(a)	 [Honolulu Police Department] HPD departmental policies
and procedures for conducting speeding citations;
 
(b)	 The HPD training manual for speeding citations;
 
(c)	 The operation manual for the specific laser gun used
in the case;
 
(d)	 Any documentation related to the following:
 i.	 The brand and model of the gun;
 ii.	 The age of the gun;
 iii.	 When the gun was purchased and first put into
use by HPD;
 iv.	 The period of warranty on the gun;
 v.	 Where the gun is stored;
 vi.	 How the gun is maintained;
 vii.	 When the gun was last tested or calibrated;
viii. All certification documents;
 ix.	 All police maintenance, servicing, repair and
calibration records for any laser devise [sic]
used in the instant case;
 x.	 Laser readings;
 xi.	 Laser unit test results for the officer(s) in
the instant case;
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 xii. The laser gun training and qualification test
results for the officer(s) in the instantcase;
 xiii. The firearm qualification test results for theofficer using the laser for the one year priorand the one year after the date of Defendant'scitation/arrest;
 xiv. The fixed distance used to calibrate the subject laser unit and location where thecalibration took place;
 xv. The delta distance used to calibrate the subject laser unit and location where thecalibration took place;
 xvi. Any calibration reading;
 xvii. Manufacturer's service representative'smaintenance, service and calibration recordsfor the laser gun in question;
 xviii. The laser gun manufacturer's establishedprocedures for verifying and validating thatthe instrument was in proper working order;
 xix. Written verification that said manufacturer's established procedures were followed[;]
 xx. Written verification that the laser gun was inproper working order at the time the laser gunwas used[;]
 xxi. Records of regular maintenance, servicing,upkeep, repair, modification and/orcalibration of the laser gun performed by themanufacturer (or the manufacturer's dulytrained and licensed representative), a yearbefore and a year after the dates of anyalleged offense(s), as well as officialmaintenance, repair, modification, servicing,and/or calibration manuals for the device inquestion prepared by and/or relied upon by themanufacturer (or the manufacturer's dulytrained and licensed representative). 
The State did not oppose items 3(d)xiv (fixed distance) and
 
3(d)xv (delta distance). The district court2
 ordered discovery
of "the delta distance and location" and denied the remainder of
 the items. It is unclear from our review of the record what
 
information was provided to Gonsales.
3
 
2
 The Honorable Fay M. Koyanagi presided.
 
3
 Immediately after ruling on the Discovery Motion, the district court
asked, "[A]re you able to provide that today, Wendy," to which an
"Unidentified Female" responded, "Yes, I am. . . . I have the form ready."
 
3
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
It appears that the Discovery Motion sought five types
 
of documents and information that were denied: (1) documents
 
related to the operation and maintenance of the laser gun and the
 
training and certification of the officer in the use of the laser
 
gun (Operation, Maintenance and Training Documents);4
 
(2) documents related to the policies and procedures of the HPD
 
5
regarding speeding citations (Speeding Documents);  (3) documents
related to the date of acquisition and the age of the laser gun
 
6
(Equipment Age Documents);  (4) written verifications that
manufacturer's procedures were followed and that the laser gun
 
7
was in proper working order (Written Verifications);  and
(5) "[t]he brand and model of the gun"; the "[l]aser readings";
 
and "[a]ny calibration reading[.]"
8
 
In State ex rel. Marsland v. Ames, 71 Haw. 304, 313-14, 
788 P.2d 1281, 1286-87 (1990), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held 
that the trial court exceeded its authority under HRPP Rule 
9
16(d)  by ordering the State to disclose manufacturer's manuals,
instructions, specifications pertaining to the components,
 
precision limits, operation, calibration, and maintenance of the
 
Intoxilyzer, and information pertaining to the qualification,
 
training and certification of the operator.

 
4 Identified in the Discovery Motion as items (c) and (d)iv, v, vi,
vii, viii, ix, xi, xii, xiii, xvii, xviii, and xxi [JIMS 6/25/08 at 3-5].
5 Identified in the Discovery Motion as items (a) and (b) [JIMS 6/25/08
at 3].
6 Identified in the Discovery Motion as items (d)ii and iii [JIMS
6/25/08 at 3].
7
 Identified in the Discovery Motion as items (d)xix and xx.
 
8
 Identified in the Discovery Motion as items (d)i, x, and xvi in the
instant case.
9
 HRPP Rule 16(d), discretionary disclosure, provides: "[u]pon a
showing of materiality and if the request is reasonable, the court in its
discretion may require disclosure as provided for in this Rule 16 in cases
other than those in which the defendant is charged with a felony, but not in
cases involving violations."
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The district court did not abuse its discretion in
 
denying the Discovery Motion with respect to the Operation,
 
Maintenance, and Training Documents, the Speeding Documents, and
 
the Equipment Age Documents requested by Gonsales as they are
 
similar in nature to the manuals, documents pertaining to
 
maintenance, and the documents pertaining to the qualification
 
and training of the Intoxilyzer operator in Ames and therefore
 
are not subject to discovery in a non-felony case. 
It was not an abuse of discretion for the district
 
court to deny discovery of the Written Verification Documents. 
Consistent with the Ames determination regarding operation and
 
training manuals, it does not appear that "[w]ritten verification
 
that said manufacturer's established procedures were followed"
 
and "[w]ritten verification that the laser gun was in proper
 
working order at the time the laser gun was used" "tend[] to
 
negate the guilt of the defendant." HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(vii). 
Therefore, both exceed the scope of discovery that the district
 
court could allow pursuant to HRPP Rule 16(d). See also Ames, 71
 
Haw. at 313, 788 P.2d at 1286 ("discovery in a misdemeanor case
 that exceeds the limits of discovery established by HRPP Rule 16
 
for felony cases cannot be justified under the rule").
 
On the other hand, the remaining requests for
 
(1) "[t]he brand and model of the gun," (2) the "[l]aser 
readings," and (3) "[a]ny calibration reading" to the extent they 
are readings taken in preparation for or during the firing of the 
laser gun at Gonsales's vehicle related to this incident and meet 
the criteria of materiality and reasonableness set forth in HRPP 
Rule 16(d). The brand and model of the laser gun meet the 
requirement of materiality as defined in State v. Lo, 116 Hawai
'i 
23, 26-27, 169 P.3d 975, 978-79 (2007). The request is also reasonable to the extent that the request is for information in 
the possession and control of the HPD and its disclosure is not 
burdensome. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In Ames, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that the 
Intoxilyzer results and the calibration results for the 
Intoxilyzer may be discoverable in misdemeanor cases under HRPP 
Rule 16(d). Ames, 71 Haw. at 311 & n.9, 788 P.2d at 1285 & n.9. 
The laser gun calibration and the result of the firing of the laser gun at Gonsales's vehicle are similar to the results of the 
Intoxilyzer test and the calibration of the Intoxilyzer as was 
allowed in Ames and therefore should also be discoverable here. 
However, the result of the laser firing at Gonsales's vehicle -­
eighty-six miles per hour -- was made known to Gonsales before 
the trial, as it was reflected on the citation, and thus it was 
unnecessary for the district court to order that “laser reading” 
be produced to the defense. 
(2) Sufficiency of the evidence.
 Gonsales claims there was insufficient evidence of the
 
speed of the vehicle, but also contends that such insufficiency
 was based upon the district court's abuse of discretion "by 
concluding that Officer Kau's testimony provided a proper
 
foundation for the speed reading given by the laser gun." 
Gonsales failed to object to admission of the laser gun speed
 
reading on the basis of a lack of foundation or on any other
 
ground.
 
In this case, where no explicit objection was posed on 
a lack of foundation at admission of the laser gun reading, the 
general rule is that any objection was waived, and the issue is 
precluded on appeal. State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai
'i 382, 409-10, 
910 P.2d 695, 722-23 (1996) (issue that the officer's testimony of the weight of cocaine lacked foundation for scale accuracy was 
waived where objection at trial was on basis of relevancy, and no 
plain error was found); State v. Naeole, 62 Haw. 563, 570, 617 
P.2d 820, 826 (1980) (objection to inadmissible testimony 
regarding photographic identification by witnesses not testifying 
at trial was waived where no objection was made at trial, and no 
justification for plain error review was found). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The situation in the instant case differs from the 
circumstances in State v. Werle, 121 Hawai 'i 274, 279-80, 218 
P.3d 762, 767-68 (2009), where the Hawai 'i Supreme Court, on 
certiorari, determined that plain error review was not 
appropriate because foundational objections to the blood alcohol 
test results were preserved by a motion to strike the evidence 
and by a motion for judgment of acquittal that reflected a 
foundational basis. Here, although Gonsales did move for 
judgment of acquittal at the close of the State's case, 
Gonsales's grounds for the motion were "based on the evidence," 
with no other specification. After Gonsales presented evidence 
and rested his case, defense counsel stated: "Just renewing our 
motion for JOA at this time, Your Honor". Although Gonsales 
appears to argue a lack of foundation for the laser reading in 
closing argument, this falls short of the efforts taken in Werle, 
and does not suffice to preserve the issue on appeal. 
Consequently, Gonsales has waived any issue as to a lack of 
foundation for admission of the speed reading. 
As to sufficiency of the evidence, evidence of the 
laser gun speed reading, "even though incompetent, if admitted 
without objection or motion to strike, is to be given the same 
probative force as that to which it would be entitled if it were 
competent." Wallace, 80 Hawai 'i at 410, 910 P.2d at 723 (quoting 
2 Wharton's Criminal Evidence § 265 n. 3 (14th ed. 1986)) (internal quotation marks omitted). Evidence was presented that 
the speed reading that Officer Kau obtained from the laser 
indicated that Gonsales was "traveling at 86 miles per hour", 
that Gonsales stated to Officer Kau that "he was falling asleep", 
that the speed limit in the area was 60 miles per hour, that 
Gonsales "woulda [sic] had to pass at least one" speed limit 
sign, which was a "clear, unobstructed sign" of "60 miles an 
hour". Accordingly, 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sufficient evidence existed for the district court to convict
 
Gonsales of excessive speeding.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT sufficient evidence existed
 
for the judgment of conviction entered by the District Court of
 the First Circuit; however, this case is remanded to the district
 
court to determine (a) whether Gonsales received the discovery to
 
which he was entitled as specified herein and, if he did not, (b)
 
whether Gonsales was prejudiced such that a new trial should be
 
ordered. If the district court determines that a new trial is
 
not warranted, the district court shall enter a new judgment
 
reinstating Gonsales's conviction.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 24, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Karen T. Nakasone,
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge

 
Anne K. Clarkin,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge

 
8
 