 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30237
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
JAMES GREGORY BATCHELOR, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
MISAKO NAKAMURA BATCHELOR, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DIVORCE NO. 08-1-1183)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant James Gregory Batchelor (James)
 
appeals from the Divorce Decree filed on November 13, 2009 in the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit (family court).1
 
On appeal, James raises two points of error. First, 
James contends that the family court erred in denying his 
"Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment" (MPSJ) in which 
he sought, among other things, dissolution of the marriage. He 
contends that pursuant to Hawai' i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 
56 and Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 580-42, he was entitled as a matter of law to an immediate decree dissolving the marriage, 
although other parts of the divorce case remained pending. 
Related to this argument is his contention that in the court's 
"Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law" (FOF/COL), filed on 
1
 The Honorable Paul T. Murakami issued the Decree.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
January 26, 2010, the family court erred in its Findings of Fact
 
(FOFs) 6-8 and Conclusions of Law (COLs) 1, 2 and 3.
 
In his second point of error, James asserts that the
 
family court abused its discretion in granting Defendant-Appellee
 
Misako Nakamura Batchelor's (Misako) "Motion for an Award of Rule
 
68 Attorney Fees and Other Sanctions" (Rule 68 Motion). Related
 
to this point of error, James contends that the family court
 
erred in its FOFs 9 and 10 and COL 4. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve James's points of error as follows:
 
(1) As James points out, both he and Misako admitted in
 
their pleadings, and the family court found, that the marriage
 
was irretrievably broken. James contends that the family court
 
improperly declined to grant his MPSJ based on its determination
 
that "compelling circumstances" are required to grant a divorce
 
before deciding the other parts of the divorce case -- child
 
custody, visitation, and support; spousal support; and
 
division/distribution of property and debts. James asserts that
 
the "compelling circumstances" requirement should be overruled. 
Even though the subsequent Divorce Decree already dissolved the
 
marriage and the issue is arguably moot, James asserts this court
 
should consider whether the family court properly applied a
 
"compelling circumstances" standard under an exception to the
 
mootness doctrine; that is, the alleged error is capable of
 
repetition, yet evading review.
 
The family court filed the Divorce Decree on 
November 13, 2009 and thereby granted a divorce to the parties. 
Moreover, the Hawai' i Supreme Court recently ruled on the 
question James has raised. In Kakinami v. Kakinami, 125 Hawai' i 
308, 314, 260 P.3d 1126, 1132 (2011), the court held that 
pursuant to HRS ยง 580-47(a), "good cause" is the appropriate 
2
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
standard for bifurcating the dissolution of marriage from the 
remaining parts of a divorce case. The "compelling 
circumstances" recommendation in Eaton v. Eaton, 7 Haw. App. 111, 
118, 748 P.2d 801, 805 (1987), is mere dicta and does not 
supplant the "good cause" standard. Kakinami, 125 Hawai' i at 
314, 260 P.3d at 1132. 
Because the family court has granted a decree of
 
divorce to the parties, James has identified no consequences
 
associated with the family court not granting a decree of divorce
 
at the time that James requested it, and the issue which James
 
raises in this appeal has been reviewed and resolved by Kakinami,
 
James's first point of error is moot.
 
(2) In an order filed on July 7, 2009, the family court
 
granted Misako's HFCR Rule 68 Motion and awarded Misako $1,039.27
 
in attorney's fees.2
 
Rule 68 provides in relevant part:
 
Rule 68. OFFER OF SETTLEMENT. 
At any time more than 20 days before any contested
hearing held pursuant to HRS sections 571-11 to 14
(excluding law violations, criminal matters, and child
protection matters) is scheduled to begin, any party may
serve upon the adverse party an offer to allow a judgment to
be entered to the effect specified in the offer. . . . If
the judgment in its entirety finally obtained by the offeree
is patently not more favorable than the offer, the offeree
must pay the costs, including reasonable attorney's fees
incurred after the making of the offer . . . .
 
(Emphasis added). Misako's purported Rule 68 offer, a letter
 
from her counsel to James's counsel, states:
 
[Misako] has authorized me to make an offer of
settlement regarding your [MPSJ] pursuant to Rule 68 . . . ,
with all the ramifications that flow from its acceptance or
non-acceptance. This offer shall be deemed withdrawn at the
 end of the tenth (10th) day following your receipt of it if
[James] does not accept it. . . . 
. . . . 
2
 The Honorable Jennifer L. Ching issued the order granting the Rule 68
Motion.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Misako's] Rule 68 offer, as to the [MPSJ], is that
you withdraw the [MPSJ], thus obviating the need for having
to prepare for the hearing on May 6, 2009 and avoiding the
needless expenditure of attorney fees and costs.
 
Frankly, [the family court] looked skeptical when you
were describing your [MPSJ], and I also do not believe that
it will be granted. We have trial set in this case, and if
we are unable to settle, then that is when orders should be
made regarding the final disposition of this case.
 
(Emphasis added). The letter did not include "an offer to allow
 
a judgment to be entered[.]" Hence, Misako's purported offer did
 
not meet the requirements of HFCR Rule 68.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the portion of the family
 
court's July 7, 2009 "Order Re: Defendant's Motion for an Award
 of Rule 68 Attorney Fees and Other Sanctions" awarding Misako
 
$1,039.27 in attorney fees and costs pursuant to HFCR Rule 68, is
 
reversed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 8, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Steven J. Kim 
(Law Office of Steven J. Kim)for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
4
 