NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30211 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
SUSAN D. LANGSNER, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTC-09-037349)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Susan D. Langsner (Langsner)
 
appeals the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
 
Plea/Judgment filed on October 20, 2009 in the District Court of
 the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court).
1
 
Langsner was convicted of Excessive Speeding, in
 
violation of HRS § 291C-105(a)(1)(c)(1) (Repl. 2007 & Supp.
 2009). 
On appeal, Langsner contends that (1) the District
 
Court abused its discretion in denying her motion to compel
 discovery because the requested materials are reasonable and
 because the District Court incorrectly believed that the
 materials could be obtained through a subpoena duces tecum and
 (2) insufficient evidence existed as to the accuracy of the laser
 gun.
 
1
 The Honorable Leslie Hayashi presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Langsner’s points of error as follows.
I.	 Discovery
 
A ruling limiting discovery is reviewed for an abuse of
 
discretion. State v. Peseti, 101 Hawai' i 172, 178, 65 P.3d 119, 
125 (2003); see also Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
Rule 16(d) (2010).
 
On July 28, 2009, Langsner filed a motion to compel
 
discovery (Discovery Motion). The Discovery Motion sought the
 
following items:
 
(a)	 [Honolulu Police Department] HPD departmental policies
and procedures for conducting speeding citations; 
(b)	 The HPD training manual for speeding citations;
 
(c)	 The operation manual for the specific laser gun used
in the case;
 
(d)	 Any documentation related to the following:
i. The brand and model of the gun;
ii.	 The age of the gun;
iii.	 When the gun was purchased and first put into
use by HPD;
iv.	 The period of warranty of the gun;
v. Where the gun is stored;
vi.	 How the gun is maintained;
vii.	 When the gun was last tested or calibrated;
viii.	 All certification documents;
ix.	 All police maintenance, servicing, repair and
calibration records for any laser devise [sic]
used in the instant case;
 x. Laser readings;
xi.	 Laser unit test results for the officer(s) in
the instant case;
xii.	 The laser gun training and qualification test
results for the officer(s) in the instant case;
xiii.	 The firearm qualification test results for the
officer using the laser for the one year prior
and the one year after the date of Defendant's
citation/arrest;
xiv.	 The fixed distance used to calibrate the subject
laser unit and location where the calibration
 took place;
xv.	 The delta distance used to calibrate the subject
laser unit and location where the calibration
 took place;
xvi.	 Any calibration reading;
xvii.	 Manufacturer's service representative's
maintenance, service and calibration records for
the laser gun in question;
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 xviii.	 The laser gun manufacturer's established
procedures for verifying and validating that the
instrument was in proper working order;
xix.	 Written verification that said manufacturer's
 established procedures were followed[;]
xx.	 Written verification that the laser gun was in
proper working order at the time the laser gun
was used[;]
xxi.	 Records of regular maintenance, servicing,
upkeep, repair, modification and/or calibration
of the laser gun performed by the manufacturer
(or the manufacturer's duly trained and licensed
representative), a year before and a year after
the dates of any alleged offense(s), as well as
official maintenance, repair, modification,
servicing, and/or calibration manuals for the
device in question prepared by and/or relied
upon by the manufacturer (or the manufacturer's
duly trained and licensed representative).
 
The State did not oppose items (d)(xiv) and (d)(xv) regarding
 
calibration distance and location used for the laser gun. The
 District Court ordered discovery of "the State v. Lo,
[2] State v.
 
Lee[3] information" and denied the remainder of the items, but
 
stated "Defense does have the option of subpoenaing HPD for the
 user's manual and the like." 
The District Court, by its order, permitted discovery
 
of the brand and model of the gun (item (d)(i)), pursuant to Lee;
 
4
laser readings (item (d)(x)), pursuant to Lee;  the fixed
distance used to calibrate the subject laser unit and location
 where the calibration took place (item (d)(xiv)), pursuant to Lo;
 the delta distance used to calibrate the subject laser unit and
 location where the calibration took place (item (d)(xv)),
 pursuant to Lo; and any calibration reading (item (d)(xvi)),
 pursuant to Lee. 
It appears that the Discovery Motion sought five types
 
of documents and information: (1) documents related to the
 operation and maintenance of the laser gun and the training and
 
2
 State v. Lo, 116 Hawai' i 23, 169 P.3d 975 (2007). 
3
 State v. Lee, 120 Hawai' i 256, 203 P.3d 676, No. 29017, (App.
Mar. 13, 2009) (SDO).
4
 Laser and calibration readings are discoverable under Lee "to the
 
extent they are readings taken in preparation for or during the firing of the
laser gun at [defendant's] vehicle on the [date] in question." Lee, SDO at 5­
6.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
certification of the officer in the use of the laser gun
 
(Operation, Maintenance and Training Documents); (2) documents
 related to the policies and procedures of the HPD regarding
 speeding citations (Speeding Documents); (3) documents related to
 the date of acquisition and the age of the laser gun (Equipment
 Age Documents); (4) written verifications that manufacturer's
 procedures were followed and that the laser gun was in proper
 working order (Written Verifications); and (5) "[t]he brand and
 model of the gun"; the "[l]aser readings"; and "[a]ny calibration
 reading."
 
In State ex rel. Marsland v. Ames, 71 Haw. 304, 313-14, 
788 P.2d 1281, 1286-87 (1990), the Hawai' i Supreme Court held 
5
that, contrary to HRPP Rule 16(d),  the trial court exceeded its
authority by ordering the State to disclose manufacturer's
 manuals, instructions, specifications pertaining to the
 components, precision limits, operation, calibration, and
 maintenance of an Intoxilyzer, and information pertaining to the
 qualification, training and certification of the operator. 
The
 
result in Ames
 under HRPP Rule 16(d) also appears to be
 
consistent with HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(vii).6
 
The discovery items requested in Ames appear to relate 
to materials that could be used to challenge whether the Intoxilyzer reading was sufficiently reliable to permit its admission. Similar to the situation in Ames, the discovery items here relate to materials that could be used to challenge whether the laser gun reading was sufficiently reliable to be admitted as substantive evidence of guilt. See State v. Assaye, 121 Hawai' i 
204, 210, 214, 216 P.3d 1227, 1233, 1237 (2009) (determining that 
5
 HRPP Rule 16(d), discretionary disclosure, provides: "[u]pon a
showing of materiality and if the request is reasonable, the court in its
discretion may require disclosure as provided for in this Rule 16 in cases
other than those in which the defendant is charged with a felony, but not in
cases involving violations."
6
 HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(vii) provides that the prosecution disclose, if in
its possession: "any material or information which tends to negate the guilt
of the defendant as to the offense charged or would tend to reduce the
defendant's punishment therefor."
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
an inadequate foundation existed without proof of the laser gun's
 
accuracy).
 
Based on Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963), the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court has recognized that "the suppression by the 
prosecution of evidence favorable to the accused violates due process where the evidence is material to guilt or punishment, regardless of the good faith or bad faith of the prosecution." State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai' i 383, 401-02, 894 P.2d 80, 98-99 
(1995); State v. Matafeo, 71 Haw. 183, 185-86, 787 P.2d 671, 672 (1990). In Brady, the United States Supreme Court held that the prosecution has a constitutional obligation under the due process clause to disclose evidence favorable to the accused upon request when such evidence is material to either guilt or punishment. Clearly, if the prosecution had evidence that the laser gun reading in this case was unreliable, it would be obligated to disclose such evidence to Langsner in discovery pursuant to Brady. Here, Langsner has not shown that undisclosed items requested in the Discovery Motion constitute Brady material or "material or information which tends to negate the guilt of the defendant" that is subject to disclosure pursuant to HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(vii). In connection with her Discovery Motion, Langsner did not present any evidence suggesting that the laser gun reading may have been inaccurate or unreliable. Under these circumstances, we cannot conclude that the District Court abused its discretion in ruling on Langsner's Discovery Motion. 
Consistent with Ames, it appears that the District
 
Court did not abuse its discretion in denying the Discovery
 Motion with respect to the Operation, Maintenance, and Training
 Documents. The Operation, Maintenance, and Training Documents
 (items (c) and (d)iv, v, vi, vii, viii, ix, xi, xii, xiii, xvii,
 xviii, and xxi in the instant case) requested by Langsner are
 similar in nature to the manuals, documents pertaining to
 maintenance, and the documents pertaining to the qualification
 and training of the Intoxilyzer operator in Ames and therefore
 are not subject to discovery in a non-felony case. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
With respect to the Speeding Documents (items (a) and
 
(b) in the instant case), Langsner argues that they "were
 
essential to challenge Rosalez's claim that he was qualified to
 operate the laser gun and that he had been operating the gun on
 the date of the incident in accordance with manufacturer
 recommended procedures." The Speeding Documents therefore relate
 to the operation of the laser gun, training of the officer, and
 accuracy of the laser reading. These are similar to the
 documents referenced in Ames and also are not subject to
 discovery under the circumstances of this case. 
The Equipment Age Documents do not appear to be 
material to Langsner's defense. In order for a conviction to be based upon the results of a laser gun, the State is required to prove that "the nature and extent of an officer's training in the operation of a laser gun meets the requirements indicated by the manufacturer[,]" Assaye 121 Hawai' i at 215, 216 P.3d at 1238, 
and that the laser gun "tests conducted by [the officer] were procedures recommended by the manufacturer for the purpose of showing that the particular laser gun was in fact operating properly . . ." Id., at 212, 216 P.3d at 1235. If the laser gun 
is functioning properly on the date of the alleged offense, the age and date of purchase of the laser gun do not appear to be material to the defense. See HRPP Rule 16(d). Furthermore, the 
documents go to foundation and do not fall under the ambit of HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(vii). It was therefore not an abuse of discretion for the District Court to deny the request for the Equipment Age Documents. 
It was not an abuse of discretion for the District
 
Court to deny discovery of the Written Verification Documents. 
Consistent with the Ames determination regarding operation and
 training manuals, it does not appear that "[w]ritten verification
 that said manufacturer's established procedures were followed"
 and "[w]ritten verification that the laser gun was in proper
 working order at the time the laser gun was used" "tend[] to
 negate the guilt of the defendant." HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(vii). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, discovery of these items was not required pursuant to
 
HRPP Rule 16(d). See also Ames, 71 Haw. at 313, 788 P.2d at 1286
 
("discovery in a misdemeanor case that exceeds the limits of
 discovery established by HRPP Rule 16 for felony cases cannot be
 justified under the rule"). 
Langsner asserts that the District Court acted contrary 
to Honolulu Police Dept. v. Town, 122 Hawai' i 204, 214, 225 P.3d 
646, 656 (2010) by stating that the materials could be obtained by subpoena. Town was issued subsequent to the judgment of 
conviction in this case. Even if Town may be considered applicable to the instant case, because the District Court did not err in denying discovery of the materials, any error of the District Court in discussing a subpoena procedure was harmless. 
Accordingly, the District Court did not err in its
 
ruling on Langsner's motion to compel discovery.
II. Foundation
 
Langsner frames her point of error as insufficient 
evidence of the speed of the vehicle, arguing that, pursuant to 
Lo, 116 Hawai' i at 27, 169 P.3d at 979 (citing State v. Tailo, 70 
Haw. 580, 582, 779 P.2d 11, 13 (1989)), such sufficient foundation of the accuracy of the laser must be provided "in order to sustain" the conviction. 
Sufficiency of the evidence is reviewed "in the
 
strongest light for the prosecution" "whether the case was before
 a judge or a jury" to determine "whether there was substantial
 evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." State
 
v. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 
(2007). Whether "necessary foundation for the introduction of evidence" has been established is reviewed for abuse of discretion. State v. Assaye, 121 Hawai' i at 210, 216 P.3d at 
1233. 
Langsner objected to the testimony of Officer Rosalez
 
regarding the laser gun. Sufficient foundation for admission of
 the laser gun reading requires evidence that (1) the laser gun
 was tested according to manufacturer recommended procedures, Id.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 210, 216 P.3d at 1233, and (2) the nature and extent of an
 
officer's training in the operation of a laser gun meets the
 requirements indicated by the manufacturer. Id. at 215, 216 P.3d
 
at 1238.
 
Evidence reflected that Officer Rosalez was initially
 
trained in 1995 on the LTI 20-20 Marksman, consisting of "a[n]
 eight-hour class," "oral, written, a test, and also hands-on on
 how to operate the instrument." Officer Rosalez further
 confirmed that he had read the operator's manual for the LTI 20­20/UltraLyte that he used on the date of the offense, testifying
 that he reviewed the manual at "a refresher course back in '98"
 that was for the UltraLyte. Officer Rosalez confirmed that Laser
 Technologies, Inc. published the manual, that the training he
 received was in accordance with the manual's specifications based
 on his reading of the manual, and that the manual on the
 UltraLyte model that he used included "a section about how to
 test the laser device to make sure it's working properly." 
According to Officer Rosalez, the tests that the manual described
 were the same tests that he performed. Officer Rosalez
 acknowledged that he was "qualified in how to use the LTI 20-20
 laser device[,]" which qualification was "valid on April, 25th,
 2009[,]" which was the date of the instant citation. Officer
 Rosalez testified that he was certified on the UltraLyte when he
 took the refresher course in 1998 and the certification lasts
 until he retires or the model is changed.
 
Officer Rosalez testified about the four tests he did
 
on the laser gun, consistent with manufacturer specifications,
 and explained the self-test, display test, Delta distance test
 and the scope alignment. 
As to testing and operation, Officer Rosalez confirmed
 
that he "performed all of these tests" on the date of the
 citation "prior to going out" and that the results showed that
 "the instrument was working properly". Officer Rosalez explained
 that "we do the scope alignment after each citation is written[;]
 [o]r every 15 minutes elapse we do a scope alignment" and that he
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"did that in this case". Officer Rosalez acknowledged that he
 
had used the laser "thousands of times", that he "verif[ied]
 whether or not the device was accurate, tested and working
 properly", and that he would not "issue a citation without doing
 the tests".
 
In light of the foregoing, the evidence establishes 
that the laser gun was tested by Officer Rosalez according to the manufacturer recommended procedures. The evidence also established that "the nature and extent of [Officer Rosalez's] training in the operation of a laser gun meets the requirements indicated by the manufacturer." Assaye, 121 Hawai' i at 215, 216 
P.3d at 1238. 
Additionally, evidence was presented that, as to the
 
speed reading of the laser gun on Langsner's vehicle, Officer
 Rosalez had a reading of 72 miles per hour, that in the area
 there were four posted thirty-five-mile-per-hour speed limit
 signs, which were "clear and unobstructed", that Langsner "[had]
 to have passed". Accordingly, sufficient evidence existed for
 the District Court to convict Langsner of excessive speeding. 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, filed on October 20,
 2009 in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
 Division, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 29, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Craig W. Jerome
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant 
Chief Judge 
Anne K. Clarkin Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 