 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30074
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DAVID JOHN PASCUA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT

 
WAILUKU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 2DTC-09-002347)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard, J.,
with Ginoza, J., concurring separately)
 
Defendant-Appellant David John Pascua (Pascua) appeals
 
from a judgment of conviction on one count of No Motor Vehicle
 
Insurance Policy, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 § 431:10C-104 (2005), entered on August 19, 2009, in the District
 Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division (district court).
1
 
On appeal, Pascua argues that the district court erred
 
in finding him guilty of driving without no-fault insurance
 because there was insufficient evidence (1) to negate Pascua's
 good faith defense of lack of knowledge of no insurance under HRS
 § 431:10C-117(a)(4) (2005 & Supp. 2009); and (2) to support the
 finding that Pascua acted with a reckless state of mind. Based
 upon our careful review of the record and consideration of the
 arguments of the parties, we disagree.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
At trial, Officer Joy Medeiros (Officer Medeiros)
 
testified that on March 21, 2009, she cited Pascua for, among 
1  The Honorable Kelsey Kawano presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
other things, driving a motor vehicle without a valid driver's
 
license and without insurance. Officer Medeiros was behind the
 vehicle being driven by Pascua on Makawao Avenue, and she saw
 that the vehicle had an expired tax sticker and an expired safety
 sticker. After stopping the vehicle, Officer Medeiros asked
 Pascua for "his license, registration, and insurance." Pascua
 was unable to produce any of the requested documents.
 
Zachary Pascua (Zachary) testified that he is Pascua's
 
son and was the owner of the vehicle that was driven by Pascua. 
The vehicle was over twenty years old, it was not working and
 needed to be repaired, and Zachary had asked Pascua to try to fix
 it. Zachary stated that he asks his father to do side jobs and
 sometimes pays him. The vehicle was parked on Zachary's ranch
 and Pascua was to work on the vehicle where it was parked. 
According to Zachary, Pascua had not driven the vehicle before
 the day he was cited because the vehicle had not previously been
 running. The vehicle was not insured because Zachary did not
 want to get it insured unless it was fixed. Zachary indicated
 that he did not tell Pascua that the vehicle was uninsured.
 
Pascua testified that on the day of the citation, he
 
had just repaired the vehicle, was taking it on a test run, and
 was driving the vehicle to his son's house to drop it off. 
Pascua testified he was taking the vehicle to his son's house
 because someone wanted to buy it for parts. According to Pascua,
 the vehicle had license plates, but he did not look to see if it
 had a safety sticker or a tax sticker. Pascua never asked his
 son Zachary if the vehicle was insured, and Pascua stated he had
 no reason to suspect that it was not insured. However, because
 the vehicle was getting old and because "[t]he body was getting
 rotten[,]" Pascua testified "[i]t was something that you would
 like to use around the ranch" and he did not think it was good to
 be putting it on the roadway.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In closing argument, Pascua asserted a good faith
 
defense that he did not know the vehicle was uninsured. The
 
district court found that the good faith defense did not apply. 
The question litigated in this case was pursuant to
Count II, no motor vehicle insurance. Defendant's assertion
 
of his good faith defense, the Court is finding that the
good faith defense does not apply in this case. Defendant
 was driving a vehicle. There was no registration or
insurance. They [sic] were expired tags and safety. This
 defendant had come into possession of this vehicle by way of
being asked to work on the vehicle, which was not running.
It was actually on the Defendant's son's ranch property.
 
By Defendant's own testimony, it was in bad shape,
really wasn't fit to be operated as a motor vehicle, and it
was probably adequate to be operated as a farm vehicle
rather than a motor vehicle on the highway.
 
And in fact, at the time that defendant went up, he
testified that his intention was to return it to his son's
 place where his understanding was that it was going to be
sold for parts. And based upon the totality of the
circumstances, and the facts of this case, the Court does
find that the evidence does support that the defendant
recklessly drove his vehicle in violation of HRS 1031­10(c)(104)[sic], that vehicle being -- an uninsured vehicle.
 
Pascua timely appealed.
 
II. DISCUSSION
 
A. Good Faith Defense
 
On appeal, Pascua contends that "[t]he trial court
 
erred when it rejected Mr. Pascua's good faith defense and
 
convicted Mr. Pascua of driving without no-fault insurance
 because there was insufficient evidence presented [at trial] to
 negate the defense." We disagree.
 We will not set aside a verdict where there is
 
substantial evidence to support it. Substantial evidence is
 defined as "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
 probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
 support a conclusion." State v. Lee, 90 Hawai
'i 130, 134, 976 
P.2d 444, 448 (1999) (internal quotation marks, brackets, and
 citations omitted). 
3

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Pascua argues that the prosecution failed to negate the
 
good faith defense set forth in HRS § 431:10C-117(a)(4)(C), which
 
provides:
 
(4)	 Any person cited under this section shall have
an opportunity to present a good faith defense,
including but not limited to lack of knowledge
or proof of insurance. The general penalty
provision of this section shall not apply to: 
. . . 
(C)	 Any operator of a borrowed motor vehicle if the
operator holds a reasonable belief that the
subject vehicle is insured[.] 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In State v. Kahaunaele, 10 Haw. App. 519, 531, 879 P.2d
 
566, 571 (1994), this court interpreted the above-emphasized
 
language set forth in HRS § 431:10C-117(a)(4)(C).2 In State v.
 
Bolosan, 78 Hawai 'i 86, 890 P.2d 673 (1995), the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court cited with approval this court's interpretation of that
 language in Kahaunaele:
 
[W]e believe that the following analysis from the
Kahaunaele opinion accurately characterizes the lack
of knowledge defense subsequent to the 1990 amendment: 
The borrower of a motor vehicle has a statutory right
to reasonably believe that the borrowed motor vehicle
is insured. Evidence that the defendant borrowed and
 operated upon a public street a motor vehicle that was
not insured under a no-fault policy is sufficient
evidence to sustain the lack of knowledge defense.
The fact that the borrower did not consider whether or
 not the borrowed motor vehicle was insured does not
 negative the defense. However, if one or more
relevant facts reasonably required the borrower to
inquire, he or she then had a duty to inquire until he
or she reasonably believed that the motor vehicle was
insured. The borrower's failure to satisfy that duty
to inquire negatives the defense.
 
[Kahaunaele,] 10 Haw. App. at 531, 879 P.2d at 571.
 
2 The provision construed in Kahaunaele was previously
 
codified as HRS § 431:10C-117(a)(2)(C) (Supp. 1992) and was the
result of a 1990 amendment to HRS § 431:10C-117. See 1990 Haw.
 
Sess. Laws Act 167, § 1 at 329.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bolosan, 78 Hawai 'i at 91 n.9, 890 P.2d at 678 n.9 (brackets in 
original omitted; emphasis added). 
Here, the prosecution adduced evidence showing that
 
there were facts that reasonably required Pascua to inquire about
 
the insured status of the vehicle. This included evidence that
 the vehicle was inoperable, old, and in poor condition when
 Zachary asked Pascua to repair the vehicle; that Pascua worked on
 the vehicle where it was parked on Zachary's ranch; that Pascua
 himself did not think the vehicle was suitable for use on public
 roadways and understood it was going to be sold for its parts;
 and that the tax sticker and safety sticker affixed to the
 vehicle had expired. We conclude that the trial evidence was
 sufficient to show that Pascua had a duty to inquire about the
 insured status of the vehicle in order to have a reasonable
 belief that the vehicle was insured. Pascua admitted that he
 never asked Zachary whether the vehicle was insured. We conclude
 that the prosecution presented sufficient evidence to disprove
 any good faith defense Pascua may have had.
 
Pascua argues that the district court's statement that
 
"the good faith defense does not apply in this case" indicates
 that the district court erroneously placed the affirmative burden
 of proving the good faith defense on Pascua, rather than
 requiring the prosecution to negate the good faith defense. 
However, "[t]rial judges are presumed to know the law and to
 apply it in making their decisions." Walton v. Arizona, 497 U.S.
 
639, 653 (1990), overruled on other grounds by Ring v. Arizona,
 536 U.S. 584 (2002); see Au-Hoy v. Au-Hoy, 60 Haw. 354, 358, 590
 P.2d 80, 83 (1979) (stating that appellate courts "necessarily
 approach a case with the assumption that no error has been
 committed upon the trial . . . until this assumption has been
 overcome by a positive showing" (internal quotation marks and
 citation omitted)). We cannot read the district court's comments 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as demonstrating that it misunderstood or misapplied the law
 
regarding the good faith defense. 
B. 	Sufficiency of the Evidence Regarding
Reckless State of Mind
 
We reject Pascua's claim that there was insufficient
 
evidence to support the district court's finding that Pascua
 acted recklessly. The record here contains substantial evidence
 that Pascua acted recklessly with respect to whether the vehicle
 was insured, including that: (1) the vehicle was inoperable at
 the time Pascua was asked to try to repair it; (2) Pascua was to
 repair the vehicle at Zachary's ranch where it was parked; (3)
 given the poor condition of the vehicle, Pascua believed it was
 suited for use on the ranch and not on the road; (4) Pascua
 understood that Zachary was going to sell the vehicle for parts;
 and (5) the tax and safety stickers on the vehicle had expired.
 
III. 
CONCLUSION

 
For the foregoing reasons, the August 19, 2009,
 
judgment of the district court is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, September 23, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Jennifer D.K. Ng
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Renee Ishikawa Delizo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
6
 