 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30022
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
BONNIE MACLEOD KAKINAMI, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
AARON K.H. KAKINAMI, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 06-1-0040)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Aaron K.H. Kakinami (Aaron),
 
appearing pro se, appeals from the following post-decree orders
 
and judgment of the Family Court of the Fifth Circuit (Family
 
Court): (1) the July 24, 2009 "Order Denying Defendant Aaron
 
K.H. Kakinami's Motion and Affidavit for Order to Show Cause and
 
Relief after Order or Decree"; (2) the October 14, 2009 "Order Re
 
Defendant's Motion to Enforce Complete Performance By Plaintiff
 
Re Division of Assets and Debts after Entry of Bifurcated Divorce
 
Judgment Filed October 7, 2009"; and (3) the Judgment entered on
 
October 14, 2009.1/
 
On appeal, Aaron asserts that: (1) the Family Court
 
lacked jurisdiction to enter the post-decree orders, which he
 
contends modified the Supplemental Divorce Decree Re Division of
 
Assets and Debts After Entry of Bifurcated Divorce Judgment
 
1/
 The Honorable Calvin K. Murashige presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entered on October 7, 2008 (Supplemental Decree), which followed
 
the October 1, 2007 bifurcated divorce decree dissolving the
 
marriage between Aaron and Plaintiff-Appellee Bonnie MacLeod
 
Kakinami (Bonnie) and granting certain other relief (Bifurcated
 
Decree); and (2) the Family Court lacked jurisdiction and
 
otherwise erred when it granted an attorney's charging lien
 
against Aaron's award of the marital estate.
 
Upon a thorough review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having duly considered the issues
 
and arguments raised on appeal, as well as any authorities
 
relevant thereto, we resolve Aaron's contentions as follows:
 
(1) Generally, once a party files a notice of appeal, 
the lower court is divested of jurisdiction to proceed further on 
the matter. Lowther v. Lowther, 99 Hawai' i 569, 578, 57 P.3d 
494, 503 (App. 2002). In addition, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 580-56(d) (2006) deprives the Family Court of jurisdiction to 
redistribute or modify property division following one year after 
the entry of a decree or order reserving final property 
distribution. However, under both Lowther and HRS § 580-56(d), 
the Family Court retains jurisdiction to enforce its judgments 
and decrees. Id.; Richter v. Richter, 108 Hawai' i 504, 506-07, 
122 P.3d 284, 286-87 (App. 2005). 
The post-decree orders and judgment filed July 24, 2009
 
and October 14, 2009: (1) reaffirm that the transfer of Bonnie's
 quitclaim deed must occur simultaneously with the exchange of her
 
share of the equity, and order that this be done via escrow, and
 
(2) confirm the remaining amounts Aaron owes Bonnie, taking into
 
account his receipt of the AXA annuity and Lockwood & Hartley's
 
charging lien.
 
Aaron argues that the first function impermissibly
 
modifies the Supplemental Decree. We disagree. The Bifurcated
 
Decree awards the marital residence to Aaron and expressly
 
requires a simultaneous exchange. Aaron failed to deposit
 
2  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bonnie's share into escrow and, as a result, Bonnie did not
 
quitclaim her interest. Although the Supplemental Decree does
 
not expressly state that a simultaneous exchange is required, it
 
substantially reiterates the award of the marital residence to
 
Aaron as set forth in the Bifurcated Decree. It updates the
 
mortgage and value figures, but it does not accomplish a new
 
division of the marital residence. It clarifies that pursuant to
 
final property distribution, Aaron may offset Bonnie's share of
 
the equity with his share of the marital estate. The subsequent
 
order specifying a particular manner of transfer pertains to
 
enforcement, not property redistribution. In order to enforce
 
the Supplemental Decree, the Family Court had to interpret its
 
provisions. The Family Court's interpretation is consistent with
 
the language of the decree and with the numerous prior orders
 
concerning the transfer of the marital residence. The Family
 
Court's interpretation does not undermine or modify the decree. 
Aaron also argues that following the expiration of the 
one-year deadline under HRS § 580-56(d), Bonnie must be compelled 
to transfer outright her interest in the residence because it is 
no longer part of her personal estate, citing Richter, 108 Hawai' i 
504, 122 P.3d 284. Richter is inapposite. The decrees in this 
case do not require a unilateral transfer of the residence to 
Aaron; rather Aaron's award of the residence is subject to his 
buy-out of Bonnie's share, the value of which was fixed in the 
Supplemental Decree. 
As to the second function, the October 14th order and
 
judgment merely reconcile the remaining amounts owed and do not
 
alter property distribution in any way. The order recognizes
 
that Aaron had been permitted to offset the debt with his share
 
of the marital property, but failed to do so. As a result, it
 
directs entry of judgment against Aaron and orders the
 
preparation of Qualified Domestic Relations Orders to effectuate
 
the division of the remaining retirement accounts. This is
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
wholly consistent with the award of property set forth in the
 
Supplemental Decree.
 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Family Court did not
 
exceed its jurisdiction in entering the post-decree orders and
 
judgment.
 
(2) Aaron argues that the Family Court lacked
 
jurisdiction to approve his attorney's charging lien against him 
in this case; rather, Aaron argues that his attorney was required
 
to proceed by assumpsit pursuant to HRS § 607-14. Although
 
Aaron's argument is unclear, it appears that he might be arguing
 
that his attorney was required to file a separate action against
 
him. Aaron's arguments are without merit. The Family Court did
 
not err in applying HRS § 507-81 when it evaluated counsel's
 
motion for a charging lien. Aaron cites no authority for his
 
further argument that the Family Court proceeded improperly by
 
granting the request for the charging lien separately from the
 
approval of a specific lien amount, after the submission of an
 
affidavit and exhibits, if any, setting forth the work performed
 
and the fees owed.
 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the Family
 
Court did not err in entering the post-decree orders entered on
 
July 24 and October 14, 2009, and we affirm the Family Court's
 
judgment entered on October 14, 2009.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 13, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Aaron K.H. Kakinami 
Pro Se Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Steven L. HartleySeth R. Harris for Hartley & McGehee, LLP Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4 