NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30039
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
RAYMOND L. FOSTER, aka "RAY", Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 06-1-0449(1))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Raymond L. Foster (Foster) appeals 
from the Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the Second
 
1
Circuit (Circuit Court)  on August 12, 2009.  Foster was
 
convicted of promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree
 
(Count 1) and promoting a detrimental drug in the third degree
 (Count 7).
2 The Circuit Court sentenced Foster to five years of
 
imprisonment on Count 1, with a mandatory minimum term of one
 
1 The Honorable Joel E. August presided over the proceedings relevant to
this appeal. 
2 After a pre-trial dismissal of certain counts, the Circuit Court
renumbered the counts for trial. In this Summary Disposition Order, we will
refer to the counts as they were originally numbered in the indictment. The
 Circuit Court granted Foster's post-trial motion for judgment of acquittal on
Counts 5 and 6 of the indictment, which charged Foster and co-defendant Philip
P. Malano, as principals and/or accomplices, with being felons in possessionof a firearm (Count 5) and felons in possession of ammunition (Count 6). The State of Hawai' i has filed a separate appeal from the Circuit Court's order
granting Foster's post-trial motion for judgment of acquittal on these counts.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
year and eight months as a repeat offender, and thirty days of
 
imprisonment on Count 7. The Circuit Court imposed these terms
 to run concurrently with each other and with any term Foster was
 serving in other cases.
 
On appeal, Foster challenges the Circuit Court's denial
 
of his motion to suppress evidence. We affirm.
 
I.
 A.
 
Officers Larry Pacheco and John Yamamoto of the
 
Department of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR) stopped a vehicle
 because they suspected that the vehicle's occupants were involved
 in illegal night hunting.
3 Foster was driving the vehicle which
 
had three additional occupants. Upon approaching the vehicle,
 Officer Yamamoto heard a sound that he thought had been made by
 the slide mechanism of a firearm, and both officers saw an
 ammunition clip on the front seat. While the back-seat
 passengers were exiting the vehicle, Officer Yamamoto saw a rifle
 on the floor behind the front passenger seat, and he seized the
 rifle. 
Officer Pacheco informed Foster that he was under
 
arrest for a place to keep firearm offense and advised Foster of
 his Miranda rights. Foster waived his rights and made a
 statement. Officer Pacheco also asked Foster, who was a
 registered owner of the vehicle, for consent to search the
 vehicle. Foster refused and explained that he had contraband, "a
 couple joints," in the vehicle. 
Maui Police Department (MPD) Officer James Kahuhu
 
arrived at the scene. Officer Kahuhu readvised Foster of his
 Miranda rights, which Foster again waived. Officer Kahuhu
 
3
 Hawai'i Administrative Rules (HAR) §§ 13-123-6 and 13-123-7 (1999)
provide as follow: 
§ 13-123-6 Hunting hours. Hunting is permitted from one-
half hour before sunrise to one-half hour after sunset. No person
shall hunt from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before
 sunrise, except where specified differently.
 
§ 13-123-7. Artificial light prohibited. No person shall
hunt game mammals with the use of artificial light." 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
presented Foster with an MPD consent to search form and read the
 
form to Foster. Foster signed the form and consented to the
 search of his vehicle. During the search of the vehicle, the
 Officers recovered ammunition and various drugs and drug
 paraphernalia. 
B.
 
Foster filed a motion to suppress evidence obtained as
 
the result of the stop and search of his vehicle. He argued that 
the DLNR officers lacked reasonable suspicion for the stop and
 that his consent to search was involuntary. After holding
 evidentiary hearings, the Circuit Court issued a written order
 denying the motion, which included detailed findings of fact and
 conclusions of law.
 
With respect to the stop of the vehicle, the Circuit
 
Court made findings and conclusions, including that: (1) at 2:05
 a.m., Officers Pacheco and Yamamoto were conducting checks for
 illegal night hunting; (2) the officers were in a remote area
 where illegal night hunting was known to occur; (3) from the top
 of a hill, the officers noticed a beam of light panning mauka and
 makai several times, in a manner consistent with the use of a
 spot light for illegal night hunting; (4) the light appeared to
 be moving towards them so the officers partially blocked the road
 and waited; (5) the officers stopped Foster's vehicle, which was
 the only vehicle in the remote area, as it slowly approached
 them; (6) based on the officers' experience, the activities they
 observed were consistent with illegal night hunting; and (7) the
 officers had reasonable suspicion based on articulable facts to
 stop Foster's vehicle.
 
With respect to Foster's consent to search, the Circuit
 
Court made findings and conclusions, including that: (1) Officer
 Kahuhu presented the consent to search form to Foster and
 reviewed the form with Foster; (2) Officer Kahuhu advised Foster
 that he had the right to refuse to consent to search; (3) Officer
 Kahuhu also advised Foster that his vehicle could be towed and
 impounded because the officers had sufficient evidence to obtain
 a search warrant for the vehicle; (4) Foster, as "an individual
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with some experience involving the criminal justice system, was
 
undoubtedly aware that his [previously] volunteered information
 about the presence of drugs and drug paraphernalia could likely
 provide the basis for a warrant"; (4) Foster signed the consent
 to search form and gave the officers permission to search the
 vehicle; (5) there was no evidence of a prolonged interrogation,
 and Officer Kahuhu testified that he did not use force or threats
 of force or make promises to obtain Foster's consent; (6) there
 was no evidence that the consent to search was coerced; and (7)
 under the totality of the circumstances, Foster's consent to
 search was voluntary.
 
II.
 
On appeal, Foster argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in denying his suppression motion because: (1) the DLNR officers
 did not have reasonable suspicion to stop Foster's vehicle; and
 (2) Foster's consent to search was not voluntary. We conclude
 that Foster's arguments lack merit. We resolve Foster's
 arguments as follows:
 
1. The Circuit Court did not err in ruling that the 
DLNR officers had reasonable suspicion to stop Foster's vehicle. The Circuit Court's factual findings were not clearly erroneous. Based on these factual findings and the evidence presented, the DLNR officers had "specific and articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences from those facts," provided them with reasonable suspicion to believe that Foster was engaged in illegal night hunting and to stop Foster's vehicle for further investigation. State v. Spillner, 116 Hawai' i 351, 357, 173 P.3d 
498, 504 (2007) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
2. The Circuit Court did not err in ruling that
 
Foster's consent to search was voluntary. The Hawai' i Supreme 
Court has stated:
 
[W]hether consent to search has been given voluntarily is a
question of fact to be determined by the trial court from
the "totality of all the circumstances." Considerable
 deference must be given in this regard to the findings of
the trier of fact, who is best situated to decide the
question of voluntariness. . . .
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The power to judge credibility of witnesses,
resolve conflicts in testimony, weigh evidence and
draw factual inferences, is vested in the trial court.
On appeal[,] all presumptions favor proper exercise of
that power, and the trial court's findings —- whether
expressed or implied —- must be upheld if supported by
substantial evidence.
 
The role of the reviewing court on this issue is
 
thus quite limited
.
 
State v. Kaleohano, 99 Hawai' i 370, 381, 56 P.3d 138, 149 (2002) 
(ellipsis points, certain brackets, and emphasis in original)
 
(quoting State v. Patterson, 58 Haw. 462, 468, 571 P.2d 745, 749
 (1977)). We conclude that there was substantial evidence to
 support the Circuit Court's finding, under the totality of all
 the circumstances, that Foster's consent was voluntary. We
 therefore uphold the Circuit Court's decision.
 
III.
 
We affirm the August 12, 2009, Judgment of the Circuit
 
Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 31, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Cynthia A. Kagiwada
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Chief Judge
Renee Ishikawa Delizo
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
5
 