NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30371
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
LITO A. MATEO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0107)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Lito A. Mateo (Mateo or Defendant)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed
 
February 9, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
 
(circuit court).1 A jury found Mateo guilty of Murder in the
 
Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 ยง 707-701.5(1) (1993), and Carrying or Use of Firearm in the
 
Commission of a Separate Felony, in violation of HRS ยง 134-21(a)
 
(Supp. 2010). 
On appeal, Mateo contends: 
(1) The circuit court abused its discretion in denying 
Mateo's Motion in Limine No. 1, in which Mateo sought to preclude the State of Hawai' i (State) and its witnesses from referring to 
decedent Tito Rafol (decedent or Rafol) as "the victim." 
(2) The circuit court erred in denying Mateo's oral
 
motion for judgment of acquittal where Mateo was under the
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
influence of extreme mental and emotional disturbance (EMED) at
 
the time of the incident.
 
(3) In the State's closing argument, its
 
characterization of the incident as an "execution-style killing"
 
constituted prosecutorial misconduct.
 
(4) The circuit court's jury instructions were
 
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, and misleading because
 
they failed to specify that a showing of a total loss of self-
control was not necessary to establish the EMED defense.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Mateo's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) The circuit court did not abuse its discretion by 
denying Mateo's Motion in Limine No. 1 and allowing the State to 
refer to Rafol as "victim." Mateo's reliance on State v. Nomura, 
79 Hawai' i 413, 903 P.2d 718 (App. 1995), for the proposition 
that referring to a complaining witness as "victim" is prejudicial is misplaced. This court in Nomura based its holding 
on Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 1102, which forbids the court 
from commenting on the evidence. Nomura, 79 Hawai' i at 417, 903 
P.2d at 722. In the instant case, the circuit court made no such comment on the evidence, but rather only the State and a witness 
referred to Rafol as "victim." 
A new trial or the setting aside of a guilty verdict is 
warranted only where the defendant's right to a fair trial is 
prejudiced. State v. McGriff, 76 Hawai' i 148, 158, 871 P.2d 782, 
792 (1994). Allowing Rafol to be called "victim" by the State and the State's witness did not prejudice Mateo's right to a fair 
trial. In Nomura, this court held that the term "victim" 
includes a "person who is the object of a crime as the victim of 
a robbery is the person robbed" or "one that is acted on and 
. . . adversely affected by a force or agent or one that is 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
injured." Nomura, 79 Hawai' i at 416, 903 P.2d at 721 (internal 
quotation marks, citations, brackets, and ellipsis in original 
omitted). At most, referring to Rafol as the "victim" concludes 
that Rafol was harmed by another, an issue that is not in dispute 
in this case. 
(2) The circuit court's denial of Mateo's oral motion 
for judgement of acquittal was proper. According to Hawai' i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 29(a), the circuit court "shall order the entry of judgment of acquittal of one or more 
offenses alleged in the charge after the evidence on either side 
is closed if the evidence is insufficient to sustain a conviction 
of such offense or offenses." When reviewing a judgment of 
acquittal, the appellate court judges 
whether, upon the evidence viewed in the light most
favorable to the prosecution and in full recognition of the
province of the trier of fact, the evidence is sufficient to
support a prima facie case so that a reasonable mind might
fairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. . . .
Under such a review, we give full play to the right of the
fact finder to determine credibility, weight [sic] the
evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact.
 
State v. Poohina, 97 Hawai' i 505, 508-09, 40 P.3d 907, 910-11 
(2002) (quoting State v. Aplaca, 96 Hawai' i 17, 21, 25 P.3d 792, 
796 (2001)). 
Mateo's argument that he proved the affirmative defense 
of EMED does not warrant a judgment of acquittal. Mateo 
improperly focuses on the affirmative defense, rather than the 
State's presentation of a prima facie case. While the 
testimonies of Mateo's two expert witness do support the 
contention that Mateo did suffer from EMED at the time of the 
incident, when judging a motion for judgment of acquittal, "it is 
the province of the trier of fact, and not an appellate court, to 
determine the credibility of witnesses and to assess the weight 
and effect of the evidence adduced at trial." Aplaca, 96 Hawai' i 
at 23, 25 P.3d at 798. The State clearly carried its burden by presenting evidence of all of the elements of Murder in the 
Second Degree and Carrying or Use of Firearm in the Commission of 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a Separate Felony. The question of whether Mateo suffered from
 
EMED does not affect the State's presentation of a prima facie
 
case.
 
(3) The State's characterization of the incident as an 
"execution style killing" during its closing argument was a 
permissible comment on the testimony of Dr. Hall and did not 
constitute prosecutorial misconduct. During closing argument, 
the prosecutor "is permitted to draw reasonable inferences from 
the evidence and wide latitude is allowed in discussing the 
evidence. It is also within the bounds of legitimate argument 
for prosecutors to state, discuss, and comment on the evidence as 
well as to draw all reasonable inferences from the evidence." 
State v. Carvalho, 106 Hawai' i 13, 18, 100 P.3d 607, 612 (App. 
2004) (citations omitted) (quoting State v. Clark, 83 Hawai' i 
289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996)). The instances in which the 
prosecutor referred to the incident as an "execution" or 
"execution style killing" were in direct reference to Dr. Hall's 
testimony that the incident was "highly compatible with execution 
behavior." Because the statements by the prosecutor in his 
closing argument were comments on and reasonable inferences from 
the evidence presented, the prosecutor's use of the phrase 
"execution style killing" and "execution" did not constitute 
prosecutorial misconduct. 
(4) The circuit court's jury instructions regarding 
EMED were proper and did not warrant further clarification on the 
loss of self-control required for EMED. Mateo's reliance on 
State v. Kupihea, 80 Hawai' i 307, 909 P.2d 1122 (1996), for the 
proposition that the court must clarify that the loss of self-control need not be complete for a finding of EMED is misplaced. 
In Kupihea, the Hawai' i Supreme Court examined whether the 
State's hypothetical, in which a hypothetical individual suffered from a complete loss of self-control, was prejudicial to the 
defendant. Id. at 312 & 317, 909 P.2d at 1127 & 1132. Kupihea 
argued that "it is error to say the mental or emotional 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disturbance must result in the total loss of self[-]control." 
Id. at 317, 909 P.2d at 1132. The supreme court, without making
 
a ruling on the validity of Kupihea's argument, stated that
 
"taken in context, we do not believe that is what the prosecutor
 
said." Id.
 
In the instant case, however, the circuit court made no 
mention of a "total" or "complete" loss of self-control, but 
instead described self-control as a "significant factor" in 
deciding EMED. The Hawai' i Supreme Court has already upheld such 
a description of self-control in relation to EMED. In State v. Matias, 74 Haw. 197, 204, 840 P.2d 374, 378 (1992), the court 
held that "[t]he applicable case law leaves no doubt that the 
question of a killer's self-control, or lack of it, at the time 
of the killing is a significant, even determining, factor in 
deciding whether the killer was under the influence of an extreme 
emotional disturbance." By simply describing the relationship 
between self-control and EMED in a manner consistent with the 
supreme court's interpretation of EMED, the circuit court did 
nothing to warrant a further clarification that the loss of self-
control need not be a total loss. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence filed on February 9, 2010 in the Circuit Court of
 the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 21, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Darien W.L.C. Nagata,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai' i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
5
 