NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30700
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
GERARDO DENNIS PATRICKSON; RODOLFO BERMUNDEZ ARIAS;
BENIGNO TORRES HERNANDEZ; FERNANDO JIMENEZ ARIAS; MELGAR
OLIMPIO MORENO; SANTOS LEANDROS; HERMAN ROMERO AGUILAR; ELIAS
ESPINOZA MERELO HOOKER ERA CELSTINO; ALIRIO MANUEL MENDEZ;
and CARLOS HUMBER RIVERA, individually and on behalf
of others similarly situated, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
DOLE FOOD COMPANY, INC.; DOLE FRESH FRUIT COMPANY; DOLE FRESH
FRUIT INTERNATIONAL, INC.; PINEAPPLE GROWERS ASSOCIATION
OF HAWAII; AMVAC CHEMICAL CORPORATION; SHELL OIL COMPANY;
DOW CHEMICAL COMPANY; and OCCIDENTAL CHEMICAL CORPORATION,
(individually and as successor to Occidental Chemical Company
and Occidental Chemical Agricultural Products, Inc., Hooker
Chemical and Plastics, Occidental Chemical Company of Texas
and Best Fertilizer Company); STANDARD FRUIT COMPANY; STANDARD
FRUIT AND STEAMSHIP COMPANY; STANDARD FRUIT COMPANY DE COSTA
RICA, S.A.; STANDARD FRUIT COMPANY DE HONDURAS, S.A.; CHIQUITA
BRANDS INC.; CHIQUITA BRANDS INTERNATIONAL, INC., (Individually
and as successor in interest to United Brands Company, Inc.);
MARITROP TRADING CORPORATION; DEL MONTE FRESH PRODUCE N.A., INC.
(incorrectly named as Del Monte Fresh Produce N.A.); DEL MONTE
MONTE FRESH PRODUCE COMPANY; DEL MONTE FRESH PRODUCE (HAWAII)
INC., (incorrectly named as Del Monte Fresh Produce Hawaii,
Inc.); DEL MONTE FRESH PRODUCE COMPANY and FRESH DEL MONTE N.V.,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOES PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
and DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, Defendants.
 
DOLE FOOD COMPANY, INC., Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff-
Appellees, v. DEAD SEA BROMINE CO., LTD. and BROMINE COMPOUNDS
LIMITED, Third-Party Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0047)
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Gerardo Dennis Patrickson,
 
Benigno Torres Hernandez, Fernando Jimenez Arias, Elias Espinoza
 
Merelo, Alirio Manuel Mendez, and Carlos Humberto Rivera1
 
(collectively Six Plaintiffs) appeal from the July 28, 2010
 Judgment in favor of defendants and against plaintiffs (Judgment)
 filed in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (First Circuit
 Court).
2
 
In this appeal, we consider whether the claims asserted
 
by the Six Plaintiffs are barred by Hawaii's two-year statute of
 limitation for tort actions or whether a class action pending in
 another jurisdiction tolls the statute of limitation. We also
 consider whether the Six Plaintiffs have asserted claims for
 which a four-year or six-year statute of limitation applies, such
 that those claims are timely.
 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.
 
I. Introduction
 
The Six Plaintiffs are citizens of the countries of
 
Costa Rica, Ecuador or Guatamala. They contend that they were
 harmed from exposure to dibromochloropropane (DBCP) which was
 allegedly used or manufactured from the 1960s through the 1980s
 by Defendants-Appellees Dole Food Company, Inc., Dole Fresh Fruit
 Company, Pineapple Growers Association of Hawaii, AMVAC Chemical
 Corporation, Shell Oil Company, Dow Chemical Company, Occidental
 Chemical Corporation, Standard Fruit Company, Standard Fruit and
 Steamship Company, Del Monte Fresh Produce N.A., Inc., and Del
 Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii) Inc. (collectively Defendants).
3
 
1
 Five additional plaintiffs were named in the original complaint filed
on October 3, 1997, but their claims were subsequently dismissed by
stipulation on October 8, 2009 and October 9, 2009.
2
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 
3
 Nine additional defendants were named in the original complaint filed
on October 3, 1997. The following originally named defendants were all
dismissed by stipulations filed in 2007 and 2008: Dole Fresh Fruit
 International, Inc., Dole Fresh Fruit International, Limited, Standard Fruit
(continued...)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
DBCP was used to kill nematodes, which are worms that attack
 
banana plant roots. The Six Plaintiffs contend that they were
 exposed to DBCP while employed by American fruit companies or
 their subsidiaries in the commercial cultivation of bananas for
 sale in the United States. They further contend that DBCP has
 been banned from use in the United States and allegedly causes
 sterility, sexual and reproductive abnormalities, and cancer.
4
 
In this appeal, the Six Plaintiffs assert that the
 
First Circuit Court erred when it granted Defendant Dow Chemical
 Company's (Dow Chemical) and Defendant Shell Oil Company's (Shell
 Oil) respective motions for partial summary judgment, and the
 other Defendants' susbstantive joinders thereto, based on the
 two-year statute of limitations for tort claims under Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 657-7 (1993). The First Circuit Court
 granted the motions and joinders to the extent they were based on
 Dow Chemical's motion, which asserted that, more than two years
 before filing this action, the Six Plaintiffs were among numerous
 plaintiffs who had filed individual claims in a Florida lawsuit,
 Abarca, v. CNK Disposition Corp., No. 95-3765 (13th Jud. Cir. of
 Hillsborough Cnty., Fla., filed June 9, 1995) (the Abarca
 action), that were similar to those asserted in this case. Dow
 Chemical's motion thus argued that, at least by the time they
 filed the Abarca action, the Six Plaintiffs were well aware of
 their claims and therefore the claims asserted in this action -­filed more than two years later -- are time barred by HRS § 657­7.
 
3 (...continued)
Company De Costa Rica, S.A., Standard Fruit Company De Honduras, S.A.,
Chiquita Brands, Inc., Chiquita Brands International, Inc., Maritrop Trading
Corporation, Del Monte Fresh Produce Company, and Fresh Del Monte Produce N.V.
(incorrectly named as Fresh Del Monte N.V.).
4
 Referring to DBCP, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals (Ninth Circuit)
stated: "Absorbed by the skin or inhaled, [DBCP is] alleged to cause
sterility, testicular atrophy, miscarriages, liver damage, cancer and other
ailments that you wouldn't wish on anyone. Originally manufactured by Dow
Chemical and Shell Oil, the pesticide was banned from general use in the
United States by the Environmental Protection Agency in 1979." Patrickson v.
 
Dole Food Co., 251 F.3d 795, 798 (9th Cir. 2001) aff'd in part, cert.
dismissed in part, Dole Food Co. v. Patrickson, 538 U.S. 468 (2003). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Six Plaintiffs argued in opposition to Dow
 
Chemical's motion, and similarly contend on appeal, that they
 
were putative members of a class action lawsuit filed in Texas
 state court that asserted similar claims, Carcamo v. Shell Oil
 Company, No. 93-C-2290, 23rd Jud. Dist. of Brazoria Cnty., Tex.
 (Carcamo), that the statute of limitations for their claims was
 thus tolled until class certification was denied in Carcamo, and
 therefore their complaint in this case is timely. The Six
 Plaintiffs also argue that they have asserted claims in this case
 for fraud and negligent misrepresentation, which are subject to a
 six-year statute of limitations, and that they have also asserted
 an implied warranty claim which is subject to a four-year statute
 of limitation, such that these claims are timely.
 
This appeal therefore presents the following questions:
 (1) whether the Carcamo class action lawsuit pending in
  
another state tolled the statute of limitations for the Six
 Plaintiffs, who were putative members of the Carcamo class, such
 that this action was timely filed; and
 
(2) if class action tolling does not save their claims,
 
whether the Six Plaintiffs have asserted causes of action for
 which a four-year or six-year statute of limitation applies, such
 that those claims were timely asserted in this case.
 
We hold that class action tolling does not save the Six
 
Plaintiffs' claims from being untimely. Moreover, the only claim
 asserted by the Six Plaintiffs with a statute of limitations
 longer than two years is their claim for breach of implied
 warranty. However, even the breach of implied warranty claim is
 untimely.
II. Procedural History In This Case and the Related Cases
A. Identifying the Cases
 
To give context to the class action tolling issues, we
 
set forth the relevant procedural history not only in this case,
 
but also in the Carcamo class action and the Abarca action. As
 explained in fuller detail below, Carcamo was filed in August
 1993, Abarca was filed in June 1995, and this case was filed in
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
October 1997. These cases are interrelated for a variety of
 
reasons and have each been before respective state and federal
 courts.
 
We further note that, for a period of time, Carcamo was
 
consolidated with other similar cases which had all been removed
 to federal court in Texas and which were consolidated under
 Delgado v. Shell Oil Co., No. H-94-1337 (212th Dist. Ct.,
 Galveston Cnty., Tex.) (generally Delgado). There were two
 published opinions issued by the federal courts in Delgado: one
 by the District Court for the Southern District of Texas in
 Delgado v. Shell Oil Co., 890 F. Supp. 1324 (S.D. Tex. 1995)
 (Delgado I); and the second by the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals 
in Delgado v. Shell Oil Co., 231 F.3d 165 (5th Cir. 2000)
 (Delgado II).
5
 
B. Carcamo, Delgado, and Abarca
 
The Carcamo case was initiated on August 24, 1993 in
 
Texas state court. Based on the undisputed evidence in this
 
case, at least as of the Fourth Amended Petition filed on
 November 22, 1993 in Carcamo, the plaintiffs in that case
 asserted a class action on behalf of:
 
[a]ll persons exposed to DBCP, or DBCP-containing products,
designed, manufactured, marketed, distributed or used by
defendants between 1965 and 1990 in the following countries:
(1) Honduras, (2) Costa Rica, (3) Guatemala, (4) Ivory
Coast, (5) Burkina Faso, (6) Dominica, (7) St. Lucia, (8)
St. Vincent, (9) Ecuador, (10) Philippines, and (11)
Australia. Excluded from the class are 30 DBCP cases to be
 selected from cases currently pending in Brazoria, Dallas,
Galveston, Jim Hogg, and Morris counties in Texas.
 
The parties do not dispute that the Six Plaintiffs were putative
 
class members in the Carcamo class action.6
 
5
 We are mindful that we are reviewing a grant of partial summary
judgment. Therefore, the relevant facts set forth in this opinion are based
on the record developed by the parties below and, pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) 201, relevant facts of which we take judicial notice based onthe published opinions in Delgado.
6
 The Six Plaintiffs and Dow Chemical entered an express stipulation
that the Six Plaintiffs were putative class members in the Carcamo class
action.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In 1994, the Carcamo class action was removed to a
 
federal district court in Texas after a third-party complaint was
 
filed against inter alia an Israeli company, Dead Sea Bromine
 Co., Ltd. (Dead Sea). After being removed to federal district
 court, Carcamo was consolidated in Delgado with several other
 lawsuits pending in Texas federal courts in which plaintiffs had
 similarly asserted claims stemming from exposure to DBCP. 
While Delgado was pending in federal court, the Six
 
Plaintiffs were among 3,307 plaintiffs who filed individual
 claims in the Abarca action. The complaint in Abarca was filed
 on June 9, 1995 in Florida state court. The Six Plaintiffs
 contend that the Abarca complaint was filed as a defensive
 measure in "response to the Delgado defendants' efforts to
 persuade the Delgado federal court in Texas to enjoin the
 litigation of any further DBCP cases anywhere in the United
 States." The Abarca complaint was never served on any defendant,
 but was removed to federal court on July 7, 1995. The Abarca
 action was voluntarily dismissed on July 12, 1995 -- a little
 over a month after it was filed and one day after Delgado I was
 issued.
 
In Delgado I, the District Court for the Southern
 
District of Texas determined that it had jurisdiction because
 under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA), Dead Sea could
 properly remove the action to federal court. The court in
 Delgado I then conditionally granted defendants' motion to
 dismiss based on forum non conveniens. Id. at 1373. 
Importantly, the district court further noted that, in addition
 to the defendants' motion to dismiss for forum non conveniens, a
 number of other motions were pending in various cases, including
 Carcamo. Delgado I, 890 F.Supp. at 1375. The district court
 
thus held, inter alia, that unless otherwise expressly addressed
 in its decision, all pending motions were denied as moot. Id. 
Our record establishes that a motion for class certification was
 pending in Carcamo prior to the Delgado I decision and that
 Delgado I did not otherwise expressly address that motion.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Therefore, upon the issuance of the decision in Delgado I on
 
July 11, 1995, the motion for class certification in Carcamo was
 denied as moot.
7
 
The plaintiffs appealed Delgado I to the Fifth Circuit
 
Court of Appeals. On October 19, 2000, the Fifth Circuit issued
 Delgado II, which affirmed Delgado I, including that the actions
 were properly removed to federal court.
 
By the time Delgado II was issued, this case had been
 
8
filed in Hawai 'i state court  and, similar to Delgado, had been
removed to federal court after Dead Sea and a related Israeli company were impleaded into the case. 
After the District Court 
for the District of Hawai 'i dismissed this case for forum non 
conveniens, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled (contrary to the Fifth Circuit) that the case was not properly removed and that the federal courts did not have jurisdiction. Patrickson v. 
Dole Food Co., 251 F.3d 795, 808-09 (9th Cir. 2001). The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari in this case and subsequently affirmed the Ninth Circuit, ruling that there was no jurisdiction under the FSIA because the Israeli companies were not instrumentalities of the State of Israel. Dole Food Co. v. 
Patrickson, 538 U.S. 468, 480 (2003). 
7 The Six Plaintiffs argue on appeal that it is unclear whether the
motion for class certification in Carcamo was indeed pending when Delgado I
was issued. However, the declaration of Michael Brem, counsel for Dow
Chemical in the Carcamo case, was submitted in this case and establishes that
a motion for class certification was pending in Carcamo and was not ruled upon
until it was denied on July 11, 1995 by the district court judge in Delgado I. 
There is nothing in the record to dispute this fact.
8 In this case, the Ninth Circuit stated that:
 
This case represents one front in a broad litigation war
between these plaintiffs' lawyers and these defendants. In
some of the cases, plaintiffs have reportedly won
multimillion dollar settlements. See Larry K. Lowry & Arthur
L. Frank, Exporting DBCP and Other Banned Pesticides:
 Consideration of Ethical Issues, 5 Int'l J. Occup. Envtl.
Health 135, 140 (1999). In others, defendants have managed
to have the cases dismissed for forum non conveniens. See,
 e.g., Delgado v. Shell Oil Co., 231 F.3d 165, 169 (5th Cir.
2000), cert. denied, 532 U.S. 972, 121 S.Ct. 1603, 149
L.Ed.2d 470 (2001); Sibaja v. Dow Chem. Co., 757 F.2d 1215,
1216 (11th Cir. 1985).
 
Patrickson v. Dole Food Co., 251 F.3d at 798. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Following the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling in this case,
 
which resolved the split between the Fifth and Ninth Circuits
 
regarding federal jurisdiction under the FSIA, the federal
 District Court for the Southern District of Texas remanded
 Carcamo to Texas state court and reinstated the case. The
 defendants in Carcamo challenged the reinstatement of the case,
 filing a petition for writ of mandamus in the 14th Court of
 Appeals of Texas in 2005. The Texas appellate court denied the
 defendants' challenge to reinstatement, holding that because of
 the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling on jurisdiction in Patrickson,
 the federal court lacked subject matter jurisdiction when it
 issued its dismissal on forum non conveniens and thus the
 requirements imposed by that order were void.
 
On February 2, 2006, the plaintiffs in Carcamo filed
 
their Eighth Amended Petition reasserting class allegations
 against the defendants in that case. Although not established in
 the record, the Six Plaintiffs assert that on June 3, 2010, the
 Texas state court denied the plaintiffs' motion for class
 certification in Carcamo. 
The Six Plaintiffs contend that, based on class action
 
tolling, the statute of limitations for the claims they assert in
 this case was tolled until June 3, 2010, when, as the Six
 Plaintiffs assert on appeal, the class certification was denied
 by the Texas state court in Carcamo. This would make their
 complaint in this case timely because it was filed thirteen years
 earlier, on October 3, 1997.
 
C. Procedural History in This Case
 
The Six Plaintiffs were among eleven plaintiffs who
 
filed this action in Hawaii's Circuit Court of the Second Circuit
 
(Second Circuit Court) on October 3, 1997. 
As discussed above, this case was removed to federal
 
court after Dead Sea and a related Israeli company were
 impleaded, and the case made its way through the federal district
 and appellate courts. After the ruling by the U.S. Supreme Court
 on April 22, 2003, that there was no federal jurisdiction, this
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
case was remanded to Hawaii's Second Circuit Court on
 
September 19, 2003. In December 2006, the Second Circuit Court
 transferred venue to the state's First Circuit Court. 
Pursuant to an Order Rehabilitating the Circuit Court
 
Record, the Six Plaintiffs submitted a copy of their First
 Amended Complaint to the First Circuit Court on February 1, 2008. 
The First Amended Complaint asserts claims of negligence,
 conspiracy, strict liability, intentional tort, and breach of
 implied warranty, and seeks compensatory and punitive damages. 
On February 25, 2008, the Six Plaintiffs filed a Motion for Class
 Certification and Appointment of Class Representatives and Class
 Counsel, which was denied. 
Subsequently, Defendants Dow Chemical and Shell Oil
 
filed their respective motions for partial summary judgment which
 are the subject of this appeal. The other Defendants joined
 Dow's motion for partial summary judgment. After extensive
 briefing and a combined hearing on the motions, the First Circuit
 Court granted summary judgment against the Six Plaintiffs and in
 favor of the Defendants.
 
On July 28, 2010, the First Circuit Court filed the
 
Judgment in favor of Defendants and against the Six Plaintiffs in
 accordance with its summary judgment rulings. The Six Plaintiffs
 timely appealed on August 24, 2010.
III. Standard of Review
 
We review a circuit court's grant or denial of summary
 
judgment de novo. Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai
'i 48, 56, 109 
P.3d 689, 697 (2005).
 
Accordingly, 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
 proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other
 words, we must view all of the evidence and inferences
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the
party opposing the motion.
 
Kahale v. City and County of Honolulu, 104 Hawai' i 341, 344,
90 P.3d 233, 236 (2004) (citation omitted). 
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai 'i 90, 
96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008).
IV. Discussion
 
The Six Plaintiffs were party to the Abarca action
 
which was filed on June 9, 1995 and which asserted claims similar
 
to this case. The original complaint in this case was filed on
 October 3, 1997, more than two years after Abarca was filed. The
 Six Plaintiffs do not dispute that they were aware of their
 claims in this action by the time they filed the Abarca action. 
Rather, they opposed summary judgment on grounds that the statute
 of limitations was tolled given the Carcamo class action. 
However, even if we assume class action tolling applies in this
 case, it would not save any claims for which a two-year statute
 of limitations applies, because any tolling ended when Delgado I
 was issued on July 11, 1995.
A. Class Action Tolling
 
Class action tolling has been recognized in Hawai
'i in 
a situation where the class action was also filed in this State. 
In Levi v. University of Hawaii, 67 Haw. 90, 679 P.2d 129 (1984), a class action lawsuit was filed in Hawai
'i and after a motion 
for class certification was denied, putative members filed motions to intervene in the case but their motions were denied. Id. at 91-92, 679 P.2d at 130-31. The putative class members then filed a separate action, but the trial court granted summary judgment against the plaintiffs on grounds that the statute of limitations had run. Id. at 92, 679 P.2d at 131. 
In Levi, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that the filing 
of the class action lawsuit "tolled the applicable statute of limitations for all proposed members of that class until class certification was denied." Id. at 91, 679 P.2d at 130. The 
supreme court adopted the rule established by the U.S. Supreme Court in American Pipe & Construction Co. v. Utah, 414 U.S. 538 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1974) and Crown, Cork & Seal Company v. Parker, 462 U.S. 345
 
(1983), and explained its analysis as follows:
 
The primary purpose of a statute of limitations is to compel
the exercise of a right of action within a reasonable time
so that the opposing party has a fair opportunity to defend.
51 Am. Jur. 2d Limitations of Actions § 17. The filing of a
class action within the statute of limitations places a
defendant on notice of the subject matter and size of the
prospective litigation. Defendant is thereby apprised of
the possible number of litigants and should not be rewarded
for lack of diligence in seeking denial of certification.
 
One of the purposes of a class action suit is to
prevent multiplicity of actions, thereby preserving the
economies of time, effort and expense. This objective can
be effectively achieved only by allowing the proposed
members of a class to rely on the existence of a suit which
protects their rights. We therefore adopt the rule
enunciated in American Pipe and Construction Co. v. Utah,
414 U.S. 538, 94 S.Ct. 756, 38 L.Ed.2d 713 (1974), and
clarified in Crown, Cork and Seal Co., Inc. v. Parker, 462
U.S. 345, 103 S.Ct. 2392, 76 L.Ed.2d 628 (1983) which states
that the commencement of a class action suspends the
applicable statute of limitations as to all asserted members
of a class who would have been parties had the suit
continued as a class action. To hold otherwise would be to
 encourage intervention and filings of separate actions in
the event class certification might be denied, thus creating
the multiplicity of actions that class suits were designed
to avoid.
 
The United States Supreme Court decision of Crown,
 
Cork was designed to alleviate the inconsistent results
which arose in federal courts after the American Pipe
 
decision. Some courts had been applying the tolling rule
only to putative class members who intervened after denial
of class certification and not to those who filed individual
 actions. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve
the conflict and in Crown, Cork extended the tolling
provisions to all asserted members of the class, until class
certification is denied.
 
Levi, 67 Haw. at 93-94, 679 P.2d at 131-32 (footnote omitted).
 
The Six Plaintiffs contend that because they were
 
putative class members in the Carcamo action, the statute of
 
limitations for their claims was tolled until 2010, when they
 claim the Texas state court denied a motion for class
 certification on remand in Carcamo. As we noted above, the
 record does not appear to contain evidence of a Carcamo class
 certification ruling in 2010. Moreover, as explained below, any
such ruling in 2010 would not be relevant.
 
 
Defendants assert the following arguments related to
 
class action tolling: (a) once the motion for class certification
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in Carcamo was denied as moot in Delgado I , any class action
 
tolling ended and the statute of limitations began to run;
 
(b) Hawai 'i should not recognize class action tolling where the 
class action is filed in another jurisdiction, what Defendants refer to as "cross-jurisdictional" tolling; (c) the Six Plaintiffs' filing of individual claims in the 
Abarca action 
precluded application of class action tolling; and (d) class action tolling does not apply to mass tort class actions. 
We need not go beyond the Defendants' first contention
 
because it is dispositive of the class action tolling issue in
 this case. That is, even if we assume arguendo that class action
 tolling applies in the context of this case, such tolling ended
 when Delgado I was issued on July 11, 1995, because that decision
 denied a pending motion for class certification in Carcamo as
 moot. The initial complaint in this case was not filed until
 October 3, 1997, more than two years later. Thus, any claims to
 which the two-year limitations period applies under HRS § 657-7
 would be barred regardless of whether class action tolling
 applies.
 
In Levi, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court noted that in Crown, 
Cork & Seal Company, the U.S. Supreme Court "extended the tolling provisions to all asserted members of the class, until class certification is denied." Levi, 67 Haw. at 94, 679 P.2d at 132 
(emphasis added). Indeed, in Crown, Cork & Seal Company, the U.S. Supreme Court stated that
 
[w]e conclude, as did the Court in American Pipe, that "the
commencement of a class action suspends the applicable
statute of limitations as to all asserted members of the
 class who would have been parties had the suit been
permitted to continue as a class action." 414 U.S., at 554,
94 S.Ct., at 766. Once the statute of limitations has been
tolled, it remains tolled for all members of the putative
class until class certification is denied. At that point,
class members may choose to file their own suits or to
intervene as plaintiffs in the pending action.
 
462 U.S. at 353-54 (emphasis added).
 
The Six Plaintiffs contend that the denial of class
 
certification in Delgado I should not end the tolling because the
 
Texas state court later held that the proceeding before the
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
federal district court in Delgado I was void for lack of
 
jurisdiction. As noted above, however, both the district court
 and the Fifth Circuit ruled that the federal courts had
 jurisdiction in Delgado. Moreover, the U.S. Supreme Court denied
 a petition for certiorari in Delgado. Delgado v. Shell Oil Co.,
 
532 U.S. 972 (2001). The issue of federal court jurisdiction
 under the FSIA was later definitively addressed in this case when
 the U.S. Supreme Court issued its ruling in April 2003, almost
 eight years after class certification was denied in Delgado I. 
See Dole Food Co. v. Patrickson, 538 U.S. 468.
 
More importantly, American Pipe, Crown, Cork & Seal 
Company and Levi provide no indication that the jurisdiction of the court denying class certification might affect whether tolling ends. In fact, the underlying analysis supporting class action tolling in these cases does not support the idea that, after class certification is denied by a trial court, tolling should continue during the appellate process or while an issue of jurisdiction is litigated. In balancing the purposes behind class actions and statutes of limitations, the U.S. Supreme Court and the Hawai
'i Supreme Court articulated, inter alia, that a 
timely filed class action prevents a multiplicity of lawsuits by allowing putative class members to rely on the class action without having to file separate actions, yet puts a defendant on notice of the subject matter and size of the litigation, such that the defendant has a fair opportunity to defend.
9 Am. Pipe, 
414 U.S. at 553-55; Crown, Cork & Seal Co., 462 U.S. at 351-53; Levi, 67 Haw. at 93, 679 P.2d at 131-32. Once class certification is denied, "[a]t that point, class members may choose to file their own suits or to intervene as plaintiffs in the pending action." Crown, Cork & Seal Co., 462 U.S. at 354. 
9
 Because notice to the defendant of the claim is one of the underlying
rationales supporting class action tolling, such tolling does not apply to
claims against a Defendant who was not previously named as a defendant in
Carcamo. From the record, it appears that Defendants Pineapple Growers
Association of Hawaii, AMVAC Chemical Corporation, Del Monte Fresh Produce
N.A., Inc., and Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii) Inc. were not named as
defendants in Carcamo, and thus for this additional reason any tolling does
not apply to claims against these Defendants.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A number of federal court decisions support the
 
proposition that class action tolling should not continue beyond
 
the initial denial of class certification by the trial court. 
Giovanniello v. ALM Media, LLC, 726 F.3d 106, 116 (2d Cir. 2013);
 Hall v. Variable Annuity Life Ins. Co., 727 F.3d 372, 375-76 (5th
 Cir. 2013); Bridges v. Dep't of Maryland State Police, 441 F.3d
 197, 211 (4th Cir. 2006) ("Crown, Cork & Seal adopted the
 bright-line rule that the statute of limitations 'remains tolled
 for all members of the putative class until class certification
 is denied' for whatever reason." (citation omitted)); Stone
 Container Corp v. United States, 229 F.3d 1345, 1355-56 (Fed.
 Cir. 2000); Hemenway v. Peabody Coal Co., 159 F.3d 255, 265-66
 (7th Cir. 1998) (dismissal of class action for lack of
 jurisdiction ended tolling in state with journeys account
 statute); Armstrong v. Martin Marietta Corp., 138 F.3d 1374,
 1384-85 (11th Cir. 1998); Nelson v. Cnty. of Allegheny, 60 F.3d
 1010, 1013 (3d Cir. 1995) (determining that under Pennsylvania
 law, tolling does not extend to appeal); Andrews v. Orr, 851 F.2d
 146, 149-50 (6th Cir. 1988), abrogated on other grounds by Cook
 v. Stegall, 295 F.3d 517 (6th Cir. 2002).
 
In Giovanniello, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals
 
recently stated that "we join every other circuit court to have
 addressed the issue and conclude that the tolling rule announced
 in [American Pipe] extends only through the denial of class
 status in the first instance by the district court." 726 F.3d at
 107-08 (emphasis added). Addressing whether a subsequently filed
 case was timely, the Giovanniello court stated:
 
Although the possibility of reconsideration or reversal on
appeal existed, Giovanniello is incorrect that this rendered
the district court's decision "provisional." Indeed, we
agree with the district court that "[a]fter a district
court's determination of whether an action may be maintained
as a class action, the class is no longer putative: having
been subjected to a legal decision, the class is either
extant or not." For this very reason, the Court in Crown,
 Cork recognized that once class status is denied, "class
members may choose to file their own suits or to intervene
as plaintiffs in the pending action." Crown, Cork, 462 U.S.
at 354, 103 S.Ct. 2392. If the Court had contemplated that
tolling continued through the pendency of reconsideration or
through appeal, there would be no need for class members to
take action to protect their rights as the Court in Crown,
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Cork explained. Thus, once Giovanniello's attempt to secure
class status failed, the statute of limitations began to run
again.
 
Id. at 117 (internal citation omitted).
 
Giovanniello is also significant in that class status
 
had been effectively denied in the prior class action when the
 
district court determined that the required amount in controversy
 for federal jurisdiction could not be met and therefore the class
 action was dismissed for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. 
Giovanniello, 726 F.3d at 108. In short, even though the
 district court in the class action suit had determined it did not
 have subject matter jurisdiction, this did not diminish the
 impact that the court had effectively denied class status, which
 in turn ended any class action tolling. See also Hemenway, 159
 
F.3d at 265-66.
 
Given the above analysis and the circumstances of this
 
case, all claims asserted by the Six Plaintiffs that have a two-
year statute of limitations are time barred. The Abarca action
 establishes that the Six Plaintiffs were aware of their claims at
 least by June 9, 1995, when the Abarca complaint was filed. 
Moreover, even if we assume that class action tolling applied,
 such tolling ended on July 11, 1995, when Delgado I was issued,
 and the complaint in this case was filed more than two years
 later, on October 3, 1997. The two-year statute of limitations
 under HRS § 657-7 precludes a significant portion of the Six
 Plaintiffs' claims.
 
We address below the Six Plaintiffs' contention that
 
they have asserted three claims to which a longer statute of
 limitations applies.
B.	 Claims of Fraudulent Misrepresentation, Negligent
Misrepresentation and Breach of Implied Warranty
 
The Six Plaintiffs contend that, although their claims
 
are not specifically styled as such, they have sufficiently
 
asserted claims for fraudulent and negligent misrepresentation,
 to which a six-year statute of limitations applies. The Six
 Plaintiffs also contend that their claim for breach of implied
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
warranty survives because a four-year statute of limitations
 
applies to that claim.
1.	 Purported Claims for Fraudulent and Negligent
Misrepresentation
 
Because the First Amended Complaint does not contain
 
express claims for fraudulent misrepresentation or negligent
 
misrepresentation, the parties contest whether such claims were
 indeed sufficiently plead by the Six Plaintiffs. We conclude
 that, regardless of whether fraudulent misrepresentation or
 negligent misrepresentation claims can be sufficiently gleaned
 from the First Amended Complaint, the nature of the Six
 Plaintiffs' claims seek "recovery of compensation for damage or
 injury to persons[,]" and thus the two-year statute of
 limitations under HRS § 657-7 applies.
 
"The proper standard to determine the relevant
 
limitations period is the nature of the claim or right, not the
 form of the pleading. The nature of the right or claim is
 determined from the allegations contained in the pleadings." Au
 
v. Au, 63 Haw. 210, 214, 626 P.2d 173, 177 (1981) (citations
 omitted). The "preliminary statement" at the beginning of the
 First Amended Complaint summarizes that the action was brought
 because the Six Plaintiffs "have had their health, welfare, and
 lives damaged" as a result of exposure to DBCP and they seek "to
 recover compensation for damages to their health, welfare, and
 lives that resulted from the injuries caused by the Defendants."
 Moreover, the allegations as to "compensatory damages" sought in
 the First Amended Complaint underscore and detail that the Six
 Plaintiffs seek compensation for a variety of personal injuries. 
Unlike in Au, where the nature of the claims was fraudulent
 representations which induced the plaintiff to purchase a damaged
 home, 63 Haw. at 216-17, 626 P.2d at 179, here the nature of the
 claims is that the health and welfare of the Six Plaintiffs
 themselves have directly been damaged by the Defendants.
 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Thus, we reject the Six Plaintiffs' arguments that they
 
have asserted timely claims for fraudulent and negligent
 
misrepresentation.
2. Breach of Implied Warranty Claim
 
The First Amended Complaint does expressly assert a
 
breach of implied warranty claim. This claim alleges that
 "Defendants impliedly warranted that their DBCP-containing
 products were of good and merchantable quality and fit for their
 intended use[,]" Defendants "knew or ought to have reasonably
 anticipated" that Six Plaintiffs would work in close proximity to
 DBCP-containing products, and "Defendants breached their implied
 warranty that their DBCP products were of good and merchantable
 quality and were fit for their particular intended use by causing
 the Plaintiffs' exposure to DBCP[.]" 
We agree with the Six Plaintiffs that, based on the
 
allegations in the First Amended Complaint, their implied
 warranty claim is subject to the four-year statute of limitations
 in the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) set out in HRS § 490:2-725
 (2008).
10 Although Defendants contend that the UCC does not
 
apply because it is limited to transactions in goods between
 buyers and sellers, HRS § 490:2-318 (2008) extends seller
 warranties to third-party beneficiaries, stating that "[a]
 seller's warranty whether express or implied extends to any
 person who may reasonably be expected to use, consume or be
 
10 HRS § 490:2-725 provides in relevant part:
 
§490:2-725 Statute of limitations in contracts for
sale. (1) An action for breach of any contract for sale
must be commenced within four years after the cause of
action has accrued. By the original agreement the parties
may reduce the period of limitation to not less than one
year but may not extend it.
(2) A cause of action accrues when the breach occurs,
regardless of the aggrieved party's lack of knowledge of the
breach. A breach of warranty occurs when tender of delivery
is made, except that where a warranty explicitly extends to
future performance of the goods and discovery of the breach
must await the time of such performance the cause of action
accrues when the breach is or should have been discovered.
 
17
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
affected by the goods and who is injured by breach of the
 
warranty." The allegations in the First Amended Complaint
 sufficiently assert that the Six Plaintiffs are third party
 beneficiaries of seller warranties relating to DBCP.
 
Moreover, although the implied warranty claim seeks 
compensation for personal injuries (like all of the claims asserted in the First Amended Complaint), the four-year statute of limitations in HRS § 490:2-725 applies, rather than the two-year limitations period under HRS § 657-7. In Larsen v. Pacesetter Systems, Inc., 74 Haw. 1, 837 P.2d 1273 (1992), a husband and wife asserted an implied warranty claim against a pacemaker manufacturer and were awarded damages due to surgeries the husband underwent to remove and replace a pacemaker. Id. at 
7, 837 P.2d at 1278. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court rejected the 
defendant's argument that the two-year statute of limitations for personal injury actions applied in that case, and instead held that the four-year statute of limitations under HRS § 490:2-725 applied. The court explained: 
Given the plain language of the UCC, as well as our decision
in Ontai v. Straub Clinic & Hosp., Inc., 66 Haw. 237,
249-52, 659 P.2d 734, 743 (1983) (Under § 490:2-318, patient
Ontai could bring an action as a third party beneficiary of
implied warranty running between General Electric,
manufacturer of the X-ray table, and Straub hospital), it is
difficult to imagine how the UCC statute of limitations
would not apply to plaintiff's implied warranty claim.
 
Id. at 11, 837 P.2d at 1280. Here, the breach of implied
 
warranty claim is asserted against all Defendants and there is no
 evidence in the record to determine at this point which of the
 Defendants were, or were not, sellers of DBCP.
 
Defendants further contend, however, that pursuant to
 
HRS § 490:2-725(2), the claim for breach of implied warranty
 accrued with the "tender or delivery" of the DBCP product, and
 that the First Amended Complaint specifically alleges that
 "Defendants used DBCP from approximately the 1960's until the
 mid-1980's." (Emphasis added). Defendants assert that, if the
 last tender of delivery of DBCP was in the mid-1980's, the
 implied warranty claim is untimely even under the four-year
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
statute of limitations in HRS § 490:2-725 because this action was
 
not filed until October 1997.
 
The Six Plaintiffs respond that the statute of
 
limitations for their breach of implied warranty claim is tolled
 based on the discovery rule. However, they offer no authority
 that the discovery rule applies to a breach of implied warranty
 claim. Moreover, HRS § 490:2-725(2) specifically provides that
 "[a] cause of action accrues when the breach occurs, regardless
 of the aggrieved party's lack of knowledge of the breach."
 (Emphasis added).
 
The Six Plaintiffs further respond that their implied
 
warranty claim is tolled based on the Defendants' fraudulent
 concealment of the claim, citing to Balog v. Center Art Gallery-
Hawaii, Inc., 745 F.Supp. 1556 (D. Haw. 1990). In Balog, the
 plaintiffs brought breach of express warranty claims against an
 art gallery, alleging that the defendant's representations about
 art pieces were false. Id. at 1558-59. The U.S. District Court
 
of the District of Hawaii held that, although the plaintiffs had
 filed their claim more than four years after the sale of the art,
 their claims were not barred under HRS § 490:2-725 because, inter
 alia, the defendants had fraudulently concealed the facts giving
 rise to the claim. Id. at 1572-73. In particular, the defendant
 
had repeatedly sent the plaintiffs certificates of authenticity
 and represented to them that their investments were continuing to
 appreciate in value, "effectively prevent[ing] the plaintiffs
 from discovering their cause of action within the applicable
 statute of limitations." Id. at 1573.
 
One of the cases that Balog relies upon is Volk v. D.A.
 
Davidson & Co., 816 F.2d 1406 (9th Cir. 1987), where the Ninth
 Circuit explained:
 
In some cases, the conduct of a defendant will toll
the statute of limitations under the doctrine of fraudulent
 
concealment. The doctrine is properly invoked only if a
plaintiff establishes "affirmative conduct upon the part of
the defendant which would, under the circumstances of the
case, lead a reasonable person to believe that he did not
have a claim for relief." Gibson v. United States, 781 F.2d
1334, 1345, (9th Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 1054,
107 S.Ct. 928, 93 L.Ed.2d 979 (1987) (civil rights case)
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(quoting Rutledge v. Boston Woven Hose & Rubber Co., 576
F.2d 248, 250 (9th Cir. 1978) (antitrust case)).
[Plaintiffs] must demonstrate that they had neither actual
nor constructive notice of the facts constituting their
claims for relief. Rutledge, 576 F.2d at 250.
 
To invoke the doctrine in the complaint, [plaintiffs]
must plead with particularity the facts giving rise to the
fraudulent concealment claim and must establish that they
used due diligence in trying to uncover the facts. Conerly
 
v. Westinghouse Electric Corp.1980); Rutledge, 576 F.2d at 250. [Defendants'] silence or
passive conduct does not constitute fraudulent concealment.
Rutledge, 576 F.2d at 250. Further, [plaintiffs'] mere
ignorance of the cause of action does not, in itself, toll
the statute. Campbell, 676 F.2d at 1127.
 , 623 F.2d 117, 120 (9th Cir.
816 F.2d at 1415-16 (emphasis added). As noted by the Ninth
 
Circuit in Conerly v. Westinghouse Electric Corp., 623 F.2d 117
 (9th Cir. 1980), to invoke fraudulent concealment, a plaintiff
 "must plead with particularity the circumstances surrounding the
 concealment and state facts showing his due diligence in trying
 to uncover the facts[.]" Id. at 120 (emphasis added) (citation
 omitted).
 
The First Amended Complaint does not invoke fraudulent
 
concealment to toll the breach of implied warranty claim. 
Although there are some allegations related to the conspiracy
 claim that assert that the Defendants concealed information about
 the risks of DBCP products, even if we consider these
 allegations, there are no facts stated in the complaint as to the
 Six Plaintiffs' due diligence in trying to uncover the facts. 
Thus, even if we liberally construe the First Amended Complaint,
 the doctrine of fraudulent concealment is inapplicable to toll
 the statute of limitations for the implied warranty claim.
 
Given the above, even though a four-year statute of
 
limitations applies to the breach of implied warranty claim, that
 claim was not timely asserted because it accrued in the mid­1980s.
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
V. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Judgment entered by the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit on July 28, 2010 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 7, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Scott M. Hendler
 
(HendlerLaw, P.C.) Jonathan Massey
(Massey & Gail LLP)
Leslie S. Fukumoto
 (Leslie S. Fukumoto, AAL, ALC)
 
for Plaintiffs-Appellants
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Sidney K. Ayabe
Calvin E. Young Steven L. Goto
 (Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto, Sia &
Nakamura LLLP)
Michael L. Brem
 (Schirrmeister Diaz-Arrastia Brem LLP)
for Defendant-Appellee
The Dow Chemical Company
 Associate Judge

 
Melvin M. Miyagi
Ross T. Shinyama
Angela T. Thompson
(Watanabe Ing LLP)
 
for Defendant-Appellee
Pineapple Growers Association of Hawaii
 
Judy A. Tanaka
Jason C. Zhao
 (Paul Johnson Park & Niles)
D. Ferguson McNiel
(Vinson & Elkins, L.L.P.)
 
for Defendant-Appellee
Occidental Chemical Corporation
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wendell H. Fuji
Anthony F. Suetsugu
(Kobayashi, Sugita & Goda)
Robert E. Meadows
 (King & Spalding LLP)
Lawrence P. Riff
 (Steptoe & Johnson LLP)
 
for Defendant-Appellee Shell Oil Company
 
Melvin M. Miyagi
Ross T. Shinyama
Angela T. Thompson
(Watanabe Ing LLP)
Andrea E. Neuman
 (Gibson Dunn & Crutcher LLP)
 
for Defendants-Appellees
Dole Food Company, Inc., Dole Fresh Fruit Company,
Standard Fruit Company, Standard Fruit and Steamship Company
 
Elise Owens Thorn
 
(Clay Chapman Iwamura Pulice & Nervell)
Boaz S. Morag
(Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton, LLP)
 
for Defendants-Appellees Del Monte Fresh Produce N.A., Inc.
and Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii) Inc.
 
Richard C. Sutton, Jr.
(Sakai Iwanaga Sutton Law Group, AAL, LLLC)
 
for Defendant-Appellee
AMVAC Chemical Corporation
 
22
 