NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30380
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
BRENDA M. HOERNIG, nka Brenda E. Morris, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BRYAN T. HOERNIG, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DIVORCE NO. 05-1-0677)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Bryan T. Hoernig (Father) appeals
 
from the "Order Re Short Trial" (Order) entered on February 9,
 
1
2010, in the Family Court of the First Circuit  (family court).  
The order denied Father's July 24, 2009 motion for post-decree
 
relief (Post-Decree Motion) from the "Decree Granting Absolute
 
Divorce and Awarding Child Custody" (Divorce Decree) that
 
dissolved his marriage from Plaintiff-Appellee Brenda M. Hoernig,
 
nka Brenda E. Morris (Mother). Father's Post-Decree Motion
 
sought a reduction in his child support obligation and a decrease
 
in his share of the educational expenses for the parties'
 
children.
 
On appeal, Father contends the family court erred when
 
it:
 
1
 The Honorable Linda S. Martell presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(1) found that Father failed to meet his burden to show
 
a material change in circumstances to justify a reduction in his
 
monthly child support obligation;
 
(2) concluded in Conclusion of Law (COL) 12 that Father
 
failed to meet his burden to prove a material change in
 
circumstances to warrant a reduction in his educational support
 
obligation to his children;
 
(3) concluded in COL 10 that Father's lifestyle is the
 
same or better than when his child support obligation was
 
established;
 
(4)
 entered Findings of Fact (FOFs) 18, 49, 50, and 51,
 
in which inter alia the family court found it difficult to
 
determine Father's income; and
 
(5) entered FOF 20, in which the family court found
 
that Father's lumber business, Honolulu Hardwoods, Inc. (HH),
 
pays Father's condominium mortgage. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Father's
 
points of error as follows:
 
I.	 The family court did not err in concluding that Father
failed to meet his burden of proof of a material change in
circumstances to justify a reduction in his child support
obligation.
 
Upon granting a divorce, the family court is authorized
 
to order the divorcing parties "to provide for the support,
 
maintenance, and education of the children of the parties." 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 580-47(a) (2006 Repl.).
2 The
 
2
 HRS § 580-47 (2006 Repl.) provides, in relevant part:
 
§580-47 Support orders; division of property.  (a) Upon
granting a divorce . . . the court may make any further orders as
shall appear just and equitable (1) compelling the parties or
either of them to provide for the support, maintenance, and
education of the children of the parties[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
family court has continuing authority to modify its orders "upon 
a showing of a change in the circumstances of either party . . . 
since the entry of any prior order relating to the support, 
maintenance, and education." HRS § 580-47(c); Davis v. Davis, 3 
Haw. App. 501, 505, 653 P.2d 1167, 1170 (1982). The party 
requesting the modification must prove the alleged change in 
circumstances. HRS § 580-47(c) and (d); Demello v. Demello, 87 
Hawai'i 209, 213, 953 P.2d 968, 972 (App. 1998). 
Father is the sole owner and chief executive officer of
 
HH, a subchapter S corporation that sells wholesale and retail
 
lumber, hardwood flooring, and moldings. Under the Divorce
 
Decree, Father was obligated to a monthly child support payment
 
of $1,620 and one-half of the children's educational expenses. 
In Father's July 24, 2009 Post-Decree Motion, he sought a
 
reduction in his child support and educational expense
 
obligations, asserting that HH had "experienced a substantial
 
decrease in revenue due to the downturn in the economy,"
 
resulting in his "earning little or no income" and "subsisting on
 
savings and borrowed funds," thus meeting his burden of showing a
 
material change in circumstances. He argues, therefore, that the
 
family court erred when it entered the following Conclusions of
 
Law (COLs):
 
14. Based on the totality of the reliable and credible
evidence presented, Father failed to meet his burden of a
material change in circumstances to justify a reduction in
his monthly child support obligation.
 
15. Based on the totality of the reliable and credible
evidence presented, the family court properly denied
Father’s motion to reduce his monthly child support
obligation.
 
When presented with a motion to modify court-ordered
 
child support, the family court considers the following
 
questions:
 
1.	 Has there been a substantial and material change in
the relevant circumstances so as to permit
consideration of the modification request?
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2. Should there be a modification?
 
3. What should the modification be?
 
See Davis, 3 Haw. App. at 506, 653 P.2d at 1170. If there has
 
not been a substantial and material change in circumstances, the
 
court need not address questions 2 and 3. We review the family
 
court's conclusion that Father failed to show there had been a
 
material change in circumstances under the right/wrong standard. 
Davis, 3 Haw. App. at 506, 653 P.2d at 1171. "A material change
 
in the relevant circumstances has occurred when a party's
 
relevant circumstances that are proven to exist at the time of
 
the modification hearing are materially different from the
 
party's relevant circumstances that were proven to exist when the
 
family court entered its [] support order." Vorfeld v. Vorfeld,
 
8 Haw. App. 391, 402, 804 P.2d 891, 897 (1991) (as applied in Doe
 VII v. Roe VII, 8 Haw. App. 437, 443, 809 P.2d 449, 452 (1991) to
 
child support orders). 
At the December 11, 2009 hearing, Father testified that
 
HH had total assets of $1.161 million, with a loan balance of
 
$987,088.50. He testified he did no advertising except through
 
his contacts at the Oahu Country Club; thus, his country club
 
expenses were not a luxury, but a necessary business expense. 
Father testified that Exhibit S, a list of names introduced into
 
evidence, represented club members with whom he had done business
 
since 2002. On cross-examination, he admitted that aside from
 
the list of names, he provided no evidence via receipts or
 
invoices that he had actually done business with anyone on the
 
list. On Father's December 3, 2009 Income and Expense statement,
 
entered into evidence as Exhibit X, he listed expenses of $1,000
 
for food and $500 for recreation. He testified that his only
 
recreation was at the Oahu Country Club and that he ate most of
 
his meals there. Mother provided subpoenaed records of Father's
 
account at the club, showing an average monthly expenditure of
 
just over $1,500. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Father acknowledged that he drew on his business line
 
of credit to cover his personal expenses. Father does not
 
challenge the family court's finding that he claimed an income of
 
$230 in 2007 and $755 in 2008 on his personal income tax forms. 
Father also does not contest the court's finding that HH sold him
 
his condominium in 2007 for $253,500, even though Father's
 
personal income that year was only $230. Father did not
 
challenge FOF 52, in which the family court found that "Father's
 
current lifestyle shows he can afford more than he earns on paper
 
through his personal or his corporation's tax returns." 
The family court also correctly noted that tax returns 
may not accurately reflect a party's financial situation, 
particularly a self-employed party. "It is the disposable income 
of the parent and not their income tax returns alone, which must 
be considered by the Court." Doe v. Child Support Enforcement 
Agency of Hawaii, 87 Hawai' i 178, 182, 953 P.2d 209, 213 (App. 
1998) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Generally, child support is calculated based on each 
parent's gross monthly income. See 2010 Hawai' i Child Support 
Guidelines at 1 (last accessed May 14, 2013 at 
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/self-help/courts/forms/oahu/child_ 
support.html). "For the self-employed parent, however, the 
amount of his or her gross monthly income is usually more 
difficult to determine." Doe v. CSEA, 87 Hawai' i at 182, 953 
P.2d at 213. The 2010 Child Support Guidelines state that "[s]elf-employed individuals must report gross incomes minus 
ordinary, necessary and reasonable business/operating 
expenses[.]" 2010 Child Support Guidelines at 17; see also Doe 
v. CSEA, 87 Hawai' i at 182, 953 P.2d at 213. Gross income 
includes "[f]ringe benefits, such as use of company car, free 
housing and reimbursed expenses which reduce personal living 
expenses[.]" 2010 Child Support Guidelines at 22-23. This court 
has noted that "in the case of a self-employed parent, there 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
should be careful scrutiny by the agency/courts as to the 
reasonableness and appropriateness of business decisions that 
lessen the amount of the income available for child support." 
Doe v. CSEA, 87 Hawai' i at 182, 953 P.2d at 213. 
Because the family court found there was insufficient 
evidence to show that Father's country club membership was a 
necessary business expense, the court determined that his 
membership at the club was a luxury which took funds away from 
support for his children, findings which Father did not challenge 
(see FOFs 37-46). Findings that are not challenged on appeal are 
binding on this court. In re Guardianship of Doe, 119 Hawai' i 
234, 235 n.4, 195 P.3d 701, 702 n.4 (App. 2008). 
The family court found that in spite of the decrease in
 
HH's gross sales, Father bought the condo he lives in and he
 spends $1,500 monthly for his country club membership, food and
 
other club amenities. 
The family court did not err in concluding that Father
 
failed to present reliable and credible evidence that he had
 
experienced a substantial and material change in the relevant
 
circumstances so as to permit consideration of the modification
 
request; therefore, the court properly denied Father's Post-
Decree Motion to reduce his monthly child support obligations.
 
II.	 The family court did not err in concluding that Father
failed to meet his burden of proof of a material change in
circumstances to justify a reduction in his educational
expense support.
 
Pursuant to the Divorce Decree, Mother and Father
 
agreed to share the children's educational expenses equally. 
Father provides no argument for a reduction in his obligation for
 
the educational expenses other than to allege that HH's revenues
 
are down. He also fails to argue how the family court erred in
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3
FOFs 11, 13, and 15,  an assertion he made in his "Statement of
Points of Error," 
and thus Father's challenge to FOFs 11, 13, 
and 15 are waived. See
 Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 
28(b)(7). 
Because Father's argument is the same as the one he
 
made regarding his monthly child support obligation, our analysis
 
is the same. Therefore, the family court correctly concluded
 
that Father failed to meet his burden of proof that a material
 
change in circumstances justified a reduction in his educational
 
expense support. As a matter of fact, because the children were
 
no longer in private schools, Father had already experienced a
 
substantial decrease in his financial obligation to the
 
children's education. 
III. The family court did not err in concluding that Father's
lifestyle remained the same or better than when his child
support obligations were established.
 
Father contends that the family court erred in COL 10,
 
which states: "Father's lifestyle remains the same or better
 
than when Father's child support was established in the Decree in
 
2006, and thus belies the income he lists on his personal income
 
tax returns." Father argues that he had a negative income in
 
2007 and 2008, as shown in his tax returns. He also argues that
 
he now meets his personal expenses by borrowing from HH, which
 
was not the case at the time of divorce. Furthermore, he claims
 
that at the time of divorce, Mother and he had been members or
 
3
 FOFs 11, 13, and 15 read as follows:
 
11. When the Decree was filed, [Child 2] was also receiving
tutoring at a cost of approximately $600.00 per month.
 
13. Later in 2009, [Child 2] switched tutors, decreasing her
monthly tutoring expense to $400.00.
 
15. At the time of trial, [Child 1] had graduated from Saint
Francis High School and was attending a public community college,
Kapiolani Community College (KCC). [Child 1's] tuition at KCC is
approximately $1,485.55 per semester, or approximately $2,971.10
 per year.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
member spouses of five clubs, but now he is only a member of the
 
Oahu Country Club, apparent evidence of a change in lifestyle. 
Father provided no evidence of previous club memberships or when
 
either he or Mother resigned from membership in any of the clubs. 
The records from his account at the Oahu Country Club showed that
 
he averaged over $1500/month in dues and expenses. Father
 
provided nothing more than a list of names to support his
 
testimony that the club membership was maintained primarily for
 
business purposes. 
Father continued to live in his condo and according to
 
the records, HH bought the condo in 2005 and sold it to Father in
 
2007 for $253,500, although Father's 2007 individual income tax
 
return shows his only income was $230. Moreover, because the
 
children's educational expenses had significantly decreased since
 
the Divorce Decree was filed, Father no longer paid as much in
 
such expenses.
 
As this court discussed in Doe v. CSEA, "it is
 
necessary to examine the total financial situation of a
 
self-employed parent, rather than to merely rely on tax returns
 
for a determination of income." 87 Haw. at 182, 953 P.2d at 213. 
Furthermore, the court should scrutinize "the reasonableness and
 
appropriateness of business decisions that lessen the amount of
 
the income available for child support." Id.
 
Examining Father's total financial situation, the
 
family court did not err in concluding that his lifestyle was the
 
same or better than when his child support obligation was
 
established.
 
IV.	 The family court did not err in entering FOFs 18, 49, 50,
and 51.
 
Father contends the following FOFs are in error:
 
18. During the divorce proceedings, it was difficult
to determine the amount of Father’s income, in large part
because Father’s corporation paid all of his personal
expenses. In order to determine Father’s monthly child
support obligation, the parties stipulated that Father’s
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
income was equivalent to Mother’s income. The Decree
established Father’s monthly child support obligation in the
amount of $1,620.00 for both children.
* * * *
 
49. Father’s accounting methods and the use of his
solely held corporation to fund his personal expenses make
it difficult to determine his actual monthly income, like it
did during the parties divorce proceedings.
 
50. Although HH’s gross sales decreased since the
filing of the Decree due to a downturn in the construction
industry, it remains difficult to determine Father’s precise
income. The corporation continues to pay Father’s living
 expenses.
 
51. Although HH’s gross sales have decreased since the
filing of the Decree due to a downturn in the construction
industry, Father’s lifestyle has not diminished. He has been
able to purchase a condominium for his personal residence.
Father also has maintained his membership at an exclusive
country club, where he plays golf and enjoys the amenities
beyond those covered by the basic membership fee.
 
Father argues that he showed he had no taxable income and
 
therefore, the family court should have used Father's monthly
 
expenditures of $5,000 as the basis for determining his income
 
for calculating his child support obligation. 
We conclude there is sufficient evidence in the record
 
to support FOFs 18, 49, 50, and 51. Further, as to Father's
 
argument that his expenditures should have been used to determine
 
his income, we have previously noted that it is the disposable
 
income of the parent that must be considered by the court. Doe
 
v. CSEA, 87 Haw. at 182, 953 P.2d at 213. Father cites to no
 authority to support his proposition that his monthly
 
expenditures can be used as the basis for calculating his child
 
support obligation. 
V. Any error in FOF 20 is harmless.
 
Father contends that the family court erred in FOF 20,
 
which stated: 
20. Father's current income and financial situation
 
remain unclear. Although Father pays himself no income, the
corporation continues to pay his living expenses, including
purchasing a condominium at 1188 Bishop Street (Bishop
Street Condominium) for him as his personal residence. HH
also pays Father's monthly bills, including the mortgage on
the condominium.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Father only challenges the statement that HH paid the condominium
 
mortgage. Father is correct in stating that there is no evidence
 
in the record of a mortgage on the condominium. But if there is
 
no mortgage, it logically means Father has less financial
 
obligations and thus more funds available to meet his child
 
support obligations. Therefore, even if the court erred
 
regarding the existence of a mortgage, the error is harmless.
 
VI. Conclusion
 
The "Order Re Short Trial" entered on February 9, 2010,
 
in the Family Court of the First Circuit is hereby affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 30, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Blake T. Okimoto 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Brenda E. Morris Plaintiff-Appellee Pro Se 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
10
 