FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--–

 
IN THE INTEREST OF TW
 
NO. 30387 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 08-11821)
 
January 31, 2011
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, FOLEY, and FUJISE, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
This appeal involves the decision of the Family Court

 
1
of the First Circuit (family court)  to divest Mother-Appellant
(Mother) of her parental rights over her child, TW, (Child) and
 
award permanent custody of Child to the Department of Human
 Services (DHS). Mother appeared as required at all family court
 proceedings starting from the initiation of the case and for the
 ensuing eighteen months. She then failed to appear at a
 scheduled court hearing. Based on Mother's single non­appearance, the family court found Mother to be in default,
 granted the DHS's motion for permanent custody, and divested
 
1 The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided over the proceedings relevant
to this appeal.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Mother of her parental rights over Child. The family court also
 
denied Mother's subsequent motion to set aside the default. 
"[P]arents have a fundamental liberty interest in the 
care, custody, and management of their children[,]" and "parental rights cannot be denied without an opportunity for [parents] to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner." In re 
Doe, 99 Hawai
'i 522, 533, 57 P.3d 447, 458 (2002) (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted; emphasis in original). The family court's entry of default against Mother divested Mother of her parental rights and awarded permanent custody of Child to the DHS without affording Mother an opportunity to challenge the DHS's motion for permanent custody on the merits. We conclude, under the circumstances of this case, that the family court abused its discretion in entering default against Mother. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
The family court proceedings in this case began with
 
the filing by the DHS of a "Petition for Temporary Foster
 Custody" on May 14, 2008.
2 In this petition, the DHS alleged
 
that Mother admitting leaving Child, who was eight months old,
 with a seventeen-year-old female from 2:00 p.m. on Fridays until
 8:00 a.m. on Sundays, while Mother performed her community
 service on Saturdays.
3 The DHS had received a report concerning
 
Mother's conduct on May 7, 2008, and determined that the
 seventeen-year-old "was not an appropriate caregiver for
 [Child]." On May 9, 2008, the police took Child into protective
 
2 The Petition for Temporary Foster Custody was also filed against
Child's father, whose name, address, and date of birth was listed in the
petition as "unknown" and who was later identified in the proceedings only by
his first name. Child's father, who was subsequently served by publication,
did not appear at any of the proceedings in this case and was defaulted for
failure to appear by the family court.
 
3 Mother was Child's natural and legal mother. 
2
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
custody. Child was then released to the DHS and placed in a DHS
 
emergency shelter.4. 
On May 16, 2008, Mother appeared with her counsel at a
 
hearing on the Petition for Temporary Foster Custody. At the
 hearing, Mother contested the petition and requested a trial. 
The family court set the trial on the contested petition for May
 23, 2008, and continued the DHS's temporary foster custody of 
Child. 
On May 23, 2008, Mother and her counsel appeared at the
 
trial on the DHS's Petition for Temporary Foster Custody. Mother
 introduced exhibits and called witnesses in support of her
 opposition to the petition. Following the conclusion of the
 trial, the family court entered an order granting the DHS foster
 custody over Child, finding that there was an adequate basis to
 sustain the petition and that Child's "physical or psychological
 health or welfare has been harmed or is subject to threatened
 harm by the acts or omissions of [Child's] family[.]" The family
 court also ordered the implementation of a family service plan
 
5
(service plan) designed by the DHS  and that Mother appear for a
review hearing on November 12, 2008.
 
Mother and her counsel appeared at the November 12,

 
2008, review hearing. The DHS recommended that foster custody
 and the service plan be continued, but it noted that "[M]other
 has been compliant with services and visits [with Child]."  The
 
4 Prior to the instant case, Mother had been involved in DHS proceedings
with regard to her three older children (Child's siblings). On April 24,
2008, the family court awarded the DHS permanent custody over Child's
siblings, finding by clear and convincing evidence that Mother was not
presently willing and able to, and will not become willing and able to,
provide a safe family home for Child's siblings even with the assistance of a
service plan within a reasonable period of time. The family court in this
case took judicial notice of the cases relating to Child's siblings.
 
5 The May 14, 2008, service plan ordered by the family court contained
the following "immediate tasks" and services for Mother to engage in or
perform: (1) individual therapy; (2) hands-on parenting
education/comprehensive counseling and support services; (3) enhanced healthy
start; (4) comprehensive counseling and support services supportive
counseling; (5) sign consents pertaining to Child's records and progress in
therapy; and (6) cooperate with the DHS social worker.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
family court ordered the continuation of foster custody and the
 
service plan, and it scheduled a review hearing for March 19,
 2009.
 
Mother appeared with her counsel at the March 19, 2009,
 
review hearing, and Mother also appeared with her counsel at
 subsequent review hearings held on June 9, 2009, and November 17,
 2009. The record reflects that during the period between the
 November 12, 2008 and the November 17, 2009, review hearings,
 Mother participated in services set forth in the applicable
 service plan and attended scheduled visitations with Child. The
 family court continued foster custody and the service plan during
 this period.
6 The record also reflects that during August and
 
September 2009, Mother admitted to using methamphetamine and
 tested positive for methamphetamine, and she was referred for
 substance abuse treatment.
 
At the November 17, 2009, review hearing, the DHS
 
stated its intention to file a motion for permanent custody
 "within the next two weeks." The DHS also asked that foster
 custody be continued, and the DHS stated that it had obtained a
 December 22, 2009, hearing date and would "set it for review and
 [a] return." On November 19, 2009, the family court filed a
 written order continuing foster custody and requiring the parties
 
7
to appear at a "review/MPC"  hearing on December 22, 2009.
On December 16, 2009, the DHS filed its "Motion for 
Order Awarding Permanent Custody and Establishing a Permanent Plan" (Permanent Custody Motion), pursuant to provisions of the Hawai
'i Child Protective Act (CPA), Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
Chapter 587.8 The DHS sought, among other things, an order 
6
 At the March 19, 2009, review hearing, the family court ordered the
implementation of a revised service plan dated March 16, 2009.
 
7 It appears that "MPC" was intended as an acronym for "motion for
permanent custody."
 
8 Effective September 1, 2010, the 2010 Legislature, through Act 135,
repealed HRS Chapter 587 and reenacted the CPA with amendments to be codified
(continued...)

 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"awarding permanent custody to an appropriate authorized agency,
 
which permanent custody order will terminate parental and
 custodial duties and rights," and establishing a permanent plan
 for Child. On December 22, 2009, the DHS filed a certificate of
 service which certified that the DHS's Permanent Custody Motion
 was served upon Mother's attorney by U.S. mail on December 16,
 2009.
 
Mother did not appear at the December 22, 2009,
 
hearing. This was the first hearing in this case for which
 Mother failed to appear as required. The DHS requested that
 Mother be defaulted and that the family court grant the DHS's
 Permanent Custody Motion and order the proposed permanent plan. 
In response, Mother's counsel, who was present at the hearing,
 stated: "I don't know where [Mother] is. She's usually here
 early. She's been coming to every hearing. I did not get the
 [Permanent Custody Motion], so I did not send that to her." The
 family court granted the DHS's requests. 
On December 22, 2009, the family court issued its
 
"Order Awarding Permanent Custody," which found Mother "to be in
 default" for failing to appear at the hearing after being duly
 served and previously ordered to appear. The family granted the
 DHS's Permanent Custody Motion, and it ordered that Mother's
 "parental and custodial duties and rights" over Child "are hereby
 divested pursuant to HRS 587-2 and 587-73" and that the Director
 of the DHS "is appointed permanent custodian" of Child.
 
On January 7, 2010, Mother filed a motion to set aside
 
the default entered against her. In support of this motion,
 Mother's counsel filed a declaration which represented, among
 other things, that: (1) as counsel informed the family court at
 the December 22, 2009, hearing, counsel had not received a copy
 of the DHS's Permanent Custody Motion and "hence did not mail one
 
8(...continued)
as a new HRS Chapter. 
2010 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 135. In analyzing this case,
we apply the relevant provisions of HRS Chapter 587 because the family court's
rulings challenged on appeal were issued before the effective date of Act 135.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to [Mother]"; (2) "it was not certain" that DHS would file a
 
Permanent Custody Motion by the scheduled December 22, 2009,
 hearing; (3) Mother explained to counsel that Mother "had been so
 
9
distraught over DHS' decision to terminate her rights[ ] in spite
of the fact that she has been participating in services, that she
 had not paid attention to the next review hearing date"; and (4)
 Mother was in a session with her therapist on the day of the
 December 22, 2009, hearing.
 
On February 11, 2010, Mother and her counsel appeared

 
at the scheduled hearing on Mother's motion to set aside the
 default, and Mother's counsel stood on the written motion. The
 family court orally denied Mother's motion at the hearing and
 filed a written order of its ruling that same day. On March 25,
 2010, the family court issued written "Findings of Fact and
 Conclusions of Law." On April 6, 2010, the family court filed an
 "Amended Order Awarding Permanent Custody." The amended order
 was the same as the original Order Awarding Permanent Custody
 except that it added a provision stating that "[Mother is]
 defaulted for failure to appear and notice of future hearings is
 waived[.]" Mother timely filed an amended Notice of Appeal.
 
II. DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Mother seeks review of the following family
 
court orders: (1) the December 22, 2009, "Order Awarding
 Permanent Custody"; (2) the February 11, 2010, "Order[]
 Concerning Child Protective Act," which denied Mother's motion to
 set aside default; and (3) the April 6, 2010, "Amended Order
 Awarding Permanent Custody." Mother argues that the family court
 abused its discretion and violated her due process rights by
 granting the DHS's Permanent Custody Motion based on the family
 court's entry of default against Mother and by denying Mother's
 motion to set aside the default. Mother also challenges the
 family court's findings of fact and conclusion of law related to
 
9 This presumably is a reference to the DHS's statement at the November
17, 2009, hearing of its intention to file a motion for permanent custody.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
its determination that Mother was an unfit parent, i.e., that
 
Mother was not willing and able, and it was not reasonably
 foreseeable that Mother would become willing and able within a
 reasonable period of time, to provide Child with a safe family
 home. These challenged findings of fact and conclusions of law
 were issued in support of the family court's granting of the
 DHS's Permanent Custody Motion. 
The dispositive issue in this appeal is whether the
 
family court abused its discretion in entering default against
 Mother, resulting in its granting of the DHS's Permanent Custody
 Motion, based on Mother's single non-appearance at the December
 22, 2009, hearing. For the reasons discussed below, we conclude
 that family court abused its discretion in entering default
 against Mother under the circumstances of this case. We vacate
 the family court orders challenged by Mother on appeal, and we
 remand the case for further proceedings. 
A. 
The sanction of a default or default judgment "is a 
harsh one." Rearden Family Trust v. Wisenbaker, 101 Hawai
'i 237, 
254, 65 P.3d 1029, 1046 (2003). "Generally, [defaults and] default judgments are not favored because they do not afford parties an opportunity to litigate claims or defenses on the merits." In re Genesys Data Technologies, Inc., 95 Hawai
'i 33, 
40, 18 P.3d 895, 902 (2001). "[A]ny doubt should be resolved in favor of the party [opposing the default or default judgment], so that, in the interests of justice, there can be a full trial on the merits." Rearden Family Trust, 101 Hawai
'i at 254, 65 P.3d 
at 1046. 
In this case, the family court sanctioned Mother for
 
her failure to appear at the December 22, 2009, hearing, by
 finding her to be in default and granting the DHS's Permanent
 Custody Motion. We review the family court's imposition of this
 sanction for abuse of discretion. See id. 
The propriety of a trial court's imposition of
 
sanctions has been analyzed in the analogous context of sanctions
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
imposed for violation of discovery obligations and pretrial 
deadlines. In construing Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 37, which authorizes a trial court to impose sanctions for discovery violations, we noted that under the parallel federal rule, the "drastic sanctions of dismissal and default judgment are authorized only in extreme circumstances." W.H. Shipman, 
Ltd. v. Hawaiian Holiday Macadamia Nut Co., 8 Haw. App. 354, 361, 802 P.2d 1203, 1207 (1990) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
In Long v. Long, 101 Hawai
'i 400, 69 P.3d 528 (App. 
2003), we quoted the following passage on the trial court's authority to dismiss actions or grant judgments of default as sanctions for discovery violations: 
In view of the strong policy favoring resolution of
cases on their merits, and since the magnitude of due
process concerns grows with the severity of the sanction,
courts uniformly have held that orders dismissing the action
or granting judgments on default as sanctions for violating
discovery orders are generally deemed appropriate only as a
last resort, or when less drastic sanctions would not ensure
compliance with a court's orders. It follows then that a
 trial court's range of discretion is appreciably narrower if
it chooses to impose these most [severe of] sanctions.
 
Id. at 405-06, 69 P.3d at 533-34 (brackets in original omitted;
 
emphasis added) (quoting 7 J. Moore, Moore's Federal Practice 
§ 37.50[2][a] at 37-77-78 (3d ed. 2002)).
 
We consider the following five factors in reviewing 
whether a trial court's dismissal of a claim or entry of default judgment as a discovery sanction constitutes an abuse of discretion: "(1) the public's interest in the expeditious resolution of litigation; (2) the court's need to manage its docket; (3) the risk of prejudice to the party moving for sanctions; (4) the public policy favoring disposition of cases on their merits; and (5) the availability of less drastic sanctions." Weinberg v. Dickson-Weinberg, 123 Hawai
'i 68, 71, 
229 P.3d 1133, 1136 (2010); W.H. Shipman, 8 Haw. App. at 362, 802 P.2d at 1207. Weinberg was a divorce case involving disputes 
over property division and alimony in which the sanction imposed 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
by the family court for the wife's failure to meet pretrial 
deadlines was tantamount to the entry of a default against the wife. Weinberg, 123 Hawai
'i at 76, 229 P.3d at 1141. The Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court agreed with this court that "the sanction chosen must be commensurate with the offense" and that a sanction which is tantamount to the entry of default "should be supported by evidence of willful or contemptuous or otherwise opprobrious behavior." Weinberg, 123 Hawai
'i at 77, 229 P.3d at 1142. 
B.
 
These principles for reviewing a trial court's decision 
to impose dismissal or default as a sanction for discovery
 violations apply to civil cases and divorce actions involving
 disputes over money and property. Concerns over the harshness of 
the severe sanction of default, which deprives a party of the
 opportunity to litigate disputed issues on the merits, are
 heightened in a case like this one where a mother's parental
 rights regarding her child are at stake. 
The United States Supreme Court has stated that it is
 
"plain beyond the need for multiple citation that a natural
 parent's desire for and right to the companionship, care,
 custody, and management of his or her children is an interest far
 more precious than any property right" and constitutes a
 "fundamental liberty interest." Santosky v. Kramer, 455 U.S.
 
745, 758-59 (1982) (internal quotation marks and citation
 omitted). "The rights to conceive and to raise one's children
 have been deemed essential [and] basic civil rights of man . . .
 ." Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U.S. 645, 651 (1972) (internal
 
quotation marks and citation omitted). The United States Supreme
 Court has further observed that "parental termination decrees are
 among the most severe forms of state action," M.L.B. v. S.L.J.,
 519 U.S. 102, 128 (1996), and that "[a] parent's interest in the
 accuracy and justice of the decision to terminate his or her
 parental status is . . . a commanding one." Lassiter v.
 
Department of Social Services, 452 U.S. 18, 27 (1981). 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Similarly, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has "affirm[ed], 
independent of the federal constitution, that parents have a
 
substantive liberty interest in the care, custody, and control of
 their children protected by the due process clause of article
 [I], section 5 of the Hawai
'i Constitution." In re Doe, 99 
Hawai'i at 533, 57 P.3d at 458. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court further 
stated:
 
Parental rights guaranteed under the Hawai' i Constitution 
would mean little if parents were deprived of the custody of
their children without a fair hearing. Indeed, parents havea fundamental liberty interest in the care, custody, andmanagement of their children and the state may not deprive aperson of his or her liberty interest without providing afair procedure for the deprivation. Furthermore, the[United States] Supreme Court has said that parental rightscannot be denied without an opportunity for them to be heard
at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner. 
Id. (brackets in original, internal quotation marks, and
 
citations omitted).
 
C.
 
Here, Mother appeared with counsel at the first hearing
 
set in this case on the DHS's Petition for Temporary Foster
 Custody and at every hearing at which Mother's attendance was
 required for the next eighteen months. At the initial hearing
 held on May 16, 2008, Mother contested the Petition for Temporary
 Foster Custody. Mother then appeared at the trial on the
 Petition for Temporary Foster Custody. After the family court
 ruled against Mother on the petition and ordered a service plan,
 Mother appeared at all four of the ensuing review hearings on
 November 12, 2008, March 19, 2009, June 9, 2009, and November 17,
 2009. During this period, Mother actively engaged in services
 required by the service plan and attended scheduled visitations
 with Child. By her actions and conduct, Mother displayed a
 strong and sustained interest in participating in the family
 court proceedings affecting her parental rights over Child and in
 securing reunification with Child. 
The family court defaulted Mother and granted the DHS's
 
Permanent Custody Motion, which divested Mother of her parental
 rights over Child, as a sanction for Mother's non-appearance at
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the December 22, 2009, hearing -- Mother's first and only failure
 
to appear at a hearing in this case. Both the DHS and Mother
 agree that the December 22, 2009, hearing was not set as a date
 for trial on the merits of the DHS's Permanent Custody Motion. 
Instead, the December 22, 2009, hearing was intended to be a
 "return" or trial-setting hearing, where the family court would
 determine whether Mother wanted to contest the DHS's Permanent
 Custody Motion, and if she did, the family court would set
 pretrial deadlines and the date for trial. Indeed, on November
 17, 2009, when the family court set the December 22, 2009,
 hearing, the DHS had not yet filed its Permanent Custody Motion,
 and the DHS only did so on December 16, 2009, six days before the
 scheduled hearing. Nothing in the record suggests that a short
 continuance of the hearing to permit Mother's counsel to
 determine Mother's whereabouts and secure Mother's attendance
 would have resulted in any substantial prejudice to the DHS or
 Child. Nor does it appear that a short continuance would have
 unduly infringed upon the family court's need to manage its
 docket. 
Under the circumstances of this case, we conclude that
 
the family court abused its discretion in imposing the harsh and
 drastic sanction of default against Mother based upon her single
 non-appearance. The effect of the default sanction was to divest
 Mother of her parental rights --her fundamental liberty interest
 in the care, custody, and control of her child -- without
 affording Mother the opportunity to contest the DHS's Permanent
 Custody Motion on the merits. The record does not show that
 Mother's single non-appearance constituted willful or
 contemptuous or otherwise opprobrious behavior on Mother's part
 or that the family court considered the availability of less
 drastic sanctions. 
"[T]he sanction chosen must be commensurate with the 
offense . . . ." Weinberg, 123 Hawai
'i at 77, 229 P.3d at 1142. 
Given the essential and fundamental nature of Mother's parental rights at stake; the strong and sustained interest she 
11
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
demonstrated in the family court proceedings in this case and in
 
obtaining reunification with Child, including her perfect
 attendance at family court hearings for the first eighteen
 months; and the procedural, trial-setting character of the
 December 22, 2009, hearing, we conclude that the default sanction
 imposed by the family court was decidedly and manifestly
 disproportionate to Mother's isolated transgression. Indeed, the
 DHS does not cite to any published opinion that upheld the entry
 of default and divestiture of a parent's rights under
 circumstances similar to this case.
10
 
10 In her appellate briefs, Mother did not cite Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) § 571-61(b)(3) (2007) in support of her appeal. HRS § 571-61(b)(1)(E)
(2007), in general terms, authorizes the family court to terminate the
parental rights of a parent who is found to be unable to provide the care
necessary for the well-being of a child. HRS § 571-61(b)(3), in turn,
provides that in respect to proceedings, including those under HRS § 571­61(b)(1)(E), the family court may exercise its authority to terminate parental
rights only when a verified petition has been filed by a responsible adult on
behalf of the child and the court has a hearing on the petition. HRS § 571­61(b)(3) further provides:
 
A copy of the petition, together with notice of the time and place
of the hearing thereof, shall be personally served at least twenty
days prior to the hearing upon the parent whose rights are sought
to be terminated. If personal service cannot be effected within
the State, service of the notice may be made as provided in
section 634-23 or 634-24. 
We requested that the parties be prepared at oral argument to address
the extent to which HRS § 571-61(b)(3)applies to this case. At oral argument,
Mother's counsel argued that HRS § 571-61(b)(3) appears to apply to this case
and that Mother was not personally served with the Permanent Custody Motion
twenty days before the hearing. Mother's counsel acknowledged, however, that
in his experience, the requirements of HRS § 571-61(b)(3) are not referred to
in termination of parental rights cases brought under the CPA, HRS Chapter
587. 
Counsel for the DHS argued that the service requirements of HRS § 571­
61(b)(3) do not apply to termination of parental rights cases brought under
the CPA. The DHS's counsel noted that the version of the CPA applicable to
this case had its own service provision, HRS § 587-51.5 (2007), which counsel
asserted only required that notice of a hearing be served forty-eight hours
before the scheduled hearing. The DHS's counsel further asserted that
 amendments to the CPA after its original enactment reflect the Legislature's
intent that the service requirements of HRS § 571-61(b)(3) do not apply to
termination of parental rights cases brought under the CPA.
 
In light of our resolution of this appeal, we need not address the
applicability of HRS § 571-61(b)(3).
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D.
 
Our conclusion that the family court abused its 
discretion in defaulting Mother in the first instance obviates 
the need to address whether the family court erred in denying Mother's motion to set aside the default. See Long, 101 Hawai
'i 
at 407, 69 P.3d at 535. As the result of its imposition of the default sanction, the family court granted the DHS's Permanent Custody Motion and divested Mother of her parental rights without giving Mother an opportunity to challenge the DHS's motion or the evidence proffered in support of the motion. Therefore, our conclusion that the family court erred in imposing the default sanction means that we must vacate the family court's Order Awarding Permanent Custody, its Amended Order Awarding Permanent Custody, and its findings of fact and conclusions of law that were based on evidence which Mother did not have the opportunity to challenge. On remand, Mother will have the opportunity to contest the DHS's Permanent Custody Motion on the merits. We express no view on what the outcome of the family court's decision on the merits of that motion should be. 
III. CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the family court's: (1) December 22, 2009,
 
"Order Awarding Permanent Custody"; (2) February 11, 2010,
 "Order[] Concerning Child Protective Act," which denied Mother's
 motion to set aside default; and (3) April 6, 2010, "Amended
 Order Awarding Permanent Custody," and we remand the case for
 further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
Randal I. Shintani
 
for Mother-Appellant
 
Deirdre Marie-Iha
 
Deputy Solicitor General
(Mary Anne Magnier
(Deputy Attorney General)
with her on the brief))
Department of the Attorney General
for Petitioner-Appellee
 
13
 