NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30088
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee
v.
 
RUBEN JACOB ALVAREZ, also known as
RUEBEN JACOB ALVAREZ, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT

 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0465(1))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ruben Jacob Alvarez, aka Rueben
 
Jacob Alvarez (Alvarez), appeals from the Judgment filed on
 
September 4, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit
 
(Circuit Court).1 After a bench trial, Alvarez was found guilty
 
of Negligent Injury in the First Degree, in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-705 (1993).
2
 
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided.
 
2
 Pursuant to HRS § 707-705:
 
(1) A person is guilty of the offense of negligent injury in
the first degree if that person causes serious bodily injury
to another person by the operation of a motor vehicle in a
negligent manner.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Alvarez contends that (1) the Circuit Court
 
erred by finding that the complaining witness did not speed or
 
quickly move his motorcycle onto the shoulder of the road and
 
(2) there was insufficient evidence to convict Alvarez of
 
Negligent Injury in the First Degree, in particular because the
 
Circuit Court applied an incorrect negligence standard. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Alvarez's points of error as follows:
 
(1) A finding that complaining witness David Adkins 
(Adkins) did or did not speed or move his motorcycle quickly into 
the shoulder of the road depended upon the testimony, and thus 
the credibility, of the witnesses. On this point, the Circuit 
Court specifically found the testimony of Adkins to be credible, 
while finding not credible the testimony of witness Jackie 
Gongora (Gongora) and Alvarez. "[A]n appellate court will not 
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and 
the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the [trier of 
fact]." State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai 'i 87, 101, 997 P.2d 13, 27 
(2000) (citations omitted, some brackets in original) (quoting State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai
'i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 697 
(1999)). 
Adkins testified that his motorcycle was sputtering at
 
the traffic light on Kula Highway and after his motorcycle died
 out, he decided to "crab-walk" it from the middle lane to the
 
right side of the road. It did not take him long to move to the
 
shoulder of the road because he was stopped on a downward slant. 
The Circuit Court did not find credible Gongora and Alvarez's
 
testimony that Adkins "essentially speeded into the shoulder or
 
moved quickly into the shoulder." Rather, the Circuit Court 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
found that "if you're trying to move a 700-pound motorcycle from
 
a standing stop, that you don't shoot out like a rocket if you're
 
walking the bike crab-style."
 
Alvarez points to the testimony of witnesses Rosemary
 
Estrella (Estrella) and David Perreira (Perreira), but their
 
testimony is not particularly helpful to Alvarez. Estrella
 
testified that she was stopped at the traffic light and Adkins's
 
motorcycle was the second vehicle in front of her, stopped with
 
everyone else. While stopped, Estrella noticed in her right
 
passenger mirror that a "dirt bike" was speeding or coming very
 
quickly down the right shoulder of the road, and she warned
 
Perreira who was a passenger in her car. When the "bike" in the
 
shoulder passed her car, she noticed the motorcycle in front of
 
her make "some kind of adjustment" that took a "couple of
 
seconds" and resulted in his front tire going into the shoulder
 
of the road, at which point the collision occurred. Perreira,
 
Estrella's passenger, testified that they had come to a stop at
 
the traffic light, Estrella warned him about a "bike" traveling
 
down the shoulder of the road, which he turned to see, and then
 
when he looked forward: "I don't know what [Adkins] was doing, if
 
he was trying to reposition himself, but he veered into the
 
shoulder" at which point the collision occurred.
 
Based on the testimony of the witnesses, and leaving to
 
the Circuit Court the determinations on credibility, the Circuit
 
Court did not clearly err in finding that Adkins did not speed or
 
move quickly into the shoulder of the road.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2) Alvarez's claim that the Circuit Court employed the 
incorrect negligence standard is without merit. In State v. 
Bayly, 118 Hawai 'i 1, 9, 185 P.3d 186, 194 (2008), the Supreme
3
Court of Hawai 'i cited HRS § 702-206(4)(a) (1993)  for the higher
standard of criminally negligent conduct in comparison to 
negligence that was merely lack of due care. In the instant 
case, the Circuit Court articulated the higher standard of 
criminal negligence, similar to 
Bayly, when concluding that the 
state proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Alvarez acted negligently. The Circuit Court did not apply a simple negligence 
or civil negligence standard. 
In setting forth its ruling, the Circuit Court
 
referenced "criminal instruction 6.05" and that the instruction
 
provided "that a person acts negligently with respect to a result
 
of his conduct when he should be aware of a substantial and
 
unjustifiable risk that his conduct would cause the result that
 
3 HRS § 702-206(4) provides the definition for negligent state of mind
as follows:
 
(4) "Negligently."
 
(a) A person acts negligently with respect to his conduct
when he should be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable
risk taken that the person's conduct is of the specified
nature.
 
(b) A person acts negligently with respect to attendant
circumstances when he should be aware of a substantial and
 unjustifiable risk that such circumstances exist.
 
(c) A person acts negligently with respect to a result of
his conduct when he should be aware of a substantial and
 unjustifiable risk that his conduct will cause such a
result.
 
(d) A risk is substantial and unjustifiable within the
meaning of this subsection if the person's failure to
perceive it, considering the nature and purpose of his
conduct and the circumstances known to him, involves a gross
deviation from the standard of care that a law-abiding
person would observe in the same situation.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
one is dealing with." In addition, the Circuit Court
 
specifically stated that it was employing a higher standard than
 
simple negligence.
 
We also conclude that there was substantial evidence
 
that Alvarez acted negligently, according to the standards stated
 
in HRS § 702-206(4) and Bayly. The cases Alvarez cites from
 
other jurisdictions are not germane as they deal with specific
 
statutes from those other jurisdictions.
 
In determining the sufficiency of the evidence to 
support a conviction, we consider the evidence in the light most 
favorable to the prosecution and determine whether there was 
substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of 
fact. Substantial evidence is "credible evidence which is of 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of 
reasonable caution to support a conclusion." State v. Eastman, 
81 Hawai 'i 131, 135, 913 P.2d 57, 61 (1996)(citations and 
brackets omitted). 
Based on the record, there is substantial evidence that
 
the collision with Adkins occurred after Alvarez operated his
 
motorcycle in the shoulder of the road at a high rate of speed
 
when approaching a red stop light at which other vehicles,
 
including Adkins's motorcycle, were stopped. Alvarez did not
 
operate his motorcycle in the roadway, did not slow down or stop,
 
and instead continued to move forward rapidly on the shoulder of
 
the road until he collided with Adkins. Further, Estrella
 
testified that when she initially saw Alvarez in her right
 
passenger mirror, he was coming down the shoulder of the road
 
only on his rear wheel, doing a "pop-a-wheelie", before he went
 
back down to two wheels and ultimately collided with Adkins. 
Alvarez should have been aware of a substantial and unjustifiable
 
risk that he was operating his motorcycle in a manner that would
 
cause serious bodily injury to another person on the shoulder of
 
the road.
 
Therefore, 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Judgment filed on
 
September 4, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 19, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Cynthia A. Kagiwada
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Chief Judge

Renee Ishikawa Delizo
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge

 
6
 