 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30206
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHAN FUNG, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0564)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: NAKAMURA, C.J., FUJISE and LEONARD, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Chan Fung (
Fung) appeals from the
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, entered on November 2, 2009,
 
by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court),
 
convicting and sentencing him for Unauthorized Entry into a Motor
 
Vehicle (UEMV) in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 708-836.5 (Supp. 2009).1 On appeal, Fung contends that: (1)
 
the Circuit Court erred in admitting Fung's "mug shot" into
 
evidence; (2) the jury wrongfully convicted Fung, and the Circuit
 Court erroneously denied Fung's oral motion for a judgment of
 acquittal; and (3) Fung's right to a fair trial was prejudiced by
 the State's improprieties in closing argument.
 
1
 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.
 Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Fung's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Fung argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
admitting his photograph because the State failed to demonstrate
 a need to introduce it into evidence, any probative value of the
 photograph was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
 prejudice, and its admission was not harmless beyond a reasonable
 doubt.
 
Courts in many jurisdictions have recognized that the 
introduction of a defendant's "mug shot" can create problems of potential unfair prejudice because of a mug shot's suggestion of prior criminal activity. See 3 Wharton's Criminal Evidence § 16:10 (15th ed. 1999); see also, e.g., Barnes v. United States, 365 F.2d 509, 510-511 (D.C. Cir. 1966) (stating that the "double-shot picture, with front and profile shots alongside each other, is so familiar, from 'wanted' posters in the post office, motion pictures and television, that the inference that the person involved has a criminal record, or has at least been in trouble with the police, is natural, perhaps automatic"). To address this risk of unfair prejudice, courts in Hawai
'i and 
other jurisdictions have adopted criteria for assessing the admissibility of mug shots. See State v. Kutzen, 1 Haw. App. 
2 406, 412, 620 P.2d 258, 262 (1980); State v. Reiger, 64 Haw. 510,
 
512-13, 644 P.2d 959, 962 (1982) (adopting the Kutzen test).
 
In Kutzen, the State sought the admission of two
 
double-shot photographic exhibits of the defendants, each
 consisting of a front and profile view, with police
 identification numbers across the bottom of each photograph. 
Kutzen, 1 Haw. App. at 410, 620 P.2d at 261. The trial court
 admitted the photographs into evidence on the condition that all
 marks identifying them as "mug shots" be removed and no reference
 to their origin or place of viewing be made. Id. Pursuant to
 the trial court's condition, pieces of white paper were folded
 and stapled to the photographs to mask the identification
 numbers. Id. at 413, 620 P.2d at 263.
 
On appeal, we adopted a three-part test:

 
1.	 The [g]overnment must have a demonstrable need to
introduce the photographs; and
 
2.	 The photographs themselves, if shown to the jury, must
not imply that the defendant has a prior criminal
record; and
 
3.	 The manner of introduction at trial must be such that
 it does not draw particular attention to the source or
implications of the photographs.
 
Kutzen, 1 Haw. App. at 412-13, 620 P.2d at 262-63 (citation
 
omitted). 
Applying this test, we reversed, holding that the

 
admission of the mug shots was erroneous because the appearance
 and insufficient masking of the mug shots suggested to the jury
 that the defendants had a prior criminal record. Id. at 413, 620 
3 P.2d at 263. In addition, the government failed to demonstrate a
 
need to introduce the photographs. Id. 
It is not clear, however, whether the Kutzen test
 
applies to every photograph of a criminal defendant obtained
 while in police custody or whether it applies only to photographs
 with some associated indicia of criminal conduct. In this case,
 although it is undisputed that the photograph was Fung's mug
 shot, there were no definitive characteristics identifying it as
 
such. The photograph was not the classic double-shot picture,
 
with front and profile shots, commonly recognized as a mug shot. 
The photograph of Fung was an unmarked, frontal shot, with
 neither internal police markings nor mug shot identification
 numbers. Thus, there was no basis to associate Fung's photograph
 with past or present criminal activity.
 
Nevertheless, we will consider the Kutzen analysis in
 
conjunction with our review. First, the State's "need" for the
 photographic evidence was minimal, at best, because two of the
 State's witnesses made in-court identifications of Fung and Fung
 was not challenging identification. Second, however, the
 appearance of Fung's photograph does not in any way imply prior
 criminal activity or that Fung was in police custody at the time
 
it was taken.2 Third, the photograph was not introduced in a
 
2
 We also note that the photograph was not "grossly prejudicial" as
characterized by the defense. In objecting to the photograph's admission, the
defense described Fung's appearance as "emaciated," "distorted," "callused,"
and "he looks like he's on drugs." There is nothing in the photograph to
support these descriptions.
 
4 manner that drew particular attention to its source or
 
implications. The mug shot was introduced during an eye­witness's testimony, and the source of the photograph was not
 mentioned to the jury. On balance, we cannot conclude that the
 Circuit Court abused its discretion in admitting Fung's
 photograph into evidence.
 
(2) Fung argues that there was insufficient evidence
 
to support the jury's determination that Fung entered the subject
 truck or acted as an accomplice to a person entering the truck. 
We disagree. Two witnesses testified that they saw Fung walking
 away from the delivery truck carrying a case of wine. One of the
 witnesses, the truck's driver, also testified that the back door
 of the delivery truck was closed, but unlocked, when he entered
 Murphy's Bar and Grill. Furthermore, the driver testified that
 he heard what sounded like the back door of the truck closing
 after he returned to the truck. When he went to investigate the
 noise, he saw Fung. We defer to the jury in determining
 credibility, weighing the evidence, and drawing reasonable
 inferences of fact from the evidence adduced. Based on the
 evidence adduced and reasonable inferences therefrom, we conclude
 that the jury did not wrongfully convict Fung, and the Circuit
 Court's denial of Fung's motion for judgment of acquittal was not
 erroneous.
 
(3) Fung argues that the State engaged in
 
prosecutorial misconduct during its closing argument by stating:
 
5 6This was a golden opportunity, a golden illegal
opportunity, an opportunity seized by two men who quickly
planned and executed a theft of two cases of wine that were
resting just one minute earlier inside Paul Espinda's
delivery truck.  One of these two men was caught redhanded. 
Now, you as members of the jury, as ministers of justice,
have the role of finding the defendant guilty of the charge.
. . .
In this particular case, members of the jury, justice
requires you to find this defendant Chan Fung guilty as
charged.
Fung objected to the prosecutor's statements and
unsuccessfully moved for a mistrial based on prosecutorial
misconduct.  On appeal, Fung again argues that the above
statement constituted prosecutorial misconduct because "the
prosecutor's remarks in closing asked the jurors to ignore the
facts and law of the case, and tell the jurors it was their civic
duty to find Fung guilty."
In State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai #i 20, 26, 108 P.3d 974,
980 (2005), the Hawai# i Supreme Court held:
[W]henever a defendant alleges prosecutorial misconduct,
this court must decide: (1) whether the conduct was
improper; (2) if the conduct was improper, whether the
misconduct was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt; and (3)
if the misconduct was not harmless, whether the misconduct
was so egregious as to bar reprosecution. 
To determine whether alleged prosecutorial misconduct
reaches the level of reversible error, we then consider "the
nature of the alleged misconduct, the promptness or lack of a
curative instruction, and the strength or weakness of the
evidence against defendant."  State v. Agrabante, 73 Haw. 179,
198, 830 P.2d 492, 502 (1992) (citations omitted).With regard to the alleged misconduct in this case, it 
is well established that "prosecutors are bound to refrain from 
expressing their personal views as to a defendant's guilt or credibility of witnesses." State v. Suan, 121 Hawai
'i 169, 175, 
214 P.3d 1159, 1165 (App. 2009) (citation omitted). Although not binding on this court, we note the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit has stated that it is "improper for the prosecutor to state that the duty of the jury is to find the defendant guilty." United States v. Sanchez, 176 F.3d 1214, 1224-25 (9th Cir. 1999) (citation omitted). In Sanchez, the Ninth Circuit also stated: 
There is perhaps a fine line between a proper and improper
'do your duty' argument. It is probably appropriate for a
prosecutor to argue to the jury that 'if you find that every
element of the crime has been proved beyond a reasonable
doubt, then, in accord with your sworn duty to follow the
law and apply it to the evidence, you are obligated to
convict, regardless of sympathy or other sentiments that
might incline you otherwise.'
 
Id. at 1225. The Ninth Circuit held, inter alia, that the
 
prosecution's conduct in that case amounted to prosecutorial
 misconduct because 
the prosecutor did not tell the jury that it had a duty to
find the defendant guilty only if every element of the crime
had been proven beyond a reasonable doubt. Nor did he
 remind the jury that it had the duty to acquit Sanchez if it
had a reasonable doubt regarding his guilt.
Id.
 
In the present case, the prosecutor stated, "Now, you
 
as members of the jury, as ministers of justice, have the role of
 
finding the defendant guilty of the charge." In essentially the
 next breath, however, the prosecutor also told the jury, "My
 
7 burden of proof as the representative of the State is to prove
 
this case beyond a reasonable doubt," and, "[s]econdly important
 is that you are not to be influenced by pity for the defendant,
 
or hatred, passion or prejudice against him.
 
The prosecutor also stated, "In this particular case,
 
members of the jury, justice requires you to find this defendant
 
Chan Fung guilty as charged."3 This statement, however, was
 
preceded by the prosecutor's detailed analysis of the evidence
 and what the State was required to prove and was made in the
 context of a discussion regarding the desire for fair and
 impartial jurors, who would render a "true verdict," "because
 we're all here for one thing, and that's justice."
 
Finally, we note that, over Fung's objections, on three

 
occasions during closing argument the prosecution displayed a
 slide with Fung's photograph (discussed above) and the caption,
 "GUILTY AS CHARGED." On appeal, however, Fung does not assert
 that this use of the photograph constituted prosecutorial
 misconduct.
4
 
3 On appeal, Fung also argues that the State engaged in
prosecutorial misconduct in rebuttal closing argument by stating: "The
 
evidence is there. You're reasonable, use your common sense. There's no
 reason why you shouldn't find him guilty. Please do your job and administer
justice." Fung did not object to the statement at trial or renew his motion
for mistrial based on that statement. Moreover, the plea for the
administration of justice did not suggest that the only way to administer
justice was to convict.
 
4
 Instead, Fung argues that the prejudicial use of the photograph
demonstrates that it should not have been admitted into evidence in the first
 instance.
 
8 Based on a careful review of the entire closing
 
argument, we cannot conclude that the prosecutor's statements
 
were improper. Unlike the prosecutor in Sanchez, the prosecutor
 in this case immediately followed the questionable comment about
 the jury's role as ministers of justice with statements that the
 State has the burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, and that
 the jury should not be influenced by pity for the defendant or
 prejudice against him. The prosecutor's fleeting reference to
 the jury as ministers of justice was not repeated.
 
The prosecutor's comment that "justice requires" the
 
jury to find the defendant guilty, viewed in context, was
 essentially that the jury should find Fung guilty based on a fair
 evaluation of the evidence.
 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 
abuse its discretion in denying a mistrial.
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
November 2, 2009 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 23, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Jacquelyn T. Esser
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
James M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9 