NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30081
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BRIAN SHELTON, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
WAILUKU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 2DTC-09-009131)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.; and Leonard,
Presiding Judge, concurring in part and dissenting in part)
 
Defendant-Appellant Brian Edward Shelton (Shelton)
 
appeals from the Judgment, filed on August 26, 2009, in the
 
District Court of the Second Circuit (District Court).1
 
The case arises from a charge alleging that, on 
February 25, 2009, Shelton operated a vehicle after his license
 
and privilege were suspended or revoked for operating a vehicle
 
under the influence of an intoxicant, in violation of Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-62 (Supp. 2009). After a bench
 
trial, Shelton was found guilty.
 
1
 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Shelton contends:
 
(1) the District Court lacked jurisdiction because the
 
charge failed to state an offense;
 
(2) the District Court erred by admitting into evidence
 
Exhibit 6 and/or by considering statements contained in Exhibit
 6, which contains various documents from the Administrative
 
Driver's License Revocation Office (ADLRO), because (a)
 
statements contained in part of the exhibit violated Shelton's
 
right under the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution
 
to confront witnesses, (b) the documents were not admissible
 
under exceptions to the hearsay rule and were not properly
 
certified, (c) statements made by Shelton's counsel contained in
 
Exhibit 6 were inadmissible; and
 
(3) absent the erroneous admission of Exhibit 6, there
 
was insufficient evidence to convict him.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
conclude that, under the liberal construction standard, the
 
charge against Shelton was not defective. On the merits of the
 
case, we conclude that Exhibit 6 was not properly certified or
 
authenticated and therefore was not admissible. Without the
 
admission of Exhibit 6, there was insufficient evidence to
 
support Shelton's conviction.
 
I. Sufficiency of the Charge
 
Shelton claims the charge was insufficient because it 
failed to specify that Shelton committed the offense on a "public 
way, street, road, or highway." Shelton claims his case is 
similar to the deficient charge in State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i 
383, 219 P.3d 1170 (2009). However, because Shelton did not object to the sufficiency of the charge in the District Court and 
raises the issue for the first time on appeal, Wheeler does not 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support Shelton's position. Rather, the liberal construction
 
standard applies, which means "we will not reverse a conviction
 
based upon a defective indictment unless the defendant can show
 
prejudice or that the indictment cannot within reason be
 
construed to charge a crime." State v. Tominiko, No. SCWC-29535,
 
2011 WL 4375245, at *16 (Haw. Aug. 26, 2011) (quoting State v.
 Motta, 66 Haw. 89, 90, 657 P.2d 1019, 1019 (1983)).
 
Shelton does not assert that he has been prejudiced by
 
the charge. Further,
 
in determining whether a defendant has been adequately
informed of the charges against him, the appellate court can
consider other information in addition to the charge that
may have been provided to the defendant during the course of
the case up until the time defendant objected to the
sufficiency of the charges against him.
 
Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i at 396, 219 P.3d at 1183. See also State v. 
Sprattling, 99 Hawai' i 312, 318-21, 55 P.3d 276, 282-85 (2002) 
(court reviewed record and information provided to defendant 
prior to challenge of the charge in determining defendant's right 
to be informed was not violated); State v. Treat, 67 Haw. 119, 
120, 680 P.2d 250, 251 (1984) (dismissal of indictment reversed 
because, prior to consideration of dismissal motion, defendant 
"had been supplied with the grand jury transcript which clearly 
established the details of the crime, [and] he had been fully 
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation against 
him."). 
At trial, Officer Taguma testified that he stopped
 
Shelton on Welakahao Road in the vicinity of South Kîhei Road and
 
that it was a public roadway. Prior to challenging the
 
sufficiency of the charge on appeal, the record establishes that
 
Shelton was informed of the nature of the charge against him and
 
we therefore reject his challenge based on Wheeler.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. Admissibility of State's Exhibit 6
 
Exhibit 6 was offered by the State and consists of
 
several documents, including two documents entitled Notice of
 
Administrative Hearing Decision (Notices) (one dated October 10,
 
2008 and another dated November 6, 2008) and certificates of
 
mailing for each Notice. The earlier Notice indicates it was
 
mailed to Shelton and that Shelton's driver's license was revoked
 
from November 4, 2008 to November 3, 2009. The later Notice
 
indicates it was mailed to Shelton's counsel and that Shelton's
 
driver's license was revoked from November 4, 2008 to August 3,
 
2009. Additionally, a document entitled "Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Decision" (Findings and Conclusions) is
 
attached to the Notice dated November 6, 2008.
 
Shelton contends Exhibit 6 should not have been 
admitted into evidence because, inter alia, it was not properly 
certified, and therefore not self-authenticated, under HRE Rule 
902(4). "When application of a particular evidentiary rule can 
yield only one correct result, the proper standard for appellate 
review is the right/wrong standard." State v. Staley, 91 Hawai' i 
275, 281, 982 P.2d 904, 910 (1999). 
No witness appeared at trial to authenticate Exhibit 6. 
Rather, it was offered by the State as a "sealed and certified" copy of the notice of administrative hearing by the ADLRO. The 
State asserted Exhibit 6 was admissible as a self-authenticating 
public record pursuant to Rule 803(b)(8) of the Hawai' i Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) (Public Records and Reports), HRE Rule 902(1) and (4) (Domestic Public Records Under Seal and Certified Copies of
 
Public Records), and HRE Rule 1005 (Public Records). The
 
District Court admitted Exhibit 6 "to the extent that it purports
 
to be a decision of the administrative hearing office and a
 
decision and order[.]"
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Shelton correctly asserts, however, that Exhibit 6 was
 
not properly certified under HRE Rule 902(4) and should not have
 
been admitted. This rule provides:
 
Rule 902. Self-authentication.  Extrinsic evidence of
 
authenticity as a condition precedent to admissibility is
not required with respect to the following:
 
. . .
 
(4) Certified copies of public records. A copy of an
official record or report or entry therein, or of a document
authorized by law to be recorded or filed and actually
recorded or filed in a public office, including data
compilations in any form, certified as correct by the
custodian or other person authorized to make the
certification, by certificate complying with paragraph (1),
(2), or (3) or complying with any statute or rule prescribed
by the supreme court.
 
(Emphasis added).2 The certification affixed to Exhibit 6
 
states: "I do hereby certify that this is a full, true, and
 
correct copy of the document on file in this office." The
 
signature line of the certification states: "Judiciary, Admin.
 
Driver's License Rev., State of Hawaii." Based on other
 
information in the exhibit, it appears the certification was
 
signed by a Review Officer within the ADLRO. The certification,
 
however, fails to establish that the certification was made by
 
"the custodian" of the documents or by another person "authorized
 
to make the certification." There is no evidence, and no
 
argument by the State, that a Review Officer is authorized to
 
make the certification required under HRE Rule 902(4). See also
 
HRS Chapter 291E, Part III (Administrative Revocation Process).
 Without more, we conclude the certification requirements under
 
HRE Rule 902(4) were not met.
 
Moreover, although the State asserts that Exhibit 6 is
 
"sealed," which is apparently a reference to the documents being
 
2
 The State argues that the authenticity of Exhibit 6 was not
challenged at trial. However, Shelton did raise the issue in briefing
submitted to the District Court and the District Court did thereafter, inter
 alia, affirm its ruling admitting Exhibit 6 as a self-authenticating public
record under HRE Rules 803(b)(8) and 902.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"public documents under seal" pursuant to HRE Rule 902(1),3
 
Exhibit 6 does not have any seal as required under that rule.
 
Even if we were to assume that the hearsay exception
 
4
under HRE Rule 803(b)(8) applied,  authentication of Exhibit 6
was a necessary predicate for admissibility. Cf. U.S. v. Baker,
 
538 F.3d 324, 331 (5th Cir. 2008) (addressing similar issue under
 
similar Federal Rules of Evidence).
 
Therefore, the requirements for admission of Exhibit 6
 
as a self-authenticating public record were not met in this case
 
and it was error for the District Court to have admitted it into
 
evidence.
 
III. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
The State was required to prove that, on the day of the 
offense, Shelton acted recklessly by consciously disregarding a 
substantial risk that his license was revoked for operating a 
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant. See State v. 
Lioen, 106 Hawai' i 123, 130-32, 102 P.3d 367, 374-76 (App. 2004). 
Without Exhibit 6, and considering the remaining evidence in the 
light most favorable to the prosecution, there was insufficient 
evidence to show that Shelton had notice of the ADLRO proceedings 
or notice that his licence was revoked for operating a vehicle 
under the influence of an intoxicant. Officer Taguma testified 
that when he stopped Shelton on February 25, 2009, Shelton was 
3 HRE Rule 902(1) states, in relevant part:
 
Rule 902. Self-authentication.
 
Extrinsic evidence of authenticity as a condition
precedent to admissibility is not required with respect to
the following:
(1) Domestic public documents under seal. 	A document
 
bearing a seal purporting to be that of the United
States, or of any state . . . or of a political
subdivision, department, officer, or agency thereof,
and a signature purporting to be an attestation or
execution. 
4
 We need not, and therefore do not, reach any decision as to whether
the requirements under HRE Rule 803(b)(8) were met in this case.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
unable to produce a driver's license. However, without Exhibit
 
6, there is a dearth of evidence as to why Shelton did not have a
 
license.
 
Thus, absent the improperly admitted Exhibit 6, there
 
was insufficient evidence to prove the state of mind requirement
 
that, on the date of the offense, Shelton acted recklessly by
 
consciously disregarding a substantial risk that his license was
 
revoked for operating a vehicle under the influence of an
 
intoxicant.5
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Judgment filed on
 
August 26, 2009 in the District Court of the Second Circuit is
 reversed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 11, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
David A. Sereno 
Matthew Nardi (David A. Sereno, ALC)for Defendant-Appellant 
Associate Judge 
Kristin Coccaro Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
5
 Given our ruling on the insufficiency of the evidence to support the
conviction, we do not reach the other issues raised on appeal.
 
7
 