NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER »
1 The Honorable William A. Cardwell presided.
2 Trasher was also charged with driving without a license,
but that charge was subsequently dismissed upon proof of a
driver's license.NO. 30689
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I »
STATE OF HAWAI I, Plaintiff-Appellee, 
v.
CARRIE L. THRASHER, Defendant-Appellant.»
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
HONOLULU DIVISION
(CASE NO. 1DTA-10-00975)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Reifurth, J., 
with Ginoza, J., concurring separately)
Defendant-Appellant Carrie L. Thrasher (Thrasher)
appeals from the Judgment filed on May 25, 2010, in the District
Court of the First Circuit (District Court).1  Plaintiff-Appellee
State of Hawai i (State) charged Thrasher by complaint with
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII),
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ÿÿ 291E-61(a)(1)
and/or (a)(3) (Supp. 2009), as a first-time offender under HRS ÿÿ
291E-61(b)(1) (Supp. 2009) and/or as a highly intoxicated driver
under HRS ÿÿ 291E-61(b)(2) (Supp. 2009).2  »NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3 HRS ÿÿ 806-28 provides in relevant part:
Characterization of the act.  The indictment need
not allege that the offense was committed or the act
done "feloniously", "unlawfully", "wilfully",
"knowingly", "maliciously", "with force and arms", or
otherwise except where such characterization is used in
the statutory definition of the offense. 
4 Article I, Section 5 of the Hawai i Constitution provides
in relevant part:
Section 5.  No person shall be deprived of life,
liberty or property without due process of law[.]
»
5 HRPP Rule 9(b)(2) provides:
(continued...)
2Prior to trial, Thrasher moved to dismiss the complaint
on the ground that the procedure used in issuing the penal
summons violated Hawai i Rule of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule
9(b)(2) (2007).  The District Court denied the motion to dismiss. 
After a bench trial, the District Court found Thrasher guilty as
charged of OVUII in violation of HRS ÿÿ 291E-61(a)(1) and (a)(3),
as a highly intoxicated driver under HRS ÿÿ 291E-61(b)(2), and it
imposed sentence.  Thrasher did not challenge the sufficiency of
the OVUII charge in the District Court. »
On appeal, Thrasher asserts that: (1) the District
Court erred in denying her motion to dismiss for violation of
HRPP Rule 9(b)(2) both (a) on the merits and (b) as untimely; (2) 
"[t]he District Court erred in failing to sua sponte  dismiss the
[OVUII] charge for failure to include the mens rea element"; and
(3) "[HRS] ÿÿ 806-28 (1993)[3] violates due process under Art. I, 
ÿÿ 5, of the [Hawai i] [C]onstitution."4  We affirm the District
Court's Judgment.»
I.
We resolve Thrasher's arguments as follows:
A.
The District Court did not err in denying Thrasher's
motion to dismiss for violation of HRPP Rule 9(b)(2).5  TheNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5(...continued)
(b) Form.
. . . .
(2) SUMMONS. The summons shall be in such form as
may be prescribed in the issuing court and shall 
(i) contain the name of the defendant;
(ii) describe the offense alleged in the charge;
(iii) command the defendant to appear before the
court at a stated place and at a stated time, which
shall be not less than 5 days from the time of service
of the summons unless waived by the defendant;
(iv) contain a prohibition against personal
delivery of the summons between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on premises not open to the public, unless a judge
of the district or circuit courts permits personal
delivery during those hours in writing on the summons.
(v) contain a warning to the person summoned that
failure to obey the summons will render the person
subject to prosecution for contempt;
(vi) state the date when issued and the court from
which it is issued; and
(vii) be signed by the clerk.
3record reflects that the clerk of the court issued the penal
summons at issue in this case to the prosecutor's office on
February 4, 2010, but with the date of the required appearance
left blank.  Upon serving Thrasher with the penal summons on
February 8, 2010, the prosecutor filled in the appearance date of
February 17, 2010, and a proof of service was filed on February
10, 2010.  On February 17, 2010, an attorney, "making a special
appearance on behalf of the defendant for the attorney of record
Earle Partington," waived Thrasher's presence and the reading of
the charges and asked for a trial date in the normal course.  The
District Court entered a not guilty plea and set the case for
trial.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4In denying Thrasher's motion to dismiss, the District
Court entered the following findings of fact:
FINDINGS OF FACT
The facts as found herein were stipulated to by the parties
herein.
1.In this matter (as in hundreds of other cases), the
original complaint was filed in this court prior to November
17, 2009, the date of the Supreme Court's decision in State
v. Wheeler, 121 Haw. 383 (2009).  That original complaint
did not contain the language held by the Supreme Court to be
necessary; that is, that the offense took place "on a public
way, street, road or highway."
2.In anticipation of the dismissal of the original
complaint as defective, the State, by the prosecutor's
office, filed a new complaint along with a penal summons. 
This new complaint was filed as a new case in this court.
3.The penal summons was stamped filed by the clerk of
this court and either the original or a copy returned to the
prosecutor's office with the date of defendant's required
appearance left blank.
4.When the original case was called for trial, this
court dismissed the case without prejudice.
5.On or about the same time, the prosecutor filled in
the required appearance information on the penal summons and
served the complaint and penal summons on the defendant.
6.Thereafter, but prior to defendant's required
appearance, the prosecutor filed the proof of service which
was attached to the penal summons.
7.At the required date and time, which was February 17,
2010, defendant or her attorney appeared for arraignment and
plea, entered a plea of not guilty and the case was set for
trial.
8.On the day of trial, defendant filed the instant
motion to dismiss alleging the penal summons to be defective
and improperly filed with this court.
9.This court takes judicial notice of the undisputed
fact that the above basic procedure was followed by the
State and this court's office of the clerk in most, if not
all, cases that were dismissed without prejudice due to the
Wheeler decision.
The District Court denied Thrasher's motion to dismiss
on alternative grounds.  First, the District Court concluded that
the clerk of court's stamping the penal summons as "filed" rather
than "issued" before delivering it for service to the
prosecutor's office did not affect whether the clerk had properlyNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5issued the summons and that "[t]he procedure followed in issuing,
delivering and serving defendant with the penal summons did not
prejudice the defendant's rights."  Second, the District Court
concluded that the motion should be denied as untimely because it
was filed on the day of trial, in violation of HRPP Rule 12,
which requires pretrial motions to be filed within twenty-one
days after arraignment.  
On appeal, Thrasher asserts that the District Court
erred in denying his motion to dismiss because the procedure used
in issuing the penal summons and designating the appearance date
violated HRPP Rule 9(b)(2).  In particular, Thrasher argues that
the clerk of court's issuing the penal summons with the
appearance date left blank and the prosecutor's filling in that
date upon serving the summons violated HRPP Rule 9(b)(2).
Assuming arguendo that the procedure followed in
issuing the penal summons and designating the appearance date was
improper, we conclude that any impropriety constituted harmless
error and did not warrant the dismissal of the complaint.  The
purpose of a penal summons is to provide the defendant with
notice of the date and time the defendant must appear in court to
answer to the charges filed against the defendant.  Here,
Thrasher was served with a penal summons and appeared in court
through counsel at the designated date and time to answer the
complaint that had been filed against her.  Thrasher does not
argue that she suffered any prejudice from the alleged violation
of HRPP Rule 9(b)(2).  We conclude that the alleged violation of
HRPP Rule 9(b)(2) did not affect Thrasher's substantial rights
and thus the District Court did not err in denying her motion to
dismiss.  See HRPP Rule 52(a) (1977) ("Any error, defect, or
irregularity or variance which does not affect substantial rights
shall be disregarded.").
Because we affirm the District Court's denial of
Thrasher's motion to dismiss on the merits, we do not need to
address Thrasher's claim that the District Court erred inNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6dismissing her motion on the alternative ground that it was not
timely filed.
B.
Thrasher's OVUII charge was sufficient.  Because
Thrasher challenges the sufficiency of the OVUII charge for the
first time on appeal, we apply the liberal construction rule:
Under the Motta/Wells  post-conviction liberal construction
rule, we liberally construe charges challenged for the first
time on appeal.  Under this approach, there is a presumption
of validity for charges challenged subsequent to a
conviction.  In those circumstances, this court will not
reverse a conviction based upon a defective indictment or
complaint unless the defendant can show prejudice or that
the indictment or complaint cannot within reason be
construed to charge a crime.
 
State v. Wheeler , 121 Hawai i 383, 399-400, 219 P.3d 1170, 1186-
87 (2009)  (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets
omitted).  »
We conclude that even if Thrasher had objected to the
sufficiency of the OVUII charge in the District Court and the
liberal construction rule did not apply, the charge was not
required to allege a mens rea in order to be sufficient.  State
v. Nesmith , No. CAAP-10-0000072 (Hawai i App. June 22, 2011)
(holding that a complaint which did not allege a mens rea was
sufficient to charge the defendant with OVUII in violation of HRS
ÿÿ 291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3), as a first-time offender under HR
ÿÿ 291E-61(b)(1)).  Accordingly, it necessarily follows that
Thrasher's challenge to the sufficiency of the charge must fail
under the liberal construction rule.»
S
C.
We reject Thrasher's due process challenge to the
constitutionality of HRS ÿÿ 806-28.  The Hawai i Supreme Court has
"consistently held . . . that every enactment of the legislature
is presumptively constitutional, and a party challenging the
statute has the burden of showing unconstitutionality beyond a
reasonable doubt.  Schwab v. Ariyoshi , 58 Haw. 25, 31, 564 P.2d
135, 139 (1977).»NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7Thrasher argues that if the elements of the offense
must  be alleged for a charge to be sufficient, then so must the
mens rea.  Thrasher, however, acknowledges that prior Hawai i
case law is to the contrary, citing cases, including State v.
Torres, 66 Haw. 281, 288-89, 660 P.2d 522, 527 (1983), and State
v. Kane, 3 Haw. App. 450, 652 P.2d 642 (1982). »NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6 We note that while the court stated that intent could be
inferred because sexual intercourse under the circumstances
alleged "could only be a wilful act," it is possible to conceive
of situations, such as where two people are unaware they are
related, where acts of incest could be committed innocently or
unintentionally.  Thus, it is more accurate to say that intent
can inferred from the allegation that Torres engaged in
incestuous sexual intercourse because incest is rarely committed
innocently or unintentionally.  Similarly, because driving while
impaired by alcohol is rarely committed without a culpable mens
(continued...)
8In Torres, the Hawai i Supreme Court considered the
sufficiency of an incest charge against Torres which alleged that
he "did commit an act of sexual intercourse" with his daughter.
Torres, 66 Haw. at 283 n.1, 660 P.2d at 524 n.1.  The statute
defining the incest offense did not specify a mental state and
the charge did not allege a mens rea.  Id. at 283-85, 660 P.2d at 
524-25.  The court acknowledged the prosecution's argument that
the charge was not deficient because HRS ÿÿ 806-28 "expressly
provides that an indictment need not allege the crime was
committed intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly, 'except where
such characterization is used in the statutory definition of the
offense.'"  Id.  at 285, 660 P.2d at 625 (quoting HRS ÿÿ 806-28).
Torres, however, argued that the charge was deficient on
constitutional due process grounds for failing to allege a
culpable state of mind.  Id. at 286, 660 P.2d at 525.  »
The court rejected Torres's due process claim and
concluded that the incest charge was sufficient, reasoning as
follows:     
Our conclusion that the crime was unmistakably defined
despite the lack of an explicit averment of the mental state
accompanying the prohibited act rests on the nature of the
offense charged and the earlier conclusion that it is not a
crime that can be accidentally or innocently committed.  In
some situations knowledge or intent need not be alleged in
terms, and a pleading is good if it fairly imports knowledge
or intent.  Incest as charged here is an offense where
intent can be inferred because "sexual intercourse" under
the circumstances alleged could only be a wilful act.
Id. at 289, 660 P.2d at 527 (internal quotation marks and
citation omitted).6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6(...continued)
rea, an intentional, knowing, or reckless state of mind can be
inferred from the allegation that Tafuna operated or assumed
physical control of a vehicle while impaired by alcohol.   
9In Kane, this court considered whether an indictment,
which, as authorized by HRS ÿÿ 806-28, did not allege a mens rea,
violated Kane's constitutional rights.  Kane, 3 Haw. App. at 451,
454-55, 652 P.2d at 644-46.  We framed the issue as follows:
While HRS § 806 28 clearly authorizes the non-
allegation of the requisite state of mind in indictments
brought under HRS § 134 9, we must decide whether such an
indictment which takes advantage of HRS § 806 28's
permissiveness nonetheless violates Kane's rights under
article I, sections 10 and 14 of the Hawaii State
Constitution (1978).
Id. at 455, 652 P.2d at 646.  This court held that the indictment
gave Kane sufficient notice of the offense charged and did not
violate his constitutional rights.  Id. at 455-58, 652 P.2d at
646-48.  We concluded: "[T]he allegation in the indictment that
Kane 'did carry on his person a pistol or revolver without a
permit or license to carry a firearm' was sufficient to imply
that Kane did so 'intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly.' . . .
[A]n explicit allegation of Kane's state of mind was not required
in the indictment."  Id.  at 458, 652 P.2d at 648.
In State v. McDowell , 66 Haw. 650, 650-51, 672 P.2d
554, 555 (1983), the Hawai i Supreme Court adopted this court's
opinion in Kane in upholding the sufficiency of an indictment
that charged McDowell with possession of a sawed-off rifle.  The
supreme court cited HRS ÿÿ 806-28 in support of its decision and
rejected the claim that a mens rea allegation in the indictment
was constitutionally required.  Id. at 651, 672 P.2d 554, 555. »
Based on Torres, McDowell , and Kane, we reject
Thrasher's claim that HRS ÿÿ 806-28 is unconstitutional because it
violates due process.  Thrasher has failed to overcome the
presumption that the statute is constitutional as applied to her
case.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10 II.
We affirm the May 25, 2010, Judgment of the District
Court.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai i, June 30, 2011. »
On the briefs:
Earle A. Partington
(The Law Office of Earle A.
Partington)
for Defendant-AppellantChief Judge
Donn Fudo
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-AppelleeAssociate Judge