NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30100
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
RAMON M. VILLANUEVA, Defendant,
and
 
REAL PARTY IN INTEREST ACE BAIL BONDS,
Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-35K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Real-Party-In-Interest/Appellant Ace Bail Bonds (Ace)
 
appeals from the "Order Denying Motion to Reconsider Denial of
 
Motion to Set-Aside Bail Forfeiture" which was entered by the
 Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court)
1 on
 
September 3, 2009.
 
On appeal, Ace's point of error is that "[t]he Circuit
 
Court erred in denying Ace's Motion for Reconsideration of Bail
 Forfeiture and Motion for Extension of Time to Surrender
 Defendant when the court had the authority to do so for good
 cause."
2
 
1
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presiding.
 
2
 Ace's Opening Brief does not comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP), Rule 28(b)(4) in that the point of error fails to allege
"where in the record the alleged error occurred" and "where in the record the
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon a careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having considered the applicable
 
statutory and case law, we resolve Ace's point of error as
 follows.
 
On February 15, 2007, Defendant Ramon Villanueva
 
(Villanueva) was indicted on three counts of Methamphetamine
 Trafficking in the First Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 712-1240.7 (Supp. 2011), and three counts of
 Prohibited Acts Related to Drug Paraphernalia, in violation of
 HRS § 329-43.5 (1993 Repl.). The circuit court set bail for
 Villanueva in the amount of $100,000. On April 10, 2007, Ace
 posted a bail bond on behalf of Villanueva in the amount of
 $100,000.
 
On May 29, 2007, Villanueva failed to appear in court
 
for jury trial. On June 1, 2007, the circuit court issued an
 "Order of Bail Forfeiture and Final Judgment of Forfeiture" (Bail
 Forfeiture Judgment), entering judgment against Ace in the amount
 of $100,000.
 
On July 12, 2007, Ace filed a "Motion to Set Aside
 
Judgment and Order of Bond Forfeiture and Stay of Enforcement of
 Judgment" (Motion to Set Aside Judgment). Attached to this
 motion was a declaration of Ace's counsel attesting inter alia
 that Ace received notice of the Bail Forfeiture Judgment on or
 after June 12, 2007. After the hearing on Ace's Motion to Set
 Aside Judgment was continued several times, the circuit court
 issued an order on February 8, 2008 denying the Motion to Set
 Aside Judgment.
 
On December 26, 2008, over eighteen months after Ace
 
had received notice of the Bail Forfeiture Judgment (on or after
 June 12, 2007 according to its counsel's declaration), Ace filed
 a "Motion to Reconsider Denial of Motion to Set Aside Bail
 
2(...continued)
alleged error was objected to or the manner in which the alleged error was
brought to the attention of the court[.]" 
Ace's counsel is cautioned to
 
comply with HRAP Rule 28 in the future.
 
2
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Forfeiture" (Motion to Reconsider). After various other
 
submissions by the parties, on September 3, 2009, the circuit
 court issued its "Order Denying Motion to Reconsider Denial of
 Motion to Set Aside Bail Forfeiture" (Order Denying Motion to
 Reconsider).
 
On October 2, 2009, Ace filed a Notice of Appeal,
 
incorrectly citing to HRS § 641-11 and HRAP Rule 4(b) which deal
 with appeals pertaining to criminal matters.
3 The Notice of
 
Appeal simply stated that Ace "here by [sic] files this Notice of
 Appeal," and contrary to the requirements of HRAP Rule 3(c), the
 Notice of Appeal does not "designate the judgment, order, or part
 thereof . . . appealed from" and a copy of the judgment or order
 is not attached as an exhibit. See HRAP Rule 3(c). In its
 
Statement of Jurisdiction, Ace asserts that it appeals pursuant
 to HRAP Rules 3 and 4(a) "from the final judgment entered herein
 on September 3, 2009." Thus, although Ace incorrectly describes
 it as a final judgment, it is apparent that Ace seeks to appeal
 from the September 3, 2009 Order Denying Motion to Reconsider.
 
Given the record in this case, Ace did not file a
 
notice of appeal from the "appealable event." Ace's right to
 seek relief from the Bail Forfeiture Judgment is set forth in
 HRS § 804-51 (Supp. 2011), which states:
 
§804-51 Procedure. Whenever the court, in any
criminal cause, forfeits any bond or recognizance given in a
criminal cause, the court shall immediately enter up
judgment in favor of the State and against the principal or
principals and surety or sureties on the bond, jointly and
severally, for the full amount of the penalty thereof, and
shall cause execution to issue thereon immediately after the
expiration of thirty days from the date that notice is given
via personal service or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the surety or sureties on the bond, of the
entry of the judgment in favor of the State, unless before
 the expiration of thirty days from the date that notice is
given to the surety or sureties on the bond of the entry of
the judgment in favor of the State, a motion or application
of the principal or principals, surety or sureties, or any
of them, showing good cause why execution should not issue
 
3 "[Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP)] 4(a), as opposed to
HRAP 4(b), applies because forfeiture of a bond is a civil proceeding." State 
v. Camara, 81 Hawai' i 324, 329 n.7, 916 P.2d 1225, 1230 n.7 (1996) (citation
omitted). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
upon the judgment, is filed with the court. If the motion or
 
application, after a hearing held thereon, is sustained, the
court shall vacate the judgment of forfeiture and, if the
principal surrenders or is surrendered pursuant to section
804-14 or section 804-41, return the bond or recognizance to
the principal or surety, whoever shall have given it, less
the amount of any cost, as established at the hearing,
incurred by the State as a result of the nonappearance of
the principal or other event on the basis of which the court
forfeited the bond or recognizance. If the motion or
 application, after a hearing held thereon, is overruled,
execution shall forthwith issue and shall not be stayed
unless the order overruling the motion or application is
appealed from as in the case of a final judgment.
 
This section shall be considered to be set forth in
 
full in words and figures in, and to form a part of, and to
be included in, each and every bond or recognizance given in
a criminal cause, whether actually set forth in the bond or
recognizance, or not.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Thus, "the appealable event is the order denying the
 
motion to set aside the judgment of forfeiture." State v.
 
Camara, 81 Hawai' i 324, 329, 916 P.2d 1225, 1230 (1996). 
Once a motion to set aside is denied, the surety may
appeal such denial "as in the case of a final judgment."
Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule
4(a)(1), a notice of appeal from a final judgment must be
filed within thirty days from the date of entry of the
judgment-in this case, thirty days from the order denying
the motion to set aside.
 
Id. (footnote omitted).
 
In this case, Ace did not appeal from the "appealable
 
event," which was the February 8, 2008 order denying the Motion
 
to Set Aside Judgment. Rather, Ace filed its December 26, 2008 
Motion to Reconsider in the circuit court, and subsequently
 appealed from the circuit court's September 3, 2009 Order Denying
 Motion to Reconsider. For reasons expressed in 
State v. Ranger
 
Insurance Co., 83 Hawai' i 118, 925 P.2d 388 (1996), we conclude 
that the circuit court was without authority to consider Ace's
 Motion to Reconsider.
 
In 
Ranger Insurance Co., after the circuit court's
 
order denying the surety's timely HRS § 804-51 motion, the surety
 filed another motion seeking inter alia to vacate the forfeiture
 judgment (Motion to Vacate). This Motion to Vacate was filed a
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
year after the surety had received notice of the forfeiture
 
judgment. The supreme court held that, because the Motion to
 Vacate was not filed within the time limit required by HRS § 804­51, "the circuit court was therefore without power to consider
 
it." Id. at 124 n.5, 925 P.2d at 294 n.5 (emphasis added). The
 
supreme court explained that "HRS § 804-51 permits the filing
 
neither of a second motion seeking to show 'good cause why
 execution should not issue' nor any motion after the closing of
 the thirty-day window." Id. Rather, a surety's "sole recourse
 
from the 'appealable event'" is to appeal. Id. (emphasis
 
added).
 
Here, Ace's Motion To Reconsider was filed "after the
 
closing of the thirty-day window." Id. We thus conclude, on
 
grounds different than the circuit court, that Ace's Motion to
 Reconsider was properly denied.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that, on the grounds
 
that the circuit court was without authority under HRS § 804-51
 to consider Ace's Motion to Reconsider, the circuit court's Order
 Denying Motion to Reconsider entered on September 3, 2009 is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 3, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Frank M. Fernandez
 
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Chief Judge
Linda L. Walton
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
5
 