FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
MICHELE N. RODRIGUES, aka: Michelle Pacheco, Defendant-Appellee 
NO. 30503
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-1666)

 
APRIL 20, 2011
 
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J. 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) appeals 
from the Order Granting Defendant's Motion to Dismiss Counts II 
and III of Complaint with Prejudice (Dismissal Order), filed on 
April 20, 2010, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
1
(Circuit Court).  In the Dismissal Order, the Circuit Court
 
dismissed Count II, which alleged Unauthorized Possession of
 
Confidential Personal Information (UPCPI) in violation of Hawaii
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-839.55 (Supp. 2009), and Count III,
 
which alleged Identity Theft in the Third Degree (Identity Theft
 3) in violation of HRS § 708-839.8 (Supp. 2009), against
 
Defendant-Appellee Michele Rodrigues, also known as Michelle
 
Pacheco (Rodrigues).
 
On appeal, the State contends that the Circuit Court
 
2
erred when it concluded that the UPCPI statute and the Identity
3
Theft 3 statute  require "impersonation" of the victim and thus
the court erred when it dismissed Counts II and III for
 
insufficient evidence of impersonation of the victim. 
We agree. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
According to Rodrigues's summary of the facts set forth

 
in the police reports, on October 18, 2009, the victim left his
 
2
 HRS § 708-839.55 provides:
 
Unauthorized possession of confidential personal
information. (1) A person commits the offense of
unauthorized possession of confidential personal information
if that person intentionally or knowingly possesses, without
authorization, any confidential personal information of
another in any form, including but not limited to mail,
physical documents, identification cards, or information
stored in digital form.
(2) It is an affirmative defense that the person who
possessed the confidential personal information of another
did so under the reasonable belief that the person in
possession was authorized by law or by the consent of the
other person to possess the confidential personal
information.
 
(3) Unauthorized possession of confidential personal
information is a class C felony.
3
 HRS § 708-839.8 provides:
 
Identity theft in the third degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of identity theft in the third degree if
that person makes or causes to be made, either directly or
indirectly, a transmission of any personal information of
another by any oral statement, any written statement, or any
statement conveyed by any electronic means, with the intent
to commit the offense of theft in the third or fourth degree
from any person or entity.
(2) Identity theft in the third degree is a class C
felony.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
waist pouch containing his checkbook in his company van. The
 
next day, the victim discovered that his checkbook was missing
 
and he asked his wife to notify their bank. On October 20, 2009,
 
Rodrigues entered a payday loan establishment to cash one of the
 
checks from the missing checkbook. The check in the amount of
 
$80 was made out to Rodrigues, who told the sales manager that it
 
was payment for babysitting. The sales manager became
 
suspicious, called the telephone number imprinted on the check,
 
and was informed that the check had been stolen. The police were
 
called. The victim denied that the signature on the check was
 
his, informed the police that he did not know Rodrigues, and
 
stated that he had not written the check to Rodrigues.
 
On October 27, 2009, the State filed its Complaint,
 
charging Rodrigues with three counts: (1) Forgery in the Second
 
4
Degree in violation of HRS § 708-852 (Supp. 2009) (Count I);  (2)
UPCPI (Count II); and (3) Identify Theft 3 (Count III).
 
On December 7, 2009, Rodrigues filed a motion to
 
dismiss Counts II and III on the grounds that she acted in a
 
continuous course of conduct and should be subject to conviction
 
on Count I only because Counts II and III merged with Count I. 
The State filed a memorandum in opposition, in which the State
 
argued that the three counts do not merge and that, even if they
 
did, the State has a right to prosecute the Defendant for all
 
4
 HRS § 708-852 provides:
 
Forgery in the second degree. (1) A person commits
the offense of forgery in the second degree if, with intent
to defraud, the person falsely makes, completes, endorses,
or alters a written instrument, or utters a forged
instrument, or fraudulently encodes the magnetic ink
character recognition numbers, which is or purports to be,
or which is calculated to become or to represent if
completed, a deed, will, codicil, contract, assignment,
commercial instrument, or other instrument which does or may
evidence, create, transfer, terminate, or otherwise affect a
legal right, interest, obligation, or status.
(2) Forgery in the second degree is a class C felony.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
three counts. At the January 6, 2010 hearing, with respect to
 
Count II, Rodrigues argued that she had not "tried to pass
 
herself off as anyone but herself." As to Count III, Rodrigues
 
argued that the only document that she had in her possession was
 
the check itself. The State responded that there was no
 
statutory requirement that Rodrigues attempt to assume the
 
identity of another person and that the check constituted
 
"personal information" because it contained the account holder's
 
name, address, bank routing information, and bank account number.
 
After the hearing, including review of certain stipulated
 
evidence, the Circuit Court concluded that the three counts did
 
not merge, but the factual allegations were insufficient to
 
support the charges in Counts II and III. Accordingly, Counts II
 
and III were dismissed. The State's motion for reconsideration
 
was denied. The State timely filed a notice of appeal.
 
II. DISCUSSION
 
A. The UPCPI Statute Does Not Require Impersonation
 
The UPCPI statute provides that a person commits the
 
offense if that person "intentionally or knowingly possesses,
 without authorization, any confidential personal information of
 
another in any form, including but not limited to mail, physical
 
documents, identification cards, or information stored in digital
 
form." HRS § 708-839.55. "Confidential personal information" is
 
statutorily defined as:
 
information in which an individual has a significant privacy
interest, including but not limited to a driver's license
number, a social security number, an identifying number of a
depository account, a bank account number, a password or
other information that is used for accessing information, or
any other name, number, or code that is used, alone or in
conjunction with other information, to confirm the identity
of a person.
 
HRS § 708-800 (Supp. 2009).
 
The Circuit Court concluded that "impersonation by the
 
defendant of the person whose identity is being confirmed is
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
implicit in the applicable definitions [of confidential personal
 
information and personal information]." The Circuit Court
 
clarified that "in a nutshell . . . person A has to be using the
 
information to say I'm person B." Rodrigues urges us to adopt
 
this interpretation.
 
Rodrigues acknowledges that, in this case, the bank
 
routing number combined with the checking account information
 
would constitute confidential personal information. Rodrigues
 
further acknowledges that, based on the plain language of the
 
statute, Rodrigues knowingly possessed a check containing
 
confidential personal information as described in HRS § 708-800,
 
thereby violating HRS § 708-839.55 on its face by knowingly
 
possessing the victim's confidential personal information without
 
his authorization. Rodrigues maintains, however, that the
 
literal interpretation of the statute under the facts presented
 
here would lead to an absurd or unjust result because an
 
individual who simply presents a forged check could then be
 
convicted of at least three separate felonies for the same
 
conduct, i.e., forgery, UPCPI, and identity theft.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has often stated the 
following, well-established, principles of statutory 
interpretation: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when there
is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness or
uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an ambiguity
exists. And fifth, in construing an ambiguous statute, the
meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought by examining
the context, with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and
sentences may be compared, in order to ascertain their true
meaning.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Haw. Gov't Emps. Ass'n, AFSCME Local 152 v. Lingle, 124 Hawai 'i 
197, 202, 239 P.3d 1, 6 (2010) (citations omitted). 
The supreme court has also held that "departure from a 
literal construction of a statute is justified when such 
construction would produce an absurd result and the literal 
construction in the particular action is clearly inconsistent 
with the purposes and policies of the act." Estate of Roxas v. 
Marcos, 121 Hawai 'i 59, 67, 214 P.3d 598, 606 (2009) (internal 
quotation marks, citations, and elipses omitted). 
The plain, obvious, and unambiguous meaning of the
 
UPCPI statute merely requires intentional or knowing unauthorized
 
possession of confidential personal information. There is no
 
statutory language requiring that the confidential personal
 
information actually be used to impersonate another person in
 
order to constitute the offense. 
Rodrigues accurately states that the legislative
 
history indicates the UPCPI statute was intended to work in
 
conjunction with identity theft statutes to allow prosecution of
 
persons who had misappropriated confidential personal
 
information, were in possession of it, but had not yet used it to
 
cause a monetary loss. For example, a conference committee
 
report states, in part:
 
Hawaii law enforcement has found it difficult to curb
 
the rise in identity theft-related crimes, as identity
thieves in possession of personal information who have not
yet caused a monetary loss to the victim cannot be
prosecuted for crimes other than petty misdemeanor thefts.
 
. . . . 
Your Committee on Conference has amended this measure
 
by replacing its substance with the language from S.B. 2159,
S.D. 2. The language from the S.D. 2 increases the
protection of personal information by making it a class C
felony to intentionally or knowingly possess confidential
information of another without authorization[.]
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2006 House Journal at 1822, Conf. Comm. Rep. 111-06 on S.B. No.
 
2159. The "Commentary" to HRS § 708-839.55 provides:
 
Act 139, Session Laws 2006, added this section to
increase the protection of personal information by making it
a class C felony to intentionally or knowingly possess the
confidential information of another without authorization. 
Hawaii law enforcement has found it difficult to curb the
 rise in identity theft-related crimes when identity thieves
in possession of personal information who have not yet
caused a monetary loss to the victim cannot be prosecuted
for crimes other than petty misdemeanor thefts. The
 legislature found that adding a law to make intentionally or
knowingly possessing the confidential information of another
without authorization a class C felony would help to deter
identity theft crimes. Senate Standing Committee Report No.
2636, Conference Committee Report No. 111-06. 
The UPCPI statute was clearly intended to allow
 
prosecution for unauthorized possession before a monetary loss
 
occurs. That purpose is in no way inconsistent with the
 
prosecution in this case, where a monetary loss from the
 
consummation of the check-cashing appears to have been avoided by
 
the alert actions of the payday loan establishment manager. 
Indeed, even if Rodrigues had been successful in obtaining money
 
here, her prosecution under the UPCPI statute's stated purpose of
 
"making it a class C felony to intentionally or knowingly possess
 
confidential information of another without authorization." Id.
 
(emphasis added). To construe the UPCPI statute in such a way as
 
to require "impersonation" would be contrary to the Legislature's
 
manifest intent to criminalize mere unauthorized possession.
 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred
 
in its construction of the UPCPI statute.
 
B. Identity Theft 3
 The Identity Theft 3 statute provides that a person
 
commits the offense if that person "makes or causes to be made,
 either directly or indirectly, a transmission of any personal
 
information of another by any oral statement, any written
 
statement, or any statement conveyed by any electronic means,
 
with the intent to commit the offense of theft in the third or
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
fourth degree from any person or entity." HRS § 708-839.8. 
"Personal information" is statutorily defined as:
 
[I]nformation associated with an actual person or a
fictitious person that is a name, an address, a telephone
number, an electronic mail address, a driver's license
number, a social security number, an employer, a place of
employment, information related to employment, an employee
identification number, a mother's maiden name, an
identifying number of a depository account, a bank account
number, a password used for accessing information, or any
other name, number, or code that is used, alone or in
conjunction with other information, to confirm the identity
of an actual or a fictitious person.
 
HRS § 708-800(1993).
 
Again, it is undisputed that the information on the
 
subject check was "personal information" within the meaning of
 
HRS § 708-883(1) and Rodrigues used this personal information in
 
an attempt to obtain $80 from the victim's checking account. 
Based on the plain language of the statute, Rodrigues transmitted
 
this personal information to the payday loan establishment
 
employee with requisite intent to commit the offense of theft in
 
the fourth degree. See HRS § 708-833(1) (1993) ("A person
 
commits the offense of theft in the fourth degree if the person
 commits theft of property or services of any value not in excess
 
of $100.) The Identity Theft 3 statute does not require
 
impersonation of a person in order to constitute the offense,
 
only the transmission of a person's personal information with the
 
intent to commit the specified theft offense. See HRS § 708­
839.8. Although the purpose of this statute clearly includes
 
establishing a criminal penalty for stealing or using the
 
identity of another, nothing in the legislative history supports
 
Rodrigues's argument that her prosecution under the Identity
 
Theft 3 statute would lead to an absurd or unjust result because
 
the basic crime is forgery or theft.
 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred
 
in its construction of the Identity Theft 3 statute.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's April 20, 2010
 
Dismissal Order is vacated and this case is remanded for
 
proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Brian R. Vincent
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellee
 
9
 