NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
1Although the case caption consistently reflects Defendant-Appellee
Edward "Tabanara", it appears, in the Defendants' pleadings, that the correct
spelling is "Tabanera".  We proceed under the assumption that the caption was
initiated in error and was never corrected.
2Woodard's complaint, filed January 22, 2008, stated two counts:
(1) violation of civil rights against Tabanera under both the U.S. and Hawai» i
constitutions; and (2) negligence against both Tabanera (relating to the
alleged use of excessive force) and the City and County of Honolulu ("City")
(relating to its alleged failure to properly train and supervise Tabanera). 
3The Honorable Sabrina S. McKenna presided.NO. 30096
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I »
DAVID L. WOODARD, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
EDWARD TABANARA and CITY AND COUNTY
OF HONOLULU, Defendants-Appellees
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0132)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
In a civil lawsuit alleging excessive use of force by
Defendant-Appellee Honolulu Police Department Officer Edward
Tabanera ("Tabanera")1 in the conduct of an otherwise lawful
arrest of Plaintiff-Appellant David L. Woodard ("Woodard") in
Honolulu's Chinatown district on the evening of March 26, 2006,2
Woodard appeals from the Final Judgment filed on September 2,
2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit3 ("Circuit
Court").  The Final Judgment entered judgment in favor of
Tabanera and the City (collectively, the "Defendants") pursuant
to the August 25, 2009 Order (1) Granting Defendants Edward
Tabanera and City and County of Honolulu's Motion for Summary
Judgment; & (2) Denying Plaintiff's Alternative Motion toNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
4Woodard does not argue any further the second point of error, and,
thus, we deem it waived.  Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be
deemed waived.")
2Continue Hearing on Motion for Summary Judgment. 
On appeal, Woodard raises two points of error,
contending that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary
judgment in favor of the Defendants, and in denying his
alternative motion to continue hearing.  In his argument, Woodard
expands upon the first point of error, arguing that the Circuit
Court erred in holding that: (1) his rights under the United
States Constitution were not violated on the basis of the facts
alleged, but, even if they were violated, those rights were not
clearly established; (2) he had not presented sufficient evidence
to show that it would be clear to a a reasonable officer in
Tabanera's situation that his use of a "leg sweep" on Woodard
under the circumstances would violate Woodard's rights under the
Hawai i Constitution; (3) he had not proved by clear and
convincing evidence that Tabanera was motivated by malice or any
other improper purpose against Woodard; and (4) he had provided
insufficient evidence to prove breach of any duty.4 »
We review de novo the question of whether the Circuit
Court was correct in granting summary judgment.  Nuuanu Valley
Ass'n v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai i 90, 96, 194 P.3d
531, 537 (2008).»
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
Woodard's appeal is without merit, and address his issues as
follows:
(1) Woodard contests the Circuit Court's conclusions
that (i) there was no objectively unreasonable use of force, and
(ii) the constitutional right that he alleged was not clearly
established.  We do not address Woodard's first contention
because the qualified immunity test set out in Saucier v. Katz,
533 U.S. 194 (2001) has been modified to permit resolution of
government official's qualified immunity claims by looking firstNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
3at the second prong of the Saucier  analysis.  Pearson v.
Callahan , 555 U.S. 223, ___, 129 S.Ct. 808, 813 (2009).
The Circuit Court did not err in concluding that it
would not be clear to a reasonable officer in Tabanera's position
that his performance of a leg sweep on Woodard was unlawful under
the circumstances.  Whether a right is clearly established must
be "undertaken in light of the specific context of the case, not
as a broad general proposition[.]"  Saucier, 533 U.S. at 201.
Woodard offered no authority in support of the
proposition that the alleged right had been clearly established. 
To the contrary, courts have ruled that a police officer does not
use excessive force in employing a leg sweep unless the suspect
poses no threat to the police officer.  E.g., Slama v. City of
Madera, No. 1:08-cv-810 AWI GSA, 2010 WL 2044662 (E.D. Cal.
May 20, 2010) (no excessive use of force when police officer
performed leg sweep when suspect placed hands behind his back,
appeared nervous and refused to open his fist upon request); Reed
v. Harrison Cnty., Miss., Civil Action No. 1:07-cv704-RHW, 2009
WL 235354 (S.D. Miss. Jan. 30, 2009) (correction officer's leg
sweep was not performed maliciously or to cause plaintiff harm,
but to make plaintiff comply with orders intended to restore
discipline and order).
Woodard's initial retreat from Tabanera, which caused
Tabanera to have to focus attention on Woodard and to disengage
from the two other suspects that he was attempting to corral, and
his subsequent action in throwing away what Tabanera correctly
believed to be contraband are sufficient to remove this case from
those where a constitutional right to be free from force has been
established.  We concur with the Circuit Court that it would not
be clear to a reasonable officer in Tabanera's position that his
performance of a leg sweep on Woodard was unlawful under the
circumstances.  As such, Tabanera was entitled to qualified
immunity from suit for any violation of Woodard's rights under
the U.S. Constitution.
(2) As above, Woodard identifies no "clearly
established constitutional right" under the state constitution. 
Furthermore, his argument that qualified immunity is notNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
4available under Medeiros v. Kondo , 55 Haw. 499, 522 P.2d 1269
(1974) is misplaced.  Medeiros holds only that there is no
absolute immunity for a non-judicial government officer from a
suit in tort.  Id. at 500-01, 522 P.2d at 1270.  As a result, we
find no error in the Circuit Court's conclusion that there was no
objectively unreasonable use of force and that the right had not
been clearly established.
(3) To prevail on a tort claim against a non-judicial
government official, the injured party must demonstrate by clear
and convincing proof that the official was stirred by malice and
not by an otherwise proper purpose.  Towse v. State , 64 Haw. 624,
631-32, 647 P.2d 696, 702 (1982); Black v. City & Cnty. of
Honolulu, 112 F. Supp. 2d 1041, 1048-49 (D. Haw. 2000) (citing
Medeiros, 55 Haw. at 505, 522 P.2d at 1272) (police official, as
a nonjudicial officer, enjoys qualified immunity from state law
claims).  
The existence or absence of malice is generally a
question for the jury.  However, when this issue has been
removed from the case by uncontroverted affidavits and
depositions, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as
a matter of law, summary judgment will be granted.  [When]
[t]he plaintiff has had his [or her] "inquiry into malice,"
and the pleadings, interrogatories, and uncontroverted
affidavits, depositions and exhibits, taken together, show
the absence of a genuine issue as to this material fact[, 
summary judgment will be granted.]  [B]are allegations . . .
which assert that the defendants were motivated by malice
are not sufficient, in and of themselves, to raise a
material issue of fact regarding an essential element of the
plaintiff's cause of action.
  
Runnels v. Okamoto, 56 Haw. 1, 5-6, 525 P.2d 1125, 1129 (1974)
(citations omitted) (summary judgment was proper because record
lacked evidence of malice by non-judicial government official).
Tabanera explained in his declaration that he utilized
the leg sweep after Woodard threw the object because he became
concerned that Woodard would attempt to flee or become physical
with him.  Tabanera further stated that he did not have any
malicious or hateful feelings for Woodard, or harbor any bad
intentions toward him at the time of the incident, and Woodard
offered no contrary evidence.  As bare allegations of malice by
the plaintiff are not sufficient to establish a genuine issue of
material fact ( Runnels, 56 Haw.  at 6, 525 P.2d at 1129), the
Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment in favor of OfficerNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
5Tabanera on Woodard's negligence claim was proper. 
(4) In light of our rulings above, it is not necessary
for us to address this argument, which invokes derivative
liability.
Therefore,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Final Judgment filed on
September 2, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai i, June 30, 2011. »
On the briefs:
Walter R. Schoettle
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Kyle K. Chang,
Deputy Corporation Counsel,
City & County of Honolulu,
for Defendants-Appellees.  Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge