 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30138
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JOHN C. VEIKOSO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 09-1-0194)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant John C. Veikoso (
Veikoso) appeals 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) on September 
28, 2009.1 Veikoso was convicted, as charged, of the following 
offenses: (A) Sexual Assault in the First Degree in violation of 
Hawai'i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-730 (1993 Repl. & Supp. 
2009) (Counts 1, 2, 4, and 5); (B) Kidnapping in violation of HRS 
§ 707-720 (1993 Repl. & Supp. 2009) (Counts 3 and 8); and (C) 
Sexual Assault in the Third Degree in violation of HRS § 707-732 
(1993 Repl. & Supp. 2009) (Counts 6 and 7). The Circuit Court 
imposed twenty-year terms of imprisonment for each of Counts 1-5 
and 8, and five-year terms for each of Counts 6 and 7. Counts 1 
through 3 are to run concurrently with each other but consecutive 
to the ten-year sentence imposed in another case, Cr. No. 08-1­
1578, involving a Place to Keep Firearms violation. Counts 4 
1
 The Honorable Steven S. Alm presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
through 8 are to run concurrently with each other but consecutive
 
to Counts 1 through 3. 
On appeal, Veikoso argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in: (1) denying his Motion for Severance of Charges; (2) failing
 
to obtain a voluntary, knowing, and intelligent waiver of his
 
right to testify; (3) admitting expert testimony of the
 
complainant's examining physician that his medical findings were
 
consistent with a sexual assault; (4) admitting the expert
 
witness's hearsay testimony regarding threats Veikoso allegedly
 
made to the complainant; and (5) imposing consecutive sentences
 
totaling fifty years, including the sentencing in 08-1-1578.
 
As discussed below, we conclude that the Circuit Court 
did not err in denying Veikoso's severance motion, obtaining a 
valid waiver of Veikoso's right to testify, or admitting the 
expert witness's opinion testimony regarding his medical 
findings. However, the Circuit Court erred in allowing the 
State's expert witness to present hearsay testimony regarding 
threats Veikoso allegedly made to the complainant. Because the 
hearsay statements were not "reasonably pertinent to diagnosis or 
treatment," they are not admissible under the hearsay exception 
for statements made for purposes of medical diagnosis or 
treatment. Hawai 'i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 803(b)(4). 
Given the centrality of the complainant's credibility with regard 
to Counts 4 through 8, we cannot conclude that this error was 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. We therefore vacate and 
remand for a new trial on those counts. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On February 11, 2009, Veikoso was charged in an eight-
count indictment for the sexual assaults and kidnappings of
 
Complaining Witness #1 (CW #1) and Complaining Witness #2 (CW
 
#2). Counts 1 through 3 pertained to events stemming from
 
January 18, 2009, concerning CW #1. Counts 4 through 8 stemmed
 
from events on February 7th, 2009, concerning CW #2. Both
 
2  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complainants alleged that Veikoso beat, threatened, and raped
 
them utilizing a distinct modus operandi.
 
A. CW #1's Testimony
 At trial, CW #1 testified that in the early morning of
 
January 18, 2009, she was working as a prostitute near the Pali
 Longs Drug Store in Honolulu. Veikoso drove by several times
 
before soliciting her for a "date." CW #1 agreed to a price of
 
"200" and voluntarily entered his truck. Shortly thereafter,
 
Veikoso began striking her and asked if she had ever been raped. 
CW #1 pulled herself onto the window frame and began kicking at
 
Veikoso while he tried to pull her back into the truck. At one
 
point, her foot became wedged against the passenger-side rearview
 
mirror as her heel "went through it." 
As Veikoso drove along the Pali Highway toward the Pali
 
Lookout, CW #1 "let go" or "fell" out of the truck. She hit her
 
head on the road, felt her collarbone break, and sustained severe
 
road rash. She attempted to flee, but Veikoso retrieved her and
 
dragged her back to his truck. He "slapped [CW #1] around a few
 
times" and told her that if she didn't do what he said, he was
 
"going to kill [her]." Along the ride from the Pali Lookout
 
toward the Windward side, Veikoso forced her to perform oral sex
 
on him. 
Veikoso then took CW #1 to Maunawili Elementary School. 
CW #1 said she was thirsty, and Veikoso took her to a water
 
basin, allowed her to drink, and washed some of the blood off her
 
face. CW #1 could not physically walk, but Veikoso attempted to
 
drag her to a particular bench or picnic table at the school. 
Eventually, however, he threw her against the driver's side door
 
of the truck. He told her to do as he said or "he wasn't going
 
to let [her] go." Veikoso told CW #1 she wasn't the "first one,"
 
but was "number six or number seven." Veikoso then forced her to
 
perform oral and vaginal sex. CW #1 believed that if she didn't
 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
comply, he would kill her or let her die. Veikoso ejaculated on
 
CW #1's sweater, and she rolled it up to preserve the evidence. 
Veikoso then smoked a cigarette and gave one to CW #1. 
He remarked, "I can't believe you jumped out of the car." His
 
demeanor seemed "kind of frantic," and he said, "[M]aybe I should
 
just take you to my house or whatever and clean you up." CW #1
 
pleaded with him to take her to a hospital as she had been
 
bleeding from her head for several hours, she could barely walk,
 
and her arm "was just hanging." Veikoso placed a lava-lava or
 
sarong over her legs to catch the blood and drove her to Tripler
 
Hospital. He asked her, "You're not going to tell anybody,
 
right?" At the hospital, he helped CW #1 get out of the truck
 
and walked her halfway up to the gate. CW #1 was treated for her
 
injuries and had a forensic kit completed. 
CW #1 later identified the truck with the broken side
 
mirror that her heel had kicked. The State's expert determined
 
that blood stains on the seat belt and buckle of the vehicle
 
matched CW #1's DNA profile. Semen stains on CW #1's sweater and
 
lava-lava matched Veikoso's DNA profile. 
B. Chad Ogawa's Testimony 
Chad Ogawa (Ogawa) was the first witness to testify
 
regarding the February 7, 2009 incident. Early that day, he was
 
driving past the Maunawili Elementary School when CW #2 "came
 
running up to [him] to [his] car and asked [him] for help." CW
 
#2 appeared "kinda frantic." Ogawa observed that CW #2's blouse
 
was ripped and she had some blood on her lip. CW #2 told him
 
"she just got raped at the school right across the street." 
CW #2 got into Ogawa's car, and they drove to the
 
parking lot behind the school. CW #2 pointed out Veikoso and his
 
car. Ogawa took down the license plate number on his phone. 
Ogawa then drove CW #2 to a 7-Eleven or Aloha gas
 
station where his classmate, an employee at the store, called 911
 
4    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and placed a report. Ogawa testified that he did not place the
 
call himself because he had an outstanding traffic warrant. 
C. Dr. Wayne Lee's Testimony
 
The State's expert witness, Dr. Wayne Lee (Dr. Lee),
 
testified second as to the incident concerning CW #2. He was
 
received as an expert "in the general field of medicine, the
 
field of general surgery, and as an expert in the examination and
 
treatment of sex assault victims or persons alleging sexual
 
assault." Dr. Lee completed a three-hour examination of CW #2 at
 
the Kapiolani Women's and Children's Medical Center's Sex Abuse
 
Treatment Center. The examination occurred about eight hours
 
after the alleged assault. The purpose of the examination was
 
"to examine the patient for any injuries that might need medical
 
attention and also to gather forensic evidence." 
As part of the examination, Dr. Lee obtained an
 
incident history from CW #2. He related that CW #2 had told him: 
the assailant hit her several times; he grabbed her and pulled
 
her out of the car; he kissed her and spat in her mouth; and he
 
penetrated her vaginally and orally. CW #2 told Dr. Lee that she
 
performed oral sex because "I didn't want to say anything. I was
 
scared and didn't want to get hit again." Dr. Lee reiterated,
 
"Those were her words as to why she did it." 
Dr. Lee then asked CW #2 "if there were any threats
 
involved." CW #2 allegedly told him, "[Veikoso] said he -- I
 
wouldn't be going home if I didn't do what he told me to do. He
 
said he would shoot me. . . . He said I'll be lucky to be going
 
home today." Dr. Lee further testified, "'He said he would shoot
 
me. He said I'd be lucky to go home today because most girls
 
don't go home,' is what [CW #2] said to me that [Veikoso] had
 
said." Veikoso objected to this line of questioning. 
During the physical examination, Dr. Lee found recent
 
abrasions on the right side of CW #2's neck and right thigh. He
 
found a two-centimeter hematoma on the back of her head. CW #2
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had pain, but no marks, on her right shoulder, at the bridge of
 
her nose, and in the cheek bone area. Dr. Lee also observed a
 
red, swollen lip and multiple contusions and abrasions on her
 
body that were recent in nature. 
In his pelvic examination of CW #2, Dr. Lee observed
 
some redness on her external genitalia, indicating "that recently
 
there was some irritation there." However, there were no breaks
 
in the skin. He also discovered a loose black hair, which did
 
not match CW #2's hair color. Dr. Lee opined that the
 
examination was consistent with vaginal penetration. 
On redirect examination, Dr. Lee testified that someone
 
can strike another person without leaving physical marks or
 
injuries. He opined that a lack of physical injuries does not
 
rule out an assault. He further testified that a lack of
 
physical injuries in the genital area does not rule out sexual
 
assault because "[i]n my experience, as many as one half would
 
have no physical injuries at all, of people who present
 
themselves as sex assault victims that I see." He explained
 
various reasons why injuries may not be apparent. 
D. CW #2's Testimony
 CW #2 testified that in the early morning hours of
 
February 7, 2009, she was "down at Nuuanu, behind the Pali Longs,
 Safeway." Before she encountered Veikoso, she had engaged in sex
 
for a fee with one other man. Veikoso drove up to CW #2 in a
 
Ford Mustang. He asked CW #2 if she wanted to "cruise with him,"
 
and she agreed. Veikoso stated he was driving his cousin's car. 
Veikoso began driving up the Pali Highway. He told CW #2, "I can
 
take you back if you're scared. . . . I can go get somebody
 
else. If you want to go back, just tell me." CW #2 told him, "I
 
don't mind. We can go hang out." Veikoso turned into a dark
 
neighborhood on Old Pali Road and reiterated that he could take
 
her home if she was scared. CW #2 finally stated, "Okay already.
 
. . . Just take me back already." Veikoso responded, "Oh, why? 
6  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Are you scared of me now?" CW #2 reached for her phone, but
 
Veikoso grabbed it from her and began striking her in the face. 
He yanked her hair down toward the middle console, and CW #2
 
could see blood dripping from her face onto the console. Veikoso
 
told her, "[Y]ou're going to do what I tell you to do." CW #2
 
thought she was going to die. She screamed, "Let me go, let me
 
go." Veikoso told her, "Shut the fuck up or I'm going to shoot
 
you." After that, CW #2 "stayed quiet" so that "he wouldn't hurt
 
[her] anymore." Veikoso continued driving, heading over the Pali
 
Highway.
 
As Veikoso's vehicle headed down the windward side of
 
the Pali Highway, Veikoso told CW #2 he would let her go at a
 
nearby bus stop and give her money to catch a bus home.  However,
 
he continued to drive, turning into the Maunawili area. CW #2
 
offered to give Veikoso the $120 she had on her if he let her go. 
Veikoso took the money, then stated, "[Y]ou can have it back
 
after we're done." However, he never returned the money.
 
Veikoso told CW #2, "The last girl that was with me got
 
out, but she broke her collarbone." They continued driving
 
through a dark stretch of Maunawili, and Veikoso said, "Oh, it's
 
scary back here, yeah? Do you know where you are?" He turned
 
into Maunawili Elementary School and told her, "[Y]ou can tell
 
your friends this is where you got fucked." He then turned off
 
the car and said, "[Y]ou're going to do whatever I want you to do
 
and then you can go; You'll be fine if you do it." 
Veikoso pulled CW #2 out of the car by her hair and
 
took her to a bench at the school. There, he forced her to
 
perform oral and vaginal sex. CW #2 believed that if she didn't
 
comply, "he was either going to hurt [her] again or kill [her]." 
Veikoso kissed her, bit her lip, and spat inside her mouth. 
Afterward, Veikoso said, "I'll give you your cell phone
 
back; just come with me back to my car." CW #2 told him she
 
would meet him "on the side." CW #2 then walked quickly toward
 
7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the parking lot, and when she reached the sidewalk, began running
 
toward the highway. She attempted to flag down several cars on
 
the highway, and eventually Ogawa stopped. CW #2 told Ogawa that
 
somebody had just raped her across the street. From this point
 
forward, CW #2's testimony was largely consistent with Ogawa's
 
version of what happened. 
The State's expert determined that blood samples taken
 
from the Ford Mustang matched CW #2's DNA profile. The expert
 
also detected semen in CW #2's vaginal swabs, but did not detect
 
any male DNA. The expert was unable to obtain a DNA profile from
 
the black hair recovered from CW #2. The DNA profiles obtained
 
from CW #2's secretion swabs excluded Veikoso. 
E.	 Motion for Severance of Charges
 On May 6, 2009, Veikoso filed a Motion for Severance of
 
Charges. He urged the Circuit Court to sever Counts 1 through 3
 (involving CW #1) from Counts 4 through 8 (involving CW #2). 
Veikoso argued that a single trial would heighten the risk that a
 
jury would convolute the facts of the two incidents and that it
 
would preclude him from testifying as to the second incident. He
 
argued that such prejudice would "far outweigh[] any judicial
 
economy concerns." 
The Circuit Court denied the motion, concluding:
 4.	 
The allegations against Defendant demonstrate a common
intent, scheme, plan, design or modus operandi.
5.	 Defendant will not benefit from severance as the
 
charged offenses are based on two similar acts.
6.	 Defendant has not articulated adequate grounds for
severance to tip the balance between possible
prejudice to the defendant (if any exist) against the
public interest in efficient use of judicial time
through joint trial of these offenses.
 
At the close of the State's case, Veikoso renewed his
 
Motion for Severance, arguing that he wanted to testify as to the
 
second set of charges but not the first. The Circuit Court again
 
denied the motion. 
8  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
F. Tachibana Colloquies
 
Prior to trial, at a hearing on various motions in
 
limine, the Circuit Court advised Veikoso of his rights as
 
follows:
 
THE COURT: And as far as the question of testifying, you
have a constitutional right to testify in your own defense.
And although you should consult with your attorney, Mr.
Guerrero, regarding the decision to testify, it is your
decision and no one can prevent you from testifying, if you
choose to do so. If you decide to testify, the prosecutor
will be allowed to cross-examine you. You also have a
 constitutional right not to testify and to remain silent.
If you choose not to testify, the jury will be instructed
that it cannot hold your silence against you in deciding
 your case. And if you have not testified by the end of the
trial, I will briefly question you at that point to make
sure that it was your decision not to testify.
Do you understand that?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 THE COURT: Do you have any questions about it?
THE DEFENDANT: No.
 THE COURT: Okay. And as far as the -- you know, what rules
we come up with today, you know, that may be the way it is
when we start. Things could change during the trial. And
 this is something for you to talk to Mr. Guerrero about
because even initial rulings can get changed if something
happens. Like, for instance, I don't know if you have any
prior convictions, but if you had any, say, just for
example, if you took the stand and you told the -- as part
of your testimony, you said I've never been in trouble with
the law before, if that was not accurate, the prosecutor
would probably ask to approach the bench and say Mr. Veikoso
is giving the jury a false impression of things. So he'd
 want to bring in any record that you might have.
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 THE COURT: So even though at the beginning perhaps, you
know, if you did have a record, your attorney would be
asking that none of it be included because the jury
shouldn't be considering that to decide whether you
committed these offenses.
 THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 THE COURT: And even though that may be the ruling when we
start, that can get changed based on what people say or what
they do. So, I'm just giving you that as an example that
once we're done with today, it will give you an idea of what
the preliminary rulings are on regarding the evidence, but
that is all subject to change depending on what happens in
the case, okay?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 
At the close of the State's case, Veikoso renewed his
 
Motion for Severance and made an offer of proof as to his
 
testimony with respect to CW #2. The Court again advised him of
 
his rights:
 
9  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Mr. Veikoso, as I discussed with you at the
start, before the trial started, you have a Constitutional
right testify -- to testify in your own defense.
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 THE COURT: And although you should consult with your lawyer
regarding the decision to testify, it is your decision, and
no one can prevent you from testifying, if you choose to do
 so. If you do decide to testify, the prosecutor will be
allowed to cross-examine you.
You also have a constitutional right not to testify
and to remain silent. If you choose not to testify, the
jury will be instructed that it cannot hold sour [sic]
silence against you in deciding your case. Now, based on
what your attorney has just said, he's telling me that you
do not intend to testify; is that correct?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 THE COURT: And is it your decision not to testify?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 THE COURT: And you've had a chance to discuss this with
your attorney, Mr. Guerrero?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 THE COURT: Do you have any questions for me about that?
THE DEFENDANT: No.
 
Veikoso did not testify at trial and was convicted on
 
all counts. On October 28, 2009, Veikoso filed a timely appeal.
 
II.	 POINTS OF ERROR
 
Veikoso raises five points of error on appeal:
 (1) The Circuit Court erred in denying Veikoso's
 
Motion for Severance of Charges;
 
(2) The Circuit Court erred in failing to obtain a
 
voluntary, knowing, and intelligent waiver of Veikoso's right to
 
testify; 
(3) The Circuit Court erred in admitting Dr. Lee's
 
opinion testimony that his medical findings were consistent with
 
sexual assault; 
(4) The Circuit Court erred in admitting Dr. Lee's
 
hearsay testimony regarding Veikoso's alleged threats; and 
(5) The Circuit Court erred in sentencing Veikoso to
 
consecutive terms of imprisonment totaling fifty years.
 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
We review the Circuit Court's ruling on the Motion for 
Severance under the abuse of discretion standard. State v. 
Timas, 82 Hawai
'i 499, 512, 923 P.2d 916, 929 (App. 1996). 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Because Veikoso for the first time on appeal contends 
that his waiver of his right to testify was not knowing or 
voluntary, the issue is reviewed for plain error. See Hawai 'i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b); State v. Staley, 91 
Hawai'i 275, 282, 982 P.2d 904, 911 (1999). 
"[W]here the admissibility of evidence is determined by 
application of the hearsay rule, there can be only one correct 
result, and the appropriate standard for appellate review is the 
right/wrong standard." State v. Moore, 82 Hawai 'i 202, 217, 921 
P.2d 122, 137 (1996) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). With respect to hearsay exceptions, "the only question 
for the trial court is whether the specific requirements of the 
rule were met, so there can be no discretion." State v. Ortiz, 
91 Hawai
'i at 189, 981 P.2d at 1135 (internal quotation marks, 
citation, footnote, and brackets omitted). 
Where the trial court errs in admitting evidence, "a 
defendant's conviction will not be overturned if the error was 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." State v. Haili, 103 Hawai 'i 
89, 100, 79 P.3d 1263, 1274 (2003). "In applying the harmless-beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard, the court is 
required to examine the record and determine whether there is a 
reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have 
contributed to the conviction." State v. Kassebeer, 118 Hawai
'i 
493, 505, 193 P.3d 409, 421 (2008) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
"The authority of a trial court to select and determine 
the severity of a penalty is normally undisturbed on review in 
the absence of an apparent abuse of discretion or unless 
applicable statutory or constitutional commands have not been 
observed." State v. Reis
, 115 Hawai 'i 79, 83, 165 P.3d 980, 984 
(2007) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
11  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. Severance
 
Veikoso argues that the Circuit Court erred in denying
 
his Motion for Severance of Charges. HRPP Rule 8(a) provides
 that two or more offenses may be joined in one charge when the
 
offenses: "(1) are of the same or similar character, even if not
 
part of a single scheme or plan; or (2) are based on the same
 
conduct or on a series of acts connected together or constituting
 
parts of a single scheme or plan." Here, the Circuit Court found
 
that the charged offenses "demonstrate a common intent, scheme,
 
plan, design or modus operandi" and that they "are based on two
 
similar acts." 
Veikoso does not dispute the propriety of the joinder 
under HRPP Rule 8(a), but rather the Circuit Court's appraisal of 
prejudice under HRPP Rule 14. Joinder may result in prejudice to 
the defendant by: "(1) preventing him or her from presenting 
conflicting defenses or evidence with respect to each charge, (2) 
permitting the prosecution to introduce evidence that would be 
inadmissible with respect to certain charges if tried separately, 
or (3) bolstering weak cases through the cumulative effect of the 
evidence." State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai
'i 390, 411, 56 P.3d 692, 
713 (2002). HRPP Rule 14 offers discretionary relief from a prejudicial joinder: 
If it appears that a defendant or the government is
prejudiced by a joinder of offenses or of defendants in a
charge or by such joinder for trial together, the court may
order an election or separate trials of counts, grant a
severance of defendants or provide whatever other relief
justice requires.
 
In ruling on a motion for severance, the trial court 
must "balance the possible prejudice to the defendant from 
joinder with the public interest in efficient use of judicial 
time through joint trial of defendants and offenses which are 
connected." Timas, 82 Hawai 'i at 512, 923 P.2d at 929 (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted). Ultimately, "[t]he 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
decision to sever is in the sound discretion of the trial court." 
State v. Balanza, 93 Hawai 'i 279, 290, 1 P.3d 281, 288 (2000). 
In reviewing a ruling on severance, we "may not 
conclude that the defendant suffered prejudice from a joint trial 
unless [we] first conclude that a defendant was denied a fair 
trial. What might have happened had the motion for severance 
been granted is irrelevant speculation." Timas, 82 Hawai 'i at 
512, 923 P.2d at 929 (ellipsis and brackets omitted) (quoting 
State v. Gaspar, 8 Haw. App. 317, 327, 801 P.2d 30, 35 (1990)). 
"The defendant has the burden of proving a denial of a fair 
trial." Timas, 82 Hawai 'i at 511, 923 P.2d at 928. 
Veikoso argues that he was denied a fair trial because the joinder resulted in a "spillover effect" between the two 
incidents, heightening the risk that the jury would convolute the 
facts and convict on both sets of counts. Veikoso asserts that 
had the cases been tried separately, the State would not have 
been permitted to present evidence of the offenses against a 
different complainant. 
We disagree. Evidence of the other offenses would 
likely have been admissible to show modus operandi and identity. 
See HRE Rule 404(b). Both incidents involved targeting 
prostitutes in the Pali Longs area, beating them while driving 
along the Pali Highway, threatening and frightening them into 
submission, sexually assaulting them in a similar manner at 
Maunawili Elementary School, and abruptly changing his demeanor 
to reflect caring and concern following the assaults. These 
"characteristics and methodology" of the two incidents are so 
"strikingly similar . . . as to support the inference that both 
were the handiwork of the very same person." Commentary to HRE 
Rule 404; see State v. Yamada, 116 Hawai
'i 422, 436-37, 173 P.3d 
569, 583-84 (App. 2007) (evidence of subsequent assault and robbery admissible to show identity and modus operandi where both 
incidents involved startling the complainants in the Diamond Head 
13  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
area, overpowering them with violence, and utilizing an aluminum
 
baseball bat). Thus we reject the argument the joinder allowed
 
the State to present evidence that would have been inadmissible
 
in separate trials.2
 
Veikoso also argues that he did not receive a fair
 
trial because he was unable to testify about his defense to CW
 
#2's allegations without subjecting himself to cross-examination
 
regarding CW #1's allegations.3 In his offer of proof, Veikoso
 
proposed to testify that CW #2 agreed to sex for a fee, that he
 
refused to pay her, and "that's when the problem arose." He
 
maintains that this defense conflicted with his defense for the
 
CW #1 incident, lack of proof beyond a reasonable doubt. He
 
argues that his proposed testimony as to CW #2 would harm his
 
defense of reasonable doubt as to CW #1, thereby resulting in
 
prejudice.
 
2
 Even assuming arguendo that evidence of the other offenses would 
be inadmissible in separate trials, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has recognized
that "[c]onsolidated trials will almost always permit the admission of some
evidence that would not be admissible with respect to each and every one ofthe charges if tried separately." Cordeiro, 99 Hawai' i at 413, 56 P.3d at
715. Although some prejudice may result, it "may be effectively dispelled by
a jury instruction to the effect that 'each count and the evidence thatapplies to that count is to be considered separately.'" Id. (citation 
omitted). Here, the Circuit Court instructed the jury to consider each countseparately, emphasizing, "The fact that you may find the defendant not guilty,or guilty of one of the counts charged, does not mean that you must reach thesame verdict with respect to any other count charged." The court appropriately limited any prejudicial effect of CW #2's testimony concerningVeikoso's statement that "the last person to jump out of the car got a brokencollarbone." It specifically instructed the jury, at the close of the State'sdirect examination of CW #2, that it should only consider the statement withregard to "this particular incident, with this particular witness." Because juries are presumed to follow all of the trial court's instructions, theCircuit Court effectively dispelled any prejudicial effect arising from theoverlapping evidence. Montalvo v. Lapez, 77 Hawai' i 282, 301, 884 P.2d 345,
364 (1994) (citation omitted). Veikoso has presented no evidence to doubtthat "the jury was able to assess the credibility of the witnesses and weighthe evidence in each case without reference to the others." Cordeiro, 99 
Hawai'i at 413, 56 P.3d at 715. Veikoso has not demonstrated he was denied a 
fair trial on this basis. 
3
 As discussed below, we find no support for Veikoso's assertion
that he was prevented from testifying on his own behalf. The record indicates
 he exercised his right not to testify as a matter of strategy.
 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In describing the "conflicting defenses" ground for
 
prejudice, this court stated that a consolidated trial may have
 
been unfair if "the core of each defense was in irreconcilable
 
conflict with the other and there was a significant danger, as
 
both defenses were portrayed in the trial, that the conflict
 
alone led the jury to infer the defendant's guilt." Gaspar, 8
 
Haw. App. at 327, 801 P.2d at 35. Here, we fail to see how
 Veikoso's two proposed defenses are conflicting. To the
 
contrary, they are by no means mutually exclusive. In his
 
closing argument, Veikoso utilized both defenses with regard to
 
both CW #1 and CW #2. As the court did in Gaspar, we decline to
 
speculate as to how Veikoso's testimony may have shaped his
 
defenses had he taken the stand. "The only relevant facts are
 
what actually happened." Id. at 328, 801 P.2d at 36. We are
 
unpersuaded that the joinder prevented Veikoso from testifying,
 thereby resulting in an unfair trial. 
Finally, Veikoso argues that the joinder allowed the
 
State to "bolster its weaker case [regarding CW #2] through the
 
cumulative effect of the evidence of both complainants." Upon
 
review of the record, we cannot conclude that the State's
 
evidence regarding CW #2 was sufficiently weak, if at all, as to
 
deny Veikoso a fair trial. Although CW #2's allegations, unlike
 
CW #1's, were not supported by DNA evidence, both complainants'
 
testimonies were critical to their credibility and hence their
 
respective allegations. Furthermore, as discussed above, the
 
jury is presumed to follow the trial court's instructions. The
 
Circuit Court's instructions dispelled any potential "cumulative
 
effect" of the evidence. Thus Veikoso has failed to demonstrate
 
that he was denied a fair trial as a result of the joinder.
 
B. Waiver of Veikoso's Right to Testify
 Veikoso argues that the Circuit Court failed to obtain
 
a voluntary, knowing, and intelligent waiver of his right to 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testify. Because Veikoso failed to properly preserve the issue
 
for appeal, we review for plain error. HRPP Rule 52(b). 
The accused's right to testify in criminal prosecutions 
is guaranteed by both the federal and state constitutions. U.S. 
Const. amend. V, XIV; Haw. Const. art. I, §§ 5, 10, 14; State v. 
Silva, 78 Hawai 'i 115, 122-23, 890 P.2d 708, 709-10 (App. 1995), 
abrogated on other grounds by Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai 'i 226, 
900 P.2d 1293 (1995)). Trial courts must advise criminal 
defendants of their rights and obtain an on-the-record waiver in 
every case where the defendant does not testify. Tachibana, 79 
Hawai'i at 237, 900 P.2d at 1304. The trial court must inform 
the defendant that: (1) he has the right to testify; (2) if he 
wants to testify, no one can prevent him from doing so; (3) if he 
testifies, the prosecution will be allowed to cross-examine him; 
(4) he has a right not to testify; and (5) if he does not
 
testify, the jury will be instructed that it cannot hold his
 
silence against him. Id. at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7. 
These advisements should take place before trial and must be
 reiterated before the defense rests. Id. at 237, 900 P.2d at
 
1304. 
Veikoso first argues that the Circuit Court failed to
 
obtain a valid waiver of his right to testify in its pretrial
 Tachibana colloquy. He claims the waiver was tainted by the
 
Circuit Court's discussion of possible cross-examination
 
scenarios, which had the effect of discouraging him from
 
testifying. After delivering the required colloquy, the Circuit
 
Court further explained:
 
THE COURT: Okay. And as far as the -- you know, what rules
we come up with today, you know, that may be the way it is
when we start. Things could change during the trial. And
 this is something for you to talk to Mr. Guerrero about
because even initial rulings can get changed if something
happens. Like, for instance, I don't know if you have any
prior convictions, but if you had any, say, just for
example, if you took the stand and you told the -- as part
of your testimony, you said I've never been in trouble with
the law before, if that was not accurate, the prosecutor
would probably ask to approach the bench and say Mr. Veikoso
 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
is giving the jury a false impression of things. So he'd
 
want to bring in any record that you might have.
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 THE COURT: So even though at the beginning perhaps, you
know, if you did have a record, your attorney would be
asking that none of it be included because the jury
shouldn't be considering that to decide whether you
committed these offenses.
 THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 THE COURT: And even though that may be the ruling when we
start, that can get changed based on what people say or what
they do. So, I'm just giving you that as an example that
once we're done with today, it will give you an idea of what
the preliminary rulings are on regarding the evidence, but
that is all subject to change depending on what happens in
the case, okay?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 
Veikoso argues that because he had a pending firearm offense,
 
this warning effectively discouraged him from testifying. 
The court in Tachibana recognized the delicacy of 
requiring trial courts to advise defendants of their rights. 79 
Hawai'i at 242-43, 900 P.2d at 1309-10. In so doing, the trial 
court runs the risk of implicitly emphasizing certain rights over others. For example, "in explicating the right to testify," the 
trial judge risks "cast[ing] in unflattering light the right not 
to testify." Id. at 243, 900 P.2d at 1310 (citation omitted). 
The court carefully crafted the specific elements of the Tachibana colloquy to avoid any such undue emphasis. Id. at 236 
n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7. It therefore mandated that "[i]n conducting the colloquy, the trial court must be careful not to 
influence the defendant's decision whether or not to testify and 
should limit the colloquy to [the five elements]." Id. 
Here, by engaging in a discussion of the potential
 
consequences of testifying, the Circuit Court ventured somewhat
 
beyond the colloquy in Tachibana. See, e.g., Webb v. Texas, 409
 
U.S. 95, 98 (1972); Arthur v. United States, 986 A.2d 398, 403-04
 (D.C. App. 2009). Thus, we must determine whether the Circuit
 
Court's remarks effectively precluded the defendant from exerting
 
a valid waiver of his right to testify. To determine whether
 
such a waiver is voluntary, knowing, and intelligent, we must
 
17  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
examine the totality of facts and circumstances. State v. 
Merino, 81 Hawai 'i 198, 221, 915 P.2d 672, 695 (1996). 
At the close of the State's case, the Circuit Court
 
repeated the Tachibana colloquy without detailing the possible
 
consequences of testifying. The court specifically clarified
 
that it was Veikoso's own decision not to testify. Veikoso was
 
represented by counsel throughout the proceedings and had the
 
opportunity to discuss the decision with his attorney. Although
 
his counsel previously stated that Veikoso wished to testify to
 
refute CW #2 but not CW #1, the record indicates his ultimate
 
choice not to testify was a matter of strategy and not because of
 
undue pressure by the judge. Based on the totality of facts and
 
circumstances, we conclude that Veikoso knowingly, voluntarily,
 
and intelligently waived his right to testify.
 
C. Dr. Lee's Opinion re Sexual Assault
 Veikoso argues that the Circuit Court erred by allowing
 
Dr. Lee to opine that his medical findings were consistent with
 
sexual assault. He maintains that the testimony had the improper
 
prejudicial effect of bolstering CW #2's credibility. Because
 
Veikoso failed to object at trial, we review for plain error. 
HRPP Rule 52(b).
 
Veikoso points to State v. Morris, 72 Haw. 527, 825
 
P.2d 1051 (1992), to support his contention of error. In that
 
child abuse case, the expert witness opined that the child
 
suffered chronic abuse. Id. at 528-29, 825 P.2d at 1052. 
However, the witness had never examined the child and there was
 no physical evidence to support his opinion. Id. at 529, 825
 
P.2d at 1052. The court concluded that the "clear implication"
 of the expert's testimony was to "say that the child [was]
 
truthful" without any factual basis. Id. Here, in contrast, Dr.
 
Lee based his opinion on a thorough examination of CW #2. He did
 
not base his testimony on facts not in evidence. Thus Morris is
 
not on point. 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Veikoso's reliance on another child abuse case, State
 
v. Batangan, is likewise misplaced. 71 Haw. 552, 799 P.2d 48
 
(1990). There, the court held that "conclusory opinions that
 
abuse did occur and that the child victim's report of abuse is
 
truthful and believable is of no assistance to the jury, and
 
therefore, should not be admitted." Id. at 558, 799 P.2d at 52. 
The expert witness in that case "implicitly testified" that the
 complainant "was believable and that she had been abused by [the
 
defendant]." Id. at 555, 799 P.2d at 50. Here, however, Dr. Lee
 
did not implicitly testify as to CW #2's believability. He
 merely testified that his findings did not "rule out" sexual
 
assault. 
In a case addressing this very issue, an expert witness 
testified that a lack of physical trauma was consistent with the 
complainant's allegations of assault. State v. Mars, 116 Hawai
'i 
125, 140, 170 P.3d 861, 876 (App. 2007). This court concluded that although it is improper to admit expert opinion testimony 
that "directly addresses the credibility of the victim, i.e., 'I 
believe the victim,'" it is proper to admit testimony that 
medical findings are "consistent with" the complainant's account. 
Id. at 140, 170 P.3d at 876 (internal quotation marks and 
citation omitted). Here, where substantially similar testimony 
is at issue, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not plainly 
err in admitting Dr. Lee's opinion testimony. 
D. Dr. Lee's Testimony re Veikoso's Threats
 Veikoso contends that the Circuit Court erred by
 
admitting Dr. Lee's hearsay testimony regarding threats Veikoso
 allegedly made to CW #2. During the course of his examination of
 
CW #2, Dr. Lee asked her "if there were any threats involved." 
Over Veikoso's objection, Dr. Lee testified as follows:
 
THE WITNESS [Dr. Lee]: And [CW #2] said she was -- she said
she was scared, to me, and, quote, He said he -- I wouldn't
be going home if I didn't do what he told me to do. He said
 he would shoot me.
 . . . .
 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE WITNESS [Dr. Lee]: He said I'll be lucky to go home
today.
 . . . .
 Q. BY MR. CHIN [Prosecutor]: Okay. You were interrupted
[by Veikoso's objection]. But what were the -- what were
 the type of statements that were being made that you were
just talking about?
A. Well, she told me, He said he would shoot me. He said
 
I'd be lucky to go home today because most girls don't go
home, is what she said to me that he had said.
 
The Circuit Court overruled Veikoso's objection and
 
admitted the testimony under the hearsay exception for statements
 
made for purposes of medical diagnosis or treatment under HRE
 
Rule 803(b)(4). 
HRE Rule 803(b)(4) allows admission of:
 Statements made for purposes of medical diagnosis or
treatment and describing medical history, or past or present
symptoms, pain, or sensations, or the inception or general
character of the cause or external source thereof insofar as
 reasonably pertinent to diagnosis or treatment.
 
Hawai'i courts have not fully developed the reach of 
this exception in the context of sexual assault. Other courts 
generally admit hearsay statements describing the physical nature 
of the assault, as such statements pertain to the "cause or 
external source" of the injuries. See, e.g., Guam v. Ignacio, 10 
F.3d 608, 613 (9th Cir. 1993). Under this reasoning, the physician's ability to treat the complainant's injuries is 
dependent upon a description of how they arose. Id. Here, Dr. 
Lee's testimony regarding CW #2's description of the physical aspects of the assault was admissible under this reasoning. 
With regard to statements assigning fault, it appears
 
that courts have tended to adopt either a broad or narrow
 
interpretation of this hearsay exception. However, as discussed
 
below, even courts employing the broad interpretation generally
 
do not admit statements describing alleged threats the defendant
 
made to the complainant.
 
20   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Under the narrower interpretation, courts will not
 
admit hearsay statements pertaining to fault.4 In jurisdictions
 
employing this interpretation, statements assigning fault,
 
including those regarding the identity of the assailant,
 
generally are not admissible. See, e.g., United States v.
 
Belfast, 611 F.3d 783, 819 (11th Cir. 2010); Storms v. Storms,
 454 N.W.2d 175, 178 (Mich. Ct. App. 1990); In re Marriage of
 
P.K.A., 725 S.W.2d 78, 80 (Mo. Ct. App. 1987); State v.
 
Robinson, 718 N.W.2d 400, 404-07 (Minn. 2006).
 
Under the broader interpretation, courts appear to be
 
more willing to admit hearsay statements assigning fault and, in
 domestic or child abuse situations, the assailant's identity. 
See, e.g., State v. Rosa, 575 A.2d 727, 729-30 (Me. 1990)
 
(physician's testimony that complainant told him the assailant
 
threatened her with a knife was pertinent when physician
 
testified that he was treating the victim for emotional trauma);
 
Moore v. City of Leeds, 1 So.3d 145, 150 (Ala. Crim. App. 2008)
 
(physician's testimony regarding complainant's description of
 
altercation with her husband that gave rise to her injuries was
 
reasonably pertinent to medical treatment stemming from domestic
 
violence). A number of jurisdictions have held that in child
 
sexual abuse cases, statements identifying the abuser are
 
admissible. See, e.g., Danaipour v. McLarey, 386 F.3d 289, 298­
99 (1st Cir. 2004); Morgan v. Foretich, 846 F.2d 941, 949 (4th
 Cir. 1988); United States v. Balfany, 965 F.2d 575, 579 (8th Cir.
 
1992); United States v. George, 960 F.2d 97, 99-100 (9th Cir.
 
1992); Ignacio, 10 F.3d at 613; State v. Williams, 154 P.3d 322,
 
327-28 (Wash. Ct. App. 2007); State v. Livingston, 907 S.W.2d
 
392, 396-97 (Tenn. 1995); State v. DePastino, 638 A.2d 578, 585
 
4
 This approach comports with the Advisory Committee's note to Fed.
R. Evid. Rule 803(4) that "[s]tatements as to fault would not ordinarily
qualify." The commentary to the identical Hawai' i rule quotes the federal
Advisory Committee's notes, observing that "a patient's statement that he wasstruck by an automobile would qualify but not his statement that the car was
driven through a red light.” Commentary to HRE Rule 803(b)(4).
 
21 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Conn. 1994); State v. Logan, 806 P.2d 137, 139-40 (Or. Ct. App.
 
1991); Nash v. State, 754 N.E.2d 1021, 1025 (Ind. Ct. App. 2001). 
The identity of the abuser is relevant to the child's
 
psychological and emotional treatment, as well as his or her
 
safety. See United States v. Joe, 8 F.3d 1488, 1494-95 (10th
 
Cir. 1993). Several jurisdictions have extended this reasoning
 to domestic assault complainants, as their ongoing safety and
 
psychological treatment depends on the identity of the abuser. 
Id. at 1495; Oldman v. State, 998 P.2d 957, 961-62 (Wyo. 2000);
 
United States v. Tome, 61 F.3d 1446, 1450 (10th Cir. 1995);
 
Moore, 1 So.3d at 150. However, in cases such as this, where the
 
assailant is a stranger who does not maintain daily contact with
 
the complainant, the safety rationale is inapplicable.
 
A handful of cases have dealt with the type of hearsay
 
at issue in this case -- alleged threats of the assailant. The
 
overwhelming majority have held the threats inadmissible.
 
In United States v. Joe, 8 F.3d at 1497, a physician
 
testified that the complainant told him her husband threatened to
 
kill her if he ever caught her with another man. The Tenth
 
Circuit held that the testimony did not fall within the hearsay
 
exception for medical diagnosis or treatment because it did not
 
concern the cause of the alleged sexual assault-related injuries
 
for which the complainant was treated. Id. Similarly, in the
 
instant case, there is no testimony linking Veikoso's alleged
 threats to the cause or inception of CW #2's injuries.
 
In State v. Pina, 455 A.2d 313, 315 (R.I. 1983), the
 
examining physician testified to threats the defendant allegedly
 
made in the course of a sexual assault. The assailant allegedly
 
threatened to kill the complainant and throw her in a river. Id. 
He also allegedly told her that he "was horny and interested in
 sex" and that "he was going to rape her and didn't care what
 
happened to him." Id. The court considered whether such
 
statements were "helpful in the diagnosis or treatment of [the
 
22 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complainant's] ailments," and concluded they were not. Id.
 
(quoting State v. Contreras, 253 A.2d 612, 619 (R.I. 1969)). It
 
held that the statements were "clearly not pertinent to diagnosis
 
or treatment," and were therefore inadmissible. Id. This
 
interpretation of the hearsay exception was reaffirmed in State
 v. Burgess, 465 A.2d 204 (R.I. 1983), and State v. Gaspar, 982
 
A.2d 140 (R.I. 2009). In People v. Mitchell, 558 N.E.2d 559, 564
 
(Ill. App. Ct. 1990), an Illinois appellate court considered
 
whether the defendant's statements during the course of a sexual
 
assault, as told by the complainant's treating physician, were
 
admissible under the medical diagnosis exception. Allegedly, the
 
defendant told the complainant that if she would not go out with
 
him, he would take what he wanted. Id. The court held that this
 
testimony was not reasonably pertinent to the complainant's
 diagnosis or treatment. Id.
 
In Howard v. State, 403 S.E.2d 204, 204-05 (Ga. 1991),
 
the Georgia Supreme Court considered a physician's hearsay
 
testimony regarding the defendant's alleged threat to shoot her
 
if she took another step. It concluded that the testimony was
 
inadmissible because it was not reasonably pertinent to medical
 
diagnosis or treatment. Id. at 205. 
Similarly, in Casica v. State, 24 So.3d 1236, 1241
 
(Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2009), the trial court erroneously admitted
 
the hearsay statement of the complainant, related by her treating
 
nurse, that the man who sexually assaulted her had a gun. The
 
appellate court held that the statement was not reasonably
 
pertinent to diagnosis or treatment. Id. Accord, State v.
 
Hairston, 586 N.E.2d 1200, 1204 (Ohio Ct. App. 1990); see also
 Herrera v. State, 879 So.2d 38, 40 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2004)
 
(State conceded that alleged threat at gunpoint to rip off
 
complainant's clothes and take nude pictures of her was not
 
reasonably pertinent to medical diagnosis or treatment).
 
23 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Finally, in State v. Clary, 596 N.E.2d 554, 561 (Ohio
 
Ct. App. 1991), the Ohio Court of Appeals held that the
 
assailant's threat against the complainant during the course of
 
an alleged sexual assault was not admissible under the exception. 
It reasoned that the threat could not "effect any change in
 
treatment or diagnosis." Id. It appears that, when the treating
 
physician testified that he or she was inquiring for the purposes
 of psychological treatment or diagnosis, some courts have reached
 
a contrary conclusion. In State v. Woods, 23 P.3d 1046, 1069-70
 
(Wash. 2001), the defendant went on a rampage, sexually
 
assaulting and beating two victims to death. Before the second
 
victim died, she told the emergency room physician that the
 
assailant "hauled her out of bed, took her into the room where
 
[the first victim lay badly beaten], showed [the first victim] to
 
her and said, . . . 'if you don't do what I tell you, you are
 
going to end up in the same condition.'" Id. at 1069. The
 
emergency room physician testified to these statements, as well
 as the victim's detailed descriptions of the attacks. Id. As a
 
foundation, the physician testified that he "needed to have an
 idea of what happened 'the same way the patient knows the story'"
 
in order to arrange for psychological counseling. Id. at 1070. 
The court held that the statements were admissible under the
 medical diagnosis exception. It reasoned that they were
 
pertinent to an assessment of the victim's potential need for
 
psychological counseling. Id. The victim's forced viewing of
 
the beaten body of her friend was particularly relevant to
 eventual psychological treatment. Id.; see also State v.
 
Woodward, 908 P.2d 231, 238 (N.M. 1995) (psychologist's testimony
 that victim's husband had made various threats to kill her held
 
reasonably pertinent to psychological treatment); Vallinoto v.
 
DiSandro, 688 A.2d 830, 840-41 (R.I. 1997) (hearsay statements
 
admissible where directly relevant to psychological treatment).
 
24   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, Dr. Lee noted that the treatment center provided
 
counseling services. However, unlike the physician in Woods, he
 
did not testify that a purpose of his examination was to discern
 
whether psychological treatment may be necessary. Rather, his
 
examination was confined to "any injuries that might need medical
 
attention." The whole of his testimony confirms that the
 
examination was for physical, not psychological, diagnosis and
 
treatment.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held that the HRE 
803(b)(4) exception extends to statements made for the purpose of 
psychological treatment. State v. Yamada, 99 Hawai 'i 542, 546­
47, 556, 57 P.3d 467, 471-72, 481 (2002); see also State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai
'i 504, 518, 78 P.3d 317, 331 (2003) (hearsay 
exception includes statements made for purposes of psychological treatment). The Yamada court held that a videotape of the 
defendant's "reenactment" of the events giving rise to 
prosecution was admissible because the reenactment was conducted 
to aid the treating psychologist in making a diagnosis. Yamada, 
99 Hawai
'i at 546-47, 556, 57 P.3d at 471-72, 481. Here, 
however, Dr. Lee did not testify that the threats were relevant 
to treatment or diagnosis. He only testified that obtaining a 
generalized "incident history" aids in the diagnosis of physical 
injuries. Thus, although under Yamada, the alleged threats could 
arguably be admissible if conveyed for the purpose of 
psychological diagnosis or treatment, no such foundation was laid 
here. 
Accordingly, under the circumstances of this case, we
 
conclude that Dr. Lee's testimony regarding CW #2's report of
 
Veikoso's threats was not reasonably pertinent to medical
 
diagnosis or treatment. The Circuit Court therefore erred in
 
admitting the testimony under HRE Rule 803(b)(4).
 
To determine whether this error constituted harmless
 
error beyond a reasonable doubt, we must "examine the record and
 
25  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determine whether there is a reasonable possibility that the 
error complained of might have contributed to the conviction." 
Kassebeer, 118 Hawai 'i at 505, 193 P.3d at 421 (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted). "If there is such a reasonable possibility in a criminal case, then the error is not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and the judgment of 
conviction on which it may have been based must be set aside." 
State v. Gano, 92 Hawai
'i 161, 176, 988 P.2d 1153, 1168 (1999) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Here, the hearsay statements were relayed through an
 
expert witness, a doctor, thereby heightening their prejudicial
 effect. The statement concerning alleged threats went to the
 
heart of the key witness's testimony and were not cumulative to
 
other evidence. Several of the most damaging statements were
 
conveyed solely through Dr. Lee's hearsay testimony. At trial,
 
CW #2 never testified that Veikoso told her "[she'd] be lucky to
 
go home today." Nor did she testify to his alleged threat that
 
"most girls don't go home." The jury was thus allowed to
 
consider evidence it should not have heard. The threats to which
 
CW #2 did testify arguably were colored with heightened
 
credibility as a result of Dr. Lee's improper testimony.
 
The hearsay testimony was highly prejudicial to
 
Veikoso. The alleged threats were repeated several times and
 
were presented as CW #2's own words. Moreover, in adult sexual
 
assault cases, the credibility of the complainant is paramount. 
The complaining witness is critical to establishing a lack of
 
consent, as he or she is often the sole eyewitness to what
 
occurred. Although the State presented limited corroborating
 
evidence from Dr. Lee and Ogawa, CW #2's credibility was still
 
critical to establishing all five counts. Veikoso argued a
 
defense of consent in his closing argument. He attempted to cast
 
doubt upon CW #2's credibility on several bases: her failure to
 
disclose to the Grand Jury that she was working as a prostitute;
 
26 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
her failure to disclose until the week of trial that she had sex
 
for a fee with another man earlier that same night; her failure
 
to report the incident immediately after it happened; and
 
discrepancies with her Grand Jury testimony. The alleged
 
threats, relayed in raw terms as vivid and concrete quotations
 
and repeated several times, may have tipped the scale in favor of
 
CW #2's credibility. We therefore conclude that there is a
 
reasonable possibility that the error might have contributed to
 
the conviction and we cannot conclude that the error was harmless
 
beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
E.	 Sentencing
 Veikoso contends that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in imposing consecutive sentences totaling fifty
 years. In determining whether to impose consecutive sentences,
 
HRS § 706-668.5(2) directs the court to consider the factors set
 
forth in HRS § 706-606
:
 
(1)	 The nature and circumstances of the offense and the
 
history and characteristics of the defendant;
(2)	 The need for the sentence imposed:
(a) 	To reflect the seriousness of the offense, to
promote respect for law, and to provide just
punishment for the offense;
(b)	 To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
(c) 	To protect the public from further crimes of the
defendant; and
(d) 	To provide the defendant with needed educational
or vocational training, medical care, or other
correctional treatment in the most effective
 manner;
(3)	 The kinds of sentences available; and
(4)	 The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities
among defendants with similar records who have been
found guilty of similar conduct.
 
(1993 Repl. & Supp. 2009). 
Ultimately, the Circuit Court enjoys "broad discretion 
in imposing a sentence." State v. Kahapea, 111 Hawai 'i 267, 278, 
141 P.3d 440, 451 (2006) (internal quotation marks and brackets 
omitted) (quoting State v. Rauch, 94 Hawai 'i 315, 322, 13 P.3d 
324, 331 (2000)). We may only consider "whether the court committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion." Id. 
27   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court expressly considered factors (1), 
(2), and (3) from HRS § 706-606. As the State concedes, it did 
not specifically address "[t]he need to avoid unwarranted 
sentence disparities among defendants with similar records who 
have been found guilty of similar conduct." HRS § 706-606(4). 
However, "[t]he fact that a court does not orally address every 
factor stated in HRS § 706-606 at the time of sentencing does not 
mean the court failed to consider those factors." State v. 
Sinagoga, 81 Hawai 'i 421, 428, 918 P.2d 228, 235 (App. 1996), 
overruled on other grounds by State v. Veikoso, 102 Hawai 'i 219, 
227, 74 P.3d 575, 583 (2003). "Absent clear evidence to the contrary, it is presumed that a sentencing court will have 
considered all factors before imposing concurrent or consecutive 
terms of imprisonment under HRS § 706-606." State v. Tauiliili, 
96 Hawai
'i 195, 200, 29 P.3d 914, 919 (2001). 
We presume that the Circuit Court considered factor (4)
 
of HRS § 706-606, even though it did not expressly address it in
 oral or written findings. Veikoso has presented no evidence to
 
refute this presumption. The court's failure to expressly address
 
factor (4) does not amount to an abuse of discretion. 
Veikoso also challenges the Circuit Court's
 
characterization of him as a "serial rapist" and a "violent,
 
dangerous" person. Veikoso contends that because the State is
 
required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that a defendant is
 
subject to extended term sentencing as a "dangerous person" under
 
HRS § 706-662(3), the same burden of proof should apply "where
 
the court is essentially making a clinical determination about
 
the defendant's mental status." We disagree. In context, the
 
Circuit Court was not making a "clinical determination." Rather,
 
it was considering the "nature and circumstances of the
 
offense[s]" in accordance with HRS § 706-606(1). Veikoso's
 
contention is therefore without merit. In any case, in light of
 
our determination that the Circuit Court's error in admitting Dr.
 
28 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lee's hearsay testimony was not harmless error, Veikoso's
 
conviction and sentence on Counts 4 through 8 is vacated.
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm in part and vacate
 
in part the Circuit Court's September 28, 2009 Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence; we affirm as to Counts 1 through 3, and
 
vacate and remand for a new trial on Counts 4 through 8.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 3, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Joyce K. Matsumoto-Hoshijo
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
James M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
29 