FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
LLOYD R. ANASTASI, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
FIDELITY NATIONAL TITLE INSURANCE COMPANY,
Defendant-Appellee.
 
NO. 30557 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0718)
 
DECEMBER 30, 2014
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE and GINOZA, JJ.

 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Lloyd R. Anastasi (Anastasi) filed
 
this lawsuit against his insurer Defendant-Appellee Fidelity

 
National Title Insurance Company (Fidelity) claiming that
 
Fidelity unreasonably delayed in paying benefits owed to Anastasi
 under a title insurance policy. The circumstances of this case
 involve an underlying lawsuit against Anastasi, in which Fidelity
 provided a defense under a reservation of rights. Out of that
 circumstance, Anastasi claims breach of contract and bad faith
 against Fidelity.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
This appeal arises from a grant of summary judgment by
 
1
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court)  in favor
of Fidelity on Anastasi's bad faith claim. The circuit court granted an immediate appeal of its judgment on the bad faith claim pursuant to Rule 54(b) of the Hawai
'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP). 
In resolving this appeal, we must determine: whether we
 
have appellate jurisdiction to review discovery rulings by the
 circuit court; if we have jurisdiction to review any discovery
 ruling, whether the circuit court abused its discretion in said
 ruling; whether the circuit court erred in granting summary
 judgment to Fidelity on the bad faith claim; and whether an award
 of costs to Fidelity was proper.
 
For the reasons discussed below, we hold that:
 (1) we have appellate jurisdiction to review the
 
circuit court's ruling that Fidelity need not produce ten
 documents authored or received by Elizabeth McGinnity
 (McGinnity), a Senior Vice-President and Major Claims Counsel for
 Fidelity; however, we do not have appellate jurisdiction to
 review the circuit court's discovery ruling on "other claims"
 information sought by Anastasi to prove punitive damages;
 
(2) because McGinnity acted in a dual capacity as both
 
in-house counsel and in generally handling Anastasi's claim, the
 circuit court abused its discretion in ruling that the entirety
 of the ten documents withheld from discovery were covered by the
 attorney-client privilege and/or work-product doctrine;
 
(3) the circuit court erred in determining that
 
Fidelity acted reasonably as a matter of law, and thus, summary
 judgment for Fidelity must be vacated; and
 
(4) because summary judgment for Fidelity is vacated,
 
any award of costs was not warranted.
 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided, except to the extent noted
below. 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
I. Overview
 
To put Anastasi's allegations against Fidelity into
 
context, it is necessary to consider the circumstances of both
 
this case and the underlying lawsuit from which Anastasi's bad
 faith claim arises.
 
The title insurance policy issued by Fidelity to 
Anastasi insured that an individual named Alajos Nagy (Nagy) had good title to property located in Mokul
e'ia, Hawai 'i (the 
Property) and insured Anastasi against loss in the event a mortgage on the Property executed by Nagy was not enforceable. Anastasi had loaned $2.4 million to Nagy and Nagy had executed the mortgage in favor of Anastasi as security for the loan. As set forth in more detail below, Nagy's title to the property later came into dispute. Individuals named Paul Stickney 
2
(Stickney) and Gregory Rand (Rand)  claimed to own the Property
and brought a quiet title action against Nagy and Anastasi in a
 case filed in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit entitled

 
Stickney, et al. v. Nagy, et al., Civil No. 05-1-2065-11

 
(Stickney Lawsuit). After being served with the Stickney
 Lawsuit, Anastasi tendered a claim to Fidelity under the title
 policy. Fidelity retained an attorney, Jade Ching (Ching), to
 defend Anastasi in the Stickney Lawsuit, but Fidelity also
 reserved its rights under the policy.
 
After the Stickney Lawsuit had been litigated for a
 
little over two years and judgment against Anastasi had been
 entered, Anastasi filed the instant lawsuit against Fidelity. 
Anastasi contends that, not long after the Stickney Lawsuit was
 filed, it became clear that a Warranty Deed purporting to
 transfer the Property to Nagy had been forged. Anastasi claims
 Fidelity unreasonably delayed in paying him the $2.4 million owed
 under the title policy, and also claims that Fidelity improperly
 controlled Ching's actions in litigating the Stickney Lawsuit.
 
2
 Stickney was trustee for a trust that purportedly owned the Property
and Rand was the beneficiary under the trust.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Anastasi's complaint in this case asserts causes of
 
action for breach of contract (Count I) and bad faith (Count
 
II).3 After ruling on various discovery issues, the circuit
 
court granted summary judgment for Fidelity on the bad faith
 claim and entered judgment on that claim pursuant to HRCP Rule
 54(b). Anastasi timely appealed. Thus, this appeal only
 involves the bad faith claim.
 
In his points of error on appeal, Anastasi contends
 
that the circuit court erred by:
 
(1) ruling that Fidelity's actions were reasonable as a
 
matter of law;
 
(2) ruling that Anastasi did not raise a genuine issue
 
of material fact as to whether Fidelity controlled Ching's
 actions in the Stickney lawsuit, and that Ching's actions must be
 imputed to Anastasi as a matter of law;
 
(3) holding that the ten documents authored or received
 
by McGinnity could be withheld under the attorney-client
 privilege and/or work-product doctrine;
 
(4) holding that Anastasi's claim for punitive damages 
could be supported only by evidence of Fidelity's handling of similar claims in the State of Hawai
'i within a limited time 
period; and 
(5) awarding costs, because the circuit court was
 
divested of jurisdiction upon the filing of this appeal and
 because it was premature to determine which party would be the
 prevailing party.
II. Underlying Circumstances and Quiet Title Action
A. Loan to Nagy, Warranty Deed, and Title Insurance
 
The circumstances surrounding the loan to Nagy and the
 
transaction involving the Property are somewhat curious. As
 noted, Anastasi made the $2.4 million loan to Nagy secured by a
 
3
 The record reflects that Fidelity paid the $2.4 million to Anastasi
on August 4, 2008, which was four months after this lawsuit was filed.
Anastasi's breach of contract claim was based on the non-payment of the $2.4
million, and thus it is unclear if any issues remain as to Count I.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mortgage on the Property. According to Anastasi's deposition
 
testimony, submitted in relation to Fidelity's motion for summary
 judgment, he was in the business of making equity loans secured
 by the value of properties. Anastasi did not know Nagy and did
 not recall the purpose of the loaned money. An individual named
 Paul Lee (Lee), a business acquaintance who referred potential
 borrowers to Anastasi, brought the potential Nagy loan to
 Anastasi's attention. Anastasi was also contacted by one Michael
 Talisman (Talisman) about the Nagy loan, and at some point while
 analyzing the Property, Anastasi received an appraisal of the
 Property done by an individual named Mark Justmann (Justmann).
 Based on his own due diligence, Anastasi believed the value of
 the Property was around $5 million and therefore decided to make
 the loan to Nagy. 
Prior to making the loan, Anastasi understood that
 
Talisman had met with the owners of the Property and that
 Talisman was interested in purchasing the Property. Anastasi
 also understood that Nagy was not yet the owner of the Property,
 but Lee told Anastasi that by the time the loan closed, Nagy
 would be the owner of record, would sign the loan documents, and
 that title insurance would be issued to Anastasi. Anastasi felt
 there was a transaction between Talisman, Stickney and Rand to
 which he was not privy. 
The Property was owned at the time by a trust in which 
Stickney was the sole trustee and Rand the sole beneficiary. As part of the loan transaction with Anastasi, Nagy executed the mortgage on the Property on April 25, 2005. Over a month later, the Warranty Deed dated June 1, 2005, was ostensibly signed by Stickney and purported to deed the Property from Stickney to Nagy –- the validity of Stickneys' signature on the Warranty Deed later became a central point of dispute in the Stickney Lawsuit. The Warranty Deed and the mortgage were recorded with the State of Hawai
'i Bureau of Conveyances on June 17, 2005, and on the 
same day, Fidelity issued the subject title insurance policy to Anastasi. 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The title insurance policy provided that, subject to
 
the exclusions and exceptions set forth in the policy, Fidelity
 
insures, as of Date of Policy shown in Schedule A, against
loss or damage, not exceeding the Amount of Insurance stated
in Schedule A, sustained or incurred by the insured by
reason of:
 
1. 	Title to the estate or interest described in
 Schedule A being vested other than as stated
therein;
 
2. 	Any defect in or lien or encumbrance on the
title;
 
. . . .
 
5.	 The invalidity or unenforceability of the lien of
the insured mortgage upon the title[.]
 
Schedule A, in turn, indicated that title to the Property was
 
vested in Nagy and that the insured mortgage was the one between
 Nagy and Anastasi for the $2.4 million debt.
 
Section 4 of the policy's "Conditions and Stipulations"
 
sets forth the parties' rights related to the defense and
 prosecution of actions, as follows:
 
4. 	DEFENSE AND PROSECUTION OF ACTIONS; DUTY OF INSURED
CLAIMANT TO COOPORATE
 
(a) Upon written request by the insured and subject to
the options contained in Section 6 of these Conditions and
Stipulations, the Company, at its own cost and without
unreasonable delay, shall provide for the defense of an
insured in litigation in which any third party asserts a
claim adverse to the title or interest as insured, but only
as to those stated causes of action alleging a defect, lien
or encumbrance or other matter insured against by this
policy. The Company shall have the right to select counsel
of its choice (subject to the right of the insured to object
for reasonable cause) to represent the insured as to those
stated causes of action and shall not be liable for and will
 not pay the fees of any other counsel. The Company will not
pay any fees, costs or expenses incurred by the insured in
the defense of those causes of action which allege matters
not insured against by this policy.
 
(b) The Company shall have the right, at its own cost,
to institute and prosecute any action or proceeding or to do
any other act which in its opinion may be necessary or
desirable to establish the title to the estate or interest
 or the lien of the insured mortgage, as insured, or to
prevent or reduce loss or damage to the insured. The
 Company may take any appropriate action under the terms of
this policy, whether or not it shall be liable hereunder,
and shall not thereby concede liability or waive any
provision of this policy. If the Company shall exercise its
rights under this paragraph, it shall do so diligently. 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(c) Whenever the Company shall have brought an action
or interposed a defense as required or permitted by the
provisions of this policy, the Company may pursue any
litigation to final determination by a court of competent
jurisdiction and expressly reserves the right, in its sole
discretion, to appeal from any adverse judgment or order.
 
(d) In all cases where this policy permits or requires
the Company to prosecute or provide for the defense of any
action or proceeding, the insured shall secure to the
Company the right to so prosecute or provide defense in the
action or proceeding, and all appeals therein, and permit
the Company to use, at its option, the name of the insured
for this purpose. Whenever requested by the Company, the
insured, at the Company's expense, shall give the Company
all reasonable aid (i) in any action or proceeding, securing
evidence, obtaining witnesses, prosecuting or defending the
action or proceeding, or effecting settlement, and (ii) in
any other lawful act which the opinion of the Company may be
necessary or desirable to establish the title to the estate
or interest or the lien of the insured mortgage, as insured.
If the Company is prejudice by the failure of the insured to
furnish the required cooperation, the Company's obligations
to the insured under the policy shall terminate, including
any liability or obligation to defend, prosecute, or
continue any litigation, with regard to the matter or
matters requiring such cooperation.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Section 7 of the "Conditions and Stipulations" sets
 
forth the "Determination and Extent of Liability" under the
 
policy as follows:
 
This policy is a contract of indemnity against actual
monetary loss or damage sustained or incurred by the insured
claimant who has suffered loss or damage by reason of
matters insured against by this policy and only to the
extent herein described.
 
(a) The liability of the Company under this policy
shall not exceed the least of:
 
(i) the Amount of Insurance stated in Schedule A
[$2.4 million], or, if applicable, the amount of insurance
as defined in Section 2(c) of these Conditions and
Stipulations; 
(ii) the amount of the unpaid principal
indebtedness secured by the insured mortgage as limited or
provided under Section 8 of these Conditions and
Stipulations or as reduced under Section 9 of these
Conditions and Stipulations, at the time the loss or damage
insured against by this policy occurs, together with
interest thereon; or 
(iii) the difference between the value of the
insured estate or interest as insured and the value of the
 insured estate or interest subject to the defect, lien or
encumbrance insured against by this policy. 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
If litigation did occur, the Policy provided that
 
Fidelity would not be liable for loss or damage "until there has
 
been a final determination by a court of competent jurisdiction,
 and disposition of all appeals therefrom, adverse to the title-or
 to the lien of the insured mortgage, as insured."
B. Stickney Lawsuit
 
On November 17, 2005, the Stickney Lawsuit was filed by
 
Stickney and Rand against Nagy and Anastasi to quiet title on the
 Property. The Stickney plaintiffs alleged that Stickney's
 signature had been forged on the Warranty Deed that purported to
 convey the Property to Nagy. Anastasi was served with the
 complaint on or around January 5, 2006, and immediately tendered
 defense of the lawsuit to Fidelity. There is no dispute that
 Fidelity promptly provided for Anastasi's defense by retaining
 Ching to defend him. 
On January 23, 2006, McGinnity sent a letter to
 
Anastasi advising that Fidelity was accepting his tender of
 defense for the Stickney Lawsuit, but reserving its rights. 
McGinnity wrote that Fidelity reserved any and all rights it has,
 including its right to: continue its investigation of the matter;
 assert any defense which may become apparent as a result of its
 investigation; withdraw its defense of Anastasi if it determined
 Fidelity has no obligation; commence an action against Anastasi
 on the issue of policy coverage; and deny liability for
 indemnification and seek reimbursement of attorneys' fees and
 settlement expenditures made on behalf of Anastasi. The letter
 also informed Anastasi that Fidelity had retained Ching to
 represent him in the Stickney Lawsuit. 
In a letter dated January 27, 2006, Ching informed
 
Anastasi that she and her law firm had been retained to represent
 him in the Stickney Lawsuit. The letter stated that Ching would
 be acting as counsel for Anastasi, not Fidelity, and that she
 would not disclose any confidential communications from him to
 Fidelity without his consent. The letter also stated inter alia
 that "[i]t is [] my practice to provide Fidelity with periodic
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
status reports on the status of cases in which I am representing
 
you, including an assessment of the likelihood of success of the
 defense of a claim." Further, Ching wrote, 
[i]t is anticipated that Fidelity will provide
recommendations and instructions to the law firm regarding
the steps and procedures to be taken in defending or
settling the Claim. I shall endeavor to keep you informed
of such instructions and obtain your consent where
appropriate to the procedures to be taken in defending or
settling the title dispute.
 
On October 6, 2006, the Stickney plaintiffs filed a 
motion for summary judgment in the Stickney Lawsuit, seeking, 
inter alia, an order establishing that Stickney was the owner of the Property and that neither Nagy nor Anastasi ever had any right, title, or interest in the Property. In Anastasi's memorandum in opposition, filed on October 25, 2006, Ching argued that summary judgment should be denied because 1) "Plaintiffs have not sustained their heavy burden to prove with clear and convincing evidence that Stickney's signature on the Warranty Deed is forged;" 2) "Plaintiffs have not sustained their heavy burden to overcome the presumptions of validity that attach to the Warranty Deed and its certificate of acknowledgment;" and 3) "there are genuine issues of material fact as to Plaintiffs' involvement in the alleged fraudulent forgery." Specifically, Ching argued that the only proof presented by the Stickney plaintiffs to prove that the signature was a forgery was Stickney's self-serving declaration, and that such evidence does not overcome the presumption of validity where execution of the Warranty Deed was done before a notary, Ogden Page (Page). Ching also argued that the "Plaintiffs' relationship with Talisman and Justmann raises genuine questions of material fact that remain to be resolved regarding, among other things, Plaintiffs' involvement in a scheme that left Nagy richer by $2.4 million, Anastasi poorer by the same amount and Plaintiffs in possession of the Hawai
'i property." In her deposition testimony in the 
instant case, attached to Fidelity's motion for summary judgment, 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Ching testified that "[b]efore we lost the Summary Judgment
 
motion, I thought we were going to win." 
On April 11, 2007, the circuit court granted summary
 
judgment for the Stickney plaintiffs. On April 20, 2007, Ching
 filed a motion for reconsideration without, according to Ching,
 any input from McGinnity. On October 23, 2007, the circuit court
 denied the motion for reconsideration.
 
In communications between Ching and McGinnity about a
 
possible appeal in the Stickney Lawsuit, Ching expressed her view
 that Anastasi would likely succeed on appeal but not on remand. 
Ching recommended preserving Anastasi's appeal rights by filing
 an appeal before the deadline that was only days away, and
 McGinnity agreed. Ching filed a notice of appeal on November 21,
 2007. On February 27, 2008, the attorney for the Stickney
 plaintiffs sent an email to Ching indicating that the plaintiffs
 would accept Ching's offer of $10,000 to settle and the parties
 would dismiss their respective appeals in the Stickney Lawsuit. 
On August 14, 2008, the parties to the Stickney Litigation filed
 a stipulation for dismissal of all claims remaining between the
 parties.
C. Appraisal by Harlin Young
 
On February 28, 2008, Fidelity, through its coverage
 
counsel, Clifford Frieden (Frieden), retained Harlin Young
 (Young) to appraise the Property as of the date of the loss.
4
 
Young's appraisal was issued on April 30, 2008, and valued the
 Property at the time of loss as $2,750,000.
III. The Instant Action
 
On April 8, 2008, while the Stickney Lawsuit was in its
 
final stages and while Young was preparing his appraisal,
 
4
 As stated above, pursuant to Section 7 of the policy's Conditions and
Stipulations, Fidelity's liability under the policy was limited to the lesser
of: $2.4 million; "the amount of the unpaid principal indebtedness secured by
the insured mortgage . . . at the time [of] loss[;]" or "the difference
between the value of the insured estate or interest as insured and the value
 of the insured estate or interest subject to the defect, lien or encumbrance
insured against by this policy." Young's appraisal valued the Property as of
January 6, 2006, which was the day that Anastasi presented the claim to
Fidelity.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Anastasi filed the complaint in the instant case against
 
Fidelity, alleging breach of contract and bad faith, and
 requesting a judgment directing Fidelity to pay $2.4 million plus
 interest, general, special, consequential, compensatory and
 punitive damages, and attorney's fees.
 
On August 4, 2008, Fidelity paid Anastasi $2.4 million
 
under the policy.
A. Discovery Proceedings
 
Anastasi sought to obtain various documents and
 
information from Fidelity through discovery. Relevant to the
 issues raised on appeal, Anastasi requested (1) all documents and
 claim files relating to Anastasi, the Property or the claim,
 which included documents authored or received by McGinnity, and
 (2) information and documents related to Fidelity's processing of
 other claims. It appears that Fidelity produced a number of
 documents in discovery, but also objected to producing certain
 documents or allowing certain depositions that it claimed were
 privileged or beyond the scope of proper discovery.
5
 
On December 9, 2008, Anastasi filed a motion to compel
 
discovery, asserting that Fidelity had raised unfounded
 objections to his discovery requests. Anastasi sought discovery
 of documents written or received by McGinnity which had been
 withheld from production. Although Fidelity had produced
 documents involving McGinnity, it had claimed that the attorney-
client privilege and/or work-product doctrine protected the
 documents that had been withheld.
6 Anastasi argued that
 
McGinnity's investigation documents could not be withheld under
 the attorney-client privilege or work-product doctrine because
 McGinnity served as a claims adjuster, and not an attorney. 
5
 The Declaration of Edmund K. Saffery, an attorney for Fidelity,
states that "Fidelity has produced its non-privileged documents from its
claims file along with other documents responsive to Plaintiff Lloyd R.
Anastasi's [] discovery requests, which total over 8,700 pages."
6
 Fidelity had provided a privilege log to Anastasi indicating that
Fidelity was invoking the attorney-client privilege and/or work-product
doctrine for the listed documents.
 
11
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Alternatively, he argued that he had shown substantial need for
 
the documents.
 
In his motion to compel discovery, Anastasi also sought
 
an order requiring Fidelity to produce a variety of information
 regarding other claims or cases in which: Fidelity had paid
 claims in excess of $1 million; a judgment or award was entered
 against Fidelity in excess of $1 million; or Fidelity had been
 found liable for bad faith delay. Anastasi also sought other
 claims information about government agency investigations, or
 complaints to government agencies, that addressed bad faith delay
 by Fidelity. Anastasi argued that he was entitled to such
 information about Fidelity's "other claims" because he sought
 punitive damages from Fidelity and needed to show the existence
 of established policies or practices in Fidelity's claims
 handling that are harmful to insureds. 
7
On March 17, 2009, the circuit court  issued an Order
Granting in Part and Denying in Part Plaintiff's Motion to Compel
 Discovery. As to the documents involving McGinnity, the order
 stated: 
1. The Court finds that the Declaration of Elizabeth
 
McGinnity establishes that she is an attorney employed by
Defendant and therefore, the attorney-client privilege and
work product privilege may be applicable to documents
generated and/or received by her.
 
2. With respect to the documents withheld on the
basis of privilege that were specifically identified in and
subject to the Motion ("the privileged documents"),
Defendant will review the privileged documents to determine
if any additional documents may be produced to Plaintiff and
will produce those documents to Plaintiff forthwith. If
 
Defendant elects to continue to withhold any of the
privileged documents, Defendant will produce those documents
to the Court for an in camera review. The Court will
 thereafter review each of the remaining privileged documents
and determine whether Defendant's assertion of attorney-
client and/or work-product privilege is proper, and if not,
order the production of that document. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
7
 This order was issued by the Honorable Glenn J. Kim.
 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Given the circuit court's admonition to determine if
 
any additional McGinnity documents could be produced, Fidelity
 
produced additional documents to Anastasi and then submitted the
 remaining ten documents to the circuit court for in camera
 review. Following the in camera review, the circuit court issued
 
8
an amended order on November 5, 2009,  ruling that Fidelity
properly withheld all of the documents submitted in camera and
 that "all of the documents are covered by the attorney-client

 
privilege and/or the work product doctrine." 
With regard to Anastasi's request for discovery of 
"other claims" information, the circuit court's March 17, 2009 order initially denied without prejudice Anastasi's motion to compel such information. Subsequently, pursuant to HRCP Rule 30(b)(6), Anastasi issued a notice to take the depositions of Fidelity representatives with knowledge of specified "other claims" information. 
In response, Fidelity filed a motion for 
protective order to preclude inquiry into certain areas. In an order issued on March 10, 2010, the circuit court ruled that Anastasi was entitled to conduct discovery relating to: "inquiries, investigations, complaints and communications from or with government agencies relating to bad faith title insurance claims" involving Fidelity; and "lawsuits, arbitrations or court judgments involving bad faith title insurance claims" against Fidelity. However, the court limited such discovery to claims that arose in the State of Hawai
'i, that arose or were resolved 
between January 2006 and August 2008, and that involved allegations of delayed payment, forgery or improper setting of reserves. 
B. Summary Judgment
 
On March 19, 2010, Fidelity filed a motion for summary
 
judgment on Anastasi's bad faith claim. Fidelity asserted inter
 alia that its conduct, based on its interpretation of the
 Policy's provisions, was reasonable, that it was entitled to
 
8
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader signed this order.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assert its legal contractual rights, and that Ching's actions in
 
defending the Stickney Lawsuit should be imputed to Anastasi.
 
In opposing the motion, Anastasi asserted inter alia
 
that Fidelity unreasonably withheld benefits under the policy by
 pursuing fruitless litigation and directing Ching to continue
 litigation after Fidelity learned the Warranty Deed was forged. 
After a hearing on the motion, the circuit court issued
 
an order on May 24, 2010, granting Fidelity's motion for summary
 judgment. The order states, in relevant part: 
1. The undisputed facts establish that during the
course of the underlying case, Paul Stickney et al. v. Nagy
et al., Civil No. 05-1-2065-11 in the Circuit Court of the
First Circuit, State of Hawaii ("Stickney Litigation"),
Fidelity immediately accepted Plaintiff Anastasi's tender of
the defense of the claims asserted against him by Paul
Stickney and Gregory Rand ("Stickney Plaintiffs") and fully
and timely investigated Plaintiff Anastasi's claim. 
2. In accordance with the Hawaii Supreme Court's
holding in Best Place, Inc. v. Penn [America] Ins. Co., 82Hawai'i 120, 920 P.2d 334 (1996), Fidelity acted reasonably
in its interpretation of the terms and provisions of thetitle insurance policy (the "Policy") issued to PlaintiffAnastasi when it chose to defend the claims asserted againsthim in the Stickney Litigation; particularly since Fidelityhad been told by attorney Jade Ching that she believed theclaim against Plaintiff Anastasi was defensible because,among other things, the alleged forgery of the Warranty Deedat issue in the Stickney Litigation might have been securedwith the complicity of the Stickney Plaintiffs as well asother parties in the Stickney Litigation. Given these undisputed facts, the Court finds that Fidelity was entitledto exercise its legal and contractual rights under thePolicy to defend Plaintiff Anastasi against the claimsalleged against him in the Stickney Litigation and to pursuethat defense to a final determination. 
3. While it is undisputed that the Stickney
Plaintiffs' motion for summary judgment was ruled adversely
to Plaintiff Anastasi and that a decision was made to file
 both a motion for reconsideration of that ruling and an
appeal when the motion for reconsideration was denied, these
facts do not support a finding that Fidelity acted in bad
faith in its handling of Plaintiff Anastasi's claim. 
4. Plaintiff Anastasi has failed to adduce any
evidence to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to
whether Fidelity controlled and/or directed Plaintiff
Anastasi's attorneys at Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing in their
defense of Plaintiff Anastasi in the Stickney Litigation.
The undisputed facts establish that Fidelity defended the
Stickney Litigation under a reservation of rights and that
in accordance with its obligations under Finley vs. Home
Insurance [Company], 90 Hawai'i 25, 957 P.2d 1145 (1998),
gave Plaintiff Anastasi's attorneys full rein to conduct the
defense of their client as they deemed appropriate. 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
155.  Plaintiff Anastasi has not adduced any evidence to
support the conclusion that Fidelity directed Plaintiff
Anastasi's attorneys to delay a resolution of the Stickney
Litigation for the purpose of allowing Fidelity to forestall
the payment of benefits to Plaintiff Anastasi under the
Policy.  Any delay in the resolution of the Stickney
Litigation was the natural byproduct of the defense strategy
employed by the Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing attorneys which, as
a matter of law, must be imputed to him.
 
6.  Fidelity's decision to pay for the work performed
by two appraisers, James Hallstrom and Stellmacher &
Sadoyama, and its decision to order an appraisal from Harlin
Young to determine the amount of the loss under the Policy
were consistent with and in accordance with the reasonable
interpretation of Fidelity's rights under the Policy.
In light of the foregoing, and pursuant to Rule 56 of
the Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure, the Court finds that
there is no genuine issue of material fact as to Plaintiff's
claim for Breach of Duty of Good Faith and Fair Dealing
(Count II) against Fidelity and as such, Fidelity's Motion
for Summary Judgment as to Count II is hereby GRANTED. 
On May 24, 2010, the circuit court also entered its
HRCP Rule 54(b) judgment dismissing Anastasi's bad faith claim. 
On June 8, 2010, Anastasi timely filed a notice of appeal. 
C.  Award of Costs to Fidelity
 On June 7, 2010, a day before Anastasi filed his
notice of appeal, Fidelity filed a notice of taxation of costs
and bill of costs.  On June 21, 2010, Fidelity filed a Motion for
Taxation of Costs.
In an order issued on August 25, 2010, the circuit
court granted costs to Fidelity in the amount of $25,471.72,
stating:
1. The Court has jurisdiction to consider Fidelity's
Motion for Taxation of Costs as Fidelity's Notice of
Taxation of Costs/Bill of Costs, filed on June 7, 2010
meets the requirements of a motion and was timely
submitted to the Court for its consideration; 
2.Fidelity is the prevailing party; and 
3.The costs requested are reasonable. 
IV.  Standards of Review
A.  Discovery Rulings
"We review a trial court's ruling on a motion to compel
discovery under an abuse of discretion standard.  An abuse of
discretion occurs when the trial court has clearly exceeded theFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or
 
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Save
 
Sunset Beach Coal. v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 102 Hawai 'i 465, 
484, 78 P.3d 1, 20 (2003) (citations and internal quotation marks
 omitted).
 
Similarly, we review a protective order issued by a
 
trial court pursuant to HRCP Rule 26(c) under the abuse of
 discretion standard. Doe v. Doe, 120 Hawai
'i 149, 165, 202 P.3d 
610, 626 (App. 2009) (citing Kukui Nuts of Hawaii Inc. v. R.
 Baird & Co., Inc., 7 Haw. App. 598, 620-21, 789 P.2d 501, 515
 (1990)).
B. Summary Judgment
 
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
reviewed de novo. See State ex rel. Anzai v. City and
 
County of Honolulu, 99 Hawai' i 508, [515], 57 P.3d 433,
[440] (2002); Bitney v. Honolulu Police Dep't, 96 Hawai' i 
243, 250, 30 P.3d 257, 264 (2001). 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions
on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show
that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law. A fact is material if proof of that
fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting
one of the essential elements of a cause of action or
 defense asserted by the parties. The evidence must be
 viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving
party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Kahale v. City and County of Honolulu, 104 Hawai' i 341, 344,
90 P.3d 233, 236 (2004) (citation omitted). 
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai 'i 90, 
96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008).
 
A summary judgment motion challenges the very existence
or legal sufficiency of the claim or defense to which it is
addressed. In effect the moving party takes the position
that he is entitled to prevail because his opponent has no
valid claim for relief or defense to the action, as the case
may be. He thus has the burden of demonstrating that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact relative to the
claim or defense and he is entitled to judgment as a matter
of law.
 
He may discharge his burden by demonstrating that if
the case went to trial there would be no competent evidence
to support a judgment for his opponent. For if no evidence
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
could be mustered to sustain the nonmoving party's position,
a trial would be useless."
 
First Hawaiian Bank v. Weeks, 70 Haw. 392, 396-97, 772 P.2d 1187, 
1190 (1989) (citations, internal quotation marks, brackets and ellipses omitted). "Only when the moving party satisfies its initial burden of production does the burden shift to the non-moving party to respond to the motion for summary judgment and demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial." Jou v. Dai-Tokyo 
Royal State Ins. Co., 116 Hawai
'i 159, 164, 172 P.3d 471, 476 
(2007) (citations and block quote format omitted).
V. Discussion
 
A. Appellate Jurisdiction
 
We first address Fidelity's contention that we lack
 
appellate jurisdiction to review the circuit court's discovery
 
orders. Fidelity argues that the only issue "certified for
 appeal" by the circuit court pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b)
9 was
 
judgment on the bad faith claim, and thus the interlocutory
 discovery orders are not properly before this court. We disagree
 with Fidelity that the circuit court needed to "certify" its
 discovery orders pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b) for this court to
 have jurisdiction to review those orders. However, under the
 
9 HRCP Rule 54(b) provides
 
(b) Judgment Upon Multiple Claims or Involving Multiple
Parties. When more than one claim for relief is presented in
an action, whether as a claim, counterclaim, cross-claim, or
third-party claim, or when multiple parties are involved,
the court may direct the entry of a final judgment as to one
or more but fewer than all of the claims or parties only
upon an express determination that there is no just reason
for delay and upon an express direction for the entry of
judgment. In the absence of such determination and
 direction, any order or other form of decision, however
designated, which adjudicates fewer than all the claims or
the rights and liabilities of fewer than all the parties
shall not terminate the action as to any of the claims or
parties, and the order or other form of decision is subject
to revision at any time before the entry of judgment
adjudicating all the claims and the rights and liabilities
of all the parties.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
appropriate analysis discussed below, we conclude that we have
 
appellate jurisdiction to review only the discovery orders
 addressing the McGinnity documents, and not the discovery orders
 addressing information about "other claims" handled by Fidelity.
 
We must determine in each appeal whether we have 
appellate jurisdiction. Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming & 
Wright, 76 Hawai
'i 115, 119, 869 P.2d 1334, 1338 (1994); Kernan 
v. Tanaka, 75 Haw. 1, 15, 856 P.2d 1207, 1215 (1993).
 
In Weinberg v. Mauch, 78 Hawai 'i 40, 890 P.2d 277 
(1995), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court recognized that "when an order 
is properly certified pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b), the certification 'necessarily render[s] every preliminary ruling upon which it was predicated final and appealable as well.'" Id. at 46, 890 P.2d at 283 (quoting S. Utsunomiya Enters., Inc. v. Moomuku Country Club, 75 Haw. 480, 495, 866 P.2d 951, 960 (1994)); see also Cook v. Surety Life Ins., Co., 79 Hawai
'i 403, 
409, 903 P.2d 708, 714 (App. 1995) ("Irrespective of whether the Order was a collateral order or an order certified pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b), this court will only consider other orders which were preliminary rulings upon which the subject Order was predicated or were part of the series of orders which collectively led to that Order."); Riethbrock v. Lange, 128 Hawai
'i 1, 17-18, 282 P.3d 543, 559-60 (2012) (recognizing the 
rulings in Cook and Weinberg, and holding that the appellate court lacked jurisdiction to review an order that was not a preliminary ruling upon which the appealed order was predicated).
10 
Rule 54(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
 
(FRCP) is materially similar to HRCP Rule 54(b), thus federal
 
10 Relying on Swint v. Chambers County Commission, 514 U.S. 35 (1995), 
Anastasi also argues that we should exercise "pendent appellate jurisdiction"
to review rulings that are "inextricably intertwined" with the bad faithruling that is before us in this appeal. In Swint, however, the United StatesSupreme Court rejected the exercise of pendent appellate jurisdiction by theEleventh Circuit Court in that case, id. at 51, and it is debatable to whatextent pendent appellate jurisdiction is recognized in the federal courts.Such jurisdiction has not been recognized in Hawai' i. 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
authority in this area is also helpful to guide our analysis. 
Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United Agri Prod., 86 Hawai 'i 214, 255, 
948 P.2d 1055, 1096 (1997). FRCP Rule 54(b) has been analyzed as follows: 
A proper Rule 54(b) judgment is a final judgment for
all purposes on the adjudicated claims. When an appeal is
taken from a final judgment, all interlocutory orders of the
[court] leading up to the judgment merge into the final
judgment and become appealable at that time. Accordingly,
when judgment is entered under Rule 54(b), a timely notice
of appeal brings up for review all interlocutory decisions
and orders implicated by the judgment.
 
10 Moore's Federal Practice § 54.28[3][c] (3d ed. 2009) (emphasis
 
added) (citations omitted). In Meadaa v. K.A.P. Enterprises,
 L.L.C., 756 F.3d 875 (5th Cir. 2014), the Fifth Circuit Court of
 Appeals noted that "[o]n appeals from Rule 54(b) judgments, this
 court has reviewed discovery and other interlocutory orders that
 underlie those judgments." Id. at 879 (emphasis added).
 
Contrary to Fidelity's argument, we see no basis for a
 
trial court to explicitly certify a discovery ruling under HRCP
 Rule 54(b). The rule deals with "entry of a final judgment as to
 one or more but fewer than all of the claims or parties . . . ." 
HRCP Rule 54(b) (emphasis added). The rule does not reference
 application to preliminary or interlocutory orders, such as
 discovery rulings.
 
We thus consider whether the discovery orders 
challenged by Anastasi were preliminary rulings upon which the judgment on the bad faith claim was predicated or which were implicated by the judgment. We conclude the circuit court's rulings on the McGinnity documents were a predicate to the bad faith judgment and/or implicated by the judgment. Anastasi sought documents related to Fidelity's handling of his claim in order to discover what facts were known by Fidelity, and when, so that he could demonstrate that Fidelity unreasonably delayed payment under the title policy. The bad faith test adopted in Hawai
'i establishes that "an insurer may face liability under a 
bad faith tort action if it fails to deal fairly and in good faith with its insured by refusing, without proper cause, to 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
compensate its insured for a loss covered by the policy." Best 
Place, Inc. v. Penn America Ins. Co., 82 Hawai 'i 120, 132-33, 920 
P.2d 334, 346-47 (1996) (citation and quotation marks omitted). 
Moreover, given the enhanced standard of good faith that applies in this case because Fidelity defended Anastasi under a reservation of rights, see Finley v. Home Insurance Company, 90 Hawai
'i 25, 36-37, 975 P.2d 1145, 1156-57 (1998), Anastasi also 
contends that Fidelity improperly controlled Ching in the Stickney Lawsuit and that Fidelity was more concerned about its financial interests than its obligations to Anastasi. Because McGinnity was significantly involved in Anastasi's claim, the McGinnity documents withheld by Fidelity could have had an impact on the bad faith ruling if the circuit court's discovery ruling was erroneous. Therefore, we have appellate jurisdiction to review the circuit court's orders precluding discovery of the McGinnity documents. 
On the other hand, we do not have appellate
 
jurisdiction regarding the circuit court's discovery order that
 limited the "other claims" information that Anastasi could obtain
 from Fidelity. In Anastasi's briefing to the circuit court and
 this court, and as acknowledged at oral argument, he seeks the
 "other claims" information in order to establish punitive
 damages. That is, he seeks to show that Fidelity's conduct in
 other cases supports a finding that Fidelity had ongoing policies
 and practices harmful to its insureds, that it thus acted
 deliberately in this case, and punitive damages should be
 awarded. However, such potential facts about other claims
 relevant to punitive damages would not be a predicate to, or be
 implicated in, whether summary judgment was proper in the first
 instance as to the alleged bad faith handling of Anastasi's claim
 in this case.
 
Therefore, we have appellate jurisdiction only as to
 
the circuit court's discovery rulings related to the McGinnity
 documents.
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B. Discovery Ruling Regarding McGinnity Documents
 
The circuit court ruled that Fidelity need not produce
 
the ten withheld documents involving McGinnity because they were
 
covered by the attorney-client privilege and/or work-product
 doctrine. As noted in a privilege log prepared by Fidelity, the
 ten documents were either authored or received by McGinnity. The
 privilege log also identifies: the number of pages for each
 document, the type of document (i.e. email, handwritten notes,
 letter, memorandum, or report), the author and recipient(s), the
 date (if any), the subject, and the type of privilege asserted by
 Fidelity (i.e. attorney-client privilege, work-product doctrine,
 or both). Based on the privilege log, Fidelity claims the
 attorney-client privilege for documents 6, 8, 15, 24, 25, 157,
 158, and 159. Fidelity claims the work-product doctrine for
 documents 17, 67, 157, 158, and 159 (thus claiming both the
 privilege and the work-product doctrine for documents 157, 158
 and 159).
 
Anastasi's arguments regarding the withheld McGinnity
 
documents are somewhat diffuse and imprecise. However, as
 Fidelity recognizes, it appears that Anastasi's arguments can be
 summarized as follows: (1) Anastasi's assertion of a bad faith
 claim eviscerates any privilege that would otherwise attach to
 McGinnity's communications; (2) McGinnity acted as a claims
 adjuster, not an attorney, and thus the attorney-client privilege
 and work-product doctrine do not apply; and (3) because Fidelity
 named McGinnity as a witness regarding her handling of Anastasi's
 claim, it opened up her claims file to discovery.
11
 
Fidelity responds that the assertion of a bad faith
 
claim does not nullify the attorney-client privilege or any
 immunity under the work-product doctrine, and that Anastasi
 incorrectly characterizes McGinnity as merely a claims adjuster
 in this case. Fidelity argues that McGinnity provided legal
 
11 There is no contention in this case that Fidelity is asserting an
advice of counsel defense. That is, Fidelity does not assert that it acted in
good faith because it relied on the advice of legal counsel. 
21
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
advice regarding Fidelity's rights and obligations as to
 
Anastasi's claim under the policy, and that it was necessary to
 involve an attorney because of the complex problems inherent in
 title insurance disputes, which involve insurance, property and
 contract legal issues. Fidelity also argues that it did not
 waive any privilege or immunity by naming McGinnity as a witness
 or allowing her to be deposed. Fidelity relies on McGinnity's
 declaration, submitted in opposition to Anastasi's motion to
 compel, in which McGinnity states in pertinent part:
 
1. I am a Senior Vice-President and Major Claims
Counsel for [Fidelity], Defendant in the above-entitled
matter.
 
2. I have been an attorney for twenty-nine (29) years
and am licensed to practice law in the States of Illinois
and Indiana.
 
. . . .
 
5. On or around January 6, 2006, Mr. Anastasi tendered
to Fidelity the defense of a complaint filed in [the
Stickney Lawsuit].
 
6. Pursuant to my role as Major Claims Counsel, I
investigated, analyzed and rendered legal advice in
connection with the allegations made against the interests
of our insured (the "Claim") in the Stickney lawsuit by
making an initial determination on whether the Claim was at
least potentially covered by the Policy, as well as
determining what other actions to take in response to the
Claim. The fact that an attorney was assigned to perform
these tasks was not an accident. Title insurance
 indemnifies against loss caused by a multitude of potential
problems that affect the title or interest of an insured in
real property. . . .
 
7. As Major Claims Counsel, I am tasked upon receiving
a claim for coverage with reviewing the title insurance
policy issued by Fidelity, investigating the factual basis
of the claim, evaluating the merits of the claim from not
only a factual, but a legal standpoint and evaluating
whether the claim falls within the insurance provisions
and/or exclusions of the Policy. It is only after this is
done that I provide a legal recommendation to Fidelity as to
how to respond to the claim. All of these functions were
 performed by me with regard to the Claim tendered to
Fidelity by Mr. Anastasi.
 
8. Upon receiving the complaint filed in the Stickney
lawsuit, it was evident that Fidelity would likely have to
engage in litigation against other parties to protect both
Mr. Anastasi's and/or Fidelity's interest. The Complaint
filed in the Stickney lawsuit alleged, inter alia, claims
for fraud and conspiracy against Alajos Nagy and "others
currently unknown at this time." Pursuant to the terms of
 the Policy, Fidelity had the right to bring claims against
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
these "other" parties to recover, to the extent possible,
any amounts that might have to be paid under the Policy. In
 addition, if the facts adduced in discovery or trial showed
that Mr. Anastasi was involved in the alleged fraud and
conspiracy described in the Complaint, I anticipated at the
time the Claim was tendered that a coverage dispute
resulting in litigation might ensue between Fidelity and
Mr. Anastasi.
 
9. After conducting an initial legal and factual
investigation of the Claim, I determined that Fidelity
should provide a defense to Mr. Anastasi under a reservation
of rights. After that determination was made, I sent a
letter to Mr. Anastasi dated January 23, 2006. That letter,
a true and correct copy of which is attached hereto as
Exhibit "B," sets forth Fidelity's initial coverage position
and gave notice to Mr. Anastasi that Fidelity was providing
a defense to him under a reservation of rights. My letter
also informed Mr. Anastasi that Fidelity retained Jade Lynne
Ching of the law firm of Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing to
represent him in the Stickney lawsuit. Mr. Anastasi never
 communicated to me, nor am I aware of any communication by
him to Fidelity, that he objected either to Fidelity's
retention of the Alston Hunt firm or Fidelity's decision to
contest the claims alleged in the Stickney lawsuit.
 
In presenting their arguments on appeal, the parties
 
make no meaningful distinction between the attorney-client
 
privilege and the work-product doctrine, and instead argue both
 in a combined fashion. However, the attorney-client privilege
 and the work-product doctrine are distinct from each other and
 require separate consideration. See Save Sunset Beach, 102
 
Hawai
'i at 484, 78 P.3d at 20. We first consider Fidelity's 
assertion of the attorney-client privilege and then its claim
 under the work-product doctrine.
1. 	Attorney-Client Privilege
 
a.	 Assertion of a bad faith claim does not nullify
the attorney-client privilege
 
Relying on cases from jurisdictions outside of Hawai
'i, 
Anastasi argues that the attorney-client privilege should not
 
apply in the context of a bad faith lawsuit. For example,
 Anastasi contends this court should adopt the rule that was
 adopted in Cedell v. Farmers Insurance Company of Washington, 295
 P.3d 239 (Wash. 2013), in which the Washington Supreme Court held

 
that
 
in first party insurance claims by insured's claiming bad
faith in the handling and processing of claims, other than
 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[under insured motorist] claims, there is a presumption of
no attorney-client privilege. However, the insurer may
assert an attorney-client privilege upon a showing in camera
that the attorney was providing counsel to the insurer and
not engaged in a quasi-fiduciary function.
 
Id. at 246; see also Stewart Title Guar. Co. v. Credit Suisse,
 
Cayman Island Branch, No. 1:11-CV-227-BLW, 2013 WL 1385264, at
 *4-6 (D. Idaho Apr. 3, 2013) (mem) (adopting the Cedell
 standard). In Cedell, the Washington Supreme Court created an
 exception to Washington's attorney-client privilege. The
 statutory provision setting out the privilege in Washington is
 fairly limited. See Revised Code of Washington (RCW) § 5.60.060
 
(Supp. 2013). In Hawai
'i, however, the attorney-client privilege 
has been codified in much more detail, and we must consider and
 apply the privilege as it has been legislatively adopted in
 Hawai
'i. The rule adopted in Cedell is inconsistent with the 
privilege as codified in Hawai 'i. 
In Hawai 'i, the attorney-client privilege is set forth 
in Rule 503 of the Hawai 'i Rules of Evidence (HRE).12 HRE Rule 
503(b) provides in pertinent part:
 
(b) General rule of privilege. A client has a
 
privilege to refuse to disclose and to prevent any other
person from disclosing confidential communications made for
the purpose of facilitating the rendition of professional
legal services to the client (1) between the client or the
client's representative and the lawyer or the lawyer's
representative, or (2) between the lawyer and the lawyer's
representative, or (3) by the client or the client's
representative or the lawyer or a representative of the
lawyer to a lawyer or a representative of a lawyer
representing another party in a pending action and
concerning a matter of common interest, or (4) between
representatives of the client or between the client and a
representative of the client, or (5) among lawyers and their
representatives representing the same client.
 
(Emphasis added.) HRE Rule 503(a)(1) defines a "client" as "a
 
person, public officer, or corporation, association, or other
 organization or entity, either public or private, who is rendered
 
12 The HRE as a whole were enacted in 1980 pursuant to Hawaii Revised
Statutes (HRS) Chapter 626. The HRE resulted from a "joint and coordinated
endeavor of both the judiciary and legislative branches[,]" in that the
Judiciary submitted the proposed HRE to the Legislature for enactment. See S.
 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 22-80, in 1980 Senate Journal, at 1029-31.
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  HRE Rule 503(d) provides:13
25(d) Exceptions.  There is no privilege under this rule:
(1)Furtherance of crime or fraud.  If the services of the
lawyer were sought, obtained, or used to enable or aid
anyone to commit or plan to commit what the client knew
or reasonably should have known to be a crime or fraud;
(2)Prevention of crime or fraud.  As to a communication
reflecting the client's intent to commit a criminal or
fraudulent act that the lawyer reasonably believes is
likely to result in death or substantial bodily harm,
or in substantial injury to the financial interests or
property of another;
(3)Claimants through same deceased client.  As to a
communication relevant to an issue between parties who
claim through the same deceased client, regardless of
whether the claims are by testate or intestate
succession or by inter vivos transaction;
(4)Breach of duty by lawyer or client.  As to a
communication relevant to an issue of breach of duty by
the lawyer to the client or by the client to the
lawyer;
(5)Document attested by lawyer.  As to a communication
relevant to an issue concerning an attested document to
which the lawyer is an attesting witness;
(6)Joint clients.  As to a communication relevant to a
matter of common interest between two or more clients
if the communication was made by any of them to a
lawyer retained or consulted in common, when offered in
an action between any of the clients; or
(7)Lawyer's professional responsibility.  As to a
communication the disclosure of which is required or
authorized by the Hawaii rules of professional conduct
for attorneys.professional legal services by a lawyer, or who consults a lawyer
with a view to obtaining professional legal services."  In turn,
HRE Rule 503(a)(3) defines a "lawyer" as "a person authorized, or
reasonably believed by the client to be authorized, to practice
law in any state or nation."  Nothing within the general terms of
HRE Rule 503 suggest that the attorney-client privilege is
inapplicable when a bad faith claim is asserted.
It is also significant to note that HRE Rule 503(d)
contains a list of seven exceptions for which "[t]here is no
privilege under this rule[,]"13 and there is no exception therein
precluding application of the attorney-client privilege because a
bad faith claim has been asserted.
The attorney-client privilege has long been recognized
in Hawai# i, first under common law and then pursuant to HRE Rule
503.  See DiCenzo v. Izawa,  68 Haw. 528, 535, 723 P.2d 171, 175FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1986) (noting that HRE Rule 503 "codified the common-law 
attorney-client privilege long recognized by the courts of Hawaii"); Sapp v. Wong, 62 Haw. 34, 38-40, 609 P.2d 137, 140-41 (1980) (discussing the common-law doctrine of attorney-client privilege); Wery v. Pac. Trust Co., 33 Haw. 701, 704 (Haw. Terr. 1936) (discussing the common-law standard for attorney-client privilege). "The attorney-client privilege is the oldest of the privileges for confidential communications known to the common law." Upjohn Co. v. United States, 449 U.S. 383, 389 (1981). 
"The underlying principle of [the attorney-client] privilege is to encourage full and frank communication between attorneys and their clients and thereby promote broader public interests in the observance of law and administration of justice." Save Sunset 
Beach, 102 Hawai
'i at 484, 78 P.3d at 20 (citations, internal 
quotation mark and brackets omitted). "The privilege is bottomed on assumptions that lawyers can act effectively only if they are fully advised of the facts by the parties they represent and disclosure will be promoted if the client knows that what he tells his lawyer cannot be extorted from the lawyer[.]" DiCenzo, 
68 Haw. at 535, 723 P.2d at 175 (citations, internal quotation marks, and ellipses omitted). 
Bad faith claims, like other types of claims alleging
 
corporate or company misconduct, can present a challenging
 context in which to determine whether the attorney-client
 privilege applies. Nonetheless, an insurer such as Fidelity can
 no doubt come within the definition of a "client" under HRE Rule
 503(a)(1), and the purpose underlying the attorney-client
 privilege applies when a confidential communication is made
 between persons covered by HRE Rule 503 for the purpose of
 facilitating the rendition of legal services to an insurer. 
There is nothing in HRE Rule 503 to suggest that the privilege
 does not apply merely because a bad faith claim has been
 asserted. We thus do not accept Anastasi's contention that his
 bad faith claim against Fidelity nullifies any attorney-client
 privilege that would otherwise apply.
 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
b. McGinnity's dual roles in addressing Anastasi's
claim for title insurance
 
The parties shape their arguments about the privilege
 
based on how they characterize McGinnity's role in this case,
 
with Anastasi asserting that McGinnity acted as a claims adjuster
 and with Fidelity focusing on her role as Major Claims Counsel. 
Part of the difficulty in this case is that McGinnity appears to
 have, in effect, acted in both capacities. She appears to have
 played a central role in the overall handling of Anastasi's
 claim, while also conducting legal analysis and providing her
 recommendations on the matter.
 
Fidelity has implicitly recognized McGinnity's dual
 
roles in that, although it has asserted the attorney-client
 privilege and work-product doctrine related to McGinnity, it has
 also: named McGinnity as a witness with respect to "liability and
 damages, including, but not limited to, matters related to her
 handling of Mr. Anastasi's claim and communications with
 Mr. Anastasi's attorney, Jade Ching, concerning Ms. Ching's
 strategy in defending the claim against Mr. Anastasi and her
 reasons for believing that the claim against her client was
 defensible"; produced various documents relevant to McGinnity's
 activities on the claim; and allowed McGinnity to be deposed,
 subject to a stipulation with Anastasi that McGinnity's
 deposition and the production of documents in relation to her
 deposition did not waive the attorney-client privilege or any
 work-product immunity to the extent they existed.
 
In this context, we must determine whether the circuit
 
court abused its discretion in precluding discovery of documents
 6, 8, 15, 24, 25, 157, 158, and 159, which were withheld by
 Fidelity based on its assertion of the attorney-client privilege. 
We are mindful that the party claiming the privilege has the
 burden of establishing that the privilege exists and that it
 applies as asserted. DiCenzo, 68 Haw. at 536, 723 P.2d at 176;
 
Sapp, 62 Haw. at 38, 609 P.2d at 140. Additionally, because the
 privilege "works to suppress otherwise relevant evidence and
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
forestall a search for truth, the limitations which restrict the
 
scope of its operation must be assiduously heeded. Put another
 way, the privilege must be strictly limited to the purpose for
 which it exists." DiCenzo, 68 Haw. at 535, 723 P.2d at 175
 
(citations, internal quotation marks and ellipsis omitted). 
Based on our review of the record and the eight
 
documents that Fidelity claims are subject to the attorney-client
 privilege, there does not appear to be any question that the
 documents were treated as confidential. It also appears that 
confidential communications between McGinnity and Frieden, an
 attorney retained by Fidelity to investigate and review coverage
 of Anastasi's claim, are privileged.
14 Indeed, Anastasi
 
expressly states in his Reply Brief that he does not question the
 privilege between Fidelity and Frieden. It therefore appears
 that memorandums from Frieden to McGinnity, which are a part of
 documents 157 and 158,
15 are privileged. Additionally,
 
confidential communications between McGinnity and a
 representative of Frieden would also be privileged, see HRE
 503(a)(4) and (b), and therefore documents 24 and 25 appear to be
 privileged.
 
The remaining communications in documents 6, 8, 15,
 
157, 158, and 159 are between McGinnity and other employees,
 executives and/or attorneys within Fidelity. Given Fidelity's
 claim that McGinnity was acting as Fidelity's lawyer
16 in
 
authoring or receiving these documents, whether these
 communications are privileged and were between persons covered by
 the privilege depends on whether the communications involved the
 rendition of professional legal services. As an overall matter,
 the communications must be "made for the purpose of facilitating
 
14 Frieden is a partner in the law firm of Rutan & Tucker, LLP, and is
not an employee of Fidelity.
15 Documents 157 and 158 each consist of three separate documents.
 
16 HRE Rule 503(a)(3) defines a "lawyer" as "a person authorized, or
reasonably believed by the client to be authorized, to practice law in any
state or nation."
 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the rendition of professional legal services . . . ." HRE Rule
 
503(b). Moreover, the definitions of a "client,"17 a
 
18
"representative of the client,"  or other lawyers representing
the same "client" ultimately hinge on whether the rendering or

 
obtaining of legal services was involved.
 
Given McGinnity's dual roles in this case, it is not 
evident from the information provided by Fidelity (such as McGinnity's declaration) or the documents themselves that each of documents 6, 8, 15, 157, 158, and 159 were made for the purpose of facilitating the rendition of professional legal services. Hawai
'i appellate courts have not previously addressed a claim of 
privilege in a context similar to this case. We therefore consider how courts in other jurisdictions have addressed a claim of privilege where an in-house attorney has acted both as legal counsel and in other capacities. Having reviewed numerous cases that touch on the issue, we believe the appropriate analysis is to consider whether a communication is "primarily or predominantly of a legal character." Rossi v. Blue Cross & Blue 
Shield of Greater N.Y., 540 N.E.2d 703, 706 (N.Y. 1989). See 
also Alexander C. Black, Annotation, What Corporate Communications Are Entitled to Attorney-Client Privilege - Modern Cases, 27 A.L.R. 5th 76, §41 (1995) (discussing cases in which courts determined that special scrutiny was required when corporate communications involving in-house counsel are claimed to be privileged). The discussion in Rossi is consistent with Hawai
'i case law directing that the privilege be strictly limited 
to its purpose. See DiCenzo, 68 Haw. at 535, 723 P.2d at 175.19 
17 HRE Rule 503(a)(1) defines a "client" as "a person, public officer,
or corporation, association, or other organization or entity, either public or
private, who is rendered professional legal services by a lawyer, or who
consults a lawyer with a view to obtaining professional legal services."
18
 HRE Rule 503(a)(2) defines a "representative of the client" as "one
having authority to obtain professional legal services, or to act on advice
rendered pursuant thereto, on behalf of the client."
19 We looked closely at the approach in California addressing counsel
serving in dual roles, but do not find that approach particularly compatible
(continued...)
 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In Rossi, the Court of Appeals of New York addressed
 
whether an internal memorandum from a corporate staff attorney to
 
a corporate officer was protected from disclosure by the
 attorney-client privilege. The court initially noted the
 challenges of determining whether the privilege applies when a
 company's in-house attorney is involved, stating:
 
[U]nlike the situation where a client individually engages a
lawyer in a particular matter, staff attorneys may serve as
company officers, with mixed business-legal responsibility;
whether or not officers, their day-to-day involvement in
their employers' affairs may blur the line between legal and
nonlegal communications; and their advice may originate not
in response to the client's consultation about a particular
problem but with them, as part of an ongoing, permanent
relationship with the organization. In that the privilege
obstructs the truth-finding process and its scope is limited
to that which is necessary to achieve its purpose, the need
to apply it cautiously and narrowly is heightened in the
case of corporate staff counsel, lest the mere participation
of an attorney be used to seal off disclosure.
 
540 N.E.2d at 705 (internal citations omitted). The court
 
further explained that "[o]bviously, not every communication from
 staff counsel to the corporate client is privileged. It is
 equally apparent that no ready test exists for distinguishing
 between protected legal communications and unprotected business
 or personal communications; the inquiry is necessarily
 
19 (...continued)
with Hawai' i law. In California, a trial court must first determine the
"dominant purpose of the relationship" between the company and its attorney,
i.e. whether it is an attorney-client relationship or some other type of
relationship. Costco Wholesale Corp. v. Super. Ct.,  219 P.3d 736, 746 (2009).
That initial determination then establishes whether communications are generally discoverable or not, although exceptions might apply. Id. This 
approach appears to have been formulated, in part, to address Californiastatutory law under which "a court may not order disclosure of a communicationclaimed to be privileged to allow a ruling on the claim of privilege[.]" Id. 
at 745. Apparently, California courts can only review communications claimedto be privileged if review is requested or agreed to by the party claiming the
privilege. There is no such restriction in Hawai' i and in camera review is 
utilized by our courts, as demonstrated in this case. We also believe 
California's approach would not be helpful in Hawai' i to ensure that the 
attorney-client privilege is strictly limited to its purpose. Even when the dominant purpose of a relationship is attorney-client, there can be instanceswhen communications are not for the purpose of facilitating legal services,especially in the context of a company that utilizes in-house counsel and thatindividual serves in multiple capacities. Thus, we believe that when a trialcourt deems it necessary and appropriate, it is better to review the subject
communications themselves via in camera review, rather than relying on
generally categorizing communications based on the dominant nature of therelationship. 
30
  RossiFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fact-specific." Id. (citation omitted). Quite similar to the
 
privilege adopted in Hawai 'i, the Rossi court recognized under 
New York law that for the privilege to apply to communications
 
from an attorney to a client, whether or not in response to a
 particular request, the communication "must be made for the
 purpose of facilitating the rendition of legal advice or
 services, in the course of a professional relationship." Id. at
 
706 (citation omitted).
 
The  court considered the context and timing of
 
the memorandum at issue in that case, including that there was
 imminent litigation looming, and also noted that a lack of legal
 research in the document was not determinative "where the
 communication concerns legal rights and obligations and where it
 evidences other professional skills such as [a] lawyer's judgment
 and recommended legal strategies." 
Id. (citation omitted). The
 
court concluded that,
 
[s]o long as the communication is primarily or predominantly
of a legal character, the privilege is not lost merely by
reason of the fact that it also refers to certain nonlegal
matters. Indeed, the nature of a lawyer's role is such that
legal advice may often include reference to other relevant
considerations. Here, it is plain from the content and
context of the communication that it was for the purpose of
facilitating the lawyer's rendition of legal advice to his
client. While we are mindful of the concern that mere
 participation of staff counsel not be used to seal off
discovery of corporate communications, here nothing suggests
that this is a situation where a document was passed on to a
defendant's attorney in order to avoid its disclosure. It
appears that [the corporate staff attorney] was exercising a
lawyer's traditional function in counseling his client
regarding conduct that had already brought it to the brink
of litigation.
 
Id. (emphasis added) (internal citations, quotation marks and
 
brackets omitted); see also Se. Pa. Trans. Auth. v. CaremarkPCS
 Health, L.P., 254 F.R.D. 253, 258 (E.D. Pa. 2008) (applying
 Pennsylvania law to in-house counsel communications and
 expressing that "[t]he primary purpose of the communication at
 issue must be to gain or provide legal assistance for the
 privilege to apply due to the fact that in-house counsel may play
 a dual role of legal advisor and business advisor" (citation and
 internal quotation marks omitted)).
 
31
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In a similar vein, the court in United States Postal
 
Serv. v. Phelps Dodge Refining Corporation, 852 F.Supp. 156 (E.D.
 
N.Y. 1994), recognized that "the mere fact that a communication
 is made directly to an attorney, or an attorney is copied on a
 memorandum, does not mean that the communication is necessarily
 privileged." Id. at 160. Rather,
 
[t]he information-holder's motive for the communication, to
the extent that it can be discerned from the document, thus
is an important consideration. If the information-holder
will communicate with the attorney even if the privilege
does not exist, or if a nonlegal objective is sufficient to
stimulate communication with the attorney, then there is no
reason for the privilege to attach.
 
Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
Beyond the general framework of addressing the
 
privilege where in-house counsel is involved, as set forth above,
 
it is also important in this case to consider how courts have
 addressed the privilege in the insurance context. We thus
 recognize that when a communication between an insurance company
 and its attorney deals with the issue of coverage under a policy,
 including when the communication references the investigation
 undertaken to facilitate the rendering of legal advice on
 coverage, such communication is typically privileged. See Aetna
 
Cas. & Sur. Co. v. Super. Ct., 200 Cal. Rptr. 471, 476 (Cal. Ct.
 App. 1984) (holding that retention of an attorney to investigate
 an insurance claim and make a coverage determination under a
 policy "is a classic example of a client seeking legal advice
 
20
from an attorney");  Hartford Fin. Servs. Grp., Inc. v. Lake
Cnty. Park & Recreation Bd., 717 N.E.2d 1232, 1235-36 (Ind. Ct.
 App. 1999) (relying on Aetna and holding that correspondence
 between an insurer and its legal counsel, and internal
 communications regarding the advice of counsel, were covered by
 the attorney-client privilege in a bad faith lawsuit where the
 
20 Although we do not adopt California's approach regarding the
"dominant purpose of the relationship" involving a company and in-house
counsel, cases from California nonetheless provide guidance as to the type of
conduct that is generally related to legal advice or legal services in the
insurance context.
 
32
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attorney investigated the insurance claim, rendered legal advice,
 
and made a coverage determination).
 
"However, the attorney-client privilege only protects 
disclosure of communications between the attorney and the client; it does not protect disclosure of underlying facts which may be referenced within a qualifying communication." State Farm Fire & 
Cas. Co. v. Super. Ct., 62 Cal. Rptr. 2d 834, 844 (Cal. Ct. App. 1997) (emphasis omitted). Thus, if facts referenced in privileged communications can be obtained through sources other than privileged communications, the privilege does not shield those facts from being disclosed. See Aerojet-General Corp. v. 
Trans. Indem. Ins., 22 Cal. Rptr. 2d 862, 866 (Cal. Ct. App. 1993). Generally, "a claim investigation involves gathering information from non-client sources. Gathering such information is not part of any privileged communication, so that process is not privileged. The lawyer's legal analysis based on the information gathered may be privileged or opinion work product, but the factual investigation is not." William T. Barker & Ronald D. Kent, New Appleman Insurance Bad Faith Litigation §16.04[3][c] (2d ed. 2014). This is consistent with Hawai
'i case 
law holding that a statement given by an insured to a representative of her insurer soon after an automobile accident was not subject to the attorney-client privilege. DiCenzo, 68 
Haw. at 536-39, 723 P.2d at 176-78. In DiCenzo, the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court expressed concerns about making statements taken by an insurance investigator or adjustor immune from discovery because the "internal documents of insurance companies obtained in the normal course of business relating to claims of their insureds would then be shielded from discovery," which is beyond the intended reach of the attorney-client privilege. Id. at 537­
38, 723 P.2d at 177 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
With the above guideposts in place, we turn back to the
 
particulars of this case. McGinnity's declaration provides a
 general description of her role as Major Claims Counsel and some
 
33
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the actions she took in this capacity regarding Anastasi's
 
claim and tender of the Stickney Lawsuit. Her declaration
 establishes that at least part of her duties included
 investigating and assessing whether Anastasi's claim was covered
 by the title insurance policy. Additionally, her declaration
 indicates her view that "it was evident that Fidelity would
 likely have to engage in litigation against other parties to
 protect both Mr. Anastasi and/or Fidelity's interest." McGinnity
 attested that Fidelity had the right under the policy to bring
 claims against other parties to recover amounts that might have
 to be paid under the policy. Moreover, McGinnity anticipated
 that coverage litigation might ensue between Fidelity and
 Anastasi if facts showed that Anastasi was involved in the fraud
 alleged in the Stickney Lawsuit. The circuit court thus properly
 relied on McGinnity's declaration in its initial determination
 that the attorney-client privilege may apply to the withheld
 documents. As to the documents ultimately submitted for in
 camera review, however, McGinnity's declaration provides mostly
 general background information because it does not address why
 these documents are primarily or predominantly of a legal
 character and/or the purpose or context regarding those
 particular communications. Cf. Se. Pa. Trans. Auth., 254 F.R.D.
 
at 259 (noting that the in-house counsel whose communications
 were at issue attested via affidavit that she and her paralegal
 worked on the matter in a strictly legal capacity).
 
From our review of documents 6, 8, 15, 157, 158 and
 
159, we do not believe that Fidelity has carried its burden of
 establishing that the privilege applies as asserted, because it
 appears that at least some of the documents, or portions of the
 documents, were not made to facilitate the rendition of legal
 services. For example, most of documents 6 and 8 seem to relate
 to standard claims activities such as forwarding Anastasi's claim
 within Fidelity (although arguably a part of the documents might
 implicitly touch on a coverage issue). Document 15 involves
 emails that appear to contain a mixture of general claims
 
34
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
information and also reference to coverage issues. Documents 157
 
and 158 actually consist of three separate documents each,
 including the memorandums by Frieden that appear to be
 privileged, but also documents authored by McGinnity that contain
 a mixture of claims information and some analysis. The privilege
 log states that documents 157 and 158 were submitted to a claims
 committee, but it is unclear if the purpose of McGinnity's
 documents were primarily or predominantly of a legal character,
 or rather standard claims handling. Document 159, which is quite
 extensive and consists of one-hundred and seventy-two pages,
 contains a variety of factual background and investigation
 without an apparent tie-in to a legal analysis, recommendation,
 or conclusion. We also note that documents 157, 158, and 159
 were communications that went to John Hershberger (Hershberger),
 Senior Vice-President and Major Claims Counsel of Fidelity
 National Financial, Inc., and/or Gary Urquhart (Urquhart),
 Executive Vice-President and General Counsel of Fidelity National
 Financial, Inc.
21 Like McGinnity, Hershberger and Urquhart hold
 
titles as both executives and as counsel for their respective
 Fidelity entity. Fidelity provides no explanation of Hershberger
 and Urquhart's roles in addressing Anastasi's claim or in
 receiving the subject communications to help explain why these
 communications are allegedly of a legal character and not part of
 Fidelity's ordinary business of handling claims.
 
Without further addressing each document, because such
 
review is properly the province of the trial court, we conclude
 that the circuit court abused its discretion in allowing Fidelity
 to withhold all of the documents claimed to be privileged, as it
 appears to us that at least some of the documents, or at least
 portions of some, relate to the general handling of Anastasi's
 insurance claim. We conclude that Fidelity has not carried its
 burden of establishing that documents 6, 8, 15, 157, 158, and 159
 
21 Fidelity National Financial, Inc. is not identical to the Fidelity
entity named as a party in this case. The parties do not explain the
difference between these two entities.
 
35
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as a whole are "confidential communications made for the purpose
 
of facilitating the rendition of professional legal services." 
HRE Rule 503(b). Even though some of the documents are marked as
 subject to the attorney-client privilege and/or the work-product
 doctrine, that alone is not dispositive. See DiCenzo, 68 Haw. at
 
536, 723 P.2d at 176 ("A proper application of the codified
 privilege, however, requires preliminary judicial inquiry into
 the existence and validity of the privilege, and the burden of
 establishing this rests with the claimant." (citations, internal
 quotation marks and brackets omitted)).
 
We therefore remand this issue to the circuit court for
 
further proceedings consistent with the above discussion. The
 circuit court may determine in its discretion whether to allow
 further briefing and/or submissions in light of our discussion
 above. Moreover, if the circuit court determines that a
 communication contains both privileged and non-privileged
 matters, it may allow redaction of the privileged matters and
 order production of the rest. See TP Orthodontics, Inc. v.
 
Kesling, 15 N.E.3d 985, 997-98 (Ind. 2014).
 
c.	 Naming McGinnity as a witness did not waive the
attorney-client privilege
 
We reject Anastasi's argument in which he essentially
 
asserts that by naming McGinnity as a witness, no privilege
 
attaches to her communications. Based on our discussion of
 McGinnity's dual role in this case, her communications and files
 are clearly discoverable to the extent they are not privileged
 (or subject to the work-product doctrine discussed below). 
However, as to communications involving McGinnity that Fidelity
 can establish were made for the purpose of facilitating the
 rendition of legal services to Fidelity, i.e. communications
 primarily or predominantly of a legal character, those
 communications would be privileged.
 
As previously noted, Fidelity does not attempt to
 
defend against the bad faith claim by arguing that it relied on
 the advice of its counsel. Therefore, we need not consider
 
36
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
whether the privilege was waived based on the "advice of counsel"
 
defense.
 
2. Work-Product Doctrine
 
Anastasi asserts the circuit court erred in concluding
 
that the work-product doctrine applies to documents 17, 67, 157,

 
158, and 159. The work-product doctrine is distinct from the
 attorney-client privilege. Save Sunset Beach, 102 Hawai
'i at 
484, 78 P.3d at 20. "The primary purpose of the work product
 rule is to prevent exploitation of a party's efforts in preparing
 for litigation[,]" Holmgren v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co.,
 976 F.2d 573, 576 (9th Cir. 1992) (citation and internal
 
22
quotation marks omitted),  and to "protect written statements,
private memoranda and personal recollections prepared or formed
 by an adverse party's counsel in the course of his legal duties." 
Metzler Contracting Co. v. Stephens, 642 F. Supp. 2d 1192, 1205
 (D. Haw. 2009) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
In Hawai
'i, the work-product doctrine is set forth in 
HRCP Rule 26. Save Sunset Beach, 102 Hawai 'i at 484, 78 P.3d at 
20. HRCP Rule 26 provides in pertinent part that
 
(b) Discovery Scope and Limits. Unless otherwise
 
limited by order of the court in accordance with these
rules, the scope of discovery is as follows:
 
(1) In General. Parties may obtain discovery regarding
any matter, not privileged, which is relevant to the subject
matter involved in the pending action . . . .
 
. . . .
 
(4) Trial Preparation: Materials. A party may obtain
discovery of documents and tangible things otherwise
discoverable under subdivision (b)(1) of this rule and
prepared in anticipation of litigation or for trial by or
for another party or by or for that other party's
representative (including the other party's attorney,
consultant, surety, indemnitor, insurer, or agent) only upon
a showing that the party seeking discovery has substantial
need of the materials in the preparation of the party's case
and that the party is unable without undue hardship to
 
22 The portions of HRCP Rule 26 related to the work-product doctrine
are substantially similar to FRCP Rule 26. "[W]here we have patterned a rulewithin the HRCP after an equivalent rule within the FRCP, interpretations ofthe rule by the federal courts are deemed to be highly persuasive in thereasoning of this court." Kawamata Farms, 86 Hawai' i at 255, 948 P.2d at 1096
(citation and internal quotations marks omitted). 
37
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
obtain the substantial equivalent of the materials by other
means. In ordering discovery of such materials when the
required showing has been made, the court shall protect
against disclosure of the mental impressions, conclusions,
opinions, or legal theories of an attorney or other
representative of a party concerning the litigation.
 
HRCP Rule 26(b) (emphasis added).
 
Much like the attorney-client privilege discussed 
above, the issues in this case relating to the work-product 
doctrine are of first impression in Hawai 'i and involve the 
question of how the work-product doctrine should be applied when an in-house attorney serves in dual capacities and a document involving the attorney may have multiple purposes. In seeking production of the McGinnity documents, Anastasi argued that: the work-product doctrine did not apply to any of the McGinnity documents because she acted as a claims adjuster conducting a purely factual investigation in Fidelity's ordinary course of business; it would be unfair to bar discovery simply because an attorney conducted the investigation; HRCP Rule 26(b)(4) requires that work product be produced in anticipation of litigation, measured by whether the document can fairly be said to have been prepared or obtained because of the litigation; the possibility of litigation in this case was too remote; and he has demonstrated a substantial need for the information because the withheld documents are vital to establishing his bad faith claim. Anastasi also advocated that, if the circuit court found any portions of the documents to be privileged or work product, the court should order those portions redacted. 
In response to Anastasi's motion to compel, Fidelity
 
asserted that the work-product doctrine applies because, as
 stated in her declaration, McGinnity immediately anticipated that
 there was at least a possibility of a dispute between Anastasi
 and Fidelity, and thus her investigation was conducted with an
 eye toward potential litigation. Fidelity also asserted that
 Anastasi did not demonstrate a need for the work product because
 the information contained in the documents was available in other
 documents turned over by Fidelity as discovery.
 
38
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We initially note that Fidelity asserts both the
 
attorney-client privilege and work-product doctrine in regard to
 
documents 157, 158, and 159. An initial consideration in
 applying the work-product doctrine under HRCP Rule 26(b)(4) is
 whether discovery is sought of "documents and tangible things
 otherwise discoverable under subdivision (b)(1) of this
 rule . . . ." (Emphasis added.) In turn, HRCP Rule 26(b)(1)
 permits discovery regarding any matter "not privileged." As
 discussed above, the question of whether the attorney-client
 privilege applies to documents 157, 158, and 159 is remanded to
 the circuit court in light of the standards we have adopted. To
 the extent the circuit court on remand concludes that the
 attorney-client privilege applies to these documents, the
 materials would not be subject to the work-product doctrine
 because they would not be "otherwise discoverable."
 
Assuming the subject documents are "otherwise 
discoverable," the crux of the work-product dispute between the parties is whether the materials were "prepared in anticipation of litigation." HRCP Rule 26(b)(4); see Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Waikoloa Beach Villas ex rel. Bd. of Directors v. Sunstone Waikoloa, LLC, 130 Hawai
'i 152, 161, 307 P.3d 132, 141 
(2013) (noting that the work-product doctrine applied because an opinion letter was a prerequisite for litigation and thus "prepared in anticipation of litigation"); Save Sunset Beach, 102 Hawai
'i at 484, 78 P.3d at 20 (holding that the work-product 
doctrine was inapplicable where there was no indication a memorandum was prepared in anticipation of litigation). We note that "[t]he burden of establishing work product protection lies with the proponent, and it must be specifically raised and demonstrated rather than asserted in a blanket fashion." Holliday v. Extex, 447 F. Supp. 2d 1131, 1138 (D. Haw. 2006) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The difficulty of this issue is determining at what
 
point work produced by an insurer's in-house counsel acting in a
 dual role becomes "work prepared in anticipation of litigation." 
39
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Before the trial court, Fidelity asserted that any document
 
prepared by McGinnity was prepared in anticipation of litigation
 "if it was created after the insured tendered [his] claim for
 coverage; if it begins to appear that the insurer might deny
 coverage or reserve its rights; the insurer denies coverage; if
 coverage litigation appears imminent; or if coverage litigation
 commenced[,]" citing Liberty Mutual Fire Insurance Company v.
 Kaufman, 885 So.2d 905, 910 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2004). However,
 review of Liberty Mutual indicates that the Florida District
 Court of Appeal merely stated that a document may be deemed to be
 in anticipation of litigation in such circumstances, not that it
 must. Id.
 
Instead, "[i]t is well established that documents
 
prepared in the ordinary course of business are not protected by
 the work-product doctrine because they would have been created
 regardless of the litigation." Heath v. F/V ZOLOTOI, 221 F.R.D.
 
545, 549-50 (W.D. Wash. 2004); Thomas Organ Co. v. Jadranska
 Slobodna Plovidba, 54 F.R.D. 367, 371 (N.D. Ill. 1972) ("[W]e
 conclude that any document which was prepared in the ordinary
 course of business and not in anticipation of trial or litigation
 is routinely discoverable without any showing of need under Rule
 26(b)(1) and is not protected by Rule 26(b)(3) notwithstanding
 that it contains mental impressions, conclusions, opinions and
 legal theories."). "It is presumed that a document or thing
 prepared before a final decision was reached on an insured's
 claim, and which constitutes part of the factual inquiry into or
 evaluation of that claim, was prepared in the ordinary and
 routine course of the insurer's business of claim determination
 and is not work product." Harper v. Auto-Owners Ins. Co., 138
 
F.R.D. 655, 663 (S.D. Ind. 1991). "[M]aterials prepared as part
 of claims investigation are generally not considered work product
 due to the industry's need to investigate claims. . . . Documents
 created during those processes are part of the ordinary course of
 business of insurance companies." Moe v. Sys. Transp., Inc., 270
 
F.R.D. 613, 624-25 (D. Mont. 2010) (block quote format and
 
40
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
citation omitted); see Thomas Organ, 54 F.R.D. at 374 ("If every
 
time a party prepared a document in the ordinary course of
 business to guide claim handling, this document was deemed to be
 prepared in anticipation of litigation, it is difficult to see
 what would be discoverable.").
 
In circumstances where a document serves a dual purpose,
that is, where it was not prepared exclusively for
litigation, then the "because of" test is used. Dual
 purpose documents are deemed prepared because of litigation
if "in light of the nature of the document and the factual
situation in the particular case, the document can be fairly
said to have been prepared or obtained because of the
prospect of litigation." In applying the "because of"•
standard, courts must consider the totality of the
circumstances and determine whether the "'document was
 created because of anticipated litigation, and would not
have been created in substantially similar form but for the
prospect of litigation.'"
 
United States v. Richey, 632 F.3d 559, 567-68 (9th Cir. 2011)
 
(citations omitted).
 
Given McGinnity's dual roles in this case, and from our
 
in camera review of the documents, it is not evident that
 Fidelity has carried its burden of establishing that the work-
product doctrine applies to preclude discovery of documents 17,
 67, 157, 158, and 159. In her declaration, McGinnity asserts
 that she "anticipated at the time the Claim was tendered that a
 coverage dispute resulting in litigation might ensue between
 Fidelity and Mr Anastasi." However, this does not establish that
 documents 17, 67, 157, 158, or 159 were produced or created by
 McGinnity "because of anticipated litigation, and would not have
 been created in substantially similar form but for the prospect
 of litigation." Richey, 632 F.3d at 568 (citation and quotation
 
marks omitted). For instance, Fidelity asserts in its privilege
 log that document 67, McGinnity's handwritten notes regarding the
 analysis of Anastasi's claim, is work product but there is
 nothing specific in McGinnity's declaration explaining how this
 document was produced "because of anticipated litigation." Thus,
 there is no indication the handwritten notes are tied to any
 particular litigation and not McGinnity's general claims
 investigation, which would have been conducted in substantially
 
41
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
similar form even without the prospect of litigation. See Heath,
 
221 F.R.D. at 549 ("'More than the mere possibility of litigation
 
must be evident' for materials to be considered immune from
 discovery under the work-product doctrine."); Harper, 138 F.R.D.
 at 659-60 ("There are many formulations of this level of threat,
 but the cases generally concur that a party must show more than a
 'remote prospect,' an 'inchoate possibility,' or 'a likely
 chance' of litigation." (citations omitted)); Thomas Organ, 54
 F.R.D. at 373-74 (rejecting the notion that after a claim has
 been filed, litigation is always a contingency and "speculative
 contemplation of possible litigation" constitutes anticipation of
 litigation).
 
Similarly, it is not clear that documents 157, 158 or
 
159 were made "because of anticipated litigation." On their
 face, it appears that these documents were part of the process
 for analyzing and reporting on Anastasi's claim, as well as for
 obtaining approval to pay benefits under the policy. Thus, based
 on the record before us, it does not appear that these documents
 were prepared "because of anticipated litigation."
 
We decline to further address each document. There is
 
nothing in the record to suggest that the circuit court
 considered whether the withheld documents were produced "because
 of" anticipated litigation and would not have been created in a
 substantially similar form but for the prospect of litigation. 
Based on our review of the existing record, we conclude that
 Fidelity has not carried its burden of establishing that the
 work-product doctrine applies to documents 17, 67, 157, 158 and
 159. We therefore remand this issue to the circuit court for
 
further proceedings consistent with our discussion above. To the
 extent the circuit court concludes the documents were produced in
 anticipation of litigation, and Anastasi has made the requisite
 showings of "substantial need" and "undue hardship," the court
 may determine whether redaction is appropriate to "protect
 against the disclosure of the mental impressions, conclusions,
 opinions, or legal theories of an attorney or other
 
42
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
representative of a party concerning the litigation." HRCP Rule
 
26(b)(4).
C. Summary Judgment
 
Although this case will be remanded to the circuit
 
court to further address discovery of the McGinnity documents, we
 must still consider Anastasi's points of error regarding the
 summary judgment granted in favor of Fidelity on the existing
 record. We believe that some of Anastasi's contentions regarding
 the summary judgment ruling have merit and that the circuit
 court's errors must be addressed at this time so that the bad
 faith claim can be properly resolved going forward.
 
Anastasi contends the circuit court erred in granting
 
summary judgment because the court incorrectly determined:
 (1) that Fidelity's actions were reasonable as a matter of law;
 and (2) that Anastasi did not raise a genuine issue of material
 fact as to whether Fidelity controlled Ching's actions in the
 Stickney Lawsuit and that Ching's actions must be imputed to
 Anastasi as a matter of law. We agree with the first contention
 and hold that the grant of summary judgment for Fidelity must be
 vacated on that ground. As to the second contention, the circuit
 court was correct that no genuine issue of material fact was
 raised on the question of Fidelity controlling the Stickney
 litigation, but imputing the actions of Ching to Anastasi is not
 relevant in analyzing the enhanced standard of good faith that
 applies in this case. Rather, the crucial factor in this case is
 that, on the existing record, Anastasi does not point to any
 evidence that Fidelity induced Ching to breach any ethical duties
 to Anastasi in litigating the Stickney Lawsuit.
1. Bad Faith Standards
 
In Best Place, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court adopted a 
reasonableness standard for bad faith claims. 82 Hawai 'i at 132­
33, 920 P.2d at 346-47. The court held that
 
there is a legal duty, implied in a first- and third-party
insurance contract, that the insurer must act in good faith
in dealing with its insured, and a breach of that duty of
good faith gives rise to an independent tort cause of
action. The breach of the express covenant to pay claims,
 
43
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
however, is not the sine qua non for an action for breach of
 
the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. The
 implied covenant is breached, whether the carrier pays the
claim or not, when its conduct damages the very protection
or security which the insured sought to gain by buying
insurance.
 
Id. at 132, 920 P.2d at 346 (citations and quotation marks
 
omitted). The court further ruled that in first-party bad faith
 cases, 
[w]e believe that the appropriate test to determine bad
faith is the general standard set forth in Gruenberg [v.
 Aetna Insurance Company, 510 P.2d 1032 (Cal. 1973)] and its
progeny. Under the Gruenberg test, the insured need not show
a conscious awareness of wrongdoing or unjustifiable
conduct, nor an evil motive or intent to harm the insured.
An unreasonable delay in payment of benefits will warrant
recovery for compensatory damages under the Gruenberg test.
 
However, conduct based on an interpretation of the insurance
contract that is reasonable does not constitute bad faith.
 
Id. at 133, 920 P.2d at 347 (citation omitted) (emphasis added). 
The court noted that under Gruenberg, an insurer may face
 liability for bad faith if it "fails to deal fairly and in good
 faith with its insured by refusing, without proper cause, to
 compensate its insured for a loss covered by the policy." Id. at
 
132, 920 P.2d at 346 (quoting Gruenberg, 510 P.2d at 1037)
 (quotation marks omitted).
 
Subsequent to Best Place, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
adopted standards that apply to bad faith claims arising from circumstances, like the instant case, where an insurance company defended a claim against its insured under a reservation of rights. See Finley v. Home Ins. Co., 90 Hawai
'i 25, 975 P.2d 
1145 (1998); Delmonte v. State Farm Fire & Cas. Co., 90 Hawai 'i 
39, 975 P.2d 1159 (1999). 
When there is a reservation of rights and an insurer 
retains an attorney to defend a claim against its insured, the sole client of the retained attorney is the insured. Finley, 90 
Hawai
'i at 32-33, 975 P.2d at 1152-53. Recognizing the potential 
conflicts that could arise in such a circumstance, specific requirements have been adopted to ensure that the retained attorney remains independent of the insurer. Specifically, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court explained that "where an insurer is 
44
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required to provide a defense for its insured, it would be a
 
breach of the duty of good faith to induce retained counsel to
 
provide a defense which did not meet the professional standard
 
set forth by the [Hawai 'i Rules of Professional Conduct (HRPC)]." 
Id. at 36, 975 P.2d at 1156 (emphasis added). In such
 circumstance, the insurer may be liable "if its actions caused
 the attorney's breach of [his or her] duties." Id. (emphasis
 
added); see also Delmonte, 90 Hawai
'i at 54, 975 P.2d at 1174 
(explaining that if the retained attorney breached his ethical
 duties to his clients, the insureds, and such breach was
 "causally induced" by the insurer's action, then the insurer may
 be liable for bad faith (emphasis added)).
 
In determining whether the retained attorney has met
 
his or her ethical obligations in this circumstance, the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court held that
 
[a]n attorney who follows the ... requirements of the
HRPC must: (1) consult with the client as to the "means
by which the objectives [of the representation] are to
be pursued"; (2) not allow the insurer to interfere
with the attorney's "independence of professional
judgment or with the client-lawyer relationship"; and
(3) not allow the insurer "to direct or regulate the
lawyer's professional judgment in rendering legal
services." Only if these requirements are met will the
representation of an insured, paid for by an insurer
with a conflicting interest in the outcome of the
litigation, comport with the mandates of the HRPC.
 
Delmonte, 90 Hawai 'i at 55, 975 P.2d at 1175 (quoting Finley, 90 
Hawai'i at 33, 975 P.2d at 1153). 
In turn, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court also adopted an 
enhanced standard of good faith applicable to the insurance
 
company in a reservation of rights situation.
 
An insurance company must fulfill an enhanced
obligation to its insured as part of its duty of good
faith. Failure to satisfy this enhanced obligation may
result in liability of the company.
 
This enhanced obligation is fulfilled by meeting
specific criteria. First, the company must thoroughly
investigate the cause of the insured's accident and the
nature and severity of the plaintiff's injuries.
Second, it must retain competent defense counsel for
the insured. Both retained defense counsel and the
 
insurer must understand that only the insured is the
 
client.... Finally, an insurance company must refrain
from engaging in any action which would demonstrate a
 
45
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
greater concern for the insurer's monetary interest
than for the insured's financial risk.
 
Delmonte, 90 Hawai 'i at 55, 975 P.2d at 1175 (quoting Finley, 90 
Hawai'i at 36-37, 975 P.2d at 1156-57) (brackets omitted).
2. Reasonableness of Fidelity's Actions
 
In its summary judgment order, the circuit court held
 
that, in accordance with Best Place,
 
Fidelity acted reasonably in its interpretation of the terms and
provisions of the title insurance policy (the "Policy") issued to
Plaintiff Anastasi when it chose to defend the claims asserted
 against him in the Stickney Litigation; particularly since
Fidelity had been told by attorney Jade Ching that she believed
the claim against Plaintiff Anastasi was defensible because, among
other things, the alleged forgery of the Warranty Deed at issue in
the Stickney Litigation might have been secured with the
complicity of the Stickney Plaintiffs as well as other parties in
the Stickney Litigation. Given these undisputed facts, the Court
finds that Fidelity was entitled to exercise its legal and
contractual rights under the Policy to defend Plaintiff Anastasi
against the claims alleged against him in the Stickney Litigation
and to pursue that defense to a final determination.
 
Anastasi argues that this ruling was erroneous because
 
he adduced evidence showing that within months after Fidelity
 
received Anastasi's tender of his claim, Fidelity was aware of
 evidence showing that the Warranty Deed purporting to transfer
 the Property to Nagy had been forged; and that about four months
 after receiving the claim, McGinnity had expressed in an email to
 an FBI agent her belief that there were forgeries involved. 
Fidelity does not contest the evidence showing that it had
 information that appeared to indicate there was a forgery of the
 Warranty Deed to Nagy. Given these circumstances, Anastasi
 points to Fidelity's own argument in a Georgia lawsuit where it
 asserted that a forged deed was void ab initio, and argues that
 Fidelity nonetheless chose in this case to continue litigating in
 the face of an apparent forgery, relying on the litigation
 provisions in the policy rather than paying Anastasi.
 
As argued by Fidelity, and recognized by the circuit
 
court in its summary judgment order, the title policy in this
 case does contain broad provisions allowing Fidelity to defend
 against claims adverse to the insured title or interest. The
 policy also allows for diligent pursuit of other actions to
 
46
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
establish the title or interest or the lien of the insured 
mortgage. Moreover, the policy expressly provides that "the Company may pursue any litigation to final determination by a court of competent jurisdiction and expressly reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to appeal from any adverse judgment or order." Fidelity thus asserts that the circuit court correctly granted summary judgment because, consistent with Best Place, Fidelity's actions were based on a reasonable interpretation of the policy, which does not constitute bad faith. See 82 Hawai
'i 
at 133, 920 P.2d at 347 ("[C]onduct based on an interpretation of the insurance contract that is reasonable does not constitute bad faith."). 
We do not agree that, for summary judgment purposes,
 
Fidelity's litigation provisions and the evidence in the record
 establish that Fidelity acted reasonably in this case. 
Considering the evidence in the light most favorable to Anastasi
 as the non-moving party, it appears that about four months after
 receiving Anastasi's claim, Fidelity believed that the Warranty
 Deed to Nagy had been forged. The circuit court correctly notes
 that Ching nonetheless believed she could successfully defend
 Anastasi in the Stickney Lawsuit, in part because there was a
 question whether the Stickney plaintiffs, and perhaps others,
 might have been involved in the forgery scheme. However, neither
 the parties nor the circuit court address how proving fraud by
 the Stickney plaintiffs would affect coverage under the Fidelity
 policy, as a matter of law, when there still would have
 apparently been a forgery of the Warranty Deed that purported to
 transfer the insured title to Nagy. Fidelity does not assert it
 would have no obligations to Anastasi in that circumstance. 
Because the legal and coverage consequences of a finding of fraud
 by the Stickney plaintiffs are unclear, we cannot say as a matter
 of law that where Fidelity apparently believed there was a
 forgery of the Warranty Deed, its actions thereafter were
 reasonable and that summary judgment was appropriate.
 
47
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We recognize that the Stickney Lawsuit and the 
underlying transaction posed a somewhat thorny and complicated 
circumstance to be resolved. Indeed, an additional layer that Fidelity rightly needed to address was whether Anastasi himself may have been complicit in the forgery or some type of attempt to fraudulently obtain title insurance proceeds. Notwithstanding the legitimate questions facing Fidelity in this case, it cannot overly rely on the provisions in the policy allowing it to litigate. Rather, the question under Best Place is whether, given the information Fidelity had, the timing when it had the information, and when it reasonably resolved the issues presented by Anastasi's claim, was there an unreasonable delay in paying Anastasi. See 82 Hawai
'i at 133, 920 P.2d at 347 (holding that 
an unreasonable delay in paying benefits will warrant recovery for a bad faith claim). 
Moreover, Fidelity must meet the enhanced standard of 
good faith that applies in this circumstance. Anastasi does not appear to contest that Fidelity thoroughly investigated his claim, and as discussed below, we conclude that Anastasi failed to raise any genuine issue of material fact to contest that Fidelity retained competent counsel for him who met her ethical obligations. However, Anastasi argued and adduced sufficient evidence to contest whether Fidelity engaged in action that would "demonstrate a greater concern for the insurer's monetary interest than for the insured's financial risk." Delmonte, 90 
Hawai
'i at 55, 975 P.2d at 1175 (quoting Finley, 90 Hawai 'i at 
36-37, 975 P.2d at 1156-57) (block quote format omitted). That is, Anastasi not only questions the reasonableness of Fidelity's actions after it believed there was a forgery, but also contends that Fidelity's actions were motivated more by a desire to obtain recoupment of funds it might have to pay to Anastasi, rather than a concern for providing the protection owed to Anastasi under the title policy. Given the evidence in the existing record, there is at least a genuine issue of material fact on this issue. 
48
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Anastasi's bad faith claim, asserting that Fidelity
 
acted unreasonably in not paying his claim for over two and half
 
years, is fact intensive. Applying the requisite summary
 judgment standards and thus considering the evidence in the light
 most favorable to Anastasi as the non-movant, we conclude there
 are genuine issues of material fact as to whether Fidelity
 unreasonably delayed in paying Anastasi, and therefore summary
 judgment was not appropriate.
 
3. No evidence that Fidelity induced Ching to breach
any duties owed to Anastasi 
With regard to whether Fidelity unduly controlled Ching
 
in litigating the Stickney Lawsuit, the circuit court ruled as
 
follows:
 
4. Plaintiff Anastasi has failed to adduce any
evidence to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to
whether Fidelity controlled and/or directed Plaintiff
Anastasi's attorneys at Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing in their
defense of Plaintiff Anastasi in the Stickney Litigation.
The undisputed facts establish that Fidelity defended the
Stickney Litigation under a reservation of rights and that
in accordance with its obligations under [Finley] gave
Plaintiff Anastasi's attorneys full rein to conduct the
defense of their client as they deemed appropriate. 
5. Plaintiff Anastasi has not adduced any evidence to
support the conclusion that Fidelity directed Plaintiff
Anastasi's attorneys to delay a resolution of the Stickney
Litigation for the purpose of allowing Fidelity to forestall
the payment of benefits to Plaintiff Anastasi under the
Policy. Any delay in the resolution of the Stickney
Litigation was the natural byproduct of the defense strategy
employed by the Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing attorneys which, as
a matter of law, must be imputed to him.
 
In support of its summary judgment motion, Fidelity
 
submitted a declaration by McGinnity in which she stated that,
 
after Ching made an appearance in the Stickney Lawsuit, Ching and
 Anastasi directed the defense of that lawsuit. Fidelity also
 submitted the deposition of Ching in which she testified that
 Fidelity did not direct her in how to defend Anastasi and that
 she determined the legal strategy used to defend Anastasi in the
 Stickney Lawsuit. Under the Finley standards, an insurer is
 subject to bad faith liability when it causally induces retained
 counsel to breach his or her ethical duties to the insured. The
 
49
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Finley analysis does not include imputing retained counsel's
 
actions to the insured.
 
Anastasi relies on four pieces of counter evidence to 
argue that Fidelity improperly controlled Ching's actions in the Stickney Lawsuit. However, none of the evidence that Anastasi points to raises any question that Ching breached her ethical obligations to Anastasi, i.e., that she failed to consult with Anastasi as to the means by which the objectives of the representation were to be pursued, allowed Fidelity to interfere with her independent professional judgment or her relationship with Anastasi, or allowed Fidelity to direct her professional judgment in rendering legal services. Finley, 90 Hawai
'i at 33, 
975 P.2d at 1153; Delmonte, 90 Hawai 'i at 55, 975 P.2d at 1175. 
First, Anastasi points to Fidelity's claims handbook
 
which allegedly states that when Fidelity defends against an
 attack on title, Fidelity is in control of the litigation and
 will select counsel of its choosing. As noted in Finley, even
 when an insurance contract contains provisions about controlling
 litigation,
 
[w]hatever the rights and duties of the insurer and the
insured under the insurance contract, that contract does not
define the ethical responsibilities of the lawyer to his
client.
 
When retained counsel, experienced in the handling of
insurance defense matters, is allowed full rein to exercise
professional judgment, the interests of the insured will be
adequately safeguarded.
 
90 Hawai 'i at 34, 975 P.2d at 1154 (citations and quotation marks 
omitted). Thus, even if Fidelity's claims handbook contains 
language asserting a right to control litigation, the question under Finley is whether Ching was nonetheless allowed "full rein" to exercise her professional judgment. If an insurer causally induces retained counsel to breach his or her ethical obligations to the insured, the insurer is subject to bad faith liability. Here, Anastasi points to no evidence suggesting that Ching was constrained in any way in exercising her professional judgment or that she breached any ethical duties to him. 
50
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Second, Anastasi points to an introductory letter that 
Ching wrote to Anastasi after being retained to defend him. 
Anastasi highlights passages in which Ching states that she would be providing Fidelity with correspondence, pleadings, discovery responses, deposition transcripts and periodic status reports, and that "[i]t is anticipated that Fidelity will provide recommendations and instructions to the law firm regarding the steps and procedures to be taken in defending or settling the Claim." Of course, retained counsel in such circumstances must be careful to ensure that his or her only client is the insured, Finley, 90 Hawai
'i at 32-33, 975 P.2d at 1152-53, and Ching's 
letter also stated that Anastasi was her client, not Fidelity, and that she would not provide Fidelity with confidential attorney-client information without Anastasi's consent. Moreover, like the claims handbook, Ching's letter does not show that Ching was in any way constrained in exercising her judgment in the Stickney Lawsuit. Rather, we agree with the circuit court that there appears to be no genuine issue of material fact that Ching was allowed "full rein" to defend Anastasi as Ching deemed appropriate. 
The third and fourth pieces of evidence that Anastasi
 
points to are a memorandum from Ching to McGinnity, and related
 emails between them, all of which discuss a possible appeal in
 the Stickney Lawsuit. In Ching's memorandum to McGinnity, Ching
 concludes that an appeal would likely be successful because there
 were issues of fact that should have precluded summary judgment
 in the Stickney Lawsuit. Ching further explained, however, that
 "it would be a pyrrhic victory" because they likely would not
 succeed on remand given that the signature on the Warranty Deed
 did not match known signatures of Stickney and they would
 therefore not be able to establish the validity of the Warranty
 Deed. In the email exchange, Ching forwards her memo to
 McGinnity, states that the deadline to appeal is two days away,
 and suggests that an appeal be filed to protect Anastasi's appeal
 rights, noting that the appeal can be dismissed at any time. 
51
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
McGinnity responds, stating "Yes. File the notice." We can
 
discern no basis for why the memorandum or emails indicate that
 Ching was breaching her duties to defend Anastasi or being
 precluded by Fidelity from exercising her independent
 professional judgment. To the contrary, these documents show
 that Ching wanted to preserve her client's appeal rights, that
 she suggested the same to Fidelity, which then agreed. In his
 deposition, Anastasi testified that his main concern in claiming
 bad faith against Fidelity is that it took too long to pay him,
 but in this regard, he testified that he did not fault the
 conduct of Ching.
 
Given the above, Anastasi failed to show any genuine
 
issue of material fact that Ching breached her ethical duties to
 him or that Fidelity induced any such breaches. The circuit
 court's ruling in this regard is thus affirmed. However, the
 circuit court's ruling that Ching's actions should be "imputed"
 to Anastasi is neither correct nor relevant to the proper
 analysis under Finley and Delmonte, and is therefore vacated.
D. Costs
 
Overall, we vacate the grant of summary judgment on the
 
bad faith claim and Fidelity should not have been deemed the
 prevailing party. We need not address the issues raised by
 Anastasi regarding the award of costs because, in any event,
 costs should not have been awarded to Fidelity.
VI. Conclusion
 
For the reasons set forth above, we vacate the judgment

 
entered in favor of Fidelity on the bad faith claim and remand
 
this case to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent
 with this opinion.
Philip J. Leas
(Jacqueline B. Kido
with him on the briefs)
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
 
Thomas Benedict
 (Carol A. Eblen, Edmund K. Saffery,
William K. Tanaka with him on
 the briefs)
(Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel)
for Defendant-Appellee
 
52

 