NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30734
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DANIEL KAHANAOI, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0659)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Daniel Kahanaoi (Kahanaoi) appeals 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) filed on 
September 1, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(circuit court).1 Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) 
charged Kahanaoi with Murder in the Second Degree, in violation 
2
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-701.5 (1993)  and § 706­
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-701.5 provides:
 
[§707-701.5] Murder in the second degree. (1) Except as
provided in section 707-701, a person commits the offense of
murder in the second degree if the person intentionally or
knowingly causes the death of another person.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
656 (Supp. 2011)  (Count I); Burglary in the First Degree, in
4
violation of HRS § 708-810(1)(c) (1993)  (Count II); Place to
Keep Pistol or Revolver, in violation of HRS § 134-25 (Supp.
 
2011) (Count III); Carrying or Use of Firearm in the Commission
 
of a Separate Felony, in violation of HRS § 134-21 (Supp. 2011)5
 
(Counts IV & V); and Violation of a Temporary Restraining Order,
 in violation of HRS § 586-4 (Supp. 2011) (Count VI). After a
 
jury trial, Kahanaoi was found guilty as charged in Counts I, II,
 
IV & V.
 
On appeal, Kahanaoi asserts the following points of
 
error: (1) trial counsel provided ineffective assistance of
 
counsel, (2) the circuit court erred in failing to give an
 
"imperfect self-defense" instruction, and (3) the circuit court
 
erred in failing to instruct the jury on the included offense of
 
manslaughter. 
3
 HRS § 706-656 provides that "persons convicted of second degree
murder . . . shall be sentenced to life imprisonment with possibility of
parole."
4
 HRS § 708-810 provides, in pertinent part:
 
§708-810 Burglary in the first degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of burglary in the first degree if the person
intentionally enters or remains unlawfully in a building, with
intent to commit therein a crime against a person or against
property rights, and:
 
. . . .
 (c) 	 The person recklessly disregards a risk that the
building is the dwelling of another, and the building
is such a dwelling.
5
 HRS § 134-21 provides, in pertinent part:
 
[§134-21] Carrying or use of firearm in the commission of a
separate felony; penalty.  (a) It shall be unlawful for a person to
knowingly carry on the person or have within the person's immediate
control or intentionally use or threaten to use a firearm while engaged
in the commission of a separate felony[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm the circuit 
court's Judgment, but without prejudice to Kahanaoi filing a 
petition pursuant to Rule 40 of the Hawai' i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) as specified below. 
I. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel Claim
 
Kahanaoi fails to meet his burden to establish 
ineffective assistance of counsel. To prevail on an ineffective assistance of counsel claim, Kahanaoi must establish "that there 
were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of 
skill, judgment, or diligence" and "that such errors or omissions 
resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a 
potentially meritorious defense." State v. Wakisaka
, 102 Hawai' i 
504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003) (citation and footnote omitted). Kahanaoi must show "a possible impairment, rather than 
a probable impairment, of a potentially meritorious defense." 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i at 514, 78 P.3d 327. 
A. Angle of the Bullet Path
 
Kahanaoi argues that, in order to disprove eyewitness
 
testimony that Kahanaoi shot Kimsel in the back as Kimsel lay on
 
the ground, trial counsel should have elicited mathematical
 
calculations from expert witness William Goodhue, MD (Dr.
 
Goodhue) about the angle of the path of the second bullet. 
Kahanaoi has not shown that failure to elicit testimony
 
regarding mathematical calculations reflected trial counsel's
 
lack of skill, judgment, or diligence that resulted in the
 
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
 
defense. The jury had the opportunity to hear evidence
 
challenging the eyewitnesses' version of the events. Trial
 
counsel’s questioning of Dr. Goodhue and Dr. Manoukian, as well
 
as the introduction into evidence of the autopsy photo,
 
highlighted inconsistencies with the eyewitnesses' version of the
 
angle at which Kahanaoi shot Kimsel in the back.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Furthermore, "[i]neffective assistance of counsel 
claims based on the failure to obtain witnesses must be supported 
by affidavits or sworn statements describing the testimony of the 
proffered witnesses." State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 39, 960 
P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998). Here, Kahanaoi fails to present any sworn statement that Dr. Goodhue would have testified as to the 
mathematical calculation that Kahanaoi claims should have been 
elicited. It is mere speculation that Dr. Goodhue would have 
testified to Kahanaoi's suggested mathematical calculations. 
B. 911 Recording
 
Kahanaoi contends that the 911 recording, which was
 
contemporaneous with the two shots that were fired, "contains
 
very strong evidence that Kahanaoi did not kill Kimsel
 
intentionally or knowingly" and "contains evidence that strongly
 
refutes the testimony of the prosecution witnesses." Kahanaoi
 
asserts that, as reflected in the trial transcripts when the 911
 
recording was played for the jury, certain portions were noted as
 
being "undistinguishable" in the transcript. Kahanaoi argues in
 
his opening brief that trial counsel should have done more to
 
clarify the "undistinguishable" portions, whether by enhancing
 
the recording, presenting or soliciting expert or other witness
 
testimony to clarify the recording, or by way of stipulation with
 
the prosecution. 
Kahanaoi's opening brief appears to suggest that his
 
defense was affected because clarifying evidence as to the 911
 
recording would have established that his voice could be heard
 
referring to Kimsel's rug, and also that his voice could be heard
 
saying "911." Ostensibly, this would support Kahanaoi's claim of
 
self-defense under his version of events that: Kahanaoi went to
 
Kimsel's house to pick up Rusty Anoba (Anoba); Kimsel motioned
 
for him to come into the house; Kahanaoi noticed and mentioned
 
that Kimsel had a new rug and thus Kahanaoi took off his shoes;
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kimsel then reached for a gun from his waistband; Kahanaoi
 
grabbed the gun from Kimsel at which point Kahanaoi slipped due
 
to being only in socks and the gun accidentally discharged (first
 
shot); that Kahanaoi then said to call 911; and that Kahanaoi
 
thereafter intentionally fired the gun (second shot) when he was
 
about eight feet away from Kimsel, because Kimsel was bent over
 
and appeared to be reaching for something that looked like a
 
knife on the floor. Kahanaoi argues that "[a] nine second delay
 
between the first and second shots, and all of the conversation
 
that goes on between the two shots is strong evidence that
 
Kahanaoi was acting in self-defense and did not enter Kimsel's
 
house with the intention of killing him or anyone else." 
Similar to the issue addressed above, Kahanaoi fails to 
support his claim of ineffective assistance of counsel with any 
sworn statements by witnesses that he asserts should have been 
called to clarify the 911 recording. Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 39, 
960 P.2d at 1247. Moreover, there is nothing in the record on appeal, including a sworn statement, which indicates what an 
enhanced 911 recording would reflect. The audio recording in the 
record was played for the jury and thus the jury had the 
opportunity to hear that version. Without anything in the record 
to show that an enhanced version would provide clarity as to what 
Kahanaoi purports he was saying at the time, as compared to the 
version in the record, the claim that trial counsel was 
ineffective for not obtaining an enhanced 911 recording "amounts 
to nothing more than speculation." Cf. State v. Reed, 77 Hawai' i 
72, 84, 881 P.2d 1218, 1230 (1994), overruled on other grounds by 
State v. Balanza, 93 Hawai' i 279, 1 P.3d 281 (2000). 
Responding to the State's argument that his ineffective
 
assistance of counsel claim fails for lack of sworn statements
 
from witnesses regarding the 911 recording, Kahanaoi argues in
 
his reply brief that:
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[t]he point in the opening brief is that even the unenhanced
version of the recording contains exculpatory evidence that
was not properly presented to the jury, because trial
counsel did not even attempt to introduce a stipulated
transcript or otherwise bring exculpatory evidence on the
recording to the jury's attention.
 
We also disagree with Kahanaoi's argument in his reply brief. 
First, he points to nothing in the record suggesting that a
 
stipulated transcript was possible, where that would be subject
 
to agreement by the prosecution. Second, trial counsel asked
 
Kahanaoi a series of questions to draw the jury's attention to
 
portions of the 911 recording where Kahanaoi purported to say
 
certain things that could not be heard on the recording or could
 
not be heard clearly, including his reference to the rug and to
 
call 911. Thus, trial counsel made a concerted effort to point
 
out exculpatory evidence based on the 911 recording in evidence.
 
C. Self-Defense Justification
 
The self-defense justification requires an actor to
 
retreat if he can safely do so. HRS § 703-304(5)(b) (1993 Repl.) 
("The use of deadly force is not justifiable under this section
 
if . . . [t]he actor knows that he can avoid the necessity of
 
using such force with complete safety by retreating[.]").
 
Kahanaoi contends that trial counsel should have had
 
Kahanaoi explain on direct examination, rather than on redirect,
 
why he did not retreat when the garage door was open and there
 
was no one and nothing impeding his exit. Under Kahanaoi's
 
theory of defense, and as he testified during his direct
 
examination, he fired the second shot after grabbing the gun from
 
Kimsel because Kahanaoi thought that Kimsel was reaching for
 
something that looked like a knife. It was trial counsel's
 
judgment call at that point whether to further question Kahanaoi
 
on direct about his ability to safely retreat, or wait to see
 
what testimony was elicited from Kahanaoi on cross-examination. 
The order and manner of presenting Kahanaoi's testimony was part
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of trial counsel's tactical strategy. "Defense counsel's
 
tactical decisions at trial normally will not be questioned by a
 
reviewing court. Lawyers are permitted broad latitude to make
 
on-the-spot strategic choices in the course of trying a case." 
State v. Onishi, 64 Haw. 62, 63, 636 P.2d 742, 743 (1981)
 
(citations omitted).
 
D. Failure to Adequately Question Anoba
 
Kahanaoi contends that trial counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance of counsel when he (1) failed to enter a
 
photograph of a 9mm semiautomatic gun into evidence, (2) failed
 
to question witness Anoba about whether Kimsel had a 9mm gun in
 
his house while she was on the stand as a witness for the State,
 
and (3) failed to subpoena Anoba to testify as a witness for the
 
defense. 
As previously noted, in order to establish ineffective 
assistance of counsel for failure to call a witness, Kahanaoi 
must provide an affidavit or sworn statement describing the 
testimony that would have been proferred. Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 
39, 960 P.2d at 1247. In the instant case, trial counsel made an offer of proof before the circuit court as to Anoba's expected 
testimony for the defense. His offer of proof was that: 
[Anoba] did not see the weapons in the house that particular
evening when she was there or the afternoon she was there.
She had seen the revolver that he had in the house
 constantly since she's known him. Two to three months
 before the shooting, she had seen other weapons in the
house, one of which is a .9 millimeter. It appears to be,
from showing her pictures of weapons, a .9 millimeter pistol
that she saw within two to three months prior to the
shooting.
 
Nonetheless, Kahanaoi points to no sworn statement
 
showing that Anoba would testify in this manner, regardless of
 
whether she was questioned about the guns during the
 
prosecution's case or if she was subpoenaed to appear during the
 
defense's case. Id. Moreover, Kahanaoi asserts a picture of a
 
7
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
9mm semiautomatic was necessary so that Anoba could testify
 
whether she saw a similar type of gun in Kimsel's home.6 Without
 
a sworn statement as to her proffered testimony, the asserted
 need for a picture of a 9mm semiautomatic is moot. Therefore,
 
Kahanaoi fails to establish that his trial counsel was
 
ineffective on these grounds.
 
E.	 Evidence that Anoba was Afraid Kahanaoi was Going to
Kill Her
 
Kahanaoi contends "trial counsel failed to object to 
extremely prejudicial evidence which [the circuit court] had 
ruled inadmissible and at one point actually elicited such 
evidence himself when he asked [Anoba] about her statements to 
the police that she was afraid that Kahanaoi was going to kill 
her." Kahanaoi fails to argue this point and thus it is waived. 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7). 
II.	 Instruction Regarding Imperfect Self-Defense
 
Kahanaoi contends that the circuit court plainly erred 
in failing to give a jury instruction on "imperfect self-
defense." As Kahanaoi appears to acknowledge, Hawai' i has not 
recognized such a defense. He argues, however, that HRS § 703­
7
310(1) (1993)  should be interpreted to provide that where an
6
 Kahanaoi testified that he discarded the gun used in shooting Kimsel.
No gun was admitted into evidence. 
7
 HRS § 703-310 provides, in pertinent part:
 
§703-310 Provisions generally applicable to justification.
(1) When the actor believes that the use of force upon or toward
the person of another is necessary for any of the purposes for
which such belief would establish a justification under sections
703-303 to 703-309 but the actor is reckless or negligent in
having such belief or in acquiring or failing to acquire any
knowledge or belief which is material to the justifiability of the
actor's use of force, the justification afforded by those sections
is unavailable in a prosecution for an offense for which
recklessness or negligence, as the case may be, suffices to
establish culpability.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
actor honestly but unreasonably believes the use of deadly force
 
is justified, he can only be convicted of manslaughter, not
 
murder. 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has noted that interpreting 
HRS § 703-310 in the manner that Kahanaoi proposes has not been 
adopted in Hawai' i. State v. McNulty, 60 Haw. 259, 588 P.2d 438 
(1978), overruled on other grounds by Raines v. State, 79 Hawai' i 
219, 900 P.2d 1286 (1995). The supreme court stated that "[a]lthough a few jurisdictions recognize that one who honestly 
but unreasonably believed that the use of deadly force was 
necessary in self-defense can only be convicted of manslaughter, 
8
HRS § 703-310  has not yet been so construed nor has this
jurisdiction ever recognized such a view." McNulty, 60 Haw. at
 
269 n.9, 588 P.2d at 446 n.9 (citations omitted).
 
The circuit court did not plainly err in not giving the
 
jury an "imperfect self-defense" instruction.
 
III. Instruction Regarding Lesser Included Offense of
Manslaughter
 
"[T]rial courts must instruct juries as to any included 
offenses when there is a rational basis in the evidence for a 
verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and 
convicting the defendant of the included offense[.]" State v. 
Haanio, 94 Hawai' i 405, 413, 16 P.3d 246, 254 (2001) (internal 
quotation marks omitted); HRS § 701-109(5) (1993). 
Kahanaoi contends there was a rational basis for the
 
circuit court to instruct the jury on the lesser included offense
 of manslaughter, but presents no argument based on the evidence
 
to support his contention. He only vaguely points to the
 
previous arguments in his opening brief. 
8
 The current version of HRS § 703-310(1) is materially the same as the
1976 version considered in McNulty.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Even if we assume arguendo that there was a rational
 
basis to instruct the jury on the lesser included offense of
 
manslaughter, the lack of such an instruction would be harmless
 
in this case.
 
The error is harmless because jurors are presumed to follow
the court's instructions, and, under the standard jury
instructions, the jury, in reaching a unanimous verdict as
to the charged offense [or as to the greater included
offense, would] not have reached, much less considered, the
absent lesser offense on which it should have been
 instructed.
 
Haanio, 94 Hawai' i at 415-16, 16 P.3d at 256-57 (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted). Even in cases where no 
standard instructions or other instructions on included offenses 
were given, this court and the Hawai' i Supreme Court have held 
post-Haanio that when a jury finds a defendant guilty as to the charged offense, failure to instruct the jury on an included 
offense is harmless. State v. Pauline, 100 Hawai' i 356, 364, 
381, 60 P.3d 306, 314, 331 (2002); State v. Gunson, 101 Hawai' i 
161, 64 P.3d 290 (App. 2003), cert. dismissed as improvidently 
granted by, 104 Hawai' i 78, 85 P.3d 185 (2003). 
We further note that in this case, although no
 
instructions on lesser included offenses were given, the circuit
 
court did instruct the jury as follows:
 
A verdict must represent the considered judgment of
each juror, and in order to reach a verdict, it is necessary
that each juror agree thereto. In other words, your verdict
must be unanimous.
 
Each of you must decide the case for yourself, but it
is your duty to consult with one another and to deliberate
with a view to reaching an agreement, if you can do so
without violating your individual judgment. In the course
 of your deliberations, do not hesitate to re-examine your
own views and change your opinion if convinced it is
 erroneous. But do not surrender your honest belief as to
the weight or effect of evidence for the mere purpose of
returning a verdict.
 
In this case, the jury reached a unanimous verdict on the charge
 
of murder in the second degree. Therefore, under Haanio, Pauline
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Gunson, the absence of an instruction on the lesser included
 
offense of manslaughter was harmless.
 
IV. Petition Under HRPP Rule 40
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has recognized that: 
not every trial record is sufficiently developed to
determine whether there has been ineffective assistance of
 counsel; indeed, a defendant is often only able to allege
facts that, if proved, would entitle him or her to relief.
Therefore, we hold that where the record on appeal is
insufficient to demonstrate ineffective assistance of
 counsel, but where: (1) the defendant alleges facts that if
proven would entitle him or her to relief, and (2) the claim
is not patently frivolous and without trace of support in
the record, the appellate court may affirm defendant's
conviction without prejudice to a subsequent Rule 40
petition on the ineffective assistance of counsel claim.
 
State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 592-93 (1993).
 
In this case, Kahanaoi's appellate counsel was not
 
appointed until well after the appeal was filed and had no
 
opportunity to develop the record in addressing the claim for
 
ineffective assistance of counsel. Considering the grounds upon
 
which Kahanaoi bases his claim for ineffective assistance of
 
counsel, we conclude that regarding two of those grounds,
 
Kahanaoi has alleged facts that if proven could potentially
 
entitle him to relief and his claim is not patently frivolous and
 without trace of support in the record. 
Id.
 at 439, 864 P.2d at
 
592. First, if Kahanaoi can prove that an enhanced or clarified
 
911 recording showed that his voice is referencing the rug and
 
that his voice said "911" after the first shot, it would
 
potentially bolster his testimony regarding the events that day
 
and potentially raise some doubt about the credibility of the
 
prosecution witnesses.9 Second, if Kahanaoi can prove that Anoba
 
saw guns in Kimsel's home within months prior to the incident,
 
9
 Kahanaoi argues that the prosecution's witnesses testified that
Kahanaoi kept asking "Where's Rusty?," but that the 911 recording does not
reflect Kahanaoi's voice asking about Rusty. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
particularly a 9mm semiautomatic, that would potentially bolster 
Kahanaoi's testimony that Kimsel initially had the gun and not 
Kahanaoi. See Reed, 77 Hawai' i at 87, 881 P.2d at 1233. 
Similar to Silva, 75 Haw. at 443, 864 P.2d at 594, the
 
impact of these asserted facts is suggested by the jury
 
communications in the record. During deliberations in this case,
 
the jury first requested "the 911 call transcript," to which the
 
circuit court responded: "You are in receipt of all the evidence
 
that was admitted at trial." The jury next asked for
 
"clarification on the verbage [sic] of self-defense."
 
Subsequently, the jury asked: "What are the circumstances in
 
which we are considered a 'hung jury?'" Next, the jury indicated
 
they were unable to reach a unanimous decision on the charge of
 
murder in the second degree. After the court asked whether more
 
time would assist the jury in reaching a unanimous verdict, the
 
jury reached a verdict later that day. The jury communications
 
suggest that a clearer rendering of the 911 recording may have
 
impacted the jury decision and that the jury was closely
 
considering Kahanaoi's claim of self-defense. Therefore, on the
 
record in this appeal, we reject Kahanaoi's claim of ineffective
 
assistance of counsel that he bases on the 911 recording and the
 
further testimony he purports should have been obtained from
 
Anoba. However, our ruling is without prejudice to a subsequent
 
HRPP Rule 40 petition, on these grounds, as to whether Kahanaoi's
 
claim of ineffective assistance of counsel may merit relief.
 
The other bases asserted by Kahanaoi for his
 
ineffective assistance of counsel claim do not satisfy the
 
standard under Silva to preserve an HRPP Rule 40 petition. 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V. Conclusion
 
The Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on
 
September 1, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 
affirmed, without prejudice to a petition under HRPP Rule 40 as
 
set forth above.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 22, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Walter R. Schoettle 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
13
 