NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30518
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KEVIN C. METCALFE, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-215K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kevin C. Metcalfe (Metcalfe) 
appeals from the March 25, 2010 judgment entered by the Circuit 
Court for the Third Circuit (circuit court).1 Plaintiff-Appellee 
State of Hawai' i (State) charged Metcalfe by amended complaint 
with one count of Murder in the Second Degree in violation of 
2
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 707-701.5(1)  (1993 Repl.) and
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided. 
2
 HRS § 707-701.5(1) provides in relevant part:
 
[§707-701.5] Murder in the second degree.  (1) Except as provided
in section 707-701, a person commits the offense of murder in the second
degree if the person intentionally or knowingly causes the death of
another person.
 
. . . 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3
706-660.1(1)  (1993 Repl.) (Count I) and one count of Carrying or
Use of Firearm in the Commission of a Separate Felony in
 
4
violation of HRS § 134-21(a)  (Supp. 2006) (Count II).  After a
 
jury trial, Metcalfe was found guilty of manslaughter in Count I
 
and guilty as charged in Count II. The circuit court sentenced
 
Metcalfe to an indeterminate term of twenty years incarceration
 
in both counts, to run concurrently with each other.
 
On appeal, Metcalfe asserts the following points of
 
error: (1) the circuit court erred in denying his motion to
 
dismiss; (2) the circuit court plainly erred in allowing improper
 
lay opinion testimony of Dr. Anthony Manoukian (Dr. Manoukian)
 
and Detective Walter Ah Mow (Det. Ah Mow), where the prosecution
 
3 HRS § 706-660.1(1) provides in relevant part:
 
§706-660.1 Sentence of imprisonment for use of a firearm,
semiautomatic firearm, or automatic firearm in a felony.  (1) A person
convicted of a felony, where the person had a firearm in the person's
possession or threatened its use or used the firearm while engaged in
the commission of the felony, whether the firearm was loaded or not, and
whether operable or not, may in addition to the indeterminate term of
imprisonment provided for the grade of offense be sentenced to a
mandatory minimum term of imprisonment without possibility of parole or
probation the length of which shall be a follows:
(a)	 For murder in the second degree and attempted
murder in the second degree –- up to fifteen
years;
(b)	 For a class A felony –- up to ten years;
(c)	 For a class B felony –- up to five years; and
(d) For a class C felony –- up to three years.
 
. . . .
4 HRS §134-21 provides in relevant part:
 
[§134-21] Carrying or use of firearm in the commission of a
separate felony; penalty.  (a) It shall be unlawful for a person to
knowingly carry on the person or have within the person's immediate
control or intentionally use or threaten to use a firearm while engaged
in the commission of a separate felony, whether the firearm was loaded
or not, and whether operable or not; . . .
 
. . . .
 (b) A conviction and sentence under this section shall be in
 
addition to and not in lieu of any conviction and sentence for the
separate felony; provided that the sentence imposed under this section
may run concurrently or consecutively with the sentence for the separate
felony.
(c) Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class
A felony.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failed to qualify them as experts under Hawaii Rules of Evidence
 
(HRE) 702; (3) the circuit court plainly erred in giving a wrong
 
jury instruction regarding opinion testimony, which was modified
 
from a standard expert witness instruction, because there was no
 
expert witness testimony; (4) the circuit court plainly erred in
 
giving an erroneous self-defense instruction; (5) the circuit
 
court plainly erred in failing to give an instruction on defense
 
of property; (6) the circuit court plainly erred in failing to
 
give a cautionary jury instruction regarding medical marijuana;
 
(7) there was insufficient evidence that the shotgun fired by
 
Metcalfe was a "firearm;" and (8) trial counsel rendered
 
ineffective assistance of counsel.
 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.
 
I. Background
 
This case arises from an incident on May 6, 2009,
 
wherein Metcalfe fired a shotgun and Larry Kuahuia (Kuahuia) was
 killed. Metcalfe was charged with one count of Murder in the
 
Second Degree and one count of Carrying or Use of Firearm in the
 
Commission of a Separate Felony.
 
On December 7, 2009, Metcalfe filed a motion to dismiss
 
the amended complaint on double jeopardy and collateral estoppel
 
grounds. After a hearing on January 28, 2010, the circuit court
 
issued an order denying the motion to dismiss. The circuit court
 
held that there was "no constitutional or statutory impediment
 
prohibiting the State from proceeding by way of a preliminary
 
hearing when a grand jury has filed a No Bill." 
A jury trial was held on February 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, and
 
11, 2010. The prosecution presented evidence seeking to show,
 
among other things, that decedent Kuahuia was shot in the back
 
and from a distance.
 
Metcalfe testified in his defense that, at
 
approximately 10:30 p.m., he confronted Kuahuia after an alarm
 
indicated someone was on Metcalfe's property and Metcalfe saw via
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a surveillance monitor that someone was outside his greenhouse
 
and trying to cut through a shade cloth. The greenhouse
 
contained Metcalfe's tools and medical marijuana plants. After
 
approaching the area with his shotgun, Metcalfe claims that he
 
saw Kuahuia crouched on the ground. Metcalfe claims that he told
 
Kuahuia, among other things, that he had a gun and to get on the
 
ground, but Kuahuia came towards and then jumped toward Metcalfe
 
holding something Metcalfe thought was a cutting instrument. 
Metcalfe claimed that he pulled the trigger on his shotgun in
 
self-defense.
 
II. Discussion
 
A. No Error In Denying Metcalfe's Motion to Dismiss
 
To the extent it can be understood, Metcalfe appears to
 
argue on appeal that, because his trial counsel failed to provide
 
the circuit court with evidence regarding the grand jury and
 
preliminary hearing proceedings, the trial court somehow erred in
 
denying Metcalfe's motion to dismiss without any records or files
 
in evidence. Metcalfe's motion to dismiss had asserted that
 
because probable cause for the charges was found at the
 
preliminary hearing, after a grand jury had previously issued a
 
"no bill," the State was precluded by collateral estoppel and
 
double jeopardy from re-litigating the issue of probable cause. 
The declaration of Metcalfe's trial counsel, attached to the
 
motion to dismiss, had also claimed that the finding of probable
 
cause in the preliminary hearing was made "when the prosecutor
 
omitted significant evidence that the grand jury heard, some of
 
which was exculpatory from this preliminary examination, and thus
 
[the judge] did not have the benefit of hearing the entire
 
circumstances of the offense."
 
Metcalfe's opening brief makes the seemingly
 
conflicting argument that a party alleging error has the duty of
 
demonstrating error by bringing the appropriate record before the
 
court, that in this case his trial counsel failed to provide the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
circuit court with the transcripts from the grand jury and
 
preliminary hearing proceedings, and that the circuit court then
 
abused its discretion by denying the motion to dismiss "without
 
reviewing the evidence." Even if we presume Metcalfe has not
 
waived this point of error for failure to present a discernible
 
5
 he fails on appeal to demonstrate any error by the
 argument,
circuit court. 
There are no transcripts from the grand jury or
 
the preliminary hearing proceedings in the record on appeal, and
 therefore Metcalfe makes no showing that the trial court abused
 
its discretion or that he was prejudiced in any way. 
See State
 
v.
 Taylor, 126 Hawai' i 205, 214, 269 P.3d 740, 749 (2011) ("In 
cases involving allegations of prosecutorial abuse or misconduct, 
[the supreme court] has applied an abuse of discretion standard 
when reviewing a motion to dismiss an indictment.") (citing State 
v. Mendonca, 68 Haw. 280, 282–83, 711 P.2d 731, 733–34 (1985)).
 
To the extent Metcalfe's point of error challenges the 
circuit court's decision on double jeopardy grounds, double 
jeopardy only applies after "jeopardy" has attached, which in the 
case of a jury trial occurs when a jury is empaneled and sworn. 
See Serfass v. United States, 420 U.S. 377, 388 (1975); State v. 
Quitog, 85 Hawai' i 128, 141, 938 P.2d 559, 572 (1997). Metcalfe 
cannot show that jeopardy attached at the grand jury stage, and his trial counsel conceded as much. Moreover, Metcalfe presents 
no authority for the proposition that the doctrine of collateral 
estoppel is applicable relative to his motion to dismiss. 
We conclude there is no merit regarding this point of
 
error.
 
5
 See Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) (Points
not argued may be deemed waived); Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont
Nemours & Co., 116 Hawai' i 277, 288, 172 P.3d 1021, 1032 (2007) (A court may
disregard points of error when the appellant fails to present "discerniblearguments" supporting those assignments of error). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B.	 No Plain Error In Allowing the Testimony of
Dr. Manoukian and Det. Ah Mow
 
Metcalfe argues on appeal that the trial court plainly 
erred in permitting the testimony of Dr. Manoukian and Det. Ah 
Mow because they were both proffered as lay opinion witnesses, 
although their respective testimony demonstrated expert 
knowledge. The State never proffered Dr. Manoukian or Det. Ah 
Mow as "experts," and the circuit court never expressly qualified 
them as such. Because Metcalfe did not object to Dr. Manoukian 
or Det. Ah Mow's testimony, we review Metcalfe's point of error 
under the plain error standard of review. See State v. Staley, 
91 Hawai' i 275, 282, 982 P.2d 904, 911 (1999). 
If the substantial rights of the defendant have been
affected adversely, the error will be deemed plain error.
Further, [appellate courts] will apply the plain error
standard of review to correct errors which seriously affect
the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial
proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent
the denial of fundamental rights.
 
State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai' i 327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006) 
(internal citation and citation omitted). 
The testimony by Dr. Manoukian and Det. Ah Mow
 
constituted "expert testimony" governed by HRE Rule 702, because
 
their testimony involved "scientific, technical, or other
 
specialized knowledge[.]" The State does not contest that these
 
witnesses gave expert testimony. Dr. Manoukian testified, among
 
other things: that he performed an autopsy on defendant Larry
 
Kuahuia, and that in his opinion, "within the bounds of
 
reasonable medical certainty," Kuahuia died due to a shotgun
 
wound to the back; that pictures taken during the autopsy showed
 
"parallel grazing wounds" on each side of Kuahuia's torso, which
 
indicated the trajectory of the shotgun wound was back to front;
 
and that the approximate range of firing could be estimated by
 
multiplying the diameter of the pellet injury times three and
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
converting it to feet, which was approximately 60 feet in this
 
case. 
Det. Ah Mow tested the shotgun that was recovered at
 
the scene, using the same type of ammunition recovered at the
 
scene, to conduct a shotgun pattern test to "determine the
 
distance of . . . the shotgun as the pellets go through the
 
barrel and make a spread pattern onto a target." Det. Ah Mow
 
fired a silhouette target from eight different distances, which
 
demonstrated generally that the spread pattern increased as the
 
distance increased. Det. Ah Mow also testified as to the
 
distances that the shotgun shells were ejected.
 
We conclude that allowing Dr. Manoukian and Det. Ah Mow
 
to testify without the circuit court designating them as expert
 
witnesses was not plain error. Where a defendant argues for the
 
first time on appeal that failure to formally qualify a witness
 
as an expert is error, but does not argue that the witness is not
 
qualified, or that his or her testimony or methods are
 
inadequate, any such error by the trial court is harmless. See
 
United States v. York, 572 F.3d 415, 421-22 (7th Cir. 2009)
 (Although FBI agent was not formally qualified by the trial court
 
as an expert witness, any error was harmless. "Notably,
 
[defendant] does not challenge Brown's qualifications, his
 
methods, or the accuracy of his testimony here on appeal. . . .
 
[G]iven Brown's qualifications, and no attempt to disparage them
 
here on appeal, we find that Brown would have easily qualified as
 
an expert had the court conducted the formal Rule 702
 
analysis."); People v. Lomanaco, 802 P.2d 1143, 1145 (Colo. App.
 
1990) ("[T]rial court's omission, absent any request by the
 
prosecutor or objection by defense counsel, to qualify the agent
 
specifically as an expert had no adverse effect upon defendant's
 
substantial rights. The foundation questions implied that the
 
agent, whose credentials illustrated his substantial expertise,
 
was proffered as an expert.")
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Additionally, the testimony by Dr. Manoukian and Det.
 
Ah Mow demonstrates that they qualify as experts under HRE 702,
 
and thus any error in allowing their testimony did not affect the
 
fairness, integrity, or public reputation of the judicial
 
proceedings. See United States v. Mendoza, 244 F.3d 1037, 1046­
47 (9th Cir. 2001) (assuming arguendo that the district court
 erred in admitting testimony as the opinion of a percipient
 
witness when it was expert opinion, such error was harmless
 
because the record showed that the witness could have been
 
qualified as an expert under Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of
 
Evidence); United States v. Figueroa-Lopez, 125 F.3d 1241, 1247
 
(9th Cir. 1997); United States v. Ramsey, 165 F.3d 980, 984 (D.C.
 
Cir. 1999) (concluding there was no plain error where,
 
"[a]lthough the trial judge never formally qualified [the
 
witness] as an expert witness, his testimony functionally
 
satisfied the requirements for expert testimony set forth in
 
Federal Rule of Evidence 702.").
 
HRE Rule 702 establishes three conditions for the
 
receipt of expert testimony: (1) the witness must be qualified by
 
knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education; (2) the
 
testimony must have the capacity to "assist the trier of fact to
 
understand the evidence or determine a fact in issue[;]" and
 
(3) the expert's analysis must meet a threshold level of 
reliability and trustworthiness. See State v. Torres, 122 
Hawai'i 2, 31, 222 P.3d 409, 438 (App. 2009) (citations omitted), 
corrected on other grounds by, 125 Hawai' i 382, 262 P.3d 1006 
(2011). In short, the expert testimony must be relevant and 
reliable. See State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai' i 462, 473, 946 P.2d 
32, 43 (1997). 
In this case, both Dr. Manoukian and Det. Ah Mow are
 
qualified by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
education, as evidenced by their testimony on direct
 
examination.6 Metcalfe does not dispute their qualifications.
 
Similarly, it is clear that the disputed testimony was
 
relevant given Metcalfe's theory of self-defense and his claim
 
that he shot at Kuahuia as Kuahuia charged toward him.7 Metcalfe
 
does not dispute the relevance of Dr. Manoukian and Det. Ah Mow's
 testimony.
 
The testimony by Dr. Manoukian and Det. Ah Mow was also
 
reliable. Dr. Manoukian described in detail the basis for his
 
opinion that decedent was shot in the back at an approximate
 
distance of 60 feet, including: parallel sets of grazing wounds
 
on each side of decedent's torso showing a back to front
 
trajectory of the bullets; the spread of numerous entry wounds on
 
the back; the lack of any "large central defect" that would
 
indicate a close-range firing; a general rule of thumb used in
 
pathology whereby the diameter of the pellet injury times three
 
6 Dr. Manoukian testified inter alia that: his occupation is as a
pathologist, as the laboratory director at Maui Memorial Medical Center, and
also as the coroner's physician for the County of Maui, on the Big Island andalso on Kauai; he is a physician and surgeon licensed in the State of Hawai' i;
he is certified by the American Board of Pathology in anatomic and clinicalpathology and forensic pathology; he has performed over 3,000 autopsies; hehas observed in excess of a hundred cases in which the cause of death was injury caused by a firearm; and he has had autopsy training with respect todeath due to firearms. 
Det. Ah Mow testified that he is a certified firearms instructor for the 
Hawai'i Police Department; he has been an instructor with the Special Response
Team (SRT); he is certified regarding firearms by the FBI and National RifleAssociation; and he has had training by the FBI regarding shotguns.
7 At trial, Dr. Manoukian testified: that he performed an autopsy of
Kuahuia; that injuries to Kuahuia's body indicated the trajectory of the
shotgun wound and the range of fire; and that Kuahuia's cause of death was a
shotgun wound to the back. He testified that the distance from the gun to
decedent was approximately 60 feet, and that there was no evidence to indicate
that the decedent was shot in the front of his body. 
Det. Ah Mow testified that he had test fired Metcalfe's 12 gauge shotgun
from various distances to show the spread pattern of the pellets as they hit a
cardboard silhouette target. The testimony of Ah Mow generally illustrated
that the spread pattern on the targets grew larger at larger distances, and
was utilized by the prosecution to support its theory that Metcalfe shot the
decedent from a far distance and in the back.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
equals a ballpark figure of the distance in feet between the 
decedent and the barrel of the shotgun; the fact that the only 
injuries he observed to the front of Kuahuia's body were 
abrasions or scraping; and there was nothing to indicate Kuahuia 
was shot in the front of his body. Dr. Manoukian has qualified 
as an expert in other cases in this state, including in the area 
of forensic pathology. See e.g., State v. Espiritu, 117 Hawai' i 
127, 138, 176 P.3d 885, 896 (2008); State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai' i 
390, 419, 56 P.3d 692, 721 (2002). 
Det. Ah Mow testified that the semi-automatic shotgun
 
he used during his test firing was the same shotgun recovered
 
from the crime scene. He explained that the purpose of the test
 
fire was to determine the distance of the shotgun as the pellets
 
go through the barrel and make a spread pattern onto a target. He
 
shot eight standard police silhouette targets, at distances of
 
8 9
10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 55, 47 feet 8 inches,  and 51 feet 1 inch  . 
Det. Ah Mow utilized the same type of ammunition that was
 
recovered from the Metcalfe residence in his test firing. He
 
described the spread patterns for each distance, which suggested
 
that as the distance from the target increased, the spread
 
pattern also increased. He also measured the distances between
 
where he shot and where the spent shells fell. Metcalfe does not
 
challenge the reliability of the testimony. 
Metcalfe argues, pursuant to 
Torres, that the testimony
 
of Dr. Manoukian and Det. Ah Mow was not lay opinion testimony,
 
but rather expert testimony. As discussed above, we agree with
 
Metcalfe's contention in this regard. Beyond that, however,
 
Torres is distinguishable. In Torres, the trial court did not
 
specifically rule on whether certain testimony had been admitted
 
8
 The distance between a spent shotgun shell and a hacksaw found at the
 
scene.
9
 The distance between another spent shotgun shell and the hacksaw
found at the scene.
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as lay opinion or expert testimony. 122 Hawai' i at 28, 222 P.3d 
at 435. On appeal, this court held that the opinion provided by 
the subject witness required expert testimony, but that the 
witness did not qualify as an expert under HRE Rule 702 given, 
inter alia, the lack of foundation to qualify him as an expert 
and his own testimony that he was not an expert in the relevant 
fields of expertise. Id. at 29-31, 222 P.3d at 436-38. To the 
contrary in this case, and as discussed above, the testimony of Dr. Manoukian and Det. Ah Mow established their qualifications as 
expert witnesses relative to their challenged testimony. 
The circuit court did not plainly err in allowing the
 
testimony of Dr. Manoukian and Det. Ah Mow. 
C.	 No Plain Error in the Jury Instruction on Opinion
Testimony
 
Metcalfe argues that the standard jury instruction on 
expert witness testimony was erroneously modified by the trial 
court's substitution of the words "opinion testimony" for the 
word "expert," that the instruction improperly blended HRE Rules 
701 and 702, tracked the language of neither rule, and thus ran 
afoul of both rules. We review the circuit court's jury 
instructions under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
standard. See Nichols, 111 Hawai' i at 337, 141 P.3d at 984 
("[A]lthough as a general matter forfeited assignments of error are to be reviewed under the HRPP Rule 52(b) plain error standard 
of review, in the case of erroneous jury instructions, that 
standard of review is effectively merged with the HRPP Rule 52(a) 
harmless error standard of review because it is the duty of the 
trial court to properly instruct the jury.") 
The circuit court gave the following instructions: 
During the trial you heard the testimony of one or
more witnesses who were allowed to give opinion testimony. 
Training and experience may make a person qualified to
 
give opinion testimony in a particular field. The law
 
allows that person to state an opinion about matters in that
field. Merely because such a witness has expressed an
 
11
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
opinion does not mean, however, that you must accept this
opinion. It is up to you to decide whether to accept this
testimony and how much weight to give it. You must also
 decide whether the witness's opinions were based on sound
reasons, judgment, and information. 
(emphasis added). 
Hawai'i Standard Jury Instruction Criminal(HAWJIC) 4.05 
(Dec. 1991), related to expert witnesses, states: 
During the trial you heard the testimony of one or
more witnesses who were described as experts. 
Training and experience may make a person an expert in
 
a particular field. The law allows that person to state an
opinion about matters in that field. Merely because such a
witness has expressed an opinion does not mean, however,
that you must accept this opinion. It is up to you to
decide whether to accept this testimony and how much weight
to give it. You must also decide whether the witness's
 opinions were based on sound reasons, judgment, and
information. 
(Emphasis added). 
The only difference between the instructions given and 
standard jury instruction HAWJIC 4.05 is that the circuit court: 
used the phrase "allowed to give opinion testimony" instead of 
the phrase "described as experts" in the first paragraph; and 
used the phrase "qualified to give opinion testimony" instead of 
the phrase "an expert" in the second paragraph. Because the 
given instructions as a whole accurately state the law, the 
instructions are not in error. See HRE 702; Territory v. 
Adelmeyer, 45 Haw. 144, 163, 363 P.2d 979, 989 (1961) ("Experts' opinions vary and the competence, credibility and weight of their 
testimony is exclusively the province of the jury."); State v. 
Sawyer, 88 Hawai' i 325, 335, 966 P.2d 637, 647 (1998) (holding 
that a failure to strictly conform to a HAWJIC instruction did not automatically result in incomplete and confusing jury 
instructions); State v. Mark, 123 Hawai' i 205, 219-20, 231 P.3d 
478, 492-93 (2010) (appellate courts are not bound by pattern jury instructions). 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
D. No Error in the Jury Instruction on Self-Defense
 
Metcalfe argues that the self-defense instruction was 
erroneous in that: (1) it lacked a two-part inquiry as required 
by State v. Van Dyke, 101 Hawai' i 377, 69 P.3d 88 (2003); (2) it 
did not contain the definition of confinement under HRS § 703­304(6); and (3) the part of the instruction required under State 
v. Lubong, 77 Hawai' i 429, 886 P.2d 766 (App. 1994) was 
erroneous. 
As to Metcalfe's first contention, the circuit court 
did not run afoul of Van Dyke. In Van Dyke, the Hawai' i Supreme 
Court held that the circuit court's self-defense instruction was 
in error because the defendant expressly disputed whether his use 
of force constituted "deadly force," but the circuit court 
instructed the jury only as to justifiable use of "deadly force" 
and not the justifiable use of "force."  101 Hawai' i at 387-88, 
69 P.3d at 98-99.
10 Metcalfe does not assert that, like the 
defendant in Van Dyke, he disputed whether his use of force 
constituted deadly force. Therefore, it is arguable whether Van 
Dyke applies to this case. Even assuming it does, the circuit 
court did instruct the jury as to the justifiable use of both 
"force" and "deadly force" in this case. 
Metcalfe's second argument is that the self-defense
 
instruction was erroneous in that it did not contain the
 
definition of "confinement" under HRS § 703-304(6), which he
 
contends was applicable to this case. The circuit court did not
 
err in omitting the definition of "confinement" because it was
 
not warranted or applicable. There was no evidence that Kuahuia
 
was confined. Moreover, Metcalfe fails to argue how justifiable
 
confinement would be relevant to the charges brought against him
 
10
 The supreme court in Van Dyke noted that "force" resulting in 
death was not necessarily "deadly force," as "such conduct must be accompanied
by the requisite state of mind[,]" and thus, the circuit court had erred intaking the question of what degree of force was used out of the hands of thejury. 101 Hawai' i at 387-88, 69 P.3d at 98-99. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of: Murder in the Second Degree; and Carrying or Use of Firearm
 
in the Commission of a Separate Felony (Murder in the Second
 
Degree).
 
Metcalfe's third argument is that the Lubong portion of 
the self-defense instruction was erroneous because it used the 
phrase "reasonably prudent person" rather than "reasonable 
person." The "reasonably prudent person" language in the 
instruction is based on Lubong. 77 Hawai' i at 433, 886 P.2d at 
770. Metcalfe cites no authority that would overturn Lubong or
 
that suggests that the "reasonably prudent person" standard is
 
materially different from the "reasonable person" standard.
 
Metcalfe next contends that the self-defense
 
instruction was erroneous because it "omitted the Lubong case's
 
explanation of how to apply the subjective prong." The relevant
 
part of the circuit court's self-defense instruction included the
 
instruction that "[f]or this part of the test, you should place
 
yourself in the shoes of the defendant.". Reading the
 
instructions as a whole, omitting other explanatory language from
 
Lubong was not erroneous.
 
Finally, Metcalfe argues that the Lubong portion of the
 
instructions was "flawed because it failed to specify that the
 
prosecution had the duty to disprove self-defense beyond a
 
reasonable doubt." Essentially, Metcalfe asserts that, although
 
the self-defense instruction as a whole contained the proper
 
admonition that the prosecution had the duty to disprove self-
defense beyond a reasonable doubt, the admonition should have
 
also been contained in the Lubong portion of the instruction. We
 
do not agree. Immediately prior to the Lubong portion of the
 
instructions, the circuit court's instruction stated:
 
Justifiable use of force, commonly known as self
defense is a defense to the charge of Murder in the Second
Degree and Manslaughter. Once there is any evidence of
justification, the burden is on the prosecution to prove
 
beyond a reasonable doubt that the force used by the
 
Defendant was not justifiable. If the prosecution does not
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
meet this burden then you must find the Defendant Not Guilty
of Murder in the Second Degree and Manslaughter.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
In sum, the circuit court did not err in its 
instructions on self-defense. The instructions, when considered 
as a whole, are not prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, 
inconsistent, or misleading. See State v. Behrendt, 124 Hawai' i 
90, 102, 237 P.3d 1156, 1168 (2010). 
E.	 Jury Instruction on Defense of Property Was Not
Required
 
Metcalfe argues that the circuit court erred in failing
 
to instruct the jury on the defense of property, asserting that a
 
trial court has the duty to sua sponte instruct the jury on a
 
particular defense if: (1) it appears that the defendant is
 
relying on such a defense; or (2) if there is substantial
 
evidence supportive of such a defense and the defense is not
 
inconsistent with the defendant's theory of the case. See State
 
v. Stenger, 122 Hawai' i 271, 298, 226 P.3d 441, 468 (2010) (Moon, 
C.J., dissenting); see also, State v. Yue, 2010 WL 3705983 
(Hawai'i App. 2010). 
Metcalfe fails to demonstrate that he relied on the
 
justification of defense of property. Rather, he argues that the
 
circuit court should have instructed on the defense of property
 
because he "did not specifically disavow the defense.". However,
 
Metcalfe's having not disavowed the defense is not equivalent to
 
having relied on the defense.
 
Additionally, there was not substantial evidence to
 
support a justification based on defense of property. Metcalfe
 
argues that his initial conduct in arming himself, confronting
 
Kuahuia, and his actions up until the point that he discharged
 
the shotgun, supported a defense of property. Metcalfe is not
 
charged, however, with the actions prior to discharge of the
 
shotgun. Rather, the charge of Murder in the Second Degree
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
asserted that he intentionally or knowingly caused the death of
 
Kuahuia, and the charge of Carrying or Use of Firearm in the
 
Commission of a Separate Felony asserted, inter alia, that he
 
intentionally used a firearm while engaged in the commission of a
 
separate felony, Murder in the Second Degree. Metcalfe did not
 
contend at trial that he shot at Kuahuia in order to protect his
 
property. Rather, Metcalfe testified that, as Kuahuia was
 
approaching him, he initially fired a warning shot because he was
 
"scared to death," Kuahuia was attacking him, and when asked
 
"were you thinking about your property, or were you thinking
 
about something else," Metcalfe responded "I was thinking about
 
myself.". Metcalfe testified that from the flash of the warning
 
shot, he could see Kuahuia and it appeared Kuahuia was still
 
coming towards him. Metcalfe testified that he subsequently
 
fired the gun again.
 
The circuit court was not required in this case to give
 
an instruction on defense of property.
 
F.	 Cautionary Jury Instruction on Medical Marijuana Not
Required
 
Metcalfe argues, for the first time on appeal, that the 
circuit court erred in failing to issue a cautionary instruction 
to the jury in order to "clarify, and clearly impress upon the 
jury, that there was nothing criminal or wrong, with the 
possession and use of medical marijuana by Metcalfe, Rocky, and 
Meech, who all had medical marijuana permits." Metcalfe fails to 
present any authority that would require the circuit court to 
give such a "cautionary instruction." Moreover, there was 
testimony to the effect that permits were issued in Hawai' i 
allowing medical marijuana use, including to Metcalfe. We conclude there was no plain error by the circuit court in not 
providing a cautionary instruction as asserted by Metcalfe. 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
G. Sufficient Evidence Regarding a Firearm
 
Metcalfe argues that there was insufficient evidence
 
that the shotgun was a "firearm" as defined in HRS § 134-1 (1993
 
Repl.) because "[n]o witness testified that the shotgun was a
 
'firearm . . . for which the operative force is an explosive[.]'" 
Metcalfe's argument is without merit. HRS § 134-1 defines
 
"firearm" as "any weapon, for which the operating force is an
 
explosive, including but not limited to pistols, revolvers,
 
rifles, shotguns, automatic firearms . . . . " (Emphasis added). 
The definition of "firearm" specifically includes shotguns. 
Metcalfe testified he pulled the trigger on a shotgun. Even
 
assuming it was necessary that there be additional evidence that
 
"the operating force is an explosive," Metcalfe testified to the
 
bright flash that occurred when he pulled the trigger on the
 
shotgun.
 
H. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel Not Established
 
Metcalfe argues that he had ineffective assistance of 
trial counsel. To prevail on this point, Metcalfe must show both 
"that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting 
counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence" and "that such 
errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or 
substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003) 
(citation omitted). 
First, Metcalfe argues that trial counsel failed to
 
properly argue and preserve the issue of prosecutorial misconduct
 "regarding Metcalfe's pre-trial challenge to the re-filing of
 
charges after the grand jury initially returned a 'no bill.'"
 
Metcalfe's argument fails because he does not demonstrate how the
 
prosecutor's re-filing of charges after the grand jury initially
 
returned a "no bill" would constitute prosecutorial misconduct. 
Metcalfe fails to show error by his trial counsel or that an
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
error resulted in the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a
 
potentially meritorious defense.
 
Second, Metcalfe argues that his trial counsel failed
 
to object to the admission of numerous physical items of
 
evidence, for which no authentication or relevance was
 
established. Metcalfe fails to identify the items of evidence
 
for which admission should have been challenged, or how failure
 
of his trial counsel to challenge admission detrimentally
 
affected his defense. 
Third, Metcalfe argues that his trial counsel failed to
 
object to the testimony of Dr. Manoukian and Det. Ah Mow as
 
improper HRE Rule 701 lay opinion, because they were never
 
qualified as "experts" under HRE Rule 702. The underlying basis
 
for this argument has been addressed above. Given our reasoning
 
and holding that the testimony by Dr. Manoukian and Det. Ah Mow
 
was properly admitted, Metcalfe fails to show there was error by
 
his trial counsel or a withdrawal or substantial impairment of a
 
potentially meritorious defense. 
Fourth, Metcalfe argues that his trial counsel were
 
ineffective in that they elicited expert ballistics testimony
 
from a lay police officer witness on cross-examination, and
 
violated HRE Rules 701 and 702. Metcalfe fails to articulate or
 
specify the portions of Officer Smith's testimony that was
 
allegedly detrimental to his defense. He also fails to
 
demonstrate that the testimony elicited from officer Smith was
 
"expert" testimony. Although Metcalfe suggests that Officer
 
Smith's testimony resulted in the "'firearm' element possibly
 
being proved through cross-examination," as discussed above, the
 
definition of "firearm" includes a shotgun, and moreover,
 
Metcalfe's testimony provided sufficient evidence that he used a
 
firearm.
 
Fifth, Metcalfe argues that his trial counsel were
 
ineffective in that they failed to object to the measurements
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from the Total Station device, which they challenged as
 
unreliable. Again, Metcalfe fails to explain how his trial
 
counsels' alleged failure to object to the measurements resulted
 
in the substantial impairment of his defense.
 
Sixth, Metcalfe argues that trial counsel were
 
ineffective in failing to question Dr. Manoukian regarding
 
whether a gunshot residue test was performed on decedent Kuahuia,
 
because "[t]he presence of gunshot residue on Decedent's hands
 
would contradict the prosecution's theory that the shotgun was
 
fired from a 60-foot distance[.]" Even if we were to assume that
 
a gunshot residue test was in fact performed on the decedent,
 
Metcalfe's implicit assumption that gunshot residue was on the
 
decedent's hands is highly speculative and not supported by
 
evidence in the record. Metcalfe has not demonstrated that the
 
failure to question Dr. Manoukian regarding gunshot residue on
 
the decedent impaired a meritorious defense. 
Seventh, Metcalfe argues that trial counsel were
 
ineffective in failing to object to, or exclude in limine before
 
trial, the prosecution's photograph and questioning about medical
 
marijuana. Alternatively, Metcalfe asserts his trial counsel
 
should have requested a cautionary instruction about medical
 
marijuana. Metcalfe's arguments lack merit. Metcalfe's
 
marijuana usage at the time of the incident was relevant to his
 
conduct, perception of events, and his ability to remember
 
events. Metcalfe also fails to explain how the photograph or
 
questioning about marijuana substantially impaired a meritorious
 
defense. Further, as discussed above, there is no legal
 
authority supporting the cautionary instruction Metcalfe asserts
 
should have been given regarding medical marijuana.
 
Eighth, Metcalfe argues that his trial counsel were
 
ineffective because they failed to request a defense of property
 
instruction. As discussed above, a defense of property
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instruction was not warranted in this case. Failure to request
 
the instruction did not constitute ineffective assistance of
 
trial counsel.
 
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the judgment entered
 
by the circuit court on March 25, 2010. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 30, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Karen T. Nakasone 
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Ricky R. DamervilleDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawaiifor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
20
 