FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STEPHEN MITSUO ADAMS, Individually and as Personal
Representative of the Estate of PATRICIA MARIE ADAMS;
KRISTIN LEILANI BUSH; and PATRICK KEONI BUSH,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
ROBYNN M.D. YOKOOJI; LUTERU MANU; STATE
OF HAWAII, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; and DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-10,
Defendants
 
NO. 30234
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-1567)
 
JANUARY 13, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., FOLEY AND FUJISE, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
In this case arising out of a personal injury lawsuit,
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Stephen Mitsuo Adams, Individually and as 
Personal Representative of the Estate of Patricia Marie Adams
 
(Adams); Kristin Leilani Bush; and Patrick Keoni Bush
 
(collectively, Plaintiffs) assert an interlocutory appeal from
 
the Order Re: Admissibility of Evidence (Order Re: Admissibility)
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
filed December 8, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1 
(circuit court). In the Order Re: Admissibility, the circuit 
court allowed Defendant-Appellee State of Hawai' i Department of 
Transportation (DOT) to introduce evidence at trial regarding the lighting of the highway where the accident occurred, but, 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 663-15.5 (Supp. 2010) 
(HRS § 663-15.5 or Act 300), prohibited DOT from introducing 
evidence that would point to the actions of any defendants who 
had previously settled with Plaintiffs as the legal cause of the 
accident. Plaintiffs had previously settled with Defendants/ 
Cross-Claim Plaintiffs/Cross-Claim Defendants/Appellees Robynn 
Yokooji (Yokooji) and Luteru Manu (Manu) (collectively, Settled 
Defendants). 
On appeal, Plaintiffs argue that the circuit court's
 
Order Re: Admissibility was "internally inconsistent" because by
 
permitting DOT to introduce its proffered evidence regarding the
 
lighting of the highway, the circuit court in effect was allowing
 
DOT to introduce evidence pointing to the actions of a settled
 
defendant as the legal cause of the accident. Plaintiffs contend
 
the circuit court erred when it interpreted and applied Act 300
 
to allow a non-settled defendant to introduce evidence at trial
 
that would blame the actions of a settled defendant as the cause
 
of the subject accident, when the court had previously ruled that
 
settlement with the settled defendant had been made in "good
 
faith" pursuant to Act 300.
2
 
I.
 
This case arises out of an accident in which Adams, who
 
was a pedestrian, was struck and killed by a car, driven by
 
Yokooji, on the night of October 28, 2005. Taxi driver Manu had
 
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 
2
 We do not address that portion of the Order Re: Admissibility in
which the circuit court found and ordered that DOT "cannot and will not be
 
permitted to introduce evidence at trial to apportion potential liability
among the [S]ettled Defendants," as this issue was not raised on appeal.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dropped Adams off on Kalanianaole Highway in Kailua. As Adams
 
crossed the highway to catch a bus to her destination in
 
Waimanalo, Yokooji's car struck Adams. Adams died from her
 
injuries the next day.
 
On August 23, 2007, Plaintiffs filed a civil complaint
 
(Complaint) in circuit court against Manu, Yokooji, and DOT. 
Specific to DOT, Plaintiffs alleged, in relevant part:
 
21. [DOT] owed a duty to properly design and
maintain the crosswalk and roadway where [Adams] was struck
by [Yokooji's] vehicle.
 
22. [DOT] breached its duties by negligently
designing the crosswalk area and/or by failing to provide
adequate lighting and/or signage.
 
23. [DOT]'s negligence was a direct and proximate
cause of the injuries and wrongful death of [Adams].
 
On September 19, 2007, DOT filed an answer, in which
 
DOT denied negligence and causation and asserted, inter alia, the
 
affirmative defense that the other defendants and Adams were
 
negligent and it was their negligence that was the proximate/
 
legal cause of the accident. DOT also filed a cross-claim for
 
indemnification and contribution against Manu and Yokooji.
 
Plaintiffs negotiated settlements with Yokooji and
 
Manu. Pursuant to HRS § 663-15.5, the circuit court granted
 
Plaintiffs' respective petitions for determination that the
 
parties had negotiated the settlements in good faith.
 
On July 16, 2009, Plaintiffs filed their Motion in 
Limine No. 1 to Preclude Evidence of the Liability of the 
Settled/Dismissed Defendants (Motion in Limine No. 1). 
Plaintiffs argued that DOT was precluded, pursuant to HRS § 663­
15.5, from introducing evidence to establish or infer liability 
or negligence of the Settled Defendants. On August 6, 2009, the 
circuit court held a hearing on the motion. The circuit court 
discussed Troyer v. Adams, 102 Hawai' i 399, 77 P.3d 83 (2003), 
for the proposition that the Settled Defendants were no longer joint tortfeasors and could not be held liable in tort to 
Plaintiffs or other defendants at trial. Therefore, reasoned the 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
circuit court, there would be no apportionment of liability issue
 
at trial. Based on that logic, the circuit court stated that DOT
 
"is precluded by Troyer versus Adams from using a empty-chair
 
defense."3 In further discussion with counsel, the circuit court
 
clarified that "[t]he Court isn't preventing [DOT] from
 introducing evidence as to duty, breach of duty, or causation."
 
On September 3, 2009, the circuit court entered an
 
order granting Plaintiffs' Motion in Limine No. 1; the court
 
specifically ordered that DOT "will be precluded at trial from
 
introducing evidence for the sole purpose of establishing the
 
liability of the settled Defendants [Yokooji] and [Manu]."
 
The bench trial began on September 16, 2009. A dispute
 
immediately arose over whether DOT could introduce evidence
 
regarding lighting. Plaintiffs argued that such evidence
 
violated the circuit court's order prohibiting the empty chair
 
defense. The circuit court allowed DOT to proceed, as long as
 
the intent of the evidence was to establish causation. After DOT
 
finished its opening statement, the circuit court stayed the
 
proceedings to allow Plaintiffs time to file a motion for leave
 
to file an interlocutory appeal to this court on this issue.
 
On September 24, 2009, Plaintiffs filed their Motion
 
for Leave to File Interlocutory Appeal Re: Court's Ruling on
 
Application of Act 300 (Motion to File Interlocutory Appeal). On
 
December 8, 2009, the circuit court entered its Order Re:
 
Admissibility. Also on December 8, 2009, the circuit court
 
granted Plaintiffs' Motion to File Interlocutory Appeal.
 
On December 10, 2009, Plaintiffs filed their
 
interlocutory appeal to this court.
 
3
 The "empty-chair defense" is a trial tactic whereby one defendant in
a multi-party case attempts to put all the fault on a defendant who settled
before trial. Black's Law Dictionary 484 (9th ed. 2009).
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
A. Interlocutory Appeal
 
According to [HRS] § 641-1(b) (1993), interlocutory
appeals "may be allowed by a circuit court in its discretion
 
from an order denying a motion to dismiss or from any
interlocutory judgment, order, or decree whenever the
circuit court may think the same advisable for the speedy
termination of litigation before it." (Emphasis added.)
Because the circuit court is vested with discretion over the
 matter, our review is appropriately limited to the question
whether the circuit court abused that discretion. Cf. Tri-S
 
Corp. v. Western World Ins. Co., 110 Hawai' i 473, 489, 135
P.3d 82, 98 (2006) ("[T]he circuit court has discretion to
grant extensions of time, and thus we review its orders in
this regard for abuse of that discretion.").
 
Jou v. Dai-Tokyo Royal State Ins. Co., 116 Hawai' i 159, 163, 172 
P.3d 471, 475 (2007).
 
B. Evidentiary Ruling
 
The appellate court applies "two different standards of
 
review in addressing evidentiary issues. Evidentiary rulings are
 
reviewed for abuse of discretion, unless application of the rule
 
admits of only one correct result, in which case review is under
 
the right/wrong standard." State v. Ortiz, 91 Hawai' i 181, 189, 
981 P.2d 1127, 1135 (1999) (internal quotation marks and
 citations omitted).
 
C. Statutory Interpretation
 
We review the circuit court's interpretation of a
statute de novo. State v. Pacheco, 96 Hawai' i 83, 94, 26
P.3d 572, 583 (2001). Our statutory construction is guided
by established rules:
 
When construing a statute, our foremost
obligation is to ascertain and give effect to the
intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained
primarily from the language contained in the statute
itself. And we must read statutory language in the
context of the entire statute and construe it in a
 manner consistent with its purpose.
 
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used
in a statute, an ambiguity exists . . . .
 
In construing an ambiguous statute, "[t]he
meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought by
examining the context, with which the ambiguous words,
phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order to
ascertain their true meaning." HRS § 1-15(1)
[(1993)]. Moreover, the courts may resort to
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
extrinsic aids in determining legislative intent. One
 
avenue is the use of legislative history as an
interpretive tool.
 
. . . This court may also consider "[t]he reason
and spirit of the law, and the cause which induced the
legislature to enact it . . . to discover its true
meaning." HRS § 1-15(2) (1993).
 
Id. at 94-95, 26 P.3d at 583-84 (some citations and internal
quotation marks added and some in original) (brackets in
original).
 
Troyer, 102 Hawai' i at 409, 77 P.3d at 93 (quoting Coon v. City & 
Cnty. of Honolulu, 98 Hawai' i 233, 245, 47 P.3d 348, 360 (2002)). 
III.
 
During Plaintiffs' opening statement, they outlined
 
their plans to offer evidence of DOT's negligence in its
 
maintenance of lighting, traffic signals, and crosswalk signage
 
in the area of the accident, alleging that DOT's negligence
 
caused the accident. In particular, Plaintiffs stated that "[i]t
 
was very dark," making it hard for Yakooji to see Adams.
 
DOT stated in its opening statement its intent to rebut
 
Plaintiffs' contention by producing evidence to show that
 
lighting was not a cause of the accident, signage or lack of
 
signage was not a cause of the accident, and a traffic signal at
 
the intersection was not warranted. Regarding lighting, DOT
 
stated police photographs would show that all the street lights
 
in the area of the accident were in working order the night of
 
the accident. Plaintiffs objected, arguing that the purpose of
 
such evidence was to show that the lighting was sufficient, which
 
"point[ed] the finger at" Yakooji in violation of the circuit
 
court's order. Plaintiffs argued that "[t]here's no other
 
purpose to show that the lighting was insufficient other than to
 
blame [Yakooji]. She's a settled defendant. You can't do that."
 
After an extended discussion, DOT proceeded with its opening
 
statement, while the circuit court gave Plaintiffs a running
 
objection on the issue of lighting.
 
When DOT stated it would be calling as a witness Helen
 
Rasay (Rasay), who had been driving on the highway behind Yakooji
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and had seen Adams crossing the road, Plaintiffs again objected,
 
complaining that this testimony "solely points the finger at"
 
Yokooji by implying that if Rasay had seen Adams, Yokooji should
 
have seen Adams. The circuit court overruled Plaintiffs'
 
objection. DOT then indicated it would present expert testimony
 
4
regarding "line of sight,"  showing that Yokooji "should have
been able to see [Adams] when [Adams] was in the left lane before
 
she entered [Yokooji and Rasay's] lane of traffic." Plaintiffs
 
again objected, arguing that 
the purported evidence that [DOT] intends to offer at trial
goes to the sole issue of pointing the finger and blaming
[Yokooji] for causing this accident. And, again, [DOT]
cannot do that under Act 300 under the court's granting of
[P]laintiffs' [Motion in Limine No. 1]. It goes for no
other purpose.
 
DOT argued that if it were not permitted to present
 
this evidence, it would not be able to adequately defend itself
 
on the lighting issue. Plaintiffs responded by arguing: 
It is presumed that [Yakooji's] testimony as to why
the accident happened that it was dark, that is now a
presumption that the court must accept if anything other
than that to show that there was sufficient light that
[Yakooji] should have seen [Adams] now blames her. And,
that is not allowed under Act 300.
 
Counsel for both parties then had the following
 
exchange with the circuit court:
 
[Plaintiffs]: . . . [A]s far as the lighting is
concerned, [Yokooji] is going to testify it was so dark that
I couldn't see [Adams]. That's a given now.
 
[DOT]: Excuse me, Your Honor. There you have it as
to why I should be able to proceed on this issue and why the
evidence should come in.
 
THE COURT: So, if -- if someone testifies for
plaintiff that it was very dark, you're saying then that
opposing side the State cannot come in and say it was very
bright.
 
[Plaintiffs]: Right. Saying it was very dark does
not point the finger at [Yokooji]. Saying that it was
light, does point the finger at [Yokooji]. That cannot be
 allowed. That's the difference.
 
4
 A "human factors engineer" would compare the angle of view of Rasay,
who saw Adams, with the angle of view of Yokooji, who did not see Adams.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Yes, it's a harsh result but that's the -- that was
the intent of the legislature under Act 300. It's to
 
encourage settlements. Why do we encourage settlements?
 
THE COURT: . . . [I]t's not an end result of the
trial analysis. You know, you're assuming that this court
then has to accept as credible that one -- one of your
witnesses come in to say that it was dark, that I accept
that credibility and say it was dark.
 
[Plaintiffs]: Well, -­
THE COURT: 
There's no opportunity for the opposing
side to say it was light. 
Now, if lighting had no place in it, why are you
calling someone to say it was dark?
 
[Plaintiffs]: Because that doesn't blame [Yokooji].
They can't bring in evidence that does blame her. 
If the court allows that then they are now pointing
the finger at the empty chair. And, the court's order filed
September 3rd, 2009, which granted [P]laintiffs' [Motion in
Limine No.1] to preclude evidence of the liability of the
settled dismissed defendants, the court further ordered:
 
That the defendant [DOT], State of Hawaii will be
precluded at trial from introducing evidence for the
sole purpose of establishing the liability of the
[S]ettled [D]efendant[s][.]
 
THE COURT: Right.
 [Plaintiffs]: Which was a proper ruling. So,
anything that comes in to say -­
THE COURT: It was Yokooji's fault will not be
allowed.
 
[Plaintiffs]: Right, which is what lighting goes to.
To say that it was light enough to see [Adams] that now
blames [Yokooji]. Otherwise, why is it relevant any more? 
Doesn't it just blame [Yokooji] to say that hey, you
know what, there was enough light. This other person saw.
You should have saw too. It's your fault. You weren't
 paying attention.
 
THE COURT: That argument hasn't been made yet.
 
[Plaintiffs]: But that's what [DOT's attorney is]
saying what they intend to do by offering the evidence she's
reciting in her opening.
 
* * *
 
[DOT]: As I was saying, [Rasay] saw [Adams].
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
If [Rasay] could see [Adams] before the accident
. . ., [Yokooji] should have been able to see [Adams] before
striking her.
 
The evidence because of that will show that lighting
was not a cause of this accident similar line of sight for
both drivers and witness, similar lighting.
 
* * *
 
So, lighting was not a cause of this accident.
 
The circuit court's Order Re: Admissibility provided:
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Defendant [DOT] is precluded
from introducing evidence at trial that attempts to blame
the [S]ettled Defendants ([Yokooji], [Manu]) as being the
legal cause of the subject accident and resulting damages,
i.e. evidence that points the finger at the empty chairs ofthe [S]ettled Defendants, pursuant to [HRS] § 663-15.5 ("Act300"), Troyer v. Adams, 102 [Hawai' i] 399, 77 P.3d 83 (S.
Ct. 2003), and Doe Parents v. DOE, 100 [Hawai' i] 34, 87
n.50, 58 P.3d 545, 598 n.50 (S. Ct. 2002). However, theCourt further orders and rules over Plaintiffs' objections,that [DOT] can and will be allowed to introduce evidencerelating to the lighting of the highway where the subjectaccident occurred. even if such evidence points the fingerand blames a settled Defendant for being the legal cause ofthe accident. [DOT] intends to introduce evidence at trial
to show that there was sufficient lighting for [S]ettledDefendant [Yokooji] to see pedestrian [Adams] (deceased)crossing the highway, thus, blaming [Yokooji] for causingthe subject accident due to her "inattention." 
Last, the Court finds and orders that [DOT] cannot and
will not be permitted to introduce evidence at trial to
apportion potential liability among the [S]ettled
Defendants.
 
(Strikeout in original.) 
In 2001, the Hawai' i Legislature passed Act 300, 
codified as HRS § 663-15.5,5
 
5 HRS § 663-15.5 provides in relevant part:
 
HRS §663-15.5 Release; joint tortfeasors; co-obligors; good
faith settlement. (a) A release, dismissal with or without
prejudice, or a covenant not to sue or not to enforce a judgment
that is given in good faith under subsection (b) to one or more
joint tortfeasors, or to one or more co-obligors who are mutually
subject to contribution rights, shall:
 
(1)	 Not discharge any other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor
not released from liability unless its terms so
provide;
 
(2)	 Reduce the claims against the other joint tortfeasor
(continued...)
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to simplify the procedures and reduce the costs associated
with claims involving joint tortfeasors by:
 
(1)	 Establishing a new joint tortfeasor release
statute that includes the right of contribution;
 
(2) 	Repealing the existing joint tortfeasor release
statute and right of contribution statute; and
 
(3)	 Establishing a good faith settlement procedure
for joint tortfeasors and co-obligors.
 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1230, in 2001 House Journal, at 1599. 
5(...continued)
or co-obligor not released in the amount stipulated by
the release, dismissal, or covenant, or in the amount
of the consideration paid for it, whichever is
greater; and
 
(3)	 Discharge the party to whom it is given from all
liability for any contribution to any other joint
tortfeasor or co-obligor.
 
This subsection shall not apply to co-obligors who have expressly
agreed in writing to an apportionment of liability for losses or
claims among themselves.
 
(b) For purposes of subsection (a), any party shall
petition the court for a hearing on the issue of good faith of a
settlement entered into by the plaintiff or other claimant and one
or more alleged tortfeasors or co-obligors, serving notice to all
other known joint tortfeasors or co-obligors.
 
The petition shall indicate the settling parties and, except
for a settlement that includes a confidentiality agreement
regarding the case or the terms of the settlement, the basis,
terms, and settlement amount.
 
. . . [A] nonsettling alleged joint tortfeasor or co-obligor
may file an objection to contest the good faith of the settlement.
. . . A nonsettling alleged joint tortfeasor or co-obligor
asserting a lack of good faith shall have the burden of proof on
that issue.
 
. . . .
 
(d) 
A determination by the court that a settlement was
made in good faith shall:
 
(1)	 Bar any other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor from any
further claims against the settling tortfeasor or
co-obligor, except those based on a written indemnity
agreement; and
 
(2)	 Result in a dismissal of all cross-claims filed
 against the settling joint tortfeasor or co-obligor,
except those based on a written indemnity agreement.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"[T]he term 'joint tortfeasors' means two or more
 
persons jointly or severally liable in tort for the same injury
 
to person or property, whether or not judgment has been recovered
 
against all or some of them." HRS § 663-11 (1993). In the
 
context of multi-party litigation, a good faith settlement
 
reached under HRS § 663-15.5 impacts both settled and non-settled
 
joint tortfeasors: 
[A] settlement "given in good faith" shall: (1) not
discharge the non-settling joint tortfeasors from liability,
unless its terms so provide; but (2) reduce the claims
against the non-settling joint tortfeasors in the amount
stipulated in the settlement or in the amount of the
consideration paid for it, whichever is greater; and (3)
discharge the settling tortfeasor from all liability for any
contribution to the non-settling joint tortfeasors.
 
Troyer, 102 Hawai' i at 403, 77 P.3d at 87. Thus, pursuant to HRS 
§ 663-15.5(a)(3), DOT, the remaining alleged joint tortfeasor in 
6
this case, if found liable, cannot pursue contribution  from the
Settled Defendants. 
The question before this court is whether a non-settled
 
party may introduce evidence at trial that would point to the
 
settled defendant as the cause of the accident, in spite of the
 
fact that the settled defendant had made a good faith settlement. 
We conclude that a good faith settlement made pursuant to HRS
 
§ 663-15.5 does not preclude a defendant from introducing
 
evidence that it was not the cause of the accident even though
 
this evidence will logically point the finger at someone or
 
something else, including a defendant who settled in good faith.
 
It is well-settled that plaintiffs have the burden of 
proving the elements of a negligence action -- duty, breach of 
duty, causation, and damages. Takayama v. Kaiser Found. Hosp.
, 
82 Hawai' i 486, 498-99, 923 P.2d 903, 915-16 (1996). Regarding 
causation, an actor's negligent conduct is the 
6
 Contribution can be defined as "[o]ne tortfeasor's right to collect
from joint tortfeasors when -- and to the extent that -- the tortfeasor has
paid more than his or her proportionate share to the injured party, the shares
being determined as percentages of causal fault." Black's Law Dictionary 378
 
(9th ed. 2009).
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
proximate or legal cause . . . of harm to another if
(a) his [or her] conduct is a substantial factor in
bringing about the harm, and (b) there is no rule of
law relieving the actor from liability because of the
manner in which his [or her] negligence has resulted
in the harm. Restatement, Torts, § 431; Prosser on
Torts, § 47.
 
Mitchell v. Branch, 45 Haw. 128, 132, 363 P.2d 969, 973
(1961).
 
Estate of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State of Hawai' i, 113 Hawai 'i 
332, 361, 152 P.3d 504, 533 (2007) (quoting 
Taylor-Rice v. State 
of Hawai' i, 91 Hawai' i 60, 74, 979 P.2d 1086, 1100 (1999)). 
Plaintiffs intend to present evidence at trial that
 
DOT's negligent acts or omissions brought about the death of
 
Adams. On the other hand, DOT contends it is not a joint
 
tortfeasor and intends to argue that "evidence that something or
 
someone other than [DOT] caused the accident" and this evidence
 
"is relevant to show that [DOT] did not cause the accident." DOT
 
argues that in order to put on a defense, it must be able to
 
introduce evidence regarding the lighting to show that
 
insufficient lighting was not the cause of the accident,
 
logically implying that the driver's inattentiveness, not bad
 
lighting, was the cause. In essence, DOT intends to put forth a
 
general denial that its negligence was a proximate cause of the
 
accident, which will necessarily infer that the accident was the
 
result of some other causative factor.
 
In Leonardi v. Loyola University of Chicago, 658 N.E.2d
 
450 (Ill. 1995), the decedent suffered irreversible brain damage
 
shortly after giving birth and died several years later. Id. at
 
453-54. Plaintiffs filed suit against the hospital and several
 physicians. Id. at 454. Plaintiffs settled with one defendant
 
before trial, and that defendant was dismissed from the case. 
Id. Before trial, plaintiffs filed a motion in limine seeking to
 
bar the introduction of evidence of alleged negligence of anyone
 other than the non-settling defendants. Id. at 455. The trial
 
court denied the motion and allowed evidence regarding the
 settled defendant's duties and responsibilities. Id. The jury
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
returned a verdict in favor of the remaining defendants, and
 
plaintiffs appealed. Id. at 454. On appeal, plaintiffs argued
 
that defendants' general denial of negligence was not enough to
 raise the sole proximate cause defense, but the Illinois Supreme
 
Court disagreed and reasoned:
 
In any negligence action, the plaintiff bears the burden of
proving not only duty and breach of duty, but also that
defendant proximately caused plaintiff's injury. (Smith v.
 Eli Lilly & Co. (1990), 137 Ill. 2d 222, 232, 148 Ill. Dec.
22, 560 N.E.2d 324; see 1 M. Polelle & B. Ottley, Illinois
Tort Law § 14.23 (2d ed. 1994).) The element of proximate
cause is an element of the plaintiff's case. The defendant
 
is not required to plead lack of proximate cause as an
affirmative defense. (Korando v. Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Co.
 
(1994), 159 Ill. 2d 335, 344, 202 Ill. Dec. 284, 637 N.E.2d
1020 (products liability).) Obviously, if there is evidence
that negates causation, a defendant should show it.
However, in granting the defendant the privilege of going
forward, also called the burden of production, the law in no
way shifts to the defendant the burden of proof. See Caley
 v. Manicke (1961), 29 Ill. App. 2d 323, 328-29, 173 N.E.2d
209, rev'd on other grounds (1962), 24 Ill. 2d 390, 182
N.E.2d 206; M. Graham, Cleary & Graham's Handbook of
Illinois Evidence § 301.4 (6th ed. 1994).
 
Id. at 455. The Illinois Supreme Court upheld the trial court's
 
decision, explaining that
 
[a] defendant has the right not only to rebut evidence
tending to show that defendant's acts are negligent and the
proximate cause of claimed injuries, but also has the right
to endeavor to establish by competent evidence that the
conduct of a third person, or some other causative factor,
is the sole proximate cause of plaintiff's injuries.
 
Id. at 459.
 
In Nolan v. Weil-McLain, 910 N.E.2d 549 (Ill. 2009),
 
plaintiff filed a negligence complaint against several companies,
 
alleging the decedent developed cancer after exposure to
 
asbestos-related products. Id. at 550. All the defendants but
 
one settled or were dismissed before trial. Id. The trial court 
"excluded evidence which defendant wished to present to rebut
 
plaintiff's claims and to support [defendant's] sole proximate
 
cause defense." Id. at 559. The jury found in favor of
 
plaintiff, and defendant appealed. Id. at 554. The appellate
 
court affirmed, id., but the Illinois Supreme Court reversed and
 
remanded for a new trial, finding that it was error to exclude
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"evidence of alternative causes for decedent's injuries,
 
improperly preventing defendant from supporting its sole
 
proximate cause defense." Id. at 566. The supreme court
 
reiterated that it was a well-settled rule of tort law "that the
 plaintiff exclusively bears the burden of proof to establish the
 
element of causation through competent evidence, and that a
 
defendant has the right to rebut such evidence and to also
 
establish that the conduct of another causative factor is the
 
sole proximate cause of the injury." Id. at 564.
 
Ready v. United/Goedecke Services, Inc., 939 N.E.2d 417
 
(2010), arose from a construction accident where the decedent was
 
killed during a pipe-refitting project when a scaffolding truss
 
fell eight stories and struck him in the shoulder. Id. at 418. 
Plaintiff settled with the general contractor and the employer
 and went to trial against the subcontractor. Id. Before trial,
 
plaintiff filed motions in limine to exclude evidence regarding
 the conduct of the settled defendants, arguing, inter alia, that
 
her good-faith settlement prevented the jury from apportioning
 
fault. Id. at 418-19. The trial court granted plaintiff's
 
motion to exclude evidence of the settled defendants' negligence,
 reasoning that the defendants had settled in good faith. Id. at
 
419-20. The jury returned a verdict in favor of plaintiff. Id.
 
at 420. On appeal, the Illinois Supreme Court held, pursuant to
 
the Nolan and Leonardi decisions, that the trial court erred when
 
it excluded evidence to support defendant's sole proximate cause
 
defense. Id. at 422-23. The supreme court reiterated its
 
reasoning in Leonardi that "an answer which denies that an injury
 was the result of or caused by the defendant's conduct is
 
sufficient to permit the defendant, in support of its position,
 
to present evidence that the injury was the result of another
 
cause." Ready, 939 N.E.2d at 421 (quoting Leonardi, 658 N.E.2d
 
at 455).
 
Turning to Hawai' i case law, we conclude that neither 
Troyer nor Doe Parents No. 1 v. State of Hawai' i, Dep't of Educ., 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
100 Hawai' i 34, 58 P.3d 545 (2002), stands for the proposition 
that DOT is prohibited from putting forth an empty chair defense. 
Troyer arose out of a malpractice case in which two of 
the three defendants settled. 102 Hawai' i at 403-04, 77 P.3d at 
87-88. Pursuant to HRS § 663-15.5, plaintiff petitioned the 
court for an order determining that the settlements were made in 
good faith, thereby barring any other joint tortfeasor from 
asserting claims against the settled parties for contribution. 
Troyer, 102 Hawai' i at 404-05, 77 P.3d at 88-89. The non-
settling defendant objected, contending he was entitled to contribution from the settled defendants. Id. at 406-07 & 431, 
77 P.3d at 90-91 & 115. Troyer provides guidance to the trial 
court for analyzing whether a settlement was made in good faith, 
but makes no statement regarding the evidence a non-settling 
defendant may present in court during trial. The issue in Troyer 
was not whether evidence can be presented during trial as to a 
non-settling party's liability; rather, the issue was whether the 
settling parties met the criteria for settling in good faith. 
Id. at 425-26, 77 P.3d at 109-10. 
Doe Parents No. 1 is also inapposite to the instant 
case. Doe Parents No. 1 arose out of a case involving a State of 
Hawai'i Department of Education (DOE) teacher who sexually 
molested two students. Id. at 55, 58 P.3d at 566. The trial 
court dismissed with prejudice plaintiffs' claims against the teacher. Id. at 41, 58 P.3d at 552. The supreme court, in a 
footnote, explained that because the teacher had been dismissed from the case, he was no longer a joint tortfeasor pursuant to 
HRS § 663-11 and, as a result, the trial court could not 
apportion liability pursuant to HRS § 663-10.9. Doe Parents 
No. 1, 100 Hawai' i at 87 n.50, 58 P.3d at 598 n.50. Doe Parents 
No. 1 does not stand for the proposition that a defendant is 
prohibited from establishing that someone other than defendant 
caused the injury. 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Adopting the reasoning set forth in the Illinois cases,
 
we conclude DOT is not precluded from introducing evidence that
 
its negligence was not the cause of the accident even though this
 
evidence will logically point the finger at someone or something
 
else as the causative factor.7
 
IV.
 
We affirm that portion of the Order Re: Admissibility
 
of Evidence filed on December 8, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit ordering that DOT may introduce evidence relating
 
to the lighting of the highway. We vacate any portion of the
 
Order Re: Admissibility of Evidence inconsistent with this
 
opinion and remand this case for further proceedings consistent
 
with this opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Vladimir Devens
 
(Meheula & Devens LLP)
Gerard A. Jervis
 for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
 
Robin M. Kishi
 
Caron M. Inagaki,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Defendant-Appellee
State of Hawaii, Department
of Transportation.
 
7
 However, if DOT is found liable, DOT is precluded from seeking
contribution from the settled defendants. HRS § 663-15.5(a)(3) (A judgment
given in good faith shall "[d]ischarge the party to whom it is given from all
liability for any contribution to any other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor.").
 
16
 