NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30703
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
STATE OF HAWAI
'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DANYELA CASTRO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-10-01758)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Danyela Castro (Castro) appeals
 
from the "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
 
Plea/Judgment" entered July 20, 2010 in the District Court of the
 
First Circuit, Wahiawa Division1
 (district court).  The district
 
court entered a judgment of conviction against Castro for
 operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII),
 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1)
 
(Supp. 2011).
2
  
1
 The Honorable Lono J. Lee presided.
 
2
 HRS § 291E-61 provides in relevant part:
 
§291E-61 Operating a vehicle under the influence of an
intoxicant. (a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 (1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
 sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and guard
against casualty[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Castro contends:
 
(1) The Motion to Suppress should have been promptly
 
disposed of and evidence adduced at the suppression hearing
 should not have been admitted at the bench trial.
 
(2) Evidence obtained as a result of the traffic stop
 
should have been suppressed because there was no reasonable
 
suspicion to justify a traffic stop.
 
(3) The Complaint and oral arraignment failed to allege
 
essential facts.
 
(4) Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus test (HGN test) should
 
not have been admitted into evidence or relied on by the district
 
court.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Castro's
 
appeal is without merit.
 
1.	 The district court did not err when it held the
 
suppression hearing and the bench trial on the
same day and incorporated the testimony admitted
at the suppression hearing into the bench trial.
 
Castro contends that holding the suppression hearing
 
immediately before the bench trial and incorporating the evidence
 
adduced at the suppression hearing into the bench trial violated
 
"fundamental constitutional protections" and deprived her of a
 
fair trial.
 
Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 12(e) 
states as follows: 
Ruling on motion. A motion made before trial shall be 
determined before trial unless the court orders that it be 
deferred for determination at the trial of the general issueor until after verdict; provided that 
a motion to suppress
made before trial shall be determined before trial. Where factual issues are involved in determining a motion, thecourt shall state its essential findings on the record. 
(Emphasis added.) 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[C]ourts have . . . inherent power to control the 
litigation process before them." Richardson v. Sport Shinko 
(Waikiki Corp.), 76 Hawai' i 494, 507, 880 P.2d 169, 182 (1994). 
The district court balances "the interest of the state against 
fundamental fairness to the defendant with the added ingredient 
of the orderly functioning of the court system." 
State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 56, 647 P.2d 705, 712 (1982) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Castro argues that the district court should have
 
"promptly disposed of" her Motion to Suppress at the May 20, 2010
 
hearing. However, Castro failed to appear at the hearing even
 
though HRPP Rule 43 mandated her presence. HRPP Rule 43(a) ("The
 
defendant shall be present at the arraignment, at the time of the
 
plea, [and] at evidentiary pretrial hearings[.]"). Castro's
 
counsel orally moved to waive Castro's presence. The district
 
court denied Castro's motion and continued the Motion to Suppress
 
to the same date already set for trial.
 
Because the district court has inherent power to 
control the litigation process, it did not abuse its discretion 
when it continued the May 20, 2010 hearing after Castro failed to 
appear. Richardson, 76 Hawai' i at 507, 880 P.2d at 182. 
At the next hearing, on June 24, 2010, Castro presented
 
her motion to hold the suppression hearing far enough ahead of
 
trial to prepare a transcript to use at trial. The State argued
 
that "out of judicial economy, it doesn't make sense to have two
 
trials." The State noted in its memorandum in opposition to
 
Castro's motion that the normal practice of the district court
 
was to strive to hold the suppression hearing on the same day as
 
the trial, "for purposes of judicial economy." The district
 
court agreed with the State and denied Castro's motion.
 
The suppression hearing and bench trial were held on
 
July 20, 2010. The only witness was Officer Susan Klimek
 
(Officer Klimek), the arresting officer. Castro and the State
 
stipulated that Officer Klimek's suppression hearing testimony
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
could be used at the bench trial held immediately afterwards so
 
the same testimony did not have to be repeated. The district
 
court acknowledged that Castro's stipulation was made "with the
 
understanding . . . that such an agreement will not be considered
 
a waiver of any issues you have raised in your writ of mandamus3
 
or your appeal to the -- the Intermediate Court of Appeals or
 supreme court." Castro specifically stated she was not waiving
 
her right to appeal "the need for a transcript to assist us in
 
making essential trial decisions and to use to impeach this
 
officer."
 
After the State examined Officer Klimek during the
 
suppression hearing, Castro conducted the cross-examination.
 
Castro had full opportunity to cross-examine and impeach Officer
 
Klimek. Castro questioned discrepancies such as Officer Klimek's
 
testimony that she heard screeching tires even though she had not
 
mentioned screeching tires in her report. Castro inquired about
 
Officer Klimek's procedures for conducting the field sobriety
 
tests (FSTs) and challenged her belief that Castro had nearly run
 
into the back of her car. The district court found sufficient
 
evidence to support reasonable suspicion for the traffic stop and
 
denied Castro's Motion to Suppress. The court then proceeded to
 
the bench trial.
 
Castro cites to State v. Mundon, 121 Hawai' i 339, 219 
P.3d 1126 (2009) for the proposition that it is "reversible error 
to fail to provide a defendant a written transcript before 
trial[.]" In Mundon, the pro se defendant was denied written 
transcripts of a preliminary hearing and the grand jury 
proceeding. Id. at 355, 219 P.3d at 1142. The Hawai' i Supreme 
Court determined that the defendant was prejudiced when he was denied the written transcripts because the transcripts "had 
3
 The issues raised in Castro's petition for a writ of mandamus, which
the Hawai' i Supreme Court denied, included Castro's contention that (1) the
suppression hearing should be held far enough in advance of trial to allow for
a transcript to be made and (2) the district court should not incorporatewholesale the suppression hearing testimony into evidence at trial. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
significant value to [the defendant] in preparing for trial." 
Id. at 357, 219 P.3d at 1144. 
In the instant case, Castro's claim that she needed the
 
written transcript of the suppression hearing to "use to impeach
 
this officer" makes no sense, given that Officer Klimek's
 
testimony was incorporated into the bench trial and, although
 
Castro was not precluded from further cross-examining Officer
 
Klimek during the trial proceedings, Castro made no attempt to do
 
so. Rather, Castro simply chose to rely on the testimony that
 
Officer Klimek had already given during the suppression hearing.
 
Mundon is clearly distinguishable and does not support Castro's
 
claim. 
Castro cites to no Hawai' i case law supporting the 
proposition that it is a violation of a defendant's due process 
rights to hold the bench trial immediately after the suppression 
hearing, to incorporate the witness's testimony, or to proceed 
without waiting for a written transcript of a pretrial hearing. 
The district court did not abuse its discretion when it held the 
suppression hearing and bench trial consecutively on the same day 
and incorporated Officer Klimek's suppression hearing testimony 
into the bench trial. 
2.	 The district court did not err in determining
reasonable suspicion existed to justify a traffic
stop.
 
Castro contends "the traffic stop was not supported by 
reasonable suspicion," and thus was a warrantless search and 
seizure, in violation of her rights under the United States and 
Hawai'i constitutions. “A stop of a vehicle for an investigatory 
purpose constitutes a seizure within the meaning of the constitutional protection against unreasonable searches and 
seizures, as guaranteed by the fourth amendment to the United 
States Constitution and article I, section 7 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution." State v. Bohannon, 102 Hawai' i 228, 237, 74 P.3d 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
980, 989 (2003) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets
 
omitted).
 
Hawai'i courts apply the following standard to 
determine the reasonableness of an investigative vehicle stop:
 
To justify an investigative stop, short of an arrest
based on probable cause, the police officer must be able to
point to specific and articulable facts which, taken
together with rational inferences from those facts,
reasonably warrant that intrusion. The ultimate test in
these situations must be whether from these facts, measured
by an objective standard, a man of reasonable caution would
be warranted in believing that criminal activity was afoot
and that the action taken was appropriate.
 
State v. Barnes, 58 Haw. 333, 338, 568 P.2d 1207, 1211 (1977) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Our courts 
consider the totality of the circumstances to determine whether a 
stop is supported by reasonable suspicion. State v. Spillner, 
116 Hawai' i 351, 357, 173 P.3d 498, 504 (2007). 
The instant case is similar to Bohannon, which Castro 
unsuccessfully attempts to distinguish. In Bohannon, the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court vacated the lower court's suppression of evidence, 
determining there was reasonable suspicion to stop the defendant 
based on the totality of the circumstances. Bohannon, 102 
Hawai'i at 237-38, 74 P.3d at 989-90. The defendant, Bohannon, 
had screeched to a stop within two feet of Officer Kashimoto's 
car waiting at a stop light. Id. at 230, 74 P.3d at 982. 
Officer Kashimoto pulled Bohannon over "to investigate whether [Bohannon] was operating her vehicle 'in a safe and prudent 
manner.'" Id. at 231, 74 P.3d at 983. Among the facts 
supporting the reasonableness of the traffic stop were that Bohannon had come to a "screeching halt" to avoid hitting Officer 
Kashimoto, her car had come within less than two feet of the 
officer's car before it stop, Officer Kashimoto had taken evasive 
action in the belief he was about to be hit, and Bohannon failed 
to respond immediately to the officer's directions to pull over. 
Id. at 237, 74 P.3d at 989. The supreme court concluded that in 
light of "the totality of the circumstances known to Officer 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kashimoto at the time of the incident . . . his investigative
 
stop of Bohannon was 'within the parameters of permissible police
 
conduct,'" and the motion to suppress should have been denied. 
Id. at 238, 74 P.3d at 990 (quoting Barnes, 58 Haw. at 337, 568
 
P.2d at 1211).
 
In the instant case, Castro's car was traveling "real 
fast." Officer Klimek took evasive action in anticipation of 
being struck by Castro's car, which came to a screeching stop 
only inches from Officer Klimek's car. These "specific and 
articulable facts . . . taken together with rational inferences 
from those facts" were enough to create an objective reasonable 
suspicion that "criminal activity was afoot" and the district 
court did not err when it did not suppress the evidence obtained 
during the traffic stop. Bohannon, 102 Hawai' i at 237-38, 74 
P.3d at 989-90. 
3.	 The Complaint and oral arraignment did not fail to
allege essential facts.
 
Castro argued at trial that the State failed to include
 
the essential elements in its Complaint, making the Complaint
 
invalid and depriving the district court of jurisdiction.
 
Specifically, Castro argued that the Complaint did not include a
 
mens rea, or state of mind, element.
 
"It is well settled that an accusation must 
sufficiently allege all of the essential elements of the offense 
charged, a requirement that obtains whether an accusation is in 
the nature of an oral charge, information, indictment, or 
complaint." State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i 383, 391, 219 P.3d 
1170, 1178 (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citation omitted). The sufficiency of the complaint is evaluated by 
"whether it contains the elements of the offense intended to be 
charged, and sufficiently apprises the defendant of what he or 
she must be prepared to meet." Id. (internal quotation marks, 
citation, and brackets omitted). 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRPP Rule 7(d) requires that "[t]he charge shall state
 
for each count the official or customary citation of the statute,
 
rule, regulation or other provision of law which the defendant is
 
alleged therein to have violated." Castro was charged as
 
follows:
 
On or about the 7th day of March, 2010, in the City
and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, DANYELA S.R. CASTRO
did operate or assume actual physical control of a vehicle
upon a public way, street, road, or highway while under the
influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair her
normal mental faculties or ability to care for herself and
guard against casualty; and/or did operate or assume actual
physical control of a vehicle upon a public way, street,
road, or highway with .08 or more grams of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of breath, thereby committing the offense
of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant,
in violation of Section 291E-61(a)(l) and/or (a)(3) of the
Hawaii Revised Statutes.
 
Castro was convicted of violating HRS § 291E-61(a)(1),
 
which does not specify a mens rea. Because mens rea is not an
 
essential element of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1), a charge under this
 
statute is sufficient without alleging mens rea. Wheeler, 121
 
Hawai'i at 391-93, 219 P.3d at 1178-1180.
 
4.	 Even if the district court erred when it admitted
 
the HGN test into evidence and relied, in part, on
it to reach a verdict, the error was harmless.
 
Castro alleges that no foundation was established to
 
show that Officer Klimek properly performed the HGN test and, in
 
fact, Officer Klimek's procedures for administering the test
 
"grossly deviated from the actual HGN Test approved by the NHTSA
 
[National Highway and Transportation Safety Administration]." 
Castro alleges, and the State concedes, that Officer Klimek's
 
testimony suggests she may have consolidated test procedures that
 
should have been administered separately, thus deviating from the
 
approved test procedures. On that basis, Castro argues, the HGN
 
test should not have been admitted.
 
"Where there is a wealth of overwhelming and compelling
 
evidence tending to show the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable
 
doubt, errors in the admission or exclusion of evidence are
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
deemed harmless." State v. Toyomura, 80 Hawai' i 8, 27, 904 P.2d 
893, 912 (1995) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
The State contends, and we agree, that even if there
 
was a lack of foundation to admit the HGN test, there was
 
overwhelming evidence presented to support a conviction and the
 
exclusion of the HGN test would not have changed the outcome. 
Officer Klimek first noticed Castro while Officer Klimek was
 
stopped in her car at a traffic light. Officer Klimek could see
 
Castro's car in her rear view mirror traveling so fast that
 
Officer Klimek braced herself for a collision from behind. 
Castro did not hit her but the tires squealed and the car stopped
 
so close to Officer Klimek's car that she could not step between
 
the cars. When Officer Klimek asked Castro for her driver's
 
license, registration, and insurance, Castro fumbled about in her
 
purse and eventually gave her purse to her passenger to look for
 
the requested paperwork.
 
Officer Klimek could smell alcohol on Castro's breath
 
and noticed Castro's eyes were red, watery, and bloodshot. When
 
Castro got out and walked toward the back of the car, she kept
 
one hand on the car, as if to steady herself. In addition to the
 
HGN test, Officer Klimek administered the Walk-and-Turn and One-
Leg-Stand FSTs. In those two FSTS, Castro exhibited all the
 
clues of alcohol impairment.
 
Even without the HGN test, there was overwhelming and
 
compelling evidence to show beyond a reasonable doubt that Castro
 
was guilty of being under the influence of alcohol in an amount
 
sufficient to impair her normal mental faculties or ability to
 
care for herself and guard against casualty. HRS
 
§ 291E-61(a)(1). Thus, even if the district court erred in
 
admitting the HGN test into evidence, the error was harmless. 
HRPP Rule 52(a) ("Any error, defect, irregularity or variance
 
which does not affect substantial rights shall be disregarded."). 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment" entered July 20, 2010 in
 the District Court of the First Circuit, Wahiawa Division is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 4, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Richard L. Holcomb
 
(Holcomb Law, LLLC)
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
Brian R. Vincent
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
10
 