NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30075
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI rI 
STATE OF HAWAI rI, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DEWITT LONG, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(Criminal Case No. 1P109-1433)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Dewitt Long (Long) appeals from the
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, entered on September 21,
 
2009 in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
 
Division (district court).1
 
Long was found guilty of Harassment, in violation of
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 711-1106(1)(b) (Supp. 2008). 
On appeal, Long contends that the district court (1)
 
erred by allowing the State to introduce evidence of Long's prior
 
bad acts without proper notice pursuant to Rule 404(b) of the
 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE), (2) plainly erred by allowing the
 
State to introduce evidence of Long's prior bad acts because the
 
evidence was more prejudicial than probative under HRE Rule 403,
 
and (3) erred by convicting Long of Harassment where there was
 
insufficient evidence to do so.
 
1 The Honorable Russel S. Nagata presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Long's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Long claims that the State failed to provide
 
notice of its intent to introduce evidence of his prior bad acts 
at trial. Long also claims that the district court plainly erred
 
by allowing introduction of Long's prior bad acts because the
 
evidence was more prejudicial than probative.
 
Assuming that the State failed to provide adequate
 
notice under HRE Rule 404(b) and that the evidence was more
 
prejudicial than probative, it was harmless error. "It is well
 
established that a judge is presumed not to be influenced by
 
incompetent evidence." State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 353-54, 615
 
P.2d 101, 107 (1980) (failure to object to improper evidence of
 defendant's prior arrest did not "in any way" impair defense). 
Long's trial was a bench trial, so the district court is presumed
 
to have not been influenced by improperly admitted prior bad acts
 
by Long for the purposes of proving Long's character in order to
 
show that Long was acting in conformity therewith. The district
 
court stated on the record the reasons for finding Long guilty of
 
Harassment. The reasons were not based upon Long's allegedly
 
being a pimp of the complaining witness. See Antone, 62 Haw. at
 
355-56, 615 P.2d at 108 (no evidence rebutting presumption trial
 court disregarded improperly admitted evidence).
 
(2) Contrary to Long's claim, there was sufficient
 
evidence to convict him of Harassment. The complaining witness
 
testified that as Long approached her, Long stated "that's the
 
bitch, cut her hair off," while two other men were holding her
 
down, one of whom had scissors in his hand. The scissors were
 
recovered by police, who arrived while Long and others stood over
 
the complaining witness. This witness also testified that she
 
observed the scissors and feared that she would be stabbed or
 
that her hair would be cut off. The district court found this 
testimony credible. "It is well-settled that an appellate court
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of 
witnesses and the weight of evidence[.]" State v. Mattiello, 90 
Hawairi 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 697 (1999) (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets omitted). Long's comment 
constituted a taunt or challenge made in a manner that was likely 
to cause the complaining witness to reasonably believe that Long 
intended to cause her bodily injury. It can be reasonably 
inferred from the surrounding circumstances that Long's taunt or 
challenge was done with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm the 
complaining witness by Long exiting his vehicle and crossing the 
street to issue the taunt or challenge while the complaining 
witness was being held down by two other men, one of which held a 
pair of scissors. State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai ri 85, 92, 976 P.2d 
399, 406 (1999) (circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences from a defendant's conduct is sufficient to prove the 
requisite state of mind in criminal cases). 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence, entered on September 21, 2009 in the District Court
 of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai ri, November 30, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Thomas Waters 
(Hawk Sing Ignacio & Waters),for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Anne K. Clarkin,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
3
 