FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
WARREN C.R. PERRY, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MAHEALANI PEREZ-WENDT, fka MAHEALANI KAMAUU,
fka BONNIE BROADHURST, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
EUGENE PERRY, DARDANELLE F. KAAUWAI, DARRYL D. PERRY,
ANTONE PEREZ-PERRY, JR., and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10,
Defendants-Appellees.
 
NO. 30329
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0001)
 
FEBRUARY 8, 2013
 
LEONARD, PRESIDING JUDGE, REIFURTH, and GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Mahealani Perez-Wendt (Perez-
Wendt), 
pro se, appeals from an order by the Circuit Court of the
 
1
 denying Perez-Wendt's motion to
 Fifth Circuit (circuit court)
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
dismiss the complaint filed by Plaintiff-Appellee Warren C.R.
 
Perry (Perry) (Order Denying Motion To Dismiss).
 
On appeal, Perez-Wendt contends that the circuit court
 
erred when it ruled that Perry's January 9, 2009 Complaint
 
(Complaint) did not constitute a strategic lawsuit against public
 
participation (SLAPP) under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter
 
634F, Hawaii's anti-SLAPP statute.
 
Pursuant to HRS § 634F-2(2)(A) (Supp. 2012), a party
 
moving to dispose of a claim on grounds that it is based on,
 
relates to, or involves public participation and is a SLAPP
 
lawsuit, is entitled to an immediate appeal from a court order
 
denying the motion. In this appeal, therefore, our jurisdiction
 
is limited to the specific question of whether the Complaint is a
 
SLAPP that should have been dismissed based on HRS Chapter 634F.
 
We agree with the circuit court that the Complaint does
 
not constitute a SLAPP under HRS Chapter 634F and thus affirm the
 
Order Denying Motion To Dismiss.
 
I. Circuit Court Proceedings
 
In his Complaint, Perry asserts claims against five of
 
his siblings, including Perez-Wendt (collectively, Defendant
 
Siblings).2 The Complaint alleges that in January 2007, at a
 
time when the Kauai County Mayor (Mayor) had informally requested
 that Perry accept the position of County Attorney but the Mayor
 
had not publicly announced that he would recommend Perry for the
 
position, the Defendant Siblings engaged in communications with
 
the Mayor, the Mayor's Administrative Assistant (Mayor's
 
Assistant), and members of the Kauai County Council (County
 
Council), informing them that a complaint had been or would be
 
2
 On July 21, 2009, Perry's claim against Antone Perez Perry Jr. was
dismissed for lack of service. Three other defendant siblings eventually
settled with Perry, leaving only Perez-Wendt as a defendant.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
filed with the Office of Disciplinary Counsel (ODC) against
 
Perry.
 
The Complaint alleges that the Defendant Siblings
 
thereafter filed a frivolous ODC complaint against Perry for the
 
ulterior purpose of defaming Perry, and that the Defendant
 
Siblings revealed the allegations from the ODC complaint to the
 
Mayor, the Mayor's Assistant and/or members of the County
 
Council, asserting the ODC allegations to be true and causing the
 
Mayor to rescind his offer to Perry of the County Attorney
 
position.
 
The Complaint also alleges that in November 2008, a
 
member of the newly-elected Mayor's cabinet informed Perry that
 
the new Mayor desired to appoint Perry as County Attorney, but
 
Perry had to refuse the position because a decision on the ODC
 
complaint was still pending.
 
Perry alleges claims in his Complaint for interference
 
with a prospective contractual relationship, abuse of process,
 
defamation, casting Perry in a false light, slander, libel, and
 
intentional infliction of emotional distress.
 
In her motion to dismiss Perry's Complaint, Perez-Wendt
 
asserted that the Complaint was a SLAPP and should be dismissed
 
under HRS Chapter 634F, Hawaii's anti-SLAPP statute. Perez-Wendt
 
argued that Perry had filed the Complaint to punish the Defendant
 
Siblings for "exercising their rights as citizens to participate
 
in government processes." 
The circuit court denied the motion to dismiss,
 
determining that more likely than not, Perry's allegations in the
 
Complaint do not constitute a SLAPP as defined in HRS § 634F-1
 
(Supp. 2012). 
II. Standard of Review
 
Pursuant to HRS 634F-2(1) (Supp. 2012), the trial court
 
was required to treat Perez-Wendt's motion as a motion for
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment on the pleadings. Appellate courts typically review a 
trial court's ruling on a motion for judgment on the pleadings 
under the right/wrong or de novo standard of review. See Hawaii 
Med. Ass'n v. Hawaii Med. Serv. Ass'n, Inc. 113 Hawai' i 77, 91, 
148 P.3d 1179, 1193 (2006). 
Additionally, the circuit court's consideration of the 
motion involved interpreting relevant portions of HRS Chapter 
634F. Statutory interpretation is a question of law that we 
review de novo. Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of 
Appeals of City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 114 Hawai' i 184, 193, 159 
P.3d 143, 152 (2007). 
We are guided in our interpretation and construction of
 
statutes by the following:
 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an
ambiguity exists.
 
Id. (citation omitted). Furthermore, "[l]egislative history may 
be used to confirm interpretation of a statute's plain language." 
Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai' i 126, 150 n.5, 276 P.3d 695, 719 
n.5 (2012) (quoting E & J Lounge Operating Co. v. Liquor Comm'n 
of City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 118 Hawai' i 320, 335, 189 P.3d 432, 
447 (2008)). III. HRS Chapter 634F
 
HRS Chapter 634F provides protections for a party
 
against whom a SLAPP lawsuit is brought. HRS § 634F-4 (Supp.
 
2012) requires that "[t]his chapter shall be construed liberally
 
to fully effectuate its purposes and intent." HRS Chapter 634F
 
does not contain therein a section expressing its purposes. 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, Act 187, which enacted HRS Chapter 634F in 2002,
 
articulates the purposes of the chapter.
 
The purpose of this Act is to:
(1)	 Protect and encourage citizen participation in
government to the maximum extent permitted by law;
(2)	 Create a more equitable balance between the rights of
persons to file lawsuits and to trial by jury, and the
rights of persons to petition, speak out, associate,
and otherwise participate in their governments;
(3)	 Support the operations of and assure the continuation
of representative government in America, including the
protection and regulation of public health, safety,
and welfare by protecting public participation in
government programs, public policy decisions, and
other actions;
(4)	 Establish a balanced, uniform, and comprehensive
process for speedy adjudication of SLAPPs as a major
contribution to lawsuit reform; and
(5)	 Provide for attorney fees, costs, and damages for
persons whose citizen participation rights have been
violated by the filing of a SLAPP against them.
 
2002 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 187, § 1 at 822.
 
As provided under HRS § 634F-1 (Supp. 2012), "'SLAPP'
 
means a strategic lawsuit against public participation and refers
 
to a lawsuit that lacks substantial justification or is
 
interposed for delay or harassment and that is solely based on
 
the party's public participation before a governmental body." A
 
party may counter a SLAPP by filing a motion to dispose of the
 
claim(s). HRS § 634F-2(1) (Supp 2012). This is the step Perez-
Wendt took when she filed her motion to dismiss.
 
Regarding a motion to dispose of a claim in a purported
 
SLAPP, HRS § 634F-2 (Supp. 2012) sets forth specific
 
requirements, some of which differ in material ways from typical
 
court procedures and court rules. This statute provides in
 
relevant part:
 
§634F-2 Required procedures; motion. Notwithstanding
 
any law to the contrary, including rules of court, upon the
filing of any motion to dispose of a claim in a judicial
proceeding on the grounds that the claim is based on,
relates to, or involves public participation and is a SLAPP
lawsuit:
 
( 1 )	 The motion shall be treated as a motion for
 
judgment on the pleadings, matters outside the
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
pleadings shall be excluded by the court, and
the court shall expedite the hearing of the
motion;
(2) The moving party shall have a right:
(A)	 To an immediate appeal from a court order
denying the motion; and
(B)	 To file an application for a writ of
mandamus if the court fails to rule on the
 motion in an expedited fashion;
(3)	 Discovery shall be suspended, pending decision
on the motion and appeals;
( 4 )	 The responding party shall:
 (A)	 Without leave of court, have seven days to
amend its pleadings to be pled with
specificity, and shall include such
supporting particulars as are peculiarly
within the supporting pleader's knowledge;
and
 
( B )	 Have the burden of proof and persuasion on
 
the motion;
 
( 5 )	 The court shall make its determination based
 upon the allegations contained in the pleadings;
 
( 6 )	 The court shall grant the motion and dismiss the
 judicial claim, unless the responding party has
 
demonstrated that more likely than not, the
 respondent's allegations do not constitute a
 SLAPP lawsuit as defined in section 634F-1[.]
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Regardless of the type of motion a party files to
 
3
dispose of the claim(s),  the court must treat it as a motion for
judgment on the pleadings. HRS § 634F-2(1). Generally, a motion 
for judgment on the pleadings can be converted to a motion for 
summary judgment if "matters outside the pleadings are presented 
to and not excluded by the court[.]" Hawai' i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(c). However, the anti-SLAPP statute limits the court to a review of the allegations contained in the 
pleadings and prohibits consideration of matters outside the 
pleadings. HRS § 634F-2(1) and (5) (Supp. 2012). 
3
 HRS § 634F-1 provides in relevant part: "'Motion' includes any
motion to dismiss, for summary judgment, for judgment on the pleadings or to
strike, a demurrer, or any other judicial pleading filed to dispose of a
judicial claim."
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Moreover, HRS § 634F-2 also changes the typical burden
 
of proof for a motion for judgment on the pleadings. Under the
 
HRCP, the standards for such a motion are: 
In a motion for judgment on the pleadings under HRCP Rule
12(c), the movant must clearly establish that no material
issue of fact remains to be resolved and that he or she is
 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. In considering a
motion for judgment on the pleadings, the circuit court is
required to view the facts presented in the pleadings and
the inferences to be drawn therefrom in the light most
favorable to the nonmoving party.
 
Hawaii Med. Ass'n, 113 Hawai' i at 91, 148 P.3d at 1193 (emphasis 
added and brackets omitted). However, under the anti-SLAPP 
statute, when a motion to dispose of the claim(s) is filed, the 
burden of proof and persuasion rests with the responding party, 
i.e. the non-moving party. HRS § 634F-2(4)(B) (Supp. 2012). 
Moreover, pursuant to HRS § 634F-2(5) and (6) (Supp. 2012), based
 
on the allegations in the pleadings, "[t]he court shall grant the
 
motion and dismiss the judicial claim, unless the responding
 
party has demonstrated that more likely than not, the
 
respondent's allegations do not constitute a SLAPP lawsuit as
 
defined in section 634F-1[.]"
 
IV. Perry's Complaint Was Not a SLAPP Under HRS Chapter 634F
 
The circuit court properly limited its review to the
 
pleadings in this case, particularly Perry's Complaint. See HRS
 
§ 634F-2(5) (Supp. 2012). Perez-Wendt had filed seven
 
attachments with her motion to dismiss, but at the hearing on the
 
motion, the circuit court granted Perez-Wendt's own request to
 
strike the attachments as being outside the pleadings.
 
Based upon the allegations contained in Perry's
 
Complaint, see HRS § 634F-2(5), and considering that Perry (the
 
responding party) had the burden of proof and persuasion on the
 
motion, see HRS § 634F-2(4)(B), we conclude that the circuit
 
court was correct and that Perry "has demonstrated that more
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
likely than not, [Perry's] allegations do not constitute a SLAPP
 
lawsuit as defined in section 634F-1[.]" HRS § 634F-2(6).
 
Under HRS § 634F-1, there are two components for a
 
lawsuit to be a SLAPP. That is, a lawsuit is a SLAPP if it
 
(1) "lacks substantial justification or is interposed for delay
 
or harassment[;]" and (2) "is solely based on the party's public
 
participation before a governmental body." HRS § 634F-1. In
 
this appeal, we focus on the second component.
 
As an initial matter, as defined in HRS § 634F-1,
 
"'[g]overnmental body' includes a branch, department, agency,
 
instrumentality, official, employee, agent, or other person
 
acting under color of law of the United States, a state, or
 
subdivision of a state or other public authority." This
 
definition is broad enough to include the individuals and
 
entities involved in Perry's Complaint –- i.e., the Mayor, the
 
Mayor's Assistant, members of the County Council, and the ODC.
 
However, given the allegations in the Complaint and the 
plain meaning of the statutory language, there was no public 
participation before a governmental body. "Public participation" is defined under HRS § 634F-1 as "any oral or written testimony submitted or provided to a governmental body during the course of a governmental proceeding." (Emphasis added.) HRS Chapter 634F 
does not define "testimony" or "governmental proceeding," so we 
look to the plain meaning of the statute. Liberty Mutual Fire 
Ins. Co. v. Dennison, 108 Hawai' i 380, 384, 120 P.3d 1115, 1119 
(2005) ("Where the language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous, our only duty is to give effect to its plain and 
obvious meaning.") (citation omitted). 
Black's Law Dictionary defines "testimony" as
 
"[e]vidence that a competent witness under oath or affirmation
 
gives at trial or in an affidavit or deposition." Black's Law
 
Dictionary 1613 (9th ed. 2009). Merriam-Webster's Collegiate
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dictionary defines "testimony" in relevant part as "firsthand
 
authentication of a fact: EVIDENCE," "an outward sign," or "a
 
solemn declaration [usually] made orally by a witness under oath
 
in response to interrogation by a lawyer or authorized public
 
official[.]" Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 1214 (10th
 
ed. 2000).
 
Black's Law Dictionary defines "proceeding" in relevant
 
part as: "[a]ny procedural means for seeking redress from a
 
tribunal or agency[,]" "[a]n act or step that is part of a larger
 
action[,]" or "[t]he business conducted by a court or other
 
official body; a hearing." Black's Law Dictionary 1324 (9th ed.
 
2009). In Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, "proceeding"
 
is defined as "legal action," "[p]rocedure," "[e]vents,
 
[h]appenings," "[t]ransaction," or "an official record of things
 
said or done[.]" Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 927
 
(10th ed. 2000).
 
A.	 Claims Based on Communications with the Mayor, Mayor's
Assistant, and Members of the County Council
 
With respect to Perry's claims based on Defendant
 
Siblings' communications in 2007 with the Mayor, the Mayor's
 
Assistant and with members of the County Council, these
 
communications do not constitute "testimony" submitted or
 
provided "during the course of a governmental proceeding." Based
 
on the allegations in Perry's Complaint, Perry contends that the
 
Defendant Siblings' communications with the Mayor, Mayor's
 
Assistant and the County Council occurred when the Mayor had not
 
publicly announced that he would recommend Perry as County
 
Attorney, there was nothing official about Perry being considered
 
or selected for the position, and the Mayor had not formally
 
submitted Perry's name to the County Council for confirmation. 
Even under a liberal construction of the statute, nothing in HRS
 
Chapter 634F suggests that an individual's unsolicited and
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
informal communication with a government official, when there is
 
no formal process or procedure in progress, constitutes
 
"testimony submitted or provided to a governmental body during
 
the course of a governmental proceeding." Thus, the claims based
 
on the Defendant Siblings' communications with the Mayor, Mayor's
 
Assistant and members of the County Council do not constitute a
 
SLAPP.
 
B.	 Claims Based on the Defendant Siblings' Filing of the
ODC Complaint
 
With regard to Perry's claims in the Complaint based on
 
the Defendant Siblings' filing of a frivolous ODC complaint
 
4
against Perry,  the asserted claims do not constitute a SLAPP. 
Given the allegations in Perry's Complaint, the filing of the ODC
 
complaint does not constitute "public participation" before a
 
governmental body, as defined in HRS § 634F-1, because the ODC
 
complaint did not involve "oral or written testimony."
 
Perry's Complaint states that the Defendant Siblings
 
filed a frivolous ODC complaint containing false allegations
 
4 On appeal, Perez-Wendt asserts for the first time that the ODC
complaint was privileged under Rule 2.8 of the Rules of the Supreme Court of
the State of Hawai' i (RSCH), which states in relevant part that "[c]omplaints
submitted to the Board or Counsel or testimony given with respectthereto . . . shall be absolutely privileged and no lawsuit predicated thereonmay be instituted." Perez-Wendt did not raise this issue in the circuit court. Although we have discretion to review for plain error, "[t]he plainerror doctrine represents a departure from the normal rules of waiver thatgovern appellate review, and, as such . . . an appellate court should invokethe plain error doctrine in civil cases only . . . when justice so
requires[.]" Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai' i 450, 458,
40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). In 
this appeal, we need not invoke plain error because this case will be remandedto the circuit court, at which point Perez-Wendt will have the opportunity toassert the immunity under RSCH Rule 2.8 before the circuit court. 
The issue before us in this appeal is limited to whether the Complaint
constitutes a SLAPP that should be dismissed under HRS Chapter 634F. Indeed,
as noted above, that is the basis for our appellate jurisdiction in this
appeal. See HRS § 634F-2(2)(A). Because consideration of RSCH Rule 2.8 is
 
not properly before us, we will review whether the claims in the Complaint
based on the filing of the ODC complaint constitute a SLAPP.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
against Perry, and further, that the first paragraph of the ODC
 
complaint stated: "We are siblings of Warren C.R. Perry, a Kauai­
based attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Hawaii. 
We believe our brother has engaged in unethical and/or fraudulent
 
conduct and request an investigation into the matter." 
(Emphasis added.) Perry's Complaint does not state that the
 
Defendant Siblings provided testimony of any kind before the ODC. 
Instead, the ODC complaint by the Defendant Siblings set forth
 
allegations and was a request to the ODC for an investigation.
 
Based on the plain meaning of "testimony," even when
 
liberally construed, the ODC complaint and the allegations
 
contained therein were not "testimony" and are not protected
 
under HRS Chapter 634F.
 
C.	 Claims Based On Allegation That Perry Refrained From
Taking the County Attorney Position in 2008
 
The Complaint claims that a newly elected Mayor in 2008
 
also wanted to appoint Perry as County Attorney, but that Perry
 
had to refuse the position because the ODC complaint was still
 
pending. This claim is thus grounded on the Defendant Siblings'
 
filing of the ODC complaint and, for the reasons discussed above,
 
does not constitute a SLAPP.
 
D.	 The Petition Clauses and the Noerr-Pennington Doctrine
 
As part of her argument that the Complaint is a SLAPP,
 
Perez-Wendt also argues that the Defendant Siblings' alleged
 
communications with government officials and the filing of the
 
ODC complaint are particularly protected in light of the Petition
 
5
Clause in the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution,  the
5
 The Petition Clause is set forth as part of the First Amendment of
the U.S. Constitution, which states that "Congress shall make no law
respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of
 the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress
 of grievances." (Emphasis added.)
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Petition Clause in article I, section 4 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution,6
 and the Noerr-Pennington doctrine, which arises
 
from the Petition Clause in the First Amendment. See E. R.R.
 
Presidents Conference v. Noerr Motor Freight, Inc., 365 U.S. 127
 
(1961); United Mine Workers of Am. v. Pennington, 381 U.S. 657
 
(1965). In essence, Perez-Wendt seeks to expand the reach of HRS
 
Chapter 634F to the full extent of the protections under the
 
Petition Clauses and the Noerr-Pennington doctrine. 
Perez-Wendt's arguments in this regard are misplaced. 
Although the Petition Clauses in the U.S. Constitution and the 
Hawai'i Constitution are part of the inspiration for the adoption 
of HRS Chapter 634F, see 2002 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 187, § 1 at 
821, the rights under HRS Chapter 634F are based on the express 
language adopted therein by the legislature. In this regard, HRS 
Chapter 634F sets forth a specific definition for "public 
participation" which must be applied in this appeal and which we 
have applied above. 
As noted earlier, our appellate jurisdiction in this
 
appeal is specifically based on HRS § 634F-2(2)(A), which allowed
 
the immediate appeal from the circuit court's Order Denying
 
Motion To Dismiss based on HRS Chapter 634F. Therefore, we do
 
not reach the separate question -– beyond the reach of HRS
 
Chapter 634F -- of whether the claims against Perez-Wendt are
 
barred by the Petition Clauses and/or the Noerr-Pennington
 
doctrine.
 
6
 Article I, section 4 of the Hawai' i Constitution states that "[n]o
law shall be enacted respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting
the free exercise thereof, or abridging the freedom of speech or of the press 
or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition the 
government for a redress of grievances." (Emphasis added.) 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E. Legislative History of HRS Chapter 634F
 
We base our rulings above on the plain meaning of the 
language adopted by the legislature. However, the legislative 
history for HRS Chapter 634F further confirms our interpretation 
of the plain language of the statute. Kakinami, 127 Hawai' i at 
150 n.5, 276 P.3d at 719 n.5; E & J Lounge Operating Co., 118 
Hawai'i at 335, 189 P.3d at 447; Steigman v. Outrigger Enters., 
Inc., 126 Hawai' i 133, 148-49, 267 P.3d 1238, 1253-54 (2012) 
(although statutory language was plain and unambiguous, the 
supreme court looked to legislative history to confirm its 
interpretation). 
HRS Chapter 634F was enacted in 2002. It was 
introduced in the legislature as H.B. No. 741 the previous 
legislative session. When first introduced, H.B. No. 741 
provided much broader immunity, apparently as broad as the right 
to petition under the constitutions of the United States and the 
State of Hawai' i. Specifically, H.B. No. 741 originally stated, 
in relevant part: 
Immunized acts.  Any act by a person in furtherance of the
constitutional right to petition under the United States or
State Constitution, including seeking relief, influencing
action, informing, communicating, and otherwise
participating in the process of government, shall be immune
from civil liability, regardless of intent or purpose,
except where not aimed at procuring any governmental or
electoral action, result, or outcome.
 
H.B. 741, 21st Leg., Reg. Sess. (2001).
 
In 2002, the entire section entitled "Immunized acts,"
 
quoted above, was deleted from H.B. No. 741. The conference
 
committee for H.B. No. 741 noted that it had amended the measure
 
"to reflect provisions contained in SLAPP legislation recently
 
adopted in the state of Colorado, especially the definitions of
 
'lack of substantial justification' and 'strategic lawsuit
 against public participation.'" Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 21, in 2002
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
House Journal, at 1763 (emphasis added).7 The immunity provided
 
by H.B. No. 741 was thus narrowed by deleting the "Immunized
 
acts" section and instead adding the definitions for "SLAPP" and
 
"public participation" which were eventually adopted.
 
The conference committee report notes the decision to
 
amend H.B. No. 741 to follow provisions specified in Colorado. 
In 2002, when the legislature was considering H.B. No. 741, there
 
were at least nineteen states that had anti-SLAPP legislation,
 
some of which were much broader than the legislation proposed in
 
Colorado.8 The original version of H.B. No. 741 was akin to such
 
7 Although SLAPP legislation was proposed in Colorado in 2002, it was
not enacted.
8 For instance, California's anti-SLAPP statute provided protection for
an "act in furtherance of a person's right of petition or free speech under
the United States or California Constitution in connection with a public
issue," which was defined to include:
 
(1) any written or oral statement or writing made before a
legislative, executive, or judicial proceeding, or any other
official proceeding authorized by law; (2) any written or
oral statement or writing made in connection with an issue
under consideration or review by a legislative, executive,
or judicial body, or any other official proceeding
authorized by law; (3) any written or oral statement or
writing made in a place open to the public or a public forum
in connection with an issue of public interest; (4) or any
other conduct in furtherance of the exercise of the
 constitutional right of petition or the constitutional right
of free speech in connection with a public issue or an issue
of public interest.
 
Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 425.16 (West, Westlaw through 1999 Act 960). In 2002,
other states had statutes providing broad protections similar to California,
such as: Georgia (Ga. Code Ann. § 9-11-11.1 (West, Westlaw through 1998 Act
862)); Indiana (Ind. Code Ann. §§ 34-7-7-1 and 34-7-7-2 (West, Westlaw through
1998 Act 114)); Louisiana (La. Code Civ. Proc. Ann. art. 971 (West, Westlaw
through 1999 Act 734)); Maine (Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 14, § 556 (West,
Westlaw through 1995 Act 413)); Massachusetts (Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. ch. 231,
§ 59H (West, Westlaw through 1996 Act 450)); Nevada (Nev. Rev. Stat. § 41.650
(Westlaw through 1997 Act 387)); Rhode Island (R.I. Gen. Laws Ann. § 9-33-2
(West, Westlaw through 1995 Act 386)); Utah (Utah Code Ann. § 78-58-102
(LexisNexis, Westlaw through 2001 Act 163)). Moreover, Minnesota's statute in
2002 protected acts of a party that involved "public participation," which was
defined as "speech or lawful conduct that is genuinely aimed in whole or in
part at procuring favorable government action." Minn. Stat. Ann. §§ 554.01
(West, Westlaw through 1994 Act 566).
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
broader statutes, but then was amended to follow the proposed
 
legislation in Colorado.
 
The legislative history for HRS Chapter 634F confirms
 
our interpretation of the plain language of the statute. It
 
shows that the legislature intended to provide a narrower
 
immunity than was originally drafted in H.B. No. 741 and,
 
although broader legislation existed in other states, the
 
legislature chose to follow the proposed legislation in Colorado. 
This intent appears consistent with one of the stated purposes of
 
HRS Chapter 634F to "[c]reate a more equitable balance between
 
the rights of persons to file lawsuits and to trial by jury, and
 
the rights of persons to petition, speak out, associate, and
 
otherwise participate in their governments[.]" 2002 Haw. Sess.
 
Laws Act 187, § 1 at 822 (emphasis added).
 
V. Conclusion
 
We therefore conclude that the circuit court correctly
 
determined that the claims in the Complaint did not constitute a
 
SLAPP under HRS Chapter 634F and thus properly denied Perez­
Wendt's motion to dismiss.
 
Accordingly, the "Order Denying 'Defendant Pro Se
 
Mahealani Perez-Wendt's Motion to Dismiss' Filed November 27,
 
2009," entered by the circuit court on January 15, 2010, is
 
affirmed. This case is remanded to the circuit court for further
 
proceedings.
 
On the briefs:
 
Mahealani Perez-Wendt
 
Defendant-Appellant Pro Se
 
Mark R. Zenger
(Richards & Zenger)
Warren C. R. Perry
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
15
 