  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30235
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ALVIN A. ANJO, JR., Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAII, DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION;
JOHN DOES 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0222)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Alvin A. Anjo, Jr. (Anjo or 
Plaintiff) appeals from the Judgment (Judgment) filed on 
November 9, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit1 
(circuit court). The circuit court entered judgment in favor of Defendant-Appellee State of Hawai
'i, Department of Education 
(DOE) and against Anjo on all counts of Anjo's First Amended Complaint, pursuant to the July 29, 2009 "Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law and Order Granting [DOE's] Motion for Summary 
Judgment, Filed May 1, 2009" (Order Granting SJ). 
On appeal, Anjo contends the circuit court erred by
 
entering the Judgment and the Order Granting SJ. In particular,
 
1
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Anjo challenges the circuit court's Conclusions of Law (COLs) C
 
and J in the Order Granting SJ. COL C, disposing of Anjo's
 
disability discrimination claim, provides in part: 
Plaintiff failed to show that [DOE] discriminated against
him by failing to accommodate his disability. The complaint
was based on the fact that the relocation of Plaintiff[']s
classroom at the end of January 2006 would require Plaintiff
to climb approximately twenty steps, and that it was his
difficulty navigating stairs that gave rise to the cause of
action. However, there is no genuine issue of material fact
that Plaintiff had access to his classroom via a ramp, and
that he was not required to climb steps to access the
classroom. Plaintiff could use the ramp, as he had done
prior to January 2006.
 
Challenging paragraph C, Anjo argues that (1) the issue of what
 
is a "reasonable accommodation" is generally one for the trier of
 
fact and (2) the absence of an interactive process to ascertain a
 
"reasonable accommodation" precluded a finding of summary
 
judgment in favor of DOE.
 
COL J, disposing of Anjo's retaliation claim, provides
 
in part:
 
Plaintiff has failed to rebut DOE's legitimate
nondiscriminatory purpose, and that that [sic] legitimate
nondiscriminatory purpose was a pretext to hide the true
motivation. When the burden of proof was shifted back to
Plaintiff, Plaintiff failed to present specific or
substantial evidence of pretext. Plaintiff has not "shown
 that either a discriminatory reason more likely motivated
the employer or that the employer's proffered explanation is
unworthy of credence." Villiarimo [v. Aloha Island Air,
Inc.], 281 F.3d [1054,] 1063 [(9th Cir. 2002)] (citations
omitted). The evidence before the Court shows that DOE
 received many complaints from teachers and students against
the Plaintiff; DOE was obligated to investigate those
complaints. The investigation was conducted by a neutral
party, unrelated to the administration of the KMS [Kohala
Intermediate School], and there was sufficient evidence to
conclude that Plaintiff violated DOE policies. As such,
Plaintiff[']s termination was just and proper and was not
pretextual.
 
(Ellipses omitted.) Anjo argues that he "submitted sufficient
 
direct and circumstantial evidence to demonstrate that his
 
termination was a pretext in retaliation for his requests that
 
[his] disability be 'reasonably accommodated' and for his
 
constitutionally protected assertion of this right by filing
 
complaints" with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Anjo asks this court to vacate, in whole or in part,
 
the Judgment and the Order Granting SJ and to remand this case
 
for trial on the merits.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Anjo's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) There is no genuine issue of material fact as to
 
whether the ramp was a reasonable accommodation.
 
The employer need not provide the accommodation that the
employee requests or prefers. Instead, the employer retains
the "ultimate discretion" to choose another effective
 accommodation, even if less expensive or easier to provide.
Accordingly, an employee is not entitled to a particular
reasonable accommodation if another reasonable accommodation
 is provided. To prevail, Trepka must demonstrate a genuine
issue of material fact with regard not only to her
entitlement to her requested accommodation, but also to the
inadequacy of the offered alternatives.
 
Trepka v. Bd. of Educ. of Cleveland City Sch. Dist., 28 Fed.
 
Appx. 455, 459-60 (6th Cir. 2002) (citations omitted). 
Neither Anjo nor his doctor state anywhere in the
 
record that the ramp was inadequate. When asked in his
 
deposition if he found it "easier to use the ramp," Anjo replied
 
"yes" and that he'd "try to go to the ramp . . . [a]s much as
 
possible, use the ramp."
 
(2) Anjo did not claim in his complaint or argue in 
the circuit court that there was no interactive process between 
himself and DOE. We therefore reject Anjo's claim. "As a 
general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at trial, 
that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal; this 
rule applies in both criminal and civil cases." Chung v. McCabe 
Hamilton & Renny Co., 109 Hawai 'i 520, 537, 128 P.3d 833, 850 
(2006) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
(3) DOE provided extensive, legitimate,
 
nondiscriminatory reasons for Anjo's termination. After DOE
 
satisfied its burden of production, Anjo failed to present either
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
direct or specific and substantial circumstantial evidence of
 
retaliation, which is required to survive summary judgment. 
Bergene v. Salt River Project Agric. Improvement & Power Dist.,
 
272 F.3d 1136, 1142 (9th Cir. 2001).
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment filed on
 
November 9, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 7, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Leslie S. Fukumoto 
for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
James E. Halvorson 
Maria C. Cook,Maura M. Okamoto,Deputy Attorneys General,for Defendant-AppelleeState of Hawaii, Departmentof Education. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
4
 