NOT F OR P UB LICATIO N IN WEST'S H AWAII  REPO RTS OR THE P ACIF IC REP ORTER
 
NO. 30331
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KIM R. MASSEY, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 06-1-2105)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kim R. Massey ("Massey") appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered on
 
January 13, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 
("Circuit Court"). Massey was convicted of arson in the first
 degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes § 708-8251 (Supp.
 2010). Massey was sentenced to incarceration for twenty years,
 and ordered to pay restitution of $760 and a crime victim
 compensation fee of $205.
 
On appeal, Massey contends that the Circuit Court erred 
when it (1) denied his motion to dismiss under Rule 48 of the Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure ("HRPP") without making 
appropriate findings on the reocrd, (2) failed to apply the proper factors in denying the motion to dismiss after a second mistrial was declared, and (3) failed to declare a mistrial after two of the State's witnesses violated the exclusionary rule. In addition, Massey contends that he was (4) denied effective assistance of counsel at trial, as evidenced by (a) counsel's failure to present a witness to contest the State's expert fire 
1
 The Honorable Steven S. Alm presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
witness regarding possible causes of the fire, (b) counsel's
 
failure to object to hearsay evidence, and (c) counsel's failure
 to object to the cumulative nature and relevance of the State's
 expert fire witness.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 affirm the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence and resolve
 Massey's points of error as follows:
 
(1) It is reversible error for a trial court to deny a
 
2
motion to dismiss under HRPP Rule 48  ("Rule 48") without
stating, on the record, the essential findings of fact that form
 the basis for denial of the motion, as required by HRPP Rule
 
2 Rule 48. Dismissal.
 
. . . .
 
(b) By court. Except in the case of traffic
offenses that are not punishable by imprisonment, the
court shall, on motion of the defendant, dismiss the
charge, with or without prejudice in its discretion,
if trial is not commenced within 6 months [(180
days)]:
 
.  .  .  .
 
(3) from the date of mistrial, order
granting a new trial or remand, in cases where
such events require a new trial.
 
.  .  .  .
 
(c) Excluded periods. The following periods
shall be excluded in computing the time for trial
commencement:
 
.  .  .  .
 
(4) periods that delay the commencement of
trial and are caused by a continuance granted
at the request of the prosecutor if:
 
(i) the continuance is granted
because of the unavailability of evidence
material to the prosecution's case, when
the prosecutor has exercised due diligence
to obtain such evidence and there are
 reasonable grounds to believe that such
evidence will be available at a later
 date[.]
 
Haw. R. Pen. P. 48(b)(3) and (c)(4)(i).
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
12(e) ("Rule 12(e)").3 State v. Hutch, 75 Haw. 307, 329, 861
 
P.2d 11, 22 (1993).4 Motions to dismiss under Rule 48(b), "by
 
their very nature, involve factual issues that must be resolved
 
before they can be decided." Id. at 313, 861 P.2d at 15. A
 
written order is not required. A court complies with HRPP Rule
 12(e) by stating its essential findings orally on the record. 
State v. Estabillio, 121 Hawai' i 261, 267, 218 P.3d 749, 755 
(2009).
 
Massey contends that the Circuit Court failed to make
 
"the required findings on the record concerning whether [Agent
 Marcus] was a material witness and whether [he] was unavailable."
 The Circuit Court concluded on the record, however, that Agent
 Marcus was unavailable during June, July, and August:
 
[I]t's not uncommon to ask the attorneys to talk to their
witnesses and see what the availability is. That was done. 
Both folks are officers of the court. I trust both people
to do that. And [the Deputy Prosecutor] did that and
discovered, based on all of the commitments that are in
there -– and whether it's the week of the 22nd or the week
 afterwards -– because picking a jury, calling witnesses,
doing things is a difficult thing. . . . But -– and I think
it's appropriate that we were able to supplement the record
today. And I think it justified what [the Deputy
Prosecutor] had made a representation, and that the offer he
gave was, based on [Agent Marcus's] commitments and his
 duties at the office that he was unavailable during June,
 
July, and August. And I -– the Court, in looking carefully
 at that, comes to the same conclusion. And I think his
 
testimony today verifies what [the Deputy Prosecutor] had
pointed out regarding the timing for that.
 
(Emphasis added). The Circuit Court also found "under Rule 48
 
3
 (e) Ruling on motion. A motion made before
 
trial shall be determined before trial unless the
 court orders that it be deferred for determination at
 the trial of the general issue or until after verdict;
provided that a motion to suppress made before trial
shall be determined before trial. Where factual
 issues are involved in determining a motion, the court
shall state its essential findings on the record.
 
Haw. R. Pen. P. 12(e).
 
4
 Although stating the underlying principle, Massey does not refer
us to Rule 12(e), this case, or to any relevant support for his argument,
contending only that the trial court failed to make "the appropriate
findings." Referring only to Rule 48, Massey urges us to apply "the rule to
the fact" and to find an abuse of discretion in the trial court's failure "to
 make the required findings on the record concerning whether the witness was a
material witness and whether the witness was unavailable." Rule 48 itself
 incorporates no such requirement. Massey's failure to support his argument
with authorities is a pervasive problem throughout the opening brief. Haw. R.
 App. P. 28(b)(7).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Special Agent Marcus is a material witness[.]"5 Massey does
 
not explain what he means by "appropriate findings," or what he
 
believes the law requires that the Circuit Court did not provide. 
We conclude, in any event, that the Circuit Court "state[d] its
 essential findings on the record" with regard to Agent Marcus's
 
5
 The Circuit Court had previously found Agent Marcus to be a
material witness in response to Massey's Motion to Advance Trial and Demand
for a Speedy Trial, filed on May 12, 2009. The court stated there that:
 
THE COURT: . . . I will make a Rule 48 finding that
[Agent Marcus is] a material witness. . . .
 
. . . .
 
THE COURT: Wait. But Mr. Massey -– I mean, we've all
seen from the testimony that came out in the other trials
that Mr. Marcus is the one who's done these experiments with
the cigarettes, and I think it's common misinformation that
the public has from watching every Hollywood move they've
seen, that a cigarette can start a fire like this; and based
on his own personal experience, based on his own
experiments, he is going [to] be able to and has testified
in the other trials that a cigarette is incapable of doing
that.
 
[Defense Counsel]: I understand that.
 
THE COURT: And that was one of the things that came up
with your client and the way he indicated he thought the
fire must have started, is from a cigarette.
 
. . . .
 
THE COURT: Okay. And based on the fact that[] he's
familiar with the case, he's the one that did these
experiments, I am finding he's material. . . .
 
. . . .
 
THE COURT: . . . Okay, over the Defense's objection, I
am denying your Motion to Advance Trial and Demand for a
Speed[y] Trial, [Defense Counsel], unless you and [the
Deputy Prosector] can come together and think of something
that I haven't thought of. I do find that Mr. Marcus is a
 material witness. I'm going to exclude all of that time for
Rule 48 because of the particular nature of this case that I
think it is so ingrained in the public's mind about the way
fires are started or whether they actually can be started.
 
He is the person who actually did these experiments
and is able to testify to that, and I think it's going to
take something like that to set aside people's firm beliefs
that all sorts of things can start a fire. And I think
 Hollywood is a big part of this, but I can tell you before
this trial came along, I was certainly of that belief that a
cigarette could start a gas fire this way, and it's a hard
thing to cut through in people's minds on that.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
unavailability and materiality.6
 
(2) The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
refusing to dismiss the case after the second mistrial. Massey
 
contends that the Circuit Court did not address all of the
 analytical factors outlined in State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 647
 P.2d 705 (1982), and that "[t]herefore, this Court must
 conclude[] that in not addressing all of the Moriwake factors,
 the trial Court abused its discretion[.]" Massey does not
 explain, however, which of the Moriwake factors were not
 addressed, or direct us to any law or cases that require that a
 mistrial be declared if any one or more of the factors is not
 explicitly addressed.
 
Although the Hawai' i Supreme Court stated that "in most 
cases, serious consideration be given to dismissing an indictment with prejudice after a second hung jury mistrial," the court also said that, when reviewing whether a trial court's decision was correct in this context, appellate courts will "accord deference to the conclusion of the trial court[.]" Id. at 57, 647 P.2d at 713.
 
In this case, the Circuit Court appeared to give
 
serious consideration to dismissing the indictment, and stated
 explicitly that it considered the Moriwake factors before denying
 Massey's motion to dismiss. The fact that it discussed four of
 the factors does not mean that it did not consider the fifth and
 sixth factors. We decline to extend Moriwake to require that the
 Circuit Court's consideration of each factor must be explicit. 
In light of the discretion that we are bound to accord the
 Circuit Court's decision, we find nothing to suggest that the
 Circuit Court exceeded the bounds of reason or abused its
 discretion. Therefore, the Circuit Court did not err in denying
 Massey's motion to dismiss the indictment.
 
6
 The Circuit Court went further and addressed the reasonableness of
 
its own unavailability during the month of September, time during which
Massey's own counsel was unavailable, the fact that Massey had been released
on bail, the State's due diligence in determining Agent Marcus's availability,
and its ultimate conclusion that Rule 48 had been complied with. Whether the
 Circuit Court was correct in concluding that Agent Marcus was unavailable and
material, and whether Massey was brought to trial within 180 unexcludable
days, however, are not raised on appeal and we do not consider the sufficiency
of these other findings.
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(3) The Circuit Court did not err in refusing to
 
declare a mistrial because the court's witness exclusion order
 
was violated. Massey argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 refusing to declare a mistrial when it became known that the
 complaining witness ("CW") and her daughter spoke by telephone
 after the daughter had testified, and before the CW testified. 
Massey further argues that "the appropriate remedy is for the
 Court to declare a mistrial."
 
Mistrial is not the ordinary remedy for noncompliance
 
with a sequestration order:
 
The general rule is that noncompliance with a
sequestration order under [Hawaii Rules of Evidence] Rule
615 does not require a new trial "unless the court's
decision to allow the allegedly tainted testimony was an
abuse of discretion or resulted in prejudice to the
defendant." United States v. Prichard, 781 F.2d 179, 183
(10th Cir. 1986). The defendant has the burden of proving
that "there was either prejudice or an abuse of discretion."
Id.
 
State v. Elmaleh, 7 Haw. App. 488, 493-94, 782 P.2d 886, 890
 
(1989). Massey proves neither prejudice nor abuse of discretion,
 and offers no authorities and no argument in support of his
 contention that mistrial is the appropriate remedy. As a result,
 the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion. 
(4) To prove ineffective assistance of counsel, 
defendant has the burden to show "[first,] that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence[,] and [second,] that such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003) (quoting 
State v. Aplaca, 74 Haw. 54, 66-67, 837 P.2d 1298, 1305 (1992)). 
(a) Claims that trial counsel was ineffective for 
failing to call a witness "must be supported by affidavits or sworn statements describing the testimony of the proffered witnesses." State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 
1247 (1998). Massey offers no affidavits or sworn statements. As such, his claim "amounts to nothing more than speculation[.]" State v. Reed, 77 Hawai' i 72, 84, 881 P.2d 1218, 1230 (1994) 
(citing United States v. Ashimi, 932 F.2d 643, 650 (7th Cir. 
6
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
1991)).
 
Massey contends that his trial counsel should have
 
called an expert to support his contention that the fire was
 
started by CW's cigarette. Notably, however, Massey does not
 claim that an expert with such an opinion was available. Without
 more, the claim is speculative and is not enough to find
 ineffective assistance of counsel.
 
(b) Massey offers three examples of what he contends
 
were "numerous instances of hearsay evidence" to which his trial
 counsel did not object, and as a result of which he claims
 ineffective assistance of counsel.
7
 
It is not apparent that hearsay objections in the
 
proffered examples would have been successful as the statements
 were not being offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted,
 but to explain how Honolulu Fire Department Investigator Scott
 Seguirant conducted his investigation. In addition, the Circuit
 Court gave a limiting instruction that was sufficient to inform
 the jury that the statements of others, related by Investigator
 Seguirant, were not to be taken as true.
8
 
Finally, even if those portions of Investigator
 
Seguirant's testimony should have been excluded, and even if the
 Circuit Court's limiting instruction was deemed insufficient,
 
7
 Massey offers no legal authorities in support of his argument.
Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7) (an Appellant's opening brief shall include "[t]he
argument, containing the contentions of the appellant on the points presented
and the reasons therefor, with citations to the authorities, statutes and
 parts of the record relied on." (emphasis added)).
 
8
 Massey's counsel objected on the basis of hearsay to a question,
asking what Investigator Seguirant learned from another occupant of the
building during his investigation. In addition to the objection, counsel
requested that the court issue a limiting instruction. The Circuit Court
 allowed the question, but informed the jury as follows:
 
[O]ften when people say stuff outside of court, another
witness referring to it, that's hearsay and may be excluded
unless there's an exception. I am going to allow
[Investigator Seguirant] to relate what this person told him
not that it's necessarily true or not, it's not being
offered to that, it's to explain what he did subsequent to
that. If that witness is here, she can testify to it, but
him relating it is what allowed him to function afterwards ­– and what he did afterwards. That's what a limiting
instruction . . . what [Defense Counsel] is referring to.
Okay.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Massey failed to demonstrate that the introduction of these
 
particular statements resulted in the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. Since the
 instances that Massey offers involve the out of court statements
 of two other witnesses, each of whom testified at the trial and
 were subject there to cross-examination, and one of those
 witnesses testified after Investigator Seguirant and could
 therefore have conveniently been examined on the statement, we
 can not discern the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a
 potentially meritorious defense.
 
Under the circumstances, counsel's failure to object to
 
the identified hearsay included in Investigator Seguirant's
 testimony did not amount to ineffective assistance of counsel. 
(c) Trial counsel was not ineffective because she
 
failed to object to the relevance or cumulative nature of the
 State's expert fire witness testimony.
9 Massey does not explain
 
how or where in the record the testimony is cumulative, or how
 counsel's alleged failure to object to that testimony
10 amounted
 
to the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
 meritorious defense. As a result, we deem that point to have
 been waived. Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7).
 
Massey's contention that Investigator Seguirant's
 
testimony was largely irrelevant is based on the premise that the
 point of Investigator Seguirant's testimony was to prove that
 "gasoline or a derivative was involved in creating the fire." 
That premise is incorrect. Investigator Seguirant testified that
 
9
 Massey contends that:
 
The point the government sought to make through Seguirant's
testimony is that gasoline or a derivative was involved in
creating the fire. This was the entire point of Seguirant's
testimony. Instead of objecting to testimony by Seguirant
not relevant to this central issue, Defense Counsel allowed
the government through Seigurant to talk about irrelevant
stuff for almost two days. Over the two days, Seguirant
discussed at length photos he took of the exterior and
interior of the home. Except for photos showing the area
that caught fire, everything else presented by the
government via this witness was irrelevant or cumulative.
 
10
 In fact, Massey's counsel objected to "the cumulative nature of
the presentation" during Investigator Seguirant's testimony. The objection
was overruled. Counsel also unsuccessfully objected on the basis of
relevance.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the fire investigator's job was to determine the cause of the
 
fire. To accomplish that objective, Investigator Seguirant
 described how he interviewed witnesses and collected information
 on his way to forming an opinion. Massey points to no specific
 testimony which he believes to have been irrelevant, nor do we
 determine any.
 
In sum, Massey fails to demonstrate that his trial
 
counsel's failure to object to Agent Marcus or Investigator
 Seguirant's alleged irrelevant testimony reflected "counsel's
 lack of skill, judgment or diligence" or resulted in the
 "withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
 meritorious defense." State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 348-49, 615
 
P.2d 101, 104 (1980). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the January 13, 2010 Judgment
 
of Conviction and Sentence of the Circuit Court of the First
 circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 9, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Barry L. Sooalo,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 