NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30124
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MALESALA MIKA, also known as Marshall Mika, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-1288)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Malesala Mika also known as
 
Marshall Mika (Mika) appeals from the October 13, 2009 amended
 
judgment of conviction and sentence, entered by the Circuit Court
 
of the First Circuit (circuit court).1 A jury found Mika guilty
 
of two counts of Ownership or Possession Prohibited of any
 Firearm or Ammunition by a Person Convicted of Certain Crimes, in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 134-7(b) and (h)
 
(Supp. 2010); one count of Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver, in
 
violation of HRS § 134-25 (Supp. 2010); one count of Promoting a
 
Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in violation of HRS § 712­
1243 (Supp. 2010); one count of Unlawful Use of Drug
 
Paraphernalia, in violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (2010); and one
 
count of Driving Without a License, in violation of HRS § 286-102
 
(2007).
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Mika alleges the circuit court erred (1) by
 
denying his motion to suppress evidence seized from his car after
 
a traffic stop; (2) by allowing the prosecutor's closing
 
arguments which said that Mika had not presented witnesses to
 
corroborate his testimony; and (3) by denying Mika's motion for
 
acquittal where there was insufficient evidence that Mika
 
knowingly possessed the drugs, paraphernalia, and pistol found in
 
the car he was driving.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Mika's
 
points of error as follows: 
(1) The drugs and paraphernalia were validly seized
 
under the plain view doctrine, and the search warrant under which
 
police found the pistol and ammunition was valid. Accordingly,
 
the circuit court did not err in denying Mika's motion to
 
suppress.
 
The plain view doctrine requires the government to show 
three elements to withstand a motion to suppress evidence seized: 
"(1) prior justification for the intrusion; (2) inadvertent 
discovery; and (3) probable cause to believe the item is evidence 
of a crime or contraband." State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai' i 87, 103, 
997 P.2d 13, 29 (2000) (brackets omitted). 
The police were justified in intruding into Mika's
 
vehicle. The police had reasonable suspicion to stop Mika for
 traffic violations because he was operating the car with expired
 
tax and safety stickers. See id. at 101, 997 P.2d at 27; see
 
also State v. Powell, 61 Haw. 316, 320, 603 P.2d 143, 147 (1979)
 ("authority to stop vehicles in cases of [o]bserved traffic or
 
equipment violations cannot be seriously questioned"). The
 
arresting officer determined that Mika had an outstanding
 
warrant, which permitted officers to remove him from the car, at
 
which point a small baggie of methamphetamine lying on the
 
driver's seat was no longer concealed. The arresting officer
 
"had a right to be at his vantage point" on a public street from
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
which he saw the baggie and a glass bulbous pipe on the driver's 
side floorboard. Powell, 61 Haw. at 325, 603 P.2d at 150. 
Another officer was justified in intruding into the car, for purposes of turning on the ignition and raising the windows to 
secure the vehicle. See State v. Meyer, 78 Hawai' i 308, 315, 893 
P.2d 159, 166 (1995). It was from this vantage point that the officer saw a larger baggie of methamphetamine. Indeed, Mika 
does not argue that the prosecution failed to establish the first 
element of the plain view doctrine.
 Mika argues that the drugs and paraphernalia could not 
have been "inadvertently discovered" because he contends they 
were not present or at least not where the police said they were. 
Mika bases this conclusion on his own testimony that the items 
were not visible to him and that he would have seen the items if 
they had been where the officers claimed to have seen them. The 
circuit court found Mika to be not credible. On the other hand, 
the circuit court found the officers' testimony to be credible. 
It is well established that "an appellate court will not pass 
upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses[.]" 
State v. Birano, 109 Hawai' i 327, 341, 126 P.3d 370, 384 (App. 
2005) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Whereas the circuit court's conclusion that the baggies and drug 
paraphernalia were in "plain view" hinged upon the testimony of 
the police officers, it was not erroneous. 
Mika's argument that the pistol and ammunition were
 
"fruits of the poisonous tree" is based on the premise that the
 
baggies and paraphernalia were illegally seized and accordingly
 
could not provide the probable cause to support the search
 
warrant. As the drugs and paraphernalia were validly seized,
 
this premise fails. The court did not err in admitting the
 
pistol and ammunition into evidence. Likewise, Mika's argument
 
that his convictions based on the drugs, paraphernalia, firearms,
 
and ammunition so seized must be overturned, also fails.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) The prosecution's closing statement, suggesting
 
that Mika should have called witnesses to testify, did not
 
improperly shift the burden of proof to Mika.
 
Prosecutors are afforded "wide latitude" in commenting 
on evidence in closing arguments, but they must not infringe upon 
a defendant's constitutional rights. State v. Mainaaupo, 117 
Hawai'i 235, 256-57, 178 P.3d 1, 22-23 (2008). The prosecution 
may, within limits, in closing arguments comment on the 
defendant's failure to call witnesses, for example, "when it 
would be natural under the circumstances for the defendant to 
call the witness, and when the comments do not suggest to the 
jury that it was the defendant's burden to produce proof by 
explaining the absence of witnesses or evidence." Id. at 257, 
178 P.3d at 23 (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citations omitted). See also State v. Napulou, 85 Hawai' i 49, 59, 936 P.2d 
1297, 1307 (App. 1997) ("Whether or not the defendant testifies, the prosecutor may make comments on the state of the evidence or 
the failure of the defense to introduce material evidence or to 
call logical witnesses."). 
Mika tries to distinguish this case from Mainaaupo by
 
stating that the prosecutor "more directly suggested that the
 
jury would logically have to find Mika guilty due to his failure
 
to call corroborating witnesses." We find no such distinction. 
Mika testified that he had just picked up the car after leaving
 
it for a month with a mechanic friend who allowed others to drive
 
the car. Mika's testimony inferred that someone else left the
 
contraband in the car without Mika's knowledge. It would have
 
been logical for Mika to have produced the friend to whom he had
 
entrusted the car in order to corroborate his testimony that he
 
had just picked up the car and that others had driven it. The
 
prosecutor's statements did not improperly shift the burden of
 
proof to Mika and accordingly did not constitute misconduct. 
(3) There was sufficient evidence to support the
 
charges relating to the possession of the drugs, paraphernalia,
 
firearms, and ammunition.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Mika does not claim that the jurors were improperly
 
instructed on actual and constructive possession. The jury was
 
instructed,
 
A person who, although not in actual possession, knowingly
has both the power and intention at a given time to exercise
dominion or control over a thing for a sufficient period to
terminate his possession of it either directly or through
another person or persons is then in constructive possession
of it. The fact that a person is near an object or is
present or associated with a person who controls an object
without more is not sufficient to support a finding of
possession.
 
The instructions are consistent with the definition of
 
constructive possession found in State v. Moniz, which also
 
stated, more succinctly, that "[m]ere proximity is not enough" to
 
prove possession. 92 Hawai' i 472, 476, 992 P.2d 741, 745. We 
presume that the jurors properly followed these instructions in
 evaluating the evidence presented to them. State v. Mars, 116
 
Hawai'i 125, 135, 170 P.3d 861, 871 (App. 2007). 
Factors to consider when evaluating whether a defendant
 
had constructive possession of contraband include:
 
1) the defendant's ownership of . . . or right to possession
of the place where the controlled substance was found; 2)
the defendant's sole access to the [place where the
controlled substance was found]; 3) defendant under the
influence of narcotics when arrested; 4) defendant's
presence when the search warrant executed; 5) the
defendant's sole occupancy of the [place where the
controlled substance was found] at the time the contraband
is discovered; 6) the location of the contraband . . . ; 7)
contraband in plain view; 8) defendant's proximity to and
the accessibility of the narcotic; 9) defendant's possession
of other contraband when arrested; 10) defendant's
incriminating statements when arrested; 11) defendant's
attempted flight; 12) defendant's furtive gestures; 13)
presence of odor of the contraband; 14) presence of other
contraband or drug paraphernalia, not included in the
charge; 15) place drugs found was enclosed.
 
Moniz, at 476, 992 P.2d at 745 (quoting Wallace v. State, 932
 
S.W.2d 519, 524 n.1 (Tex. Ct. App. 1995)). Factors 1, 5, 6, 7,
 
8, 9, and 10 weigh heavily against Mika. Mika does not deny that
 
he owned the vehicle in which the contraband was found. He was
 
the only person in the vehicle during the traffic stop, and the
 
drugs and pipe were found in plain view, on or next to the seat
 
where Mika had been sitting. Furthermore, Mika claimed ownership
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of a lighter, which, although not contraband, could be used with
 
the glass pipe to ingest methamphetamine. Moreover, Mika's
 
yelling at police not to search the car following his arrest is
 
circumstantial evidence from which the jury could have reasonably
 
inferred Mika knew there was more contraband in the car.
 
Upon viewing the evidence presented in the light most 
favorable to the State, State v. Delos Santos, 124 Hawai' i 130, 
136, 238 P.3d 162, 168 (2010), there is sufficient evidence from which the jury could have reasonably concluded that Mika 
knowingly possessed the methamphetamine, paraphernalia, pistol, 
and ammunition. 
Therefore, the October 13, 2009 amended judgment of
 
conviction and sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 4, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Richard H.S. Sing
(Hawk Sing Ignacio & Waters),
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Chief Judge
 
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
Associate Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
6
 