 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30320
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
MARK LYNN SPENCER, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
ANECITA SABOLONES SPENCER, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DIVORCE NO. 04-1-3689)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Mark Lynn Spencer (Father) appeals
 
from the Family Court of the First Circuit's (Family Court)
 
December 30, 2009 Order Granting [Defendant-Appellee Anecita
 
Sabolones Spencer's (Mother's)] Motion for Post-Decree Relief,
 
which was filed on June 3, 2009 (and amended on August 24, 2009)
 
1
(Post-Decree Motion).  On appeal, Father contends that: (1) the
 
Family Court erred in ruling that the dependent tax exemption
 
provision in the parties' Divorce Decree should be amended to
 
allow the parties to share the exemption on an alternating basis;
 
and (2) the Family Court erred in entering judgment in the amount
 
of $
23,820.32 against Father, in favor of Mother.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
1
 The Honorable Linda K.C. Luke presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Father's points of error as follows:
 
(1) The record reflects that, prior to the entry of
 
the Divorce Decree, the parties reached an agreement as to all
 
terms of their divorce, which agreement was reflected in the
 
Divorce Decree (drafted by Mother's attorney), and which was
 
personally "approved as to form and content" by Mother. The
 
agreed-upon terms include:
 
3.8 TAX EXEMPTION For so long as [Father] is
current and up to date on his child support, as reflected
herein this decree, [Father] will be allowed to claim the
subject child as his tax exemption. [Mother] agrees to sign
the IRS tax exemption form (Release of Claim to Exemption
for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents) for each year
[Father] is current on his child support obligations. 
(Format altered.)
 
In the Post-Decree Motion, Mother requested, without
 
citation to any factual or legal grounds, that this provision be
 
amended. At the hearing on the Post-Decree Motion, the only
 
argument made by Mother on this point was: "Miss Spencer is the
 
. . . full custodian of the child and, therefore, she is entitled
 
to that dependency exemption." However, Mother was awarded full
 
custody of the child at the time of the parties' divorce and
 
nevertheless agreed, as part of the settled terms of the divorce,
 
to allow Father the tax exemption. A party seeking modification
 
of the terms of a divorce decree has the burden to bring forward
 
factual and/or legal grounds for an amendment. See, e.g.,
 
Dowsett v. Cashman, 2 Haw. App. 77, 625 P.2d 1064 (1981). Mother
 presented no cogent reason for the requested relief, either in
 
the court below or on this appeal. Accordingly, we need not
 
address the parties' disagreement concerning whether, in this
 
case, the dependent tax exemption should be treated as a property
 
distribution matter or a child support matter.
2 We conclude
 
2
 We note that the dependent tax exemption for a child usually is
awarded to the custodial parent, unless it is waived, as it was in this case.
See, e.g., 2005 Hawai' i Divorce Manual ยง 4, 19 (7th ed 2005). We further note 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the Family Court erred in ruling that the dependent tax
 
exemption provision in the parties' Divorce Decree should be
 
amended to allow the parties to share the exemption on an
 
alternating basis.
 
(2) Father argues that because the former marital
 
residence was sold by short sale, which he argues is the same as
 
a foreclosure "from a practical standpoint," the proceeds from
 
the sale are to be apportioned 40% to Father and 60% to Mother
 
pursuant to Paragraph 4.1D of the Divorce Decree.3 We disagree. 
Any provision contingent upon foreclosure is inapplicable because
 no foreclosure occurred. We cannot conclude that the Family
 
Court erred in interpreting the Divorce Decree to require Father
 
to pay to Mother the balance due under the terms of the Divorce
 
Decree, including:
 
8.2 SETTLEMENT The parties agree that Plaintiff shall pay
to Defendant the sum of $90,000.00 which shall be paid in
two (2) payments. The first payment of $65,000.00 to
[Mother] and $5,000.00 payable to [Mother's attorney] shall
be paid within 90 days upon the signing and filing of this
decree. The second payment of $20,000.00 shall be made no
later than three (3) years from the date of the signing and
filing of this decree.
 
(Format altered.)
 
Additional language in the Divorce Decree appears to
 
address, inter alia, security for the second payment, the sale of
 
the subject property upon any default in payment, and the
 
application of the proceeds of such sale. However, no provision
 
that, prior to the 1998 amendments to the Child Support Guidelines, the
dependency tax exemption was factored into the calculation of child support,but with the 1998 amendments, the dependency tax exemption was removed fromthe child support calculations. Compare 1996 Hawai' i Divorce Manual, ยง 3 (rev.
5th ed. Supp. 1998) with 1991 Hawai' i Divorce Manual, ยง 4 (rev. 4th ed. Supp.
1994). Finally, we note that the unpublished summary disposition order citedby Mother is not "controlling case law," as argued by Mother, and was cited inviolation of Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 35. 
3
 Paragraph 4.1D states: "In the event of foreclosure of the
residence, after payment of the court ordered expenses, i.e. broker's
commission and fees, taxes, assessments and other related expenses associated
with the sale of the marital home, the existing mortgage(s), the balance of
any funds shall be apportioned 40% to [Father] and 60% to [Mother]."
 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the Divorce Decree can be reasonably construed to relieve
 
Father of his obligation to pay the amounts due pursuant to
 
Section 8.2. We conclude that the Family Court did not err in
 
entering judgment in the amount of $23,820.32 against Father, and
 
in favor of Mother, for failure to satisfy the remaining amounts
 
due under the Divorce Decree.
 
For these reasons, paragraph #2 of the Family Court's
 
December 30, 2009 Order Granting Motion for Post-Decree Relief
 
(concerning tax exemptions) is reversed. In all other respects,
 
the Family Court's December 30, 2009 Order Granting Motion for
 
Post-Decree Relief is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 30, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Scott T. Strack 
(The Strack Law Office, LLLC.)for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
Alex M. Sonson (Law Offices of Alex M. Sonson)for Defendant-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4 