FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
–––O0O–––
 
LAHAINA FASHIONS, INC., a Hawai' i corporation,
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v. 
BANK OF HAWAII, a Hawai' i corporation;
HAWAIIAN TRUST COMPANY, LTD., as Trustee for
Hawai'i Real Estate Equity Fund; HAWAI' I REAL 
ESTATE EQUITY FUND; PACIFIC CENTURY TRUST,
a division of Bank of Hawai' i as Trustee of 
the Hawai' i Real Estate Equity Fund,
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10, AND DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants 
NO. 30644
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0506(3))
 
FEBRUARY 21, 2013
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY REIFURTH, J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Lahaina Fashions,
 
Inc. ("Lahaina") appeals from the July 8, 2010 Final Judgment,
 
entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit ("Circuit
 
1
Court")  in favor of Defendants-Appellees/ Cross-Appellants Bank
of Hawai
'i ("Bank"); Hawaiian Trust Company, Ltd. ("Hawaiian 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Trust"); Hawai' i Real Estate Equity Fund ("REEF"); and Pacific 
Century Trust (collectively, "Defendants") following a jury 
trial. 
On appeal, Lahaina claims that the Circuit Court erred
 
in (1) denying its motion to correct the verdict and enter a
 judgment ("Motion to Correct Verdict and Enter Judgment") and its
 motion to deny the Defendants' proposed findings of fact and
 conclusions of law and to resubmit to the jury ("Motion to
 Resubmit"); (2) granting the Defendants' motion for judgment as a
 matter of law ("JMOL") as to Lahaina's breach-of-fiduciary-duty
 claim; (3) excluding from evidence Plaintiff's Exhibit 81
 ("Exhibit 81"), which consists of (i) an email from the Bank's
 attorney James K. Tam ("Attorney Tam") to an officer at the Bank,
 and (ii) a letter from Lahaina's attorney, David H. Nakamura
 ("Attorney Nakamura"), to Attorney Tam; and (4) refusing to
 disclose all of Defendants' attorney-client communications
 concerning the property in question from 1994 through 2002.
 
Defendants filed a cross-appeal, asserting that the
 
Circuit Court erred in denying three pre-judgment motions in
 which Defendants argued that Lahaina's tortious-interference
 claim was barred by the statute of limitations. 
We affirm.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. History of the Property and the parties
 Prior to 1994, Lahaina held fee simple title to a
 
parcel of commercial property at 744 Front Street in Lahaina,
 
Maui (the "Property"). Lahaina, however, had incurred debt of
 nearly $3.4 million and, by early 1994, had defaulted on a $2.5
 million mortgage held by International Savings & Loan
 ("International Savings"). International Savings was seeking to
 foreclose on the Property; consequently, Lahaina sought to sell
 the Property in order to repay its debts. 
Defendants, through Hawaiian Trust, purchased the
 
Property and leased the Property back to Lahaina for 50 years. 
The lease agreement between Hawaiian Trust and Lahaina ("Lease")
 gave Lahaina an option to purchase the Property from Hawaiian
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Trust for $6 million within the first ten years of the Lease
 
should Lahaina wish to sell a fee simple interest to a third-
party purchaser (the "Option"). Pursuant to the terms of the
 Option, Hawaiian Trust was entitled to 50% of any proceeds in
 excess of $9 million upon Lahaina's sale of the Property to a
 third party. 
In the fall of 1999, Lahaina's largest anchor tenant,
 
Planet Hollywood, surrendered its sublease on the Property. 
Consequently, Lahaina was unable to make its rental payments to
 Hawaiian Trust and defaulted under the Lease. On May 1, 2000,
 the then-owner of the Property, Pacific Century Trust, filed a
 lawsuit against Lahaina, seeking a judgment for possession, a
 writ of possession, and damages ("May 2000 Lawsuit"). On
 June 19, 2001, the trial court orally granted Pacific Century
 Trust's motion for judgment of possession and a writ of
 possession. 
On July 13, 2001, before the trial court entered its 
judgment in favor of Pacific Century Trust, Lahaina filed a voluntary Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition with the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Hawai' i ("Bankruptcy 
Court"). Lahaina asked the Bankruptcy Court to approve its sale of its leasehold interest in the Property to LoKo Maui, LLC in exchange for the payment of Lahaina's arrearage plus an additional $275,000.00 for Lahaina. The Bankruptcy Court approved the sale of Lahaina's leasehold interest in the Property. The May 2000 Lawsuit was subsequently dismissed with prejudice by stipulation. 
B. The Complaint
 
Lahaina initiated the lawsuit which is the basis of
 
2
this appeal on June 25, 2007,  asserting claims against
Defendants for fraud, conspiracy to defraud, breach of fiduciary
 duty, and tortious interference with prospective business
 advantage. 
Lahaina claimed that the Defendants never intended to
 
2
 Although the Complaint was filed on November 29, 2007, the parties
entered into a tolling agreement whereby the statute of limitations was deemed
tolled from June 25, 2007. 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
honor, and intentionally interfered with Lahaina's subsequent
 
attempts to exercise, the Option. Lahaina alleged that the
 Defendants' actions caused Lahaina to sell its rights under the
 Lease for a substantial loss. 
C. Trial
 
1. Testimony of George Weir
 
George Weir ("Weir"), who Lahaina describes as "the
 
Bank's senior executive officer at the time it entered the
 
agreement with Lahaina", testified at trial on April 27, 2009, on
 the issue of whether Defendants owed Lahaina any contractual or
 fiduciary duties. The testimony relevant to the issues on appeal
 concerned Weir's understanding of the legal effect of the Option:
 
Q. [by Joseph M. Alioto ("Attorney Alioto")] All
 
right. So if the option is exercised, you'd have to give
clear title, wouldn't you?
 
A. [by Weir] Of course.
 
Q. Of course. So you have to make sure that its —
the land — if the option is — if the option is exercised,
you have to make sure that the land is clear?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. You have to hold it in effect for Lahaina's
 
benefit, if they exercise the option?
 
A. At the time -- if they were to exercise their
option and we were to accept it, at close of escrow, we'd
have to deliver clean title.
 
Q. So you have an obligation to Lahaina to make sure
that at –– that if the option is in fact exercised, you're
going to give him clear title?
 
A. At close of escrow, yes, sir.
 
Q. So in effect then, Lahaina would be a beneficiary
and you would have the obligation to make sure nothing
happens to the land if the option is closed?
 
A. At the time of the close of escrow we'd have to
 
deliver it clear, as I say.
 
Q. So you have a duty to Lahaina to make sure that
nothing happens in the meantime?
 
A. Certainly nothing that can't be fixed.
 
Q. So you have an obligation to make sure that either
nothing happens or if something does, you've got to fix it?
 
A. True.
 
Q. 	
And that's an obligation to whom?
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. Would be to the lessee, to the tenant.
 
Q. To?
 
A. Lahaina.
 
Q. Lahaina. Okay. Now, would you say that that puts
you in a fiduciary relationship with them?
 
A. It's a stretch. I'll take that.
 
Q. You'll accept that?
 
A. A definition of a fiduciary is one who has a
confidential relationship with another, which could extend
to husband and wife. So sure.
 
Lahaina cites additional testimony from Weir of similar import
 
and character. 
2. Waiver of attorney-client privilege
 
On direct examination on May 5, 2009, Cassandra Joy
 
Leolani Abdul ("Abdul"), who Lahaina calls a "senior officer of
 the Bank," responding to Defendants' counsel's question about who
 it was that made the decision about "what type of information to
 include in . . . declarations [filed] in support of the motions
 in the [May 2000 Lawsuit]," testified that the Bank's attorney
 made the decision. When asked whether she advised the Bank's
 attorney "to not tell the judge that people had expressed an
 interest in the property," Abdul testified that she did not. 
The next day, Lahaina filed its motion in limine to find
 privilege waived and to compel discovery, arguing that the Bank
 waived its attorney-client privilege. 
On May 11, 2009, the Circuit Court ruled, orally, that
 
the Bank had waived the attorney-client privilege as to documents
 
relating to who made the decisions about what type of
information to include in declarations in support of motions
in the previous litigation with [Lahaina], to include who
made the decision to disclose information concerning those
individuals who had expressed an interest in the property,
but not limited to that category.
 
Lahaina subsequently filed its motion in limine to determine the
 
scope of waiver, arguing that the Circuit Court should find that
 Defendants were not entitled to rely on the attorney-client
 privilege for any communications between Defendants and their
 attorneys "from 1994 through 2002 with reference to any matter
 related to [the Property]" because the communications were either
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
made in furtherance of fraud or had been waived by significant
 
voluntary disclosures. 
The Circuit Court examined the documents in camera,
 
and, at a hearing on May 26, 2009, according to Lahaina, "refused
 to disclose all of the documents and selected only a few of the
 requested documents" for disclosure. On May 28, 2009, the court
 entered its Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion in Limine to Find
 Privilege Waived and to Compel Discovery, directing that
 Defendants produce 
all previously withheld documents relating to who made the
decisions on behalf of Defendants about what type of
information to include in declarations filed with the Court
 . . . , including, but not limited to, disclosure of
information concerning individuals who had expressed an
interest in purchasing [the Property]. 
3. Exhibit 81
 
Exhibit 81 consists of two documents. One document is
 
a letter from Lahaina's attorney to the Bank's attorney, dated
 
July 10, 2000, proposing settlement ("Letter"). The Letter
 states that Lahaina "makes this proposal so that it may finalize
 several pending offers to purchase both its 614 Front Street
 parcel and the 744 Front Street property." The other document is
 an email from the Bank's attorney to Abdul dated July 17, 2000
 ("Email"), which states: "i [sic] agree with you that the offer
 is unacceptable; it is in the REEF's best interest to get back
 the property and market it as fee owner; we are proceeding with
 partial summary judgment. jim[.]" The statement, "We are
 verifying that this email is referring to the offer attached
 hereto," is handwritten on the document. 
The Circuit Court ultimately excluded Exhibit 81 from 
evidence pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Evidence ("HRE") Rule 401,
3 
3
 HRE Rule 401 states:
 
"Relevant evidence" means evidence having any tendency
to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to
the determination of the action more probable or less
probable than it would be without the evidence.
 
Haw. R. Evid. 401 (1993).
 
6
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
4 5 6
402, 403, and 408.
4. Defendants' motion for JMOL
 
After Lahaina concluded its case in chief, Defendants
 
moved for JMOL, arguing, among other things, that (1) the
 
tortious-interference and breach-of-fiduciary-duty claims were
 barred by the two-year statute of limitations in HRS § 657-7, and
 (2) the breach-of-fiduciary-duty claim must fail because Lahaina
 failed to show that Defendants owed it a fiduciary duty. 
The
 
Circuit Court denied the motion as to (1) and granted the motion
 as to (2). 
4
 HRE Rule 402 states:
 
All relevant evidence is admissible, except as
otherwise provided by the Constitutions of the United States
and the State of Hawaii, by statute, by these rules, or by
other rules adopted by the supreme court. Evidence which is
 not relevant is not admissible.
 
Haw. R. Evid. 402 (1993).
 
5
 HRE Rule 403 states:
 
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the
jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or
needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
 
Haw. R. Evid. 403 (1993).
 
6
 HRE Rule 408 states:
 
Evidence of (1) furnishing or offering or promising to
furnish, or (2) accepting or offering or promising to
accept, a valuable consideration in compromising or
attempting to compromise a claim which was disputed as to
either validity or amount, or (3) mediation or attempts to
mediate a claim which was disputed, is not admissible to
prove liability for or invalidity of the claim or its
amount. Evidence of conduct or statements made in
 compromise negotiations or mediation proceedings is likewise
not admissible. This rule does not require the exclusion of
any evidence otherwise discoverable merely because it is
presented in the course of compromise negotiations or
mediation proceedings. This rule also does not require
exclusion when the evidence is offered for another purpose,
such as proving bias or prejudice of a witness, negativing a
contention of undue delay, or proving an effort to obstruct
a criminal investigation or prosecution.
 
Haw. R. Evid. 408 (1993).
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D. The verdict
 
The jury was asked to render a special verdict on the
 
fraud-in-the-inducement, conspiracy-to-defraud, and tortious­
interference claims. Instructions on the Verdict Form stated: 
"At least ten jurors must agree on each answer." On the fraud­in-the-inducement claim, the jury found that Lahaina had failed
 to prove that "at the time it entered into the Lease in 1994,
 Defendants did not intend to honor the option provision in the
 Lease[.]" On the conspiracy-to-defraud claim, the jury found
 that Lahaina failed to meet its burden of showing by clear and
 convincing evidence that Defendants conspired to commit fraud
 upon Lahaina. 
As for the tortious-interference claim, the Verdict
 
Form posed seven yes/no questions to the jury. The first four
 questions asked whether Lahaina had met its burden of proof on
 each of the first four elements of a tortious-interference
 
7
claim; the jury answered "Yes" to each.  In answer to Questions
 
5 and 6, the jury found that Lahaina was entitled to $680,000.00
 in general damages and $770,821.00 in punitive damages. 
Question 7, however, read:
 
Plaintiff initiated this lawsuit on June 25, 2007.
Did Defendants meet their burden of proof by a preponderance
of the evidence that Plaintiff was either aware of its
 interference claim or had enough information to warrant an
investigation which, if reasonably diligent, would have led
to discovery of the interference two or more years prior to
June 25, 2007?
 
The jury answered "Yes" to Question 7. 
This verdict was read in open court on June 10, 2009. 
7
 The elements of a tortious-interference claim are:
 
(1) the existence of a valid business relationship or
prospective advantage or expectancy sufficiently definite,
specific, and capable of acceptance in the sense that there
is a reasonable probability of it maturing into a future
economic benefit to the plaintiff; (2) knowledge of the
relationship, advantage, or expectancy by the defendant; (3)
a purposeful intent to interfere with the relationship,
advantage, or expectancy; (4) legal causation between the
act of interference and the impairment of the relationship,
advantage, or expectancy; and (5) actual damages.
 
Buscher v. Boning, 114 Hawai' i 202, 216 n.7, 159 P.3d 814, 828 n.7 (2007)
(quoting Kahala Royal Corp. v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 113 Hawai' i 
251, 267 n.18, 151 P.3d 732, 748 n.18 (2007). 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
At counsel's request, the jury was polled. Eleven of the twelve
 
jurors stated that they agreed with all of the answers read in
 open court. The verdict was then entered into the record. 
Following the entry of the verdict, the Circuit Court
 
addressed the jurors, stating:
 
After you have been discharged from your jury service
in this case, you are free to discuss this case with anyone.
You may discuss your opinion about how the case was
presented, the performance of the attorneys, the credibility
of the witnesses, the usefulness of the exhibits, the jury
instructions and procedural matters. However, you should be
careful not to discuss your thoughts or any other juror's
thought processes, in other words, why or how the jurors
reached or did not reach their verdict or verdicts.
 
To do so would violate the confidentiality of the jury
deliberation process. If you wish to report any improper
conduct by any juror or jurors during the deliberations that
may have been prejudicial to either party or that may have
compromised the fairness of your jury deliberations and/or
verdicts, then please do so by notifying the Bailiff before
you leave the courthouse.
 
If at some point after you've already left the
courthouse you want to contact the Court about the above
concerns, please send a letter to the Court. The Court upon
review of these matters may summon some or all of the jurors
back to court to hold a hearing to determine whether there
was any misconduct that may have been prejudicial to the
parties. Again, this is a standard instruction read at the
conclusion of all jury trials in the courtroom.
 
. . . .
 
On behalf of the Judiciary, on behalf of the staff of
my Court, and I'm sure I speak on behalf of the parties as
well, thank you to each and every one of you for your
dedicated service as jurors in this case. And at this time,
you are discharged from further jury service in this matter.
And the Bailiff will escort you out of the courtroom. Thank
 you so much.
 
The jury then left the courtroom.
 
E. Post-verdict proceedings
 
Later that day, the Circuit Court went back on the
 
record. The court, with the jury not present, stated:
 
I make it a practice to go into the jury room after trial is
over to meet with jurors to thank them for their jury
service and see if they have any questions or suggestions
for the Court.
 
And so, I did so in this case as well. And while I
 
was doing that, statements were made that could potentially
raise an issue relative to the verdict of the jury. I
 disclosed this to the parties and asked the parties if they
desired any additional disclosure from the Court. The
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Plaintiff has requested further disclosure. The defense has
 
requested or stated that the trial was over and the verdict
has been made a part of the record and that the proceedings
were concluded, and therefore, objects to any additional
disclosure. I've indicated to the parties what I'm inclined
to do is to go on record as I am doing at this point, that I
would welcome briefing from the parties on this particular
issue relative to what the Court should disclose, if
anything. I just didn't want to hold this information from
the parties.
 
But at the same time, I don't want to go beyond that
and do anything that I shouldn't be doing. So I'm making
this disclosure to the parties and encourage a briefing from
the parties so that I can consider their briefing as well as
my own research on the issue and also attempt to preserve
the status quo to the extent that that can be done to
instruct the –– bring the jury back, they're still here, and
to simply instruct them that they're not to discuss the case
with anyone or allow anyone to discuss the case with them.
 
The jury was then called back into the court room. 
The Circuit Court told them: 
Ladies and gentlemen, earlier I gave you an instruction, and
I'm going to need to rescind that, so that's the reason we
had you return to the courtroom; otherwise, there's nothing
that you need to be concerned with. And that is I read you
an instruction that began, "After you have been discharged
from your jury service in this case, you are free to discuss
this case with anyone."
 
And I went through the balance of the instruction.
I'm going to rescind that and instruct you that, at this
point, you are not free to discuss this case with anyone.
 
The Circuit Court then stated: "We'll release you at this time
 
subject to potential recall." The jury was then excused. 
On August 7, 2009, with the parties present, the
 
Circuit Court conducted a colloquy of Jurors 1 through 12
 ("Colloquy"). The Circuit Court read the verdict to each juror
 and then asked if the verdict conformed with the juror's
 decision. If the juror answered "No," the Court would generally
 inquire further. 
At the Colloquy, Jurors 3, 6, 11, and 12 stated that
 
the Verdict Form accurately reflected their verdict. 
Juror 5 was
 
the juror who originally stated that the Verdict Form did not
 reflect her decision on June 10, 2009.
8 Juror 4 stated that she
 
could not remember one way or the other. 
Jurors 2, 7, 8, 9, and 10 stated that the answer to
 
Question 7 was accurately recorded as "Yes," but that the jury
 
8
 Juror 5 explained that she had voted "No" on Question 7.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
thought that by answering "Yes," Lahaina's tortious-interference
 
claim would not be barred by the statute of limitations. For
 instance, Juror 7 stated that the jurors had "misinterpreted"
 Question 7 and that, although the jury answered "Yes" to Question
 7, "we felt that the statute of limitations was still valid when
 the plaintiff had found out." Juror 8 likewise stated that the
 jury "misunderstood" the question but had answered "Yes." Juror
 10 stated that they did not recognize that they had "chosen the
 wrong answer" until the judge came into the jury room "and
 explained all those things." Juror 2 offered a similar, but more
 detailed, explanation:
 
THE COURT: In relation to time, when did you realize
the answer to the last question was inaccurate, in other
words, before or after you left the courthouse on June 10th,
2009?
 
[JUROR 2]: When we had our discussion with you and
you commented on the decision, that he wasn't within the
statute of limitations, and that was not what we understood
we had answered.
 
So somehow there was a misunderstanding with the way
that question was phrased. We felt — otherwise, we wouldn't
have put the figures in there, and we wouldn't have said yes
to interfere — I guess you could still say yes to
interference and still say it's not within the statute of
limitations. But we felt there was interference and that it
 was within the statute of limitations but there was not
 conspiracy.
 
Juror 1 simply stated that the jury's answer to
 
Question 7 was "no instead of yes." Juror 1 was not asked to
 
explain what he meant by this. 
On August 17, 2009, Lahaina filed its Motion to Correct
 
Verdict and Enter Judgment, seeking an order to "1) correct the
 verdict by striking the answer 'Yes' to Verdict Form Question 7
 for 'Interference with Prospective Business Expectancy,' filed
 June 10, 2009, and 2) to enter judgment in favor of Plaintiff." 
On September 4, 2009, the Circuit Court orally denied the motion. 
On July 8, 2010, the Circuit Court issued its findings of fact,
 conclusions of law, and order denying Lahaina's Motion to Correct
 Verdict and Enter Judgment.
 
On April 1, 2010, Lahaina filed its Motion to Resubmit
 
seeking re-submission of Question 7 to the jury, and arguing that
 the jury had not yet been discharged. The Circuit Court denied
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the motion. 
This appeal followed.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure ("HRCP") Rule 60 
The granting or denying of an HRCP Rule 60 motion is 
reviewed under the abuse-of-discretion standard. See Kienker v. 
Bauer, 110 Hawai' i 97, 113, 129 P.3d 1125, 1141 (2006), 
superceded by statute on other grounds as stated in 
Kaho'ohanohano v. Dept of Human Servs., State of Haw., 117 Hawai' i 
262, 178 P.3d 538 (2008). 
Findings of fact
 
A trial court's finding of fact is reviewed under the 
clearly erroneous standard. Inoue v. Inoue, 118 Hawai' i 86, 92, 
185 P.3d 834, 840 (App. 2008). A finding of fact "is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction in reviewing the entire evidence that a mistake has been committed." Id. (citing Chun v. Bd. of Tr. of the Emps.' Ret. Sys. of the State of Haw., 106 Hawai' i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005)). 
A finding "is also clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding." Id. (quoting 
Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 91 Hawai' i 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 
1225 (1999)). 
Conclusions of law
 
An appellate court reviews a trial court's conclusion 
of law under the right/wrong standard. Chun, 106 Hawai' i at 430, 
106 P.3d at 353. 
Motions for JMOL
 
"It is well settled that a trial court's rulings on 
motions for judgment as a matter of law are reviewed de novo." Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai' i 1, 6, 84 P.3d 509, 514 (2004) 
(footnote omitted) (citing In re Estate of Herbert, 90 Hawai' i 
443, 454, 979 P.2d 39, 50 (1999)). 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Evidentiary rulings
 
[D]ifferent standards of review must be applied to trial
court decisions regarding the admissibility of evidence,
depending on the requirements of the particular rule of
evidence at issue. When application of a particular
evidentiary rule can yield only one correct result, the
proper standard for appellate review is the right/wrong
standard. However, the traditional abuse of discretion
standard should be applied in the case of those rules of
evidence that require a "judgment call" on the part of the
trial court.
 
Walsh v. Chan, 80 Hawai' i 212, 215, 908 P.2d 1198, 1201 (1995) 
(quoting Craft v. Peebles, 78 Hawai' i 287, 293-94, 893 P.2d 138, 
144-45 (1995)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The Circuit Court correctly denied Lahaina's Motion to
Correct Verdict and Enter Judgment and its Motion to
Resubmit.
 
Lahaina argues that the Circuit Court erred in denying
 
the Motion to Resubmit, under which the jury would be given the
 
opportunity to enter a new verdict, and the Motion to Correct
 Verdict and Enter Judgment, under which the trial court would
 amend the verdict, because (1) the jury had not been discharged
 and (2) "[i]t was obvious that a majority of jurors found that
 the Bank was liable for [tortious interference], but mistakenly
 marked the verdict form." We disagree and hold that Lahaina
 failed to show that the jury was capable of amending its verdict
 and the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying the
 Motion to Correct Verdict and Enter Judgment because the Colloquy
 did not establish that the jury merely made a clerical mistake
 when entering its verdict onto the Verdict Form.
 
1.	 The jury had been discharged and lacked the
authority to amend its verdict.
 
The August 17, 2009 Motion to Correct Verdict and Enter
 
Judgment was based on the former jurors' statements at the
 
Colloquy. The Circuit Court denied the motion. On April 1,
 2010, nearly ten months after the jury entered its verdict,
 Lahaina filed the Motion to Resubmit, arguing that the jury had
 not yet been discharged pursuant to State v. Manipon, 70 Haw.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
175, 765 P.2d 1091 (1989), and, thus, could still render a
 
verdict on Question 7. The Circuit Court, however, concluded
 that the jury had in fact been discharged and could no longer
 amend its verdict.
9 Lahaina argues that this conclusion was
 
erroneous. 
After a jury is discharged, it cannot amend, correct,
 
or clarify its verdict. See Dias v. Vanek, 67 Haw. 114, 118, 679
 
P.2d 133, 136 (1984) (holding that after the discharge of the
 jury, the only course of action to remedy an ambiguous verdict is
 a new trial). This follows because after the jury is discharged,
 the jury ceases to exist as an entity. See Ex parte T.D.M., No.
 
1091645, 2011 WL 5110207, at *4 (Ala. Oct. 28, 2011) ("a jury may
 amend its verdict at any time before it is discharged, but it is
 equally clear under our authorities that the discharge of the
 jury by the trial court ends their consideration of the case."
 (quoting Preferred Risk Mut. Ins. Co. v. Stuart, 395 So.2d 980,
 986 (Ala. 1981) (internal quotation marks omitted))); People v.
 Hendricks, 737 P.2d 1350, 1358 (Cal. 1987) (stating that after
 the verdict is received and the jury is discharged, the jury
 cannot alter or amend the verdict "[a]s well might any other
 twelve men be called to alter it as the men who were jurors"
 (quoting People v. Lee Yune Chong, 29 P. 776, 777 (1892)); Kempf
 Contracting & Design, Inc. v. Holland-Tucker, 892 N.E.2d 672, 676
 (Ind. Ct. App. 2008) ("When a jury is officially discharged, it
 becomes functus oficio [sic] as a jury in that particular case,
 and anything it does thereafter, even by order of the trial
 court, is null and void." (footnote omitted)); State v.
 Rodriguez, 134 P.3d 737, 739 (N.M. 2006) (after "a verdict has
 been received and entered upon the minutes, and the jury has been
 dismissed, they [sic] have not the power to reassemble and alter
 their [sic] verdict" (quoting Murry v. Belmore, 154 P. 705, 707
 (N.M. 1916) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)).
 
The question, then, is: When is a jury deemed to have 
been "discharged" in Hawai' i such that the jury can no longer 
9
 The Circuit Court stated that the rescission of its instruction to
 
the jurors that they were free to discuss with anyone did not rescind its
order discharging the jury. 
14
  
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
amend its verdict? For the reasons expressed below, we hold that
 
a jury is no longer capable of amending its verdict once the
 verdict is accepted by the trial court and the jury is explicitly
 discharged from further responsibilities in the case. 
The length of a juror's service is governed by statute. 
In Hawai' i, "trial jurors shall serve only one day or one trial 
during the year." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 612-22 (Supp. 2011). 
"Prospective jurors who are accepted to serve on a jury shall complete the duration of the trial and shall be dismissed from service for the year." Id. While HRS § 612-22 does not 
specifically address the issue of the amendment of verdicts,
10 
the legislature, in defining the limits of a trial juror's duties, plainly indicated that an individual's responsibilities as a juror end when the trial is complete. 
Once the trial court accepts and records the jury's
 
verdict and explicitly discharges the jury, the trial is complete
 and the jury ceases to exist as a legal entity. This conclusion
 is consistent with Manipon, 70 Haw. 175, 765 P.2d 1091, the case
 upon which Lahaina's argument largely relies. In Manipon, the
 defendant was charged with robbery in the first degree. 70 Haw.
 at 176, 765 P.2d at 1092. After deliberating, the jury returned
 one completed verdict form, which found the defendant not guilty
 of the lesser included offense of robbery in the second degree;
 the other verdict forms were returned unsigned. Id. Because no
 
verdict was reached on the first-degree robbery charge, the trial
 court re-read the instructions on the elements of the two robbery
 charges and instructed the jury that only if it found the
 defendant not guilty of the first-degree-robbery charge could it
 return a verdict on the lesser included offense. Id. The jury
 
10
 The legislature amended HRS § 612-22 in 1987 to include the
language in question as part of an effort to reduce the time jurors would be
asked to serve and allow greater jury participation in the community. See
 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 82, in 1987 House Journal, at 1039; Conf. Comm. Rep. No.
95, in 1987 Senate Journal, at 866—67; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 827, in 1987
Senate Journal, at 1247–48. The demands on jurors prior to the 1987 amendment
were substantially heavier than today—Professor Jon Van Dyke, testifying
before the House Judiciary Committee, stated that those selected as potential
jurors in the First Circuit Court would, on average, report to the courthouse
ten separate days and sit for two or three trials. Hearing on HB 162 Before
 
the H. Comm. on Judiciary, 14th Leg. (Haw. Mar. 4, 1987) (testimony of Prof.
Jon Van Dyke).
 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
subsequently returned a verdict finding the defendant guilty of
 
first-degree robbery. Id.
 
On appeal, the defendant argued that the trial court
 
erred in re-instructing the jury when the jury had found the
 defendant not guilty of the lesser included offense. Id. at 177,
 
765 P.2d at 1092. The Supreme Court disagreed, stating:
 
As long as the jury remains under the direction of the
trial court, it is within the court's province to have them
render a correct verdict. State v. Leevans, [], 424 P.2d
1016, 1020 ([Wash.] 1967). "When a verdict is rendered in
 
improper form, is incomplete, is insufficient in substance,
is not responsive to or does not cover the issues, or is
otherwise defective, the trial court may recommit the
verdict to the jury with proper instructions." Id. See
 
also State v. Culbertson, [], 522 P.2d 391, 394 ([Kan.]
1974).
 
Id. at 177, 765 P.2d at 1092–93. The Court held that, because
 
there was no verdict on the first-degree robbery charge, the jury
 
had not completed its duty, and "the trial court properly re-
instructed the jurors in order to obtain a complete and correct
 verdict before discharging them." Id. at 177, 765 P.2d at 1093. 
Furthermore, the Court held that the defendant's double-jeopardy
 rights were not violated, stating: "The office of a juror is not
 discharged until the acceptance of the verdict by the court." 
Id.
 
The phrase "remains under the direction of the trial
 
court" in Manipon comes from State v. Leevans, 424 P.2d 1016
 (Wash. 1967), which states that "[a]s long as the jury had the
 case in their hands and remained under the direction of the
 court, it was within the court's province to have them render a
 complete verdict." 424 P.2d at 1020. This phrase appears to
 have a specialized meaning in Washington. Examining the
 citations in State v. Badda, 411 P.2d 411 (Wash. 1966), the case
 cited in Leevans, we see that the foundation for the statement of
 law in Leevans is a Washington statute, which, in 1926, stated:
 
When the verdict is given, and is such as the court may
receive, and if no juror disagree or the jury be not again
sent out, the clerk shall file the verdict. The verdict is
 then complete and the jury shall be discharged from the
case. The verdict shall be in writing, and under the
 
direction of the court shall be substantially entered in the
 
journal as of the day's proceedings on which it was given.
 
See Bino v. Veenhuizen, 250 P. 450, 451 (Wash. 1926) (emphasis
 
16
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
added) (the statute referenced is currently codified in amended 
form at W ASH. REV. CODE § 4.44.460 (2003)). From this, the 
Washington Supreme Court stated that "[a]s long as the jurors, under the direction of the court, exercised according to law, have the case in their hands, it is within their province to change or modify the verdict." Id. The corollary of this is 
that "after a verdict has been received and recorded and the jury discharged, it can no longer function as a jury." Beglinger v. 
Shield, 2 P.2d 681, 683 (Wash. 1931). Thus, in Washington, whether a jury remains "under the direction of the trial court," i.e., has not yet been discharged, is linked to whether the verdict has been received and recorded. This understanding is consistent with Hawai' i law. See State v. Daniels, 109 Hawai' i 1, 
7, 122 P.3d 796, 802 (2005) (applying the principle that "[t]he office of the juror is not discharged until the acceptance of the verdict of the court" in the context of a clarification-of­verdict analysis). 
Lahaina cites to State v. Pare, 755 A.2d 180 (Conn.
 
2000), for support. In Pare, the Connecticut Supreme Court said
 that:
 
Discharge is defined as "[t]he relieving of a witness,
juror, or jury from further responsibilities in a case."
Black's Law Dictionary (7th Ed. 1999). According to that
definition, a jury cannot be considered discharged so long
as its members have yet to fulfill an outstanding obligation
pursuant to their status as jurors.
 
755 A.2d at 190. Lahaina claims that Pare is consistent with
 
Manipon because, under Manipon, a jury may correct the verdict so
 long as it remains "under the direction of the trial court." 
Lahaina argues that because the Circuit Court "recalled the
 jurors and ordered them not to speak to each other about the
 case" and because it "further ordered them that they would be
 recalled at a later time to provide evidence," the jury was still
 "'under the direction of the trial court' and had 'yet to fulfill
 an outstanding obligation pursuant to their status as jurors.'" 
In Pare, the jury returned a verdict finding the
 
defendant guilty of murder. 755 A.2d at 184–85. After polling
 the jurors as a group, the trial judge stated: "The jury can
 retire now and if you wait for a moment, I'll be in to speak to
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
you very shortly." Id. at 185. The judge did not state that the
 
jury was discharged. As soon as the jury exited the courtroom,
 
defense counsel requested that the court poll the jurors
 individually, but the trial court denied the request. Id. at
 
185–86. The issue on appeal was whether a request to poll jurors
 after a guilty verdict was timely made pursuant to a Connecticut
 Practice Book rule mandating that polling requests be made
 "before the jury [members] have been discharged." Id. at 182 &
 
n.2. The state contended that the jury's duties were fulfilled
 
when the jury announced its verdict and the jury "retired to the
 jury room to await the judge's remarks." Id. at 190. The
 
Supreme Court of Connecticut disagreed, stating that "when, as
 here, the trial court effectively informs the members of the jury
 that, upon departing from the courtroom, they nonetheless remain
 under the supervisory authority of the trial court, it cannot be
 said that the jury is discharged under the common understanding
 of that term." Id.
 
This case is different. Here, the jury rendered a
 
verdict. The jury was then polled. Eleven of the twelve jurors
 confirmed in open court that the verdict read in court was their
 verdict. The verdict was then entered into the record. The
 judge then announced that the jury was "discharged from further
 jury service in this matter," noting that upon discharge, they
 could discuss the case with anyone. The trial complete, the jury
 left the courtroom. The judge did not inform the jurors that
 they remained under the supervisory authority of the court or
 that the jurors needed to wait for the judge to come and talk to
 them. To the contrary, the trial judge informed the jurors that
 their duties as jurors had been fulfilled. Thus, the jury in
 this case was "discharged" and could not be legally reassembled
 to amend its verdict even by order of the trial court. 
Therefore, Pare is inapposite.
 
We recognize that, in some states, the "verbal
 
discharge or dismissal of the jury by the trial court does not
 render the jury discharged for purposes of subsequent reassembly
 to correct or amend a verdict." See State v. Green, 995 S.W.2d
 
591, 609 (Tenn. Crim. App. 1998). Instead, some courts focus on
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
whether the jury has left the presence and control of the trial
 
court following the conclusion of trial. See, e.g., State v.
 
Brandenburg, 120 A.2d 59 (Hudson County Ct. 1956); Melton v.
 Commonwealth, 111 S.E. 291 (Va. 1922). Other courts also focus
 on what the jurors did or could have done following a formal
 order of discharge. For instance, some jurisdictions consider
 whether the jurors had dispersed, see David J. Marchitelli,
 Annotation, Propriety of Reassembling Jury to Amend, Correct,
 Clarify, or Otherwise Change Verdict After Discharge or
 Separation at Conclusion of Civil Case, 19 A.L.R. 5th 622 § 5
 (1994) [hereinafter "Marchitelli"], or whether there was a
 possibility or opportunity for the jurors to have had improper
 contact with third parties, see, e.g., T.D.M., 2011 WL 5110207,
 at *4; Rodriguez, 134 P.3d 737; Green, 995 S.W.2d 591.
11
 
The decision of where to draw the line, in the absence
 
of a statute on point, comes down to balancing interests; among
 others, the desire for verdicts to reflect the true merits of the
 case, judicial economy, and the need to preserve the preeminence
 of the jury's role in our system of law.
12 Under any approach,
 
however, the integrity of the jury system must be protected. 
In Melton, for instance, the Virginia Supreme Court
 
held that "[s]o long as the whole jury are in the actual and
 visible presence of the court, and under its control, an
 inadvertent announcement of their discharge may be recalled as a
 matter still in the breast of the court, but not thereafter." 
111 S.E. at 294. But once a jury leaves the courtroom following
 discharge, "no longer subject to the usual charge to juries who
 are allowed to separate pending the trial, that they should not
 
11
 Lahaina, in its opening brief, did not argue that we should adopt
any of these common alternatives, but instead rested its case on the
"consisten[cy]" between Manipon and Pare.
 
12
 These principles have firm roots in Hawai' i law. See Kanahele v. 
Han, 125 Hawai' i 446, 457, 263 P.3d 726, 737 (2011) ("Permitting a jury to
'correct its own mistakes conserves judicial resources and the time and
convenience of citizen jurors, as well as those of the parties[,]' and allowsthe case to be resolved 'according to the intent of the original fact-finder,while that body is still present and able to resolve the matter.'" (quoting
Duk v. MGM Grand Hotel, Inc., 320 F.3d 1052, 1058 (9th Cir. 2003)); Pancakes of Haw., Inc. v. Pomare Props. Corp., 85 Hawai' i 300, 305, 944 P.2d 97, 102
(App. 1997) ("[T]he right to a jury trial in civil cases is clearly among the
most sacred, fundamental rights enjoyed by our citizens."). 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
converse with others about the case nor permit others to converse
 
with them about it," the jury no longer exists, and evidence that
 the jurors were, in fact, not sullied is inadmissible. Id. "The
 
sanctity of jury trials cannot be thus subjected to the hazard of
 suspicion." Id.; see also T.D.M., 2011 WL 5110207, at *6 ("[a]
 
critical concern raised by a jury's discharge, later recall, and
 subsequent returning of a verdict is the possibility that jurors
 could be communicated with or tampered with by any person or any
 outside influence during the very few minutes that transpired
 between the time of discharge and recall" (quoting Preferred
 Risk, 395 So.2d at 988) (internal quotation marks omitted)).
 
On the other hand, there are strong justifications for
 
our holding that a jury cannot amend its verdict following the
 acceptance and recordation of the verdict and an explicit order
 discharging the jury.
 
Some courts have considered the office of the jury
terminated at the time that the trial judge has announced to
the panel that it is dismissed, and have generally
prohibited any further consideration of the verdict, without
regard to whether the jurors have had an opportunity to
separate or be influenced by nonjurors. One rationale given
for the rule is the need for a clear distinction between a
 still constituted jury, and one that has been relieved of
legal authority to act further. In this regard, it has been
pointed out that parties, courts, and juries are generally
given ample opportunity to discover and remedy defects and
disagreements before the jury has been excused, which, in
light of the difficulties involved in defining the discharge
of the jury in terms of varying facts and circumstances, as
well as the need to promote the stability of verdicts in
general, provides the basis of the argument for terminating
the jurisdiction of the court and the jury upon the
pronouncement of the jury's discharge.
 
Marchitelli, 19 A.L.R. 5th 622 § 2. To hold that a jury can no
 
longer amend its verdict following formal discharge respects the
 limited but important role that juries and their deliberations
 play in our legal system. Furthermore, this rule offers the
 greatest protection against the erosion of public confidence in
 juridical impartiality.
13
 
13
 Beyond the overarching concerns of non-jurors influencing jurors
following formal discharge, the process of accepting and recording the jury
verdict in open court, in and of itself, has the inherent potential to impact
the minds of jurors. The announcement of the jury's verdict, in both criminal
and civil cases, is usually the most dramatic moment of a trial. Parties,
attorneys, and the gallery can react viscerally to a verdict with a wide array
of emotions: people gasp, hug, break down into tears, shake their head in
disgust, or yell out in exultation. See, e.g., Strip Club Bouncer Found Not
 
20
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Finally, even if we were to apply a standard more
 
amenable to the amendment of verdicts, we would still hold that
 
the jury had been discharged. For instance, Lahaina cites
 Rodriguez, 134 P.3d 737, for the proposition that "whether a jury
 has been discharged requires a determination of whether the jury
 is still in the presence and control of the trial court, and if
 not, whether the jury was possibly influenced by an unauthorized
 contact." Id. at 739. Even under Rodriguez, however, Lahaina's
 
argument that the jury had not been discharged would still fail. 
Upon the polling of the jury, eleven of the twelve jurors stated
 that the verdict read in open court was their verdict. The
 Circuit Court accepted the verdict and then formally discharged
 the jury. The jurors left the courtroom. After the jurors left
 the courtroom following a formal order discharging them from
 further service in the case, they were no longer in the presence
 and control of the trial court. See Melton, 111 S.E. at 294.
 
Because the jurors had left the presence and control of
 
the trial court, the next question under Rodriguez would be
 whether the jury had possibly been influenced by an unauthorized
 contact. Juror 2's and Juror 10's statements at the Colloquy
 showed that the trial judge had contact with the jurors in the
 jury room after formal discharge at which time he discussed the
 legal implications of the jury's verdict with the jurors in an
 informal fashion. Juror 2 and Juror 10 stated that the jury
 first realized that it had misinterpreted Question 7 during this
 
Guilty in Unruly Patron's Death, H ONOLULU STAR-ADVERTISER , Apr. 14, 2012,
www.staradvertiser.com/news/breaking/147386765.html (defendant "let out a yell
when a court clerk read the jury's not guilty verdict"); Commonwealth v.
 Craig, 370 A.2d 317, 318 (Pa. 1977) (spontaneous shouts of approval from the
gallery following guilty verdict). Even the absence of a reaction can be
 
attributed profound significance. See, e.g., Juror: Sandusky Lacked Emotion,
Confirming Correct Verdict, F
OXNEWS.COM (June 23, 2012)
http://www.foxnews.com/us/2012/06/23/juror-sandusky-lacked-emotion-confirming­
correct-verdict/ (reporting that, for one juror, the defendant's "lack of
emotion as the guilty verdicts were read at his child sex abuse trial
confirmed the verdicts were the right ones," because his reaction indicated
that "he knew it was true"). While such reactions during trial are frequently
to be expected, cf. Jay M. Zitter, Annotation, Emotional Manifestations by
 
Victim or Family of Victim During Criminal Trial as Ground for Reversal, New
 
Trial, or Mistrial, 31 A.L.R. 4th 229 § 2[a] (1984), reactions made following
the recitation of the verdict are different because they are in direct
response to the jury's action. In that moment, jurors are directly confronted
with the profound effect that their verdict has on the lives of their fellow
citizens.
 
21
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
discussion.  Such contact between the trial judge and the jurors,
 
outside of the presence of the parties and their attorneys, would
 
have been utterly and completely inappropriate had the trial been
 ongoing and the jury not been discharged. And because of this,
 it would have called the impartiality of the trial judge and
 jurors into question should the jury have been reconstituted for
 the purpose of rendering a different verdict. "That an officer
 
of the court can constitute an improper or 'outside' influence on
 
a juror, however innocent the officer's intent and behavior, has
 been established." See T.D.M., 2011 WL 5110207, at *7. Thus,
 
even under a test favoring the amendment of verdicts following
 formal discharge, the jury was no longer capable of amending its
 verdict.
 
Consequently, we hold that the jury could not amend its
 
verdict following the acceptance and recordation of the verdict
 and the trial court's subsequent explicit discharge of the jury. 
Until the verdict is accepted and recorded, it is not final. 
Manipon, 70 Haw. at 177, 765 P.2d at 1093 ("The office of a juror
 is not discharged until the acceptance of the verdict by the
 court."); see also 75B Am. Jur. 2d Trial § 1537 (2007)
 ("Generally, an unrecorded verdict is amendable, but a jury's
 recorded verdict is inviolate."). But once the verdict is
 accepted, the more time that passes is more time in which jurors
 could be reconsidering their verdict on an inappropriate basis. 
Our holding protects the integrity of jury verdicts and promotes
 public confidence in the foundations of our judicial system. 
Thus, the Circuit Court did not err in denying the Motion to
 Correct Verdict and Enter Judgment and the Motion to Resubmit.
 
2.	 There was no valid basis for amending the Verdict
Form.
 
Lahaina argues that the former jurors' statements
 
"obvious[ly]" establish "that a majority of jurors found that the
 
Bank was liable for interference with a prospective business
 advantage, but mistakenly marked the special verdict form." We
 disagree and hold that Lahaina failed to present a valid basis
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for amending the Verdict Form.14
 
HRE Rule 606(b) categorically bars individual jurors
 
from impeaching a jury verdict based on any juror's thought
 
process in assenting or dissenting to the verdict. HRE Rule
 606(b) states:
 
Inquiry into validity of verdict or indictment. Upon
an inquiry into the validity of a verdict or indictment, a
juror may not testify concerning the effect of anything upon
the juror's or any other juror's mind or emotions as
influencing the juror to assent to or dissent from the
verdict or indictment or concerning the juror's mental
processes in connection therewith. Nor may the juror's
affidavit or evidence of any statement by the juror
indicating an effect of this kind be received.
 
Haw. R. Evid. 606(b) (1993). 
Cabral v. McBryde Sugar Co., 3 Haw. App. 223, 228, 647
 
P.2d 1232, 1235 (1982) is on point here. In Cabral, a negligence
 
case, the jury returned a special verdict form, which was read in
 open court, setting the plaintiffs' total damages sustained at
 $24,750.00 and apportioning liability at 45% for the defendant
 and 55% for the plaintiffs. 3 Haw. App. at 224–25, 647 P.2d at
 1233. The plaintiffs' counsel polled the jurors, and all agreed
 that the verdict read in open court was accurate. Id. at 225,
 
647 P.2d at 1233. It is undisputed that the jury was then
 discharged. Id. at 228, 647 P.2d at 1235. The plaintiffs
 
subsequently filed a motion under, among other things, HRCP Rule
 59 to amend the verdict or, in the alternative, for a new trial. 
Id. at 225–27, 647 P.2d at 1234. The plaintiffs attached
 affidavits from eleven of the twelve jurors stating that the
 special verdict form confused them, that the jurors had
 unanimously agreed that the plaintiff's negligence was 45%
 responsible for the damages caused (not 55%), that they intended
 for the plaintiffs to receive a $24,750.00 judgment, and that the
 verdict read in open court was inconsistent with the jury's
 actual intentions. Id. at 225–26, 647 P.2d at 1234. The trial
 
14
 Although the jury had already been discharged, had Lahaina
presented a valid basis for impeaching the verdict, it could have been granted
a new trial, although we note that Lahaina never asked for one. Cf. Dias, 67
Haw. at 118, 679 P.2d at 136 (holding that once the jury is discharged, "the
only available remedy [for correcting an ambiguous verdict] is a remand for a
new trial"). Lahaina neither presented a valid basis for impeaching the
verdict, nor did it request a new trial.
 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court denied the motion. Id. at 226, 647 P.2d at 1234.
 
The Cabral court framed the issue on appeal as whether
 
"when a jury, subsequent to its discharge, realizes that its
 
answers to the questions on the special verdict form have caused
 a result opposite from what it intended, it will be allowed to
 change one or more of its answers so as to cause the result it
 intended." Id. at 228, 647 P.2d at 1235. The Cabral court held
 
that the answer to the question was "no" and affirmed the
 judgment, stating:
 
It must be remembered that the jury was answering a
special verdict form. A special verdict, as distinguished
from a general verdict, is one in which the jury find all
the facts of the case and refer the decision of the cause
 upon those facts to the court. Thus, the jury was not asked
to decide the ultimate verdict. It was asked to answer six
 questions, which it did. The fact that the jury, because of
the confusion or misunderstanding of the jurors, answered
the six questions in a way that caused the judge to enter an
ultimate verdict opposite from the one the jurors expected
him to enter is not grounds for reversal.
 
Hawai'i has adopted the rule stated in 76 Am.Jur.2d,
Trial, § 1219 (1975), that affidavits of jurors impeaching averdict will not be received where the facts sought to beshown are such as inhere in the verdict. Here, the factsshown are such as inhere in the verdict. Consequently, theaffidavits should not have been received by the court belowand there is no grounds for reversal. 
Id. (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
 
Jurors, however, are not barred from testifying that,
 
after the jury reached a definitive verdict, a mistake was made
 
entering that verdict onto the verdict form. See 27 Charles Alan
 
Wright et al., Federal Practice & Procedure § 6075.1 (2d ed.
 2007). Evidence of such a mistake falls "outside the scope of
 testimony precluded by Rule 606(b)" because such evidence would
 not be offered to describe the thought process of the jury or to
 bring the validity of the verdict into question, but rather would
 be "offered to prove what the verdict truly was." Id.
 
Here, the Circuit Court found that although some
 
responses from some of the jurors "indicated that the verdict
 that was returned in relation to Question No. 7 was not the
 verdict of the jury[,] . . . some jurors did explain that they
 had intended a different result . . . ." The Circuit Court,
 having considered all of the jurors' statements, concluded that
 "what the jurors might have intended cannot serve as a basis for
 
24
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Court altering the verdict returned by the jury and confirmed
 
by the jury through the Court's polling on the date that the
 verdict was returned." 
The Circuit Court's findings and conclusions are well-
supported by the record. It is abundantly clear, when
 considering the weight of the Colloquy as a whole, that the
 jurors misunderstood the legal effect of their answer—that is,
 they thought that by answering "Yes" to Question 7, the result
 would be that Lahaina's tortious-interference claim would not be
 barred by the statute of limitations and Lahaina would recover
 damages. Jurors 2, 7, 8, 9, and 10 stated that the jurors
 misinterpreted or misunderstood Question 7, and that the jury
 answered "Yes" to Question 7 because of that misunderstanding. 
Jurors 2 and 10 specifically stated that it was not until the
 trial judge spoke with them in the jury room that they realized
 their mistake. Jurors 3, 6, 11, and 12 said that the verdict
 entered was accurate. Juror 5 had already stated that the
 Verdict Form did not accurately reflect her decision when the
 jury was polled on June 10, 2009. Only Juror 1, who was not
 asked to explain her answer, stated that the answer to Question 7
 "is no instead of yes." The overwhelming weight of the jurors'
 statements at the Colloquy show that the jury did not merely make
 a clerical error, i.e., decide that the answer to Question 7 was
 "No" but accidentally put an "X" next to the answer "Yes" on the
 Verdict Form.
 
The Circuit Court found that the jury's error was that
 
it misunderstood the legal effect of its answer to a simple yes-
or-no question and was not merely a clerical error. The record
 amply supports this finding. This type of juror confusion is not
 a basis for amending the verdict. See Haw. R. Evid. 606(b)
 
(evidence of a "juror's mental processes in connection" with his
 or her assent to or dissent from the verdict cannot be received);
 Cabral, 3 Haw. App. at 228, 647 P.2d at 1235 ("The fact that the
 jury, because of the confusion or misunderstanding of the jurors,
 answered [special verdict] questions in a way that caused the
 judge to enter an ultimate verdict opposite from the one the
 jurors expected him to enter is not grounds for reversal."). 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Thus, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying
 
the Motion to Correct Verdict and Enter Judgment or the Motion to
 Resubmit.
 
B.	 Lahaina fails to show that the Circuit Court erred in
 
granting Defendants' motion for JMOL on its breach-of­fiduciary-duty claim.
 
Lahaina argues that the Circuit Court erred in granting
 
the Defendants' motion for JMOL on Lahaina's breach-of-fiduciary­
duty claim because the Defendants and Lahaina had created a
 trustee-beneficiary relationship. Lahaina claims that Weir
 admitted that the Defendants owed a fiduciary duty to Lahaina and
 that this admission constituted sufficient evidence to defeat
 JMOL. 
Lahaina's argument is without merit. In general,
 
neither lay nor expert witnesses can give his or her opinion on
 "matters which involve questions of law." See Beal v. S. Union
 
Gas Co., 349 P.2d 337, 346 (N.M. 1960); 4 Weinstein's Federal
 Evidence § 701.04, at 701-38 (2d ed. 2011) [hereinafter,
 "Weinstein"] ("In general, lay witnesses may not testify to an
 opinion that is simply a legal conclusion[.]"). Opinion
 testimony "containing a legal conclusion conveys what may be
 erroneous legal standards to the jury, and invades the court's
 province in determining the applicable law and then instructing
 the jury." 4 Weinstein § 701.04, at 701-38. Such testimony is
 "without probative value and cannot raise a fact issue or support
 a finding of fact." Robertson Tank Lines, Inc. v. Van Cleave,
 
468 S.W.2d 354, 361 (Tex. 1971).
 
Whether a fiduciary duty exists is a question of law. 
Kemp v. State of Hawai' i Child Support Enforcement Agency, 111 
Hawai'i 367, 383, 141 P.3d 1014, 1030 (2006). Here, the portion 
of Weir's testimony at issue merely consists of statements regarding Weir's personal understanding of the legal issues in the case at the time of trial. For instance, Weir testified that Defendants owed certain duties and obligations to Lahaina under the Lease. Weir also testified that such duties put the Defendants "in a fiduciary relationship with [Lahaina]" because, in Weir's mind, "[a] definition of a fiduciary is one who has a 
26
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
confidential relationship with another[.]" Weir's personal
 
opinions concerning the legal effect of the Lease or Defendants'
 purported fiduciary relationship with Lahaina are conclusory
 statements of law, wholly devoid of probative value. 
Furthermore, Weir's testimony underscores the dangers of
 testifying to matters of law, as Weir's stated understanding of
 the term "fiduciary" was very clearly incomplete. See B
LACK'S LAW
 
DICTIONARY 702 (9th ed. 2009) (defining "fiduciary" as "[a] person
 
who is required to act for the benefit of another person on all
 matters within the scope of their relationship; one who owes to
 another the duties of good faith, trust, confidence, and
 candor"). 
"[T]he relation between the vendor and the purchaser is
 
not a trust; nor is it a fiduciary relationship."  Restatement
 
(Third) of Trusts § 5 cmt. i (2003); see also Restatement
 (Second) of Trusts § 13 (1959) ("A contract to convey property is
 not a trust, whether or not the contract is specifically
 enforceable."); 1 Austin Wakeman Scott et al., Scott and Ascher
 on Trusts § 2.3.9, at 118 (5th ed. 2006) ("It is clear that the
 relationship between vendor and purchaser is different from that
 between trustee and beneficiary, in that the vendor, unlike a
 trustee, is not in a fiduciary relationship with the
 purchaser."). Because the Option is, in essence, a contract for
 Defendants to sell the Property back to Lahaina, Defendants did
 not hold the Property in trust for Lahaina. Therefore, Lahaina
 has not shown error.
 
C.	 The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
excluding Exhibit 81.
 
Lahaina argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
excluding Exhibit 81 because (a) Hawai' i case law indicates that 
HRE Rule 408 does not prohibit the introduction of settlement-
negotiation evidence from a separate case and (b) it is relevant to Defendants' motive and intent to frustrate Lahaina's rights under the Option. 
We need not address whether the Circuit Court's
 
application of HRE Rule 408 was erroneous because the Circuit
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Court did not abuse its discretion in excluding Exhibit 81
 
pursuant to HRE Rules 401 through 403. The Email simply states
 "i [sic] agree with you that the offer is unacceptable; it is in
 the REEF's best interest to get back the property and market it
 as fee owner; we are proceeding with partial summary judgment." 
The Email relates to the exercise of Defendants' own legal rights
 in pursuing summary judgment and does little, if anything, to
 show Defendants' illicit intent to tortiously or fraudulently
 harm Lahaina. The Letter merely puts the Email in context and
 does nothing to show Defendants' motive or intent to do anything. 
Lahaina was already in default on the Lease when the Letter and
 Email were sent, and Lahaina has not shown that Defendants were
 obligated to accept tender of this particular offer. 
Furthermore, the Circuit Court could have reasonably decided that
 the Email would confuse the jury or give rise to prejudice and
 that such confusion or prejudice would substantially outweigh its
 limited probative value. See Haw. R. Evid. 403. Lahaina fails
 
to address HRE Rule 403's countervailing concerns in its briefs. 
Thus, Lahaina fails to show that the Circuit Court abused its
 discretion in excluding Exhibit 81. 
D.	 The Circuit Court did not err in limiting the discovery
of attorney-client communications.
 
Lahaina argues that because the Circuit Court found
 
that Defendants had waived its attorney-client privilege with
 
regard to how Defendants and their attorneys framed certain
 declarations filed in the May 2000 Lawsuit, the Circuit Court was
 obligated to order disclosure of any and all communications
 between Defendants and their attorneys between 1994 through 2002
 "with reference to any matter related to [the Property]." 
The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion by
 
limiting the scope of waiver as it did. 
HRE Rule 511 states:
 
A person upon whom these rules confer a privilege
against disclosure waives the privilege if, while holder of
the privilege, the person or the person's predecessor
voluntarily discloses or consents to disclosure of any
significant part of the privileged matter. This rule does
 not apply if the disclosure itself is a privileged
communication.
 
Haw. R. Evid. 511 (1993). Lahaina contends that the commentary
 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to HRE 511 supports its position that it is entitled to discovery
 
of any privileged communications between Defendants and their
 attorneys relating to the Property in general, whether or not
 they relate to the declarations filed in the May 2000 Lawsuit,
 over an eight-year period. The commentary states:
 
The sole justification for any rule of privilege is
protection of a personal right of confidentiality that is
recognized to be of greater societal importance than the
principle of free disclosure of all relevant evidence in a
judicial proceeding. Any intentional disclosure by the
holder of the privilege defeats this purpose and eliminates
the necessity for the privilege in that instance.
Consistent with this, waiver of privilege is generally
absolute. Once confidentiality has been destroyed by
intentional disclosure, the holder of the privilege may not
reinvoke it, and the evidence is as admissible as if no
privilege had initially existed.
 
Haw. R. Evid. 511 Commentary. Lahaina's argument is without
 
merit.
 
The parties have not cited any Hawai' i case law 
determining the scope of a waiver of attorney-client privilege. Nevertheless, "[t]he widely applied standard for determining the scope of a waiver of attorney-client privilege is that the waiver applies to all other communications relating to the same subject matter." See Fort James Corp. v. Solo Cup Co., 412 F.3d 1340, 
1349 (Fed. Cir. 2005). Defining the boundaries of waiver is fact-intensive. "There is no bright line test for determining what constitutes the subject matter of a waiver, rather courts weigh the circumstances of the disclosure, the nature of the legal advice sought and the prejudice to the parties of permitting or prohibiting further disclosures." Id. at 1349-50. 
However, the disclosure of information resulting from the waiver of the attorney-client privilege extends only "to communications about the matter actually disclosed." See Chevron Corp. v. 
Pennzoil Co., 974 F.2d 1156, 1162 (9th Cir. 1992) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Weil v. Inv./Indicators, Research and Mgmt., Inc., 647 F.2d 18, 25 (9th Cir. 1981)). 
Here, Abdul testified that the Bank's attorneys decided
 
what information to include in declarations filed in the May 2000
 Lawsuit and that Abdul did not advise the attorneys to omit
 information that third parties had expressed an interest in the
 Property. Lahaina has not presented any reason why it should be
 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
entitled to discover all attorney-client communications relating
 
to the Property over the span of eight years. Thus, the Circuit
 Court did not abuse its discretion in refusing to disclose all of
 Defendants' attorney-client communications relating to the
 Property.
 
In light of our decisions above concerning Lahaina's
 
points of error, Defendants' cross-appeal is moot.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The July 8, 2010 Final Judgment of the Circuit Court of
 
the Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
Joseph M. Alioto and
James M. Dombroski
 for Plaintiff-Appellant/
Cross-Appellee
 
Terence J. O'Toole
 
and Andrew Lautenbach
 for Defendants-Appellees/
Cross-Appellants
 
30
 