 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30083
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROBERT LEE WILLIS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT

 
(CR. NO. 06-1-512)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Robert Lee Willis (Willis) appeals
 
from the Judgment entered on September 9, 2009, by the Circuit
 
Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court), convicting and
 
sentencing him for three counts of Robbery in the Second Degree
 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 708-841 (1993). 
Willis challenges the Circuit Court's September 3, 2009 Order
 
Denying Defendant's Motion to Withdraw Plea.1
 
On appeal, Willis contends: (1) the Circuit Court's
 
Findings of Facts (FOFs) 8-14, 16, 18-21, 23-30 are clearly
 
erroneous; (2) the Circuit Court erred in concluding that Willis
 
"has not met his burden of showing fair and just reasons for the
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara entered the Judgment of Conviction and
Sentence on behalf of the Honorable Greg K. Nakamura, who accepted Willis's
guilty plea. Judge Hara also presided over Willis's hearing on his motion to
withdraw plea and entered the September 3, 2009 Order Denying Defendant's
Motion to Withdraw Plea. 
1 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
withdrawal of his plea as Defendant entered his GUILTY pleas
 
knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily;" and (3) the Circuit
 
Court abused its discretion in denying Willis's motion to
 
withdraw his guilty plea. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Willis's point of error as follows:
 
(1) The challenged FOFs are supported by substantial
 
evidence. Willis's appointed counsel, Stanton Oshiro (Oshiro),
 
testified that: (1) Willis entered into a plea agreement which
 
contemplated cooperation with the State in order to increase the
 
likelihood of receiving a probation sentence; (2) Willis was
 
never promised or guaranteed probation, but instead, "cooperation
 
with the [S]tate was designed to maximize his opportunity to get
 
a sentence of probation;" (3) the State, without promising or
 
committing to a particular sentencing recommendation would
 
"listen" to law enforcement's recommendation; (4) Willis's bail
 
was reduced to facilitate his cooperation with the police; and
 
(5) the Circuit Court would commit to the bail reduction and 
potentially consider any probation recommendation before 
sentencing. Although Willis presented contrary testimony and 
stated that Oshiro told him he would get probation, the Circuit 
Court's decision to reject Willis's testimony in favor of 
testimony from other witnesses will not be disturbed on appeal. 
See State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai 'i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996) 
("An appellate court will not pass upon the trial judge's decisions with respect to the credibility of witnesses and the 
weight of the evidence, because this is the province of the trial 
judge.") (citations omitted). 
Furthermore, the challenged FOFs are also supported by
 
testimony from Officers Shimabukuro and Elarionoff, which
 
provided that: (1) neither officer made any promises to Willis
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
regarding sentencing; (2) Willis effectuated supervised narcotics 
transactions for Officer Shimabukuro in Hilo, and later for 
Officer Elarionoff in Kona; (3) Willis's transfer to Kona was 
due, at least in part, to the location of his family; (4) Willis 
was unsuccessful in infiltrating the targeted drug organization 
in West Hawai 'i and none of his supervised transactions resulted 
in prosecution, which was largely based on Willis's lack of credibility; and (5) Willis was not authorized to possess 
narcotics or a firearm at Mauna Kea State Park on May 6, 2008. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the FOFs are supported by 
substantial evidence and are not clearly erroneous. 
(2) & (3) A defendant does not have an absolute right
 
to withdraw a guilty plea. State v. Jim, 58 Haw. 574, 575, 574
 
P.2d 521, 522 (1978). Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
Rule 32(d) (2006) provides:
 
A motion to withdraw a plea of guilty or of nolo contendere
may be made before sentence is imposed or imposition of
sentence is suspended; provided that, to correct manifest
injustice the court, upon a party's motion submitted no
later than ten (10) days after imposition of sentence, shall
set aside the judgment of conviction and permit the
defendant to withdraw his plea.
 
When a request to withdraw a guilty plea is made before 
sentence is imposed, the court observes a "liberal approach," and 
"the court should grant the motion if the defendant has presented 
a fair and just reason for his request and the State has not 
relied upon the plea to its substantial prejudice." State v. 
Gomes, 79 Hawai 'i 32, 36 897 P.2d 959, 963 (1995) (citation 
omitted; bracketed material added). The second prong of the 
"liberal approach" is conditioned upon satisfaction of the first 
because "the absence of substantial prejudice does not support or 
resurrect a defendant's pre-sentence motion to withdraw a guilty 
or no contest plea where no fair and just reason for withdrawal 
has been presented." State v. Merino, 81 Hawai 'i 198, 223, 915 
P.2d 672, 697 (1996) (citation omitted). 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The two fundamental bases for showing a fair and just 
reason for withdrawing a guilty plea are: (1) the defendant did 
not knowingly, intelligently, or voluntarily waive his or her 
rights; or (2) changed circumstances or new information justify 
withdrawal of plea. Gomes, 79 Hawai 'i at 37, 897 P.2d at 964.2 
The defendant has the burden of establishing plausible and legitimate reasons for withdrawal of a guilty plea. State v. 
Costa, 64 Hawai
'i 564, 565, 644 P.2d 1329, 1331 (1982). 
At the hearing on the motion to withdraw his plea,
 
Willis asserted that he was guaranteed a probation sentence for
 his cooperation per a "secret agreement" between the State and
 
Willis. Willis maintained that this secret agreement was known
 
by all parties and the Circuit Court even though it was not
 
referenced at the plea-taking hearing and not included in the
 
plea offer letter, change of plea form, plea agreement
 
attachment, or the bail conditions sealed for Willis's
 
protection. Because the terms of the purported secret agreement
 
were not incorporated into the record, Willis argued that the
 
plea was faulty and he was entitled to withdrawal. The State
 
argued, and the Circuit Court found, that there was no promise or
 
guarantee of a probation sentence in exchange for Willis's
 
cooperation with the police. 
On appeal, Willis's theory of the case has somewhat
 
shifted. Willis now asserts that, even if there was no promise
 
for probation from the State, the fact that Willis believed such
 
a promise was part of the plea agreement is the dispositive
 
issue. Willis argues that because he entered his guilty plea
 
based on a misapprehension, the plea was not knowing,
 
intelligent, and voluntary. 
2
 Although the supreme court in Gomes applied these fundamental bases 
to a HRPP 32(d) motion to withdraw a nolo contendere plea, this court has
applied Gomes to HRPP 32(d) motions to withdraw guilty pleas as well. See,e.g., State v. Topasna, 94 Hawai' i 444, 452, 16 P.3d 849, 857 (App. 2000). 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Willis's argument of "misapprehension" is not supported
 
by the evidence in the record. In fact, Willis's claim directly
 
contradicts the representations he made to the Circuit Court
 
during the plea-taking hearing. In response to the Circuit
 
Court's questioning in open court at the February 6, 2008 change
 
of plea hearing, Willis confirmed that: (1) he understood the
 
nature of the charges; (2) he was pleading of his own free will;
 
(3) his plea was not the result of force or threat; (4) he
 
understood that by pleading guilty he would be waiving his right
 
to a public trial; (5) he understood that he could be subject to
 
a 10-year prison term and/or a fine of $25,000 in regard to each
 
count; (6) he believed he was guilty of three counts of Second
 
Degree Robbery; (7) the terms of the plea agreement were that in
 
exchange for his guilty plea, he will pay restitution, the State
 
will not argue for extended terms of imprisonment, the State
 
agrees he can argue for any legal sentence, and his bail will be
 
reduced to $40,000, subject to conditions; (8) he understood the
 
terms of the plea agreement; (9) he had no questions about the
 
terms of the plea agreement; (10) there were no promises made to
 
him other than those in the plea agreement; (11) he signed the
 
plea form; and (12) he reviewed the change of plea form with his
 
lawyer. 
Furthermore, Oshiro's testimony was that Willis had
 
actual knowledge, at the time of his guilty plea, that his
 
cooperation with the police, even if successful, did not
 
guarantee him a probation recommendation from the State nor
 
guarantee that the Circuit Court would impose a term of probation
 
at sentencing. 
We find no support for Willis's assertion that at the
 
time he entered his guilty plea he believed he would be
 
guaranteed probation for cooperating, in any capacity, with the
 
police. Willis's assertion is inconsistent with the Circuit
 
Court's finding that "[t]there was never an agreement and/or
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
promise from the State that [Willis] would get probation." 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 
discretion in denying Willis's pre-sentence motion to withdraw
 
his guilty plea.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's September 9,
 
2009 Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 25, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Jeffrey A. Hawk
(Hawk Sink Ignacio & Waters)for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Darien W.L.C. NagataDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawaiifor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6 