NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30065

IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
WILLARD M. IMAMOTO, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
KAHI MOHALA HOSPITAL, NAOMI MORGAN, DUDLEY AKAMA,
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, Defendants-Appellees

APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

(CIVIL NO. 06-1-2068)

SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Willard Max Imamoto (Imamoto)

brings this appeal, pro se, from the September 11, 2009 Judgment

entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit

Court),1
 dismissing with prejudice Imamoto's claims against
 
Defendant-Appellees Kahi Mohala Hospital (Kahi Mohala), Naomi

Morgan (Morgan), the Department of the Attorney General (AG) and

Dudley Akama (Akama) (collectively, Defendants).

2
Imamoto's arguments on appeal appear to be  that the
 
Circuit Court erred in (1) denying his motion for summary

1

The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided.

2

Imamoto's opening brief does not comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) in a number of respects, most notably in that he
does not provide record citations for his statements of fact, does notproperly formulate his points on appeal, and attaches Exhibit B that does notappear in the record on appeal. HRAP Rule 28(b). However, "the policies ofthis court are to permit litigants to appeal and to have their cases heard onthe merits, where possible." O'Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawai' i 383,
386, 885 P.2d 361, 364 (1994). Therefore, although we disregard Exhibit B, weaddress Imamoto's points insofar as we are able to ascertain them.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment as to Kahi Mohala, Morgan and Akama; (2) granting the

motion for summary judgment by Akama and (3) granting Kahi Mohala

and Morgan's substantive joinder in Akama's motion for summary

judgment. In particular, Imamoto alleges that the Circuit Court
 
erroneously found his claims for "conversion, violation of 4th

amendment rights, and violation of 1st
 amendment rights"
 
inapplicable. We resolve his arguments as follows.
 
1. The Circuit Court did not err in denying Imamoto's 
Motion for Summary Judgment. 
"[T]he moving party bears the 
ultimate burden of persuasion" and "[t]his burden always remains with the moving party and requires the moving party to convince 
the court that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that 
the moving party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of 
law. GECC Fin. Corp. v. Jaffarian, 79 Hawai' i 516, 521, 904 P.2d 
530, 535 (App. 1995). Furthermore, "[t]he moving party's burden of proof is a stringent one, since the inferences to be drawn 
from the underlying facts alleged in the relevant materials 
considered by the court in deciding the motion must be viewed in 
the light most favorable to the non-moving party." Id., citing 
Fernandes v. Tenbruggencate, 65 Haw. 226, 228, 649 P.2d 1144, 1147 (1982). Review of the trial court's decision on a motion 
for summary judgment is conducted de novo.  Bremer v. Weeks, 104 
Hawai'i 43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 158 (2004) 
Here, Imamoto's burden required him to convince the 
Circuit Court that with regard to his claims against Kahi Mohala, 
Morgan, and Akama, "there is no genuine issue as to any material 
fact." Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui, 116 Hawai' i 239, 254-55, 
172 P.3d 983, 998-99 (2007). This he did not do, because he did 
not support his assertions of material fact with admissible 
evidence. See Blair v. Ing, 95 Hawai' i 247, 270 n.19, 21 P.3d 
452, 475 n.19 (2001) (inadmissible evidence does not create a genuine issue of material fact). Imamoto stated in his 
memorandum in support of his motion for summary judgment that he 
intended to depose witnesses to prove his case, but he does not 
2

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appear to have submitted those depositions nor does he explain

how the documents he did submit prove the facts he averred. As a

result, Imamoto fails to demonstrate that he established "no

genuine issue of material fact exists" in support of his claims. 
 
Thus, his motion for summary judgment was properly denied.

2. The Circuit Court did not err in granting Akama's

Motion for Summary Judgment. Akama's motion alleged a number of
 
facts, all supported with reference to documents--Imamoto's own,

Morgan and Akama's depositions and certified copies of court

records, provided to the Circuit Court, in support of his defense

against Imamoto's claims. Imamoto's basic claim turned on

whether Defendants wrongfully interfered with a package sent from

the United States District Court (USDC) (the package). In his

Second Amended Complaint, Imamoto claimed "a first amendment

violation, denial of access to the courts, and a fourth amendment

violation" arising out of Defendants' receipt, handling, and

retention of this package.

It was undisputed that, while he was residing at Kahi

Mohala, Imamoto entrusted the contents of the package to a friend

for the purpose of filing those documents with the USDC. Upon
 
rejecting the documents for filing, the USDC mailed the package

to Kahi Mohala. Disputed was whether the package was addressed

to Morgan, an employee of Kahi Mohala, as averred by her in her

deposition, or whether it was addressed to Imamoto, as he

claimed. However, it is also undisputed that Imamoto was no

longer residing at Kahi Mohala when the package arrived, and he

presented no admissible evidence to refute Morgan's testimony

that the package was addressed to her nor Akama's testimony that

when he took the package from Morgan, it was addressed to Morgan.

Imamoto's claim against Kahi Mohala, for the actions of

its employee Morgan, and Morgan depend, for he alleged no other

scenario, on her allegedly improper opening of the package

because it was addressed to Imamoto. Imamoto presented no

admissible evidence that showed the package was addressed to him

and presented no authority to the Circuit Court, nor to this

3

 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court, supporting the notion that Morgan's action of opening and 
examining the contents of the package addressed to Morgan was 
actionable. Therefore, the failure to place the addressee of the 
package in dispute was fatal to Imamoto's claims for violation of 
his rights to privacy and to be free from unreasonable searches.3 
See generally State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai' i 382, 393-94, 910 P.2d 
695, 707 (1996) (where government intrusion does not invade 
legitimate expectation of privacy, there is no search under the 
Fourth Amendment). 
Imamoto also claimed that the package was improperly 
retained by Morgan, as she did not immediately forward the 
package to him upon realizing the documents inside were his, and 
by Akama, who retained the package after Morgan turned it over to 
him. However, Imamoto provides no authority for the proposition 
that he retained a property interest in his documents after the 
federal court rejected them for filing, and we find none. Nor 
does Imamoto argue why--assuming Morgan and Akama were government 
agents--the documents could not be retained as evidence of 
criminal activity pursuant to the "plain view" doctrine. 
Wallace, 80 Hawai' i 396-97, 910 P.2d 695, 709-10. 
Morgan, a non-lawyer, testified that, as she saw other

Kahi Mohala patients names and personal information in the

documents in the package, she was concerned about those patients'

confidentiality rights and a possible violation of state law

protecting patient confidentiality and called Akama, a deputy

attorney general, to "support" her on this. Akama testified that

he turned the package over to the Criminal Justice Division of

the State Attorney General's department because he believed the

3

We also note that the parties do not dispute that the package's
contents were given to a third party by Imamoto for the purpose of filing the
same with the USDC. Thus, to the extent Imamoto had already disclosed thecontents to a third party and intended to file the document with the federalcourt, he could not retain a reasonable expectation of privacy in thosedocuments. See, e.g., State v. Kolia, 116 Hawai' i 29, 34-35, 169 P.3d 981,
986-87 (App. 2007) ("When an individual voluntarily abandons evidence, thatindividual loses any legitimate expectation of privacy in the property andthereby disclaims any concern about whether the property or its contentsremain private.") 
4

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
documents contained solicitations by Imamoto to provide legal

services to others, i.e., that the documents constituted evidence

of the practice of law without a license, and identified examples

of those documents. Imamoto presented no evidence contradicting

this testimony.

Imamoto presents no argument regarding his claim for 
conversion, the alleged violation of his right to access to the 
courts, nor his point on appeal that Kahi Mohala and Morgan's 
motion for joinder in Akama's motion for summary judgment should 
have been denied, and they are thus deemed abandoned. Hawaii 
Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai' i 438, 478, 164 P.3d 696, 
736 (2007) ("an appellate court is not obliged to address matters 
for which the appellant has failed to present discernible 
arguments."). 
For the foregoing reasons, the September 11, 2009

Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is

affirmed.

DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 30, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Willard M. Imamoto,
Plaintiff-Appellant, pro se. 
Chief Judge 
Edmund Burke and John Reyes-Burke,(Burke McPheeters Bordner &Estes)for Defendants-AppelleesSutter Health Pacific doingbusiness as Kahi Mohala Hospital & Naomi Morgan 
Associate Judge 
Heidi M. Rian and John F. Molay,Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendant-Appellee DudleyAkama. Associate Judge 
5

