FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
PATRICK M. McGRAIL, Petitioner-Appellant
vs.
 
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR OF THE COURTS,
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent-Appellee
 
NO. 30605 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(Honolulu Division)
(Case No. JR 1DAA-10-0003 (08-00558))
 
July 17, 2013
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE
 
Petitioner-Appellant Patrick McGrail (McGrail) appeals
 
the administrative revocation of his driver's license after he
 
was arrested for driving under the influence of an intoxicant
 (OVUII). 
A police officer, who reportedly observed McGrail
 
driving unsafely and erratically, made a traffic stop of
 McGrail's car. A second officer, who had not observed McGrail's
 driving, later arrived at the scene, spoke to McGrail, and
 arrested McGrail for OVUII after witnessing McGrail perform field
 sobriety tests.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At McGrail's administrative revocation hearing, the
 
hearing officer struck the report of the police officer who had
 
made the traffic stop of McGrail's car (Stopping Officer) because
 the report was not a sworn statement. However, the hearing
 officer, over McGrail's objection, considered the Stopping
 Officer's unsworn statements that were included in a sworn report
 prepared by the police officer who arrested McGrail (Arresting
 Officer), in finding that the police had reasonable suspicion to
 stop McGrail's car. The Stopping Officer did not testify at the
 revocation hearing.
 
The question presented in this appeal is whether the 
hearing officer could properly consider the unsworn statements of the Stopping Officer that were included in the sworn police report of the Arresting Officer in determining that the police had reasonable suspicion to stop McGrail's car. As explained below, in light of the importance placed by the Hawai' i 
Legislature on sworn statements to ensure reliability in the administrative revocation process, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 291E, Part III, we conclude that the answer to this question is no. Accordingly, we reverse the administrative revocation of McGrail's driver's license. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Jasmine
 
McGuire (Officer McGuire or Stopping Officer) conducted a traffic
 stop of McGrail car. Officer McGuire prepared a police report
 that described the observations that led to her stopping
 McGrail's car, as follows:
 
At about 2235 hours I was traveling east bound on Kalakaua
Avenue in the mauka most lane when I observed a sedan in the
 same lane ahead of me with no tail lights. I observed that
 this vehicle appeared to be moving unsmooth and that this
vehicle now about 15 feet in front of me then made a left
 turn onto Pau Street without signaling.
 
I then followed this vehicle onto Pau Street where I
 
observed that the vehicle appeared to be making unsmooth 
2
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
movements while changing lanes into the [Koko Head] most
lane mauka bound. [ 1
]
I then observed this vehicle strike the [Koko Head] most
sidewalk or curb area with its front passenger side tire, no
damages observed or reported. 
The vehicle then appeared to
jerk suddenly away from the curb and turn left onto Ala Wai
Boulevard where it headed directly for the mauka most lane
and appeared to be heading straight for the retaining curb.
 
At about 10:40 p.m., HPD Officer Marc Cobb-Adams
 
(Officer Cobb-Adams or Arresting Officer) responded to a call to
 
assist Officer McGuire regarding her traffic stop and
 subsequently arrived at the scene. Officer McGuire informed
 Officer Cobb-Adams of the facts and circumstances regarding the
 traffic stop, which Officer Cobb-Adams documented in his police
 report as follows:
 
On 09-17-09 at about 2240 hours, Officer J. MCGUIRE informed
me of the facts and circumstances of the stop. She related
 that she observed the driver traveling east bound on
Kalakaua Ave[.] with out any headlights. She further
 related that the vehicle failed to signal as it made a left
turn on to Pau St. She then related that she observed the
 vehicle strike the sidewalk or curb area with its front
 passenger side tire, but no damages observed or reported.
 
Officer Cobb-Adams spoke to McGrail and noticed that McGrail's
 
eyes were watery and glassy and that there was a strong odor of
 alcohol coming from his breath and body. 
At Officer Cobb-Adams's request, McGrail agreed to
 
participate in standard field sobriety tests. McGrail 
staggered as he exited his vehicle and performed poorly on the
 field sobriety tests. HPD Officer Michele Yoshiki (Officer
 Yoshiki), who had also responded to the scene, gave McGrail a
 preliminary alcohol screening test, which McGrail "failed." 
1
 "Mauka" and "Koko Head" are directional terms used in Hawai' i. "Mauka" 
is a Hawaiian word meaning "[i]nland, upland, towards the mountain[.]" Mary
Kawena Pukui & Samuel H. Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary 242, 365 (rev. ed. 1986)."Koko Head" is the modern name for a well-known volcanic tuff cone on the eastern side of O' ahu, see Mary Kawena Pukui, Samuel H. Elbert & Ester T.
Mookini, Place Names of Hawaii 115 (rev. and enlarged ed. 1974), and is usedto refer to an easterly direction from certain areas on O' ahu. 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Officer Cobb-Adams placed McGrail under arrest for
 
OUVII. Officer Cobb-Adams read and explained the "Use of
 
Intoxicants While Operating a Vehicle Implied Consent for
 Testing" form and the "Notice of Administrative Revocation" form
 to McGrail. McGrail agreed to take a breath test, which was
 
performed by HPD Officer Miya Brouwer (Officer Brouwer). The
 
test showed that McGrail had 0.259 grams of alcohol per 210
 liters of breath. McGrail was served with the "Notice of
 Administrative Revocation."
 
II.
 
As part of the administrative revocation process, the 
police reports prepared by Officer Cobb-Adams, Officer McGuire, and Officer Yoshii were submitted to the Administrative Director of the Courts, State of Hawai' i (Director). Officer Cobb-Adams 
and Officer Yoshiki each swore that the information contained in their respective police reports was true and correct.
2 Officer 
McGuire did not swear that the information contained in her report was true and correct. Officer Brouwer, the Intoxilyzer operator who conduced McGrail's breath test, and Tracy J. Morita, the person responsible for maintaining the Intoxilyzer equipment used for McGrail's test, also submitted sworn statements to the Director. 
The Director, through the Administrative Driver's
 
License Revocation Office (ADLRO), conducted an administrative
 review of the issuance of the notice of administrative
 revocation. Based on the preponderance of the evidence
 considered, the Director determined that (1) McGrail's alcohol
 concentration was .08 or more; (2) there existed reasonable
 suspicion to stop McGrail's vehicle; (3) there existed probable
 cause to believe that McGrail operated the vehicle while under
 
2 HPD Officer Dominic Madamba, who responded to the scene
and moved McGrail's car, also prepared a police report that was
submitted to the Director, which the officer swore contained
information that was true and correct.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the influence of an intoxicant; (4) the evidence proved by the
 
preponderance that McGrail operated the vehicle while under the
 influence of an intoxicant; and (5) McGrail was a highly
 intoxicated driver. The Director issued an administrative review
 decision which revoked McGrail's driver's license for six months. 
McGrail requested a hearing on the administrative
 
review decision. McGrail initially requested subpoenas for
 Officer Cobb-Adams, Officer McGuire, and Officer Brouwer, but the
 ADLRO only issued subpoenas for Officers Cobb-Adams and Brouwer. 
At the first hearing, McGrail waived the testimony of Officers
 Cobb-Adams and Brower. The ADLRO hearing officer then granted
 McGrail's renewed request to subpoena Officer McGuire and the
 hearing was continued to secure her presence. The hearing was
 continued twice more, once because McGrail failed to submit the
 documents necessary to subpoena Officer McGuire and the second
 time because Officer McGuire called in sick after being
 subpoenaed. McGrail did not subpoena Officer McGuire for the
 rescheduled hearing, and McGrail informed the hearing officer
 that he was not requesting a further continuance to secure
 Officer McGuire's presence.
 
At the rescheduled hearing, McGrail moved to strike
 
Officer McGuire's unsworn police report. McGrail also moved to
 strike Officer McGuire's unsworn statements to Officer Cobb-Adams
 regarding Officer McGuire's basis for stopping McGrail's vehicle,
 which were included in Officer Cobb-Adams's sworn police report. 
The hearing officer took McGrail's motions under advisement. 
The hearing officer subsequently granted McGrail's motion to
 strike Officer McGuire's police report because it was an unsworn
 statement. The hearing officer, however, denied McGrail's motion
 to strike Officer McGuire's statements to Officer Cobb-Adams that
 were included in Officer Cobb-Adams's sworn police report. 
Based on Officer McGuire's unsworn statements in
 
Officer Cobb-Adams's sworn police report, the hearing officer
 found and concluded that Officer McGuire had reasonable suspicion
 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to stop McGrail's vehicle. The hearing officer made additional
 
findings which led to his conclusions that (1) there was probable
 cause to believe that McGrail operated a vehicle while under the
 influence of an intoxicant; (2) the evidence demonstrated, by a
 preponderance, that McGrail operated a vehicle while under the
 influence of an intoxicant; and (3) McGrail was a highly
 intoxicated driver due to his breath test result of .259 grams of
 alcohol per 210 liters of breath. The hearing officer ruled that
 McGrail's elevated breath test result was an aggravating factor
 that warranted an increase in McGrail's revocation period. The
 hearing officer therefore increased the period of McGrail's
 revocation from six months to eight months.
 
III.
 
McGrail filed a petition for judicial review of the
 
hearing officer's decision. The District Court of the First
 
3
Circuit (District Court)  affirmed the hearing officer's
decision, and it issued its "Decision and Order Affirming
 Administrative Revocation" (Decision and Order) and its "Judgment
 on Appeal" (Judgment) on April 19, 2010. 
This appeal followed. 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal to this court, McGrail argues that: (1) the
 
hearing officer erred when he considered Officer McGuire's
 unsworn statements contained in Officer Cobb-Adams's sworn police
 report to find reasonable suspicion for the traffic stop of
 McGrail's vehicle; and (2) the hearing officer violated McGrail's
 due process rights by increasing the period of his revocation by
 two months over the period imposed in the administrative review
 decision, where no additional or different evidence was presented
 to the hearing officer. 
As set forth below, we agree with McGrail that the
 
hearing officer erred in considering Officer McGuire's unswowrn
 statements that were contained in Officer Cobb-Adams's sworn
 
3
 The Honorable William A. Cardwell presided.
 
6
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
police report. We therefore reverse the District Court's
 
Judgment, which affirmed the administrative revocation of
 McGrail's driver's license. In light of our resolution of
 McGrail's first point of error, we need not address the due
 process claim he raises in his second point of error. 
I.
 
We review the District Court's decision to affirm the 
Director's administrative revocation of McGrail's driver's license to determine if the District Court was right or wrong in its decision. Brune v. Admin. Dir. of the Courts, 110 Hawai' i 
172, 176-177, 130 P.3d 1037, 1041-42 (2006). The District Court's review of the Director's decision is limited to the record of the administrative hearing and the issues of whether the Director: 
(1) Exceeded constitutional or statutory authority; 
(2) Erroneously interpreted the law; 
(3) Acted in an arbitrary or capricious manner; 
(4) Committed an abuse of discretion; or 
(5) Made a determination that was unsupported by the
evidence in the record. 
HRS § 291E-40(c) (2007). 
II.
 
McGrail requested an administrative hearing pursuant to
 
HRS § 291E-38 (2007) to challenge the initial administrative
 
review decision to revoke his driver's license. HRS § 291E-38(e)
 provides, in relevant part, that upon conducting the
 administrative hearing:
 
(e) The [D]irector shall affirm the administrative
revocation only if the [D]irector determines that:
 
(1)	 There existed reasonable suspicion to stop the
vehicle . . . ;
 
(2)	 There existed probable cause to believe that the
respondent operated the vehicle while under the
influence of an intoxicant; and 
(3)	 The evidence proves by a preponderance that: 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(A)	 The respondent operated the vehicle while
under the influence of an intoxicant[.]
 
Based on the record, it appears that Officer McGuire
 
was solely responsible for the decision to stop McGrail's car. 
Officer McGuire was the only officer who had observed McGrail's
 alleged unsafe and erratic driving, which was the asserted basis
 for the stop, and Officer McGuire was the officer who effected
 the traffic stop. The other police officers, including Officer
 Cobb-Adams, arrived at the scene after McGrail had already been
 stopped.
 
The hearing officer struck Officer McGuire's unsworn
 
police report, in which she recited her observations of McGrail's
 driving which led her to stop his car, because it was an unsworn
 statement. The only other evidence before the hearing officer
 regarding the basis for the traffic stop was Officer McGuire's
 unsworn statements to Officer Cobb-Adams that were included in
 Officer Cobb-Adams's sworn police report. Therefore, the
 validity of the hearing officer's determination that there was
 reasonable suspicion to stop McGrail's car turns on whether the
 hearing officer could properly consider Officer McGuire's
 statements that were included in Officer Cobb-Adams's police
 report.
4
 
McGrail argues that the hearing officer erred in 
considering Officer McGuire's unsworn statements contained in Officer Cobb-Adams's sworn police report. As McGrail acknowledged to the hearing officer, hearsay is generally admissible at administrative hearings. See Price v. Zoning Bd. 
of Appeals, 77 Hawai' i 168, 176 & n.8, 883 P.2d 629, 637 & n.8 
(1994). However, McGrail argues that given the particular statutory scheme for administrative driver's license revocations set forth in HRS Chapter 291E, Part III, and the emphasis placed 
4 McGrail does not dispute that if the hearing officer could properly
consider Officer McGuire's statements in Officer Cobb-Adams's police report in
determining whether there was reasonable suspicion for the stop, then there
was sufficient evidence to support the hearing officer's determination. 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by that scheme on sworn statements, the hearing officer should
 
not have considered Officer McGuire's unsworn statements in
 Officer Cobb-Adams's sworn police report to find reasonable
 suspicion for the stop.
 
We conclude that the statutory scheme reveals the 
Hawai'i Legislature's intent that sworn statements be submitted 
by police and other government officers playing crucial roles in the administrative revocation process. It also reveals the importance the Legislature placed on sworn statements by such officers as a means of ensuring the reliability of their statements and the evidence used in the administrative revocation process. Given the statutory scheme, we conclude that the hearing officer erred in considering Officer McGuire's unsworn statements contained in Officer Cobb-Adams's sworn police report to find reasonable suspicion for the stop of McGrail's vehicle. 
III.
 
We begin by examining the legislative intent underlying
 
the enactment of HRS Chapter 291E, Part III, which establishes
 the administrative revocation process. In establishing this
 process, the Legislature emphasized the importance of sworn
 statements by requiring them for police and government officers
 playing key roles in the revocation process.
 
For example, for drivers like McGrail who are arrested
 
for alcohol-related OVUII and submit to an alcohol concentration
 test, the administrative revocation process is triggered by the
 
5
 respondent-driver's arrest and a test establishing that the
respondent's alcohol concentration was .08 or more. 
HRS § 291E­
5
 In the administrative revocation proceedings, the person arrested for
OVUII and/or to whom a notice of administrative revocation has been issued is
referred to as the "respondent." That person becomes the "petitioner" when he
or she seeks judicial review of the Director's post-hearing decision to revoke
the person's license. Thus, McGrail was the "respondent" during his
administrative revocation proceedings and became the "petitioner" when he
sought judicial review of the Director's decision in the District Court.
 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
36(a) (2007).6 When this occurs, HRS § 291E-36(a) requires that
 
sworn statements of the arresting officer, the person responsible
 
for maintenance of the testing equipment, and the person who
 conducted the test be submitted immediately to the Director for
 the initial administrative review. HRS § 291E-36(a) provides in
 relevant part:
 
§ 291E-36 Documents required to be submitted for
administrative review; sworn statements. (a) Whenever a
respondent has been arrested for a violation of section
291E-61 or 291E-61.5 and submits to a test that establishes:
 the respondent's alcohol concentration was .08 or more
. . . , the following shall be forwarded immediately to the
[D]irector:
 
(1)	 A copy of the arrest report . . . and the sworn
statement of the arresting law enforcement
officer . . . , stating facts that establish
that: 
(A)	 There was reasonable suspicion to stop the
vehicle . . . ; 
(B)	 There was probable cause to believe that
the respondent had been operating the
vehicle while under the influence of an
 intoxicant; and 
(C)	 The respondent agreed to be tested . . . ; 
(2)	 In a case involving an alcohol related offense,
the sworn statement of the person responsible
for maintenance of the testing equipment,
stating facts that establish that, pursuant to
section 321-161 and rules adopted thereunder: 
(A)	 The equipment used to conduct the test was
approved for use as an alcohol testing
device in this State; 
(B)	 The person had been trained and at the
time the test was conducted was certified
 and capable of maintaining the testing
equipment; and 
(C)	 The testing equipment used had been
properly maintained and was in good
working condition when the test was
conducted; 
6 We cite to the provisions of HRS Chapter 291E, Part III, that were in
effect at the time relevant to McGrail's case. HRS §§ 291E-36 (2007) and HRS
§ 291E-37(a) (2007) were subsequently amended effective July 1, 2012, in ways
not relevant to this appeal. 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 327, §§ 13, 14, and 27
at 1099, 1108. HRS § 291E-38(h) (2007) was renumbered as HRS § 291E-38(g)
effective July 1, 2012, but the text of the provision did not change. 2012
 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 327, §§ 15, 27 at 1102-03, 1108. 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3)	 In a case involving an alcohol related offense,
the sworn statement of the person who conducted
the test, stating facts that establish that,
pursuant to section 321-161 and rules adopted
thereunder: 
(A)	 The person was trained and at the time the
test was conducted was certified and
 capable of operating the testing
equipment; 
(B)	 The person followed the procedures
established for conducting the test; 
(C)	 The equipment used to conduct the test
functioned in accordance with operating
procedures and indicated that the
respondent's alcohol concentration was at,
or above, the prohibited level; and 
(D)	 The person whose breath or blood was
tested is the respondent[.]
 
(Emphases added.)
 
The Director, through an ADLRO review officer,
 
automatically reviews the issuance of the notice of
 
administrative revocation. HRS § 291E-37(a) (2007). In
 conducting this administrative review, the Director "shall
 consider," among other things, "[t]he sworn statement of any law
 enforcement officer or other person or other evidence or
 information required by section 291E-36." HRS § 291E-37(c)(3)
 (2007). 
If the Director revokes the respondent's license at the
 
administrative review level, the respondent-driver is entitled to
 request and obtain an administrative hearing before an ADLRO
 hearing officer. HRS § 291E-38(a) (2007). At the hearing, the
 hearing officer must admit into evidence and consider the sworn
 statements required by HRS § 291E-36. HRS § 291E-38(h) (2007)
 provides in relevant part: "The sworn statements provided in
 section 291E-36 shall be admitted into evidence. The [D]irector
 shall consider the sworn statements in the absence of the law
 enforcement officer or other person." In addition, the
 respondent-driver is entitled to have the Director issue a
 subpoena to require the appearance at the hearing of any "law 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
enforcement officer or other person who made a sworn statement"
 
whom the respondent-driver wishes to examine. Id. 
IV.
 
In enacting the statutory scheme, the Legislature chose
 
to require the submission of sworn statements by key police and
 government officers as a means of ensuring the reliability of the
 revocation process. At the administrative review level, the
 Director makes the initial revocation decision based purely on
 documentary evidence. For cases like McGrail's, the Legislature
 mandated the submission of the sworn statements of the arresting
 law enforcement officer, the person responsible for maintenance
 of the testing equipment, and the person who conducted the test,
 and the Legislature further required that the Director consider
 such sworn statements in the initial administrative review. HRS
 § 291E-36(a). At the administrative hearing level, the
 Legislature mandated that the sworn statements required for the
 administrative review "shall be admitted into evidence" at the
 hearing. HRS § 291E-38(h). The Legislature also gave the
 respondent-driver the right to subpoena any officer or other
 person who made a sworn statement whom the respondent wishes to
 examine at the hearing. Id.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court and this court have also 
recognized the importance placed on sworn statements in the statutory scheme by generally precluding the hearing officer from considering unsworn statements of law enforcement officers who do not appear to testify. In Desmond v. Admin. Dir. of the Courts, 91 Hawai' i 212, 982 P.2d 346 (App. 1998) (Desmond I), this court 
concluded that: 
Based on HRS §§ 286-257, -258, and -259 [(the predecessors
of HRS §§ 291E-36, -37, and -38)], . . . upon the
[respondent-driver's] objection, the Hearing Officer must
exclude from the record only the following: (a) all unsworn
statements (except the arrest report) of law enforcement
officials who do not appear to testify; and (b) all other
evidence that is both irrelevant and prejudicial.
 
Desmond I, 91 Hawai' i at 220, 982 P.2d at 354 (emphasis added), 
rev'd on other grounds, 90 Hawai' i 301, 978 P.2d 739 (1999) 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Desmond II). The Hawai' i Supreme Court in Desmond II held that 
this court's above-quoted conclusion was correct. Desmond II, 90 
Hawai'i at 301-02, 978 P.2d at 739-40. 
Given the importance placed on sworn statements to 
ensure reliability under the statutory scheme, as recognized by 
Hawai'i precedents, we conclude that the hearing officer erred in 
considering the unsworn statements of the Stopping Officer that were included in the Arresting Officer's sworn police report to determine that there was reasonable suspicion to stop McGrail's car. We hold that where, as in this case, the Arresting Officer played no role in, and had no influence on, the decision to stop the vehicle, the hearing officer cannot consider the unsworn statements of the Stopping Officer in determining whether there was reasonable suspicion for the stop simply because the Stopping Officer's unsworn statements were included in the sworn police-report statement of the Arresting Officer. To permit the hearing officer to consider the Stopping Officer's unsworn statements under the circumstances of this case would conflict with the Legislature's reliance on the sworn statements of key police and government officials as a means of ensuring the reliability of the revocation process. It would also conflict with the requirement under Desmond I and Desmond II that the hearing officer exclude unsworn statements of non-testifying police officers where the respondent-driver objects. 
The sworn statements that must be submitted under HRS 
§ 291E-36 (2007) involve police and government officers playing
 key roles and making crucial decisions that affect the revocation
 process. These are individuals that typically provide
 information that is directly relevant to the determinations the
 Director must make in order to revoke a respondent's driver's
 license in a case like McGrail's, namely, that (1) there existed
 reasonable suspicion to stop the vehicle; (2) there existed
 probable cause to believe that the respondent operated the
 vehicle while under the influence of an intoxicant; and (3) the
 preponderance of the evidence shows that the respondent operated
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the vehicle while under the influence of an intoxicant. HRS §§
 
291E-36(a) and 291E-38(e). Although the arresting law
 enforcement officer, who must submit a sworn statement, may often
 be the stopping police officer, HRS § 291E-36 does not
 specifically require a sworn statement by the stopping police
 officer. Nevertheless, in light of the importance placed on
 sworn statements as a means of ensuring reliability under the
 statutory scheme, we conclude that it would be incongruous under
 the circumstances of this case to permit the hearing officer to
 consider the unsworn statements of the non-testifying Stopping
 Officer to determine whether reasonable suspicion existed to stop
 McGrail's vehicle.
 
Because of the emphasis placed on sworn statements 
under the statutory scheme, we stated in our opinion in Desmond I that "[t]he job of the Administrative Driver's License Revocation Office would be simpler if all statements of every law enforcement official were worded as sworn statements." Desmond I 
91 Hawai' i at 219 n.4, 982 P.2d at 353 n.4. At oral argument, 
the Director conceded that the Stopping Officer could have without any difficulty submitted a sworn statement in this case. Indeed, other police officers besides the Arresting Officer submitted sworn police reports in this case. Therefore, it does not appear that requiring an officer in the position of the Stopping Officer to submit a sworn police report would impose a significant burden on the government. 
V.
 
In opposing McGrail's arguments, the Director notes
 
that McGrail was given the opportunity to subpoena the Stopping
 Officer but ultimately declined that opportunity. However, the
 administrative revocation process places the burden on the
 government to establish a prima facie case for revocation, 
including that reasonable suspicion existed to stop the
 respondent's vehicle, before the respondent has any burden to
 present evidence. See Kernan v. Tanaka, 75 Haw. 1, 30, 856 P.2d
 
1207, 1222 (1993). Here, the government did not establish a
 
14
  7
FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prima facie case for revocation because the hearing officer could
 
not properly consider the Stopping Officer's unsworn statements
 contained in the Arresting Officer's sworn police report. 
Therefore, whether McGrail had the opportunity to subpoena the
 Stopping Officer is of no consequence because the burden to
 present evidence never shifted to McGrail.
 
The Director also argues that the hearing officer
 
properly considered the Stopping Officer's unsworn statements
 contained in the Arresting Officer's sworn police report because 
hearsay is generally admissible in administrative proceedings and
 because police officers may rely on hearsay in determining
 reasonable suspicion. The Director's hearsay arguments are
 unpersuasive.
 
First, our decision does not depend on whether hearsay
 
is admissible in administrative proceedings. Rather, it is based
 on the specific importance the Legislature placed on sworn
 statements as a means of ensuring reliability in the particular
 administrative revocation process at issue in this appeal. 
Indeed, a sworn statement itself is hearsay, and thus our
 decision does not turn on whether hearsay is generally admissible
 in administrative proceedings.
 
The ability of police officers to rely on hearsay 
information in determining reasonable suspicion also does not detract from our analysis.
7 The focus of the reasonable 
suspicion determination is still on what the officer who effected the traffic stop knew and believed at the time of the stop. See 
State v. Bohannon, 102 Hawai' i 228, 237, 74 P.3d 980, 989 (2003) 
("To justify an investigative stop . . . 'the police officer must be able to point to specific and articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences from those facts, reasonably 
 In Adams v. Williams, 407 U.S. 143, 147 (1972), the United States
 
Supreme Court rejected the argument that reasonable cause for a stop and frisk
can only be based on the officer's personal observations. Similarly, in State
 v. Prendergast, 103 Hawai' i 451, 460-61, 83 P.3d 714, 723-24 (2004), the
Hawai'i Supreme Court held that, under appropriate circumstances, an anonymous
tip could provide reasonable suspicion to justify an investigatory stop of avehicle. 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
warrant that intrusion.'" (block quote format and citation
 
omitted)). Here, the Stopping Officer, who was solely
 responsible for making the decision to stop McGrail's car, did
 not submit a sworn statement attesting to her basis for the stop
 and did not testify at the administrative hearing. There is no
 conflict between the Legislature's intent that a sworn statement
 be used as a means of ensuring reliability and the ability of a
 police officer to rely on hearsay information in determining
 reasonable suspicion. Accordingly, an officer's ability to rely
 on hearsay information does not undermine our conclusion that the
 hearing officer erred in considering the Stopping Officer's
 unsworn statements in finding that the Stopping Officer had
 reasonable suspicion to stop McGrail's car. 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we reverse the District Court's
 
Judgment. 
Jonathan Burge
for Petitioner-Appellant
 
Girard D. Lau
 Deputy Attorney General
Department of the Attorney
General
 
for Respondent-Appellee
 
16
 