  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30236
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MELVIN WRIGHT, JR., Defendant-Appellant, and
DENISE M. WRIGHT, Defendant-Cross-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0032)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Melvin Wright, Jr. (Melvin) and
 
Defendant-Cross-Appellant Denise M. Wright (Denise) appeal from
 
his/her respective Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on
 
December 3, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(circuit court).1 On September 22, 2009, a jury found Melvin and
 
Denise guilty of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree, in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 705-500(2) (1993),
 
707-701.5 (1993), 706-656 (1993 & Supp. 2010), and 702-203(2)
 
(1993).
 
On appeal: 
(1) Melvin contends the circuit court abused its
 
discretion when it denied his motion for a change of venue
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (Prosecutor) and media
 
services generated highly inflammatory, prejudicial and emotional
 
pre-trial publicity.
 
(2) Denise contends the circuit court erred when it
 
(a) failed to instruct the jury that it could not disregard the
 
court's qualification of Sheila Wendler, M.D. (Dr. Wendler) as an
 
expert by considering either Dr. Wendler's foreign medical
 
training or the number of years she had practiced in the United
 
States, (b) failed to question the jurors to determine whether
 
they had considered information Denise claims was prejudicial,
 
and (c) denied Denise's Motion for New Trial on the same grounds.
 
Melvin and Denise ask this court to vacate the circuit
 
court's judgments and grant each of them a new trial.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Melvin
 
and Denise's points of error as follows:
 
(1) The circuit court did not abuse its discretion 
when it denied Melvin's motion for a change of venue because the 
substantially factual and neutral pretrial publicity, which 
predominantly occurred long before jury selection, did not result 
in a presumption of juror prejudice or prevent the court from 
empaneling an impartial jury through its use of extensive voir 
dire. State v. Pauline, 100 Hawai' i 356, 365-69, 60 P.3d 306. 
315-19 (2002). 
(2)(a) 
The circuit court did not err when it denied
 
Denise's motion for further jury instructions. Denise argues
 
that jury Communication No. 1 evidences at least one juror's
 
intent to disregard the circuit court's qualification of
 
Dr. Wendler as an expert in forensic psychiatry. "When jury
 
instructions or the omission thereof are at issue on appeal, the
 
standard of review is whether, when read and considered as a
 
whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient,
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v. Gonsalves, 108 
Hawai'i 289, 292, 119 P.3d 597, 600 (2005) (quoting State v. 
Arceo, 84 Hawai' i 1, 11, 928 P.2d 843, 853 (1996)). 
Jury Communication No. 1 was a question of credibility, 
which asked: "How many years of work experience as a forensic 
psychiatrist does Dr. Wendler have (defense) in the US[?] Please 
do not include educational experience, or fellowship training[.]" 
Dr. Wendler's testimony in the circuit court did not specify how 
much work experience she had in the United States excluding 
educational experience or fellowship training. However, 
Dr. Choy, the State of Hawai' i's expert witness, testified that 
he had been practicing clinical psychology for 32 years and had been the director of the Kapiolani Child Protection Center at 
Kapiolani Medical Center for the last 20 to 25 years. 
The circuit court qualified Dr. Wendler as an expert 
witness, instructed the jury with regard to expert witness 
testimony, and further instructed the jury in response to jury 
Communication No. 1 that "[y]ou have received all the evidence 
for your consideration, and you are to rely upon your collective 
memory." Therefore, the circuit court did not err in denying 
Denise's motion for further jury instructions because (1) the 
"jurors [were] presumed to follow the court's instructions" 
regarding Dr. Wendler's testimony, State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai' i 
405, 415, 16 P.3d 246, 256 (2001), and (2) the circuit court's answer to Communication No. 1 was not "prejudicially 
insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." 
Gonsalves, 108 Hawai' i at 292, 119 P.3d at 600. 
(2)
(b) 
The circuit court did not err when it denied
 
Denise's motion to individually voir dire the jurors to ascertain
 
whether they considered Dr. Wendler's foreign medical training or
 
the number of years she had practiced in the United States. Jury
 
Communication No. 1 was a question regarding Dr. Wendler's
 
credibility that did not evidence juror bias regarding
 
Dr. Wendler's foreign medical training or the number of years she
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had practiced in the United States. There is no evidence that
 
the jury disregarded the circuit court's qualification of
 
Dr. Wendler as an expert witness. Therefore, it was not error
 
for the circuit court to deny Denise's motion for individual
 
juror voir dire. 
(2)(c) 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion
 
when it denied Denise's Motion for New Trial. Denise contends
 
the circuit court erred when it denied her motion because the
 
court (i) failed to instruct the jury that it could not disregard
 
the court's qualification of Dr. Wendler as an expert by
 
considering either her foreign medical training or the number of
 
years she had practiced in the United States and (ii) failed to
 
question the jury to determine whether they considered
 
information Denise claims was prejudicial. Issues (i) and (ii)
 
have been disposed of above; therefore, we address only the issue
 
of whether the circuit court abused its discretion when it denied
 
Denise's Motion for New Trial. 
As a general matter, the granting or denial of a
motion for new trial is within the sound discretion of the
 
trial court and will not be disturbed absent a clear abuse
 of discretion. The same principle is applied in the context
of a motion for new trial premised on juror misconduct. The
 trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly exceeds
the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant.
 
State v. Yamada, 108 Hawai' i 474, 478, 122 P.3d 254, 258 (2005) 
(quoting State v. Kim, 103 Hawai' i 285, 290, 81 P.3d 1200, 1205 
(2003)).
 
Discussing juror misconduct, this court has stated:
 
A motion for a new trial based on juror misconduct can
be based upon (1) failure of one or more jurors to respond
truthfully to questions posed during voir dire, or (2)
misconduct by one or more jurors during the course of the
trial. In either event, the ultimate inquiry is whether the
misconduct deprived the defendant of the fundamental right
to a trial by twelve impartial jurors. If any member or
members of the jury was shown not to be impartial, the trial
court's failure to grant a new trial is an abuse of
discretion.
 
When the basis for the motion is juror misconduct
during jury deliberations, the first responsibility of the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
trial court is to determine whether the misconduct is of a
 
nature which could substantially prejudice the defendant's
right to a fair trial. Whether it does rise to that level
 is ordinarily left to the discretion of the trial court.
Where the trial court determines that the juror misconduct
could substantially prejudice the defendant's right to a
fair and impartial jury, a rebuttable presumption of
prejudice is raised and the court must investigate the
totality of circumstances to determine if the misconduct
impacted the jury's impartiality.
 
State v. Adams, 10 Haw. App. 593, 599-600, 880 P.2d 226, 231-32
 
(1994) (citations omitted).
 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it
 
denied Denise's Motion for New Trial because Denise did not show
 
in the circuit court or on appeal that any member or members of
 
the jury were not impartial or participated in juror misconduct. 
As discussed above, Communication No. 1 was a question concerning
 
expert witness credibility, not evidence of juror misconduct,
 
bias, or prejudice.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence as to Defendant-Appellant Melvin Wright, Jr., and
 the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence as to Defendant-Cross-
Appellant Denise M. Wright, both filed on December 3, 2009 in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 5, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Lane Y. Takahashi 
for Defendant-AppellantMelvin Wright, Jr. Chief Judge 
Phyllis J. Hironaka,Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Cross-Appellant Denise M. Wright. Associate Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
5
 