  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30662
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
MITCHELL K. KURODA, obo AMBER S. KURODA, a minor,
Petitioner-Appellee,
v.
 
HOWARD SETH KEITH PECK, Respondent-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DA NO. 10-1-0942)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ., with Leonard, Presiding Judge,
concurring and dissenting separately)
 
Respondent-Appellant Howard Seth Keith Peck (Peck)
 
appeals from the July 12, 2010 Order for Protection by the Family
 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (family court) granting Petitioner-
Appellee Mitchell K. Kuroda's (Kuroda) "Petition for an Order for
 
Protection on Behalf of a Family or Household Member" to prohibit
 
Peck from, inter alia, contacting Kuroda's minor child Amber
 
(Minor) and coming within a hundred yards of Minor's place of
 
residence and school. The Order of Protection is in effect until
 
November 2018, when Minor reaches the age of eighteen. Minor was
 
nine years old at the time of the proceedings in the family
 
1
 The Honorable Wilson M.N. Loo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court, and according to evidence in the record, she is diagnosed
 
as autistic. 
On appeal, Peck contends that the family court erred
 
by: (1) permitting Kuroda's hearsay testimony as to Minor's
 
statements; (2) prohibiting cross-examination inquiry into the
 
area of Minor's suggestibility; (3) admitting Kuroda's Exhibit 7,
 
consisting of two photographs; and (4) denying Peck's counsel's
 
request to call additional witnesses. Additionally, Peck
 
contends that he was denied a fair trial due to the professional
 
misconduct of Kuroda's counsel. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised therein, we resolve
 
Peck's appeal as follows: 
In his first point of error, Peck contends the family
 
court erred in permitting Kuroda to give hearsay testimony
 
concerning statements made to Kuroda by Minor that Peck had
 
caused the injury on Minor's back. Specifically, Kuroda
 
testified that, while changing Minor's clothes in the morning on
 
June 11, 2010, he noticed a scab about the size of a nickel and
 
bruising in the area below her right shoulder blade. When
 
Kuroda's counsel asked Kuroda whether Minor told him how the
 
injury had occurred, Peck's counsel objected on hearsay grounds.
 
The objection was overruled. Kuroda then testified that Minor
 
told him "[m]ommy and papa were arguing[,]" that when Minor says
 
"papa" she is referring to Peck, and that Minor further told
 
Kuroda that "he" (apparently meaning Peck) had hit her with his
 
hand. Kuroda further testified that he had asked Minor if it
 
hurt and did she cry, and she told him it hurt and that she
 
cried.
 
"Where admissibility of evidence is determined by
 
application of the hearsay rule, there can only be one correct
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
result, and the appropriate standard for appellate review is the 
right/wrong standard." State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai' i 354, 362, 
227 P.3d 520, 528 (2010) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Moreover, the family court's decision should be 
affirmed if it is deemed correct, regardless of the reasoning or 
lack of reasoning articulated by the family court. See State v. 
Taniguchi, 72 Hawai' i 235, 240, 815 P.2d 24, 26 (1991) ("[W]e 
have consistently held that where the decision below is correct 
it must be affirmed by the appellate court even though the lower 
tribunal gave the wrong reason for its action."); Reyes v. 
Kuboyama, 76 Hawai' i 137, 140, 870 P.2d 1281, 1284 (1994). We 
conclude, however, that based on the record in this case, it was not proper to admit Kuroda's testimony regarding Minor's 
statements to him. 
As noted by Peck on appeal, the family court summarily 
overruled Peck's hearsay objection and there was no discussion or 
further consideration of the hearsay issue related to Kuroda's 
testimony. Significantly, however, this was the only testimony 
implicating Peck as having caused Minor's injury. Thus, it 
appears from the record that this testimony was hearsay, that is, 
"a statement, other than one made by the declarant while 
testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in evidence to prove 
the truth of the matter asserted." Hawai' i Rules of Evidence 
(HRE) Rule 801. "Generally, because hearsay is not subject to the same safeguards as are present during in-court testimony 
before a factfinder, hearsay is inadmissible at trial, unless it 
qualifies as an exception to the rule against hearsay." State v. 
Apilando, 79 Hawai' i 128, 131, 900 P.2d 135, 138 (1995) 
(citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
Kuroda argues on appeal that perhaps there were non-
hearsay purposes for which Kuroda's testimony was admitted, but
 
makes no credible argument based on the record in this case and
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
does not cite any authority in this regard. Moreover, although
 
Kuroda argues there may be hearsay exceptions, generally, he does
 
not assert any particular exception as applicable in this case.
 
As noted in Peck's opening brief, there is a hearsay
 
exception pursuant to HRE 804(b)(6) for a statement of a child,
 
which provides that:
 (b) Hearsay exceptions. The following are not
excluded by the hearsay rule if the declarant is unavailable
as a witness:
 
. . .
 (6) Statement by child. A statement made by a child
when under the age of sixteen, describing any act of sexual
contact, sexual penetration, or physical violence performed
with or against the child by another, if the court
determines that the time, content, and circumstances of the
statement provide strong assurances of trustworthiness with
regard to appropriate factors that include but are not
limited to: (A) age and mental condition of the declarant;
(B) spontaneity and absence of suggestion; (C)
appropriateness of the language and terminology of the
statement, given the child's age; (D) lack of motive to
fabricate; (E) time interval between the event and the
statement, and the reasons therefor; and (F) whether or not
the statement was recorded, and the time, circumstances, and
method of the recording. If admitted, the statement may be
read or, in the event of a recorded statement, broadcast
into evidence but may not itself be received as an exhibit
unless offered by an adverse party[.]
 
We agree with Peck that, given the record in this case,
 
the requirements for the hearsay exception under HRE 804(b)(6)
 
were not established. As Peck contends, the family court did not
 
consider, and made no determination, that the "time, content, and
 
circumstances of the statement provide strong assurances of
 
trustworthiness," and the court did not consider any of the
 
factors set forth in the rule. Moreover, the record is
 
insufficient for this court to conclude that the necessary
 
trustworthiness of the hearsay statement was established. 
Additionally, the record does not establish or show that Minor
 
was "unavailable as a witness." HRE 804(a) and (b). 
Unavailability is a threshold requirement for the hearsay
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exception under HRE 804(b)(6). HRE 804(b); See also Apilando, 79 
Hawai'i at 141, 900 P.2d at 148. "Unavailability as a witness" 
includes a situation in which the declarant "[i]s unable to be present or to testify at the hearing because of . . . then 
existing physical or mental illness or infirmity[.]" 
HRE 804(a)(4). Although there is evidence that Minor has been 
diagnosed as autistic, there was no explicit consideration as to 
her ability to testify. A showing as to her unavailability is 
required for the hearsay exception under HRE 804(b)(6) to apply. 
In sum, Kuroda does not assert and it does not appear
 
that any exception to the hearsay rule was established to allow
 
Kuroda's challenged hearsay testimony. The family court thus
 
erred in admitting Kuroda's hearsay testimony regarding Minor's
 
statements to him. There was no other evidence relating Minor's
 
injury to Peck and therefore the order for protection cannot
 
stand.
2
 
In light of the above, we conclude that the July 12,
 
2010 Order for Protection must be vacated. However, we remand
 
for a new trial because it is unclear from the record whether
 
Minor could have testified about the alleged incident. If so,
 
Kuroda could have introduced Minor's testimony rather than
 
relying on evidence that was admitted by the family court but
 
which is now determined on appeal to be incompetent. Harrell v.
 
W.B. Lloyd Constr. Co., 266 S.E.2d 626, 630 (N.C. 1980) (where
 evidence at trial was determined on appeal to be incompetent to
 
establish a claim, a new trial was properly granted by the
 
appellate court because "[h]ad it not been for the erroneous
 
admission of the incompetent evidence in the first place,
 
plaintiff might well have introduced other, competent evidence of
 
the same import[.]"); Midgett v. Nelson, 192 S.E. 854 (N.C.
 
2
 Given our ruling on Peck's first point of error, we need not reach
his further points of error.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1937); cf. In re Estate of Nakuapa, 3 Haw. 400 (Haw. Kingdom
 
1872). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the July 12, 2010 Order for
 
Protection entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit is
 vacated. This case is remanded to the family court for further
 
proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 23, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Steven J. Kim 
(Law Office of Steven J. Kim)for Respondent-Appellant 
Associate Judge 
Gregory RyanShannon Parrott (Law Office of Gregory Ryan, LLLC)for Petitioner-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
6
 