NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30227
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
STATE OF HAWAI» I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
LESLIE MICHAEL DABIS, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-342)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Leslie Michael Dabis (Dabis)
 
appeals from the Judgment filed on December 2, 2009 in the
 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court).1 Following a
 
trial, the jury found Dabis guilty of the following offenses:
 Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in violation of
 
2
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ÿÿ 712-1243(1 ) (Count I); Attempted
 
Methamphetamine Tracking in the Second Degree, in violation of
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 
2
 HRS ÿÿ 712-1243 (Supp. 2006) provides: " Promoting a dangerous drug in
the third degree. (1) A person commits the offense of promoting a dangerous
drug in the third degree if the person knowingly possesses any dangerous drug
in any amount."
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS ÿÿÿÿ 705-500(1)(b)
3 and 712-1240.8(1)4 (Count II); Prohibited
 
Acts Related to Drug Paraphernalia, in violation of HRS ÿÿ 329­
43.55 (Count XI); Driving without a License, in violation of
 
6 (Count XIV); and Reckless Driving of Vehicle,
 HRS ÿÿ 286-102(b)
in violation of HRS ÿÿ 291-2
7 (Count XVI).8
 
3
 HRS ÿÿ 705-500(1)(b) (1993) provides, in pertinent part: 
Criminal Attempt. (1) A person is guilty of an attempt to
commit a crime if the person: . . . (b) Intentionally
engages in conduct which, under the circumstances as the
person believes them to be, constitutes a substantial step
in a course of conduct intended to culminate in the person's
commission of the crime. 
4 HRS ÿÿ 712-1240.8 (Supp. 2006) provides, in pertinent part, as
follows: "Methamphetamine trafficking in the second degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of methamphetamine trafficking in the second degree if the
person knowingly distributes methamphetamine in any amount."
 
5 HRS ÿÿ 329-43.5(a) (1993) provides, in pertinent part:
 
Prohibited acts related to drug paraphernalia. (a) It is
 
unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to
use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of this chapter. Any person who violates this
section is guilty of a class C felony and upon conviction
may be imprisoned pursuant to section 706-660 and, if
appropriate as provided in section 706-641, fined pursuant
to section 706-640.
 
6 HRS ÿÿ 286-102(b) (Supp. 2006) ( Licensing ) provides: "A person
operating the following category or combination of categories of motor
vehicles shall be examined as provided in section 286-108 and duly licensed by
the examiner of drivers: (1) Mopeds; (2) Motorcycles and motor scooters; (3)
Passenger cars of any gross vehicle weight rating . . . ."
 
7 HRS ÿÿ 291-2 (Repl. 2007) provides: 
Reckless driving of vehicle or riding of animals; penalty. 
Whoever operates any vehicle or rides any animal recklessly
in disregard of the safety of persons or property is guilty
of reckless driving of vehicle or reckless riding of an
animal, as appropriate, and shall be fined not more than
$1,000 or imprisoned not more than thirty days, or both.
 
8
 The jury found Dabis not guilty as to two counts of prohibited acts
related to drug paraphernalia and one count of promoting a dangerous drug in
(continued...)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Prior to trial, on November 23, 2007, Dabis filed a
 
"Motion to Suppress Evidence and Statements," arguing inter alia
 
that the police did not have sufficient reliable information or
 
specific and articulable facts to support their stop and seizure
 
of him. Dabis therefore asserted that evidence obtained from his
 
seizure should be suppressed. After hearings on February 20,
 
2008, February 28, 2008, and March 27, 2008, the circuit court
 
entered "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law Denying
 
Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence and Statements" (Findings
 
and Conclusions) on May 13, 2008.
 
On appeal, Dabis contends that the circuit court erred
 
in denying his motion to suppress evidence.
 
We hold that the circuit court did not err in denying
 
Dabis's motion to suppress, but we do so on grounds different
 
than those stated by the circuit court.
 
I. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"A trial court's ruling on a motion to suppress 
evidence is reviewed de novo to determine whether the ruling was 
'right' or 'wrong.'" State v. Spillner, 116 Hawai» i 351, 357, 
173 P.3d 498, 504 (2007) (quoting State v. Kaleohano , 99 Hawai» i 
370, 375, 56 P.3d 138, 143 (2002)). "The proponent of the motion 
to suppress has the burden of establishing, by a preponderance of 
the evidence, that the statements or items sought to be excluded 
were unlawfully secured and that his or her right to be free from 
8(...continued)
the third degree. 
The jury was unable to come to a unanimous verdict as to
the other counts, but before a retrial was held on those counts, Dabis entered
a "no contest" plea to Count IV, which had been reduced to promotion of a
dangerous drug in the second degree (a lesser included offense of the original
charge). As part of the plea agreement, the State agreed to dismiss the
remaining mis-tried charges.
 Dabis was sentenced to concurrent terms of imprisonment of five years
for Count I, ten years for Count II, ten years for Count IV, five years for
Count XI, and thirty days for each of Counts XIV and XVI. Defendant Dabis was
 
ordered to serve a mandatory minimum term of one year for Count II pursuant to
HRS ÿÿ 712-1240.8.
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unreasonable searches or seizures was violated under the fourth 
amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, 
section 7 of the Hawai» i Constitution." Id. (citation omitted.) 
"The circuit court's conclusions of law underlying its 
ruling on a motion to suppress are also reviewed de novo under 
the right/wrong standard." State v. Vinuya , 96 Hawai» i 472, 480, 
32 P.3d 116, 124 (App. 2001). The trial court's findings of fact 
are reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard and as such 
"will not be set aside on appeal unless . . . determined to be 
clearly erroneous." Id. (citations omitted). 
Furthermore,
 
when the defendant's pretrial motion to suppress is denied
and the evidence is subsequently introduced at trial, the
defendant's appeal of the denial of the motion to suppress
is actually an appeal of the introduction of the evidence at
trial. Consequently, when deciding an appeal of the pretrial
denial of the defendant's motion to suppress, the appellate
court considers both the record of the hearing on the motion
to suppress and the record of the trial.
 
Id. at 481, 32 P.3d at 125 (quoting State v. Kong, 77 Hawai» i 
264, 266, 883 P.2d 686, 688 (App. 1994)). 
II. CASE BACKGROUND
 
A. Statement of Facts
 
This case arose out of an incident that occurred on 
July 9, 2007, in Hilo, Hawai» i.9 Officer Brian Prudencio 
(Officer Prudencio), who was assigned to the Hilo Vice Section 
Ice Task Force Unit of the Hawai» i County Police Department, 
obtained information from a person he identified as a reliable 
confidential informant. In an affidavit dated the same day as 
the incident and supporting a search warrant in this case, 
Officer Prudencio attested that he spoke with the informant 
within five days prior to the incident "concerning 
9
 This factual summary is taken from the record and from the findings
of fact made by the circuit court in denying Dabis's motion to suppress.
Dabis does not challenge any of the findings of fact by the circuit court.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
methamphetamine distribution involving a male individual known
 
only as 'Les'." The informant told Officer Prudencio that "Les"
 
was Filipino, was not from the Big Island, and that "Les" had
 
been frequently coming to Hilo from either Maui or Honolulu to
 
sell methamphetamine. The informant further stated that "'Les'
 
is operating a beige colored sedan and that he frequents various
 
areas in Hilo to sell methamphetamine." The informant told
 
Officer Prudencio that "Les" keeps packaged methamphetamine with
 
him at all times in his pockets or within the vehicle he is
 
operating.
 
Officer Prudencio's affidavit also sets forth the basis
 
for his belief that the informant is reliable. He states that
 
the informant had assisted police on "more than three occasions
 
regarding drug purchases and information concerning possession
 
and distribution of methamphetamine in the past which resulted in
 
the recovery of methamphetamine." Officer Prudencio's affidavit
 
also states that information received from the informant in the
 
past had "resulted in the recovery of methamphetamine through
 
controlled purchases which resulted in a search warrant and
 
recovery of methamphetamine at the direction of your affiant." 
The affidavit further provides that the informant "related
 
against his/her penal interest to having become acquainted with
 
the physical characteristics of methamphetamine through having
 
been a past user," and related that he/she is familiar with the
 
ways methamphetamine is ingested, weighed and distributed. 
Officer Prudencio's affidavit then sets out the
 
information he received on the day of the incident as follows:
 
That on July 09, 2007, at 1610 hours, your affiant,
received information from a reliable confidential informant
 
that "Les" would be conducting a drug transaction that was
set to take place within the parking lot of the Kawailani
Pizza Hut parking lot, on the corner of West Kawailani
Street and Kinoole Street. With the information related
 from the reliable confidential informant, your affiant
proceeded to conduct checks at the described location.
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although Officer Prudencio describes the information received on
 
this date as being "from a reliable confidential informant," it
 
is not clear from the record whether it was the same informant
 
from whom he had previously received information about "Les."
 
At approximately 4:20 p.m. on July 9, 2007, about ten
 
minutes after contact with the informant that day, Officer
 
Prudencio and several other officers arrived at the Kawailani
 
Pizza Hut in an unmarked, eight-passenger white van. The van
 
reversed into a parking stall facing Kinoole Street to survey the
 
area.
 
A short time later, from his vantage point in the van,
 
Officer Prudencio saw a sedan which could be characterized as
 
beige or gold in color enter the parking lot. The driver of the
 
sedan was a male of Filipino descent (later identified as Dabis)
 
and the driver reversed into a parking stall next to another
 
vehicle. Officer Prudencio observed a female passenger seated
 
next to the driver, and she got out of the sedan and approached
 
the other vehicle. Officer Prudencio had the driver of the
 
police van drive closer to the sedan and he observed that the
 
sedan's driver was looking around as if he were "keeping a
 
watchful eye." Based on these observations, Officer Prudencio
 
suspected that a drug deal was taking place.
 
Officer Prudencio directed the driver of the police van
 
to stop in front of the sedan. The police van drove to a spot
 
between some gas pumps and the parking stalls, so that it
 
partially blocked the sedan and formed a "T" shape. Officer
 
Prudencio exited the van and could hear the sedan's engine
 
running, could see Dabis looking around the parking lot, and saw
 
Dabis was "moving and from the upper body up, and it got very
 
fast, quick, uh paced . . . arms moving." 
Officer Prudencio approached the front of the sedan. 
He was wearing his "battle dress uniform," which is a military­
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
style uniform consisting of blue pants, a blue long-sleeve
 
buttoned shirt reading "police" on the back, a police patch on
 
the left arm, and a police badge hanging from his neck to the
 
front chest area. As Officer Prudencio was in front of the sedan
 
and attempting to approach the driver's side, the sedan started
 
to move forward out of the stall. The sedan could not go around
 
both the van and Officer Prudencio. Officer Prudencio then drew
 
his gun and pointed it at the driver, testifying that "at that
 
time, I felt that the vehicle was deadly force coming to me so at
 
the same time for my safety as well as the safety for individuals
 
in the area, I drew my weapon."
 
After Officer Prudencio drew his firearm, Dabis
 
reversed the sedan over the parking lot curb and down a grassy
 
embankment before the sedan collided into two utility poles. 
Officer Prudencio followed the car down the embankment, yelling
 
"Stop. Police."
 
At the bottom of the slope, Officer Prudencio saw Dabis
 
jump into the back seat of the sedan and try to exit through a
 
back passenger door. Officer Prudencio yelled at the defendant
 
to stop and to unlock the car doors. Another officer, Officer
 
Weber, used a collapsible baton to break the passenger window,
 
and Officer Paul Fukuda (Officer Fukuda) reached in and unlocked
 
the door. Dabis and another male were found in the back seat of
 
the car.
 
After all the parties were secured, Officer Prudencio
 
asked Dabis for consent to search the sedan, which Dabis
 
refused.10 During the time the police took action regarding the
 
motor vehicle accident, Officer Fukuda, a narcotic canine handler
 
who had been in the police van, conducted a canine screen for
 
10 An investigation revealed that the sedan was registered to "Rodney
Miyazono," who told the police that he had lent the car to Leimomi Melendez,
his "sort of girlfriend," and that he had no belongings in the vehicle.
Melendez in turn lent the car to Dabis.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
drugs in the sedan. The canine alerted to the odor of a
 
controlled substance in the sedan.
 
Dabis was arrested for not having a driver's license
 
and for possession of a controlled substance. Officer Fukuda
 
conducted a pat-down search of Dabis's person, which recovered
 
U.S. currency.
 
That same day, Officer Prudencio prepared his affidavit
 
and requested a search warrant to search the sedan. The search
 
warrant was issued and a search of the vehicle was conducted
 
several hours later in the sally port of the Hilo Police Station.
 
Drugs and drug paraphernalia were recovered during the search.
 
B. Circuit Court Ruling
 
In its Findings and Conclusions, the circuit court
 
concluded that Dabis was seized when Officer Prudencio drew his
 
firearm and pointed it at Dabis, but that the facts at that point
 
"do not rise to the level of specific and articulable facts
 
indicating that criminal activity was afoot." The circuit court
 
thus concluded that the initial detention of Dabis, at the point
 
Officer Prudencio pointed his firearm, was illegal.
 
However, the circuit court further concluded that,
 
because of Dabis's subsequent illegal conduct, the police had
 
probable cause to detain him to investigate the offenses of
 
driving without a license, reckless driving of a vehicle, and
 
obedience to police officers. The circuit court then reasoned
 
that, during the time Dabis was validly detained for
 
investigation, the canine screen was done and that probable cause
 
existed for the search warrant to be issued. The circuit court
 
therefore denied the motion to suppress evidence.
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Dabis contends on appeal that the circuit court "erred
 
in not suppressing the evidence seized from the unconstitutional
 
and illegal stop of the Appellant on July 9, 2007."
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Both the United States and Hawai» i Constitutions 
provide protection against unreasonable searches and seizures. 
"We presume that a warrantless search or seizure is invalid 
unless and until the prosecution proves that the search or 
seizure falls within a well-recognized and narrowly defined 
exception to the warrant requirement." State v. Prendergast , 103 
Hawai» i 451, 454, 83 P.3d 714, 717 (2004) (citation omitted). 
In connection with the established guidelines, [i]t may be
stated . . . that the intrusion upon personal liberty must
be based on something more substantial than inarticulate
hunches, and that reasonableness would be judged by an
objective standard, namely, whether the facts known by the
officer would warrant a man of reasonable caution to believe
 that the action taken was appropriate.
 
State v. Onishi , 53 Haw. 593, 596, 499 P.2d 657, 659 (1972).
 
In this case, the initial approach by the police toward
 
Dabis was for investigatory purposes. "A law enforcement officer
 
may 'in appropriate circumstances and in an appropriate manner
 
approach a person for purposes of investigating possibly criminal
 
behavior even though there is no probable cause to make an
 
arrest.'" State v. Ward , 62 Haw. 459, 461, 617 P.2d 565, 566
 
(1980) (per curium) (quoting Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 22
 
(1968)).
 
To justify an investigative stop, short of arrest
based on probable cause, the police officer must be able to
point to specific and articulable facts which, taken
together with rational inferences from those facts,
reasonably warrant that intrusion. The ultimate test in
these situations must be whether from these facts, measured
by an objective standard, a man of reasonable caution would
be warranted in believing that criminal activity was afoot
and that the action taken was appropriate.
 
State v. Bohannon , 102 Hawai» i 228, 237, 74 P.3d 980, 989 (2003) 
(citations, brackets and quotation marks omitted). We consider 
the "totality of the circumstances" in determining whether 
reasonable suspicion supported a stop. See Spillner, 116 Hawai» i 
at 357, 173 P.3d at 504. 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. Seizure of Dabis
 
As an initial matter, we hold that Dabis was "seized"
 
within the meaning of the fourth amendment when the unmarked
 
police van stopped in front of the car Dabis was occupying and
 
Officer Prudencio, wearing police "battle dress uniform,"
 
approached the vehicle from the front. At that point, Dabis's
 
vehicle was blocked in the parking stall by the van and Officer
 
Prudencio. See Terry, 392 U.S. at 20 n.16 (explaining that a
 
person is seized "when the officer, by means of physical force or
 show of authority, has in some way restrained the liberty of a
 
citizen . . . ."); State v. Tsukiyama , 56 Haw. 8, 12, 525 P.2d
 
1099, 1102 (1974) ("In order to determine if the defendant's
 liberty was restrained and he was, therefore, seized, we must
 
evaluate the totality of the circumstances and decide whether or
 
not a reasonably prudent person would believe he was free to
 
go.").
 
Under the totality of the circumstances, a reasonable
 
person in Dabis's situation would not have felt that he or she
 
was free to leave, where both the van and Officer Prudencio
 
blocked Dabis's car. When Dabis started to move his vehicle
 
forward, Officer Prudencio then pulled out his gun and pointed it
 
at Dabis in self-protection.
11
 
Having determined that Dabis was "seized" at the point
 
of being blocked into the parking stall, we turn to the issue of
 
whether the police had reasonable suspicion of criminal activity
 
at that time to make such a seizure constitutional.
 
11 We note that under the circumstances, Officer Prudencio's drawing of
his pistol did not constitute an "arrest." Rather, it was a reasonable self-
protective measure. See State v. Goudy, 52 Haw. 497, 502-04, 479 P.2d 800,
803-04 (1971) ("[U]nder similar circumstances, the mere approach with drawn
pistols upon persons stopped for questioning is not an arrest."). Here,
although there was no evidence that Dabis was carrying a weapon, Dabis was
suspected of drug dealing and the sedan moved forward toward Officer
Prudencio. Under these circumstances, the officer's drawing of his gun was
reasonable.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. Reasonable Suspicion for An Investigatory Stop
 
As noted above, the record is not clear whether the
 
same informant was involved both prior to and on the day of the
 
incident. To the extent that it was the same informant that
 
provided information to Officer Prudencio within days of the
 
incident and on the day of the incident - in other words, one
 
informant who had reliably assisted police on three prior
 
occasions - that factor would provide added reliability to the
 
information known to police to support the stop of Dabis. See
 
Ward, 62 Haw. at 461, 617 P.2d at 567 (court noted as one factor
 
that confidential informant was known to police officer and had
 
provided reliable information in the past).
 
Even if we assume, arguendo, that there were two
 
informants and only the first informant had provided reliable
 
information in the past, the totality of the circumstances in
 
this case support the conclusion that the investigatory stop of
 
Dabis was warranted. That is, even if there was a second
 
informant that provided the information on the day of the
 
incident, under an objective standard, the totality of the
 
circumstances in this case includes the information provided
 
prior to the day of the incident and the more specific
 
information provided on the day of the incident, in conjunction
 
with Officer Prudencio's corroborating observations at the scene
 
in the Kawailani Pizza Hut parking lot a short time after contact
 
with the second informant.
 
The Hawai» i Supreme Court has decided cases involving 
investigatory stops based in part on information from known 
confidential informants, as well as cases involving anonymous 
tips. Based on these cases, we must consider whether the 
information provided by the informant(s) was sufficiently 
reliable or whether "other factors tending to corroborate the 
defendant's involvement in criminal activity are present." State 
11
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
v. Temple , 65 Haw. 261, 271, 650 P.2d 1358, 1364-65 (1982); see
 
also Ward; State v. Joao, 55 Haw. 601, 525 P.2d 580 (1974); State
 
v. Kuahuia, 62 Haw. 464, 616 P.2d 1374 (1980); State v. Kea, 61
 
Haw. 566, 606 P.2d 1329 (1980) (per curium); Goudy.
 
(1)	 Relevant Hawai» i Case Law Involving a Known
Confidential Informant 
Where the informant is known to law enforcement, courts
 
have considered whether that person has provided reliable
 
information in the past, or whether there is an adequate factual
 
basis that the person is a reliable informant. Ward , 62 Haw. at
 
461, 617 P.2d at 566-67; Joao , 55 Haw. at 605, 525 P.2d at 583;
 
Temple, 65 Haw. at 270, 650 P.2d at 1364 ("The informant was
 
known to [the officer] personally and had provided him with
 information in the past. This is a stronger case than obtains in
 
the case of an anonymous telephone tip.") (quoting Adams v.
 
Williams, 407 U.S. 143, 146-47 (1972)).
12
 
Ward and Joao are cases where the informant was known
 
to law enforcement. The informant in Ward  had provided reliable
 
information in the past, but there was no similar evidence in
 
Joao. Given these factors, plus the corroborating information
 
(or lack thereof) in the respective cases, the investigative stop
 was upheld in Ward  but not in Joao.
 
In Ward, the court held that a reliable confidential
 
informant's tip "was sufficiently corroborated by the officers'
 
observations to warrant a limited investigatory stop." 62 Haw.
 
at 461, 617 P.2d at 566. There, an officer received a call from
 
a confidential informant, whom he personally knew and who had
 
provided reliable information in the past. The informant stated
 
that:
 
12 In the context of an investigatory stop, the information from an
informant need not be of the same caliber as is required to support the higher
standard for probable cause. See Ward, 62 Haw. at 461, 617 P.2d at 566.
 
12
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Jeff Kealoha and another person . . . were on their way to
the IBEW Union Hall on Hau Street in a late model Cutlass
 
automobile bearing license number 6C87; that they were the
two individuals who had been in an altercation earlier with
 
union leader, Josiah Lii; that they had three machine guns
in the trunk of their car; and that they were probably
carrying firearms on their persons.
 
Id. at 460, 617 P.2d at 566. The court noted that "[h]ow and in
 
what manner the informant obtained this information is not shown
 
by the record." Id. Upon receiving the tip, the officers drove
 
to the union hall and set up a surveillance of the area. Id.
 
Approximately 45 minutes after receiving the informant's call,
 
the suspect car drove into the parking lot, and two men stepped
 
out; one of whom an officer recognized to be Jeff Kealoha. Id.
 
At that point:
 
There was nothing unusual or suspicious about
Kealoha's appearance or behavior. The agent noticed,
however, that the other man, the defendant, had a bulge
under his shirt at the right hip area. [The agents] drove
into the parking lot and as they approached the two men, the
officers saw the defendant looking at them while appearing
to adjust the bulge under his shirt. The agents came to a
stop near the two and alighted from their vehicle with guns
drawn. They ordered Kealoha and the defendant to place
their hands against the car and conducted a frisk of their
 persons. The object causing the bulge under the defendant's
shirt was revealed by the search to be a revolver.
 
Id. at 460-61, 617 P.2d at 566.
 
The court determined that the investigative stop was
 
warranted where "the substance of [the informant's] tip was very
 
specific and was adequately anchored as to time and place" and
 
where "the agents acted promptly upon the information and their
 
observations coincided in verifiable respects with their
 
informant's tip." Id.  at 461, 617 P.2d at 567.
 
In Joao, the court affirmed suppression of an automatic
 
pistol recovered from a stop and frisk based on a confidential
 
informant's tip. There, the informant told an officer that a
 
person named "Walter Joao was carrying a .22 caliber automatic
 
pistol and that he carried it with him whenever he's in Waikiki
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and traveling around in the town area." Id. at 602, 525 P.2d at
 
581-82. The police observed nothing unusual or suspicious about
 
Joao's conduct prior to frisking him and attempted to justify
 
their actions based on the informant's tip. Id. at 603-04, 525
 
P.2d at 582-83. The court stated that because the informer's tip
 
lacked "an adequate anchor, as to time and place, the reliability
 
of this information [was] greatly attenuated." Id. at 604, 525
 
P.2d at 582-83. Furthermore, although the officer testified that
 the informant was "reliable," his testimony merely stated this
 
factor as a conclusion rather than asserting the factual basis
 
upon which another person could draw this conclusion. Id. at
 
604, 525 P.2d at 583. Also, importantly, the Joao  court noted
 
that the informant's tip was the "sole justification for the stop
 
and frisk" in that case. Id.  at 604, 525 P.2d at 583.
 
Assuming arguendo there were two informants in the
 
instant case, the totality of the circumstances lie somewhere
 between Ward  and Joao, but are more similar to Ward. That is,
 
both informant(s) were known to Officer Prudencio and there is
 
evidence that the first informant had provided reliable
 
information in the past; the first informant provided general
 
information about "Les", similar to the tip in Joao, but the
 
information from the second informant was more specifically
 
anchored by time and place; the police acted promptly upon
 
receiving the more specific information from the second
 
informant; and the information provided by the informant(s) was
 
not the only justification for the stop because Officer Prudencio
 
was able to corroborate details provided by the informant(s) and
 
observed conduct he reasonably believed to be consistent with the
 
anticipated drug deal.
 
(2) Hawai» i Case Law Involving an Anonymous Tip 
Although this case deals with confidential informant(s)
 
known to Officer Prudencio, case law involving anonymous tips are
 
14
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
also instructive. That is, even when an informant is an 
anonymous person, the Hawai» i Supreme Court has held there may be 
sufficient basis to warrant an investigatory stop. See Goudy; 
Kea; Kuahuia. 
The decision in Goudy  is particularly helpful to our
 
analysis. In Goudy, a police sergeant received an anonymous
 
telephone call that a transaction involving a gun and jewelry was
 
about to take place at 127 Oneawa Street in Kailua, that the
 
buyer would be driving a black Barracuda automobile, and that the
 
passenger in the Baracuda would be the contact man to obtain the
 
articles. There was no description provided about the
 
individuals to be involved. The sergeant went to Kailua to check
 
the address, but no house existed with that address. Id.
 
However, he and another detective kept watch on Oneawa Street
 and, about an hour after receiving the anonymous call, observed a
 
black Barracuda on Oneawa driving toward Kaneohe. Id. The
 
officers followed the car and observed the defendant get out of
 
the car, enter a nearby lane, return with a beige-colored case
 
that appeared to contain a rifle, place the case into the car, go
 
back into the house, and return to the car with a brown paper
 
sack. Id. at 488-499, 479 P.2d at 801-802. After the car began
 
to head back towards Kailua, the police signaled the Barracuda to
 
pull over. Id. at 499, 479 P.2d at 802. "Up to this point,
 
there was nothing furtive in the actions of Kaaku and defendant,
 and nothing to arouse any suspicion of criminal activity, except
 
for substantial dovetailing of police observations with the
 
information given in the anonymous telephone call." Id. The
 
officers approached the car with pistols drawn and ordered the
 two occupants out of the car. During their approach to the car,
 
the officers saw the butt end of a rifle sticking out from a case
 
in the back seat. Upon opening the door, one officer also saw
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the butt end of a pistol on the floor. Id. at 499-500, 479 P.2d
 
at 802. 
The court concluded that while the anonymous phone call
 
standing alone did not justify an arrest or search, "the call was
 
a factor in the totality of circumstances which made the decision
 
of [the officers] to stop the Barracuda and approach its
 
occupants for questioning reasonable." Id.  at 501, 479 P.2d at
 
803. The court noted that the tip involved possible traffic in
 
firearms. Further, the court stated it would have been poor
 
police work for the officers not to have stopped the Barracuda
 
for questioning when "upon surveillance, they observed facts
 
which substantially corroborated the information in the telephone
 
call. The observed facts might have been consistent with lawful
 
activity. But they were also consistent with possible criminal
 
activity." Id.  at 502, 479 P.2d at 803. The court held that the
 
stop was reasonable.
 
Here, assuming arguendo that there were two informants,
 
the totality of the circumstances involved information provided
 
by known confidential informant(s), evidence as to the past
 
reliability of one of the informant(s), the observations by
 
Officer Prudencio -  at the specific location identified by the
 
second informant just a short time before -- that corroborated
 
information from the informant(s), and the observations of
 
Officer Prudencio that he reasonably believed were consistent
 
with a drug transaction. The information provided by the first
 
informant, who had previously given reliable information to
 
Officer Prudencio, included that "Les" operated a beige colored
 
sedan and that he frequented various areas in Hilo to sell
 
methamphetamine. On the date of the incident, the other
 
informant provided further specific information, that "Les" would
 
be conducting a drug transaction that "was set to take place
 
within the parking lot of the Kawailani Pizza Hut parking lot, on
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the corner of West Kawailani Street and Kinoole Street." 
Moreover, based on photographs and testimony in the record, the
 
Kawailani Pizza Hut parking lot is of limited size and consists
 
mainly of one row of eight or nine stalls.
 
Although the supreme court has warned that "[m]ere 
confirmation of innocent static details in an anonymous tip does 
not constitute corroboration" for purposes of determining 
probable cause, State v. Detroy , 102 Hawai» i 13, 20, 72 P.3d 485, 
492 (2003) (citing United States v. Clark , 31 F.3d 831, 834 (9th 
Cir. 1994)), such factors can be considered in the totality of 
the circumstances to support reasonable suspicion for an 
investigatory stop. As noted in Goudy , "given a state of facts, 
which separately may appear innocent but which taken together would warrant investigation, it would be poor police work to fail 
to make further investigation." Goudy , 52 Haw. at 501, 479 P.2d 
at 803 (citing Terry v. Ohio , 392 U.S. 1 (1968)). 
Here, the details as given by the informant(s)
 
substantially dovetailed with the observations of Officer
 Prudencio at the scene. Officer Prudencio observed a Filipino
 
male driving a beige or gold sedan pull into the specific
 
location given by the second informant just a short time after
 
the information was received. Other observations by Officer
 
Prudencio, although taken separately perhaps innocent conduct,
 
reasonably added to his belief under the totality of the
 
circumstances that a drug transaction was occurring.
13 First,
 
upon arriving at the parking lot, the sedan reversed into a stall
 next to another vehicle. Second, a female passenger in the sedan
 
got out and approached the other vehicle. Officer Prudencio
 
stated that this aroused his suspicions because the vehicle and
 
13 At the time of the incident, Officer Prudencio had been a police
officer for approximately seven years, had received special training in drug
investigations, and had conducted in excess of fifty investigations involving
illegal drugs and controlled substances.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
operator matched the description from the confidential informant
 
and "through my training and experience in conducting
 
[surveillance] of drug transactions, distributors at times
 
reverse into [their] stall so they can obtain easier exit, faster
 
exit, as to not [be] in one area long enough to be detected by
 
police or by concerned citizens who may report their activity[.]"
 
Officer Prudencio also reported that he found the female exiting
 
the sedan and approaching the other vehicle to be suspicious
 
based on his training and experience conducting surveillance of
 
drug transactions. According to Officer Prudencio, it is common
 
in drug transactions that a vehicle will park and occupants will
 
exit the vehicle to approach another individual or another
 
vehicle to carry currency or narcotics. 
Officer Prudencio also observed Dabis "looking around 
as if to be keeping a watchful eye." The Supreme Court has noted 
that "nervous, evasive behavior can be a pertinent factor in 
determining reasonable suspicion" especially when it is 
"unusually severe or persistent, or accompanied by other, more 
probative, grounds for reasonable suspicion." State v. 
Estabillio, 121 Hawai» i 261, 274, 218 P.3d 749, 762 (2009) 
(citation omitted). Here, although the described actions do not 
appear to have been "unusually severe or persistent," they were 
accompanied by other grounds supporting reasonable suspicion. 
Taken together, the totality of the circumstances in
 
this case made the seizure of Dabis objectively reasonable and we
 
hold there was reasonable suspicion for an investigatory stop.
 
C. There was Probable Cause to Search the Vehicle.
 
"Under the safeguards of the fourth amendment to the 
United States Constitution and article I, section 7 of the 
Hawai» i Constitution, all arrests and searches must be based upon 
probable cause." State v. Navas, 81 Hawai» i 113, 115-16, 913 
P.2d 39, 41-42 (1996) (footnotes omitted). Thus, we must 
18
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determine whether, based on the totality of the circumstances,
 
probable cause existed for the search of the vehicle which
 
ultimately yielded the drugs and drug paraphernalia. We review
 
this issue de novo. Id. at 123, 913 P.2d at 49.
 
"Probable cause exists when the facts and circumstances
 
within one's knowledge and of which one has reasonably
 
trustworthy information are sufficient in themselves to warrant a
 
person of reasonable caution to believe that an offense has been
 
committed." Id.  at 116, 913 P.2d at 42. 
Here, as Officer Prudencio approached the sedan that
 
Dabis was driving, it started moving forward towards Officer
 
Prudencio. Officer Prudencio then drew his gun and pointed it at
 
Dabis, whereafter the sedan reversed over the parking curb and
 
went down an embankment before colliding into a utility pole. 
Officer Prudencio thus had probable cause to believe that a crime
 
(i.e., reckless driving in violation of HRS ÿÿ 291-2) had
 
occurred. When Dabis could not produce a driver's license, there
 
was probable cause to arrest Dabis for driving without a license
 
in violation of HRS ÿÿ 286-102(b).
 
Based on the totality of the circumstances at that 
point, the officers also had reasonable suspicion to conduct the 
canine drug screen of the sedan. The officers had all of the 
information that had supported the initial stop of Dabis for a 
drug investigation, plus his actions thereafter in moving his 
vehicle towards Officer Prudencio and then quickly reversing his 
vehicle over the curbing and down the embankment in an effort to 
flee. As stated by the Hawai» i Supreme Court, "although not 
dispositive, flight from the police is a factor which may support a finding of probable cause." State v. Melear , 63 Haw. 488, 494, 
630 P.2d 619, 625 (1981) (citing Sibron v. New York , 392 U.S. 40, 
66-67 (1968); United States v. Minor, 382 F. Supp. 203, n.1 (D. 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Haw. 1974); Franklin v. United States, 382 A.2d 20 (D.C. App.
 
1978)).
 
We are therefore satisfied that there was probable
 
cause to support the issuance of the search warrant. Although
 
the information from the confidential informant(s) standing alone
 
would not have established probable cause, that information was
 
just one factor to be evaluated under the totality of the
 
circumstances. The tip from the informant(s), the observations
 
of Officer Prudencio at the scene, Dabis's actions in attempting
 
to flee, and the positive alert to drugs by the canine screen
 
together support probable cause sufficient for issuance of the
 
search warrant. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We conclude that the police acted constitutionally in
 
the initial investigatory stop of Dabis and in conducting the
 
canine screen. We further conclude that the warrant issued to
 
search the sedan was based on probable cause. Therefore, the
 
circuit court did not err in denying Dabis's motion to suppress
 
and we affirm the judgment of the circuit court.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, July 29, 2011. 
Vaughan S. Winborne Jr.
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Presiding Judge
Jason Skier 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Hawai» i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
20
 