FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
THE MALULANI GROUP, LIMITED fka MAGOON BROTHERS, LTD.,
a Hawaii corporation, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
KAUPO RANCH, LTD., a Hawaii corporation; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES OF
HAMOLE AKA MARIA HAMOLE; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES OF KALEIMOMI
PIIMAUNA AKA ROBERT KALEIMOMI PIIMAUNA; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES OF
KAWAI AKAHI; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES OF IPOALOHA KALALANI AKA IPO
KEKIWI; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES OR BENJAMIN KEKIWI AKA BENJAMIN
KAHALE KEKIWI; SAM K. KAAWA AKA SAMSON K. KAAWA; MAUREEN LISA
BULLER; JEFFREY LOU BULLER; JEROME PIIMAUNA; JEFFREY NOHUA
PIIMAUNA; ANDREW PIIMAUNA; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES OF JOSEPH N.
PIIMAUNA, JR., AKA JOSEPH NAHALE PIIMAUNA, JR.; WALTER HIU, JR.;
BEATRICE KAHUILA CHERRY; PATRICK KAHUILA; YOLANDA Y. MATA AKA
YOLANDA Y. HAUKI; EDWINA L. HIU; CLARENCE K. T. HIU; NANCY MISAO
KAHUILA BOND AKA NANCY M. MCDANIEL; LINDA A. CLARK; HEIRS AND/OR
DEVISEES OF ABEL WAILANI HAI; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES OF ADAM SCOTT
HAI, SR.; AGNES KANALULU SMITH; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES OF JOHN E.
KAMAI; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES OF PALAONEA; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES
OF JOSHUA AHULII; LUCINDA PUPUHI; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES OF
KAMAKALOHI; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES OF PUPUHI; HEIRS AND/OR
DEVISEES OF HOLI; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES OF A. KAWEA AKA ANE KAWEA
and as ANE KAULAINAMOKU; HEIRS AND/OR DEVISEES OF WAHINEAEA
and JOHN DOES 1-100; JANE DOES 1-100; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-100;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-100; DOE ENTITIES 1-100 and
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-100, Defendants-Appellees.
 
NO. 30509
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0501(3))
 
MAY 5, 2014
 
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD and GINOZA, JJ.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant The Malulani Group, Limited, fka 
Magoon Brothers, Ltd., (Malulani) filed this declaratory action
 
alleging that it owns property in Kaupo, Hana, Maui (Malulani
 Parcel) and seeking to establish implied access and utility
 easements across adjacent property (Kaupo Parcel) in which
 Defendant-Appellee Kaupo Ranch, Ltd. (Kaupo Ranch) has an
 interest. Malulani's First Amended Complaint asserts three
 claims: (1) an access easement implied by necessity; (2) an
 access easement implied by prior use; and (3) a utilities
 easement as part of an access easement.
 
The Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit
 
1
court) granted summary judgment for Kaupo Ranch on all of
Malulani's claims and granted costs to Kaupo Ranch. 
On April 16,
 
2010, the circuit court entered a Final Judgment and Decree
 (Final Judgment) against Malulani, from which Malulani appeals. 
For the reasons discussed below, we vacate the Final
 
Judgment entered by the circuit court and remand for further
 proceedings.
I. Background
 
The Malulani Parcel consists of approximately 20.2 
acres that Malulani asserts is wholly surrounded and landlocked 
by the Kaupo Parcel, which in turn consists of approximately 118 acres. 
Malulani further contends that records in the Bureau of 
Conveyances contain no access or utilities easements between the Malulani Parcel and the closest government road, Pi
'ilani 
Highway. However, Malulani asserts that the Malulani Parcel and the Kaupo Parcel were initially owned by the Kingdom of Hawai
'i, 
that each parcel was conveyed by respective land grants in the 1850s, and that a continuous and apparent easement for access between the Malulani Parcel and Pi
'ilani Highway exists over the 
Kaupo Parcel. Malulani thus claims an implied easement over the Kaupo Parcel in favor of the Malulani Parcel for access to 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided. 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pi'ilani Highway. Malulani further claims that such an easement 
creates a general right-of-way for all reasonable purposes, 
including utility easements. 
The circuit court resolved all of Malulani's claims by
 
granting summary judgment for Kaupo Ranch. The primary basis for
 the circuit court's ruling was that the Kingdom of Hawaii's
 original ownership of both the Malulani Parcel and the Kaupo
 Parcel could not, as a matter of law, satisfy the "unity of
 ownership" requirement for implying an easement. Additionally,
 the circuit court concluded that Malulani's claims were barred by
 the statute of limitations set forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) § 657-31 (1993). 
In its points of error raised on appeal, Malulani
 
contends that the circuit court erred by: 1) granting summary
 judgment to Kaupo Ranch based on the court's conclusion that the
 Kingdom of Hawaii's common initial ownership of the properties
 could not, as a matter of law, satisfy the unity of ownership
 requirement for the implied easement claims; 2) concluding that
 the utility easement claim fails as a matter of law because it
 derives from Malulani's implied easement claims; 3) concluding
 that Kaupo Ranch was entitled to summary judgment on the
 additional basis that the statute of limitations in HRS § 657-31
 barred Malulani's claims; 4) finding that Kaupo Ranch is the
 current owner of an undivided interest in the Kaupo Parcel;
 5) entering the April 16, 2010 Final Judgment; and 6) awarding
 costs to Kaupo Ranch.
 
We hold that, under the circumstances of this case, the
 
Kingdom of Hawaii's prior ownership of both the Malulani Parcel
 and the Kaupo Parcel satisfies the unity of ownership requirement
 for an implied easement claim. Further, we hold that the statute
 of limitations set forth in HRS § 657-31 does not apply to an
 implied easement claim and thus does not bar the claims in this
 case. Summary judgment and the costs awarded in favor of Kaupo
 Ranch were not warranted, and the case is remanded.
 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II. Standards of Review
 
A. 	Summary Judgment 
"On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
reviewed de novo." First Ins. Co. of Hawai' i v. A & B 
Props., Inc., 126 Hawai' i 406, 413, 271 P.3d 1165, 1172
(2012) (citing Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai' i 90, 96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008)).
Furthermore, 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions
on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show
that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law. A fact is material if proof of that
fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting
one of the essential elements of a cause of action or
 defense asserted by the parties. The evidence must be
 viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving
party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Id. at 413–14, 271 P.3d at 1172–73 (citation omitted).
 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawai 'i 46, 55-56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285-86 
(2013).
B. Award of Costs
 
We review an award of costs under the abuse of
 
discretion standard.   Pulawa v. GTE Hawaiian Tel., 112 Hawai 'i 3, 
10-11, 143 P.3d 1205, 1212-13 (2006).
III. Discussion
 
A. Implied Easements
1. Requirements Under Hawai 'i Law 
Hawai'i courts have long recognized the principle that 
easements can be implied, depending on the circumstances of the 
case. See AOAO of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai 'i 
97, 100, 105-07, 58 P.3d 608, 611, 616-18 (2002) (holding that an implied easement existed for a drainage system); Neary v. Martin, 57 Haw. 577, 582-83, 561 P.2d 1281, 1284-85 (1977) (holding there was no implied easement for access where the trial court found that the parties to the conveyance severing the subject properties intended the conveyance to be free and clear of the alleged easement); Tanaka v. Mitsunaga, 43 Haw. 119, 124-25 (Haw. Terr. 1959) (holding there was no implied easement for a right of 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
way where the trial court findings supported the conclusion that
 
the prior owner of both parcels did not intend to convey an
 easement); Stibbard v. Rego, 38 Haw. 84, 94 (Haw. Terr. 1948)
 (holding there was an implied easement for use of a driveway
 where the previous owner of the subject properties had conveyed
 parcels to her children containing the driveway and had continued
 using the driveway thereafter to access a retained parcel);
 Kalaukoa v. Keawe, 9 Haw. 191, 194 (Haw. Prov. Gov. 1893)
 (recognizing a "way of necessity" created by implied grant and
 holding that the width of the way was the same as was used for
 many years prior to the conveyance that impliedly granted the
 way); Henmi Apartments, Inc. v. Sawyer, 3 Haw. App. 555, 559-61,
 655 P.2d 881, 885-86 (1982) (recognizing implied easements for
 pedestrian and utility purposes).
 
A key requirement to imply an easement is that there 
must have been a prior "unity of ownership" of the dominant and servient properties. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has consistently 
relied on the following quote from 3 Powell on Real Property § 411, to explain the theory underlying an implied easement. 
All implications of easements necessarily involve an
original unity of ownership of the parcels which later
become the dominant and servient parcels. When A owns
 Blackacre, it is not possible for A as the owner of the west
half of Blackacre to have a true easement with respect to
the east half of Blackacre; but it is both possible and
frequent to find A using the east half of Blackacre for the
service of the west half of Blackacre, as for example, when
the east half of Blackacre contains drains, or sewers, or
irrigation ditches, or roadways or stairways which increase
the usability of the west half of Blackacre. It is then
 possible to describe A's utilization of one part of
Blackacre for the service of another part thereof as a
quasi-easement, and to speak of the served part as the
quasi-dominant tenement, and of the burdened part as the
quasi-servient tenement.
 
Where such a quasi-easement has existed and the common owner
thereafter conveys to another the quasi-dominant tenement,
the conveyee is in a position to claim an easement by
implication with respect to the unconveyed quasi-servient
tenement.
 
AOAO of Wailea Elua, 100 Hawai 'i at 105-06, 58 P.3d at 616-17 
(emphasis added) (quoting Neary, 57 Haw. at 580, 561 P.2d at 
1283); Tanaka, 43 Haw. at 122-23; see also 25 Am. Jur. 2nd Easements and Licenses § 19 (2004) ("An implied easement normally 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
arises only when the land on which the easement is sought was
 
once part of the same parcel that is now landlocked."); Jon W.
 Bruce & James W. Ely, Jr., The Law of Easements and Licenses in
 Land § 4:7 (2014); 28A C.J.S. Easements § 112 (2008) ("Ways of
 necessity cannot exist where there was never any unity of
 ownership of the alleged dominant and servient estates.");
 4 Richard R. Powell, Powell on Real Property § 34.07[2], at 34-49
 (Michael Allen Wolf, ed. 2013) (noting that although there are
 different theories for an implied easement, "an original unity of
 ownership of the dominant and servient parcels must be pleaded
 and proved").
2
 
If there was prior unity of ownership of the 
properties, Hawai 'i courts then focus on the intent of the 
parties at the time the properties were severed to determine if an implied easement exists. "Whether an implied easement exists depends on the intent of the parties as shown by all the facts and circumstances under which the conveyance was made." Henmi, 
3 Haw. App. at 559, 655 P.2d at 885; see also AOAO of Wailea Elua, 100 Hawai
'i at 106, 58 P.3d at 617 ("The primary factor in 
determining whether . . . the grantor[] retained an implied easement . . . is the parties' intent at the time [of severance.]"); Tanaka, 43 Haw. at 123 ("[T]he basis of an implied easement is the presumption of grant arising from the 
2 Although Hawai' i courts have not explicitly discussed the public
policy behind implying an easement, Kellogg v. Garcia, 125 Cal. Rptr. 2d 817
(Cal. Ct. App. 2002) provides a good explanation that is consistent withHawai'i law and which underscores why a previous unity of ownership is a
requirement: 
A way of necessity is of common-law origin and is supported by the rule
of sound public policy that lands should not be rendered unfit for
occupancy or successful cultivation. Such a way is the result of the
application of the presumption that whenever a party conveys property,
he conveys whatever is necessary for the beneficial use of that property
and retains whatever is necessary for the beneficial use of land he
still possesses. Thus, the legal basis of a way of necessity is the
 
presumption of a grant arising from the circumstances of the case. This
 
presumption of a grant, however, is one of fact, and whether a grant
 should be implied depends upon the terms of the deed and the facts in
 each particular case.
 
Id. at 823 (emphasis in original, citations and internal quotation marks
omitted).
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
circumstances of the case. Such presumption is one of fact,
 
which may be rebutted."); Kalaukoa, 9 Haw. at 192-93 ("The
 question as to what is granted or reserved is a question of
 intention to be shown by competent evidence. . . . In the case of
 an implied grant it is proved by all the circumstances of the
 case, and especially by the condition of the property at the time
 of conveyance.").
 
As further explained in AOAO of Wailea Elua,
 
[t]hree factors are often used as a means of indicating
intent. It is often said that, in order for a previously
existing quasi-easement to ripen into an implied easement,
the quasi-easement must have been: (1) apparent;
(2) permanent; and (3) either (a) "important for the
enjoyment of the conveyed quasi-dominant parcel," or
(b) "strictly necessary" for the enjoyment of the dominant
parcel. . . . [A]lthough the three above-mentioned general
"requirements" for the creation of an implied easement will
ordinarily constitute the "test" by which courts should
ascertain the presence of an implied easement, they are but
one method of ascertaining "the presumption of grant arising
from the circumstances of the case," Tanaka, 43 Haw. at 123,
or "the intent of the parties as shown by all the facts and
circumstances under which the conveyance was made," Henmi, 3
Haw. App. at 559, 655 P.2d at 885.
 
100 Hawai 'i at 106 n.8, 58 P.3d at 617 n.8 (original brackets 
omitted).
 
There are thus a variety of issues involved in whether
 
an implied easement exists. In light of the circuit court's
 
summary judgment ruling, this appeal reaches only the "unity of
 ownership" requirement.
3 Even if the unity of ownership
 
3 Malulani's First Amended Complaint claims access easements "implied
by necessity" and "implied by prior use." Based on Malulani's description of
these two claims in the First Amended Complaint, the only difference appears
to be with regard to the third "test" for intent described in AOAO of Wailea Elua -- that is, whether the previously existing quasi-easement was "strictly
necessary" or rather, "important for the enjoyment of the conveyed quasi-dominant parcel." 100 Hawai' i at 106 n.8, 58 p.3d at 617 n.8. Hawaii's 
appellate courts have declined to determine whether only a "strictlynecessary" easement can be implied, or whether an easement can be impliedmerely when it is "important for the enjoyment of the conveyed quasi-dominantparcel," as these concepts simply reflect a method of ascertaining "the intentof the parties as shown by all the facts and circumstances under which the
conveyance was made[.]" Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
This issue was not raised in the summary judgment motion or addressed by the
circuit court, and thus it is not before us in this appeal. 
Likewise, this appeal does not address Malulani's claim in its
First Amended Complaint that an implied access easement would create a general
(continued...)
  
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
requirement is met, the other requirements must also be met. 
"Whether [an implied easement] claim will be effective depends
 upon the satisfaction of certain tests established by the cases." 
Tanaka, 43 Haw. at 123 (quoting 3 Powell on Real Property § 411);
 Neary, 57 Haw. at 580, 561 P.2d at 1283.
 
2. Unity of Ownership by a Governmental Entity
 
This appeal presents an issue of first impression in
 
Hawai
'i, whether the Kingdom of Hawaii 's previous ownership of the 
subject properties can satisfy the unity of ownership requirement
 for an implied easement claim. Under the circumstances of this
 case, we conclude that it can.
 
It is undisputed between Malulani and Kaupo Ranch, and
 
the evidence in the record establishes,4
 that the Kingdom of
Hawai'i previously had unified ownership of the Malulani Parcel 
and the Kaupo Parcel. The undisputed evidence shows that title
 to the Malulani Parcel originally derives from Royal Patent
 No. 2340 issued in February 1857, in which the Kingdom of Hawai
'i 
granted fee simple title to T.C. Wilmington for $20.25. The
 evidence also shows that title to the Kaupo Parcel originally
 derives from another land grant two years later, Royal Patent
 No. 2577 issued in May 1859, in which the Kingdom of Hawai
'i 
3 (...continued)
right-of-way for all reasonable purposes, including easements for utility
lines. 
The parties did not litigate the scope of any claimed easement and the
circuit court did not rule on any such issue. Rather, the circuit court
granted summary judgment for Kaupo Ranch on all of Malulani's easement claims
based on the unity of ownership requirement, as well as on statute of
limitations grounds.
4 We note that the circuit court made certain "findings of fact" as
part of its January 4, 2010 order granting summary judgment to Kaupo Ranch.However, because the circuit court was addressing a summary judgment motion,and did not hold any type of evidentiary hearing, we apply the usual summaryjudgment principles and are not bound by the circuit court's findings,regardless of whether those findings are challenged on appeal or not. Thus,
inter alia, we review the circuit court's summary judgment ruling de novo,
consider whether there are any genuine issues of material fact, and also view
the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. See 
Ralston, 129 Hawai' i at 55-56, 292 P.3d at 1285-86; Hawai' i Rules of Civil 
Procedure Rule 56. "[I]n reviewing summary judgment decisions, an appellate
court steps into the shoes of the trial court and applies the same legal
standard as the trial court applied." Koga Eng'g & Const. Inc. v. State, 122
Hawai'i 60, 78, 222 P.3d 979, 997 (2010) (citations and original brackets
omitted). 
8
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
granted fee simple title to Pali_Ohule_Wahapuu and Naha Charlotte
 
Harbottle for $118. For purposes of the implied easement claims
 in this case, we focus on the 1857 conveyance, at which point the
 properties were severed. 
Generally, there is a split of authority whether the
 
"unity of ownership" element for implying an easement can be
 satisfied by prior government ownership. See Bruce & Ely, supra,
 
§ 4:7, at 4-21 to -22 ("Controversy exists as to whether
 governmental ownership of both tracts may fulfill the unity-of­title standard."); 4 Powell, supra § 34.07[4], at 34-59 ("Special
 problems concerning easements by necessity are encountered where
 the only unity of title was the original ownership by the
 government.").
 
Some courts have held that an easement cannot be
 
implied when the only unity of ownership was held by the
 government. See United States v. Rindge, 208 F. 611, 619 (S.D.
 
Cal 1913); Bully Hill Copper Mining & Smelting Co. v. Bruson, 87
 P. 237, 238 (Cal. Dist. Ct. App. 1906); Guess v. Azar, 57 So. 2d
 443, 445 (Fla. 1952); Backman v. Lawrence, 210 P.3d 75, 80 (Idaho
 2009); Cont'l Enters., Inc. v. Cain, 296 N.E.2d 170, 171 (Ind.
 Ct. App. 1973); Thomas v. Morgan, 240 P. 735, 737 (Okla. 1925),
 overruled in part on other grounds by Pearson v. Hasty, 137 P.2d
 545 (Okla. 1943); Pearne v. Coal Creek Mining & Mfg. Co., 18 S.W.
 402, 404 (Tenn. 1891).
 
A number of these cases are of older vintage and
 
provide little explanation for the adopted position. See Bully
 
Hill, 87 P. 237; Thomas, 240 P. 735; Pearne, 18 S.W. 402. In
 Rindge, the court expressed a concern about the potential breadth
 of implying easements based on common ownership going back to the
 government. 208 F. at 619. More recently, in Backman, the Idaho
 Supreme Court endorsed a similar view that
 
[i]t would be ruinous to establish the precedent contended
for, since by it every grantee from the earliest history of
the State, and those who succeed to his title, would have an
implied right of way over all surrounding and adjacent lands
held under junior grants, even to the utmost limits of the
State.
 
9
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
210 P.3d at 80 (quoting Guess, 57 So. 2d at 444-45). The Backman
 
court rejected the argument that implied rights would be limited
 by the requirement of necessity, discounting the argument by
 simply stating "there would be little reason to have a unity of
 title element if it could be satisfied by common ownership in the
 United States." Id.
 
The modern trend, however, appears to take a different
 
view, recognizing that prior ownership by the government can
 serve to meet the unity of ownership requirement, particularly
 when an easement by necessity is implied against the governmental
 entity or over land which was held by the government at the time
 the properties were severed. See McFarland v. Kempthorne, 545
 
F.3d 1106, 1111 (9th Cir. 2008); Kinscherff v. United States, 586
 F.2d 159, 161 (10th Cir. 1978); United States v. Dunn, 478 F.2d
 443, 444 n.2 (9th Cir. 1973); Fitzgerald v. United States, 932 F.
 Supp. 1195, 1202 (D. Ariz. 1996); Mont. Wilderness Ass'n v. U.S.
 Forest Serv., 496 F. Supp. 880, 885-86 (D. Mont. 1980); Kellogg
 v. Garcia, 125 Cal. Rptr. 2d 817, 826 (Cal. Ct. App. 2002);
 Moores v. Walsh, 45 Cal. Rptr. 2d 389, 391 (Cal. Ct. App. 1995).
5
 
One of the primary cases that Malulani relies upon is
 
Kellogg, whereas Kaupo Ranch contends that Kellogg has limited
 value and should have no application to this case. In Kellogg,
 the Kelloggs filed a quiet title action claiming inter alia an
 implied easement for access over neighboring property owned by
 the Garcias. 125 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 820-21. The federal
 government had originally held unity of ownership, but in 1878
 conveyed the property that the Kelloggs eventually came to own
 and retained the property that the Garcias eventually came to
 own. Id. At the time of severance, the conveyed property was
 
surrounded by the property retained by the federal government. 
Id. at 820. The trial court relied on Bully Hill and ruled that
 
5
 The Restatement (Third) of Property § 2.15 cmt. c (2000) states that
"[s]ervitudes by necessity arise on conveyances by governmental bodies as well
as by other grantors." See also Kitras v. Town of Acquinnah, 833 N.E.2d 157,
164 n.5 (Mass. App. Ct. 2005) (adopting the Restatement's approach and stating
"[t]here appears no compelling modern reason here to distinguish between
governmental and private grantors, and we adopt the Restatement's approach").
 
10
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the unity of ownership requirement had not been met because the
 
original owner of the properties was the federal government. 125
 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 824.
 
On appeal in Kellogg, the California Court of Appeal,
 
Third District, reversed and held that unity of ownership could
 be established by the federal government's prior ownership of the
 properties. 125 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 825-26, 829. The court noted
 that Bully Hill was "in conflict with the current trend in the
 law" as well as the then-recent decision in Moores, which had
 been decided by another California appellate court, the
 California Court of Appeal, First District.
6 Id. at 825. The
 
Kellogg court further pointed to commentators who had expressed
 the view that allowing government ownership to satisfy the unity
 of ownership requirement is consistent with underlying theories
 for the "easement-of-necessity concept." Id. at 825-26. That
 
is, "[i]t furthers the public policy of promoting productive use
 of land and also is in harmony with the presumption that the
 parties intended to grant or to reserve an easement to benefit
 the landlocked parcel." Id. (citing to Bruce & Ely, The Law of
 
Easements and Licenses in Land § 4:7 (2001); 4 Powell on Real
 Property § 34.07[4] (2001); Tiffany, The Law of Real Property
 § 793 (3d ed. 1939)).
7
 
Kaupo Ranch argues that Kellogg is undermined by Murphy
 
v. Burch, 205 P.3d 289 (Cal. 2009), a later decision by the
 California Supreme Court, and that Malulani's reliance on Kellogg
 
6 In Moores, the properties involved were once jointly owned by the
federal government. 45 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 390. The California Court of Appeal,
First District, rejected the argument that "common ownership must be by other
than the federal government" to satisfy the unity of ownership requirement and
instead recognized that "[a]n easement by necessity may exist across lands
owned by the federal government." Id. at 391 n.1. The court ultimately held,
however, that the claimed easement by necessity, for access to the landlocked
parcel, had been extinguished because the necessity requirement could no
longer be met. Id. at 391-92.
 As noted earlier, and similar to Hawai' i case law, Kellogg also 
recognizes that the presumption of a grant "is one of fact, and whether a
grant should be implied depends upon the terms of the deed and the facts ineach particular case." 125 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 823 (emphasis, citations andinternal quotation mark omitted). 
11
 7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is misplaced. We disagree with Kaupo Ranch. Rather, as Malulani
 
contends, Murphy does not establish a bright line rule that
 government ownership can never satisfy the unity of ownership
 requirement. Moreover, and importantly, Murphy distinguished
 Kellogg based on the differing circumstances in those cases. 
This case is similar to Kellogg.
 
In Murphy, the plaintiff Murphy and the defendants
 
Burches sought to quiet title as to whether an implied easement
 existed over the Burches' property to benefit Murphy's property. 
205 P.3d at 291. Both properties were originally owned by the
 federal government. When the federal government severed the
 properties, it conveyed the quasi-servient parcel (that the
 Burches eventually owned) to various private owners, and retained
 the quasi-dominant parcel (that Murphy eventually owned). Id. at
 
292. Because there was no express easement over the conveyed
 
quasi-servient parcel, the question in Murphy was whether the
 federal government had impliedly reserved an access easement by
 necessity over the quasi-servient parcel it had conveyed. Id.
 
The California Supreme Court noted that "[i]n contrast
 
to private party conveyances, . . . conveyances involving a
 sovereign as the common owner typically do not give rise to
 implied reservations of easements or other property interests in
 conveyed land." Murphy, 205 P.3d at 294 (italics in original,
 
underline emphasis added). The court explained that the
 considerations for this result include that "a number of courts
 express reluctance to interfere with the certainty and
 predictability of land titles conferred by a sovereign without
 any express reservation of rights[;]" that "some courts warn that
 the common-ownership requirement would be meaningless unless
 stronger showings are required for implying an easement by
 necessity in cases tracing back to [government] patents[;]" and
 that "some courts recognize that strict necessity does not exist
 in the case of the sovereign as in the case of the private
 landowner, because the sovereign can exercise the power of
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
eminent domain to obtain any and all reasonable rights-of-way." 
Id.
 
The California Supreme Court thus adopted the following
 
approach:
 
[A]lthough we need not and do not presently impose a
categorical bar to all easement-by-necessity claims tracing
common ownership to the federal government, we hold that the
special considerations above must inform the determination
whether such an easement arises by implication. This means
 that, consistent with existing California common law, an
easement by necessity may arise by implication based on the
inferred intent of the parties to the property conveyance,
as determined from the terms of the relevant instrument and
 the circumstances surrounding the transaction. Strict
 necessity and common ownership remain required showings, but
when a claimant traces common ownership back to the federal
government and seeks to establish an implied reservation of
an access right-of-way, the intent of Congress is paramount
and the government's power of eminent domain also bears
significance. Given the unique historical and legal nature
of land patents, extreme caution must be exercised in
determining whether the circumstances surrounding a
government land grant are sufficient to overcome the
inference prompted by the omission of an express reference
to a reserved right of access. In such cases, the easement
claimant bears the burden of producing evidence on the
issues regarding the government's intent to reserve an
easement and the government's lack of power to condemn.
 
Id. at 295-96 (emphasis added, internal citations omitted). 
Under Murphy, therefore, unity of ownership by the government
 does not per se bar the possibility of an implied easement, but
 special considerations apply to establish an implied reservation
 of an easement by the government.
 
Significantly, the Murphy court addressed Kellogg and
 
distinguished it, stating:
 
Unlike the situation here, Kellogg . . . did not
 
concern a claim of an implied reservation. Rather, the
plaintiffs in Kellogg sought to establish that when the
federal government made a grant of landlocked property, the
government also impliedly granted  a right of access for that
property over the land it retained. Because exercise of the
 
government's power of eminent domain could have had no
effect on access to the conveyed landlocked property, it is
hardly surprising that Kellogg made no attempt to
distinguish the authorities holding that such power negates
the element of strict necessity when an implied reservation
claim is at issue. As one treatise observes, where the
government is identified as the common grantor, "an easement
of necessity may be created against the government, but the
government agency cannot establish an easement by necessity
over land it has conveyed because its power of eminent
domain removes the strict necessity required for the
creation of an easement by necessity." 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
205 P.3d at 297 (italics in original, underline emphasis added,
 
internal citations omitted). Thus, Murphy did not overrule nor
 call into question the holdings in Kellogg or Moores. Rather,
 Murphy recognized that Kellogg addressed a different
 circumstance, i.e. in Kellogg, at the time of severance, the
 government had conveyed the quasi-dominant parcel which would
 benefit from the claimed easement, while retaining the quasi­servient parcel over which the easement was to be implied, and
 thus the government's eminent domain powers were irrelevant and
 the question was whether there was an implied grant of an
 easement by the federal government.
 
The instant case between Malulani and Kaupo Ranch is 
similar to Kellogg. The Kingdom of Hawai
'i had original unified 
ownership of both the Malulani Parcel and the Kaupo Parcel. The parcels were severed in February 1857, when the Kingdom of Hawai
'i conveyed the Malulani Parcel to T.C. Wilmington under 
Royal Patent No. 2340 and retained the Kaupo Parcel, which allegedly surrounded the Malulani Parcel. Thus, at the time the properties were severed, the Kingdom of Hawai
'i conveyed the 
quasi-dominant property which would benefit from the claimed easement and retained the quasi-servient property over which the easement is claimed. The ultimate question then is whether it can be implied that the Kingdom of Hawai
'i intended to grant an 
easement in favor of the conveyed property over the Kingdom's retained property. In this circumstance, any eminent domain powers held by the Kingdom of Hawai
'i would not affect the 
"necessity" requirement because the private party grantee, and not the Kingdom of Hawai
'i, was allegedly in need of the easement 
at the time of severance. 
We conclude that the modern trend is most consistent 
with Hawai 'i law. Therefore, we hold that the "unity of 
ownership" requirement for implying an easement can be satisfied by prior government ownership of the parcels when the question is whether the government impliedly granted an easement, i.e. at the time of severance, the government conveyed the quasi-dominant 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
parcel which would benefit from the claimed easement and retained 
the quasi-servient parcel over which the implied easement is claimed.
8 Because this case involves the question whether the 
Kingdom of Hawai 'i impliedly granted an access easement over the 
Kaupo Parcel that it retained at the time of severance, the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment for Kaupo Ranch based on its view that the Kingdom of Hawaii's prior ownership could not, as a matter of law, satisfy the unity of ownership requirement. 
The circuit court also granted summary judgment on
 
Malulani's utility easement claim as a consequence of its ruling
 on the unity of ownership issue. On that basis, summary judgment
 was not warranted.
 
Having addressed the unity of ownership issue, it
 
remains to be seen whether, on remand, the other requirements for
 the claimed implied easements can be met.
9
 
B. Statute of Limitations
 
Kaupo Ranch also based its summary judgment motion on
 
the assertion that Malulani's claims were barred by the statute
 of limitations in HRS § 657-31. Malulani did not oppose this
 part of the motion in its opposition memorandum, but did argue at
 the summary judgment hearing that the statute of limitations did
 not apply to the claims asserted in this case. The circuit court
 appears to have ruled that, because Malulani did not oppose the
 statute of limitations argument in its opposition memorandum,
 
8 We do not reach the issue addressed in Murphy, whether government
ownership can satisfy the "unity of ownership" requirement when the claim is
that the government impliedly reserved an easement, i.e. at the time of
 
severance the government conveyed the quasi-servient parcel over which an
implied easement is claimed and retained the quasi-dominant parcel which would
benefit from the claimed easement.
9
 It appears from the record that, in opposing Kaupo Ranch's motion for
summary judgment, Malulani filed a combined opposition and cross-motion for
summary judgment. On appeal, Malulani requests not only that summary judgment
for Kaupo Ranch be vacated, but also that this court grant summary judgment in
favor of Malulani. Malulani's cross-motion for summary judgment was not
expressly adjudicated by the circuit court, but in any event the record at
this juncture does not contain evidence to support summary judgment for
Malulani given the further requirements for an implied easement.
 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
summary judgment was also proper based on the statute of
 
limitations in HRS § 657-31.10 Malulani challenges this ruling
 
and we conclude the ruling was in error.
 
Malulani's failure to oppose the statute of limitations
 
argument in its opposition memorandum was not fatal in this case. 
Malulani did argue at the hearing that the statute of limitations
 did not apply. Moreover, as the summary judgment movant, Kaupo
 Ranch had the initial burden to establish that
 
no genuine issue of material fact exist[ed] with respect to
the essential elements of the claim and that, based on the
undisputed facts, [it was] entitled to judgment as a matter
of law. Only once the moving party has satisfied its
initial burden of production does the burden shift to the
non-moving party to show specific facts that present a
genuine issue for trial.
 
Gurrobat v. HTH Corp., SCAP-12-0000764, 2014 WL 714693, at *12 
(Haw. Feb. 25, 2014) (emphasis added, internal citation omitted) (citing First Ins. Co. of Hawai
'i v. Sariaslani, 80 Hawai 'i 491, 
493, 911 P.2d 126, 128 (App. 1996)). Here, Kaupo Ranch did not carry its initial burden to show that it was entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law on statute of limitations grounds. Indeed, as argued by Malulani at the hearing, the statute of limitations in HRS § 657-31 does not apply to the implied easement claims asserted in this case. 
HRS § 657-31 provides that "[n]o person shall commence
 
an action to recover possession of any lands, or make any entry
 thereon, unless within twenty years after the right to bring the
 action first accrued." (Emphasis added). "An easement is a
 
10
 The circuit court's relevant conclusion of law states:
 
3. The Court concludes that under the circumstances
 
presented by this case and the undisputed facts noted above
and, notwithstanding Malulani's counsel's arguments made on
the record at the hearing on December 16, 2009, based on
Malulani's lack of opposition to Kaupo Ranch's Motion for
Summary Judgment on the grounds that . . . the Complaint was
filed after the expiration of the applicable statute of
limitations as set forth in HRS Section 657-31 and its
 predecessor statutes that judgment, as a matter of law,
should be entered in favor of Kaupo Ranch on all three
causes of action set forth in the Complaint. 
16
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nonpossessory right to enter and use land in the possession of
 
another and obligates the possessor not to interfere with the
 uses authorized by the easement." Marvin M. Brandt Revocable
 
Trust v. United States, 134 S. Ct. 1257, 1265 (2014) (emphasis
 added, internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Restatement
 (Third) of Property § 1.2(1) (1998)); see also Nihoa v. Chow, 57
 Haw. 172, 173 n.2, 552 P.2d 77, 79 n.2 (1976) (noting that
 easements are "interests in land, albeit incorporeal,
 nonpossessory interests") (emphasis added). Furthermore, as
 explained in Sylva v. Wailuku Sugar Co., 19 Haw. 681 (Haw. Terr.
 1909), the term "entry" as used in a predecessor statute to
 HRS § 657-31 is based on the common law meaning of the word,
 which "was the extrajudicial remedy for the wrong done by ousting
 the owner of the freehold, whether by abatement, intrusion or
 disseizin and applies only in cases 'when another person who hath
 no right hath previously taken possession of lands or
 tenements.'" Id. at 682 (quoting 3 William Blackstone,
 
Commentaries, 168, 174). Thus, HRS § 657-31 addresses recovery
 of possession of land and does not apply to claims seeking to
 imply an easement on another's land.
 
HRS § 657-33 (1993) sets forth when an action accrues
 
under HRS § 657-31 and further illustrates that implied easements
 are not subject to the statute of limitations in HRS § 657-31. 
HRS § 657-33 states:
 
§657-33 Action accrues when.  In the construction of
 
this part, the right to make an entry or commence an action,
shall be deemed to have first accrued at the following
times:
 
(1)	 When any person is disseised, his right of entry
or action shall be deemed to have accrued at the
 time of the disseisin. 
(2)	 When he claims as heir or devisee of one who
 died seised, his right shall be deemed to have
accrued at the time of the death, unless there
is an estate by the curtesy or in dower, or some
other estate intervening after the death of such
ancestor or devisor, in which case his right
shall be deemed to have accrued when the
 intermediate estate shall expire, or when it
would have expired by its own limitation.
(3)	 Where there is such an intermediate estate, and
in all other cases, where a party claims in
remainder, or reversion, his right so far as it
is affected by the limitation herein prescribed,
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
shall be deemed to accrue when the intermediate
 
or precedent estate would have expired by its
own limitation, notwithstanding any forfeiture
thereof, for which he might have entered at an
earlier time. 
(4)	 Paragraph (3) shall not prevent any person from
entering, when entitled to do so, by reason of
any forfeiture or breach of condition, but if he
claims under such a title, his right shall be
deemed to have accrued when the forfeiture was
 incurred or condition broken. 
(5)	 In the cases not otherwise specially provided
for, the right shall be deemed to have accrued
when the claimant, or the person under whom he
claims, first became entitled to the possession
of the premises under the title upon which the
entry or action is founded. 
(Emphasis added).11 Nothing in HRS § 657-33 is applicable to a
 
claim for an implied easement, which is a nonpossessory interest. 
Kaupo Ranch points to several cases addressing
 
prescriptive easements to argue that the statute of limitations
 
under HRS § 657-31 applies to easements generally.12 However,
 
the cited cases are distinguishable because, under Hawai 'i law, 
"the same elements necessary to prove acquisition of title by
 adverse possession are required to establish an easement by
 prescription." The Nature Conservancy v. Nakila, 4 Haw. App.
 
584, 598, 671 P.2d 1025, 1035 (1983). In short, because a
 prescriptive easement must be proved by elements similar to an
 adverse possession claim, the same statute of limitations applies
 to both such claims. In this case, however, Kaupo Ranch is not
 claiming a prescriptive easement and the twenty year limitations
 period in HRS § 657-31 is inapplicable.
 
Beyond the express terms of HRS § 657-31 and our
 
interpretation of that statute, we further note that statutes of
 limitations generally do not apply to bar a claim for an implied
 easement by necessity. See
 11 Am. Jur. Proof of Facts 3d, at 630
 
11 The term "disseise" means "[t]o wrongfully deprive (a person) of the
freehold possession of property." Black's Law Dictionary, 541 (9th ed. 2009).
12 Kaupo Ranch cites to: Lalakea v. Hawaiian Irrigation Co., 36 Haw.
692, 706 (Haw. Terr. 1944); Kalaukoa v. Keawe, 9 Haw. 191 (Haw. Prov. Gov.
1893); The Nature Conservancy v. Nakila, 4 Haw. App. 584, 600, 671 P.2d 1025,
1036 (1983); and Ryan v. Tanabe Corp., 97 Hawai' i 305, 37 P.3d 554 (App.
1999). These cases are inapposite. 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1991) ("No statute of limitations is applicable to preclude an
 
action for a way of necessity."); Kellogg, 125 Cal. Rptr. 2d at
 823 (stating that "a way of necessity, having been created by the
 necessity for its use, cannot be extinguished so long as the
 necessity exists" and that the statute of limitations for quiet
 title actions did not apply to an easement of necessity (citation
 and brackets omitted)). 
Because Kaupo Ranch did not meet its initial burden to
 
show that it was entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law
 under HRS § 657-31, the circuit court erred in granting summary
 judgment on this basis.
C. Finding of Fact 2
 
Malulani challenges finding of fact (FOF) 2, which
 
states in relevant part that: "Kaupo Ranch is the current owner
 of an undivided interest of land located in Kaupo, Hana, Maui,
 Hawaii being Royal Patent Grant No. 2577 to Pali, Ohule, Wahapuu
 and Naha Charlotte Harbottle granted to Pali, Ohule, Wahapuu and
 Naha Charlotte Harbottle by the Kingdom of Hawaii in 1859[.]"
 Malulani argues that there is no evidence in the record to
 support FOF 2, and that the record shows that there are many
 potential owners of the Kaupo Parcel.
 
Malulani's claims were adjudicated by summary judgment
 
and thus FOF 2 is not based on a trial or an evidentiary hearing. 
Because we have concluded that the summary judgment ruling was
 not warranted, the case will be remanded to the circuit court and
 the circuit court's findings in its January 4, 2010 order,
 including FOF 2, are subject to further litigation in the case.
 
As noted by Kaupo Ranch, FOF 2 appears to be based on
 
Malulani's pleadings and arguments related to its implied
 easement claims. Kaupo Ranch did not dispute the assertion that
 it has an interest in the Kaupo Parcel and the circuit court
 appears to have based FOF 2 on the lack of dispute between these
 parties. Neither party suggests that there is any evidence in
 the record regarding Kaupo Ranch's specific interest in the Kaupo
 Parcel. Thus, FOF 2 is not binding on Malulani or Kaupo Ranch
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
going forward, nor is it binding on any other party named in the
 
complaints in this case.
D. Costs Granted to Kaupo Ranch
 
The circuit court awarded Kaupo Ranch costs as the
 
prevailing party. Because we have concluded that Kaupo Ranch was
 not entitled to summary judgment, Kaupo Ranch is no longer the
 prevailing party and the award of costs is likewise vacated.
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the April 16, 2010
 
Final Judgment, the January 4, 2010 "Findings of Fact and
 
Conclusions of Law and Order Partially Granting And Partially
 Denying Defendant Kaupo Ranch, [Ltd.'s] Motion for Summary
 Judgment And Request For Attorney's Fees and Costs," and the
 March 24, 2010 order awarding costs to Kaupo Ranch, entered by
 the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit. We remand this case to
 the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this
 opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Gregory J. Garneau
(Kiefer & Garneau LLC)
for Plaintiff-Appellant
The Malulani Group, Limited
 
Brian R. Jenkins
 
(Jenkins & Jenkins)
for Defendant-Appellee
Kaupo Ranch, Ltd.
 
20
 