 
 Szymanski raises three points of error on appeal,
 
contending that the Circuit Court erred when it: (1) failed to
 
grant the request by Szymanski's counsel-of-record, Karen Holma
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30697
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
TITLE GUARANTY ESCROW SERVICES, INC.,
a Hawai'i corporation, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MICHAEL J. SZYMANSKI, Defendant/Cross-Claimant/Third-Party
Plaintiff/Cross-Claim Defendant/Third-Party Counterclaim
Defendant-Appellant, WAILEA RESORT COMPANY, LTD., a Hawai' i
 
corporation, Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Cross-Claimant-
Appellee, ADOA-SHINWA DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION, a Hawai' i
 
corporation, and SHINWA GOLF HAWAII CO., LTD., a Hawai' i
 
corporation, Third-Party Defendants/Counterclaimants-Appellees,
JOHN DOES 1-50, JANE DOES 1-50, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50, DOE
ENTITIES 1-50, DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants-Appellees
and DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 11-20,
DOE UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS ENTITIES 21-30 and JOHN DOE
 
INDIVIDUALS 31-40, Third-Party Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 02-1-0352(2))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
  
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant/Cross-Claimant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Third-
Party Plaintiff/Third-Party Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant
 Michael J. Szymanski (Szymanski) appeals from the Final Judgment
 
as to All Claims and Parties (Final Judgment) entered by the
 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court) on July 28,
 
2010.
1
  
1
 The Honorable Shackley F. Raffetto presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Holma), to continue the June 30, 2010 hearing for Szymanski to
 
obtain new counsel; (2) granted Defendant/Cross-Claim
 
Defendant/Cross-Claimant-Appellee Wailea Resort Company, Ltd.'s
 (Wailea's) motion for order directing the clerk of court to
 
disburse funds; and (3) granted the motion of the law firm of
 
Bays, Deaver, Lung, Rose and Holma (Bays Deaver) to affirm its
 
withdrawal of counsel for Szymanski.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Szymanski's points of error as follows:
 
(1) We will first address Szymanski's third point of 
error. We generally review a trial court's ruling on a motion for withdrawal of counsel for an abuse of discretion. See, e.g., 
State v. Kossman, 101 Hawai' i 112, 119, 63 P.3d 420, 427 (App. 
2003). Thus, we will review Bays Deaver's motion, which was denominated as a motion to affirm withdrawal of counsel, using the abuse of discretion standard. An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Amfac, Inc. v. 
Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992). 
Bays Deaver filed a "motion to affirm withdrawal of 
counsel" on June 30, 2010, less than one hour before the hearing on the substantive motion that is the subject of this appeal, seeking to be relieved of its duties as counsel-of-record for Szymanski effective July 7, 2009, nearly one year prior to the date of the motion. At the time that Bays Deaver filed its "motion to affirm withdrawal," the law firm cited no rule or other legal authority for their request for relief other than Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 7. It appears that 
the failure to cite the applicable rules might have been related to the fact that Bays Deaver did not follow the applicable rules either when it filed its June 30, 2010 motion to affirm withdrawal or, one year earlier, when on July 8, 2009 it 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
apparently obtained a Circuit Court file-stamp on a Withdrawal
 
and Substitution of [Appellate] Counsel that had been filed with
 the Clerk of the Appellate Courts on July 7, 2009. 
2
At that time,  the Rules of the Circuit Courts of the
State of Hawai
'i (CCR) Rule 10.1 provided: 
Except as provided in Rule 10(c) of these rules,
withdrawal of counsel in cases pending before the circuit
courts shall be effective only upon the approval of thecourt and shall be subject to the guidelines of Rule 1.16 ofthe Hawai' i Rules of Professional Conduct and other 
applicable law. 
CCR Rule 10(c) provides:
 
The clerk may grant, sign, and enter the following
orders without further direction by the court, but any
orders so entered may be set aside or modified by the court:
. . . .
 
(c) Substitution of attorneys. Orders on consent for
 
the substitution of attorneys.
 
We need not decide whether the Circuit Court clerk's
 
mere acceptance of a document for filing might constitute the
 
granting, signing, and entry of an order by the clerk pursuant to
 CCR Rule 10(c) because, in this case, the document in question
 did not evidence Szymanski's consent (or substitute appellate
 counsel's consent) to Bays Deaver's withdrawal and the
 substitution of counsel in the Circuit Court proceedings. 
Rather, in a single sentence, the withdrawal and substitution of
 counsel twice states that the change of counsel consented to by
 the client was for the purposes of Szymanski's appeal in No.
 27254, stating:
 
COMES NOW, Peter Van Name Esser, attorney at law, and
hereby substitutes as counsel of record in the above-
entitled appeal on behalf of [Szymanski], in place of [Bays
Deaver], who are hereby withdrawing as counsel from this
appeal.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The limited language of this withdrawal and
 
substitution of appellate counsel stands in sharp contrast to the
 
prior, August 21, 2007, withdrawal and substitution and order,
 whereby Bays Deaver entered the case, which stated:
 
2
 This rule has since been repealed and modified by HRCP Rule 25.1,
which became effective on January 1, 2012. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that Paul, Johnson, Park &
Niles hereby withdraws as counsel of record for [Szymanski]
pursuant to Rule 10(c) and 10.1 of the Rules of the Circuit
Courts of the State of Hawai' i and [Bays Deaver] hereby
substitutes and enters its appearance as counsel for
[Szymanski] 
as to the entirety of this action .
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Thus, Szymanski did not manifest his consent to Bays
 
Deaver's withdrawal in the Circuit Court proceedings, which were
 
not terminated by the appeal in No. 27254, which stemmed from an
 HRCP Rule 54(b) judgment, and not an HRCP Rule 58 final judgment. 
It is notable that, at no time relevant to Bays Deaver's "motion
 to affirm withdrawal," did any Bays Deaver attorney attest or
 otherwise represent to the court that appellate counsel, Peter
 Esser, had agreed to represent Szymanski in the Circuit Court
 proceedings. Accordingly, CCR Rule 10(c) is inapplicable. 
Nor did the 2009 submission comply with CCR 10.1, which
 
requires court approval and is subject to the Hawai' i Rules of 
Professional Conduct (RPC) Rule 1.16, which provides in relevant
 
part:
 
Rule 1.16 Declining or Terminating Representation
. . . 
(b) Except as stated in paragraph (c), a lawyer may
withdraw from representing a client if withdrawal can be
accomplished without material adverse effect on the
interests of the client, or if:
 
(1) the client persists in a course of action
involving the lawyer's services that the lawyer
reasonably believes is criminal or fraudulent;
 
(2) the lawyer reasonably believes that the
client has used the lawyer's services to perpetrate a
crime or fraud;
 
(3) a client insists upon pursuing an objective
that the lawyer considers repugnant or imprudent;
 
(4) the client fails substantially to fulfill an
obligation to the lawyer regarding the lawyer's
services and has been given reasonable warning that
the lawyer will withdraw unless the obligation is
fulfilled;
 
(5) the representation will result in an
unreasonable financial burden on the lawyer or has
been rendered unreasonably difficult by the client;
or
 
(6) other good cause for withdrawal exists.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(c) When ordered to do so by a tribunal, a lawyer
shall continue representation notwithstanding good cause for
terminating the representation.
 
(d) Upon termination of representation, a lawyer
shall take steps to the extent reasonably practicable
to protect a client's interests, such as giving
reasonable notice to the client, allowing time for
employment of other counsel, surrendering papers and
property to which the client is entitled and refunding
any advance payment of fee that has not been earned.
The lawyer may retain papers relating to the client to
the extent permitted by other law.
 
Although Bays Deaver's claim of "irreconcilable
 
differences" with Szymanski appears to fall within RPC Rule 1.16
 
(b)(5) or (b)(6), we need not address that issue because Bays
 Deaver clearly did not obtain a court order allowing it to
 withdraw from the Circuit Court proceedings in 2009. Indeed,
 there is no certificate of service or other evidence in the
 record, and Bays Deaver did not argue or represent, that Bays
 Deaver served or otherwise provided Szymanski (or appellate
 counsel) with the document bearing the Circuit Court's July 8,
 2009 file-stamp.
 
Similarly, Bays Deaver's 2010 motion to affirm
 
withdrawal of counsel seeks relief that is not sanctioned by CCR
 Rule 10.1. The rule specifically states that "withdrawal shall
 be effective only upon the approval of the court" and does not
 provide for nunc pro tunc relief from an attorney's professional
 duties and obligations as counsel-of-record in a case. The
 flawed submission of the 2009 withdrawal and substitution of
 appellate counsel provided insufficient grounds for the requested
 retrospective relief.
 
In addition, the record is replete with evidence that
 
Szymanski's lack of effective representation at the June 30, 2010
 hearing was to his substantial detriment. Opposing counsel
 declined to agree to a continuance of the hearing date to allow
 substitute counsel to appear. The Circuit Court denied Bays
 Deaver's late-filed motion to continue the hearing, even though
 substitute counsel had agreed to represent Szymanski if a
 continuance were allowed. At the hearing, Holma informed the
 court that Bays Deaver had not received the amended notice of
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearing. The Circuit Court ruled on Wailea's motion, granting
 
all requested relief against Szymanski, without any substantive
 argument being made on Szymanski's behalf, either in writing or
 at the hearing.
 
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion when it granted Bays Deaver's motion to
 affirm withdrawal of counsel effective as of July 7, 2009. 
Notwithstanding this conclusion, the Circuit Court did not abuse
 its discretion in allowing Bays Deaver's withdrawal effective as
 of the date of the Circuit Court's order, August 25, 2010.
 
(2) For similar reasons, we conclude that, under the
 
circumstances of this case, the Circuit Court erred when it
 denied Holma's oral motion for a continuance. "A court has the
 discretion to grant or refuse a continuance of a proceeding in
 the orderly administration of justice. This discretion is a
 judicial one and is subject to review for abuse." Sapp v. Wong,
 
62 Haw. 34, 41, 609 P.2d 137, 142 (1980) (citation omitted). In
 Sapp, in finding that the trial court abused its discretion for
 failing to grant a motion to continue, the Supreme Court
 considered the following factors: (1) the circumstances did not
 suggest that the appellant, movants for the continuance, merely
 sought general delay; (2) instead, the continuance was sought for
 the limited purpose of locating appellees to serve them with
 subpoenas and compel their attendance in court; (3) all parties
 had considered the appellees' testimonies indispensable to the
 case; (4) granting the continuance would not have been
 prejudicial to, or have inconvenienced, the appellees; and (5)
 the failure to grant the continuance was prejudicial to the
 appellants, as they did not have a reasonable opportunity to try
 their case upon its merits. Id. (citations omitted) 
Here, counsel-of-record was not served by Wailea with
 
the amended notice of hearing and, when contacted by Szymanski
 shortly before an opposition was due, took the position that they
 were not counsel-of-record. The Circuit Court did not find, and
 based upon the record it does not appear, that Holma's request
 for a continuance on behalf of Szymanski was for the purpose of
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
delay. It appears that Szymanski made several attempts to obtain
 
replacement counsel prior to the June 30, 2010 hearing, but was
 unable to do so in time to respond to the substance of Wailea's
 motion. Szymanski's informal request (not by proper motion) to
 appear telephonically, on his own behalf, was denied. Substitute
 counsel had agreed to represent Szymanski if a continuance were
 granted. Although Wailea declined to stipulate to a continuance,
 it did not represent that it would be prejudiced by a further
 brief delay in the matter.
3 In addition, combined with the lack
 
of effective representation and apparent misapprehensions on the
 part of all counsel and the court concerning counsel-of-record,
 the Circuit Court's denial of a continuance worked to Szymanski's
 substantial detriment, leading directly to the entry of judgment
 against him, without any substantive argument on his behalf. 
Under these circumstances, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 abused its discretion in denying Holma's request to continue the
 June 30, 2010 hearing.
 
(3) In light of the above, we do not reach the merits
 
of Szymanski's challenge to the disbursal of the escrowed funds
 to Wailea. The Circuit Court's July 19, 2010 order will be
 vacated in part, with respect to the disbursal of funds to
 Wailea, and affirmed in all other respects. Upon remand, Wailea
 shall serve a second amended notice of hearing on Szymanski, by
 service to Keith M. Kiuchi, Esq., who has entered his appearance
 in this matter on behalf of Szymanski. Thus, Szymanski shall
 have an opportunity to timely file an opposition, in accordance
 with the second amended notice of hearing and the applicable
 rules, and an opportunity to be heard prior to the Circuit
 Court's further ruling on the substance of Wailea's motion.
 
For these reasons, and to the extent discussed above,
 
the Circuit Court's July 28, 2010 Final Judgment as to All Claims
 
3
 The resolution of this proceeding had been previously delayed by a
bankruptcy proceeding filed by Szymanski, but there is no evidence or argument
that the bankruptcy matter was intended to inject delay into the final
resolution of this case, which involved the disbursement of funds interpleaded
by Title Guaranty Escrow Services.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and Parties is vacated, and this case is remanded for further 
proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 24, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Keith M. Kiuchi 
for Defendant/Cross-Claimant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff/Third-Party CounterclaimDefendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
Bruce H. Wakuzawa 
for Defendant/Cross-ClaimDefendant/Cross-Claimant-Appellee Wailea ResortCompany, Ltd. and Third-PartyDefendants/Third-PartyCounterclaimants-AppelleesAdoa-Shinwa DevelopmentCorporation and Shinwa GolfHawai'i Co., Ltd. Associate Judge 
8
 