NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30330
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SHAWN KALANI BROWN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 08-1-0746(4))

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Shawn Kalani Brown ("Brown")
 
appeals from the judgment of conviction ("Judgment") entered on
 
January 15, 2010, in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit1
 
("Circuit Court"). Brown was convicted by a jury of Assault in
 the First Degree under Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") ยง 707-710
 
2
(1993),  and was sentenced to ten years in prison, and to pay
restitution and a criminal injuries compensation fee. 
On appeal,
 
Brown contends that there was insufficient evidence to prove
 serious bodily injury, such that the injury constituted a
 
substantial risk of death or a protracted loss or impairment of a
 
1
 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง707-710 states in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the
first degree if the person intentionally or knowingly causes
serious bodily injury to another person.
 
HRS ยง 707-700 (1993) states in relevant part:
 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury which
creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious,
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of
the function of any bodily member or organ.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
bodily function.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Brown's point of error as follows:
 
This case arises from a fight that occurred outside
 
Ocean's Nightclub in Kihei, Maui. The victim, Jamie Alexander
 
("Alexander"), suffered injuries to his face and skull that
 
required emergency medical attention. 
Dr. Sam Shon, an emergency room physician at Maui
 
Memorial Hospital, was Alexander's treating emergency room
 
physician and declared at trial to be an expert in emergency and
 
general medicine. Dr. Shon testified that Alexander presented
 
with severe fractures to his face, including a fractured nasal
 
bone, which extended through the bone around the eye. Alexander
 
had a tripod fracture, leaving his cheek bone as a free-floating
 
piece on the left side of his head. He also had fractured
 
cartilage in the nose and fractured sinuses on the right side of
 
his head.
 
Alexander testified that, since the incident, he
 
suffered from constant, ongoing migraines that required the use
 
of strong pain medication and treatment from a neurologist. 
Additionally, he explained that a metal plate had been inserted
 
in his face to stabilize the bone in his cheek. These injuries
 
had all continued since the incident and prevented Alexander from
 
performing many activities from which he had earned a living and
 
that he had previously enjoyed. Dr. Shon testified that someone
 
who suffered blunt force trauma to the head, like that suffered
 
by Alexander, could suffer from chronic headaches. 
Brown argued that physician testimony was necessary in
 
order to show a relationship between the incident and the injury,
 
and to establish "impairment" and/or "loss", which he claimed are
 
not within the grasp of a lay person. The cases that Brown
 
offers, however, do not stand for the proposition for which they
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
are presented. See In re Doe, 106 Hawai 'i 530, 537-38, 107 P.3d 
1203, 1210-11 (App. 2005) (physician witness's failure to say 
that vision impairment was "protracted" was of no consequence 
because the word is commonly understood and requires no medical 
opinion). 
Whether the victim's injuries constituted "serious
 
bodily injury" is a question of fact for the jury. See State v.
 
Kupau, 10 Haw. App. 503, 512, 879 P.2d 559, 563 (1994). "Our
 
statutes do not define 'serious, permanent disfigurement, or
 
protracted loss or impairment.' Neither do they define 'member'
 
or 'organ.' The question is whether the victim's injuries
 
described above meet the definition of HRS ยง 707-700." State v.
 
Yamashiro, 8 Haw. App. 595, 600-01, 817 P.2d 123, 126-27 (1991)
 
(footnote omitted) (referring to out-of-state cases for guidance
 
as to whether the loss of teeth and broken facial jaw bones are
 
serious injuries within their assault statutes). 
The evidence and justifiable inferences, considered in 
the most favorable light for the State, are sufficient to enable 
a reasonable mind to fairly conclude beyond a reasonable doubt 
that the injuries suffered by Alexander constituted "protracted 
loss or impairment of the function of [a] bodily member or 
organ." See State v. Meyers, 112 Hawai 'i 278, 145 P.3d 821 (App. 
2006) (eight fractured ribs resulting in painful breathing for 
more than two weeks sufficient to establish protracted loss or 
impairment of the function of victim's lungs); Yamashiro, supra, 
(scaring, facial numbness, missing teeth and broken facial jaw 
bones sufficient to establish protracted loss or impairment of 
the function of a bodily member or organ and/or serious permanent 
disfigurement); State v. Hilpipre, 395 N.W.2d 899, 903-04 (Iowa 
Ct. App. 1986) (pain from two broken ribs that impaired 
functioning of the victim's lungs over several months sufficient 
to prove "protracted loss or impairment of the function of a 
bodily member or organ"); Walker v. State, 742 P.2d 790, 791 
(Alaska Ct. App. 1987) (broken jaw, wired shut for six weeks, was 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
sufficient to prove that the victim suffered a "protracted
 
impairment of the function of a body member or organ"). 
In light of our conclusion, we do not consider whether
 
there exists substantial evidence to support a finding of bodily
 
injury which creates a substantial risk of death.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the January 15, 2010 Judgment
 
of the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 21, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Matthew S. Kohm,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Kristin Coccaro,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4

 