NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1  The Honorable Richard W. Pollack presided.
2  HRS ÿÿ 708-836 provides in relevant part:
ÿÿ708-836  Unauthorized control of propelled vehicle.  (1)  A
person commits the offense of unauthorized control of a propelled
vehicle if the person intentionally or knowingly exerts
unauthorized control over another's propelled vehicle by operating
the vehicle without the owner's consent or by changing the
identity of the vehicle without the owner's consent.NO. 30588
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I »
STATE OF HAWAI I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ANTHONE K. SANTARONE, Defendant-Appellant»
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 08-1-1716)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Anthone K. Santarone (Santarone)
appeals from the Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
filed on June 15, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
(circuit court).  A jury found Santarone guilty of Unauthorized
Control of Propelled Vehicle (UCPV), in violation of Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS) ÿÿ 708-836 (Supp. 2010).2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2On appeal, Santarone contends:
(1) There was not substantial evidence to support his
conviction.
(2) The comment of the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
(Prosecutor) during closing argument constituted misconduct.
(3) The Prosecutor's questioning during her cross-
examination that was designed to "open the door" to adducing
evidence of Santarone's prior bad acts constituted misconduct.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve
Santarone's points of error as follows:
(1) There "was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact" that Santarone had intentionally
or knowingly exerted unauthorized control over another's
propelled vehicle by operating the vehicle without the owner's
consent, in violation of HRS ÿÿ 708-836(1).  State v. Eastman , 81
Hawai i 131, 135, 913 P.2d 57, 61 (1996).»
At trial, evidence was adduced that (1) Santarone
transferred a license plate from the silver Jeep onto the white
Jeep, (2) Santarone drove the white Jeep without the owner's
permission, (3) Santarone tried to evade police, and (4) the
white Jeep's ignition had been punched.  Further, Santarone's
girlfriend testified that Santarone started the white Jeep with a
screwdriver and he told her to tell the court system that it was
not him driving the white Jeep.
Clearly, the jury did not believe Santarone's story,
and in reviewing whether substantial evidence exists to support a
conviction, due deference must be given to the right of the trier
of fact to "determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw
justifiable inferences of fact from the evidence adduced."  State
v. Naeole , 62 Haw. 563, 565, 617 P.2d 820, 823 (1980).  "[G]uilt
may be proved beyond a reasonable doubt on the basis ofNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3reasonable inferences drawn from circumstantial evidence."  State
v. Mitchell , 88 Hawai i 216, 226, 965 P.2d 149, 159 (App. 1998)
(emphasis omitted) (quoting State v. Pone , 78 Hawai i 262, 273,
892 P.2d 455, 466 (1995)). »
»
(2) Santarone contends the Prosecutor committed
prosecutorial misconduct when she stated in closing argument:
[Santarone] asked no questions about the car.  He
don't ask questions about any of the cars that he ever had
that had punched ignition because he's not concerned.
And what that means, ladies and gentlemen, is he is
not concerned about individuals like Kurt Podrazik who, at
the time of the offense, was out to sea serving our country
in a submarine.  That when he came home from that service,
his car was stolen.
He don't care about people like Kurt Podrazik.  He
don't ask questions.  If he can get a car for 50 bucks, he
going to get a car for 50 bucks.  That was his testimony. 
He don't care.  He don't ask questions.  He don't have to. 
He does what he wants.
Santarone argues that the Prosecutor tried to evoke the
jurors' sympathy for Kurt Podrazik, the legal owner of the white
Jeep, by emphasizing that Podrazik was "serving our country" at
the time his white Jeep was stolen.  Santarone further argues
that the Prosecutor attempted to inflame the jurors' passions
against Santarone by stating that Santarone "don't care about
people like Kurt Podrazik," implying that Santarone does not
support people who serve the United States in the Armed Forces.
Santarone failed to object to the Prosecutor's
statements at trial; therefore, the appellate court 
must, as a threshold matter, determine whether the alleged
misconduct constituted plain error that affected [the
defendant's] substantial rights.  In so doing, [the
appellate] court considers the nature of the alleged
misconduct, the promptness or lack of a curative
instruction, and the strength or weakness of the evidence
against the defendant.
State v. Iuli , 101 Hawai i 196, 208, 65 P.3d 143, 155 (2003)
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).  The statements
made by the Prosecutor in her closing argument did not amount to
plain error.  The Prosecutor's statements were drawn from the»NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4evidence and reasonable inferences that could be made from the
evidence.
However, assuming arguendo that the Prosecutor's
statements were inappropriate and meant to prejudice the jurors
against Santarone, the circuit court did not commit plain error
because (a) during jury selection, the court told the jury
candidates that they "must not be influenced by . . . passion or
prejudice against [Santarone]" and "all participants in the trial
are to be treated without bias, prejudice, or favoritism on the
grounds of . . . occupation"; (b) before closing arguments, the
circuit court informed the jury that they "must not be influenced
by . . . passion or prejudice against [Santarone]"; (c) "jurors
are presumed to follow the court's instructions," State v.
Haanio, 94 Hawai i 405, 415, 16 P.3d 246, 256 (2001); and (d) the
evidence against Santarone was overwhelming.  Given the strength
of the evidence against Santarone, the instructions to the jury,
and the nature of the alleged misconduct, we conclude the
Prosecutor's statements did not constitute plain error that
affected Santarone's substantial rights.»
(3) Santarone contends the Prosecutor committed
misconduct when she questioned him concerning his knowledge of
punched ignitions and their relation to stolen vehicles.  Hawaii
Rules of Evidence Rule 404(b) provides:
Rule 404  Character evidence not admissible to prove
conduct; exceptions; other crimes.  
. . . .
(b)  Other crimes, wrongs, or acts.  Evidence of other
crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the
character of a person in order to show action in conformity
therewith.  It may, however, be admissible where such
evidence is probative of another fact that is of consequence
to the determination of the action, such as proof of motive,
opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident.  In
criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be offered
under this subsection shall provide reasonable notice in
advance of trial, or during trial if the court excuses
pretrial notice on good cause shown, of the date, location,
and general nature of any such evidence it intends to
introduce at trial.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5Santarone testified on cross-examination that the only
time he ever encountered punched ignitions was for legitimate
purposes.  However, he later admitted that he had encountered
punched ignitions on cars known to be stolen.  The Prosecutor did
not commit prosecutorial misconduct by questioning Santarone
concerning his knowledge of punched ignitions, and the circuit
court did not disapprove of this line of questioning.  The cross-
examination of Santarone on this knowledge of punched ignitions
was not in violation of HRE Rule 404(b).  The cross-examination
was appropriate to rebut Santarone's mistake of fact defense. 
Additionally, it was appropriate under HRE Rule 607 in attacking
the credibility of Santarone.
Therefore, 
The Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed
on June 15, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai i, June 30, 2011. »
On the briefs:
Thomas Waters
(Hawk Sing Ignacio &
Waters)
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Associate Judge
Associate Judge