NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30450
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SIAOSI FELEUNGA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-1083)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Siaosi Feleunga (Feleunga) appeals
 
from the March 22, 2010 judgment of the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit (circuit court),1
 convicting Feleunga of:  (1) 
Accident Involving Death or Serious Bodily Injury in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291C-12 (2007 & Supp. 2010) 
(Accident charge); (2) Negligent Homicide in the Second Degree in 
violation of HRS § 707-703 (1993) (Negligent Homicide charge); 
and (3) Operating a Vehicle After License and Privilege have been 
Suspended or Revoked for Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence 
of an Intoxicant in violation of HRS § 291E-62 (2007 & Supp. 
2008) (Driving While License Suspended charge). Pursuant to a 
plea agreement with the State of Hawai' i (State) and to which the 
circuit court agreed to be bound pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of 
1
 The Honorable Karen S. S. Ahn presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 11(e)(1),  the circuit court
sentenced Feleunga to concurrent terms of imprisonment of ten
 
years, five years, and thirty days, respectively.3 The circuit
 
court also ordered Feleunga to pay restitution in the amount of
 $1,865 to the State Department of Human Services (DHS) for
 
medical expenses and $5,106.57 in restitution to the victim's
 
mother for funeral expenses, an assessment of $500 to the
 
Neurotrauma Special Fund, and an assessment of no more than $500
 
to the DNA Registry Special Fund.
 
On appeal, Feleunga challenges his sentence of
 
restitution on two grounds: (1) The circuit court erred when it
 
ordered restitution despite having agreed to be bound by the
 
terms of a plea agreement that did not provide for restitution in
 
the underlying criminal case and (2) the legislature, by
 
mandating restitution through enactment of HRS § 706-646,
 
2 Rule 11. Pleas
 
. . . .
 
(e) Plea Agreement.
 (1) In General. The prosecutor and counsel for the
defendant, or the defendant when acting pro se, may enter
into plea agreements that, upon the entering of a plea of
guilty or nolo contendere to a charged offense or to an
included or related offense, the prosecutor will take
certain actions or adopt certain positions, including the
dismissal of other charges and the recommending or not
opposing of specific sentences or dispositions on the charge
to which a plea was entered. The court may participate in
discussions leading to such plea agreements and may agree to
be bound thereby.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
3 Feleunga pleaded guilty to the offenses charged in the instant
case, Cr. No. 09-1-1083, pursuant to a plea agreement that included charges in
two other criminal cases. In the instant case, Feleunga agreed to concurrent
sentences of ten years imprisonment for the Accident charge, five years
imprisonment for the Negligent Homicide charge, and thirty days imprisonment
for the Driving While License Suspended charge. Feleunga and the State agreed
that there would be no waiver of the presentence investigation and report.
The plea agreement did not mention any restitution payments to the victim's
mother or DHS, although Feleunga points out that the plea agreement
specifically provided for victim restitution in one of the other two cases.
The Guilty Plea form signed by Feleunga in Cr. No. 09-1-1083 included the
averment that, inter alia, he understood restitution and a fee and/or
assessment could be imposed, but also indicated he was told the circuit court
agreed to bind itself to the plea agreement pursuant to HRPP Rule 11.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
violated the separation of powers doctrine insofar as it operated
 
to impose restitution despite the terms of a plea agreement
 
thereby invading "the province of the Courts to ensure protection
 
of criminal defendants through its inherent power to regulate
 
plea agreements."
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced, the issues raised by the parties, and the
 
relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Feleunga's point of
 
error as follows:
 
"The authority of a trial court to select and determine 
the severity of a penalty is normally undisturbed on review in 
the absence of an apparent abuse of discretion or unless 
applicable statutory or constitutional commands have not been 
observed." State v. Gaylord, 78 Hawai' i 127, 143-44, 890 P.2d 
1167, 1183-84 (1995) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). As the circuit court was statutorily required to order 
restitution to both the victim's mother and DHS, the circuit 
court did not abuse its discretion in ordering the restitution 
payments at issue in this case. HRS § 706-646 (Supp. 2010) 
("[t]he court shall order the defendant to make restitution for 
reasonable and verified losses suffered by the victim or victims 
as a result of the defendant's offense when requested by the 
victim.") (emphasis added).
4 
4 § 706-646. Victim restitution  (1) As used in this section,
"victim" includes any of the following:
 
(a)	 The direct victim of a crime including a
business entity, trust, or governmental entity;
 
(b)	 If the victim dies as a result of the crime, a
surviving relative of the victim as defined in
chapter 351; or
 
(c)	 A governmental entity which has reimbursed the
victim for losses arising as a result of the
crime.
 
(2)	 The court shall order the defendant to make
 
restitution for reasonable and verified losses suffered by
(continued...)
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In the instant case, Feleunga does not dispute that the
 
terms of HRS §706-646 were met. Rather, Feleunga appears to be
 
arguing that the terms of his plea agreement prevented the
 
application of this legislative mandate. However, nothing in
 
Feleunga's plea agreement prohibits the imposition of
 
restitution.5 Compare State v. Costa, 64 Haw. 564, 566-67, 644
 
P.2d 1329, 1331-32 (1982) (prosecution did not breach plea
 agreement by seeking mandatory minimum term of imprisonment where
 
agreement stated only that the prosecution agreed to seek a
 
4(...continued)
the victim or victims as a result of the defendant's offense
 
when requested by the victim. The court shall order
restitution to be paid to the crime victim compensation
commission in the event that the victim has been given an
award for compensation under chapter 351. If the court
orders payment of a fine in addition to restitution or a
compensation fee, or both, the payment of restitution and
compensation fee shall have priority over the payment of the
fine, and payment of restitution shall have priority over
payment of a compensation fee.
 
(3) In ordering restitution, the court shall not
consider the defendant's financial ability to make
restitution in determining the amount of restitution to
order. The court, however, shall consider the defendant's
financial ability to make restitution for the purpose of
establishing the time and manner of payment. The court shall
specify the time and manner in which restitution is to be
paid. Restitution shall be a dollar amount that is
sufficient to reimburse any victim fully for losses,
including but not limited to:
 
(a)	 Full value of stolen or damaged property, as
determined by replacement costs of like
property, or the actual or estimated cost of
repair, if repair is possible;
 
(b)	 Medical expenses; and
 
(c)	 Funeral and burial expenses incurred as a result
of the crime.
 
(4) The restitution ordered shall not affect the
 
right of a victim to recover under section 351-33 or in any
manner provided by law; provided that any amount of
restitution actually recovered by the victim under this
section shall be deducted from any award under section
351-33.
 
5
 Similarly, we note that Feleunga's plea agreement prohibits
neither the Neurotrama Special Assessment or the DNA Registry Special
Assessment also imposed as part of his sentence. Yet, Feleunga does not
challenge these assessments.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
twenty-year maximum term and not life imprisonment), with State
 
v. Abbott, 79 Hawai' i 317, 321, 901 P.2d 1296, 1300 (App. 1995) 
(breach by prosecution where requests, although not specifically prohibited by the agreement, was contrary to statute and thus not 
within the contemplation of the defendant). 
As the circuit court was statutorily required to order
 
restitution to both the victim's mother and DHS and the plea
 
agreement did not explicitly exclude the imposition of
 
restitution, the circuit court did not err in ordering the
 
restitution payments at issue in this case.
 As we do not read the plea agreement as precluding
 
restitution in the underlying criminal case, we do not reach
 
Feleunga's separation of powers argument.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the March 22, 2010 Judgment
 
of Conviction and Sentence of the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 15, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Shawn A. Luiz,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
5
 