  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30407
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JANICE LYNN SUSSMAN, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROGER LEE SUSSMAN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DIVORCE NO. 04-1-0468)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant/Appellant Roger Lee Sussman (Roger) appeals
 
from a Family Court of the Second Circuit (Family Court) March 3,
 
2010 Order After Hearing, granting in part and denying in part
 
Roger's motion for post-decree relief from a divorce decree that
 dissolved his marriage from Plaintiff/Appellee Janice Lynn
 Sussman (Janice).
1
 
Roger raises several points of error on appeal, arguing
 
that the Family Court erred by:
 
(1) failing to recalculate the Divorce Judgment's child
 
and spousal support awards based upon a material change of
 circumstances (in contravention of the ICA's decision in Sussman
 I) and instead erroneously affirming the awards as a result of:
 
(a) improperly imputing pre-decree monetary gifts given
 
from Roger's parents "directly" to Janice;
 
(b) failing to recalculate Roger's income, where
 
Roger's parents "ceased giving their regular and consistent
 monetary gifts;" 
1
 The Honorable Keith E. Tanaka presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(c) failing to recalculate the income imputed to Janice
 
based on the "regular and consistent monetary gifts" she was
 
receiving from her parents; and
 
(d) denying Roger's HFCR Rule 60(b) motion to
 
recalculate the Divorce Judgment's spousal and child
 support awards;
 
(2) issuing mixed Findings of Fact (FOFs) and
 
Conclusions of Law (COLs) not based on substantial evidence in
 
its March 3, 2010 Order After Hearing; 
(3) disregarding evidence related to Janice's ability
 
to exert reasonable efforts to attain self-sufficiency;
 
(4) admitting documents into evidence that were not
 
named on Janice's Exhibit List and not properly authenticated;
 
and 
(5) using financial information not timely submitted in
 
recalculating the child support order.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Roger's
 points of error as follows:
 
(1) Roger contends that the Family Court failed, in
 
contravention of the holding in Sussman I, to "properly impute
 regular and consistent monetary gifts to the beneficiary of said
 gifts," essentially arguing that the Family Court's calculations
 of child and spousal support were incorrect based on contemporary
 circumstances. In Sussman I, the Intermediate Court of Appeals
 (ICA) opined:
 
In light of HRS § 580-47, we conclude that the family court
may and should consider regular and consistent monetary
gifts received by a spouse as part of that spouse's actual
financial resources, condition and ability when determining
spousal support. Pursuant to HRS § 580-47(d), if and when
Roger's parents materially reduce their regular and
consistent monetary gifts to Roger, he may allege a material
change in circumstance and ask the family court for a review
of its orders.
 
Sussman I, 112 Hawai 'i 437, 441, 146 P.3d 597, 601 (App. 2006). 
There are four parts to this argument. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
First, Roger contends that the Family Court ignored
 
evidence suggesting that, after his separation from Janice in
 
November 2003, the monetary gifts from his parents were intended
 solely for the benefit and/or enjoyment of Janice and the
 parties' minor children and, therefore, should have been imputed
 to her income. Roger contends that the ICA, in issuing the
 Sussman I decision, was not aware that Roger's parents were
 giving monetary gifts directly to Janice; however, on remand, the
 Family Court was made aware of this fact during the February 8,
 2010 trial and therefore erred in allowing the Divorce Judgment's
 spousal support award to stand.
 
"[A] spousal support modification hearing is not a
 
review hearing or a rehearing of the original hearing. It is a
 new hearing based on changed circumstances." Saromines v.
 
Saromines, 3 Haw. App. 20, 28, 641 P.2d 1342, 1348 (1982)
 (citation omitted). Though at one point Janice was receiving
 some funds from Roger's parents, it is uncontested that at the
 time of the February 8, 2010 trial, Janice was receiving no
 monetary gifts from them. Janice testified that "Roger's parents
 stopped giving the monthly allowance back in 2004." Roger
 testified that his parents were giving funds directly to Janice
 "[f]or most of the time, between the time of separation [in
 November 2003] until almost the time of their departure [in
 2005]." Thus, the parties agree that it has been a significant
 amount of time (at least five years) since Janice received any
 sort of monetary gift from Roger's parents. 
In order to consider monetary gifts received by a 
spouse as part of that spouse's actual financial resources, condition, and ability when determining spousal support, the gifts must be "regular and consistent"; irregular, unpredictable, or past gifts may not be imputed as income. See Sussman I, 112 
Hawai
'i at 441, 146 P3d at 601. Although the gifts from Roger's 
parents could possibly be considered "regular and consistent" in the sense that they were mostly given to Janice on a fairly consistent basis over a year and a half period, it was not error to classify them otherwise given that they had been discontinued 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
several years before the Family Court's ruling. Moreover, they
 
were not always given directly to Janice; Roger admitted that
 sometimes the funds were given to him to make purchases for the
 children's sake. Accordingly, the Family Court did not abuse its
 discretion in refusing to recalculate the spousal support award
 to impute the pre-divorce monetary gifts given from Roger's
 parents to Janice.
 
Second, Roger asserts that the Family Court failed to
 
recalculate child and spousal support, pursuant to a material
 change of circumstances, because his parents materially reduced
 their regular and consistent monetary gifts. However, the Family
 Court did, in fact, reduce the child support award based upon a
 material change in Roger's financial circumstances (namely, that
 there had been a change in the "current financials" of the
 parties, as well as the fact that Roger was only responsible for
 one child, instead of three). Therefore, the issue is whether
 the court's failure to similarly change the Divorce Judgment's
 spousal support award was an abuse of discretion.
 
A family court, upon a "material change in the physical
 
or financial circumstances of either party, or upon a showing of
 other good cause," may "amend or revise any order and shall
 consider all proper circumstances in determining the amount of
 the allowance, if any, which shall thereafter be ordered." HRS
 § 580-47(d). In Vorfeld v. Vorfeld, this court held that trial
 courts are presented with three questions when reviewing a
 request to modify court-ordered spousal support: (1) whether any
 of the relevant circumstances materially changed; (2) if so,
 whether there should be a modification; and (3) if a modification
 is warranted, what that modification should be. Vorfeld v.
 
Vorfeld, 8 Haw. App. 391, 391-92, 804 P.2d 891, 892 (1991). The
 court in Vorfeld described "relevant circumstances" as follows:
 
The first relevant circumstance is the payee's need. What
 
amount of money does he or she need to maintain the standard
of living established during the marriage? The second
 relevant circumstance is the payee's ability to meet his or
her need without spousal support. Taking into account the
payee's income, or what it should be, including the net
income producing capability of his or her property, what is
his or her reasonable ability to meet his or her need
without spousal support? The third relevant circumstance is
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the payor's need. What amount of money does he or she need
to maintain the standard of living established during the
marriage? The fourth relevant circumstance is the payor's
ability to pay spousal support. Taking into account the
payor's income, or what it should be, including the income
producing capability of his or her property, what is his or
her reasonable ability to meet his or her need and to pay
spousal support?
 
Id. This court must also consider that family courts are 
afforded wide discretion with respect to a modification based on 
a material change in circumstance. See Davis v. Davis, 3 Haw. 
App. 501, 506, 653 P.2d 1167, 1171 (1982); see also In re Doe, 77 Hawai
'i 109, 115, 883 P.2d 30, 36 (1994) (stating that "[t]he 
family court possesses wide discretion in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion"). 
In the present case, the Family Court decided not to
 
disturb the spousal support award, instead opting to leave it at
 its current level. In rendering its decision, the Family Court
 noted the affirmation of spousal support by the ICA in Sussman I,
 and considered that there was no significant change in Roger's
 situation, because "even though [Roger's] parents [] stopped
 payment directly to Ms. Sussman, what they did was open up this ­- open this trust, this irrevokable [sic] trust for Mr. Sussman,
 which then covered his expenses." The court found that the trust
 essentially took the place of the periodic payments that Roger's
 parents had previously given to him (and to Janice). The Family
 Court's ruling is consistent with Vorfeld, in that the court
 considered all of the relevant circumstances (primarily "the
 payor's ability to pay spousal support"), and determined that
 they did not warrant modification of the award. Thus, we
 conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in
 finding that the spousal support award should remain the same,
 even though Roger's parents materially reduced their direct
 monetary gifts to him.
 
Third, Roger contends that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion when it failed to impute the so-called "regular and
 consistent monetary gifts" that Janice received from her parents.
 In its Order After Hearing, the Family Court found the following:
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[T]here is no imputation of income to [Janice] based upon
[Janice] (and the minor child) living in [Janice's] parents'
home. The Court found that Ms. Sussman's parents'
contributions to [Janice] are not considered regular and
consistent monetary gifts; rather, what Ms. Sussman's
parents are doing is just providing for her as a matter of
necessity - it is not because they have money to spare, but
because there is no choice here.
 
Roger, on the other hand, argues that the help Janice
 
received from her parents (in the form of free or reduced rent,
 
shared use of the family vehicle, and some meals) should be
 considered "regular and consistent monetary gifts." The Family
 Court's finding, however, that this assistance is a "matter of
 necessity," and not a "financial gift," is supported by the
 record. Here, Janice's housing situation is very different from
 that during the parties' marriage. During the marriage, Roger's
 parents purchased a separate house for the parties to live in,
 and they also paid for essentially all of the parties' expenses,
 despite living in a completely different location.  Following the
 
divorce, Janice and the parties' two youngest children were
 
simply living with Janice's parents in her parents' home,
 accepting meals provided by her parents, and some "emergency aid"
 with the children's expenses. Furthermore, Janice testified that
 the arrangement with her parents was based on an agreement that
 reimbursement would be made in consideration of her parents'
 financial help:
 
As far as, you know, basically, to the issue at hand
is just that –- that it's been hard. I mean, I've been
receiving food stamps for ever since I have been in the
State of Washington.
. . .
 
So, it's been the food stamps. And at the beginning
there we were also getting family aid because of the time
that I was with cancer. And so we got some emergency family
aid. And that's been –- my parents have helped with paying
for their grandkids in school, and the agreement was that it
was a long-term loan.
Just as I had always intended that staying in their
home, being that their income is very low, that their home
was -– that I would be paying them back for some of the
expenses that they have had to put out as far [as] rent and
just living expenses.
 
We conclude that the Family Court did not err in
 
declining to characterize the assistance of Janice's parents as
 
financial gifts and/or imputed income.
 
6
 Hayashi,NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fourth, Roger argues that the Family Court erred when 
it denied his oral Hawai 'i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 
60(b)(6) Motion to "go back to the Divorce Decree, calculate the 
parties' accurate income, and retroactively order the correct child support and spousal support awards." The Family Court found that "under Rule 60(b) there's no grounds as far as mistake, inadvertance [sic], excusable neglect, or newly discovered evidence or fraud to retroactively go back and undue what's already been done here." The Family Court further found that the motion was not made within a "reasonable time," stating that "since the divorce was back in April of '05 and since the ICA opinion came back in August of '06, it's already -- this is February 2010 . . . I don't find that there's been any reasonable time as far as the request to make this retroactive." 
HFCR Rule 60(b)(6) "permits the trial court in its
 
sound discretion to relieve a party from a final judgment." 
Hayashi v. Hayashi, 4 Haw. App. 286, 290, 666 P.2d 171, 174
 (1983). Specifically, the rule provides, in relevant part:
 
Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newly discovered
evidence; fraud. On motion and upon such terms as are just,
the court may relieve a party or a party's legal
representative from any or all of the provisions of a final
judgment, order, or proceeding for the following reasons:
(1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect;
(2) newly discovered evidence which by due diligence could
not have been discovered in time to move for a new trial
 under Rule 59(b); (3) fraud (whether heretofore denominated
intrinsic or extrinsic), misrepresentation, or other
misconduct of an adverse party; (4) the judgment is void;
(5) the judgment has been satisfied, released, or
discharged, or a prior judgment upon which it is based has
been reversed or otherwise vacated, or it is no longer
equitable that the judgment should have prospective
application; or (6) any other reason justifying relief from
the operation of the judgment. The motion shall be made
within a reasonable time, and for reasons (1), (2), and (3)
not more than one year after the judgment, order, or
proceedings was entered or taken.
 
Relief under HFCR Rule 60(b)(6) is extraordinary, and
 
the movant must show that "(1) the motion is based on some reason
 
other than those specifically stated in clauses 60(b)(1) through
 (5); (2) the reason urged is such as to justify the relief; and
 (3) the motion is made within a reasonable time."  4
 
Haw. App. at 290, 666 P.2d at 174 (citation omitted). "The
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeal of a denial of an HFCR Rule 60(b) motion brings up for
 
review only whether the trial court abused its discretion in
 denying the motion itself; it does not bring up for review the
 merits of the underlying order or judgment." Rigsby v. Rigsby,
 
No. 30359, at *2 (App. Feb. 28, 2013) (SDO) (citation omitted).
 
In the present case, Roger argues that the Family
 
Court's decisions were "based on incorrect facts," which stems
 from the contention that the court improperly imputed the
 parties' income. However, as stated above, the Family Court did
 not abuse its discretion regarding the imputation of income. 
Roger otherwise fails to provide a "reason justifying relief" as
 to why the spousal support award should now be retroactively
 amended.
 
Additionally, HFCR Rule 60(b) requires that a motion be
 
made "within a reasonable time." HFCR Rule 60(b). The record
 indicates that although Roger was represented by counsel at all
 times during the divorce proceedings, there was a delay of nearly
 three years after the Sussman I decision was filed before Roger
 filed his May 28, 2009 motion requesting a modification of the
 child and spousal support awards. Indeed, Roger's oral motion
 seeking retroactive, as well as prospective, relief was not made
 until nearly four years after the Sussman I decision was filed. 
It was not an abuse of discretion to reject Roger's argument that
 his motion was made within a reasonable period of time. The
 Family Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Roger's Rule
 60(b)(6) motion.
 
(2) Roger contends that the Family Court's FOFs in its
 
March 3, 2010 Order After Hearing were insufficient and do not
 satisfy the requirements of HFCR Rule 52(a).
2 FOFs (and COLs
 
2
 HFCR Rule 52(a) provides:
 
(a) Effect. In all actions tried in the family court, the court
may find the facts and state its conclusions of law thereon or may
announce or write and file its decision and direct the entry of
the appropriate judgment; except upon notice of appeal filed with
the court, the court shall enter its findings of fact and
conclusions of law where none have been entered, unless the
written decision of the court contains findings of fact and
(continued...)
 
8
  (1) failure to properly impute gifts pursuant to the
Sussman I decision in the recalculation of spousal
support;
(2) refusal to recalculate the spousal support award based
on a material change in circumstances;
(3) refusal to impute the "gifts" from Janice's parents to
Janice;
(4) conclusion that the support given to Janice from herparents were a matter of "necessity," rather than a"gift";
(5) recalculation of child support based on "unverifiedfigures";
(6) failure to properly impute gifts pursuant to theSussman I decision in the recalculation of child 
support;
(7) conclusion that "there are no grounds to retroactivelygo back and undo what has already been ordered"; and
(8) conclusion that Roger's Rule 60(b) motion had not beenmade in a reasonable time. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that present mixed questions of fact and law) are reviewed under 
the clearly erroneous standard. Schiller v. Schiller, 120 
Hawai'i 283, 288, 205 P.3d 548, 553 (App. 2009) (citations, 
internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). An FOF is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding or determination, or (2) despite substantial evidence to support the finding or determination, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Id. "Where an appellant alleges 
that the trial court failed to make adequate findings of fact, the appellate court will examine all the findings, as made, to determine whether they are (1) supported by the evidence; and (2) sufficiently comprehensive and pertinent to the issues in the case to form a basis for the conclusions of law." Doe IV v. Roe 
IV, 5 Haw. App. 558, 565, 705 P.2d 535, 542 (1985) (citation omitted). Roger claims the Family Court's FOFs do not support its: 
2(...continued)
conclusions of law. . . . Findings of fact if entered shall not be
set aside unless clearly erroneous, and due regard shall be given
to the opportunity of the trial court to judge the credibility of
the witnesses. . . . If a decision is filed, it will be sufficient
if the findings of fact and conclusions of law appear therein.
 
Accordingly, where "the written decision of the court contains findings of
fact and conclusions of law," the court need not enter separate FOFs and COLs.
See HFCR Rule 52(a). 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although not extensive, the Family Court's FOFs were
 
sufficient to enable the parties and this Court to ascertain the
 
basis of its decision because the court laid out its findings and
 conclusions in a logical manner that was supported by the record. 
"The trial judge is required to only make brief, definite,
 pertinent findings and conclusions upon the contested matters;
 there is no necessity for over-elaboration of detail or
 particularization of facts." Doe IV, 5 Haw. App. at 565, 705
 
P.2d at 542 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Upon review, we conclude that Roger's argument is without merit.
 
(3) Roger argues that the Family Court erred and
 
abused its discretion by disregarding facts related to Janice's
 failure to exert reasonable efforts to attain self-sufficiency. 
A party receiving spousal support is "always under a duty to
 exert reasonable efforts to attain self-sufficiency at the
 standard of living established during the marriage and will not
 be allowed to benefit from the consequences of a violation of
 that duty." Saromines, 3 Haw. App. at 28, 641 P.2d at 1348. 
Roger argues that despite Janice's work history and job
 
skills, she continues to depend on others for support. At trial,
 Roger testified that Janice had previously worked as a waitress,
 a cook, and a lab technician, and had also worked in a plant
 nursery, in production, and in the office of a medical practice. 
Roger further testified that during the marriage, Janice was
 employed at a local cable access station and directed "a number
 of non-profit voluntary non-paying jobs." Based on her work
 experience, Roger contends, Janice is capable of earning a living
 for herself. 
Janice, on the other hand, testified that she had been
 
receiving welfare benefits since the divorce in 2005, and due to
 two years of cancer treatments, she had not been able to start
 working until 2007. Janice also testified that in 2007, she
 began working part-time as a Director at a Pregnancy Resource
 Center, while simultaneously enrolling herself in an online
 schooling program in order to work towards a degree in natural
 sciences and religious studies, and later a degree in marriage
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and family counseling. Janice further testified that she was
 
only working "half time" ("generally . . . more than twenty hours
 a week") because those were the only hours available to her and
 because of her school and family obligations. The record
 indicates that although Janice did not work regularly during the
 marriage, following the divorce (and when her health improved)
 Janice made efforts to support herself by furthering her
 education, as well as simultaneously working part-time. In light
 of Janice's work history, health issues, job skills, efforts, and
 the standard of living established during the marriage, the
 Family Court was within its discretion in finding that Janice did
 not violate her duty to attain self-sufficiency.
 
(4) Roger asserts that the Family Court erred by
 
admitting the Trust document into evidence because it (1) was not
 named on Janice's Exhibit List and (2) was not properly
 authenticated. First, we note that the terms of the Trust were
 generally referenced in Roger's opening statement, as well as in
 Roger's trial testimony.  Despite Roger's inability to identify
 
the document admitted as being the Trust document, the Family
 
Court admitted it into evidence as Plaintiff's Exhibit A, stating
 that Roger "had a chance to review it" and that it "is purported
 to be what it is." The Family Court subsequently questioned
 Roger about the Trust.
 
"Evidentiary rulings are reviewed for abuse of 
discretion, unless application of the rule admits of only one correct result." Inoue v. Inoue, 118 Hawai
'i 86, 93, 185 P.3d 
834, 841 (App. 2008) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). "There being no single right or wrong disposition of authentication issues," the Family Court's ruling on authentication of items under rules of evidence is subject, on appeal, to "review for abuse of discretion." Kam Fui Trust v. 
Brandhorst, 77 Hawai
'i 320, 326, 884 P.2d 383, 389 (App. 1994). 
Here, we note that the Trust document was clearly
 
relevant to the issues before the Family Court. It provided
 evidence germane to the calculation of Roger's income and (along
 with Roger's testimony) explained the process by which the
 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trustee used Trust monies to pay for Roger's monthly expenses. 
Although Roger was purportedly unable to authenticate the Trust
 document, Janice had also received a copy of the Trust directly
 from the Trust Company pursuant to court order.  Moreover, based
 
on his personal knowledge, Roger testified about the Trust and
 
the process by which he obtains reimbursement from the Trust for
 his living expenses. We conclude that the Family Court did not
 abuse its discretion in determining that the evidence was
 sufficient to support a finding that the Trust document was what
 it was purported to be. In addition, based on Roger's testimony
 regarding the trust, any error that might have resulted from
 admitting the Trust document into evidence was harmless error and
 did not affect any of Roger's substantial rights. See Hawaii
 
4
Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 103(a) 3; HFCR Rule 61.  We conclude
 
that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in admitting
 the Trust document and that, even if the Family Court erred, such
 error was harmless.
 
(5) Finally, Roger contends that the Family Court
 
abused its discretion by not requiring Janice to file her
 financial statements prior to the hearing on his motion for post-
decree relief. HFCR Rule 7(b)(5) requires that both the movant
 and the respondent ("no later than 48 hours prior to the
 hearing") submit signed Income and Expense, and Asset and Debt
 Statements, in connection with "[a]ny motion seeking an order for
 or modification of financial or monetary relief of any kind,
 
3 HRE Rule 103(a) states, in relevant part, that "[e]rror may not be
predicated upon a ruling which admits or excludes evidence unless a
substantial right of the party is affected." 
4
 HFCR Rule 61 provides the following: 
No error in either the admission or the exclusion of
 
evidence and no error or defect in any ruling or order or in
anything done or omitted by the court or by any of the
parties is ground for granting a new trial or for setting
aside a verdict or for vacating, modifying, or otherwise
disturbing a judgment or order, unless refusal to take such
action appears to the court inconsistent with substantial
justice. The court at every stage of the proceeding must
disregard any error or defect in the proceeding that does
not affect the substantial rights of the parties.
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
except for an award of attorney's fees in enforcement
 
proceedings."
 
At the hearing, because Janice had not previously filed
 
an Income and Expense Statement, on cross-examination, Roger's
 counsel questioned Janice about "what's on the [statement]
 sheet." Janice essentially testified as to all the information
 covered on the Income and Expense Statement. Roger did not
 object to Janice filling out a written statement after giving her
 testimony: 
THE COURT: Mr. Edelman [counsel for Roger], since you went
through the income and expense statement, whichwasn't provided and Ms. Sussman didn't fill oneout, do you want to fill it out on her behalfand have her –­
EDELMAN: Well –­
THE COURT: I know you went through all the questions,essentially, going through that form with her. 
EDELMAN: Right. 
THE COURT: Do you want that admitted as, like, an exhibit,
as far as a filled-out form? 
EDELMAN: Yes, I would, your Honor. 
THE COURT: Well, let me do this then. Let me have -– I will give Ms. Sussman a blank income and expenseso you can exactly put down what was just askedyou as far as your income and expenses. 
So, and then you can sign off on it as far as it
being true and correct. 
[JANICE]: Okay. . . . I don't know if I might need hisnotes to see what I said. 
. . . 
EDELMAN: 	
I have no problem. I will share those notes,
your Honor.
 
Janice's Income and Expense Statement was consistent with her
 
testimony, although there were minor deviations. 
Because Roger did not object to the admission of 
Janice's Income and Expense Statement, and in fact requested its admission, this point of error is waived on appeal. See Ass'n of 
Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai
'i 
97, 107, 58 P.3d 608, 618 (2002) ("Legal issues not raised in the trial court are ordinarily deemed waived on appeal.") (citations 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
omitted). Moreover, we conclude that the Family Court did not
 
abuse its discretion in considering Janice's Income and Expense
 Statement.
 
For these reasons, the Family Court's March 3, 2010
 
Order After Hearing is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 10, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Joel Edelman 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Janice Sussman Pro Se Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
14
 