FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
---o0o--­
RICHARD NELSON III; KALIKO CHUN; JAMES AKIONA, SR.;
SHERILYN ADAMS; KELII IOANE, JR.; and CHARLES AIPIA,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
HAWAIIAN HOMES COMMISSION; THE DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN
HOME LANDS; KAULANA H.R. PARK,1 in his official capacity
as Chair of the Hawaiian Homes Commission; PERRY ARTATES,
ALAPAKI NAHALE-A, DONALD S.M. CHANG, STUART HANCHETT, MALIA
KAMAKA, FRANCIS LUM, TRISH MORIKAWA, and HENRY K. TANCAYO,2
 
in their official capacities as members of the Hawaiian Homes
Commission; KALBERT K. YOUNG,3 in his official capacity
as the State Director of Finance; and THE STATE OF HAWAII,
Defendants-Appellees
 
NO. 30110
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-1663)
 
1
 When the complaint was filed in this lawsuit, Micah A. Kane was the
Chair of the Hawaiian Homes Commission. He was succeeded in 2009 by Kaulana
H.R. Park. Pursuant to Hawai »i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule
43(c)(1), Kaulana H.R. Park has been substituted as a party in place of Micah
A. Kane.
 
2
 When the complaint was filed, Billie Baclig and Milton Pa were two of
the commissioners. They were succeeded by Alapaki Nahale-a and Henry K.
Tancayo. Pursuant to HRAP Rule 43(c)(1), Alapaki Nahale-a and Henry K.
Tancayo have been substituted as parties in place of Billie Baclig and Milton
Pa. 
3
 When the complaint was filed, Georgina K. Kawamura was the State
Director of Finance. She was succeeded by Kalbert K. Young. Pursuant to HRAP
 Rule 43(c)(1), Kalbert K. Young has been substituted in place of Georgina K.
Kawamura. 
FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
JANUARY 12, 2011
 
FOLEY AND FUJISE, JJ.; NAKAMURA, C.J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Richard Nelson III; Kaliko Chun;
 
James Akiona, Sr.; Sherilyn Adams; Kelii Ioane, Jr.; and Charles
 
Aipia4 (Plaintiffs) appeal from the Final Judgment filed on
 
September 23, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit5
 
(circuit court).
 
I.
 
Plaintiffs sought declaratory and injunctive relief in
 
the circuit court, claiming that (1) Defendants-Appellees
 
Hawaiian Homes Commission; The Department of Hawaiian Home Lands
 
(DHHL); Micah A. Kane, in his official capacity as Chair of the
 
Hawaiian Homes Commission (Chair); Perry Artates, Billie Baclig,
 
Donald S.M. Chang, Stuart Hanchett, Malia Kamaka, Francis Lum,
 
Trish Morikawa, and Milton Pa, in their official capacities as
 
members of the Hawaiian Homes Commission (the Chair and the
 
members are collectively referred to as commissioners); Georgina
 
K. Kawamura, in her official capacity as the State Director of 
Finance; and the State of Hawaii (the State) (collectively, 
Defendants) were obligated by Article XII (Hawaiian Homes 
Commission Act, 1920 (HHCA)), Sections 1 and 2 of the 
Constitution of the State of Hawaii (Hawai» i Constitution) to 
provide particular levels of funding to the DHHL and (2) the State failed in the past to provide sufficient funds to DHHL. 
In their October 19, 2007 First Amended Complaint for
 
Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, Plaintiffs alleged, in
 
relevant part:
 
4
 Charles Aipia passed away on January 11, 2008.
 
5
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided over the proceedings, and the
Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan signed the Final Judgment. 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
FACTUAL ALLEGATIONS
 
23. As of May 1983, there were 7,901 eligible
beneficiaries on the waiting lists for Hawaiian homesteads.
 
24. There are currently over 20,000 people on the
Hawaiian Home Lands waitlist.
 
25. Hundreds of native Hawaiians have been on the
 
[DHHL's] waiting list for over three decades.
 
26. Until 1987, the State failed to appropriate a
single dollar of general fund revenues, generated from its
various general and special tax revenue sources, to pay for
the operations and programs of the [DHHL] and its
homesteading programs.
 
27. In 1987, the State [L]egislature [(the
Legislature)], for the first time, appropriated general
funds from state revenues to the operating budget of the
[DHHL].
 
28. General revenue appropriations for the [DHHL]
peaked at over $4.2 million per year in fiscal year 1992.
 
29. In 1994, the Legislature enacted Act 14 to
compensate the [DHHL] for breaches of the [HCCA] trust
committed by the [S]tate between 1959 and 1988 that deprived
the trust of assets and income improperly.
 
30. Act 14 (SLH 1994, Special Sess.) authorized the
payment of $30 million per year for 20 years to compensate
the trust for these trust breaches, provided that this sum
not count toward the current fiscal obligations of the State
to the [HCCA] trust.
 
31. During her 2002 election campaign Governor Linda
Lingle pledged to eliminate the [DHHL] waiting list in 5
years.
 
32. In 2007 the [Legislature] appropriated less than
$1.5 million in general revenue appropriations to the
[DHHL].
 
33. Since 1987, the Legislature appropriated annual
general revenue funds for the administration and operating
budgets of the [DHHL] without regard to whether the funding
reflected the amounts actually needed by the department to
fully implement and administer all programs to assure that
the spirit of the [HHCA] was effectively carried out.
 
34. Between 1989 through 2007, the [S]tate's general
fund appropriation to the [DHHL] for its administration and
operating budget never exceeded 0.5% of the total general
fund budget for any given fiscal year.
 
35. Simultaneously, since 1979, the Legislature
appropriated major general fund revenues for other purposeswhich were not mandated by the Hawai
»i Constitution and for 
items of no constitutional priority. 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
36. Over the past decade, state funding for the
Hawaii Tourism Authority, which is not constitutionally
mandated, has increased from zero to over eighty seven
million dollars a year, increasing by $22 million in the
past fiscal year alone.
 
37. Over the past four fiscal years, the [DHHL] has
awarded an average of fewer than six hundred leases to
native Hawaiians annually.
 
38. The length of the Hawaiian Homes waiting list
has remained virtually unchanged since 2002.
 
. . . .
 
COUNT 1
 
(Violation of the Constitutional
Duty to Sufficiently Fund the [DHHL])
. . . .
 
61. In 1979, the voters of Hawai
»i ratified an 
amendment passed by the 1978 Hawai »i Constitutional 
Convention delegates which specifically required the
Legislature to provide the [DHHL] "sufficient sums" to payfor its trust programs and operating budget. 
62. Under [Hawai
»i Constitution] Article XII,
[Section] 1, the [L]egislature must make sufficient sums
available for the following purposes: (1) development ofhome, agriculture, farm and ranch lots; (2) home,agriculture, aquaculture, farm and ranch loans; (3)rehabilitation projects to include, but not limited to,
educational, economic, political, social and cultural
processes by which the general welfare and conditions ofnative Hawaiians are thereby improved; (4) theadministration and operating budget of the [DHHL]; infurtherance of (1), (2), (3) and (4) herein, by
appropriating the same in the manner provided by law. 
63. Furthermore, under the [HHCA] [Section] 219.1,
the Defendants are obligated to assist the lessees in
obtaining maximum use of their leased lands, including
taking any steps necessary to develop these lands for their
highest and best use commensurate with the purposes for
which the land is being leased, and assisting the lessees in
all phases of farming, ranching, and aquaculture operations
and the marketing of their agricultural or aquacultural
produce and livestock.
 
64. Hawaiian homestead beneficiaries cannot achieve
 
the lofty aims of the [HHCA] unless they are awarded
homesteads timely and provided sufficient assistance to
maximize their utilization of those lands for the purposes
set out in the [HHCA].
 
65. Payments made pursuant to Act 14, 1995 Special
Session, do not diminish funds that the [DHHL] is entitledto pursuant to Article XII, [S]ection 1 of the [Hawai
»i 
Constitution]. 
66. Accordingly, the compensation for past breaches
of trust by the State under Act 14 is exclusive of the
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"sufficient sums" to which the DHHL is entitled pursuant to
Article XII, [S]ection 1 of the [Hawai »i Constitution]. 
67. The infrastructure cost to develop Hawaiian Home
Land lots on average is approximately $100,000 per lot.
 
68. According to [the] Hawaiian Homes Commission
Chair . . ., "The model is there, the projects are there,
the momentum is there. Now, it's just an issue of money."
 
69. According to [the] Hawaiian Homes Commission
Chair . . ., a conservative estimate of the funding
necessary for infrastructure to place one thousand
homesteaders each on homestead lands each year is
$100,000,000 annually.
 
70. In contrast, other than the funding provided
pursuant to Act 14, the [DHHL] received less than one and a
half million dollars in general revenue funds from the
legislature for fiscal year 2007.
 
71. Simultaneously, since 1994, the [State] has not
floated nor issued any capital improvement bond financing to
support the need for additional DHHL infrastructure.
 
72. The [DHHL] does not currently receive sufficient
funding to develop house lots for all applicants on the
waiting list.
 
73. The [DHHL] does not currently receive sufficient
funding to reduce the waiting list by ninety percent over
the next decade.
 
74. The [DHHL] does not currently receive sufficient
funding to pay for the development of homesteads for
applicants on the waiting list within a reasonable time
frame.
 
75. The [DHHL] does not currently receive
sufficient funds for the following purposes: (1) development
of home, agriculture, farm and ranch lots; (2) home,
agriculture, aquaculture, farm and ranch loans; (3)
rehabilitation projects to include, but not limited to,
educational, economic, political, social and cultural
processes by which the general welfare and conditions of
native Hawaiians are thereby improved; (4) the
administration and operating budget of the [DHHL]; in
furtherance of (1), (2), (3) and (4) herein.
 
76. The [S]tate administration fails to annually
request "sufficient sums" for the administration and
operating budget of the [DHHL] to assure that all the
programs of the department prescribed under Article XII,
[Section] 1 are adequately funded.
 
77. Accordingly, Plaintiffs are entitled to a
declaration by this court that Defendants are in breach of
their duties under Article XII, [Sections] 1 and 2.
 
78. Plaintiffs are also entitled to mandatory
injunction requiring the State to provide sufficient funds
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the [DHHL] to (a) place as many beneficiaries on the
department's waiting lists for residences, farms, and
ranches on available Hawaiian home lands within a reasonable
 
period of time; (b) fund a fully functioning farm, ranch,
and aquaculture support program to enable homesteaders to
maximize utilization of their homestead lands.
 
COUNT 2
 
(Breach of Trust Obligation to Seek
Sufficient Funds from the Legislature)
. . . .
 
80. A trustee is obligated to institute action and
proceedings for the protection of the trust estate and the
enforcement of claims and rights belonging thereto, and to
take all legal steps which may be reasonably necessary with
relation to those objectives.
 
81. Under trust principles applicable to all
trustees, Defendants owe their beneficiaries a duty of
exclusive loyalty to take action to promote their specific
interests under the terms of the trust.
 
82. The Hawaiian Homes Commission and the
 
commissioners have a trust duty to seek from the
[L]egislature all the funds it deems necessary to fulfill
the spirit and intent of the [HHCA].
 
83. The Hawaiian Homes Commission and its
 
commissioners have not requested from the [L]egislature
sufficient funds to fulfill the spirit and intent of the
[HHCA].
 
84. For years, these defendants have not
affirmatively sought to enforce the literal terms of Act 14
[SLH 1995, Spec. Sess.] by demanding "sufficient sums"
exclusive of payments under that act in order to fulfill
their duties of loyalty to their beneficiaries.
 
85. The Hawaiian Homes Commission and its
 
commissioners have not, as of yet, sued the [State] to
obtain sufficient funds to fulfill the spirit and intent of
the [HHCA].
 
86. Accordingly, Plaintiffs are entitled to a
declaration by this court that Defendants the Hawaiian Homes
Commission and its commissioners . . . are in breach of
 
their duties under Article XII, [Sections] 1 and 2 by not
suing for enforcement of these constitutional mandates.
 
87. Plaintiffs are also entitled to mandatory
injunction requiring Defendants the Hawaiian Homes
Commission and its commissioners . . . to request and
actively pursue that level of funding for the [DHHL] from
the Legislature to meet the costs of placing as many
beneficiaries on the department waiting lists for
residences, farms, and ranches on available Hawaiian home
lands within a reasonable period of time, and funding farm,
ranch, and aquaculture support programs.
 
(Brackets in original omitted.)
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Plaintiffs contend the circuit court erred
 
in granting summary judgment and concluding that the political
 
question doctrine bars justiciability of Plaintiffs' claims. The
 
circuit court concluded:
 
There are no judicially discoverable and manageable
standards for resolving the dispute over the definition anddetermination of "sufficient sums" under Article XII,Sections 1 & 2, of the [Hawai
»i Constitution] without making
initial policy determinations of a kind clearly for
nonjudicial discretion. 
II.
 
The Hawai» i Supreme Court has stated that an appellate 
court
 
reviews the circuit court's grant of summary judgment de 
novo. Price v. AIG Hawai »i Ins. Co., 107 Hawai »i 106, 110,
111 P.3d 1, 5 (2005). Summary judgment is appropriate "if
the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, andadmissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any,show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as amatter of law." HRCP Rule 56(c). 
Gillan v. Gov't Employees Ins. Co. , 119 Hawai» i 109, 114, 194 
P.3d 1071, 1076 (2008).
 
III.
 
The issue on appeal is: Is whether the Legislature has
 
provided sufficient sums to DHHL pursuant to Article XII,
 
Section 1 of the Hawai» i Constitution a "political question"? 
In deciding whether the political question doctrine
 
should be invoked, the Hawai» i Supreme Court in Trustees of the 
Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. Yamasaki, 69 Haw. 154, 737 P.2d 446
 (1987), adopted the test recited by the United States Supreme
 
Court in Baker v. Carr , 369 U.S. 186, 82 S. Ct. 691 (1962):
 
Prominent on the surface of any case held to involve a
political question is found a textually demonstrable
constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate
 
political department; or a lack of judicially discoverable
and manageable standards for resolving it; or the
impossibility of deciding without an initial policy
determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion;
or the impossibility of a court's undertaking independent
resolution without expressing lack of the respect due
coordinate branches of government; or an unusual need for
unquestioning adherence to a political decision already
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
made; or the potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious
pronouncements by various departments on one question.
 
Unless one of these formulations is inextricable from
 
the case at bar, there should be no dismissal for
nonjusticiability on the ground of a political question's
 
presence.
 
Yamasaki , 69 Haw. at 170, 737 P.2d at 455 (quoting Baker, 369
 
U.S. at 217, 82 S. Ct. at 710).
 
IV.
 
In deciding whether the funding of DHHL is a political
 
question, we must look to the proceedings of the Constitutional
 
Convention of Hawaii of 1978 (1978 Constitutional Convention). 
The Hawai» i Supreme Court has long recognized that 
"'the Hawai »i Constitution must be construed with due regard
to the intent of the framers and the people adopting it, and
the fundamental principle in interpreting a constitutional
principle is to give effect to that intent.'" Save Sunset 
Beach Coal. v. City & County of Honolulu, 102 Hawai »i 465, 
474, 78 P.3d 1, 10 (2003) (quoting Convention Center Auth. 
v. Anzai, 78 Hawai »i 157, 167, 890 P.2d 1197, 1207 (1995)
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted)). 
"'The general rule is that, if the words used in a
constitutional provision . . . are clear and unambiguous,they are to be construed as they are written.'" Kelly v. 
1250 Oceanside Partners, 111 Hawai
»i 205, 223-224, 140 P.3d
985, 1003-04 (2006) (quoting Taomae v. Lingle, 108 Hawai »i 
245, 251, 118 P.3d 1188, 1191 (2005) (citations omitted)).
Furthermore, in interpreting a constitutional provision,"this court 'may look to the object sought to be establishedand the matters sought to be remedied along with the historyof the times and state of being when the constitutional
provision was adopted.'" Id. at 225, 140 P.3d at 1005 (quoting City & County of Honolulu v. Ariyoshi, 67 Haw. 412,
419, 689 P.2d 757, 763 (1984) (citation omitted)). 
Kaho» ohanohano v. State , 114 Hawai» i 302, 339, 162 P.3d 696, 733 
(2007).
 
V.
 
The language of Section 1 of Article XII came from the
 
Committee on Hawaiian Affairs of the 1978 Constitutional
 
Convention. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 56 in I Proceedings of the
 
Constitutional Convention of Hawaii of 1978, at 628-34 (1980). 
The Committee on Hawaiian Affairs proposed to amend Section 1 as
 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
follows (bracketed material to be repealed; underscored material
 
to be added):
 
Anything in this constitution to the contrary
notwithstanding, the [HCCA], 1920, enacted by the Congress,
as the same has been or may be amended prior to the
admission of the State, is hereby adopted as a law of the
State, subject to amendment or repeal by the legislature,
provided, that if and to the extent that the United States
shall so require, said law shall be subject to amendment or
repeal only with the consent of the United States and in no
other manner, provided, further that, if the United States
shall have been provided or shall provide that particular
provisions or types of provisions may be so amended. The
 
proceeds and income from Hawaiian home lands shall be used
only in accordance with the terms and spirit of said Act[,].
[and the] (A) The  legislature [may, from time to time, make
additional] shall make sufficient sums available for the
 
purposes of: (1) development of home, agriculture, farm and
ranch lots; (2) home, agriculture, aquaculture, farm and
ranch loans; (3) rehabilitation projects to include, but not
limited to, educational, economic, political, social, and
cultural processes by which the general welfare and
conditions of native Hawaiians are thereby improved; (4) the
administration and operating budget of the department of
Hawaiian Home Lands; in furtherance of (1), (2), (3) and (4)
herein, [said Act] by appropriating the same in the manner
provided by law.
 
Comm. Rep. No. 56, at 629.
 
In proposing this amendment, the Committee on Hawaiian
 
Affairs stated the clear intent of the amendment:
 
Your committee proposal makes it expressly clear that
the legislature is to fund DHHL for purposes which reflect
the spirit and intent of the [HCCA]. Your Committee decided
 to no longer allow the legislature discretion in this area.
 
Your Committee decided that the [L]egislature should
provide sufficient funds to DHHL for the following projects:
 
1. For the development of site improvements for
homes, agriculture, farm and ranch lots. Development shall
include but not be limited to off-site and on-site
 improvements which are necessary to provide grading, access
(roads) and utility services (drainage, sewerage, water and
electrical systems) for the developed lots;
 
2. For lessee loans in the areas of home
 
construction and farm and ranch construction and equipment.
Under this loan mandate, DHHL is authorized to request loans
for lessees or native Hawaiians for agricultural purposes,
which includes but is not limited to acquaculture;
 
3. For various rehabilitation projects, including
education, social, political, economic and cultural
processes which contribute to the general welfare and
betterment of native Hawaiian conditions; and
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. For administrative and operational costs, which
expenditure requests are to be utilized for all of the
above-mentioned.
 
Comm. Rep. No. 56, at 630.
 
The Committee on Hawaiian Affairs added:
 
The department was established by the [HCCA] to
provide a means to rehabilitate its beneficiaries through a
series of projects and yet was given very little financial
assistance to perfect its mandate. For example, the
department must lease its lands in order to generate
revenues to support its administrative and operating budget.
 
. . . .
 
The department presently general leases its lands to
obtain moneys for administrative expenses and salaries. In
 
order to keep up with a built-in inflation rate and to
rehire prospective employees through SCET losses, DHHL
continues to general lease more of its lands. These
 employees are necessary to keep up with the current housing
output. DHHL averages 10 dollars per acre on its general
leases.
 
DHHL cannot afford to lease more acreage to the
general public for the purpose of generating income to
accommodate a minimal employee level.
 
It is clear to your Committee that the intent and
spirit of the Act would be better moneys served by releasing
the department of its present burden to generate revenues
through the general leasing of its lands. Your Committee
 decided that through legislature funding this dilemma would
be resolved. In that manner more lands could be made
 available to the intended beneficiaries. 
Comm. Rep. No. 56, at 631-32.
 
When this proposed amendment came before the Committee
 
of the Whole of the 1978 Constitutional Convention, the Committee
 
on Hawaiian Affairs members addressed what constituted
 
"sufficient funds."
 
Delegate Sutton stated:
 
Again, to the word "sufficient" -- what does this
really mean? It means funding to develop house lots for
applicants on the waiting list or implied in the general
plan. It also means money to provide loans to lessees to
construct their homes, since the lessee cannot mortgage or
encumber the land.
 
For the administration, there is need for support of a
staff to adequately service the department's beneficiaries
and to purchase equipment which will allow sufficient
management of its resources and records.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawaii of
 
1978, at 414.
 
Delegate Crozier added:
 
Mr. Chairman, I'd like to speak in favor of this proposal.
The proposal states: "The legislature shall make sufficient
sums available . . . ." The standards which define
 
"sufficient" are contained in the department's general plan,
approved by the Hawaiian homes commission on October 31,
1975 and signed by Governor Ariyoshi on April 14, 1976.
 
Id. at 415.
 
Committee on Hawaiian Affairs Chairperson De Soto (De
 
Soto) followed:
 
What we propose with respect to "shall fund" is the
administrative and costs of running the Hawaiian homes
program, which would amount to operating and administrating
approximately $1.3 million to $1.6 million, taking into
consideration inflation, collective bargaining agreements
that go into inflation with the pay.
 
Id. at 421.
 
VI.
 
In deciding whether the 1978 constitutional amendment
 
requiring sufficient funding of DHHL is a political question, we
 
apply the test set forth in Yamasaki  to the intent of the
 
delegates to the 1978 Constitutional Convention. The presence of
 any of the following six factors would make this case
 
nonjusticiable:
 
a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the
issue to a coordinate political department; or a lack of
judicially discoverable and manageable standards for
resolving it; or the impossibility of deciding without an
initial policy determination of a kind clearly for
nonjudicial discretion; or the impossibility of a court's
undertaking independent resolution without expressing lack
of the respect due coordinate branches of government; or an
unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political
decision already made; or the potentiality of embarrassment
from multifarious pronouncements by various departments on
one question.
 
69 Haw. at 170, 737 P.2d at 455.
 
A. TEXT
 
As it stands, the language of Article XII, Section 1,
 
as amended, does not constitute a textually demonstrable
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate political
 
department.
 
The language of Article XII, Section 1 prior to the 
1978 amendment was a textually demonstrable constitutional 
commitment of the issue to the legislature. However, the 1978 
amendment changed the language "may, from time to time make 
additional" sums available to "shall make sufficient" sums 
available. In proposing this change, the Committee on Hawaiian 
Affairs stated that its intention was to deprive the Legislature 
of the discretion to provide sufficient sums to DHHL. If the 
question of what are sufficient sums were nonjusticiable, the 
1978 constitutional amendment would be devoid of any real 
substance and effect. It would result in giving the Legislature 
unreviewable discretion to determine what are sufficient sums -­
contrary to the stated intent of the framers of the amendment. 
We cannot "ascribe to the constitutional framers the intent to 
enact laws devoid of any real substance and effect." In re Water 
Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai» i 97, 142, 9 P.3d 409, 454 
(2000). 
A constitutional provision must be construed to avoid an
absurd result and to recognize the mischief the framers
intended to remedy. As a matter of policy, we do not
blindly apply rules of construction to the point that we
reach absurd conclusions that are inconsistent with the
 intent of our lawmakers.
 
United Pub. Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO v. Yogi , 101 
Hawai» i 46, 53, 62 P.3d 189, 196 (2002) (internal quotation marks 
and citations omitted). 
B. STANDARDS
 
There is no lack of judicially discoverable and
 
manageable standards for resolving the question of what are
 
sufficient funds. The 1978 Constitutional Convention set forth 
the standards: 
homes, agriculture, farm and ranch lots. Development shall
1. For the development of site improvements for
include but not be limited to off-site and on-site
 
improvements which are necessary to provide grading, access
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(roads) and utility services (drainage, sewerage, water and
electrical systems) for the developed lots;
 
2. For lessee loans in the areas of home
 
construction and farm and ranch construction and equipment.
Under this loan mandate, DHHL is authorized to request loans
for lessees or native Hawaiians for agricultural purposes,
which includes but is not limited to acquaculture;
 
3. For various rehabilitation projects, including
education, social, political, economic and cultural
processes which contribute to the general welfare and
betterment of native Hawaiian conditions; and
 
4. For administrative and operational costs, which
expenditure requests are to be utilized for all of the
above-mentioned.
 
Comm. Rep. No. 56, at 630.
 
It is very clear that the amendment was to end DHHL's
 
practice of leasing its "lands in order to generate revenues to
 
support its administrative and operating budget." Id. at 631. 
By legislative funding of the administrative and operating budget
 
of DHHL "more lands could be made available to the intended
 
beneficiaries" of the HHCA. Id. at 632.
 
Delegate Sutton stated that sufficient sums
 
means funding to develop house lots for applicants on the
waiting list or implied in the general plan. It also means
 
money to provide loans to lessees to construct their homes,
since the lessee cannot mortgage or encumber the land.
 
For the administration, there is need for support of a
staff to adequately service the department's beneficiaries
and to purchase equipment which will allow sufficient
management of its resources and records.
 
II Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawaii of
 
1978, at 414.
 
De Soto stated that sufficient sums in 1978 meant the
 
"administrative and costs of running the Hawaiian homes program,
 
which would amount to operating and administrating approximately
 
$1.3 million to $1.6 million, taking into consideration
 
inflation, collective bargaining agreements that go into
 
inflation with the pay." Id. at 421.
 
Delegate Crozier stated that the "standards which
 
define 'sufficient' are contained in the department's general
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
plan, approved by the Hawaiian [H]omes [C]ommission on
 
October 31, 1975 and signed by Governor Ariyoshi on April 14,
 
1976." Id. at 415.
 
C.	 POLICY
 
The initial policy determination on what are sufficient
 
sums was made by the 1978 Constitutional Convention and is
 
therefore not for a court to decide. The convention cited with
 
approval the DHHL April 1976 General Plan that set forth the
 
policy of DHHL in making Hawaiian home lands available to persons
 
of at least one-half Hawaiian blood. The General Plan set forth
 
ten-year goals and objectives that were summarized as follows:
 
1.	 Goal: Maximize HOUSING assistance for native
 
Hawaiians.
 
Objective : Program housing for 2,600 new families.
 
2.	 Goal: Allocate AGRICULTURAL LANDS to native
 
Hawaiians.
 Objective : Allocate at least 40,000 additional acres
for direct agricultural use by eligible Hawaiians; use
all available techniques to maximize productivity of
agricultural lands. (Note: The [HHCA] sets 20,000
acres as the limit which can be allocated within any
five-year period.)
 
3.	 Goal: Reduce the acreage of LANDS USED FOR INCOME
purposes.
 
Objective : Reduce by at least 20,000 acres the lands
presently under general lease and temporary use permit
and make these lands available for direct use by
native Hawaiians.
 
4.	 Goal: Maximize INCOME through more effective land
management.
 
Objective : Use only a small fraction of Hawaiian Home
Lands to generate sufficient income for operating and
administrative expenses. 
The General Plan stated that the goals and objectives
 
of the DHHL should be re-evaluated at five-year intervals. The
 
DHHL has a fiduciary duty to continue to re-evaluate its goals
 
and objectives in light of the 1978 constitutional amendment and
 
request that the legislature provide sufficient sums to meet
 
these goals and objectives. Ahuna v. Dep't of Hawaiian Home
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lands, 64 Haw. 327, 337-40, 640 P.2d 1161, 1168-69 (1982). In
 
making its request for funds, DHHL shall be guided by the policy
 
and standards set forth in the 1978 Constitutional Convention and
 
DHHL's April 1976 General Plan and any revision thereof. Whether
 
DHHL's request for funds from the legislature is reasonable is
 
reviewable by the courts. Ahuna , 64 Haw. at 337-40, 640 P.2d at
 
1168-69.
 
D. RESPECT
 
There is no lack of respect to the legislature in a 
court's addressing the question of sufficient sums. The 1978 
Constitutional Convention emphatically stated that the 
legislature has no discretion in this area. The "courts, not the 
legislature, are the ultimate interpreters of the Constitution." 
State v. Nakata , 76 Hawai» i 360, 370, 878 P.2d 699, 709 (1994) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
E. ADHERENCE TO POLITICAL DECISION
 
This case and question do not present an unusual need 
for unquestioning adherence to a political decision already made. The need is for adherence to the Hawai» i Constitution and the 
intent of the framers of the 1978 amendment to Article XII, Section 1. There is no unusual need for unquestioning adherence 
to a legislative decision not to make sufficient sums available 
to DHHL as mandated by the Hawai» i Constitution. 
F. EMBARRASSMENT
 
There is no potential for embarrassment due to 
multifarious pronouncements by various departments on one
 
question. In this case, DHHL should ask the legislature to make
 
sufficient sums available to it. DHHL shall be guided by the
 
1978 Constitutional Convention in determining the amount of sums
 
it should request from the legislature. The legislature will or
 
will not make sufficient sums available. If there is a dispute
 
as to whether the sums are sufficient, the courts may be asked to
 
resolve the question. In resolving this question, the courts
 
would consider the request of DHHL, the response of the
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
legislature, and the mandate of the 1978 Constitutional
 
Convention.
 
Because none of the six factors set forth in Yamasaki
 
is present in this case, the question of the legislature making
 
sufficient sums available to the DHHL is justiciable and
 
therefore not a political question.
 
VII.
 
Therefore, the Final Judgment filed on September 23,
 
2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is vacated, and
 
this case is remanded to the circuit court for further
 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
David Kimo Frankel
 
(Alan T. Murakami with him
on the briefs)
(Native Hawaiian Legal Corporation)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
 
Girard D. Lau,
First Deputy Solicitor General
(Charleen M. Aina, Deputy Attorney
General, with him on the brief)
for Defendants-Appellees State of
Hawai» i and Kalbert K. Young,
in his official capacity as the
State Director of Finance.
 
Brian A. Kang
(Emi L.M. Kaimuloa with him on the
brief)
(Watanabe Ing LLP)
for Defendants-Appellees Hawaiian
Homes Commission, The Department
of Hawaiian Home Lands; Kaulana H.R.
Park, in his official capacity as
Chair of the Hawaiian Homes Commission;
Perry Artates, Alapaki Nahale-a,
Donald S.M. Chang, Stuart Hanchett,
Malia Kamaka, Francis Lum, Trish
Morikawa, and Henry K. Tancayo, in
their official capacities as members
of the Hawaiian Homes Commission.
 
16
 