 
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30163
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
EVAN Y. TANAKA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-1498)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Evan Y. Tanaka (Tanaka) appeals

 
from the October 6, 2009 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
(judgment) of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
 
1
court)  convicting him of the offense of Forgery in the Second
Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 708-852

 
(Supp. 2009).2 The case arises from Tanaka's attempt to cash an
 
1 The Honorable Michael A. Town presided.
 
2
 ยง 708-852. Forgery in the second degree. (1) A person commits the
offense of forgery in the second degree if, with intent to defraud,
the person falsely makes, completes, endorses, or alters a written
instrument, or utters a forged instrument, or fraudulently encodes
the magnetic ink character recognition numbers, which is or purports
to be, or which is calculated to become or to represent if completed,
a deed, will, codicil, contract, assignment, commercial instrument,
or other instrument which does or may evidence, create, transfer,
terminate, or otherwise affect a legal right, interest, obligation,
or status.
 (2) Forgery in the second degree is a class C felony.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
altered money order at a Wal-Mart store. Tanaka was convicted
 
following a jury trial. 
On appeal, Tanaka asserts that: (1) his conviction must
 
be reversed because there was not substantial evidence that he
 
knew that the money order had been altered3
 and (2) the circuit
court "abused its discretion in denying the defense's motion for
 mistrial where the conduct of the State's witnesses in discussing
 
their testimony constituted misconduct that deprived [him] of his
 
right to a fair trial."
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to

 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Tanaka's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) There was substantial evidence adduced at trial
 
from which the jury could conclude that Tanaka knew that the
 
money order he presented for cashing to a Wal-Mart cashier had

 
been altered. As has been often expressed by Hawaii's appellate
 courts:
 
[g]iven the difficulty of proving the requisite state of
mind by direct evidence in criminal cases, "[w]e have
consistently held that ... proof by circumstantial evidence
and reasonable inferences arising from circumstances
surrounding the [defendant's conduct] is sufficient....
Thus, the mind of an alleged offender may be read from his
acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the
circumstances." 
3
 With regard to the mens rea element of the offense, the circuit court
 
instructed the jury as follows: 
"Intent to defraud" means that the defendant either, A,
intended to use deception to injure another person's
interest which had value, in which case the required state
of mind is intentionally, or, B, knew that he was
facilitating an injury to another person's interest which
had value, in which case the required state of mind is
knowingly.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai 'i 85, 92, 976 P.2d 399, 406 (1999) 
(citations omitted, brackets and ellipses in original). 
Moreover, "[t]he standard of review on appeal for sufficiency of 
the evidence is substantial evidence." State v. Stanley, 110 
Hawai'i 116, 121, 129 P.3d 1144, 1149 (App. 2005). "Substantial 
evidence as to every material element of the offense charged is 
credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative 
value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a 
conclusion." State v. Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 
1241 (1998) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
In determining whether substantial evidence exists to 
support a conviction, we view the facts of this case "in the strongest light for the prosecution[.]" State v. Mason, 79 
Hawai
'i 175, 177, 900 P.2d 172, 180 (App. 1995) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted) (circumstantial evidence permitted inference of intent to defraud for purposes of forgery 
in the second degree conviction). At trial, there was 
substantial evidence that Tanaka knew the money order was 
altered. First and foremost, the money order itself was in 
evidence, which on its face appeared worn and bore red pen marks 
on the serial number. Moreover, the print on the money order, 
including the $900 amount, was faded and not very clear.  The 
prosecution also presented the testimony of multiple witnesses 
regarding the various discrepancies that appeared on the money 
order at issue in the case as compared to that of an authentic 
money order. While these witnesses may have had more experience 
with money orders than Tanaka, this testimony was credible 
evidence with probative value tending to show that Tanaka knew 
the money order had been altered. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Further, the prosecution presented both testimonial and
 
video evidence regarding Tanaka's suspicious behavior after
 
presenting the money order to a Wal-Mart cashier. From the
 
video, the jury was able to view for themselves whether Tanaka's
 
conduct indicated that he knew the money order was altered. 
Moreover, the Wal-Mart cashier testified that Tanaka's behavior
 
was "suspicious" and that he appeared agitated "like there's
 
something bothering him." The arresting police officer testified
 
that when he came to escort Tanaka to the police station, Tanaka
 
appeared "nervous" and "angry" and that despite the cool
 
temperature inside Wal-Mart, Tanaka was "sweating a lot."
 
Finally, even if the jury did not find the testimony of
 
Tina Bouatic credible in all respects, her explanation of the
 
circumstances under which she allegedly requested Tanaka's 
assistance regarding the money order provided additional basis
 
for the jury to believe Tanaka knew the money order was altered. 
At a minimum, from Bouatic's testimony, Tanaka knew that Bouatic
 
had not been able to previously cash the money order at Wal-Mart. 
In sum, the testimony about the circumstances under
 
which Tanaka had the money order, Tanaka's behavior immediately
 
after presenting the altered money order to the Wal-Mart cashier,
 
and the evidence of the money order itself showing visible
 
alterations, was sufficient for a reasonable inference that
 
Tanaka did know that the money order had been altered. We
 
therefore conclude that there was substantial evidence supporting
 
Tanaka's Forgery in the Second Degree conviction and the circuit
 
court did not err in denying the defense's motion for judgment of
 
acquittal.
 
(2) Tanaka asserts that the circuit court erred in
 
denying his motion for mistrial because the conduct of the
 
State's witnesses, in discussing their testimony outside of the
 
courtroom, allegedly deprived Tanaka of the right to a fair
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial. We disagree. This court reviews a trial court's denial 
of a motion for mistrial under the abuse of discretion standard. 
State v. Nupeiset, 90 Hawai 'i 175, 977 P.2d 183 (App. 1999) 
(trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying a defense motion for mistrial based on juror's acquaintance with murder 
victim's father). In the instant case, the defense orally moved 
for a mistrial after Tanaka's trial counsel observed two of the 
State's witnesses speaking to each other outside of the courtroom 
in the vicinity of several jurors. The two witnesses in question 
were: the Wal-Mart supervisor who initially referred the suspect 
money order to management; and Wal-Mart's lead loss prevention 
agent who was authorized to speak on behalf of Wal-Mart and 
testified that Wal-Mart did not give permission to Tanaka to 
falsely utter a forged commercial instrument. The loss 
prevention agent was not a percipient witness to the events in 
question and thus there was no danger of "tailoring" or "shaping" 
of testimony. However, the defense was particularly concerned 
that, during the conversation between the witnesses, the 
supervisor had described the money order as "altered" and the 
defense further questioned exactly what the jurors may have 
overheard. 
In addressing the motion for mistrial, the circuit
 
court screened the potentially affected jurors and they
 
represented that they did not hear the witnesses' conversation. 
Moreover, the circuit court called back the two State's
 
witnesses, who testified as to the subject and nature of their
 
conversation. Given that one of the witnesses was not a
 
percipient witness to the events in question, and further that
 
Tanaka was not challenging that the money order was in fact
 
altered, the circuit court determined that the conversation was
 
"harmless." Accordingly, the circuit court denied the defense's
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
motion for mistrial. We conclude that the circuit court did not
 
commit an abuse of discretion in declining to declare a mistrial. 

Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the October 6, 2009 judgment
 
entered by the circuit court is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 12, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 