NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30108
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
SURVIVORS OF GARY S. KANESHIRO, DECEASED,
Claimant-Appellant,
v.
 
DIAMOND HEAD PETROLEUM, INC., and
HAWAII EMPLOYERS' MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY,
Employer/Insurance Carrier-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2007-148 (2-05-04303)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Claimant-Appellant Survivors of Gary S. Kaneshiro 
(Claimant) appeals from the "Decision and Order" entered by the 
Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB) in favor of Employer-Appellee Diamond Head Petroleum, Inc. (Diamond Head Petroleum) and Insurance Carrier-Appellee Hawai
'i Employers' 
Mutual Insurance Company (collectively, "Employer"). The LIRAB concluded that the death of Gary S. Kaneshiro (Kaneshiro) was not work-related and therefore that Claimant, who was Kaneshiro's surviving spouse, was not entitled to workers' compensation benefits. The LIRAB's Decision and Order affirmed the decision of the Director of the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations (Director) denying compensability. 
On appeal, Claimant argues that the LIRAB failed to
 
properly apply the presumption of compensability set forth in
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 386-85 (1993)  and that the LIRAB
erroneously concluded that Employer presented substantial
 evidence to rebut the presumption. We affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Kaneshiro was the general manager of Diamond Head
 
Petroleum. 
At approximately 5:00 in the morning on September 28,
 
2004, an employee found Kaneshiro lying dead on the floor of
 Diamond Head Petroleum's office.
 
Kaneshiro's medical records indicated that he had a
 
history of hypertension and high cholesterol and that he smoked
 about three packs of cigarettes a day. Kaneshiro had been
 advised to stop smoking, improve his diet, exercise, and consider
 medication. 
In October 2002, he asked for time to decide whether
 
he wanted to take the recommended medication. 
For three days prior to his death, Kaneshiro complained
 
of chest pains. He was encouraged to seek treatment for his
 condition, but refused. Kaneshiro also was not taking any
 
medications. 
According to the Non-Autopsy Report filed by the First
 
Deputy Medical Examiner, Kaneshiro's cause of death was
 
"[p]robable arteriosclerotic cardiovascular disease[,]" with
 hypertension and hypercholesterolemia noted as "contributing
 cause/other significant conditions." Kaneshiro's death
 certificate identified "probable arteriosclerotic cardiovascular
 disease" as the cause of death. 
Claimant filed a "Dependents' Claim for Compensation"
 
1
 HRS § 386-85 provides in relevant part:
 
In any proceeding for the enforcement of a claim for
compensation under this chapter it shall be presumed, in the
absence of substantial evidence to the contrary:
 
(1) That the claim is for a covered work injury[.] 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with the Director. Claimant described the nature of the injury
 
causing Kaneshiro's death as "[w]ork-related stress causing heart
 attack, which occurred at place of employment." Employer denied
 liability with respect to the claim. After a hearing, the
 Director denied Claimant's claim for compensation. 
II.
 
Claimant appealed to the LIRAB. The sole issue before
 
the LIRAB was whether Kaneshiro's death constituted a compensable
 work-related injury. In support of its position that Kaneshiro's
 death was not work-related, Employer submitted as evidence the
 reports of medical experts Edward L. Chesne, M.D. (Dr. Chesne),
 and Jack H. Scaff, Jr., M.D. (Dr. Scaff), cardiologists who had
 reviewed Kaneshiro's medical records. According to Dr. Chesne,
 
Kaneshiro's death was caused by
 
a long history of smoking, high blood pressure, a
cholesterol abnormality, all of them not definitively
treated, [which] led to narrowing of the coronary
arteries and a decreased blood flow to the heart as a
 result. In turn, the narrow coronary arteries caused
chest pain as a result of decreased blood supply to
the heart. Heart muscle damage ensued, and this in
turn led to a lethal rhythm disturbance of the heart,
a predictable cascade of events.
 
Dr. Chesne opined that none of the multiple risk factors that
 
started this lethal cascade of events -- heavy smoking, untreated
 high blood pressure, and untreated cholesterol abnormalities -­were caused by work. Dr. Chesne specifically opined that
 "[Kaneshiro's] cardiac condition, the basis for his demise, was
 neither caused nor aggravated, nor accelerated, by his employment
 or by 'mental stress.'"
 
Dr. Scaff similarly concluded that Kaneshiro's death
 
was due to underlying atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. 
Dr. Scaff opined that:
 
Mr. Kaneshiro suffered from extremely aggressive and
progressive underlying atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease:
 
Exacerbated and accelerated by:
 
1) Cigarette smoking; 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2) Hypertension;
 
3) Hypercholesterolemia (Type IV).
 
Causing:
 
Ischemic anginal type chest pain beginning on or
about September 25, 2004
 
and leading to:
 
Ischemic cardiovascular collapse secondary to
ventricular fibrillation on September 28, 2004.
 
Dr. Scaff concluded that "on a chronic basis there is nothing to
 
suggest that any of Mr. Kaneshiro's cardiovascular risk factors
 were worsened or aggravated by his employment." He also
 concluded that there was nothing to suggest that "emotional
 stress on a chronic basis whatever its cause would have
 contributed to Mr. Kaneshiro's demise." 
Claimant did not submit evidence from any medical
 
expert. Claimant submitted her affidavit in which she asserted
 that Kaneshiro had a very stressful job due to numerous work-
related worries, concerns, and responsibilities. Claimant,
 however, basically relied upon the presumption of compensability.
 
III.
 
The LIRAB found that Employer had "presented
 
substantial evidence to rebut the presumption that [Kaneshiro's]
 death was work-connected." It further found that Kaneshiro's
 death was caused by a pre-existing atherosclerotic cardiovascular
 disease, which "was not caused, aggravated, or accelerated by
 [Kaneshiro's] work activities on or about September 28, 2004." 
Accordingly, the LIRAB affirmed the Director's decision denying
 compensability. 
In rendering its Decision and Order, the LIRAB credited
 
the opinions of Drs. Chesne and Scaff. On the other hand, it did
 not give great weight to Claimant's representations regarding
 Kaneshiro's work-related stress because the overwhelming evidence
 showed that Claimant and Kaneshiro were separated and living
 apart; Claimant was out of the country at the time of Kaneshiro's
 death; Claimant's representations were uncorroborated; and it was
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
unclear whether Claimant's representations were based on personal
 
knowledge. The LIRAB issued its Decision and Order on 
September 9, 2009, and this appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Hawai'i's workers' compensation law is codified in HRS 
Chapter 386. Under HRS § 386-3(a) (Supp. 2012), an employee is entitled to compensation for injuries suffered "by accident arising out of and in the course of the employment . . . ." In determining the compensability of an injury, Hawai' i courts have 
adopted a unitary test which "simply requires the finding of a causal connection between the injury and any incidents or conditions of employment." Chung v. Animal Clinic, Inc., 63 Haw. 
642, 648, 636 P.2d 721, 725 (1981).
2 
HRS § 386-85 creates a presumption in favor of a
 
workers' compensation claimant that the claim is for a covered
 work injury. This presumption controls unless the employer can
 produce substantial evidence to rebut it. See Akamine v.
 
Hawaiian Packing & Crating Co., 53 Haw. 406, 408, 495 P.2d 1164,
 1166 (1972). "Substantial evidence is relevant and credible
 evidence of a quality and quantity sufficient to justify a
 conclusion by a reasonable man that an injury or death is not
 work-connected." Id. 
We review the LIRAB's findings of fact under the 
clearly erroneous standard. Nakamura v. State, 98 Hawai' i 263, 
267, 47 P.3d 730, 734 (2002). Under this standard, we consider whether the LIRAB's factual findings are "clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record." Id. (block quote format, brackets, and citation 
omitted). We are required to sustain the LIRAB's factual findings unless we are "left with a firm and definite conviction that a mistake has been made." Id. (block quote format and 
2 Where a work injury causes the employee's death, the employee's
dependents are entitled to benefits. See HRS § 386-41 (1993 & Supp. 2012).
Claimant filed a claim for compensation as a dependent of Kaneshiro.
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
citation omitted). 
We review the LIRAB's conclusions of law de novo, under
 
the right/wrong standard. Id. "To the extent that the [LIRAB's]
 
decisions involve mixed questions of fact and law, they are
 
reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard 'because the
 conclusion is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the
 particular case.'" Id. (citation omitted).
 
We give deference to the LIRAB with respect to
 
questions concerning the credibility and weight of the evidence.
 
It is well established that courts decline to consider the
 
weight of the evidence to ascertain whether it weighs in
favor of the administrative findings, or to review the
agency's findings of fact by passing upon the credibility of
witnesses or conflicts in testimony, especially the findings
of an expert agency dealing with a specialized field.
 
Id. at 268, 47 P.3d at 735 (block quote format altered and
 
citation omitted). 
II.
 
Claimant argues that the LIRAB erred in concluding that
 
Employer presented substantial evidence to rebut the presumption
 of compensability, and in doing so, failed to properly apply the
 presumption.
3 We disagree.
 
A.
 
In support of its position that Kaneshiro's death was
 
not work-related, Employer presented the expert opinion evidence
 
3 In its Decision and Order, the LIRAB clearly acknowledged that it was
required to apply the presumption of compensability. The LIRAB, quoting from
Nakamura v. State, also acknowledged that:
 
"In order to overcome the presumption of work-relatedness,
the employer bears the initial burden of 'going forward' with theevidence and the burden of persuasion. Nakamura v. State of Hawaii
, 98 Hawai' i 263, 267 (2002) (citations omitted). "Once the 
trier of fact determines that the employer has adduced substantialevidence that could overcome the presumption, it must then weighthat evidence against the evidence presented by the claimant."Nakamura
 at 268 (citations omitted). "In so doing, the employer
bears the burden of persuasion in which the claimant is given thebenefit of the doubt.["] Nakamura at 268 (citations omitted). 
There is no question that the LIRAB was aware of the correct legal
standard. Therefore, Claimant's arguments on appeal turn on whether the LIRAB
properly applied the presumption. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of cardiologists Drs. Chesne and Scaff. Drs. Chesne and Scaff
 
prepared detailed reports which explained the cause of
 Kaneshiro's death and concluded that Kaneshiro's death was not
 caused, aggravated, or accelerated by his work activities. Drs.
 Chesne and Scaff also explained their reasons for rejecting
 Claimant's contention that alleged work-related stress caused or
 contributed to Kaneshiro's death. We conclude that Employer
 presented substantial evidence to rebut the presumption of
 compensability and to show that Kaneshiro's death was not caused,
 aggravated, or accelerated by his work activities. 
In rendering its decision that Kaneshiro's death was
 
not work-related, the LIRAB credited the opinions of Drs. Chesne
 and Scaff. The LIRAB noted that Claimant had not presented any
 medical evidence to support her position that Kaneshiro's death
 was work-related or to contradict the opinions of Drs. Chesne and
 Scaff. It also discounted and did not give great weight to the
 affidavit submitted by Claimant that Kaneshiro was suffering from
 work-related stress. We give deference, as we must, to the
 LIRAB's determinations regarding the credibility and weight of
 the evidence, and we conclude that the LIRAB did not err in
 ruling that Kaneshiro's death was not compensable.
 
Claimant cites Akamine and Chung in support of her 
argument that the LIRAB erred. However, in Nakamura, the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court interpreted Akamine as concluding that "'generalized' medical testimony was insufficient to rebut the presumption of work-relatedness" and that "a reasonable degree of specificity is required in order for medical opinion evidence to rebut the presumption of compensability." Nakamura, 98 Hawai' i 
at 268-69, 47 P.3d at 735-36. The supreme court also explained that Chung applied the principle that "the presumption of compensability is not rebutted when there is credible conflicting evidence as to causation that is of equal weight and effect." Id. at 270, 47 P.3d at 737. However, the supreme court further explained that "Chung does not stand for the broad proposition that the [LIRAB] is mandated to reconcile conflicting expert 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testimony in favor of the claimant; that proposition would
 
eviscerate the well established rule that the [LIRAB's]
 determinations of credibility and weight are entitled to
 deference." Id. 
Here, we conclude that the expert medical opinions of
 
Drs. Chesne and Scaff concerning the cause of Kaneshiro's death
 provided a sufficient degree of specificity to rebut the
 presumption of compensability. We also conclude that the
 evidence as to causation presented by the parties was not of
 equal weight and effect, and thus the LIRAB did not err in
 reconciling the evidence presented in favor of Employer.
 Accordingly, neither Akamine nor Chung mandate that we overturn
 the LIRAB's decision.
 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the LIRAB's 
Decision and Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 30, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Wayne H. Mukaida
for Claimant-Appellant Chief Judge
 
Brian G.S. Choy
Keith M. Yonamine
 (Choy & Tashima) for Employer/Insurance Carrier­
Appellee
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
8
 