FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
---o0o--­
LISA KOBASHIGAWA, as Personal Representative of
the ESTATE OF WILLIAM S. KOBASHIGAWA, Deceased, and
EARL KOBASHIGAWA and GAIL PEI, as Co-Trustees of the
MARGARET M. KOBASHIGAWA REVOCABLE LIVING TRUST and
 
as Assignees of MARGARET M. KOBASHIGAWA, Deceased,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
JOSEPH M. K. SILVA and CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; ROE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS
1-10; and ROE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
 
NO. 30639
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-0682)
 
DECEMBER 2, 2011
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Lisa Kobashigawa, as Personal
 
Representative of the Estate of William S. Kobashigawa, Deceased,
 
and Earl Kobashigawa and Gail Pei, as Co-Trustees of the Margaret
 
M. Kobashigawa Revocable Living Trust and as Assignees of
 
Margaret M. Kobashigawa, Deceased, (collectively, Kobashigawas)
 
appeal from the Judgment Pursuant to Special Verdict filed on
 
March 25, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
 
court).1 The circuit court entered judgment in favor of
 
Defendant-Appellee City and County of Honolulu (City) and against
 Kobashigawas on all counts in Kobashigawas' Second Amended
 
Complaint.
 
On appeal, Kobashigawas contend: 
(1) The circuit court erred in denying Kobashigawas'
 
Motion in Limine No. 1 (MIL No. 1) and partially denying
 Kobashigawas' Motion in Limine No. 4 (MIL No. 4), as such denial
 
permitted irrelevant and highly prejudicial evidence and argument
 
on Kobashigawas' motive for bringing suit.
 
(2) The circuit court committed reversible error by
 
allowing the admission of portions of the deposition testimony of
 
Gina Bailey (Bailey), a witness to the accident, because her
 
testimony contained irrelevant evidence that prejudiced the
 
substantial rights of Kobashigawas and the fairness of the
 
proceeding.
 
(3) The cautionary jury instruction given by the
 
circuit court after the reading of Bailey's deposition
 
constituted reversible error because it misstated the law and
 
prejudiced the substantial rights of Kobashigawas.
 
(4) The circuit court erred in allowing City, in
 
closing argument, to comment on Kobashigawas' motive for bringing
 
suit.
 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(5) The circuit court erred in filing a Judgment
 
Pursuant to Special Verdict and partially granting City's Motion
 
for Taxation of Costs because of the above-stated reversible
 
error.
 
I.
 
This case arises out of an collision on December 22, 
2005 between a motor vehicle and William S. Kobashigawa 
(Mr. Kobashigawa), a pedestrian, that resulted in the death of 
Mr. Kobashigawa. Kobashigawas alleged that Mr. Kobashigawa was 
in a pedestrian crosswalk on Kamehameha Highway in Kaneohe, 
Hawai'i, when he was struck and killed by a truck driven by 
Joseph M.K. Silva (Silva). 
Kobashigawas filed a Complaint against Silva on
 
April 21, 2006. On March 5, 2007, Kobashigawas filed a First
 Amended Complaint, naming City as an additional defendant. 
Kobashigawas filed a Second Amended Complaint on March 18, 2008
 
against Silva and City, alleging negligence, negligent infliction
 
of emotional distress, and loss of consortium. Kobashigawas'
 
negligence claim against City included defective design and/or
 
maintenance of Kamehameha Highway, including the pedestrian
 
crosswalk and the surrounding trees, street signs and/or street
 
lights at or near the crosswalk.
 
On September 21, 2009, Kobashigawas filed MIL No. 1,
 
seeking to bar evidence and argument speculating on Kobashigawas'
 
motives in filing suit, and MIL No. 4, objecting to, inter alia,
 
City's designation of Bailey's deposition testimony. On
 
October 5, 2009, the circuit court held a hearing on the motions
 
in limine, at which the court denied MIL No.1 and denied in part
 
MIL No. 4.
 
Kobashigawas reached a settlement with Silva in the
 
fall of 2009. The circuit court dismissed Silva from the lawsuit
 
with prejudice on October 9, 2009.
 
At trial, portions of Bailey's deposition testimony
 
were read to the jury.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The jury returned a verdict on October 21, 2009,
 
finding that City was not negligent for Mr. Kobashigawa's death. 
The circuit court entered the Judgment Pursuant to Special
 
Verdict on March 25, 2010. On April 7, 2010, City filed a Motion
 
for Taxation of Costs, which the circuit court granted in part
 
and denied in part. Kobashigawas timely appealed.
 
II.
 
A. Motion in Limine
 
"The granting or denying of a motion in limine is 
reviewed for abuse of discretion." Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai' i 
1, 7, 84 P.3d 509, 515 (2004) (internal quotation marks, citation, and ellipsis omitted). An abuse of discretion occurs 
if the trial court has "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or 
disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the 
substantial detriment of a party litigant." Amfac, Inc. v. 
Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992). 
B. Jury Instructions
 
When jury instructions, or the omission thereof, are at
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the
error was not prejudicial.
 
Nelson v. Univ. of Hawai' i, 97 Hawai' i 376, 386, 38 P.3d 95, 105 
(2001) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). "[E]ven 
the complete failure to object to a jury instruction does not 
prevent an appellate court from taking cognizance of the trial 
court's error if the error is plain and may result in a 
miscarriage of justice." Montalvo v. Lapez, 77 Hawai' i 282, 288, 
884 P.2d 345, 351 (1994) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
C. Plain Error
 
The plain error doctrine represents a departure from the
normal rules of waiver that govern appellate review, and, as
such, . . . an appellate court should invoke the plain error
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
doctrine in civil cases only when justice so requires. As
 
such, the appellate court's discretion to address plain
error is always to be exercised sparingly. 
Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai' i 450, 458, 
40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002) (internal quotation marks, citations, and 
ellipsis in original omitted). In civil cases, the appellate 
court has taken into account three factors in deciding whether 
the court's discretionary power to notice plain error should be 
exercised: "(1) whether consideration of the issue not raised at 
trial requires additional facts; (2) whether its resolution will 
affect the integrity of the trial court's findings of fact; and 
(3) whether the issue is of great public import." Id. (quoting 
Montalvo, 77 Hawai' i at 290, 884 P.2d at 353). 
III.
 
A.	 The circuit court erred in giving the cautionary
jury instruction regarding Bailey's deposition
testimony.
 
Kobashigawas correctly contend that the circuit court
 
erred in issuing the cautionary jury instruction given both
 
before the reading of Bailey's deposition testimony to the jury
 
and shortly before closing argument. This error by the circuit
 
court, combined with City's closing argument discussed infra,
 
constitutes a reversible error by the court.
 
City argues that Kobashigawas did not object to this 
jury instruction at trial. "However, even the complete failure 
to object to a jury instruction does not prevent an appellate 
court from taking cognizance of the trial court's error if the 
error is plain and may result in a miscarriage of justice." 
Montalvo, 77 Hawai' i at 288, 884 P.2d at 351 (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted). The Hawai' i Supreme Court held in 
Montalvo that it was plain and reversible error for a trial court 
not to issue a jury instruction on the definition of "legal 
cause" when that phrase was a primary issue in the case. Id. at 
292, 884 P.2d at 355. 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
As stated earlier,
 
[w]hen jury instructions, or the omission thereof, are at
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the
error was not prejudicial.
 
Nelson, 97 Hawai' i at 386, 38 P.3d at 105. 
In the instant case, the circuit court instructed the
 
jury as follows:
 
You have heard testimony from one witness about certain
statements attributed to a Kobashigawa family member
following Mr. Kobashigawa's death. Your consideration of
 this evidence is limited to determining the existence or
absence of any possible bias, interest or motive, if any, by
[Kobashigawas] in bringing this lawsuit and not for any
other purpose.
 
The above instruction is an erroneous statement of the law. In
 
bringing an action, the motives of the plaintiffs are immaterial
 
absent bad faith. "So far as the law is concerned, if the
 
plaintiff has made out a case on the facts, it is immaterial what
 
[the] motive was." Carter v. Ah So, 12 Haw. 291, 302 (1899);
 
Karim v. Gunn, 999 A.2d 888, 890 (D.C. 2010) ("The motive of a
 
party in bringing an action generally is immaterial to the
 
question whether the action may be maintained." (Internal
 
quotation marks and citation omitted.)); Somers v. AAA Temp.
 
Servs., Inc., 284 N.E.2d 462, 465 (Ill. App. Ct. 1972) ("It is
 
generally accepted that where the plaintiff asserts a valid cause
 
of action, [plaintiff's] motive in bringing the action is
 
immaterial.").
 
Appellate courts take into account three factors when 
deciding whether a court has committed plain error: "(1) whether 
consideration of the issue not raised at trial requires 
additional facts; (2) whether its resolution will affect the 
integrity of the trial court's findings of fact; and (3) whether 
the issue is of great public import." Montalvo, 77 Hawai' i at 
290, 884 P.2d at 353. 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"The first factor is based on the tenet that an
 
appellate court should not review an issue based upon an
 
undeveloped factual record." Id. at 290-91, 884 P.2d at 353-54. 
In the instant case, it is undisputed that the circuit court
 issued the above-stated jury instruction, and, as such, the first
 
Montalvo factor is satisfied. The Montalvo court held that under
 
the second factor, it is the circuit court's "fundamental duty to
 
properly instruct the jury on the law." Id. at 291, 884 P.2d at
 
354. As the instant case concerns the circuit court's failure to
 
properly instruct the jury on the law, the second Montalvo factor
 
is clearly satisfied. Finally, under the third factor, the
 
Montalvo court held that preserving the integrity of the jury
 
system is of "great public import." Id. The Montalvo court held
 
that the circuit court's failure to properly instruct the jury on
 an essential element of the case satisfied this factor. Id. 
Likewise, in the instant case, the circuit court's incorrect
 statement of the law in its instruction to the jury satisfied the
 
third Montalvo factor. 
B.	 In light of the improper jury instructions, the
circuit court erred in allowing City to comment in
its closing argument on Kobashigawas' motive for
bringing suit.
 
Kobashigawas contend the circuit court erred in
 
allowing City to comment in its closing argument on Kobashigawas'
 
motive for bringing suit. At closing, City argued:
 
[Bailey] told you in a day or so after the accident she got
a call from Officer Lisa Reed to call one of the family
members to talk about the accident. [Bailey] made that
call, and the first words that [Bailey] told you that she
heard was will you testify when we sue? [Bailey] obviously
was appalled, recoiled and hung up the telephone just as her
deposition testimony told you. Why hang up? It's obvious,
she recoiled from the notion of looking to file a lawsuit
within a day or so after this accident, not asking her about
did my father suffer, did my father have any last words,
what can you tell me, was he at peace, nothing like that?
 
* * *
 
. . . Why is the City in this lawsuit? To collect
 
monetary damages, but from whom do they seek this
compensation? Well, of course, it's from the City. With
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
this in mind, with those facts in mind, consider this,
Dr. Hayes[2] was hired to go to the scene to investigate it
six days after the accident. Counsel was certainly hired
earlier than six days after the accident to take him out
there looks like. And [Bailey] says she spoke to a family
member within a day or so after the accident who wanted her
to testify in their lawsuit. Is this case simply about
getting a collectable monetary award from the City when it
was [Silva] who caused the accident?
 
The standard of review for jury instructions on appeal 
looks to whether the instructions are prejudicially insufficient 
or misleading, and "[e]rroneous instructions are presumptively 
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively 
appears from the record as a whole that the error was not 
prejudicial." Nelson, 97 Hawai' i at 386, 38 P.3d at 105 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
In Kakligian v. Henry Ford Hosp., 210 N.W.2d 463, 465
 
(Mich. Ct. App. 1973), the Court of Appeals of Michigan held that
 in conjunction with the lower court's failure to properly
 
instruct the jury, a defense counsel's reference to the
 
plaintiff's motive in bringing suit was grounds for a new trial. 
The court stated: "Why the suit was brought is irrelevant. We
 
conclude that defendants' attorney injected the matter of revenge
 
for the sole purpose of appealing to the jury's bias and
 
prejudice. Plaintiff is entitled to a new trial." Id. 
Because an improper jury instruction requires the error
 
to be read in light of the record as a whole and City's closing
 
argument added to the harm caused by the circuit court's
 
erroneous jury instruction, the circuit court erred in allowing
 
City to comment in its closing argument on the Kobashigawas'
 
motives.
 
IV.
 
The Judgment Pursuant to Special Verdict filed on
 
March 25, 2010 is hereby vacated, and this case is remanded for a
 
new trial. We decline to address Kobashigawas' other points of
 
2
 Dr. Hayes was Kobashigawas' expert witness in the field of physics
with expertise in the area of lighting.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
error as they are moot.3 See Weinberg v. Dickson-Weinberg, 123
 
Hawai'i 68, 80, 229 P.3d 1133, 1145 (2010). 
On the briefs:
 
Arthur Y. Park
 
John C. McLaren
 Tyson T. Tamashiro
(Park Park & Remillard)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
 
Traci R. Morita,
Deputy Corporation Counsel,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Defendant-Appellee.
 
3
 We do note, however, that "[w]here the motion in limine is denied and
during trial, opposing counsel attempts to ask the questions challenged in the
motion or offer the prejudicial evidence covered therein, a proper objection
at that time is necessary to preserve the error for appellate review."
Lussier v. Mau-Van Dev., Inc., 4 Haw. App. 359, 393, 667 P.2d 804, 826 (1983).
Kobashigawas failed to so object at trial.
 
9
 