NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30466
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
BRINKWOOD LAND EQUITIES, LTD, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
HILO BROKERS, LTD; KELLY MORAN, et al, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0285)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Brinkwood Land Equities, Ltd.
 
(Brinkwood) appeals from the Judgment entered March 19, 2010 in
 
1
the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit  (circuit court) in favor
of Defendants-Appellees Hilo Brokers, Ltd. (Hilo Brokers) and
 
Kelly Moran (Moran) (collectively, Defendants) and against
 
Brinkwood. The circuit court entered judgment pursuant to the
 
"Order Granting Defendants Hilo Brokers, Ltd. and Kelly Moran's
 
Motion for Summary Judgment Filed December 24, 2009," (Order)
 
filed February 17, 2010, and the "Clerk's Taxation of Costs,"
 
filed March 3, 2010.
 
On appeal, Brinkwood contends the circuit court erred 
when it (1) refused to continue the hearing pursuant to Hawai
'i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(f) and (2) granted 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment (MSJ) by applying an
 
inappropriate standard regarding disclosure of material facts
 
about the property.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Brinkwood's predecessors-in-interest James Clay (Clay) 
and James Singleton (Singleton) (collectively, Predecessors), 
through their broker, Barclay Wagner, submitted a written offer 
by way of a Deposit Receipt Offer and Acceptance (DROA) on a 
four-acre parcel of undeveloped land at 245 Wainaku Street in 
Hilo, Hawai' i (Property). Predecessors were attracted to the 
Property because they liked the description of the Property as being in close proximity to "the views and sounds of waterfalls 
and Pukihae St[r]eam[.]" 
On May 23, 2005, the seller, Geraldine Randall
 
(Randall), via Defendants, accepted Predecessors' offer of $1.915
 
million and signed the DROA, creating a contract. The DROA
 
included the following addenda: (a) Existing "As Is" Condition
 
Addendum ("As Is" Addendum), (b) Hawaii County Addendum (County
 
2
Addendum), (c) Caribbean Tree Frog  Pest Alert Addendum (Frog
Alert), (d) Seller's Real Property Disclosure Statement
 
(Disclosure Statement), and (e) Option Agreement Input Form
 
(Option Agreement). 
The County Addendum and the Frog Alert
 
notified Predecessors of the existence of coqui frogs in the
 
2
 The United States Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service Pest Alert provides in pertinent part:
 
First spotted in Hawaii in 1992, invasive Caribbean tree frogs
have been a threat to the State's agriculture, tourism, and native
ecosystems ever since. In just 10 years, burgeoning populations
of two species, the coqui frog [] and the greenhouse frog [], have
become established on Maui, Oahu, Kauai, and Hawaii's main island.
 . . . .
 
The coqui frog . . . is distinguished by the loud, continuous
chirping of the male. Beginning at dusk and continuing until
dawn, male coqui frogs move into the trees and call "ko-kee" over
and over to attract females. The noise from a group of frogs can
exceed 70 decibels, rivaling the sound of a lawnmower or chainsaw.
 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/publications/wildlife_damage/content/printable_versi
on/pa_wscoquitfrogs.pdf
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
area. The Option Agreement created an option contract, with the
 
Predecessors' consideration of $75,000 due by September 1, 2005. 
The DROA provided that if Predecessors failed to perform their
 
obligations under the DROA, Defendants could bring an action for
 
damages for breach of contract and retain the initial and any
 
subsequent deposits as liquidated damages. On May 25, 2005,
 
Predecessors made an "initial earnest money deposit" of $25,000
 
with First American Title Escrow.
 
On June 13, 2005, Brinkwood "was incorporated with the
 
intent of proceeding with the purchase and development of the
 
Property." Singleton was president, treasurer, and director and
 
his daughter, Heather Singleton, was vice president, secretary,
 
and director. Singleton and Clay assigned their interest in the
 
DROA to Brinkwood.
 
On August 1, 2005, Brinkwood sent a fax to Defendants
 
cancelling escrow on the Property. On September 1, 2005, in
 
spite of cancelling escrow, Singleton contacted Randall directly
 
and made plans to meet with her and Moran, Randall's real estate
 
broker, on September 9, 2005 "[t]o sign a new deal and make a
 
deposit." Singleton testified at his deposition that he
 
cancelled the September 9, 2005 meeting after he made a trip to
 
Hilo on September 6, 2005, visited the Property at night, and
 
realized how loud the coqui frogs were. He also testified that
 
he had learned the area near the Property was "populated by drug
 
dealers and hookers."
 
Brinkwood filed its First Amended Complaint (Complaint)
 
in circuit court on November 7, 2007. Brinkwood contended
 
Defendants had misrepresented the Property and its development
 
potential when, instead of being in an area "where one could hear
 
the flow of water falls and a stream . . . all one could hear is
 
the sound of dying and tortured animals (which is the sound of
 
the frogs occupying the area) and [the Property] was in a
 
neighborhood where drug dealers and prostitutes frequented."
 
On November 30, 2007, Defendants answered the
 
Complaint. On March 21, 2008, Brinkwood answered interrogatories
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and on July 31, 2009, Defendants took depositions of Clay and
 
Singleton. On December 24, 2009, Defendants filed their MSJ. 
The circuit court heard the case on January 27, 2010, and on
 
February 17, 2010, the court filed the Order granting summary
 
judgment to Defendants. Pursuant to the Order, judgment was
 
entered on March 19, 2010. Brinkwood timely filed its appeal on
 
April 16, 2010.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Motion for HRCP Rule 56(f) Continuance
 
The circuit court's decision to deny a request for a
continuance pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(f) shall not be
reversed absent an abuse of discretion.
 
[T]he request must demonstrate how postponement of a
ruling on the motion will enable him or her, by
discovery or other means, to rebut the movants'
showing of absence of a genuine issue of fact. An
 abuse of discretion occurs where the trial court has
 clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded
rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
Josue v. Isuzu Motors America, Inc., 87 Hawai‘i 413, 416, 958 P.2d
535, 538 (1998) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted).
 
Associates Financial Services Co. of Hawaii, Inc. v. Richardson, 
99 Hawai' i 446, 454, 56 P.3d 748, 756 (App. 2002). 
B. Motion for Summary Judgment
 
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
reviewed de novo. See State ex rel. Anzai v. City and 
County of Honolulu, 99 Hawai' i 508, [515], 57 P.3d 433,
[440] (2002); Bitney v. Honolulu Police Dep't, 96 Hawai' i 
243, 250, 30 P.3d 257, 264 (2001). 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
 proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other
 words, we must view all of the evidence and inferences
drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the
party opposing the motion.
 
Kahale v. City and County of Honolulu, 104 Hawai' i 341, 344,
90 P.3d 233, 236 (2004) (citation omitted). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai' i 90, 
96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The circuit court did not err when it refused
 
to continue the hearing on Defendants' MSJ
pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(f).
 
When a party contesting summary judgment asks the court 
to continue a hearing pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(f), the party must 
present affidavits setting forth the reasons it cannot present by 
affidavit facts essential to justify the party's opposition. 
Acoba v. General Tire, Inc., 92 Hawai' i 1, 11-12, 986 P.2d 288, 
298-99 (1999). The "request must demonstrate how postponement of a ruling on the motion will enable him or her, by discovery or 
other means, to rebut the movants' showing of absence of a 
genuine issue of fact." Josue v. Isuzu Motors America, Inc., 
87 Hawai' i 413, 416, 958 P.2d 535, 538 (1998) (internal quotation 
marks, citation, and brackets omitted). If the circuit court 
deems the stated reasons sufficient, the court may grant a 
continuance of the motion to permit the party to obtain 
affidavits, take depositions, or conduct other discovery. 
Wilder v. Tanouye, 7 Haw. App. 247, 253, 753 P.2d 816, 820 (1988) 
(citing 10A C. Wright, A. Miller & M. Kane, Federal Practice and 
Procedure: Civil 2d § 2740 (1983)). "A [circuit] court's 
decision to deny a request for a continuance pursuant to HRCP 
Rule 56(f) will not be reversed absent an abuse of discretion." 
Josue, 87 Hawai' i at 416, 958 P.2d at 538. 
Brinkwood sought relief under HRCP Rule 56(f) by filing
 
a memorandum in opposition to the MSJ and attaching a declaration
 
by Singleton stating Brinkwood needed time to depose Moran.
 
Brinkwood argued it was a question of material fact whether Moran
 
knew about the coqui frog problem and "other issues," whether
 
Moran sufficiently examined the Property, and whether Moran
 
adequately disclosed the problems to Brinkwood.
 
Brinkwood failed to explain why it had been unable to
 
depose Moran between November 7, 2007, when the Complaint was
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
filed, and January 27, 2010, when the hearing on the MSJ was
 
held, other than to state it had encountered "scheduling
 
difficulties." Between August 2008 and March 2009, the circuit
 
court granted four stipulated requests by Brinkwood to extend the
 
time to file a pretrial statement because of scheduling problems
 
in setting depositions, but Defendants were the only party to
 
file a Notice of Taking Depositions Upon Oral Examination.
 
Brinkwood provided no evidence that it tried to depose 
Moran at any time prior to the hearing on the MSJ nor did it set 
forth any facts upon which the circuit court could conclude that 
Brinkwood had not had an adequate opportunity for discovery. As 
will be discussed in the next section, Brinkwood also failed to 
demonstrate how a continuance would enable it to rebut 
Defendants' "showing of absence of a genuine issue of fact." 
Josue, 87 Hawai' i at 416, 958 P.2d at 538. We conclude the 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it denied Brinkwood's request for a continuance to depose Moran. 
B.	 The circuit court did not err when it granted
Defendants' MSJ.
 
Brinkwood asserts that the circuit court erred in
 
granting summary judgment to Defendants when the court shifted
 
"the burden of disclosure by Defendants to one of discovery by
 
[Brinkwood]." Brinkwood contends it was a question of material
 
fact whether defendants had knowledge of the [c]oqui frog problem
 
and the alleged adverse social conditions in the neighborhood and
 
"whether [D]efendants' fail[ure] to disclose material facts
 
violated [Hawaii Revised Statutes] HRS § 467-14(18) [(Supp.
 
3	2011)] and, by analogy, [HRS §] 508D-7(c) [(2006 Repl.)]."
4
 
3
 HRS § 467-14 provides, in pertinent part:
 
§467-14 Revocation, suspension, and fine. In addition to
 
any other actions authorized by law, the commission may revoke any
license issued under this chapter, suspend the right of the
licensee to use the license, fine any person holding a license,
registration, or certificate issued under this chapter, or
terminate any registration or certificate issued under this
chapter, for any cause authorized by law, including but not
limited to the following:
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on these assertions, Brinkwood argued summary judgment
 
should not have been granted.
 
We review the granting of a motion for summary judgment 
de novo. Nuuanu Valley Ass'n, 119 Hawai' i at 96, 194 P.3d at 
537. Summary judgment is appropriate if, when viewed in the
 
light most favorable to the non-movant, the circuit court
 
concludes there is no genuine issue of material fact and the
 
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id. 
a) Disclosure of Coqui Frog Infestation
 
As the moving party, Defendants had the burden to 
demonstrate the absence of any genuine issue of material fact. 
French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai' i 462, 470, 99 P.3d 
1046, 1054 (2004). Regarding the coqui frog problem, Defendants produced evidence to show they had disclosed the existence of the 
problem and, additionally, to show Brinkwood knew about the coqui 
frog problem via other sources. 
The DROA signed by Predecessors included as attachments
 
the County Addendum and the Frog Alert.
5 The County Addendum and
 
. . . .
 
(18) Failing to ascertain and disclose all material facts
concerning every property for which the licensee accepts the
agency, so that the licensee may fulfill the licensee's
obligation to avoid error, misrepresentation, or concealment
of material facts[.]
4
 HRS § 508D (2006 Repl. & Supp. 2011), which governs residential real
property, not vacant land, was incorporated by reference into the DROA. HRS 
§ 508D-7(c) provides, in relevant part:
 
(c) If the seller's agent is or becomes aware of any
material facts inconsistent with or contradictory to the
disclosure statement or the inspection report of a third party
provided by the seller, the seller's agent shall disclose these
facts to the seller, the buyer, and the buyer's agent.
 
5
 The County Addendum and the Frog Alert, initialed/signed by
Predecessors, informed buyers of property in Hawaii County of the coqui frog
problem:
 
Caribbean Tree Frogs have been expanding into various areas of the
Big Island. Because tree frogs are nocturnal, Buyer and their Realtor
will not hear any of the chirping sounds that are associated with the
frogs during a daytime tour of the subject property. Buyer is advised
to visit the subject property in the evening during their inspection
period to determine the level of frog infestation and frog chirping and
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Frog Alert advised Predecessors to conduct their own
 
inspection to ascertain whether the level of noise made by the
 
frogs was acceptable to Predecessors in terms of the purpose for
 
which they were purchasing the Property. During his deposition,
 
Singleton acknowledged receipt of the County Addendum and the
 
Frog Alert and admitted he did not do any investigation or talk
 
to his realtor about the frog problem.
 
In addition to being informed of the coqui frog problem
 
via the County Addendum and the Frog Alert, Singleton indicated
 
in a July 27, 2005 memorandum to Moran that he was aware of the
 
problem. In the memo, Singleton wrote: "We also learned from the
 
former owner, Mr. Higgins, who lived there in the 90's, that
 
there is a serious frog problem. The creek area is infested and
 
they croak all night. That too needs to be addressed."
 
At the hearing on the MSJ, in answer to the circuit
 
court's query whether there was any genuine issue of material
 
fact about whether Brinkwood's Predecessors had received the
 
disclosures about the frog infestation, Brinkwood admitted the
 
disclosures had been received and Predecessors had acknowledged
 
receipt. Brinkwood argued the disclosures were misleading and
 
insufficient because the disclosures "talk[ed] about chirping
 
little frogs," and did not state definitively that frogs were in
 
the area or describe the extent of infestation and the level of
 
noise. Brinkwood pointed to nothing to support his theory that
 
disclosure required more than Defendants' action of disclosing
 
the problem and advising Predecessors to investigate any
 
potential problems related to the coqui frog. We conclude the
 
circuit court did not err when it held there was no genuine issue
 
whether it is acceptable to the Buyer. Buyer should be aware that the
level of noise may vary depending upon factors such as weather,
temperature, time of night, increase or decrease in level of infestation
and other variables. In addition, the success or failure of any
government eradication program may also affect the level of frog
chirping as well. (Emphasis added.)
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of material fact in regards to Defendants' disclosure of the
 
potential problem of coqui frog noise.
 
b) Disclosure of Neighborhood Conditions
 
In Hawai
'i real estate transactions, a seller or his 
agent has a duty to disclose "any fact, defect, or condition, 
past or present, that would be expected to measurably affect the 
value to a reasonable person of the residential real property 
being offered for sale." HRS § 508D-1. These material facts, 
defects, or conditions must be within the seller's or his agent's 
knowledge or control or must be able to be seen from visible, 
accessible areas. Id. The question before us is whether 
Defendants had a duty to inspect and disclose information about off-site social conditions that could affect the value of the 
Property. Brinkwood cites to no Hawai' i statute or case to 
support its theory that a seller or broker has a duty to inspect or disclose information about off-site social conditions. 
Instructive is a decision of the New Jersey Supreme
 
Court that imposed a duty on agents to disclose to potential
 
buyers of residential real estate any adverse off-site physical
 
conditions that an objectively reasonable buyer would consider
 
material to the value of the property if those conditions were
 
known to the agent and not readily observable to the buyer. 
Strawn v. Canuso, 140 N.J. 43, 64, 657 A.2d 420, 431 (1995). The
 
court determined the seller had a duty to disclose the existence
 
of a nearby closed hazardous-waste landfill that was not readily
 
observable to the buyer. Id. at 423. The Strawn court declined
 
to extend the disclosure duty to conditions that were not
 "root[ed] in the land." The court clarified:
 
We do not hold that sellers and brokers have a duty to
investigate or disclose transient social conditions in the
community that arguably affect the value of property. In
 the absence of a purchaser communicating specific needs,
builders and brokers should not be held to decide whether
 the changing nature of a neighborhood, the presence of a
group home, or the existence of a school in decline are
facts material to the transaction.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Id. at 431.6
 
In the instant case, Randall provided a Disclosure
 
Statement that included a list of twenty-six questions concerning
 
the Property to which Randall could answer "Yes," "No," or "NTMK"
 
(Not To My Knowledge). Brinkwood argued to the circuit court
 
7
that Questions 24 and 25  indicated Randall's duty to disclose
the alleged social conditions in the neighborhood and Moran's
 
duty to disclose the conditions when Randall did not disclose
 
them.8 But the examples of "adverse conditions" listed in
 
Question 24, although not intended to be inclusive, related only
 to physical conditions of the neighborhood, similar to the Strawn
 
court's focus on off-site physical conditions. The off-site
 
examples in Question 25 related to physical conditions or zoning,
 
while the other examples (homicide, felony, or suicide) were on-
site conditions regarding the Property.
 
We find nothing in Hawai' i statute or case law to 
support Brinkwood's contention that Defendants had a duty to 
inspect and/or disclose facts about transient social conditions 
in the neighborhood. Accordingly, the circuit court did not err 
when it granted summary judgment in favor of Defendants. 
6
 Subsequently, the New Jersey Legislature curtailed the scope of a
seller's disclosure obligations with the passage of the New Residential
Construction Off-Site Conditions Disclosure Act, so that sellers were no
longer under a duty to disclose off-site physical conditions such as landfills
but needed only to provide a list of such sites. New Jersey Statutes
Annotated (N.J. Stat. Ann.) § 46:3C-4, 5 (1995), Nobrega v. Edison Glen
Associates, 327 N.J. Super. 414, 418, 743 A.2d 864, 866 (2000). The
 Legislature identified "off-site conditions" as ones affecting the physical
property, such as nearby landfills, underground gas transmission lines, and
electrical transformer substations. N.J. Stat. Ann. § 46:3C-3 (1995).
7
 Question 24 asked, "Are you aware of any adverse conditions existing
in the general neighborhood/area (such as pesticides, soil problems,
irrigation, etc.)?," to which Randall marked, "NTMK." Question 25 inquired,
"Is there any additional information you should disclose (i.e. pending
developments in the area, road widening projects, zoning changes, homicide,
felony, or suicide occurring on Property etc.)? Randall marked the "yes" box
with a question mark and wrote that a neighbor "may have development plans[.]"
RA 1 at 259
8
 HRS § 508D-7(c) requires the seller's agent to disclose material
facts he becomes aware of that are inconsistent with or contradictory to the
disclosure statement.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The Judgment entered March 19, 2010 in the Circuit
 
Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 14, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Edward C. Kemper
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Sidney K. AyabeRyan I. Inouye(Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto,Sia & Nakamura)for Defendants-Appellees. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
11
 