    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30392
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
GREGORY KEITH AYERS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0438)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Gregory Keith Ayers (Ayers) appeals
 
from the Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on
 
February 11, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 
(circuit court). On September 11, 2009, a jury found Ayers
 guilty of Burglary in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-811 (1993).
2
 
On appeal, Ayers contends:
 (1) Judge Dexter D. Del Rosario (Judge Del Rosario)
 
erroneously refused to recuse himself.
 
1
The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 
2
 HRS § 708-811 provides in relevant part:
 
§708-811 Burglary in the second degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of burglary in the second degree if the person
intentionally enters or remains unlawfully in a building with
intent to commit therein a crime against a person or against
property rights.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) The circuit court erroneously allowed improper
 
impeachment of a defense witness.
 
(3) The circuit court erroneously refused to give
 
Ayers' requested jury instructions and erroneously instructed the
 
jury.
 
Ayers asks this court to vacate the judgment and remand
 
his case for a new trial.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Ayers'
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) The circuit court did not abuse its discretion
 
when it denied Ayers' motion to disqualify Judge Del Rosario. On
 
appeal, Ayers contends the circuit court erred when it denied his
 
motion to disqualify because (1) Judge Del Rosario's impartiality
 
might reasonably be questioned because he had sentenced Kiyuna,
 
Ayers' witness, "to a maximum sentence and was still handling
 
Kiyuna's pending criminal matters," and (2) Judge Del Rosario's
 
refusal to recuse himself violated the doctrine of "law of the
 
case."
 
Ayers did not file an affidavit, as required by HRS
 
§ 601-7(b) (1993 & Supp. 2010), stating "the facts and the
 
reasons for the belief" that Judge Del Rosario had "a personal
 
bias or prejudice either against the party or in favor of any
 
opposite party to the suit."
 
If the alleged bias falls outside of the provisions of HRS
§ 601-7, the court may then turn, if appropriate, to the
notions of due process described in [State v. Brown, 70 Haw.
459, 776 P.2d 1182 (1989)] in conducting the broader inquiry
of whether "circumstances . . . fairly give rise to an
appearance of impropriety and . . . reasonably cast
suspicion on [the judge's] impartiality."
 
State v. Ross, 89 Hawai' i 371, 377, 974 P.2d 11, 17 (1999). 
Ayers' first argument on appeal that Judge Del Rosario's 
impartiality might reasonably be questioned because he had 
sentenced Kiyuna to a maximum sentence and was still handling 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kiyuna's pending criminal matters is without merit because the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court has long recognized "that petitioners may 
not predicate their claims of disqualifying bias on adverse rulings, even if the rulings are erroneous." Id. at 378, 974 
P.2d at 18. 
Ayers further argues that Judge Del Rosario violated
 
the doctrine of "law of the case" because Judge Del Rosario
 refused to recuse himself from a similar situation in which Judge
 
Lee had recused himself. Assuming arguendo that the "law of the
 
case" did apply, Judge Del Rosario had cogent reasons not to
 
recuse himself because 
a judge owes a duty not to withdraw from a case -­
howevermuch his personal feelings may incline him to
do so -- where the circumstances do not fairly give
rise to an appearance of impropriety and do not
reasonably cast suspicion on his impartiality.
 
[Brown, 70 Haw. at 467 n.3, 776 P.2d at 1188 n.3.]
 
Ross, 89 Hawai' i at 377, 974 P.2d at 17. 
(2) The circuit court did not abuse its discretion 
when it allowed the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (Prosecutor) to 
impeach defense witness James Haggerty (Haggerty) regarding his 
prior convictions for forgery and theft. Ayers argues on appeal 
that there was an inadequate showing that Haggerty's forgery and 
theft convictions related to the issue of truth or veracity and 
his convictions did not have probative value on the issue of 
truth or veracity. Hawai' i Rules of Evidence Rule 609 states in 
relevant part: 
Rule 609 Impeachment by evidence of conviction of
crime. (a) General rule. For the purpose of attacking the
credibility of a witness, evidence that the witness has been
convicted of a crime is inadmissible except when the crime
is one involving dishonesty.
 
The record indicates that Haggerty had been convicted 
of forgery and theft because he had been caught using fake checks 
in conjunction with a fake identification to purchase goods from 
Circuit City, which goods he later returned, using the fake 
identification, to receive a cash refund. The Hawai' i Supreme 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Court held in a similar case that the "possession of false 
identification cards, and assorted activities undertaken 
therewith, were probative of untruthfulness." State v. Culkin, 
97 Hawai' i 206, 221, 35 P.3d 233, 248 (2001). Finally, Haggerty 
himself admitted that his conviction involved dishonesty: 
Q. [Prosecutor] Having an ID and passing it off as
someone else, you weren't being truthful; is that correct?
 
A. [Haggerty] Yeah, I guess, yeah.
 
(3) Ayers contends that Attempted Burglary in the
 
Second Degree is clearly an included offense of Burglary in the
 
Second Degree and there was a rational basis to support its
 
inclusion in the instructions to the jury.
 
The circuit court gave jury instructions for Burglary
 
in the Second Degree and Criminal Trespass in the Second Degree,
 
but not Attempted Burglary in the Second Degree. The jury
 
convicted Ayers of Burglary in the Second Degree. Assuming
 
arguendo that it was error for the circuit court not to include
 
Ayers' proposed jury instructions on Attempted Burglary in the
 

 such error, however,
 Second Degree,3
is harmless when the jury convicts the defendant
of the charged offense or of an included offense
greater than the included offense erroneously
omitted from the instructions. The error is
 harmless because jurors are presumed to follow
the court's instructions, and, under the
standard jury instructions, the jury in reaching
a unanimous verdict as to the charged offense or
as to the greater included offense, would not
have reached, much less considered, the absent
lesser offense on which it should have been
 instructed. 
[State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai' i 405, 415-16, 16 P.3d 246,
256-57 (2001).] 
[State v. Pauline, 100 Hawai' i 356, 381, 60 P.3d 306, 331
(2002).] 
3
 Without the jury instruction on Attempted Burglary in the Second
Degree, there was no basis to give Ayers' requested jury instruction on
renunciation, which was contingent on the giving of the Attempted Burglary in
the Second Degree jury instruction.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Gunson, 101 Hawai' i 161, 166, 64 P.3d 290, 295 (App. 
2003).
 
Therefore,
 
The Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed
 
on February 11, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 2, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Keith Shigetomi
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Donn Fudo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, 
Presiding Judge
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
5
 