NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30433
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
LEILA HAYASHIDA HENNA, as Personal Representative
of the Estate of Harold Hifuo Hayashida, and as
Successor Trustee of the Harold H. Hayashida
Revocable Trust, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
NAOMI IWASAKI HAYASHIDA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 08-1-0657)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
This appeal concerns the division of property in a
 
divorce case, where the property-division order was issued by the
 
1
Family Court of the Second Circuit ("Family Court")  after one of
the parties had died. Defendant-Appellant Naomi Iwasaki
 
Hayashida ("Naomi") appeals from the November 18, 2009 Order
 Granting Harold Hayashida's Motion for Summary Judgment Re:
 Transfer of His Inheritance to the Parties' Daughter Was a Valid
 Conveyance; the January 6, 2010 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
 Law, and Order; and the April 1, 2010 Supplemental Findings of
 Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order. 
2
On appeal,  Naomi contends that (1) the Family Court
should have concluded that she and Plaintiff Harold Hifuo
 Hayashida ("Harold"), her ex-husband, "made an oral postnuptial
 
1
 The Honorable Geronimo Valdriz, Jr. presided.
 
2
 An appellant's opening brief must contain points of error that
state, among other things, "where in the record the alleged error was objected
to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to the attention ofthe court or agency." Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(4)(iii). Several of Naomi's points of error do not state where she raised her arguments or objectionsbelow. Counsel is warned that future non-compliance with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure 28(b) may result in sanctions.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
agreement following their separation in 1989"; (2) the Family
 
Court should have ordered a new trial where Harold died after
 their divorce but before the date of the order dividing the
 
3
marital estate;  (3) the Family Court erred in utilizing non-
permitted presumptive guidelines when dividing the parties'
 assets and debts; (4) valid and relevant considerations ("VARCs")
 potentially justified deviation from marital partnership
 principles; and (5) the Family Court erred in granting Harold
 summary judgment, approving the transfer of his interest in real
 property located at 66 Ala Moana Street, Lahaina, Maui ("Ala
 Moana St. Property") to Naomi and Harold's daughter, Plaintiff-
Appellee Leila Hayashida Henna ("Leila"). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Naomi's points of error as follows:
 
(1)
 Naomi argues that the Family Court "should have
 
concluded that Naomi and Harold made an enforceable postnuptial
 agreement." Naomi contends that the parties made an "oral
 postnuptial agreement" pursuant to which "Harold received the
 property at 65 West Kauai Street, his interest in the [Ala Moana
 St. Property], his retirement, his savings, and all the property
 his [sic] name alone, and Naomi received the property at 538
 Waikala Street, her retirement, her savings, and all of the
 property in her name alone." 
"All contracts made between spouses, whenever made 
. . . and not otherwise invalid because of any other law, shall be valid." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 572-22 (2006); Chen v. Hoeflinger, 
127 Hawai' i 346, 356, 279 P.3d 11, 21 (App. 2012) (Hawaii Revised 
Statutes ("HRS") § 572-22 covers post-nuptial agreements). "[I]n order for an oral contract to be enforceable, there must be an offer, an acceptance, and consideration." Douglass v. Pflueger 
Haw., Inc., 110 Hawai' i 520, 525, 135 P.3d 129, 134 (2006). 
3
 The parties' divorce was finalized on September 10, 2009, pursuant
to proceedings bifurcated after Harold learned that his cancer had recurred.
The property-division trial occurred on September 25 and October 16, 2009.
Harold passed away on November 28, 2009. The Family Court issued its Findings
of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order on January 6, 2010, and its
Supplemental Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order on April 1, 2010. 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ultimately, "[w]hether or not the parties entered into an
 
agreement is essentially a question of fact." Island Directory
 
Co. v. Iva's Kinimaka Enters., 10 Haw. App. 15, 23, 859 P.2d 935,
 940 (1993). A trial court's finding that a contract does not
 exist "will not be disturbed unless it is clearly erroneous." 
See id.
 
"The burden of proving the existence and terms of a
 
valid contract is on the party asserting it[.]" 17B C.J.S.
 Contracts § 926 (2011). "In the case of an oral contract, the
 party relying on its existence must prove that the contract was
 clear and precise, and has a particularly heavy burden to
 establish objective signs of the parties' intent to be bound." 
Id. (footnote omitted).
 
At the heart of the alleged agreement is a purported
 
contract under which Harold would transfer title to real property
 on Waikala St. in Kahului ("Waikala St. Property") and Alahele
 St. in Kîhei ("Alahele St. Property") to Naomi and Naomi would
 transfer title to real property on W. Kauai St. in Kahului ("W.
 Kauai St. Property") to Harold. There was a significant amount
 of testimony from Harold which, on balance, was unsupportive of
 there being any "agreement." 
Although Harold "believed" that "what was hers was
 
hers" and "what was his was his," and that, at some time before
 filing for divorce, he also believed that the Waikala St.
 Property and the Alahele St. Property should go to Naomi and the
 W. Kauai St. Property should go to him, he admitted to no such
 agreement, even as to the alleged components: 
Q. [By Ms. Melehan] Mr. Hayashida, there was an
agreement, right, that Naomi didn't have to pay the mortgage
at 65 West Kauai, right?
 
A. Wait, wait, wait, wait. Wait, wait, wait, wait.
 MS. YANAGIDA: Objection.
 . . . .
 MS. MELEHAN:  I'm sorry, I'll rephrase.
 
Q. (By Ms. Melehan) You and Naomi had an agreement
that she wouldn't have to pay anything at 65 West Kauai?
 
A. Not me.
 
Q. Who?
 
3
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. That's my daughter Leila. Because Leila went to
 
see her for a loan, yeah. And Leila told her no worry, you
no need pay. But knowing what I know today, she got to pay
because she wouldn't take her name off [title to the
property].
 
Naomi's record citations establish only that Harold held certain
 
beliefs about who was entitled to various assets, not that there
 was any agreement that formed the basis for those beliefs, or,
 further, that there was any meeting of the minds between Harold
 and Naomi.
 
The weight of the evidence is a determination to be 
made by the trier of fact. Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai' i 41, 46, 
137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006). Personalized expectations or beliefs notwithstanding, there was no clear testimony that the parties had come to any sort of agreement, whether explicit or implicit. Given Harold's testimony, including his statement that he gave the Waikala St. Property to Naomi "no questions asked," Naomi fails to show that the Family Court's finding that no post­nuptial agreement as to property division existed is clearly erroneous. 
(2) Naomi argues that the Family Court should have 
conducted a new trial following Harold's death because his death necessarily altered his asset, debt, and income profile. She reasons that such information could not have been discovered prior to trial, thus warranting a new trial, pursuant to Hawai' i 
Family Court Rules Rule 59(a), in order to hear "evidence of the nature and extent of the assets in Harold's estate, and the circumstances of Harold's heirs." 
Pursuant to HRS § 580-47(a), upon granting a divorce,
 
or thereafter if the family court reserves jurisdiction over the
 issue, the family court "may make any further orders as shall
 appear just and equitable" finally dividing and distributing the
 estate of the parties and allocating responsibility for the
 payment of the parties' debts. H
AW. REV. STAT. § 580-47(a) (2006 &
 
Supp. 2012). "In making these further orders, the court shall
 take into consideration: the respective merits of the parties,
 the relative abilities of the parties, the condition in which
 each party will be left by the divorce, the burdens imposed upon
 
4
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
either party for the benefit of the children of the parties, and
 
all other circumstances of the case." Id.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court "has adopted the rules 
pertaining to the dissolution of business partnership to apply to the division and distribution of property in divorce cases." Cox 
v. Cox, 125 Hawai' i 19, 26, 250 P.3d 775, 782 (2011). "Under the 
Partnership Model, absent valid and relevant considerations (VARCs), each partner is generally awarded his or her capital contribution, while the appreciation is split fifty-fifty." Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai' i 126, 130 n.4, 276 P.3d 695, 699 
n.4 (2012).
 
Naomi does not provide any sound basis for concluding
 
that events occurring after dissolution of marriage should affect
 a court's pending determination of property division. She
 invokes Magoon v. Magoon, 70 Haw. 605, 780 P.2d 80 (1989), for
 the proposition that the intervening death of a spouse requires a
 revisitation of what constitutes a just and equitable division of
 property. Magoon, however, is inapposite. In requiring the
 
lower court to readdress the division of property, the Magoon
 court merely corrected the lower court's misapprehension that,
 despite new evidence of fraud, it had been time-barred to do so. 
Id. at 614–16, 780 P.2d at 85–87. Rather, the valuation of a
 marital estate and the equities of its division should be
 determined as of the date of the dissolution, cf. H
AW. REV. STAT. §
 
580-56 (2006) (providing that, where proceedings are bifurcated
 and a spouse remarries, property division occurs "as of the
 effective date of the entry of the decree of divorce"); neither a
 party's windfall, downfall, remarriage, nor death should
 necessarily, post-divorce, cause a court to reconsider its
 property division. Cf. Beard v. Beard, 758 N.E.2d 1019, 1024
 
(Ind. Ct. App. 2001) (affirming trial court's denial of wife's
 motion to dismiss dissolution proceedings after husband passed
 away prior to final property division).
4 In sum, Naomi fails to
 
4
 Even if the death of an ex-spouse after divorce but prior to an
order dividing the parties' property and debts could be determined to be a
VARC, a surviving ex-spouse is not necessarily entitled to deviation from the
partnership model. Clearly, the family court has discretion to decide whether
a deviation is proper given all the circumstances of the case, including
whether the surviving spouse is sufficiently supported by the partnership­
5
   
 
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
show that the Family Court abused its discretion in denying her
 
motion for a new trial.
 
(3) Naomi argues that the Family Court improperly 
applied marital partnership principles because, in her view, they are "non-permitted" presumptive guidelines. Even if the argument was not waived by Naomi's failure to raise it below, the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court has explicitly adopted the marital partnership model for the division and distribution of property in divorce cases. See Cox, 125 Hawai' i at 26, 250 P.3d at 782. Thus, the 
argument is without merit. 
(4) In her opening brief, Naomi summarily contends that
 
the Family Court erred when it concluded that the age and life
 expectancy of the parties, the parties' contributions to the
 marital assets following separation, the parties' separate
 economic lives, and the parties' medical conditions were not
 VARCs. 
VARCs can be found where they relate to the respective 
merits of the parties, the relevant abilities of the parties, the condition in which each party will be left by the divorce, the burdens imposed upon either party for the benefit of the children of the parties, and all other relevant circumstances of the case. H
AW. REV. STAT. § 580-47(a). Whether the facts presented at trial 
constitute VARCs is a matter of law.  See Schiller v. Schiller, 120 Hawai' i 283, 287, 205 P.3d 548, 552 (App. 2009). 
Contrary to Naomi's claim, the Family Court concluded 
only that the parties' post-separation contributions did not constitute a VARC, citing to Jackson v. Jackson, 84 Hawai' i 319, 335 
(App. 1997). As to the other factors, the Family Court did not determine that they were not VARCs, but, rather, that they were not VARCs "warranting deviation from the partnership model." Naomi makes no argument that Jackson is not dispositive on the issue of post-separation contributions, and furthermore fails to explain, with regard to the other factors, why the specific, relevant facts 
model division and whether it would be just and equitable for the surviving
spouse to benefit from the death where such a holding could, for example,
adversely and inequitably affect the rights of the decedent's heirs. Although
alluding to a stroke and "bleeding in the brain," Naomi does not establish on
appeal that the Family Court erred in concluding to the contrary.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the case warrant deviation from the partnership model.  As to
 
those latter factors, Naomi makes no cogent argument as to why it
 was an abuse of the Family Court's discretion not to deviate from
 the partnership model in light of the other facts and circumstances
 in the case.
 
5) Naomi contends that the Family Court erred in granting 
Harold summary judgment, which approved Harold's transfer of the Ala Moana St. Property to Leila, based on "the factual dispute as to whether Naomi's consent to the transfer of the [Ala Moana St. Property] to Leila was unconditional." The record indicates that the Family Court granted summary judgment on the grounds that the Ala Moana St. Property was Harold's separate marital property acquired by inheritance and that in 1992 Naomi released any interest she had in the property. Naomi fails to explain how her contention presents a genuine issue of material fact. Thus, Naomi has not shown that the Family Court erred in granting summary judgment to Harold. See Haw. Fam. Ct. R. 56(c); see also Kakinami, 
127 Hawai' i at 130 n.4, 276 P.3d at 699 n.4 (marital separate 
property includes property acquired through gifts and inheritance during the marriage that is expressly classified as separate property and maintained and funded through non-partnership assets; marital separate property is not subject to division). 
Therefore, the November 18, 2009 Order Granting Harold
 
Hayashida's Motion for Summary Judgment Re: Transfer of His
 Inheritance to the Parties' Daughter Was a Valid Conveyance; the
 January 6, 2010 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order;
 and the April 1, 2010 Supplemental Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
 Law and Order are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 19, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
William C. Darrah and 
Elizabeth C. Melehan Presiding Judge 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Joy Mademba-Sy Yanagida and
Jean-Claude Mademba-Sy(Yanagida & Associates)for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 