NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30217
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
EUGENE C. KOSTRON and LOPAKA CENO, Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0268)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai' i (State) appeals 
from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (circuit court)1 
October 23, 2009 order granting Defendant-Appellee Eugene C. 
Kostron's (Kostron) motion to dismiss the case, which Defendant-
Appellee Lopaka Ceno (Ceno) had joined. 
The State raises the following points of error on
 
appeal: (1) the circuit court abused its discretion in dismissing
 
the February 25, 2009, Felony Information and Non-Felony
 
Complaint (2009 Complaint) with prejudice, and also in dismissing
 
the entire 2009 Complaint against Kostron and Ceno, which
 
included four charges of assault in the third degree that were
 
unaffected by the charging mistakes at issue in this case; and
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2) the circuit court abused its discretion in denying the
 
State's motion to amend Counts I and V of the 2009 Complaint.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve the State's points of error as follows:
 
This case arises from an incident on March 3, 2007. 
Kostron and Ceno were first charged with respect to this incident
 
by way of a Felony Information and Non-Felony Complaint filed
 
August 15, 2007 (2007 Complaint) in Cr. No. 07-1-1510. A year
 
later, on August 25, 2008, Cr. No. 07-1-1510 was dismissed with
 
prejudice due to the then-assigned Deputy Prosecuting Attorney's
 
inexcusable lack of readiness for trial.2 However, after a
 
hearing on January 22, 2009, the circuit court granted the
 State's motion to reconsider the dismissal with prejudice and, in
 
an order filed on February 17, 2009, dismissed Cr. No. 07-1-1510
 
without prejudice.
 
On February 25, 2009, the State re-filed the case by
 
way of the 2009 Complaint in the instant case, docketed in the
 
circuit court as Cr. No. 09-1-0268. The 2009 Complaint contained
 
a total of six counts, four against Kostron and two against Ceno. 
Count I alleged a charge of Assault in the Second Degree against
 
Kostron for recklessly causing "serious bodily injury" to Ronald
 
Lewis, Jr. Count V alleged a charge of Assault in the Second
 
Degree against Ceno for recklessly causing "serious bodily
 
injury" to William Naeole.
 
The prior 2007 Complaint had also alleged charges for
 
Assault in the Second Degree against Kostron and Ceno, however,
 
Count I and V in the 2007 Complaint alleged that defendants had
 
caused "substantial bodily injury" and not "serious bodily
 
injury."
 
2
 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided with regard to
Cr. No. 07-1-1510.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 8, 2009, eleven days before the scheduled
 
trial and after the circuit court in a status conference had
 
questioned the language in the 2009 Complaint, the State filed a
 
motion to amend the 2009 Complaint in order to change the injury
 
language from "serious bodily injury" to "substantial bodily
 
injury." Kostron and Ceno opposed the motion to amend. 
Simultaneous with his opposition memorandum, Kostron also filed a
 
motion to dismiss the case, which Ceno later joined.
 
At the hearing on the motion to amend the 2009 
Complaint, the State candidly conceded that it could not prove 
serious bodily injury. Moreover, although counsel for Ceno 
admitted that he had been proceeding under the belief that the 
charges in the 2009 Complaint were the same as in the 2007 
Complaint, counsel for Kostron asserted that he had noted the 
discrepancy and planned on raising a motion for judgment of 
acquittal after the State's case at trial. The circuit court 
thereafter denied the State's motion to amend the 2009 Complaint 
on grounds that, under Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
Rule 7(f), the defendants would be prejudiced by such an amendment because the State had conceded that it could not prove 
"serious bodily injury." 
Subsequently, the circuit court held a separate hearing
 
on the motion to dismiss, at which the court orally granted the
 
motion to dismiss and ruled that it would dismiss the case with
 
prejudice. The circuit court entered its written order
 
dismissing the case with prejudice on October 23, 2009.
 
The State's first point of error is that the circuit
 
court erred in dismissing the case with prejudice.
 
A trial court's exercise of its inherent power to dismiss a
criminal case with prejudice was upheld in State v.
 Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 647 P.2d 705 (1982). There, the court,
relying on article VI, section 1 of the Hawai' i Constitution 
pertaining to the "judicial power of the State[,]" and also
citing HRS ยง 603-21.9 (1976) which grants courts the power
to take steps "necessary" for the promotion of justice,
found that the inherent power included the "power to
administer justice." Id. at 55, 647 P.2d at 711-12. The
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court held that under this aspect of the judicial power,
"trial courts have the power to dismiss sua sponte an
indictment with prejudice and over the objection of the
prosecuting attorney[ ] [w]ithin the bounds of duly
exercised discretion[.]" Id. The "parameters within which
this discretion is properly exercised" requires a
"'balancing [of] the interest of the state against
fundamental fairness to a defendant with the added
 ingredient of the orderly functioning of the court system.'" 
Id. at 56, 647 P.2d at 712 (quoting State v. Braunsdorf, 98
Wis.2d 569, 587, 297 N.W.2d 808, 817 (1980) (Day, J.,
dissenting)).
 
State v. Mageo, 78 Hawai' i 33, 37, 889 P.2d 1092, 1096 (App. 
1995) (emphasis added). Thus, within the framework set out in 
Mageo, the circuit court had discretion in this case whether to 
grant Kostron and Ceno's motion to dismiss with prejudice. 
Although the circuit court did not issue written
 
factual findings to set forth its reasoning for dismissal with
 
prejudice, as called for in Mageo, Id., the circuit court made
 
clear at the hearing on the motion to dismiss that the basis for
 
the dismissal with prejudice was the entire context of this case,
 
as recited in a declaration by Kostron's counsel attached to the
 
motion to dismiss. The context of this case, as attested to in
 
the declaration of Kostron's counsel, includes that:
 
misrepresentations and misconduct of a prior deputy prosecuting
 
attorney in Cr. No. 07-1-1510 initially resulted in a dismissal
 
with prejudice of that case; and at the behest of the State, the
 
court granted a motion for reconsideration and dismissed
 
Cr. No. 07-1-1510 without prejudice, so that the State could re-
file the charges against Kostron and Ceno. After the re-filing
 
of the charges in Cr. No. 09-1-0268, the charges in Counts I and
 
V of the 2009 Complaint alleged "serious bodily injury" (as
 
opposed to "substantial bodily injury" as alleged in the 2007
 
Complaint). The State thereafter indicated several times to the
 
circuit court that it was prepared to go to trial and expressed
 
no concerns with proving Counts I and V. On October 6, 2009, at
 
a status conference thirteen days before the scheduled trial, the
 
circuit court pointed out the potential problem the State may
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
have in proving "serious bodily injury" given the record at that
 
time. Thereafter, the State sought to amend Counts I and V to
 
allege "substantial bodily injury."
 
Under these circumstances, the charges against Kostron
 
and Ceno had already once before been dismissed (initially with
 
prejudice and then without prejudice), and moreover, but for the
 
circuit court pointing out the allegation of "serious bodily
 
injury" in the 2009 Complaint, the State would have proceeded to
 
trial on Count I and V alleging a level of injury that it
 
concedes it could not prove.
 
Considering that the circuit court was required to 
balance the interest of the state against fundamental fairness to
 
the defendants, with the added ingredient of the orderly
 
functioning of the court system, and given the entirety of the
 
circumstances in Cr. No. 07-1-1510 and the instant case, we
 
cannot conclude that the circuit court abused its discretion in
 
dismissing this case with prejudice.
 
Finally, the State contends that the circuit court
 
erred in dismissing all of the charges against Kostron and Ceno,
 
including four charges of assault in the third degree that were
 
unaffected by the charging mistakes. In the circuit court, the
 
State never raised this argument or sought to preserve the third
 
degree assault charges. To the contrary, at the hearing on the
 
motion to dismiss, the State noted that it had considered but
 
then rejected the idea of filing a motion to nolle prosequi the
 
case. There was no discussion or assertion that the State would
 
seek to proceed separately on the third degree assault charges. 
The State has therefore waived its argument that dismissal of the
 
third degree assault charges was in error. 
Because the circuit court acted within its discretion
 
to dismiss the case with prejudice, we do not reach the State's
 
second point of error regarding the motion to amend the complaint 
Therefore, 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the circuit court's
 
October 23, 2009 order dismissing the case against Kostron and
 
Ceno is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 28, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
James M. Anderson 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
Phyllis J. HironakaDeputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-AppelleeEugene C. Kostron 
Associate Judge 
Harrison L. Kiehm for Defendant-AppelleeLopaka Ceno 
Associate Judge 
6
 