 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30631
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF JK
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 08-11738)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)

 
Father-Appellant (Father) appeals from the "Order
 
Awarding Permanent Custody" (Permanent Custody Order) filed on
 
July 9, 2010, in the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family
 Court).
1 The Permanent Custody Order divested Father of his
 
parental rights over his child, JK, and awarded permanent custody
 of JK to the Department of Human Services (DHS). The Family
 Court found that Father was not presently willing and able, and
 it was not reasonably foreseeable that he would become willing
 and able within a reasonable period of time, to provide JK with a
 safe family home. 
On appeal, Father argues that the Family Court erred in
 
"terminating [Father's] parental rights solely because of his
 incarceration." We affirm the Family Court's Permanent Custody
 Order.
 
I.
 
At the time of the trial on the DHS's "Motion for Order 
Awarding Permanent Custody and Establishing a Permanent Plan"
 
1
 The Honorable Christine E. Kuriyama presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Permanent Custody Motion), Father was incarcerated at the
 
Saguaro Correctional Center in Arizona and had been incarcerated
 for five years. Father was incarcerated before JK was born. 
Father did not cause the harm or threatened harm to JK that
 prompted the DHS's involvement in this case. 
Father was incarcerated on convictions for sex assault,
 
kidnapping, and robbery. Father's "release date" is March 24,
 2024.
2 The DHS social worker testified that in the social
 
worker's opinion, Father could not provide a safe family home for
 JK due to: (1) Father's long-distance and minimal relationship
 with JK; and (2) Father's incarceration. The DHS social worker
 also testified that he had concerns about (1) the violence of
 Father's crimes, because the sex assault and kidnapping were
 reportedly done at knife point; and (2) information that Father
 had been abusive to JK's mother (Mother) during Father's
 relationship with Mother. 
II.
 
Father cites to the Hawai
'i Supreme Court decision in 
In re Doe, 100 Hawai 'i 335, 60 P.3d 285 (2002) (hereinafter, 
"Doe"), in support of his argument that the Family Court erred in "terminating [Father's] parental rights solely because of his incarceration." The supreme court in Doe noted that incarceration for a criminal offense "does not mandate a per se forfeiture of a parent's rights to a child." Id. at 345, 60 P.3d 
at 295. The supreme court, however, went on to conclude that 
incarceration may be considered along with "other factors
and circumstances impacting the ability of the parent to
remedy the conditions of abuse and neglect." Thus, if the
sole caretaker of a child is confined for a long period of
time, the lack of permanence or guidance in the child's life
may be a factor in considering whether the parent may be 
2
 The DHS's September 17, 2009, Safe Family Home Report states that
Father's "release date is 03/24/2024." At the trial on the Permanent Custody
Motion (held on July 9, 2010), Father testified: "According to my, um,
watchamacall, my minimum term, it's March 24, 2023 I think. But in, uh, two
years I'm up for parole." Father's testimony is confusing because if his
minimum parole term was set for 2023, he would not be "up for parole" in two
years. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
able to provide a safe family home within a reasonable
period of time.
 
Id. (citation omitted).
 
Pursuant to Doe, although incarceration does not
 
mandate per se forfeiture of parental rights, a parent's
 
incarceration and the consequences of that incarceration may
 provide a basis for determining that a parent cannot provide a
 safe family home. Here, Mother stipulated to the DHS's Permanent
 Custody Motion and her parental rights over JK were terminated. 
Father has been sentenced to a lengthy term of incarceration for
 serious criminal offenses. The record reflects that his "release
 date" is in 2024. Father testified that he thought his "minimum
 term" was set for 2023, but also testified that he was "up for
 parole" in "two years." Even if Father is "up for parole" in two
 years from when he testified, this would mean he would be up for
 parole at the earliest in 2012, when JK will be approximately
 seven years old. JK has been in foster custody since January
 2008. Although Father wanted JK placed with JK's paternal
 grandmother (Grandmother) while Father remained incarcerated,
 Grandmother testified that her own children had been removed from
 her custody after child protective services became involved. 
Grandmother also indicated that as the result of an abuse
 incident with her sister-in-law about "two years ago,"
 Grandmother had been placed on probation for a year. We
 conclude, under the circumstances of this case, that the Family
 Court did not err in basing the termination of Father's parental
 rights on Father's incarceration.
 
In any event, the record reflects that Father's
 
incarceration was not the sole basis for the termination of his
 parental rights. The DHS social worker, whom the Family 
Court found credible, testified to other factors that raised
 concerns about Father's willingness and ability to provide JK
 with a safe family home, namely, the violent nature of the crimes 
which resulted in Father's incarceration; information regarding
 Father's domestic violence during his relationship with Mother;
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Father's minimal relationship with JK. These factors, in
 
addition to Father's incarceration, provided sufficient support
 for the Family Court's decision to grant the DHS's Permanent
 Custody Motion.
 
III.
 
We affirm the "Order Awarding Permanent Custody" filed
 
by the Family Court on July 9, 2010. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 24, 2011. 
On the briefs:

 
Herbert Y. Hamada
 
for Father-Appellant
 
Chief Judge
Korrine S.S. Oki

 
Mary Anne Magnier
Deputies Attorney General
for Petitioner-Appellee Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge

 
4
 