NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30482
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
BRYSON N. LALONDE, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
'EWA DIVISION
 
(Case No. 1DTC-09-049902)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Bryson N. Lalonde (Lalonde) appeals
 
from the April 5, 2010 Judgment entered by the District Court of
 
1
the First Circuit, ' Ewa Division (district court),  convicting
him of Excessive Speeding, in violation of Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 291C-105(a) and (c)(1) (2007 & Supp. 2010). 
On appeal, Lalonde challenges the district court's
 
(1)
 decision, insofar as it denied, in part, his motion to compel
 
discovery and (2) verdict of guilt, based on the sufficiency of
 the evidence in support of his conviction.
 
Based on the issues raised and argued by the parties,
 
the record and the relevant authority, we resolve Lalonde's
 
appeal as follows.
 
1. Lalonde argues that the district court erred to the
 
extent that it did not order discovery of all of the items
 
1
 The Honorable David W. Lo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
identified in his Motion to Compel:
 
(a)	 HPD departmental policies and procedures for
conducting speeding citations;
 
(b)	 The HPD training manual for speeding citations;
 
(c)	 The operation manual for the specific laser gun used
in the case;
 
(d)	 Any documentation related to the following:
 
i. The brand and model of the gun;
 
ii.	 The age of the gun;
 
iii.	 When the gun was purchased and first put
into use by HPD;
 
iv.	 The period of warranty of the gun;
 
v. Where the gun is stored;
 
vi.	 How the gun is maintained;
 
vii.	 When the gun was last tested or calibrated;
 
viii.	 All certification documents;
 
ix.	 All police maintenance, servicing, repair
and calibration records for any laser
devise [sic] used in the instant case;
 
x. Laser readings;
 
xi.	 Laser unit test results for the
 
officer(s)in the instant case;
 
xii.	 The laser gun training and qualification
test results for the officer(s) in the
instant case;
 
xiii.	 The firearm qualification test results for
the officer using the laser for the one
year prior and the one year after the date
of Defendant’s citation/arrest;
 
xiv.	 The fixed distance used to calibrate the
 
subject laser unit and location where the
calibration took place;
 
xv.	 The delta distance used to calibrate the
 
subject laser unit and location where the
calibration took place;
 
xvi.	 Any calibration reading;
 
xvii.	 Manufacturer’s service representative’s
maintenance, service and calibration
records for the laser in question;
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
xviii. The laser gun manufacturer’s established
procedures for verifying and validatingthat the instrument was in proper workingorder; 
xix. Written verification that said manufacturer’s established procedures werefollowed. 
xx. Written verification that the laser gun wasin proper working order at the time thelaser gun was used. 
xxi. 
Records of regular maintenance, servicing,upkeep, repair, modification and/orcalibration of the laser gun performed bythe manufacturer (or the manufacturer’sduly trained and licensedrepresentative)[.]
2 
The district court ordered, inter alia, that Lalonde would be
 
able to review and make one copy of certain pages of the
 
"Marksman (trainee) manual" and the "LTI Ultralyte operator
 
(user) manual."
 
A ruling limiting discovery is reviewed for an abuse of 
discretion. State v. Peseti, 101 Hawai' i 172, 178, 65 P.3d 119, 
125 (2003). Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rules 16 and 
16.1 generally limit discovery to felony cases but provide for
 
"discretionary disclosure" in non-felony cases not involving
 
violations upon a showing of materiality and resonableness of the
 
request.
 
Lalonde argues on appeal that items (c), (d)(i) through
 
(d)(x), and (d)(xvii) through (d)(xxi) as listed in his Motion to
 
Compel (the Storage, Maintenance and Calibration documents) "were
 
relevant to establish how long the particular laser gun had been
 
in service and whether it had been properly maintained and
 
serviced" and were "relevant to establish whether the laser gun
 
had been stored, maintained, calibrated, and operated according
 
2
 Lalonde also asked for, with respect to item xxi,
a year before and a year after the dates of any alleged
offense(s), as well as official maintenance, repair,
modification, servicing, and/or calibration manuals for the
device in question prepared by and/or relied upon by the
manufacturer (or the manufacturer’s duly trained and
licensed representative).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to procedures recommended by the gun's manufacturer." However,
 
beyond this conclusory statement, Lalonde does not provide any
 
authority for his assertion that the manner in which the laser
 
unit was stored, maintained, serviced or even calibrated prior to
 
its use on the date in question was "material" to the accuracy of
 
the laser unit's reading.3
 
Indeed, in State v. Ames, 71 Haw. 304, 313-15, 788 P.2d 
1281, 1286-87 (1990), the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that the 
trial court exceeded its authority by ordering the State to disclose manufacturer's manuals, instructions, specifications 
pertaining to the components, precision limits, operation, 
calibration, and maintenance of the Intoxilyzer, and information 
pertaining to the qualification, training and certification of 
the operator. The Storage, Maintenance and Calibration documents 
requested by Lalonde are similar in nature to the manuals, 
documents pertaining to maintenance, and the documents pertaining 
to the qualification and training of the Intoxilyzer operator in 
Ames and therefore are not subject to discovery in a non-felony 
case. 
Lalonde also argues that items (a), (b), and (c) as
 
listed in his Motion to Compel were material as they "were
 
essential to challenge [Officer Franks's] claim that he was
 
qualified to operate the laser gun and that he had been operating
 
the gun on the date of the incident in accordance with
 
manufacturer recommended procedures." However, the district
 
court did order disclosure of the "LTI Ultralyte operator (user)
 
manual." As Lalonde does not explain why this order did not
 
satisfy this request, his argument is rejected.
 
3
 We note that Officer Jeremy Franks (Officer Franks) testified at
trial that he performed the manufacturer's recommended tests on the laser unit
both before and after he used the unit to measure Lalonde's speed and found
the laser unit to be working properly.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Lalonde also argues that items (d)(xi) through
 
(d)(xiii) and (d)(xix) as listed in his Motion to Compel--having
 
to do with Officer Franks's training and qualification and
 
"written verification" that the manufacturer's procedures were
 
followed--were "necessary to challenge the sufficiency of
 
[Officer Franks's] training and to establish whether he
 
improperly operated the laser gun to measure Lalondes' [sic]
 
speed." Again, consistent with Ames, items (d)(xi) through
 
(d)(xiii) and (c)(xix) do not "tend[ ] to negate the guilt of the
 
defendant," HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(vii), and thus were not
 
discoverable. To the contrary, armed with the manufacturer's
 
manual, Lalonde was equipped to, and did, cross-examine Officer
 
Franks at trial regarding his training and qualifications and
 
whether the manufacturer's procedures were followed in the
 
instant case.
 
The district court did not abuse its discretion in
 
granting Lalonde's Motion to Compel only in part.
 
2. Relying on State v. Assaye, 121 Hawai' i 204, 216 
P.3d 1227 (2009), Lalonde argues that there was insufficient 
evidence for his conviction. He maintains the evidence presented 
at trial was insufficient to establish that the laser unit used 
to measure his speed was tested according to manufacturer-
recommended procedures and was determined to be functioning 
properly and that the officer using the laser unit was qualified 
by training and experience to operate the device. These are the 
only bases for his challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence 
in support of his conviction. 
In Assaye, the court held that the prosecution must 
prove "whether the officer is qualified by training and 
experience to operate the particular laser gun; namely whether 
the nature and extent of an officer's training in the operation 
of a laser gun meets the requirements indicated by the 
manufacturer." Assaye, 121 Hawai' i at 215; 216 P.3d at 1238. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, Officer Franks testified that (1) he was trained
 
in the use of the laser unit at issue approximately six years
 
before this citation and this was the ninth citation he issued on
 
the day of Lalonde's offense; during that training he was given a
 
manual copyrighted by the manufacturer of the laser unit; (2) he
 
reviewed the manual at the time of the training; and (3) his
 
training was "in conformance with the manual." Moreover, Officer
 
Franks testified that, albeit after the speeding citation in this
 
case, he had reviewed the instructor's manual issued by the laser
 
unit's manufacturer and at the time of trial, was an instructor. 
On this record, the foundation for Officer Franks's
 
qualifications to operate the laser unit was sufficient.
 
The Assaye court also required that, to overcome an
 
objection to the foundation for the laser unit's calibration,
 
i.e. accuracy, evidence of the manufacturer's accepted procedures 
for testing of the laser unit to ensure proper operation and that 
the laser unit was tested in accordance with such procedures, 
must be presented. Assaye, 121 Hawai' i at 213-14, 216 P.3d at 
1236-37. 
In the instant case, Officer Franks testified that the
 
laser unit's manual "include[s] methods to determine whether
 [the] laser unit is working correctly"; pursuant to the manual,
 
the operator conducts four tests, the self-test, display test,
 
scope alignment test, and the delta distance velocity
 
test/calibration test; that if the laser unit fails any of the
 
tests, it is turned in for servicing; he conducts all four tests
 
both before and after his tour of duty and the scope alignment
 
test before and after each citation issued; and that on the day
 
in question, the laser unit passed all tests.
 
Based on the testimony regarding Officer Frank's
 
training and experience and of his operation of the laser unit,
 
we conclude the district court did not err in admitting the laser
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
unit's reading and in finding Lalonde guilty of excessive
 
speeding.
 
Based on the foregoing, the April 5, 2010 Judgment
 
entered by the District Court of the First Circuit, ' Ewa Division 
is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 22, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Kainani C. Collins,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Chief Judge
 
Anne K. Clarkin,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
Associate Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
7
 