 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30652
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
ANGELA BROWN, Individually and as Special
Administrator of the ESTATE OF RYAN CORNELL,
Plaintiff/Appellant,
v.
 
ROMEO E. MARQUEZ,
Defendant/Cross-Claim Plaintiff/Appellee,
ARAKAKI MECHANICAL, LLC,
Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Appellee,
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants/Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0154)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this appeal arising out of a personal injury
 
lawsuit, Plaintiff/Appellant Angela Brown (Brown), Individually
 
and as Special Administrator of the Estate of Ryan Cornell
 
(Cornell), appeals from the Final Judgment filed on July 30, 2010
 
in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit court).1
 
Pursuant to the Order Granting Summary Judgment, the circuit
 court entered judgment in favor of Defendant/Cross-Claim
 
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendant/Appellee Arakaki Mechanical, LLC (Arakaki) and against
 
Brown in Counts II and III of Brown's First Amended Complaint
 
(Complaint). Pursuant to the Order of Dismissal and the Order
 
Granting Summary Judgment, the circuit court entered judgment in
 
favor of Arakaki and against Defendant/Cross-Claim
 
Plaintiff/Appellee Romeo E. Marquez (Marquez) on all cross-claims
 
filed by Marquez. Pursuant to the Order Granting Defendant
 
[Marquez's] Petition for Approval of Good Faith Settlement, the
 
circuit court entered judgment in favor of Marquez and against
 
Brown in Counts I and III of Brown's Complaint.
 
On appeal, Brown contends the circuit court erred in
 
granting summary judgment in favor of Arakaki on the issue of
 
respondeat superior liability when the circuit court failed to
 
properly apply enterprise theory and failed to recognize an
 
applicable exception to the "going and coming" rule.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
This case arises out of a motor vehicle accident on
 
December 12, 2007 on the island of Maui between the automobile
 
driven by Marquez and the motorcycle driven by Cornell. As a
 
result of the accident, Cornell was fatally injured and Marquez
 
sustained injuries. Brown, Cornell's mother, filed her Complaint
 
on October 20, 2008, alleging negligence of Marquez under Count
 
I, liability of Arakaki based on the theory of respondeat
 
superior and negligence under Count II, and loss of consortium
 
due to Marquez's conduct under Count III.
 
On August 3, 2009, Arakaki filed a Motion for Summary
 
Judgment (MSJ) on all claims against it. On February 25, 2010,
 
the circuit court heard argument on the motion. On May 12, 2010,
 
the circuit court issued its "Order Granting [Arakaki's] [MSJ]." 
On July 30, 2010, the circuit court issued its Final Judgment. 
Brown timely filed her Notice of Appeal.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Summary Judgment
 
[An appellate] court reviews a trial court's
 
grant of summary judgment de novo. Ofahu Transit 
Servs., Inc. v. Northfield Ins. Co., 107 Hawaif i 
231, 234, 112 P.3d 717, 720 (2005). The standard
 
for granting a motion for summary judgment is well
 
settled:
 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the
pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories,
and admissions on file, together with the affidavits,
if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
 proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other
 words, [the appellate court] must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the
 light most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Price v. AIG Hawaif i Ins. Co., 107 Hawaif i 106, 110, 111 P.3d
1, 5 (2005) (original brackets and citation omitted). 
Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawaif i 92, 104, 
176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Pursuant to Hawaif i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 56(c), the circuit court shall grant a motion for summary 
judgment when the moving party has shown "that there is no 
genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party 
is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." We view the 
evidence in the light most favorable to the non-movant. Kamaka, 
117 Hawaif i at 104, 176 P.3d at 103. 
A. Scope of Employment
 
"Whether an employee is acting within the scope of his 
or her employment is ordinarily a question of fact to be determined in light of the evidence of the particular case." 
Wong-Leong v. Hawaiian Independent Refinery, Inc., 76 Hawaif i 
433, 441, 879 P.2d 538, 546 (1994). But "where the facts are susceptible of but one reasonable conclusion, the question 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[whether the employee is acting within the scope of his
 
employment] may become a question of law for the court." Id. at 
442, 879 P.2d at 547. 
Brown asserts that Arakaki was liable for Marquez's
 
accident under the doctrine of respondeat superior because
 
Marquez was acting within the scope of his employment when he
 
collided with Cornell. Under the doctrine, "an employer may be
 
liable for the negligent acts of its employees that occur within
 
the scope of their employment." Id. at 438, 879 P.2d at 543.
 
The Restatement (Second) of Agency ยง 228 (1958), cited 
favorably by the Hawaif i Supreme Court, defines scope of 
employment as follows: 
(1) Conduct of a servant is within the scope of
employment if, but only if:
 
(a) it is of the kind he is employed to perform;
 
(b) it occurs substantially within the
authorized time and space limits; [and]
 
(c) it is actuated, at least in part, by a
purpose to serve the master[.]
 
(2) Conduct of a servant is not within the scope of
employment if it is different in kind from that authorized,
far beyond the authorized time or space limits, or too
little actuated by a purpose to serve the master.
 
Henderson v. Professional Coatings Corp., 72 Haw. 387, 392, 819
 
P.2d 84, 88 (1991).
 
As clarified by the supreme court, the applicable test 
for determining the scope of employment is "whether the 
employee's conduct was related to the employment enterprise or if 
the enterprise derived any benefit from the activity." 
Wong-Leong, 76 Hawaif i at 441, 879 P.2d at 546. Two key factors 
to consider are: "[(]1) whether the enterprise of the employer would have benefitted by the context of the act of the employee 
but for the unfortunate injury[] and [(]2) whether the employer's 
risks are incident to the enterprise." Id. at 441, 879 P.2d at 
546 (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citations omitted). 
The policy justification for the doctrine of respondeat superior 
is that the employer is better situated to spread the risk of 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
loss through insurance and carry the cost as part of its costs of
 
doing business. Kang v. Charles Pankow Associates, 5 Haw. App.
 
1, 10, 675 P.2d 803, 809 (1984).
 
[H]owever, the liability imposed upon the employer is not
open-ended and unlimited. The employer's liability is
limited by the test of whether the employer's risks are
incident to his enterprise, or the "enterprise theory" which
finds liability if the "enterprise of the employer would
have benefitted by the context of the act of the employee
but for the unfortunate injury."
 
Id. at 11, 675 P.2d at 809-10 (citation omitted).
 
Brown argues that Marquez was acting to the benefit of
 
Arakaki's enterprise by moving to Maui and driving to work and
 
therefore was acting in the scope of employment when the accident
 
occurred. We disagree. Even taking into consideration the
 
policy justification behind respondeat superior, Arakaki's
 
liability is not so expansive. Id. at 10, 675 P.2d at 809. 
The undisputed relevant facts of this case are as
 
follows: On December 12, 2007, Marquez was driving to his job as
 
a welder at HC&S Puunene Sugar Mill in Kahului, Maui. Shortly
 
after 6:30 a.m., he collided with the motorcycle operated by
 
Cornell. Under the union contract, Marquez worked five days a
 
week from 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Arakaki did not ask Marquez to
 
work overtime, to come in early or stay late, or to use his car
 
to run errands or pick up equipment. All the work Marquez did
 
took place at the job site.
 
The underlying facts in this case show that at the time
 
of the accident, Marquez was not acting within the scope of his
 
employment. His act was not "of the kind he [was] employed to
 
perform," did not occur "substantially within the authorized time
 
and space limits," nor was "actuated, at least in part, by a
 
purpose to serve [Arakaki]." Restatement (Second) of 
Agency ยง 228. His act did not represent a direct benefit to
 
Arakaki nor a risk incident to Arakaki's enterprise. Kang at 9,
 
675 P.2d at 808. Even though Marquez's arrival at work every day
 benefitted Arakaki, how he got to work was of no interest to
 
Arakaki. Marquez, by choice, drove his car to work rather than
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
take transportation Arakaki was mandated to provide. 
Furthermore, as addressed in the next section, the Hawaif i 
Supreme Court has determined that driving to and from work generally does not fall under an employee's scope of employment. 
B. "Going and Coming Rule"
 
Following the majority rule across the nation regarding 
the "going and coming" rule, the Hawaif i Supreme Court has noted 
that "[g]enerally, driving to and from work is not considered to be within the scope of employment, unless the employee's position 
requires him or her to remain on call or the employee is 
reimbursed for his or her travel." Wong-Leong, 76 Hawaif i at 441 
n.9, 879 P.2d at 546 n.9; Smith v. State, Dep't of Labor and Indus. Relations, 80 Hawaif i 150, 154, 907 P.2d 101, 105 (1995). 
In Smith, the supreme court cited to 1 Modern Workers'
 
Compensation, ยง 111.1 (M. Canavan ed. 1993) to clarify the "going
 
and coming" rule:
 
Under the going and coming rule, travel between home and
work is considered a personal activity since the employee
typically performs services which benefit the employer only
after his or her arrival at the place of employment;
therefore, injuries occurring off the work premises during
such travel are generally not compensable.
 
Smith, 80 Hawaif i at 154, 907 P.2d at 105. 
As noted by the supreme court, the "going and coming"
 
rule is subject to an exception if the employer requires the
 
employee to be on call or reimburses the employee for his or her
 
travel. Here, Marquez testified he worked a regular shift, did
 
not work overtime, and was not asked to come in early or work
 
late. Arakaki paid for Marquez's initial flight from Oahu to
 
Maui and ground transportation from the Maui airport. Although
 
Arakaki was required to provide transportation to the job site,
 
Marquez chose to drive his own car. There is no evidence Marquez
 
was reimbursed for mileage or paid for the time it took him to
 
drive to or from work. 
Brown asserts that Oahu was Marquez's primary residence
 
and Hilo, where the Arakaki business office was located, was
 
Arakaki's primary business location. Based on these assertions,
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Brown contends the "going and coming" rule was not applicable 
because Marquez was "sent to a remote job site away from his 
primary residence or away from the employer's primary business 
location." Brown fails to point to any Hawaif i case law that 
provides for an exception to the "going and coming" rule when an employee has moved to another island or when the home office of a 
company is on a different island from the job site where the 
employee works. 
Furthermore, Hawaif i courts have rejected the notion 
that an action by an employee on temporary assignment to another 
island necessarily gives rise to respondeat superior: 
We do not believe that the respondeat superior doctrine is
so pliant that where an employee is hired in one locality
and relocated to another by his employer for an indefinite
period of time, any act of the employee before, during, or
after his working hours is one within the scope of his
employment as long as he works for the employer in the
latter locality.
 
Kang, 5 Haw. App. at 9, 675 P.2d at 809.
 
Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Brown, 
we nevertheless conclude that at the time of the accident, 
Marquez was not acting within the scope of his employment. He 
was employed as a welder fabricator, not a driver; the accident 
occurred before work and off the job site; and driving to work 
was "too little actuated by a purpose to serve the master." See 
Restatement (Second) of Agency ยง 228. Driving to work was not "related to the employment enterprise" and Arakaki did not derive 
any benefit from Marquez's conduct. See Wong-Leong, 76 Hawaif i 
at 441, 879 P.2d at 546. 
We hold there is no genuine issue of material fact and
 
the only reasonable inference and conclusion to draw from the
 facts is that Marquez's action at the time of the accident did
 
not fall within the scope of his employment. Therefore, Arakaki
 
was entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The Final Judgment filed on July 30, 2010 in the
 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, June 15, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Jan K. Apo
(Law Offices of Jan K. Apo)for Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Roy F. HughesCharlene S.P.T. Murata (Hughes & LaFountaine) forArakaki Mechanical, LLCDefendant/Cross-ClaimDefendant/Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8
 