NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
 NO. 30495
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
SARA H. MUNSON, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0328(1))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Sara H. Munson (Munson) was
 
convicted of first-degree burglary, in violation of Hawaii
 
1
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-810(1)(c) (1993)  (Count 1), and
third-degree assault, in violation of HRS § 707-712(1)(a) (1993)2
 
(Count 2), in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit
 
1
 HRS § 708-810(1)(c) provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of burglary in the first
degree if the person intentionally enters or remains unlawfully in
a building, with intent to commit therein a crime against a person
or against property rights, and:
 
. . .
 
(c)	 The person recklessly disregards a risk that the
building is the dwelling of another, and the building
is such a dwelling. 
2
 HRS § 707-712(1)(a) provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the third
degree if the person:
 
(a)	 Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causes bodily
injury to another person[.] 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court).3 On appeal, Munson contends that: (1) the Circuit Court
 
plainly erred in allowing testimony that was elicited by defense
 
counsel of Munson's alleged prior bad act; (2) the Circuit Court
 plainly erred in failing sua sponte to give a limiting
 instruction regarding that testimony; and (3) there was
 insufficient evidence to support the jury's guilty verdicts on
 the charges of first-degree burglary and third-degree assault. 
As explained below, we affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The complaining witness, Ashley Griffin (Griffin),
 
lived with her fiancé, Shane Kapu (Kapu), and her two infant
 children in an apartment unit in Lahaina. Griffin had known
 Munson for ten years and had considered her a good friend until
 January 2009.
 
On direct examination, Griffin testified, however, that
 
in January 2009, there was an argument at her house that involved
 Munson, Griffin, and Kapu. After this argument, Griffin
 intentionally had no contact with Munson until March 21, 2009,
 the date of the charged incident.
 
On cross-examination, defense counsel elicited details
 
concerning the January 2009 argument, including that Griffin's
 mother had also been involved. Defense counsel elicited the
 following information from Griffin:
 
Q. Now, this argument in January, we don't have
time to hear all the details, but can I ask for a couple,
please?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Did the argument end up involving [Kapu]?
 
A. Absolutely.
 
Q. Okay. Who did [Kapu] get mad at, and who was
mad at [Kapu], if anyone?
 
3
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. [Kapu] asked [Munson] to leave his home with her
children, and she didn't. She got in his face and called
him out. 
. . . .
 
Q. As a result of the argument, did it get loud?
 
A. Ah, yeah, very.
 
Q. Okay. And was it loud enough that someone
actually, maybe a neighbor, called the cops?
 
A. They all. All of 'em.
 
Q. All right. Was there anything physical or was
it just words?
 
A. There was physical activity.
 
Q. What was physical?
 
A. [Munson] attacked my mother.
 
Q. Really?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Was that ever documented?
 
A. Idiotically my mother did not make a report.
 
(Emphasis added.) Defense counsel did not object to Griffin's
 
testimony that Munson had attacked Griffin's mother during the
 January 2009 argument, did not move to strike that testimony, and
 did not request a limiting instruction.
 
During her testimony, Griffin described what happened
 
on March 21, 2009, in the early morning hours. Griffin testified
 that she was sleeping in her bed with her two infant children. 
Kapu, who worked as security for the apartment complex where they
 lived, was working the 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. "graveyard
 shift[]" and was not at home. An oven light in the kitchen was
 on, but other lights in the kitchen, livingroom, and Griffin's
 bedroom were turned off.
 
A little past 2:00 a.m., Griffin awoke in her bed to
 
find Munson standing in the bedroom doorway. Munson was calling
 Griffin's name in a "[v]ery, very loud" tone of voice. Griffin
 had not allowed or invited Munson to enter her residence; Griffin 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not hear Munson knock on the door or hear Munson ask for
 
permission to enter the residence.
 
Griffin was afraid because she could tell by Munson's
 
actions that Munson "wanted to be aggressive and probably fight."
 Griffin asked Munson to leave or they were "going to get into
 it." Munson replied, "let's get into it," and a verbal argument
 ensued. Griffin picked up her four-month-old daughter and placed
 her daughter in front of her chest because she was unclothed, she
 was scared, and she felt that Munson would not attack her while
 she was holding her baby. While holding her baby, Griffin
 attempted to walk around Munson to get to a phone to call the
 police. Munson "jolted and attacked" Griffin by choking Griffin. 
Griffin had not attempted to make contact with Munson or done
 anything aggressive toward Munson before Munson attacked and
 began choking Griffin. While still holding her baby, Griffin
 struggled with Munson to escape from the choke hold and was
 thrust against the refrigerator in the kitchen. Griffin kicked
 Munson three times before Munson released Griffin. After
 releasing Griffin, Munson left the apartment and got into the
 passenger side of her car, which was positioned in the fastest
 way to exit the parking lot, and the car drove away.
 
Griffin could tell that Munson had been drinking "[b]y
 
her slurred speech and [her] staggering in [Griffin's] doorway." 
As the result of Munson' attack, Griffin's throat was sore, she
 sustained three big scratches on the left side of her neck and
 one scratch on the right, and she was bleeding. Griffin reported
 the incident and her injuries to the police.
 
After counsel for both parties finished questioning
 
Griffin, the Circuit Court considered questions submitted by the
 jury. One of the questions was: "[H]ave you seen [Munson] angry
 before to strike out at someone to confrontation?" Defense
 counsel objected to this question and the Circuit Court refused
 to ask it, stating:
 
Well, I think this may raise 404(b) issues. Counsel,
I think, opened the door actually to some comment from
[Griffin] having to do with, I believe she stated [Munson]
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attacking her mother, but it was in response to some type of
question that was asked by the defendant. But I don't think
 we should revisit that and open up the door to either that
particular issue again, or others that she may know about.
So that [question] would have to be denied.
 
II.
 
Munson testified in her own defense at trial. Munson
 
testified that she and Griffin had been friends until the January
 
2009 incident. During that incident, Munson intervened in an
 argument between Kapu and Griffin, which led to Munson arguing
 with Kapu. The argument between Munson and Kapu caused neighbors
 to call the police.
 
In the early morning on March 21, 2009, Munson asked a
 
friend to drive her to Griffin's residence. Munson had been
 drinking and felt a "little bit buzzed." Munson called Griffin's
 telephone, but there was no answer.
 
According to Munson, upon arriving at Griffin's
 
residence, she knocked on the door, called Griffin's name, and
 thought she heard Griffin say "yeah." Munson then opened the
 door and walked into the apartment. She went into the bedroom
 and began talking to Griffin. However, when Munson began
 criticizing Kapu, Griffin became upset. Munson testified that
 Griffin got out of bed, holding her infant daughter, and grabbed
 Munson by the throat. Munson defended herself by pushing Griffin
 away and left the apartment.
 
III.
 
The jury found Munson guilty as charged of first-degree
 
burglary (Count 1) and third-degree assault (Count 2). The
 Circuit Court sentenced Munson to ten years of imprisonment on
 Count 1, with a mandatory minimum term of thirty months as a
 repeat offender, and a concurrent term of one year of
 imprisonment on Count 2. The Circuit Court filed its Judgment of
 Conviction and Sentence on April 7, 2010, and this appeal
 followed. 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
In cross-examining Griffin, defense counsel elicited
 
testimony that during the January 2009 argument, Munson had
 
physically attacked Griffin's mother. Griffin's testimony was
 directly responsive to defense counsel's questions. Defense
 counsel did not object to Griffin's testimony or move to strike
 it. Nevertheless, on appeal, Munson argues that the Circuit
 Court erred in allowing this testimony. Munson contends that the 
testimony was irrelevant and unduly prejudicial and that the
 Circuit Court should have ordered it stricken as inadmissible
 "bad act" evidence pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)
 Rule 404(b) (Supp. 2011).
4 We disagree. 
Although Munson frames the issue as an error by the
 
Circuit Court in "allowing" Griffin's testimony, it was Munson,
 through the questioning of her counsel, that introduced the
 challenged testimony. The Circuit Court cannot be faulted for
 permitting defense counsel to ask the questions that elicited
 Griffin's testimony on cross-examination. As noted, defense
 counsel did not object to Griffin's answers or move to strike the
 testimony. We conclude that Munson waived any objection to the
 Circuit Court's failure to strike Griffin's testimony. See State
 
v. Hoglund, 71 Haw. 147, 150–51, 785 P.2d 1311, 1313 (1990) (refusing to consider, for the first time on appeal, an issue that the defendant failed to properly raise at trial); State v. 
Crisostomo, 94 Hawai' i 282, 290, 12 P.3d 873, 881 (2000) 
(concluding that the defendant waived hearsay argument by failing to object at trial); State v. Ildefonso, 72 Haw. 573, 584, 827 
4
 HRE Rule 404(b) provides in relevant part:
 
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence of other
 
crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character
of a person in order to show action in conformity therewith. It
 may, however, be admissible where such evidence is probative of
another fact that is of consequence to the determination of the
action, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation,
plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake
or accident. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
P.2d 648, 655 (1992) ("Our review of the record reveals that [the
 
defendant] did not raise this argument at trial, and thus it is
 deemed to have been waived.").
 
Assuming, arguendo, that Munson has not waived her
 
challenge to Griffin's testimony, we reject Munson's claim that
 the testimony was inadmissible under HRE Rule 404(b). Griffin's
 testimony was relevant to a critical issue in the case -- whether
 Munson believed she had permission to enter Griffin's residence 
and thus had the requisite criminal intent to enter or remain
 unlawfully in Griffin's residence that was necessary to commit
 burglary. Griffin and Munson had been good friends prior to the
 January 2009 argument. Griffin's testimony that during the
 January 2009 argument, Munson not only argued with Griffin's
 fiancé, but attacked Griffin's mother, served to refute Munson's
 suggestion that she believed she had implied permission to enter
 Griffin's residence on March 21, 2009, based on their prior
 friendship. 
Griffin's testimony that Munson had attacked her mother 
during the January 2009 argument was directly relevant to explaining the nature of the relationship between Griffin and Munson on the date of the charged burglary. In addition, Griffin's testimony was probative of Munson's intent in entering Griffin's residence, a pivotal, disputed issue in the case. We conclude that Griffin's testimony was admissible. See HRE Rule 
404(b); State v. Clark, 83 Hawai' i 289, 300–03, 926 P.2d 194, 
205–08 (1996) (concluding that prior incidents of domestic violence were admissible under HRE Rule 404(b) to show the context of the relationship between the defendant and the alleged victim); State v. Mars, 116 Hawai' i 125, 141, 170 P.3d 861, 877 
(App. 2007) (concluding that defendant's prior conduct was admissible under HRE Rule 404(b) to show the defendant's intent); State v. Steger, 114 Hawai' i 162, 171-73, 158 P.3d 280, 289-91 
(App. 2006) (same). 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
Besides failing to object to or move to strike 
Griffin's testimony that Munson had attacked Griffin's mother, 
Munson also did not request a limiting instruction regarding this testimony. We reject Munson's contention that the Circuit Court committed plain error in failing sua sponte to give a limiting instruction regarding Griffin's testimony. Although Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) concedes error on this point, 
the Hawai' i Supreme Court has held that "appellate courts have an 
independent duty 'first to ascertain that the confession of error is supported by the record and well-founded in law and second to determine that such error is properly preserved and prejudicial.'" State v. Veikoso, 102 Hawai' i 219, 221-22, 74 
P.3d 575, 577-78 (2003) (citation omitted). In other words, the State's concession of error "is not binding upon an appellate court[.]" State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai' i 333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 
(2000) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). As explained below, we conclude that the State's concession of error was not well taken.
5 
In State v. Cabagbag, 127 Hawai' i 302, 315, 277 P.3d 
1027, 1040 (2012), the Hawai' i Supreme Court recognized the 
prerogative of criminal defendants to make strategic trial decisions in holding that a trial court is not required to give a jury instruction on eyewitness identification "unless the defendant requests it." (Emphasis added.) In Cabagbag, the supreme court addressed the question of whether "a cautionary jury instruction regarding eyewitness identification should be required in any case in which eyewitness identification is a critical or central issue." Id. at 309, 277 P.3d at 1034 
(internal quotation marks omitted). Prior precedents of the supreme court had held that the giving of such an instruction was 
5
 We note that the State's answering brief was filed before the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court's decision in State v. Cabagbag, 127 Hawai' i 302, 277 P.3d 1027
(2012), which is discussed infra. 
8
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
within the discretion of the trial court. Id. In Cabagbag, the
 
supreme court overruled its prior precedents and held that "when
 
eyewitness identification is central to the case, circuit courts
 must give a specific jury instruction upon the request of the
 defendant to focus the jury's attention on the trustworthiness of
 the identification." Id. at 313-14, 277 P.3d at 1038-39.
6
 
The dissenting opinion in Cabagbag would have imposed
 
an obligation on the trial court to sua sponte give an eyewitness
 identification instruction, even if not requested by the
 defendant. Id. at 314 n.19, 315-16, 319-20, 277 P.3d at 1039
 
n.19, 1040-41, 1044-45. The Cabagbag majority refused to impose
 this obligation. The majority stated: "Our holding does not
 require a trial court to give the instruction unless the
 defendant requests it. This recognizes that a defendant may
 legitimately conclude, as a matter of trial strategy, that the
 instruction is not necessary or appropriate in a given case." 
Id. at 315, 277 P.3d at 1040 (footnote omitted) (emphasis added). 
The majority explained that permitting a defendant to make
 strategic decisions furthered the truth-seeking function, and it
 therefore "respectfully disagree[d] with the dissent's position
 that the instruction must be given whether requested or not." 
Id. The majority stated that "where the circumstances of the
 
identification lend weight to its reliability, the defendant may
 wish to focus the jury's attention on other issues in the case." 
Id. at 316, 277 P.3d at 1041.
 
We conclude that the supreme court's reasoning in
 
Cabagbag is instructive in deciding this case. Just as a
 defendant may legitimately decide, as a matter of trial strategy,
 to forgo requesting an instruction on eyewitness identification, 
6 The supreme court gave this new rule prospective application.
Cabagbag, 127 Hawai' i at 317, 277 P.3d at 1042. The court also held that a 
circuit court, in the exercise of its discretion, may give a specific
eyewitness instruction if it believes the instruction is otherwise warranted.
Id. at 314, 277 P.3d at 1039. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a defendant may legitimately decide, as a matter of trial
 
strategy, to forgo requesting a limiting instruction on HRE Rule
 404(b) evidence. Courts have recognized that a defendant's
 decision to forgo requesting a limiting instruction for "bad act"
 evidence encompassed by HRE Rule 404(b) may be a legitimate
 tactical decision to avoid drawing attention to or reemphasizing
 the evidence. E.g., State v. Yarbrough, 210 P.3d 1029, 1041
 
(Wash. Ct. App. 2009) (concluding that failure to request a
 limiting instruction on "bad act" evidence "may be a legitimate
 tactical decision not to reemphasize damaging evidence");
 Commonwealth v. Delp, 672 N.E. 2d 114, 118 (Mass. App. Ct. 1996)
 ("Counsel's decision not to request a limiting instruction [on
 "bad act" evidence] may have been a tactical move not to
 highlight the evidence."); United States v. Barnes, 586 F.2d
 1052, 1059 (5th Cir. 1978) (concluding that defense counsel "may
 refrain from requesting a[] [limiting] instruction in order not
 to emphasize potentially damaging evidence," in support of its
 holding that the trial court did not commit plain error in
 failing sua sponte to give a limiting instruction on "bad act"
 evidence); State v. Schaim, 600 N.E. 2d 661, 670 n.9 (Ohio 1992)
 (declining to impose a duty on the trial court to give a limiting
 instruction on "other act" evidence when the instruction is not
 requested because "the decision not to request a limiting
 instruction is sometimes a tactical one").
 
In this case, Griffin's reference to Munson attacking
 
Griffin's mother was brief and devoid of details. As a matter of
 legitimate trial strategy, defense counsel may have decided not
 to request a limiting instruction to downplay and avoid
 highlighting the evidence. Consistent with the recognition of
 the defendant's prerogative to make strategic choices, HRE Rule
 105 (1993) only requires a court to give a limiting instruction
 "upon request." We conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 commit plain error in failing sua sponte to give a limiting
 instruction regarding Griffin's testimony.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
Munson argues that there was insufficient evidence to
 
support her convictions for first-degree burglary and third-
degree assault. With respect to her first-degree burglary
 conviction, Munson contends that there was insufficient evidence
 to show that: (1) she intentionally entered or remained
 unlawfully in Griffin's residence; and (2) she had the intent to
 commit therein a crime against a person or property. With
 respect to her third-degree assault conviction, Munson contends
 that there was insufficient evidence to negate her claim of self-
defense. We conclude that Munson's arguments are without merit.
 
In evaluating the sufficiency of the evidence, we view
 
the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution.
 State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981).
 "The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a
 reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to
 support the conclusion of the trier of fact." State v. Richie,
 
88 Hawai'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) (block quote format
 and citation omitted). We give "full play to the right of the
 fact finder to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and
 draw justifiable inferences of fact." State v. Yabusaki, 58 Haw.
 
404, 411, 570 P.2d 844, 848 (1977) (block quote format and
 citation omitted).
 
Griffin and Munson gave conflicting testimony on what 
happened during the incident in question. However, in reviewing a sufficiency of the evidence claim, we "will not attempt to reconcile conflicting evidence, or interfere with a jury decision based on the credibility of witnesses or the weight of the evidence." State v. Yamada, 116 Hawai' i 422, 442, 173 P.3d 569, 
589 (App. 2007) (block quote format and citation omitted). "It is the province of the jury, not the appellate courts, to determine the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence." State v. Smith, 106 Hawai' i 365, 372, 105 P.3d 242, 
249 (App. 2004). 
When viewed in the light most favorable to the State,
 
the evidence showed that in January 2009, there was a heated
 
argument involving Griffin, her fiancé Kapu, and Munson, which
 resulted in the police being called. During this argument,
 Munson argued with Kapu and attacked Griffin's mother, and Kapu
 told Munson to leave his and Griffin's residence. After this
 argument, Griffin intentionally had no contact with Munson. At
 about 2:00 a.m. on March 21, 2009, while Griffin was sleeping and
 the lights were off, except for an oven light in the kitchen,
 Munson entered Griffin's apartment without being invited or
 receiving any permission to enter. Munson was drunk. Munson
 awakened Griffin by very loudly calling her name. Griffin was
 afraid because Munson appeared aggressive as if she wanted to
 fight. Griffin asked Munson to leave or they were "going to get
 into it," but Munson refused to leave. While carrying her baby,
 Griffin attempted to walk past Munson to call the police. 
Without provocation, Munson suddenly attacked Griffin by grabbing
 Griffin's neck and choking her. After Griffin was able to
 struggle free, Munson left the apartment and departed the scene
 in a car that had been positioned to quickly exit the parking
 lot. As the result of Munson's attack, Griffin suffered pain and
 sustained injuries to her neck. 
We conclude that there was substantial evidence to show
 
that Munson intentionally entered or remained unlawfully in
 Griffin's residence and that Munson did so with the intent to
 commit therein a crime against a person, namely, assault or
 harassment against Griffin. We also conclude that there was
 substantial evidence, based on Griffin's version of events, to
 negate Munson's claim of self-defense. Accordingly, there was
 sufficient evidence to support Munson's convictions.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment of Conviction 
and Sentence. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 15, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Jennifer D.K. Ng
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Kristin Coccaro 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee 
13
 