NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30061
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI rI 
STATE OF HAWAI rI, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SUSAN SOLOMON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1P108-13944)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
1
Defendant-Appellant Susan Solomon (Solomon)  appeals
from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order (Judgment),
 
filed on June 5, 2009, in the District Court of the First
 
2
Circuit, Honolulu Division, (district court)  convicting her of
Violation of Restraining Order or Injunction Against Harassment,
 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 604-10.5(h)
 
(Supp. 2010).3 The district court sentenced Solomon to one year
 
of probation with special terms and conditions, including five
 days of incarceration; 150 hours of community service; payment of
 
1
 Solomon's name is spelled alternatively "Solomon" and "Soloman" in
the record on appeal. In this Summary Disposition Order, we spell it
"Solomon" for the sake of consistency. 
2
 The Honorable Leslie Hayashi presided.
 
3
 HRS ยง 604-10.5(h) provides in relevant part that "[a] knowing or
intentional violation of a restraining order of injunction issued pursuant to
this section is a misdemeanor." 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
restitution and various fines and fees; and an anger management
 
assessment and/or mental health assessment and treatment, if
 
deemed necessary. Solomon's sentence has been stayed pending
 
this appeal.
 
On appeal, Solomon argues that the district court
 
erroneously convicted her after the court had abused its
 
discretion and violated her right to confrontation under the
 
Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article I,
 
4
Section 14 of the Hawai ri Constitution  by improperly limiting
the scope of her cross-examination of complainant Michelle White 
(White) at trial. Solomon asks that we "reverse her conviction 
and remand this case for a new trial." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Solomon's points of error as follows:
 
(1) The district court did not abuse its discretion by 
precluding Solomon's counsel from asking White on cross-
examination whether White told Alvin Cantere about the video 
footage she took of the incident and whether she showed it to 
him. Counsel's question was beyond the scope of direct 
examination and was testimonial in nature, and limitation of this 
line of questioning was within the district court's discretion. 
See Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 611 and Yamashiro v. 
Costa, 26 Haw. 54, 60-61 (Haw. Terr. 1921); see also, State v. 
Kassebeer, 118 Hawai ri 493, 514, 193 P.3d 409, 430 (2008) 
(question presupposing a prior incident without foundation for that incident was properly prevented by the court and did not 
4
 The Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides in
relevant part that "[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy
the right . . . to be confronted with the witnesses against him[.]" Article 1, Section 14 of the Hawair i Constitution provides in relevant part that "[i]n
all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right . . . to beconfronted with the witnesses against the accused." 
2
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
violate defendant's confrontation rights) and State v. Rulona, 71 
Haw. 127, 131-32, 785 P.2d 615, 617-18 (1990) (relying on 
predecessor of Hawai ri Rules of Professional Conduct Rule 3.4(g) 
prohibiting a lawyer from asserting personal knowledge of facts in issue), overruled on other grounds by State v. Mueller, 102 
Hawai
ri 391, 76 P.3d 943 (2003). 
(2) The district court abused its discretion by
 
precluding Solomon's counsel from asking White on cross-
examination if White had assumed Solomon and her husband were
 
told to move their parking space. The question was not outside
 
the permissible scope of cross-examination because White
 
testified on direct examination that "the landlord" made Solomon
 
and her husband move spaces. HRE Rule 611. However, given that
 
the matter did not directly relate to Solomon's guilt, that the
 
reason the Solomons were asked to move their space, if that were
 
true, was never testified to by White, and that White had already
 
testified that she did not know whether the Solomons had asked to
 
move their parking space, the error was harmless.5
 
(3) Solomon has waived her argument that the district 
court abused its discretion and violated her right to 
confrontation by prohibiting her from asking White about 
statements White allegedly made to Solomon, which were witnessed 
by Roberta Olivera (Olivera), because Solomon's counsel withdrew 
the question. Hawai ri Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4) 
(requiring appellant to state where in the record he or she objected to the alleged error). In any event, because White did 
not testify on direct regarding a conversation in Olivera's 
presence, Solomon's counsel's question was outside the 
5
 We also note that Solomon herself had the opportunity to testify on
this matter but did not.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
permissible scope of cross-examination under HRE Rule 611, and
 
the district court did not abuse its discretion by precluding
 
Solomon's counsel from asking it. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment and/or Order filed on June 5, 2009 in the District Court
 of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
ri, March 31, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Craig W. Jerome,

Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
Associate Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge

 
4
 