NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30729
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF S.F.
 
and IN THE INTEREST OF K.F.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S Nos. 05-1-0055 and 05-1-0056)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Appellant-Mother (Mother) appeals from the Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order (FOF/COL/Order), filed on
 
August 25, 2010, in the Family Court of the Second Circuit
 
1
(Family Court).  In the FOF/COL/Order, the Family Court found,
 
inter alia
, that Mother was not and would not become within a
 
reasonable period of time willing and able to provide her
 
children, S.F. and K.F. (Children), with a safe family home, even
 
with the assistance of a service plan, and the Department of
 
Human Service's (DHS's) Proposed Permanent Plan dated January 4,
 
2010 was in Children's best interests. The court awarded DHS
 
permanent custody of Children.
 
On appeal, Mother argues that the Family Court wrongly
 
concluded in Conclusions of Law (
COL) 8 that she was not
 
presently willing and able to provide Children with a safe family
 
1
 The Honorable Geronimo Valdriz, Jr. issued the FOF/COL/Order. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
home, even with the assistance of a service plan, for the
 
following reasons:
 
(1) DHS did not make reasonable efforts to reunite
 
Children with Mother, where DHS did not provide Mother with an
 
adequate written service plan and thereafter, did not issue her a
 
new or updated service plan, which shifted to her the burden of
 
locating and procuring services. Related to this argument is her
 
contention that Findings of Fact (FOFs) 62, 77-78, and 79 are
 
clearly erroneous. 
(2) DHS did not make reasonable efforts to reunite
 
Children with Mother because DHS did not provide Mother with
 
reasonable visitation. Related to this argument is her
 
contention that FOFs 47 and 79 are clearly erroneous.
 
Mother asks that we vacate the FOF/COL/Order and remand
 
this case for further proceedings.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Mother's points of error as follows:
 
(1) In conjunction with her first point of error,
 
Mother argues that the 4/15/08 service plan, which had the
 
ultimate goal of reunifying Child with Mother in a safe home
 
without DHS services, does not provide clear objectives and
 
goals, only vague service recommendations and target dates, in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587-26 (Supp. 2006). 
In addition, Mother maintains that "[t]here is no evidence in the
 
record to demonstrate that any ICPC [Interstate Compact on the
 
Placement of Children] contact ever was provided or that Mother
 
received any help or assistance from the Oklahoma Department of
 
Child Service or the Maui DHS in procuring the services required
 
to meet the Target goals listed in the [plan]." We disagree.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The 4/15/08 plan provides, inter alia:
 
II. TASKS FOR PARENTS, (PRIORITIZED ACCORDING TO SAFETY
NEEDS)
 
The following tasks are based on the safety issues, as
outlined in the [report] dated Jun 30, 2005 and
[M]other's stipulation to harm at the court hearing on
August 30, 2005.
 
A. PARENT: [Mother]
 
1. [Mother] will participate in a substance
abuse program as arranged by her probation officer in
connection with her felony conviction and the
requirements of her sentencing. She will be required
to participate in random urinalysis checks through her
program and to build her sober support system.
 
a. Focus of task: To support abstinence
 
b. Name and address of provider: To be
 
determined
 
c. Mother will follow all requirement
[sic] made by her probation officer and will
sign all consents to allow the DHS and GAL to
access those records and contact and discuss her
 case with her provider.
 
Expected Changes Mother will have negative UA
tests, and create a safe sober support system, through
her counseling and sober contacts.
 
2. [Mother] will actively participate in
individual parent services.
 
a. Focus of task: To increase
 
[M]other's understanding of the
developmental needs of her children and
the immense harm she has caused them
 through her irresponsible and dangerous
and violent behaviors towards them;
 
b. Name and address of provider:
To be determined by her probation officer
in Oklahoma or through our impending ICPC
contact with the Oklahoma Department of
Child Services; and
 
c. Time frame: Mother will
 
participate until completion of the
parenting program as recommended by the
parent educator and the DHS social worker.
 
Expected changes: Mother will have an enhanced
 
understanding of the needs of the children in terms of
their physical, developmental, and emotional needs.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. [Mother] will participate in individual
psychotherapy with both a psychiatrist for medical
management and face to face treatment, and either a
psychologist or qualified therapist to address her Bi-
Polar Disorder coupled with her Personality Disorder.
This may be done through a group or individual
therapy. It will need to be highly structured and
[Mother] will be required to sign any releases
necessary so that DHS, the GAL and the therapist
treating her children can communicate freely with her
therapists and receive reports. DHS will not accept
any diagnosis or treatment from Dr. Dan Asimus as he
has not seen [Mother] for over a year and relies on
only her reports via phone to devise his treatment.
She will follow all qualified treatment
recommendations. 
a. Focus of task: To assist
 
[Mother] in addressing her mental health
issues, such as her inability to control
her temper, her paranoid thought processes
and her bi-polar disorder with personality
disorder;
 
b. Name and address of provider:
To be determined by her Federal Probation
Officer in Oklahoma and if needed by our
ICPC contacts in Oklahoma; and
 
c. Time frame: She will continue
 
until clinically discharged with DHS
approval.
 
Expected changes: Mother will develop coping
skills that she can utilize to stabilize her life
 
during times that are stressful. This stability will
benefit the children by preventing disruption to their
daily activities.
 
4. [Mother] will fully comply with all other
aspects of her probation.
 
5. Cooperate with the DHS Social Worker by:
 
a. Keeping appointments with worker
and providers;
 
b. Attending other services as
recommended;
 
c. Informing of any changes in the
home;
 
d. Informing of any problems in
following the service plan; and
 
e. Keeping appointments with
probation officers and following probation
requirements.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Formatting altered.) As Mother was in Oklahoma, in conjunction
 
with her sentence for a conviction of a charge of interference
 
with a flight attendant (Interference) (the incident having
 
occurred after Mother fled the Hawai' i court's jurisdiction with 
Children, while subject to family supervision), the 4/15/08 plan
 
relied in part, and appropriately, on services provided to Mother
 
in Oklahoma. A 4/8/08 report provides, inter alia:
 
At this time [Mother] is in Oklahoma. She has been
 
sentenced on her felony plea of [Interference]. She is
 
required to participate in an array of services including
psychological counseling, anger management and psychiatric
treatment with medical management from the treating
psychiatrist. This worker was able to speak with her
program case manager and Bi-polar Group leader Melissa
Jordan last Friday morning. This worker found that [Mother]
had attended approximately two of the 14 to 15 bi-polar
group sessions that were available to her since she engaged
the program at the Mental Health and Substance Abuse Center
of Southern Oklahoma. Melissa also shared that she believed
 her attendance at the anger management program was the same.
Additionally [Mother] had recently been dismissed by her
psychiatrist for failing to take her prescribed medication
as prescribed by her doctor, and for failing to meet with
this doctor in person. She has been accessing the services
at the Southern Oklahoma Center as an indigent but at the
same time has been paying a psychiatrist who practices here
on Maui and in Beverley [sic] Hills, for sessions and to
also prescribe medication. It should be noted that this
 psychiatrist, Dr. Dan Asimus, has not seen [Mother] in over
 a year.
 
This worker subsequently spoke with Vince Windham, the
federal probation officer assigned to [Mother]. Mr. Windham
 himself had also just recently become aware of the same
information as this worker. He was quite unsatisfied by
[Mother's] level of engagement. He shared that he was going
to terminate her association with her present provider and
force her to participate in the government's purchase of
service providers in Oklahoma City, where he said he would
know within an hour should she not make an assigned session.
 
This worker has filed the information received from
 
the Southern Oklahoma program, including the most recent
psychiatrist's notes. In conversing with Ms. Jordan she
agreed with this worker that [Mother] has not engaged in
treatment in any meaningful way and has most assuredly not
stabilized on medication nor been under the direct care of a
 psychiatrist through their program. She agreed that the
children's welfare was most important and that [Mother]
needed to make the proper effort and progress before contact
of any kind should be afforded her with the children. She
 said that [Mother] believes the services she is required to
do are a punishment to her and not there to help her gain
clarity about her life.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This report was written shortly before the Family Court
 
approved the 4/15/08 plan. Based on the information provided in
 
the report and lack of evidence in the record on appeal that
 
Mother expressed any dissatisfaction with the amount or quality
 
of services she was receiving in Oklahoma subsequent to the
 
filing of the report, it appears that Mother continued to receive
 
services such as psychological counseling, anger management, and
 
psychiatric treatment while in Oklahoma. It further appears that
 
any alleged lack of specificity in the 4/15/08 plan is
 
attributable to Mother's absence from the state and participation
 
in services in Oklahoma. Given the foregoing, the 4/15/08 plan
 
does not violate HRS § 587-26.
 
Mother argues that DHS violated HRS §§ 587-40 and
 
587-71(f) by failing to provide her with a new or updated plan
 
after the Family Court ordered the 4/15/08 plan. The court
 
ordered the 4/15/08 plan and continued it up until the court
 
terminated Mother's parental rights.
 
HRS § 587-40(b)(2)(A) (Supp. 2006) provides in relevant
 
part that a DHS report "shall . . . recommend as to whether the
 
court should order . . . a revision to the existing service
 
plan[.]" HRS § 587-71(f) (Supp. 2006) provides in relevant part
 
that "the court shall order in every case that the authorized
 
agency make every reasonable effort, pursuant to section 587-40,
 
to prepare a written service plan, as set forth in section 587­
26." Further, HRS § 587-72(b)(5) (Supp. 2006) provides that upon
 
each review hearing, the family court shall "[o]rder revisions to
 
the existing service plan, . . . as the court, upon a hearing
 
that the court deems to be appropriate, determines to be in the
 
best interests of the child[.]" 
Mother claims that, at a May 5, 2009 review hearing,
 
her counsel objected to DHS's failure to provide her with a plan
 
after April 15, 2008. At the hearing, however, the court asked
 
Mother's attorney if he objected to a plan being proposed for the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
father of Children, and Mother's counsel responded: "There is no
 
service plan for my client, so I haven't -- I don't think I have
 
even seen [the father's]." Counsel's statement does not amount
 
to an objection. 
In "Mother's Objections to [Report] Dated July 7, 2009"
 
filed August 18, 2009, Mother disputed various items stated in
 
the July 7, 2009 report, asked that Children be returned to her
 
care or the care of their father or another relative, and
 
challenged the adequacy of the telephonic visitation between
 
Mother and the Children. In closing, Mother requested "that this
 
court consider returning Children to her care in Oklahoma with an
 
appropriate Family Service Plan and with a request that the State
 
of Oklahoma provide courtesy supervision." This request,
 
however, does not amount to an assertion that the 4/15/08 plan
 
was inadequate or should be replaced or updated. 
Based on our review of the record on appeal, Mother's
 
counsel did not raise the issue of the absence of a new or
 
updated plan until the permanent plan hearing on July 2, 2010. 
At the hearing, on cross-examination, Mother's case manager
 
testified that DHS had not issued Mother a plan since April 15,
 
2008 because DHS had "been in an extended holding pattern in
 
regard to order to show cause hearings and permanent plan
 
hearings for almost a year now[.]" He added that "at some point
 
in this case we pretty much abandoned the goal of reunification
 
with the mother and we focused on the father." The case manager
 
testified that had he prepared an updated or new plan for Mother,
 
it would probably have contained therapeutic intervention,
 
appropriate medical management, and anger management; the same
 
services she had been provided through federal probation and
 
failed to complete. The GAL testified that after Mother returned
 
to Maui, DHS did not provide Mother with a plan and "did nothing
 
to assist her"; however, the GAL also opined that Mother did not
 
demonstrate sufficient stability to reunify with the Children at
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that time or in the reasonable future and that it would be in the
 
Children's best interests to be permanently placed with the
 
current foster parents. Mother testified that she contacted DHS
 
for services after she returned to Maui, but did not request
 
anger management or medical monitoring because she was still on
 
federal probation and she worked "with them on that."
 
Mother did not timely make a claim for additional or 
different services. See In re Doe, 100 Hawai' i 335, 344, 60 P.3d 
285, 295 (2002). Given her failure to do so, she cannot now fault DHS or the family court for not providing her with a new or 
updated plan. See also In re Doe, 99 Hawai' i 522, 537, 57 P.3d 
447, 462 (2002) (holding that failure to object amounts to a waiver of claim on appeal). 
We conclude that DHS did not violate HRS §§ 587-26,
 
587-40, or 587-71(f), and FOFs 62, and 77-79 are not clearly
 
erroneous.
 
(2) Mother argues that the evidence was insufficient
 
to support the Family Court's conclusion that DHS had made
 
reasonable efforts to reunite her with Children and she was
 
unwilling and unable to provide a safe family home, even with the
 
assistance of a service plan, where DHS did not provide her with
 
reasonable visitation. Mother contends that "[i]t is
 
unconscionable for the Family Court to find that Mother had
 
weekly supervised visitation with her children when the record so
 
clearly states otherwise." She challenges the following
 
(underscored) parts of FOFs 47 and 79 as clearly erroneous:
 
47. [Children] had weekly supervised phone contact
with [Mother] when [Mother] was in Oklahoma. These contacts
 
became more stressful for the children and they are becoming
more and more resistant to participating.
 
. . . .
 
79. The DHS treated Mother and Father fairly and
serviced the entire family intensely since the start of the
instant DHS and Family Court intervention subject to
Father's voluntary absenteeism at the onset of the case and
Mother's unauthorized flight from the jurisdiction and
subsequent relocation(s). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On November 16, 2007, Mother moved for an order
 
providing for contact between her and Children. In an attached
 
declaration, her counsel stated that her case manager would not
 
allow any contact whatsoever between Mother and Children. He
 
claimed that Mother had not been able to contact Children, but
 
was told she could send them letters and packages, which the case
 
manager would review before they were passed on. 
On December 6, 2007, DHS filed a report, stating that
 
Mother was in Oklahoma awaiting sentencing in her Interference
 
case; requesting that the Family Court defer a plan from DHS
 
until after Mother's sentencing, so DHS could see whether she
 
would be incarcerated and what recommendations the court in that
 
case might make; and recommending continued foster custody until
 
further evaluations could be completed. On January 11 and 29,
 
2008 and March 10, 2008, the court continued foster custody and a
 
5/29/07 service plan. 
DHS filed the 4/8/08 report, recommending that the
 
Family Court approve and order the 4/15/08 plan and prohibit
 
Mother from having any phone or physical contact with Children
 
until she was engaged in treatment and was on medication and
 
stable. The Family Court ordered the 4/15/08 plan. 
At a May 6, 2008 hearing, the case manager stated that
 
he was working to provide Mother with phone visitation with
 
Children that would be supervised by Children's therapist and
 
conducted during therapy sessions. The court ordered telephone
 
visitation, and Mother's counsel stated that he had no objection
 
to the plan. 
The record on appeal shows that there was a time when
 
Mother did not have telephone contact with Children because DHS
 
and the court determined that it was impracticable to order it,
 
but she had regular, weekly telephone contact with Children after
 
May 6, 2008.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother argues that the court should not have found that
 
she was provided with weekly visitation or that DHS treated her
 
fairly and serviced the entire family intensely, where the court
 
erroneously denied her June 30, 2008 motion for transfer or and
 
contact with Children and her July 28, 2008 motion for supervised
 
visits and a finding of no reasonable efforts.
 
On June 30, 2008, Mother filed the motion to transfer
 
Children to Oklahoma, and in an attached declaration her attorney
 
stated the following: Mother was on probation and could not
 
leave the jurisdiction, and she was told she could not transfer
 
to Maui to be with Children, in part because the DHS case manager
 
had opposed it on the basis that she could not see Children until
 
she was stable for nine to twelve months first. The court held a
 
hearing, at which Mother's counsel admitted that in requesting
 
personal contact with Children, Mother was seeking an
 
"extraordinary remedy," but she was just trying to find a way to
 
get her probation transferred to Maui. Mother's counsel stated
 
that reunification was not possible with Mother in Oklahoma and
 
Children on Maui. The court denied the motion. 
On July 28, 2008, Mother filed a motion for supervised 
visitation and for a finding of no reasonable efforts. In an 
attached declaration, Mother's attorney stated that Mother's 
probation officer would consider transferring her to Maui if she 
could have supervised visitation with Children there, but the DHS 
case manager refused to allow it. The court denied the motion, 
and stated if Mother returned to Hawai' i, the court might 
reconsider her motion for supervised visits. 
The Family Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
denying supervised visitation after considering evidence that
 impacted upon the issue, including that Mother had not been
 
complying with services in Oklahoma and had been denied a
 
probation transfer on the basis that the case manager had made
 
nine to twelve months of stability a condition of supervised
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
visitation. See In re Doe, 109 Hawai' i 399, 411, 126 P.3d 1086, 
1098 (2006) (citations omitted) ("[w]here the best interests of a 
child is of paramount importance, consideration of all relevant 
evidence becomes a critical duty of the court in making a 
decision regarding . . . visitation"); see also HRS §§ 587­
63(c)(2), 587-71(m), & 587-72(b)(6) (Supp. 2006). The record 
supports the Family Court's determination that continued 
visitation would not be in Children's best interests. 
Accordingly, we conclude that FOF 47 and 79 are not
 
clearly erroneous. The Family Court did not clearly err in
 
concluding that Mother was unable and unwilling and would not in
 
the reasonably foreseeable future become able or willing to
 
provide Children with a safe family home within a reasonable
 
period of time, even with the assistance of a service plan. COL
 
8 is not wrong.
 
For these reasons, the Family Court's August 25, 2010
 
decision, entitled Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
 
Order, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 31, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Meg Obenauf
(Obenauf Law Group)for Mother-Appellant Chief Judge 
Patrick A. Pascual Mary Anne MagnierDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Petitioner-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11
 