NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30522
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
MINA LEE VOCKROTH, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
GRAHAM BYRON VOCKROTH, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 07-1-3746)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Graham Byron Vockroth (Husband)
 
appeals from the March 9, 2010 Decree Granting Absolute Divorce
 
entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1
 
Husband raises two points of error on appeal.2 He
 
first argues that the Family Court erred when it denied his
 
"request for an automatic stay and continuance of the trial set
 
for the week of January 18, 2010 based on the Servicemembers'
 
1
 The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided.
 
2
 Husband's Opening Brief does not comply with the requirements of
Hawaifi Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b) in that it lacks, inter 
alia, a subject index, consistent references to the record for his statements
of fact and points of error and quotations of the contested findings orconclusions of the trial court. Counsel is warned that future violations of the rules may result in sanctions. HRAP Rule 51. 
We also note that the copies of Husband's Opening Brief provided
to this court appear "cut off" at page 13 and thus incomplete.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Civil Relief Act" (SCRA)3. Second, Husband argues that the
 
Family Court improperly relied upon section 601 of the superceded
 
Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act (SSCRA) that was offered
 
by Plaintiff-Appellee Mina Lee Vockroth's (Wife) counsel as the
 
justification for denying the request for automatic stay.
 
After careful consideration of the issues raised, the
 
arguments presented by the parties, the record, and the
 
applicable authority, we resolve Husband's appeal as follows.
 
The Family Court erred when it denied Husband's request
 
for a stay. The provisions of the SCRA should be liberally
 
construed in favor of the servicemember. See Boone v. Lightner,
 
319 U.S. 561, 575 (1943); see also H. R. Rep. No. 108-81, at 2
 
3 50 App. U.S.C. ยง 522 (2008) provides:
 
(a) Applicability of section
 This section applies to any civil action or proceeding,
including any child custody proceeding, in which the
plaintiff or defendant at the time of filing an application
under this section--
(1) is in military service or is within 90 days after
termination of or release from military service; and 
(2) has received notice of the action or proceeding.
 
(b) Stay of proceedings
 
(1) Authority for stay. At any stage before final
judgment in a civil action or proceeding in which a
servicemember described in subsection (a) is a party, the
court may on its own motion and shall, upon application by
the servicemember, stay the action for a period of not less
than 90 days, if the conditions in paragraph (2) are met. 
(2) Conditions for stay. An application for a stay
under paragraph (1) shall include the following:
 
(A) A letter or other communication setting
forth facts stating the manner in which current
military duty requirements materially affect the
servicemember's ability to appear and stating a
date when the servicemember will be available to
 appear.
 
(B) A letter or other communication from the
servicemember's commanding officer stating that
the servicemember's current military duty
prevents appearance and that military leave is
not authorized for the servicemember at the time
 of the letter.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2003), reprinted in 2004 U.S.C.C.A.N. 2367 ("The purposes of 
this Act are . . . to provide for, strengthen, and expedite the 
national defense through protection extended by this Act to 
servicemembers[.]"). While not a model of clarity, Husband 
provided his own affidavit and letter from his commanding officer 
which, taken together, substantially satisfied the requirements 
of 50 App. U.S.C. ยง 522(b). The commanding officer's letter 
stated that Husband was serving in active military service under 
his command; was an instructor who was conducting "overlapping 
courses" where there was "minimal instructor manning;" was a "key 
member" without whom "the unit will not be able to accomplish its 
mission;" and that he would be able to release Husband during the 
month of March to travel to Hawaif i. Therefore, under the terms 
of the statute, Husband was entitled to a ninety-day stay. 
Husband also argues that the Family Court erred by
 
relying on the "inappropriate use" provision of superceeded SSCRA
 section 601. We note that this provision was reenacted in the
 
SCRA as section 581. 50 App. U.S.C. ยง 581 (2003).
4 However,
 
having said this, it appears that the current provision does not
 apply to this case. The "inappropriate use" contemplated by
 
section 581 is where the court determines the servicemember has
 
transferred or acquired any property or contract interest for the
 
purpose of invoking the protections of the Act. The Family Court
 
has made no such finding.
 
Wife argues that Husband's conduct, in violating the
 
Family Court's orders to suspend his pursuit of a divorce in
 
Alabama and her concerns that Husband would use the time granted
 
in a stay to dispose of marital assets justified the denial of
 
4
 ยง 581. Inappropriate use of Act.
 
If a court determines, in any proceeding to enforce a civil
right, that any interest, property, or contract has been
transferred or acquired with the intent to delay the just
enforcement of such right by taking advantage of this Act
[sections 501 to 515 and 516 to 597b of this Appendix], the
court shall enter such judgment or make such order as might
lawfully be entered or made concerning such transfer or
acquisition.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the stay. However, the SCRA does not include this basis as an
 
"inappropriate use" or otherwise provide an exception to the
 
application of the Act for these reasons. Therefore, we conclude
 
that there was no "bad faith" basis for denying the stay.
 
Therefore, the Family Court of the First Circuit's
 
March 9, 2010 Decree Granting Absolute Divorce is vacated and
 
this case is remanded for a new trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, October 25, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Christopher D. Thomas,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Thomas D. Farrell,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 