NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NOS. 30152 and CAAP-12-0000003
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ROARING LION, LLC, a Montana Limited Liability Company;
DAVID COWAN and NATHALIE COWAN; UMANG P. GUPTA and
RUTH M. GUPTA, as Trustees of the Umang and Ruth Gupta Trust
under Trust Agreement dated January 18, 2000; and PAUOA BEACH 8
LLC, a Hawaii Limited Liability Company, Plaintiffs/Appellees,
v.
 
EXCLUSIVE RESORTS PBL 1, LLC, a Delaware Limited Liability
Company; and EXCLUSIVE RESORTS PBL3, LLC, a Delaware
Limited Liability Company, Defendants/Appellants,
and
 
PAUOA BAY PROPERTIES, LLC, a Delaware Limited Liability Company;
WHITE SAND BEACH LIMITED PARTNERSHIP, a Delaware Limited
Partnership; PAUOA BEACH REALTY LLC, a Hawaii Limited
Liability Company, JOHN DOES 1-50, Defendants/Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 04-1-332)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this consolidated appeal, Defendants/Counterclaim
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Exclusive Resorts PBL1, LLC and Exclusive
 
Resorts PBL3, LLC (collectively, ER Defendants) challenge two
 
orders entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit1
 
(circuit court): (1) the October 1, 2009 "Findings of Fact,
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion To
 
Enforce Settlement Agreement" (First Enforcement Order); and
 
(2) the May 17, 2010 "Order Granting in Part Plaintiffs' Motion
 
for Order to Show Cause Why [ER Defendants] Should Not Be Held in
 
Contempt" (Second Enforcement Order).
 
The circuit court initially granted partial summary
 
judgment in favor of the ER Defendants and against
 
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants-Appellees Roaring Lion, LLC,
 
David Cowan and Nathalie Cowan, Umang P. Gupta and Ruth M. Gupta,
 
as Trustees of the Umang and Ruth Gupta Trust under Trust
 
Agreement dated January 18, 2000, and Pauoa Beach 8 LLC
 
(collectively, Plaintiffs). Thereafter, a settlement conference
 
was held on July 10, 2008 (Settlement Conference) and a purported
 
settlement agreement was placed on the record. The circuit court
 
subsequently determined that the parties had entered into an
 
enforceable settlement agreement and further ordered enforcement
 
of the settlement agreement.
 
On appeal, ER Defendants contend that:
 (1) the circuit court erred in holding that terms
 
placed on the record at the July 10, 2008 Settlement Conference,
 along with post-conference negotiations, constituted an
 
enforceable settlement agreement.
 
(2) the circuit court lacked jurisdiction to enter the
 
Second Enforcement Order because the pending appeal of the First
 
Enforcement Order divested the court of jurisdiction to
 
materially and substantially change the First Enforcement Order.
 
We conclude that the circuit court erred in holding
 
that the parties had entered into an enforceable settlement
 
agreement. There being no enforceable settlement agreement, we
 
need not reach ER Defendants' second issue on appeal regarding
 
the circuit court's jurisdiction to enter the Second Enforcement
 
Order.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
The Plaintiffs and ER Defendants own real property in 
the Pauoa Beach subdivision (Pauoa Beach) of the Mauna Lani 
Resort in the County of Hawai' i. ER Defendants, as subsidiaries 
of Exclusive Resorts, LLC, a world-wide "destination club," provide its members with access to luxury vacation homes, 
including homes in Pauoa Beach. Plaintiffs sought to enjoin ER 
Defendants from operating the destination club in Pauoa Beach. 
Plaintiffs and ER Defendants filed a number of motions and cross-
motions, all of which were eventually disposed of by various 
stipulations and orders, including orders granting partial 
summary judgment in favor of ER Defendants. 
Subsequently, on July 10, 2008, the circuit court
 
facilitated the Settlement Conference with Plaintiffs and ER
 
Defendants, which lasted all day. The parties allegedly reached
 
a preliminary settlement agreement that was read into the record. 
As stated on the record, the agreement contemplated that the
 
parties would work cooperatively to amend the Pauoa Beach
 
covenants, conditions, and restrictions (Pauoa Beach CC&Rs), with
 
the general intent that the changes would prevent any destination
 
club or other similar entity from operating at Pauoa Beach
 
Resort, except that the ER Defendants would be grandfathered. In
 
the course of putting the settlement on the record, counsel for
 
the parties indicated that further work needed to be done to
 
define or finalize certain terms. For instance, the parties
 
still needed to define more specifically "destination club." 
Moreover, and importantly, the parties still needed to define and
 
clarify the scope of the contemplated "grandfather clause,"
 
particularly in regards as to who could utilize the grandfather
 
rights and who could be a "successor" to such rights. The
 
parties anticipated finalizing and submitting to the circuit
 
court within thirty days a fully executed document reflecting the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
settlement terms, and that the Pauoa Beach CC&Rs would be amended
 
within one hundred and twenty days after signing the settlement
 
document. 
During post-settlement conference negotiations, the
 
parties attempted to define the open terms. The parties
 
eventually agreed on all terms except the scope of the
 
grandfather rights. Although the parties drafted proposed
 
amendments to the Pauoa Beach CC&Rs, the parties could not agree
 
on the definition of "successors and assigns." Thereafter, ER
 
Defendants refused to execute a written settlement agreement,
 
asserting that the parties were unable to resolve essential terms
 
left open when the settlement agreement had been put on the
 
record at the Settlement Conference. 
Plaintiffs filed a "Motion to Enforce Settlement
 
Agreement" (Motion to Enforce), which the circuit court heard on
 
July 21, 2009. On October 1, 2009, the circuit court filed its
 
First Enforcement Order, holding that there was a valid and
 
enforceable settlement agreement. 
On October 30, 2009, ER Defendants filed a notice of
 
appeal from the First Enforcement Order. This appeal was
 
docketed as appellate case number 30152.
 
Subsequently, alleging that ER Defendants had failed to
 
abide by the circuit court's First Enforcement Order, Plaintiffs
 
filed a "Motion For Order to Show Cause Why [ER Defendants]
 
Should Not Be Held in Contempt" (Contempt Motion). The circuit
 
court heard the Contempt Motion on February 25, 2010. On May 17,
 
2010, the circuit court entered its Second Enforcement Order. 
On July 1, 2010, ER Defendants moved to stay the First
 
and Second Enforcement Orders. On August 18, 2010, the circuit
 
court granted ER Defendants' motion to stay, pending appeal from
 
both orders. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On December 1, 2010, the circuit court filed a
 
purported final judgment, but when Plaintiffs appealed from the
 
judgment, this court dismissed the appeal for lack of appellate
 
jurisdiction.
 
On December 5, 2011, the circuit court filed an Amended
 
Final Judgment to correct deficiencies in the final judgment. ER
 
Defendants timely appealed from the Amended Final Judgment,
 
including with respect to the Second Enforcement Order. 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
"A trial court's determination regarding the
 
enforceability of a settlement agreement is a conclusion of law
 
reviewable de novo." Assocs. Fin. Servs. Co. of Hawai' i v. Mijo, 
87 Hawai' i 19, 28, 950 P.2d 1219, 1228 (1998). 
Where the evidence in the record shows that all
 
the essential elements of a contract are
 present, a compromise agreement among the
parties in litigation may be approved by the
court and cannot be set aside except on the
 grounds that would justify rescission.
 
Generally, in the absence of bad faith or fraud,
when parties enter into an agreement settling
and adjusting a dispute, neither party is
permitted to repudiate it.
 
However, since very important rights are at
 
stake in most cases, appellate courts must
 
strive to ensure that the purported compromise
 agreement sought to be enforced is truly an
 agreement of the parties.
 
Miller v. Manuel, 9 Haw. App. 56, 63, 828 P.2d 286, 291
(1991) (citations omitted) (emphases added), cert. denied,
72 Haw. 618, 841 P.2d 1075 (1992). "To determine the
 validity of the settlement agreement, the court looks to the
totality of the circumstances surrounding the making of the
agreement." Ziarko v. Soo Line R.R., 161 Ill.2d 267, 204
 
Ill.Dec. 178, 186, 641 N.E.2d 402, 410 (1994). Accord
 
Scurry v. Cook, 206 Ga. 876, 59 S.E.2d 371, 373 (1950).
 
87 Hawai' i at 28-29, 950 P.2d at 1228-29. 
In Mijo, the Hawai' i Supreme Court also stated that 
"[w]hether the parties in fact entered into an agreement is
 
essentially a question of fact." Id. at 28, 950 P.2d at 1228. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In that case, however, the lower court had held an evidentiary
 
hearing in the course of deciding a motion to enforce a
 
settlement agreement.
 
In Miller v. Manuel, 9 Haw. App. 56, 828 P.2d 286
 
(1991), where no evidentiary hearing was held in the lower court
 
to resolve a motion to enforce a purported settlement agreement,
 
this court held that it would review the lower court's order
 
granting the motion to enforce a settlement as if it were a
 
summary judgment ruling. Id. at 63-64, 828 P.2d at 291-92. 
"Thus, the question is whether the evidence presented to the
 trial court indicated that there was no genuine issue of material
 
fact and that as a matter of law the parties had entered into a
 
valid compromise agreement." Id. at 64, 828 P.2d at 292.
 
Because there was no evidentiary hearing held in the
 
circuit court in this case, we will review the circuit court's
 
First Enforcement Order as if it were a summary judgment ruling. 
Moreover, the parties agree on appeal that whether they entered
 
into an enforceable settlement agreement is determined by a
 
review of the statements put on the record at the July 10, 2008
 
Settlement Conference. Thus, the record is undisputed and we
 
must simply determine whether the statements made at the July 10,
 
2008 Settlement Conference, as reflected in the transcripts from
 
the Settlement Conference, establish that the parties agreed to
 
the essential elements of an agreement.
 
III. THE CIRCUIT COURT ERRED IN HOLDING THAT THERE WAS AN
 
ENFORCEABLE SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT
 
ER Defendants contend that the July 10, 2008 Settlement
 
Conference did not result in an enforceable settlement agreement
 
because the parties had not come to a meeting of the minds on
 
several essential terms, particularly as related to the
 
grandfather rights. See Boskoff v. Yano, 217 F.Supp.2d 1077,
 
1088 (D. Haw. 2001) (quoting Honolulu Rapid Transit Co. v.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Paschoal, 51 Haw. 19, 27, 449 P.2d 123, 127 (1968) (to form a
 
binding contract, there must be a meeting of the minds on all
 
essential terms).
 
Neither party disputes that the grandfather rights to
 
the ER Defendants and their affiliates, subsidiaries and
 
successors is an essential term of the settlement agreement. 
Inamed Corp. v. Kuzmak, 275 F.Supp.2d 1100, 1122 (C.D.Cal. 2002)
 
("One measure of whether terms are 'material' is whether they
 
have been the subject of debate and discussion during the course
 
of the parties' negotiations."). However, the parties dispute
 
whether they agreed on the scope of the proposed grandfather
 
rights at the Settlement Conference. ER Defendants argue that
 
because material and essential terms were missing, there was not
 
a final and enforceable agreement. Boteilho v. Boteilho, 58 Haw.
 
40, 42, 564 P.2d 144, 146 (1977) ("To be enforceable[,] a
 contract must be certain and definite as to its essential
 
terms."). "If an essential element of the promise is reserved
 
for future agreement, there is no binding contract until the open
 
point is resolved." Inamed Corp., 275 F.Supp.2d at 1120.
 
In this instance, although the parties indicated that
 
they had a preliminary agreement and that there was "conceptual
 
agreement" or "an agreement in principle" with regard to the
 
grandfather rights, ultimately both sides recognized that they
 
needed to further and more specifically define those rights. 
After the day-long Settlement Conference, the parties endeavored
 
to put their agreement on the record and the transcript from the
 
Settlement Conference reflects the following relevant parts of
 
the settlement discussion:
 
[PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL]: Your Honor, the [p]arties agree
that as a resolution of this matter, for now, the [p]arties
will work cooperatively to pass a change in the CC&Rs
relating to [Pauoa Beach] which are substantially similar to
the following. And before I state the wording, the general
intent is that the CC&R changes would prevent any
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8destination, ah, club or other similar entity from operating
at [Pauoa Beach] in the future. Except that Exclusive
Resorts will be grandfathered.
We anticipate that language substantially similar to
the following to be used. With respect to [CC&Rs] section
15.4.13, it will be entitled time share vacation -- sorry,
destination or other similar commercial entities are
prohibited. No time share use or ownership plan, [(]to which
HRS 514E applies[)], and no destination club or other
similar commercial entity shall be permitted with respect to
all or any portion of the property.
The grandfather provision for ER which will state that
ER, which will be defined to include the affiliates within
its control group –-
THE COURT: It's within its control group or group?
[PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL]: -- control group, has been
operating a vacation club on its lots and units and may
continue to do so despite the language set forth above. 
Upon the, ah -- as long -- I'm sorry, as long as ER
continues to use the property as a destination club, whether
ER owns the property or not, it will have the right and will
not be prohibited from engaging in such activity. Once ER is
no longer operating, all rights will cease.
.  .  .
THE COURT: Do you have a definition for "destination
club" or "vacation club"?
[PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL]: That's something that we are
working on.
THE COURT: Okay.  But the general principle would be,
however, that ER is presently operating a destination or
vacation club?
[PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL]: I believe it's a destination
club.  And I believe at one point I misspoke and said
"vacation club" when it should have been "destination club."
But our intent is that we really do not want an ER like
entity.  And we will take some time to work out the exact
words on that.
.  .  .
[PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL]: I'm sorry, there is one
additional item which I did not mention.  Um, if there is a
change in control in ER, the CC&Rs will still stay in effect
but the stand-down position and stay will end and we will
come back to court to talk about further action in the
litigation.
.  .  .NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[ER DEFENDANTS' COUNSEL]: . . . [I]n the CC&Rs,
what's grandfathered in is Exclusive Resorts and its -- I
think was mentioned, affiliates, subsidiaries, also
 successors. And again, we are going to draft more specific
language to detail what is meant by the phrase or the term
ER, Exclusive Resorts, to implement the grandfathered
provision. 
Because it's very important to our client who is
grandfathered into what uses at Exclusive Resorts during the
two-and-a-half year period.
 
[PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL]: I think that we are in
conceptual agreement here
. I think that the concern that we
 
have with respect to the use of the term "successor" is that
we have no objection to an ER successor except if there was
a change in control. We would have a problem with ER
attempting to transfer its grandfathered rights to another
vacation club or destination club.
 
[ER DEFENDANTS' COUNSEL]: As stand alone rights.
 
[PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL]: As stand alone rights. And it's
that wording that we're going to have to cobble together to
define successor. But it does not allow ER to simply sell
those lots or units at [Pauoa Beach] and allow somebody else
to use them as a club.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Can we go off the record?
 
[Recess taken]
 THE COURT: Alright, back on the record.
 [PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL]: Thank you.
 [ER DEFENDANTS' COUNSEL]: I agree with Counsel that we
have an agreement in principle. But the principle that we
agreed to is basically that 
if Exclusive Resorts is sold
completely, we have the benefit of the grandfather clause.
If it's sold piecemeal, the right -- the grandfathered right
being separated as a separate right to another entity, then
the grandfather provision would terminate.
 
THE COURT: Okay.
 
[ER DEFENDANTS' COUNSEL]: That's the concept we'll be
working on.
 
[PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL]: And that's agreed.
 THE COURT: Okay. Much different than I thought. Okay.
 [PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL]: Well -- and if they want to
transfer lots or operations to another ER related entity,
one of the subsidiaries, that would be fine. But if it was
 
to a third party that would be the end of the grandfathered
rights
.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
There was clearly a lack of agreement between the
 
parties as to the scope of the grandfather rights. ER Defendants
 
indicated an expectation that they could transfer the grandfather
 
rights if Exclusive Resorts was sold completely. Plaintiffs, on
 
the other hand, stated their intention that grandfather rights
 
not continue if there was a "change in control" of the ER
 
Defendants, and that a transfer of lots or operations to a third
 
party would terminate the grandfather rights.
 
A further indication that the discussion on the record
 
did not represent a final and enforceable settlement agreement is
 
that at the end of the Settlement Conference, the parties set up
 
a status conference with the court three weeks hence to give the
 
court an "update and see whether there is [sic] any
 
clarifications or help of the Court that would be needed." 
In its First Enforcement Order, the circuit court
 
attempted to define the scope of the grandfather rights:
 
[FOF 5.](d) Exclusive Resorts and its affiliates
(including any affiliate within its control group) may
continue to operate a destination club on its lots and
units, notwithstanding the CC&R amendment during the stay
period, as long as ER continues to use its property as a
destination club, whether or not ER owns its lot or unit
("Grandfathered Rights"). Once ER is no longer operating at
Pauoa Beach, all such Grandfathered Rights will cease. If ER
is sold completely, ER's successor or assign in such case
will have the benefit of the Grandfathered Rights. If ER is
sold piecemeal to another entity, where the Grandfathered
Rights are separated as separate stand alone rights, then
the Grandfathered Rights terminate.
 
.
 .  .
 
[FOF 5.] (k) If there is a change of control in ER,
the CC&R amendment will remain in effect but the litigation
stay and governmental stand-down will cease. . . .
 
. . . 
[COL] 10. The transcript of proceedings of the July
10, 2008 Settlement Conference reveals that the parties
agreed that if ER were sold "completely", then the
transferee would have the benefit of the "Grandfathered
 Rights" as a successor or assign. On the other hand, if a
Pauoa Beach subdivision lot or unit were transferred to a
 third party, but not as a "complete" sale, then the
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Grandfathered Rights" would terminate as to that lot or
unit. [CAAP-12-3] Tr. [7/10/08] at page 11, line 16 to page
12, line 11.
 
(Emphases added.) Even the circuit court's findings and
 
conclusions are difficult to understand and in our view do not
 
fully and accurately capture the parties' discussion at the
 
Settlement Conference regarding the grandfather rights. It
 
appears that, although the parties and the circuit court made a
 
genuine and extended effort to have the parties reach a
 
settlement agreement, there simply was no meeting of the minds
 
between the parties on the specifics of the grandfather rights.
 
The purported agreement in this case is not
 
sufficiently definite as to the essential terms related to the
 
scope of the grandfather rights. Inamed Corp., 275 F. Supp. 2d
 
at 1120-21; 17A Am. Jur. 2d Contracts § 181 (2004) ("To be
 enforceable, an agreement must be definite and certain as to its
 
terms and requirements[.]"). The parties did not agree as to who
 
the ER Defendants could transfer the grandfather rights and thus
 
who could be a "successor" or "assign" to those rights. The
 
purported agreement thus fails for indefiniteness as a matter of
 
law. See Honolulu Waterfront Ltd. P'ship v. Aloha Tower Dev.
 
Corp., 692 F. Supp. 1230, 1234-35 (D. Haw. 1988) aff'd, 891 F.2d
 295 (9th Cir. 1989). 
Therefore, given the lack of agreement about the scope
 
of the grandfather rights, we conclude that the circuit court
 
erred when it held that an enforceable settlement agreement had
 
been entered into by the parties. Essential terms were left to
 
be determined later and the parties were ultimately unable to
 
agree on the terms. 
In light of our determination that there was not an
 
enforceable settlement agreement, we do not address ER
 
Defendants' second point of error that the circuit court did not
 
have jurisdiction to enter the Second Enforcement Order. That
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is, without an enforceable settlement agreement in the first
 
instance, there was no agreement to enforce.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the above, the Amended Final Judgment filed on
 
December 5, 2011 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is
 
vacated with respect to (1) the October 1, 2009 "Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion To
 
Enforce Settlement Agreement" and (2) the May 17, 2010 "Order
 
Granting in Part Plaintiffs' Motion for Order to Show Cause Why
 
[ER Defendants] Should Not Be Held in Contempt," and each of
 
these orders is likewise vacated. This case is remanded to the
 
circuit court for further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 24, 2013. 
Robert G. Klein 
R. John Seibert Lisa W. Cataldo (McCorriston Miller Mukai
MacKinnon LLP)
for Defendants-Appellants Presiding Judge
Margery S. BronsterRex Fujichaku(Jae B. Park with them
on the briefs)
(Bronster Hoshibata)Attorneys for Plaintiffs-Appellees Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
12
 