   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30649
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF A.S.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 08-11941)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Appellant Father (Father) appeals from the Order
 
Awarding Permanent Custody, filed on July 19, 2010, in the Family
 
Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1
 
On appeal, Father contends that: (1) there was 
insufficient evidence to find that Father was unable and 
unwilling to provide a safe family home for his daughter, A.S., 
presently or within a reasonably foreseeable future, even with 
the assistance of a service plan; (2) the State of Hawai' i, 
Department of Human Services (DHS) failed to provide a specific 
written plan that took Father's level of cognitive functioning 
into account; (3) the Family Court erred by failing to first 
determine whether Father was willing and able to provide A.S. 
with a safe family home before finding that an award of permanent 
custody was in A.S.'s best interest; and (4) Findings of Fact 
(FOFs) 41, 61, 74, and 116 are clearly erroneous and Conclusion 
of Law (COL) 12 is wrong. 
1
 The Honorable Linda S. Martell presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Father's points of error as follows:
 
(1) There was clear and convincing evidence that
 
Father was not presently willing and able to provide A.S. with a
 
safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan. By
 
the time the hearing on the permanent plan commenced, A.S. had
 
been in foster custody for over two years. It is presumed that
 
Father was under the influence of alcohol when he failed to
 
submit to testing, as ordered by the Family Court, after
 
appearing in court on June 24, 2010 smelling of alcohol. 
Increased visits are a required step in the reunification process
 
of A.S. with Father. However, Father refused to increase his
 
visitation with A.S. because he did not have time for more than
 
one visit per week. Despite completing parenting classes, Father
 
demonstrated that his behavior did not change and did not put
 
A.S. before his own needs. For example, Father admitted that
 
cigarette smoke was not good for A.S. (A.S. reportedly had
 
respiratory difficulties as an infant), but his apartment smelled
 
like cigarette smoke on the day that Father was to have an
 
inhouse visit. 
There was clear and convincing evidence that it was not
 
reasonably foreseeable that Father would become willing and able
 
to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
 
service plan, within a reasonable period of time. Father failed
 
to complete individual psychotherapy and individual counseling as
 
required by the March 2009 Service Plan. Father declined to
 
participate in individual psychotherapy and individual counseling
 
because he believed that he did not need it. Father refused to
 
listen to feedback on parenting skills and became defensive when
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
different information was pointed out to him. Without
 
significant changes, Father's parenting ability was at the same
 
place when A.S. was first placed into foster custody. This
 
demonstrated that Father's parenting ability was not likely to
 
change in the foreseeable future to the extent that it would
 
allow him to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance
 
of a service plan. 
(2) Contrary to Father's claim, DHS provided written
 
service plans that he could understand. Father appeared to
 
understand the September 2008 Service Plan because he completed
 
all of the required services. The March 2009 Service Plan
 
required that Father participate in individual psychotherapy and
 
individual counseling. The March 2009 Service Plan did not
 
require a higher level of understanding than the September 2008
 
Service Plan when it stated that Father should participate in
 
additional services. Father apparently understood the March 2009
 
Service Plan when he contacted service providers regarding
 
individual psychotherapy and individual counseling. 
(3) The Family Court clearly first found that Father
 
and Mother were not presently willing and able to provide a safe
 
family home, even with the assistance of a service plan, and that
 
they could not provide the child with a safe family home within a
 
reasonable period of time, before it determined that the
 
permanent plan was in the best interest of the child. Therefore,
 
Father's claim that the Family Court did not determine that the
 
permanent plan was in A.S.'s best interest before making a
 
determination that Father could not provide a safe family home is
 
without merit.
 
(4) FOF 41 is supported by Ivy Isagawa's testimony
 
and, therefore, is not clearly erroneous.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Regarding FOF 61, the record does not contain any
 
objections to Father's testimony as non-responsive. Nor did the
 
State argue that Father's responses did not make sense. In
 
addition, FOF 61 does not specify which responses were non­
responsive or did not make sense, and its context is not apparent
 
from other FOFs. FOF 61 is clearly erroneous. However, the
 
Family Court's error is harmless because FOF 61 was not necessary
 
for the court's finding that there was clear and convincing
 
evidence that Father was not willing and able to provide a safe
 
family home, even with the assistance of a service plan, and that
 
it is not reasonably foreseeable that Father will become willing
 
and able to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance
 
of a service plan, within a reasonable period of time which shall
 
not exceed two years from the date upon which the child was first
 
placed under foster custody by the court.
 
Dina Koyanagi testified that she thought Father was not
 
willing and able to provide A.S. with a safe family home, even
 
with the assistance of a service plan. Therefore, FOF 74 is not
 
clearly erroneous. DHS timely referred Father for individual
 
counseling as required by the March 2009 Service Plan and,
 
therefore, the Family Court did not clearly err in Finding of FOF
 
116. Both service plans were explained to Father and Father
 
contacted a service provider but refused to participate in
 services. 
COL 12 is not wrong. See paragraph (3) above.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Family Court's July 19, 2010
 
Order Awarding Permanent Custody is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 31, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Thomas A.K. Haia 
for Father-Appellant Chief Judge 
Jay K. GossMary Anne MagnierDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 