NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30294
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
MAKILA LAND CO., LLC, Plaintiff/
Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellee,
v.
 
YOLANDA DIZON, JOHN AQUINO
and TIARA KANANI AQUINO,
Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/Appellants,
and
 
Heirs of assigns of H.W. HAKUOLE;
MYRTLE WILCOX SCHUMANN, AND
ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN,
Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 02-1-0146)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/Appellants Yolanda
 
Dizon, John Aquino, and Tiara Kanani Aquino ("Tiara Aquino")
 
(collectively, "Appellants") appeal from (i) the December 17,
 2009 Final Judgment Re Fee Simple Title to Apanas 1 Through 5 of
 Land Commission Award 6528, Royal Patent 1718, to H. W. Hakuole;
 (ii) the December 1, 2009 Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for
 54(B) Certification; and (iii) the August 5, 2009 Order (1)
 Granting Plaintiff's Summary Judgment Motion Filed June 12, 2009
 on Plaintiff's Claim and Defendants' Counterclaims of Title, and
 (2) Denying Plaintiff's Summary Judgment Motion Filed June 12,
 2009 on Defendants' Counterclaims of an Easement, entered by the
 Circuit Court of the Second Circuit ("Circuit Court").
1
  
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
This case concerns the ownership of ' Âpanas 1 through 5 
of Land Commission Award 6528, Royal Patent 1718, located on Maui 
("Subject Property"). Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellee Makila Land Co., LLC ("Makila") sought to quiet title to the Subject Property, claiming fee-simple ownership through either paper title or adverse possession. 
The parties have not disputed that the original owner
 
of the Subject Property was H.W. Hakuole. Although Makila
 conceded that "[t]here is no record of a deed by the awardee, H.
 W. Hakuole, and no judicial determination of the identity of this
 [sic] heirs[,]" Makila claimed that it had paper title through
 mesne conveyances stemming from a warranty deed in which
 individuals named Sam Hakuole and O.H. Hakuole purported to
 convey title in the Subject Property to Lahaina Agricultural
 Company on February 23, 1912 ("February 1912 Deed"). The Circuit
 Court granted summary judgment in favor of Makila, holding that
 Makila is the owner in fee simple of the Subject Property. 
Appellants argue on appeal that the Circuit Court erred
 
in granting Makila's motion for summary judgment ("MSJ") on the
 issue of title because (1) there were disputes of material fact
 as to whether Makila established that it had acquired title
 through adverse possession; (2) Makila's MSJ, as it related to
 adverse possession, relied on inadmissible evidence; and (3) to
 the extent that the Circuit Court granted Makila summary judgment
 on the basis of paper title, the issue was not properly before
 the Circuit Court or, in the alternative, genuine issues of
 material fact remained to be resolved. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Appellants' points of error as follows:
 
Examining the record on appeal, it is unclear whether
 
the Circuit Court granted Makila summary judgment on the basis of
 paper title, adverse possession, or both. We address paper title
 because the issue is dispositive.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
I.	 Appellants fail to show that the issue of paper title was
not properly before the court.
 
Appellants argue that it "would not be fair or proper
 
for Makila to argue in this Court that Makila has ownership of
 
the property by paper title" because (A) Makila's Complaint did
 not raise the issue of paper title, and (B) despite the fact that
 Makila's MSJ and reply memorandum addressed the issue of paper
 title, Makila's attorney had represented in a June 30, 2009 email
 that the MSJ merely sought a declaration of title based on
 adverse possession, not paper title. Appellants are mistaken
 regarding the first point and overstate the consequences of the
 second.
 
A.	 The issue was properly raised.
 
In the first numbered paragraph of the Complaint,
 
Makila claimed that after Sam Hakuole and O.H. Hakuole conveyed
 
their interest in the Subject Property to Lahaina Agricultural
 Company on February 23, 1912, "title vested by mesne conveyances
 in Plaintiff." Thus, Appellants' contention that the Complaint
 solely relies on adverse possession is incorrect.
 
In addition, Makila clearly raised the issue of paper
 
title in the MSJ. Appellants responded to Makila's paper-title
 argument in their memorandum in opposition. In its reply in
 support of the MSJ, Makila again argued that it had paper title
 to the Subject Property. 
B.	 Appellants failed to present the Circuit Court with
anything to support their contention that Makila was
abandoning its paper-title argument.
 
Appellants' bare assertion in its memorandum in
 
opposition to the MSJ, that Plaintiff's counsel had indicated
 
that Makila was "not relying upon paper title in this matter[,]"
 provided no basis for the Circuit Court to evaluate Appellants'
 claim and lacked any probative value.
2 See Leis Family Ltd.
 
2
 On appeal, Appellants contend for the first time that after Makila
filed its MSJ, their attorney requested that Makila's attorney provide them
with legible copies of Exhibits 18, 19, and 23. Also for the first time,
Appellants cite to a June 30, 2009 email from Makila's attorney, attached as
an appendix to the opening brief, which states:
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
P'ship v. Silversword Eng'g, 126 Hawai' i 532, 534 n.2, 273 P.3d 
1218, 1220 n.2 (App. 2012) ("argument of counsel in a memorandum
 
of law is not evidence" (quoting Thomas v. Burlington Indus.,
 Inc., 769 F.Supp. 368, 369 (S.D. Fla. 1991) (brackets and
 ellipsis omitted))). To the extent that Appellants wished for
 the Circuit Court to agree that the paper title issue had been
 waived or to otherwise ignore it, they undercut that position by
 proceeding to address the issue on the merits. Makila's reply in
 support of the MSJ demonstrated clearly its intent to not abandon
 the argument.
3
 
Based on Makila's Complaint and the arguments advanced
 
in its MSJ, the issue of paper title was ripe for consideration. 
Thus, Appellants have not shown that the Circuit Court should not
 have considered the issue of paper title or that it would be
 unfair or improper for this court to consider the issue now.
 
II.	 Makila had a substantial interest in the Subject Property
and its title was superior to that of Appellants.
 
Makila proved that it had a substantial interest in the
 
Subject Property via paper title. "In an action to quiet title,
 
the burden is on the plaintiff to prove title in and to the land
 in dispute, and, absent such proof, it is unnecessary for the
 
I am writing in response to your letter dated 6-18-2009.
You request legible copies of Exhibits 18, 19 and 23
attached to my motion for summary judgment. I must point
out that our motion seeks to have the court confirm title in
 plaintiff based upon adverse possession not paper title.
The exhibits that you are asking about concern paper title.
If you want to see better copies of the exhibits you might
take a look at the copies in the court file which are
original certified copies.
 
An appellate court will not examine evidence not specifically called to the
attention of the trial court. Ass'n of Apt. Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea 
Resort Co., 100 Hawai' i 97, 108, 58 P.3d 608, 619 (2002). Therefore, we
observe no basis upon which we might conclude that Plaintiff is equitably
estopped from advancing arguments here regarding its claim to paper title. 
3
 In addition, Appellants failed to provide a transcript of the
hearing on the MSJ, at which time the issue may have been raised andaddressed, thus precluding us from reviewing the Circuit Court's action or
rationale. See Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553,
558 (1995) ("The burden is upon appellant in an appeal to show error by
reference to matters in the record, and he or she has the responsibility of
providing an adequate transcript." (quoting Union Bldg. Materials Corp. v. Kakaako Corp., 5 Haw. App. 146, 151, 682 P.2d 82, 87 (1984) (internal
quotation marks and brackets omitted))). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
defendant to make any showing." Maui Land & Pineapple Co. v. 
Infiesto, 76 Hawai' i 402, 407, 879 P.2d 507, 512 (1994). "The 
plaintiff has the burden to prove either that he has paper title 
to the property or that he holds title by adverse possession." Id. at 408, 879 P.2d at 513. "While it is not necessary for the plaintiff to have perfect title to establish a prima facie case, he must at least prove that he has a substantial interest in the property and that his title is superior to that of the defendants." Id. 
Recitals of fact in a deed purporting to establish an 
interest in real property are admissible to prove that such an interest existed "unless the circumstances indicate lack of trustworthiness." See id. at 406–07, 879 P.2d at 511–12; Haw. R. 
Evid. 803(b)(15). For instance, in Maui Land & Pineapple, the Supreme Court held that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in considering a recital in a deed that a grantor of real property was "lawfully seized in fee simple" and that the property was "clear and free of all encumbrances." 76 Hawai' i at 
406–07, 879 P.2d at 511–12 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Here, in the February 1912 Deed, S. Hakuole and O.H.
 
Hakuole declared that they were "lawfully seized of the [Subject
 Property]" and that they had "a good and lawful right to sell the
 same[.]" Appellants do not address these statements, and nothing
 in the record indicates that they are untrustworthy; S. Hakuole
 and O.H. Hakuole share the same last name as H.W. Hakuole,
 leading to a reasonable inference that they inherited an interest
 in the Subject Property. As Makila claims paper title through
 mesne conveyances arising from the February 1912 Deed, Makila has
 made a prima facie showing that it has a substantial interest in
 the Subject Property.
 
Appellants fail to offer evidence of any title to the
 
Subject Property and, thus, have not presented a dispute of
 material fact sufficient to defeat summary judgment. They have
 not presented any evidence tending to prove that they were
 conveyed an interest in the Subject Property or of any relation
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
to H.W. Hakuole.4 Nor have Appellants presented a genuine issue
 
of material fact with regard to their own acquisition of title to
 
the Subject Property through adverse possession. Thus, the
 Circuit Court did not err in granting Makila summary judgment on
 the issue of title to the Subject Property because Appellants
 failed to present any evidence indicating that they have any
 title in the Subject Property.
 
Therefore, the December 17, 2009 Final Judgment Re Fee
 
Simple Title to Apanas 1 Through 5 of Land Commission Award 6528,
 Royal Patent 1718, to H. W. Hakuole; the December 1, 2009 Order
 Granting Plaintiff's Motion for 54(B) Certification; and the
 August 5, 2009 Order (1) Granting Plaintiff's Summary Judgment
 Motion Filed June 12, 2009 on Plaintiff's Claim and Defendants'
 Counterclaims of Title, and (2) Denying Plaintiff's Summary
 Judgment Motion Filed June 12, 2009 on Defendants' Counterclaims
 of an Easement, entered by the Circuit Court of the Second
 Circuit, are affirmed.
5
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 15, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
James Richard McCarty,
for Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/Appellants Chief Judge 
Michael W. Gibson,(Ashford & Wriston)for Plaintiff/Counterclaim­Defendant/Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 Tiara Aquino claims to be a descendent of "William H. Hakuole,"
but does not explain who he is. In their opposition memorandum, Appellants
refer to the original owner of the Subject Property as H.W. Hakuole, not as
William H. Hakuole. 
5
 The Circuit Court's judgment that is the subject of this appeal
did not address Defendants' counterclaim for an easement, concerning which the
Circuit Court stated that there were genuine issues of material fact. Thus,
we express no opinion on the easement counterclaim.
 
6
 