NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30543
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
TIMOTHY BUECHLER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0174)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Timothy Buechler (Buechler) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on April 27,
 
1
2010 in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit  (circuit court).  
On February 2, 2010, a jury found Buechler guilty of Forgery in
 
the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
2
§ 708-852 (Supp. 2010),  and Attempted Theft in the Second
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 
2
 HRS § 708-852 provides in relevant part:
 
§708-852 Forgery in the second degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of forgery in the second degree if, with
intent to defraud, the person falsely makes, completes, endorses,
or alters a written instrument, or utters a forged instrument, or
fraudulently encodes the magnetic ink character recognition
numbers, which is or purports to be, or which is calculated to
become or to represent if completed, a deed, will, codicil,
contract, assignment, commercial instrument, or other instrument
which does or may evidence, create, transfer, terminate, or
otherwise affect a legal right, interest, obligation, or status.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3
Degree, in violation of HRS §§ 705-500 (1993)  and 708-831(1)(b)
(Supp. 2010).4
 
On appeal, Buechler contends he was denied the right to
 
effective assistance of trial counsel because counsel failed to
 
object to irrelevant testimony evidence of the break-in, the
 
probative value of which, even if relevant, was substantially
 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the
 
issue, or misleading the jury, and testimony regarding a check
 
3
 HRS § 705-500 provides:
 
§705-500 Criminal attempt.  (1) A person is guilty of an
attempt to commit a crime if the person:
 
(a)	 Intentionally engages in conduct which would
constitute the crime if the attendant circumstances
 were as the person believes them to be; or
 
(b)	 Intentionally engages in conduct which, under the
circumstances as the person believes them to be,
constitutes a substantial step in a course of conduct
intended to culminate in the person's commission of
the crime.
 (2) When causing a particular result is an element of the
crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the crime if,
acting with the state of mind required to establish liability with
respect to the attendant circumstances specified in the definition
of the crime, the person intentionally engages in conduct which is
a substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known to
cause such a result.
 
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial step
under this section unless it is strongly corroborative of the
defendant's criminal intent. 
4
 HRS § 708-852(1)(b) provides:
 
§708-831 Theft in the second degree.  (1) A person commits
the offense of theft in the second degree if the person commits
theft:
 
. . . .
 
(b)	 Of property or services the value of which exceeds $300[.]
 
HRS § 708-830 (Supp. 2010) provides in relevant part:
 
§708-830 Theft. A person commits theft if the person does
any of the following:
 
(1)	 Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property.
A person obtains or exerts unauthorized control over
the property of another with intent to deprive the
other of the property.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(first check), other than the subject check, that was improper
 
character evidence of Buechler and should have been excluded.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 
Buechler's appeal is without merit.
 
Buechler does not establish ineffective assistance of
 
counsel because he does not demonstrate specific errors or
 
omissions by trial counsel reflecting counsel's lack of skill,
 
judgment, or diligence. Buechler has
 
the burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel
and must meet the following two-part test: 1) that there
were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack
of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. To satisfy
this second prong, the defendant needs to show a possible
impairment, rather than a probable impairment, of a
potentially meritorious defense. A defendant need not prove
actual prejudice.
 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 
(2003) (internal quotation marks, citations, and footnote 
omitted). 
Buechler first argues that the testimony regarding the
 
break-in was not relevant and should have been objected to and
 
excluded because the "fact of the break-in would not tend to make
 
more probable any fact relating to the elements of the charges of
 
Forgery in the Second Degree and of Theft in the Second Degree." 
Buechler further argues that even if relevant, "the probative
 
value of testimony evidence of the break-in was substantially
 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the
 
issue, or misleading the jury."
 
HRE Rule 401 defines "relevant evidence" as "evidence
 
having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of
 
consequence to the determination of the action more probable or 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
less probable than it would be without the evidence." The 
testimony evidence given by Donn (Donn) and Gayle (Gayle) 
Carswell was relevant because it established (1) how Donn and 
Gayle lost possession of the subject check, (2) that the subject 
check was blank when they lost possession of it, (3) neither Donn 
nor Gayle wrote the subject check to Buechler or authorized him 
to possess that check, and (4) that Donn and Gayle had never met 
Buechler and Buechler had never done any work for them. "Failing 
to object to admissible evidence cannot be considered an error or 
omission. Moreover, because the evidence was admissible, the 
failure to object did not deprive [defendant] of a potentially 
meritorious defense." State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 40, 960 
P.2d 1227, 1248 (1998). 
Next, Buechler contends his trial counsel should have 
objected to the Prosecutor's questioning him concerning the first check, not the subject check, and his testimony regarding the 
first check should have been excluded under HRE Rule 404(a)(1) 
and (b). Buechler testified on direct examination that he had 
received the subject check as payment from "Don" and on cross-
examination that the subject check was the second check he had 
received from "Don" and he had been previously paid by the first 
check for work he had performed for "Don." Therefore, it was 
proper for the Prosecutor to question Buechler concerning how 
"Don" had paid Buechler, including the first check Donn had 
written to Buechler. Buechler does not establish "1) that there 
were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of 
skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or 
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial 
impairment of a potentially meritorious defense," and therefore, 
Buechler's claim of ineffective assistance of counsel is without 
merit. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i at 513-14, 78 P.3d at 326-27. 
Therefore,
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence filed on April 27, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the
 
Fifth Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 21, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Charles A. Foster 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Tracy Murakami,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Kauai,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
5
 