NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30468
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAII, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
DAVID A. SERENO, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
WAILUKU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 2DTA-09-00479)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.) 
The State of Hawai' i (State) appeals the April 8, 2010 
Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment and the April 9, 2010 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law entered 
by the District Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division 
(district court),
1
 which granted a motion to suppress evidence
filed by Defendant-Appellee David A. Sereno (Sereno) in a
 prosecution for Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an
 
Intoxicant, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E­
61(a) (Supp. 2009).
 
The case stems from a motor vehicle accident (MVA) in
 
which Sereno's vehicle was struck by another vehicle and went on
 
to collide with and into a house. 
During investigation of the
 
MVA, Officer Dennis Arnds (Officer Arnds) concluded that Sereno
 was impaired and arrested Sereno. After a hearing on Sereno's
 
1
 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
motion to suppress evidence based on an absence of probable cause
 
for the arrest, the district court granted the motion and
 
suppressed all evidence obtained as a result of Sereno's arrest. 
This appeal followed.
 
On appeal, the State contends that the district court
 
erred in granting Sereno's motion to suppress, maintaining that
 
sufficient probable cause existed for Sereno's arrest.
 
Appellate review of factual determinations made by the
trial court deciding pretrial motions in a criminal case is
governed by the clearly erroneous standard. A finding of
fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite
substantial evidence in support of the finding, the
appellate court is left with a definite and firm conviction
that a mistake has been made. The circuit court's
 conclusions of law are reviewed under the right/wrong
standard. Furthermore, . . . the proponent of a motion to
suppress has the burden of establishing not only that the
evidence sought to be excluded was unlawfully secured, but
also, that his own Fourth Amendment rights were violated by
the search and seizure sought to be challenged. The
 proponent of the motion to suppress must satisfy this burden
of proof by a preponderance of the evidence.
 
State v. Balberdi, 90 Hawai' i 16, 20-21, 975 P.2d 773, 777-78 
(App. 1999) (quoting State v. Anderson, 84 Hawai' i 462, 467, 935 
P.2d 1007, 1012 (1997)). The appellate court reviews "the 
circuit court's ruling on a motion to suppress de novo to 
determine whether the ruling was right or wrong." State v. 
Eleneki, 106 Hawai' i 177, 180, 102 P.3d 1075, 1078 (2004). 
"'[P]robable cause' exists when the facts and 
circumstances within the knowledge of police officers and of 
which they had reasonably trustworthy information were sufficient 
in themselves to warrant a man or woman of reasonable caution to 
believe that a crime was being committed." State v. Kaleohano, 
99 Hawai' i 370, 377, 56 P.3d 138, 145 (2002) (citing State v. 
Texeira, 50 Haw. 138, 142, 433 P.2d 593, 597 (1967)). 
(1) The State asserts that Findings of Fact (finding)
 
numbers 5 and 10 erroneously included certain facts in the
 
district court's determination of probable cause, although the
 
facts were not known or testified to by the officer at the time
 
of his probable cause determination. However, the challenged
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
facts are supported by the evidence presented and as such, these
 
findings are not clearly erroneous. Moreover, the district court
 
did not indicate that it was finding these facts were known by
 
Officer Arnds when he concluded there was probable cause for the
 
arrest.
 
Furthermore, the district court's findings that Officer
 
Arnds did not mention (1) speeding as a factor in the collision
 
or decision to arrest Sereno or (2) that Sereno had not caused
 
the original collision were supported by the evidence,
 
notwithstanding that neither was a factor in the officer's
 
determination of probable cause. Finding number 5 was not
 
clearly erroneous as it does not appear to be a list of Officer
 
Arnds's reasons for the arrest because it did not include Officer
 
Arnds's consideration of the fact that Sereno's vehicle was found
 
inside a house as part of finding number 5.
 
The State also argues that finding number 5 erroneously
 
included a finding that there was no evidence of conduct
 
constituting a violation of any driving or traffic code. Based
 
on the testimony that Sereno was driving 30 miles per hour in a
 
20 mile per hour zone, this portion of finding number 5 is
 
clearly erroneous. See HRS § 291C-102 (2007).
 
In this context, the State also challenges the district
 
court's Conclusion of Law (conclusion) number 8 that in the
 
absence of any evidence Sereno was at fault in causing the
 
initial collision, evidence of the accident, per se, could not
 
support a determination of impairment. As we read this
 
conclusion as limited to the effect of the initial collision on
 
the impairment determination, it is correct.
 
(2) The State also challenges finding number 8 insofar 
as the district court omitted other instances of "evasiveness" by 
Sereno testified to by the officer. This finding is not clearly 
erroneous, as the district court was entitled to accept a portion 
of testimony. Kaleohano, 99 Hawai' i at 376, 56 P.3d at 144. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) The State asserts that in finding number 9, the
 
district court erroneously stated that Officer Arnds
 
"acknowledged that defendant's speech was not slurred". We
 
agree, as the record does not reflect any such "acknowledgment"
 
by the officer. Therefore, this portion of finding number 9 is
 
clearly erroneous.
 
(4) The State challenges finding number 12, because
 
the district court omitted slurred speech and refusal to
 
participate in the field sobriety maneuvers (FSMs) in its
 
determination of reasons that Officer Arnds placed Sereno under
 
arrest. As this finding was consistent with Officer Arnds's
 
testimony when he was asked to list the factors that formed the
 
basis for his arrest, it was not clearly erroneous. Id.
 
(5, 6) The State argues that conclusion numbers 5 and
 
6 were incomplete and inaccurate statements of the legal
 
standard.
 
Conclusion number 5 presents accurate statements of law 
regarding the significance of FSMs in the cases cited therein. 
It does not purport to apply those legal concepts to this case, 
and as such is not wrong. See Kernan v. Tanaka, 75 Haw. 1, 38 
n.23, 856 P.2d 1207, 1226 n.23 (1993) and Kaleohano, 99 Hawai' i 
at 377, 56 P.3d at 145. 
Regarding conclusion number 6, as State v. Ito, 90 
Hawai'i 225, 978 P.2d 191 (App. 1999), held probable cause was 
lacking where it was based solely on an inadmissible field sobriety test and did not address other factors that may 
constitute probable cause, it was inapposite to this case. In 
Kaleohano, 99 Hawai' i at 377, 56 P.3d at 145, a different mix of 
indicia were present and also was not apposite to the facts of this case. Thus, conclusion number 6 is wrong. 
(7) As to conclusions numbered 7 and 10, the State 
points out that the district court erroneously applied State v. 
Ferm, 94 Hawai' i 17, 28, 7 P.3d 193, 204 (App. 2000), to the 
instant case insofar as it considered facts not known to Officer Arnds at the time of the arrest, in concluding that Sereno's 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
refusal to participate in the FSMs should not be interpreted as
 
consciousness of guilt. We agree. Thus, conclusion numbers 7
 
and 10 are wrong.
 
(8) The State asserts that the district court erred in
 
its conclusion number 9 that, because Sereno admitted that he had
 
been drinking, and because Officer Arnds "acknowledged that he
 
did not observe [Sereno's] speech was slurred," he had nothing to
 
hide "by turning away or maintaining distance" from Officer
 
Arnds, where the officer did not acknowledge Sereno had no
 
slurred speech and where the focus should have been on the
 
officer's inferences.
 
Although Officer Arnds did not "acknowledge that he did
 
not observe [Sereno's] speech was slurred," considering that the
 
officer did not observe Sereno to have any problems with balance
 
or fumbling of paperwork, that Sereno "produced all documentation
 
as requested" and "responded to all questions[,]" where "all
 
2
answers were appropriate and consistent[;]"  that the district
court, upon viewing the video of the accident scene found "that
 
[Sereno] displayed no overt indicia of intoxication or impairment
 
3
due to alcohol[;]"  that "[t]he videographer testified that he
could not smell alcohol from [Sereno] from a couple of feet
 
4
 and that Sereno had admitted to Officer Arnds that
 distance[;]"
he had been drinking, the district court's conclusion that Sereno
 
had nothing to hide "by turning away or maintaining distance"
 
from the officer and declining to "infer a consciousness of
 
guilt" therefrom is not wrong.
 
While it is true that probable cause is assessed using
 
the information within the officer's knowledge, the standard used
 
is an objective one. See State v. Delmondo, 54 Haw. 552, 553-54,
 
2
 Included in the unchallenged portion of finding number 9. State v.
 
Rapozo, 123 Haw. 329, 334 n.4, 325 P.3d 325, 330 n.4 (2010) (unchallenged
findings are binding on the appellate court).
3
 Included in unchallenged finding number 13.
 
4
 Included in unchallenged finding number 14.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
512 P.2d 551, 552 (1973). Therefore, we look at the information
 
known to the officer at the time of his arrest and agree that, 
notwithstanding the officer's belief that evasiveness was a
 
reason for the arrest, it was not reasonable for the officer to
 
infer consciousness of guilt from Sereno's turning away or
 
maintaining distance from the officer under these circumstances. 
Viewed as such, conclusion number 9 is not wrong.
 
(9) Finally, the State argues that, in conclusion
 
number 11, the district court erred when it reached its
 
conclusion that probable cause for Sereno's arrest did not exist
 
because it was based only upon three factors (the odor of
 
alcohol; red, watery eyes; and flushed facial features) although
 
other factors such as the circumstances of the MVA, the lack of
 
skid marks, slurred speech, evasiveness, and refusal to
 
participate in the FSMs also were present.
 
The district court discounted the MVA, reasoning that,
 
because no fault could be attributed to Sereno for the accident,
 
no consciousness of guilt could be inferred therefrom. The
 
district court also independently determined that slurred speech
 
was not present, notwithstanding the erroneous finding that
 
Officer Arnds acknowledged no slurred speech existed. The
 
district court also properly concluded that evasiveness could not
 
be fairly inferred from Sereno's actions. Thus, the district
 
court was not wrong in omitting those factors.
 
As to the ultimate conclusion of whether probable cause
 
existed for the arrest, in giving deference to the proper
 
district court's determinations as discussed in Iaea v. Iaea, 59
 
Haw. 648, 650, 586 P.2d 1015, 1016-17 (1978), and reviewing de
 
novo the issue of probable cause, the factors that were
 
reasonable for the officer to consider in his determination of
 
probable cause were Sereno's admission of drinking, the odor of
 
an alcoholic beverage, red, watery eyes, and flushed facial
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
features. Based on these factors, we agree that insufficient
 
probable cause existed for the arrest.
 
Therefore, for the reasons stated herein, the District
 
Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division's April 8, 2010
 
Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment and
 
the April 9, 2010 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law are
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 21, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Kristin L. Coccaro,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
Presiding Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Matthew Nardi,
for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
7
 