 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30502
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BLUE LEALAO, aka Boy Blue Lealao, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-1341)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Blue Lealao, also known as Boy Blue
 
Lealao (Lealao), appeals from the April 20, 2010, Amended
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Amended Judgment) that was
 entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 Court).
1 Lealao was charged by indictment with first degree
 
assault. A jury found Lealao guilty of the lesser included
 offense of second degree assault, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 707-711 (Supp. 2008).
2 The Circuit Court
 
1
 The Honorable Michael A. Town presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-711 provides in relevant part:
 
(1)
degree if: A person commits the offense of assault in the second 
(a) The person intentionally or knowingly causes
substantial bodily injury to another; 
(b) The person recklessly causes serious or substantialbodily injury to another[.] NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sentenced Lealao to five years of incarceration to be served
 
concurrently with any other sentence Lealao may be serving.
 
On appeal, Lealao argues that: (1) the Circuit Court
 
erred in admitting Lealao's statement that Lealao "had made a big
 mistake," which he made to the niece of the complaining witness
 (CW); (2) the Circuit Court erred in denying Lealao's request for
 a jury instruction on mutual affray; (3) there was insufficient
 evidence to support the jury's verdict; and (4) Lealao's
 conviction should be vacated because his trial counsel provided 
ineffective assistance. We affirm the Circuit Court's Amended
 Judgment.
 
I.
 A.
 
Chelcey Lealao (Chelcey) and her husband Bob Lealao, 
Jr. (Bob) held a birthday party for their infant son at the 'Âhuimanu Clubhouse in Kahalu' u. The CW and Lealao were both 
guests at the party, but did not know each other. The CW is Chelcey's uncle and Lealao is Bob's uncle. At the time of trial, which was about 18 months after the charged incident, the CW was 45 years old, five feet five inches tall, and weighed 165 pounds, and Lealao was 47 years old, about 6 feet tall, and weighed about 310 pounds. Both the CW and Lealao had been drinking beer at the party. 
The CW and Virgilo Tamayo (Tamayo) were friends. The
 
CW went to the parking lot when he heard that his son and
 Tamayo's son were involved in a confrontation. At the parking
 lot, the CW got into a verbal argument with Tamayo, which
 attracted a crowd. The CW was "agitated" and was "bouncing up
 and down[.]"
 
Bob heard the CW and Tamayo arguing and went to break
 
up the argument. Bob got in between the CW and Tamayo to split
 them apart. Bob testified that the CW pushed him, which caused
 Bob to take a few steps back, and the CW told Bob to "get off
 me." Bob stated that he did "not really" feel threatened when
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the CW pushed him, but that he was "pretty sure" it would have
 
looked like he was being threatened to someone watching.
 
The CW and Tamayo continued arguing for about another 
minute, and then Lealao hit the CW. Witnesses did not see Lealao
 say anything to the CW, or see the CW turn towards Lealao, before
 Lealao struck the CW in the face. The CW did not see who hit
 him. The CW fell to the ground, lost consciousness for about
 twenty to thirty minutes, and was bleeding from the back of the
 head. Tamayo called 9-1-1, and when the police arrived, the CW
 was still unconscious.
 
The CW suffered a fractured jaw, a laceration to the
 
back of his head of just under two inches that required stitches,
 and a serious concussion. As a result of the jaw fracture, CW's
 jaw was wired shut for nineteen days, and his jaw remained
 restricted by elastic bands for another six weeks. The CW was
 not able to chew solid foods for about eight weeks. Christopher
 Johnson, M.D., an emergency room doctor who treated the CW,
 opined that the CW's injuries created a serious risk of death and
 that the CW's jaw fracture caused a protracted loss or impairment
 of a bodily member or organ, in that it impaired his ability to
 eat. 
B.
 
Lealao testified that he heard yelling in the parking
 
lot and saw his nephew Bob in between the CW and Tamayo, two
 people Lealao did not know. According to Lealao, he went to the
 parking lot because he was concerned for Bob's safety. When
 Lealao was walking to the parking lot, he was hit on the right
 side, which caused his nose to bleed. Lealao did not see who hit
 him. Lealao then saw the CW push Bob. Bob stepped back, and the
 CW was jumping up and down. Lealao swung one time at the CW. 
Lealao swung because he was concerned that the CW would "go
 after" Bob. After Lealao struck the CW, Bob pushed and held
 Lealao back, and the police came and arrested Lealao.
 
Dr. Johnson, who treated both the CW and Lealao,
 
testified that Lealao suffered a nose injury, consisting of
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"swelling and tenderness to the region of the nasal ridge, the
 
top of the nose, that would be consistent with either a contusion
 or fracture of the nose." Dr. Johnson further testified that the
 nose injury was consistent with being hit in the face, and that
 Lealao also had abrasions on the inside of his lip.
 
II.
 
We resolve Lealao's arguments on appeal as follows:
 
A.
 1.
 
The Circuit Court did not err in admitting Lealao's
 
statement to Chelcey that he "had made a big mistake." Prior to
 trial, Lealao filed a motion in limine to exclude statements of
 condolence that he made. According to the prosecution, Lealao
 had spoken to Chelcey on the phone, and Lealao had "indicated
 over and over that he wanted to apologize to [Chelcey] and her
 family; that he's sorry for what happened; [and] he made a big
 mistake[.]" This phone conversation took place long after the
 charged incident and shortly before the scheduled trial date. 
The Circuit Court applied Hawaii Rules of Evidence
 
3
(HRE) Rule 409.5 (Supp. 2010)  and ruled that the only portion 
3 HRE Rule 409.5 provides:
 
Evidence of statements or gestures that express sympathy,
commiseration, or condolence concerning the consequences of an
event in which the declarant was a participant is not admissible
to prove liability for any claim growing out of the event. This
 rule does not require the exclusion of an apology or other
statement that acknowledges or implies fault even though contained
in, or part of, any statement or gesture excludable under this
rule.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
The commentary to HRE Rule 409.5 provides: 
This rule, shielding expressions of "sympathy,
commiseration, or condolence," resembles measures recently adopted
in several sister states. See, e.g., CA Evid. Code § 1160,
excluding expressions of "sympathy or a general sense of
benevolence." The rule favors expressions of sympathy as
embodying desirable social interactions and contributing to civil
settlements, and the evidentiary exclusion recognizes that the law
should "facilitate or, at least, not hinder the possibility of
this healing ritual." Robbennolt, Apologies and Legal Settlement:
An Empirical Examination, 102 Mich. L. Rev. 460, 474 (2003). The
 Hawaii legislature also stated: "Your committee finds it
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of Lealao's statement to Chelcey that it would allow the
 
prosecution to introduce was the statement, "I made a big
 mistake." The Circuit Court stated:
 
Okay, I'm going to allow in "I made a big mistake."
That's all. That's the only part of that that I'm going to
let in. The rest look like sympathy. And I understand the
 position that may create a record for appeal but seems to me
that's more than -- than sympathy, commiseration, or
condolences in the context. . . .
 
. . . .
 
[H]e says, "I'm so sorry for what happened" -- referencing this
incident and that I might not let in, but he says, "I made a big
mistake." To me, that's beyond just saying ["]I'm sorry for what
happened. My condolences.["]
 
At trial, Chelcey testified that during a phone
 
conversation with Lealao "about a week-and-a-half ago," while
 
discussing the incident in which her uncle, the CW, was injured,
 Lealao indicated that Lealao had made a big mistake. According
 to Chelcey, Lealao said this approximately four times.
 
2. 
We conclude that Lealao's statement that he had made a
 
big mistake was relevant and admissible as probative evidence of
 his consciousness of guilt and that his use of force was not
 justified. See HRE Rule 401 (1993). It was for the jury to
 
decide what weight to give to this evidence. 
Lealao's reliance on State v. Canady, 80 Hawai' i 469, 
911 P.2d 104 (App. 1996), is misplaced. In Canady, this court
 concluded that evidence that the defendant wanted to apologize to
 the alleged victim, along with other unchallenged evidence, was
 
3(...continued)
appropriate to allow individuals and entities to express sympathy
and condolence without the expression being used . . . to
establish civil liability". Senate Standing Committee Report No.
1131, March 21, 2007.
 
Whether a challenged utterance amounts to an expression of
sympathy or an acknowledgment of fault will be entrusted to the
sound discretion of the trial court under rule 104(a). In making
this determination, the court could consider factors such as the
declarant's language, the declarant's physical and emotional
condition, and the context and circumstances in which the
utterance was made. 
(Emphasis added). 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
insufficient to support the defendant's conviction for abuse of a 
family or household member. Id. at 475, 911 P.2d at 110. 
However, evidence may be relevant and admissible without being sufficient to establish a material element of a charged offense. See State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai' i 382, 409-10, 910 P.2d 695, 722­
23 (1996). 
The Circuit Court determined that Lealao's statement
 
that he made a big mistake was not excludable under HRE Rule
 409.5. We cannot say that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in making this determination.
4
 
B.
 
The Circuit Court did not err in denying Lealao's
 
request for a jury instruction on mutual affray. There was no
 evidence that Lealao hit the CW during "a fight or scuffle
 entered into by mutual consent[.]" HRS § 707-712(2) (1993). The
 CW was not engaged in a confrontation with Lealao prior to being
 punched by Lealao. Lealao testified that he was hit on his way
 to the parking lot, but Lealao did not see who hit him, and there
 is no indication that Lealao had been hit by the CW.
 
Moreover, any error in the Circuit Court's failure to 
give a mutual affray instruction was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Mutual affray is a mitigating defense to third degree assault. Because Lealao was convicted of second degree assault, any error in the instructions pertaining to the lesser included offense of third degree assault, including the failure to give a mutual affray instruction, was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai' i 405, 415-16, 16 P.3d 246, 
256-57 (2001). 
C.
 
There was sufficient evidence to support the jury's
 
verdict. When viewed in the light most favorable to the
 
4
 It is not clear that HRE Rule 409.5 applies to criminal cases. HRE
 
Rule 409.5 and its commentary, see footnote 3, supra, indicate that the rule
may be directed at the admissibility of evidence in civil cases. For purposes
of our analysis in this case, we assume without deciding that HRE Rule 409.5
is applicable. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prosecution, see State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d
 
1115, 1117 (1981), there was substantial evidence to prove the
 essential elements for second degree assault. There was also
 substantial evidence to negate Lealao's claims of self-defense
 and the defense of others.
 
D.
 
Lealao fails to meet his burden of proving that his 
trial counsel provided ineffective assistance. See State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998). Lealao 
contends that his trial counsel was ineffective because counsel: (1) did not vigorously pursue all defenses available to Lealao,
 including asserting a theory of self-defense; (2) did not call
 all witnesses requested by Lealao, including Tracy Schweitzer,
 Lealao's girlfriend, who would have substantiated Lealao's
 version of events; and 3) did not introduce Lealao's medical
 records at trial or otherwise adequately raise the injuries
 Lealao sustained before he struck the CW. 
Trial counsel defended Lealao at trial by arguing that 
Lealao's conduct was justified because he was acting in self-defense and in the defense of others. The record does not support Lealao's contention that his trial counsel failed to vigorously pursue all defenses available to Lealao. The absence of affidavits or sworn statements from Schweitzer and from any other witness Lealao claims his trial counsel failed to call that describes their anticipated testimony is fatal to Lealao's claim that his trial counsel was ineffective for failing to call witnesses. See State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai' i 462, 481, 946 P.2d 
32, 51 (1997). While trial counsel did not introduce Lealao's medical records, trial counsel adduced evidence of Lealao's injuries through the testimony of Dr. Johnson and Lealao's own testimony. Lealao did not meet his burden of showing that his trial counsel was ineffective for failing to adequately raise Lealao's injuries. 
We note that appellate counsel was not appointed until
 
after the notice of appeal was filed. Therefore, appellate 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
counsel did not have the opportunity to develop a record to 
support Lealao's claims of ineffective assistance of counsel. Our rejection of Lealao's claims of ineffective assistance of counsel is without prejudice to Lealao's developing an adequate record to support an ineffective assistance of counsel claim in subsequent proceedings under Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure 
Rule 40. See State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 
592-93 (1993). 
III.
 
We affirm the April 20, 2010, Amended Judgment of the
 
Circuit Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 19, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Lars Robert Isaacson
 
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Chief Judge
Donn Fudo
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
8
 