  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
NO. 30444
 
Case No. CU-10-278
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I; CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU;
COUNTY OF HAWAI 'I; COUNTY OF MAUI; COUNTY OF KAUAI;
HAWAI'I HEALTH SYSTEMS CORPORATION; AND THE JUDICIARY,
Complainants/Appellees-Appellees
vs.
 
DAYTON NAKANELUA, State Director,
UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFL-CIO
and UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFL-CIO (2009-42),
Respondents/Appellants-Appellants,
and
 
HAWAI'I LABOR RELATIONS BOARD; JAMES B. NICHOLSON;
SESNITA A.D. MOEPONO; and ROCK B. LEY,1 
Agency/Appellees-Appellees. 
Case No. CE-10-726
 
UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFL-CIO,
Complainant/Appellant-Appellant,
vs.
 
NEIL DIETZ,2
 Chief Negotiator,
Office of Collective Bargaining, State of Hawai 'i (2009-043),
Respondent/Appellee-Appellee,
and
 HAWAI 'I LABOR RELATIONS BOARD; JAMES B. NICHOLSON;
SESNITA A.D. MOEPONO; and ROCK B. LEY,
Agency/Appellees-Appellees.
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-2488)
 
1
Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 43(c)(1)
(2010), Sesnita A.D. Moepono and Rock B. Ley, current members of the Hawai' i 
Labor Relations Board (HLRB), are automatically substituted as parties for
Emory J. Springer and Sarah R. Hirakami, former members of the HLRB. 
2Pursuant to HRAP Rule 43(c)(1), Neil Dietz, the current Chief
Negotiator, is automatically substituted as a party for Marie Laderta, the
former Chief Negotiator.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30568
 
UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFL-CIO,
Union-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
vs.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I; THE JUDICIARY;
HAWAI'I HEALTH SYSTEMS CORPORATION,
Employers-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
and
 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU (2009-044),
Employer-Appellee.
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS NO. 09-1-0305)
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000166
 
Case No. CU-10-278
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU;
COUNTY OF HAWAI 'I; COUNTY OF MAUI; COUNTY OF KAUAI;
HAWAI'I HEALTH SYSTEMS CORPORATION; AND THE JUDICIARY,
Complainants/Appellees-Appellees,
vs.
 
DAYTON NAKANELUA, State Director,
UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFL-CIO
AND UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFL-CIO (2009-042)
Respondents/Appellants-Appellants,
and 
HAWAI'I LABOR RELATIONS BOARD; JAMES B. NICHOLSON;
SESNITA A.D. MOEPONO; and ROCK B. LEY,
Agency/Appellees-Appellees. 
Case No. CE-10-726
 
UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFL-CIO,
Complainant/Appellant-Appellant,
vs.
 
NEIL DIETZ, Chief Negotiator, Office of
Collective Bargaining, State of Hawai 'i (2009-043),
Respondent/Appellee-Appellee,
and
 
HAWAI'I LABOR RELATIONS BOARD; JAMES B. NICHOLSON;
SESNITA A.D. MOEPONO; and ROCK B. LEY,
Agency/Appellees-Appellees. 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0323)
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
January 31, 2014
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND FOLEY AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE
 
These consolidated appeals stem from a dispute between
 
government employers and a government-employee union regarding
 
the process of selecting a neutral arbitrator after an impasse
 was reached in the parties' renegotiation of their collective
 bargaining agreement (CBA) for a new term. The type of
 arbitration involved in this case, known as "interest
 
3
arbitration,"  is designed to determine the terms of the parties'
CBA when the parties cannot come to an agreement and an impasse
 is reached. The use of arbitration to resolve the impasse in
 this case is mandated by statute. 
The government employers, the State of Hawai 'i (State), 
the Judiciary, Hawaii Health Systems Corporation, and the City and County of Honolulu (City) (collectively, "Employer"), and the government-employee union, United Public Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO (UPW), reached an impasse in the renegotiation of the CBA for Bargaining Unit 10 (Unit 10), which is comprised of institutional, health, and correctional workers. Employer and UPW entered into a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) setting forth an alternate impasse procedure for selecting a panel of arbitrators to conduct the arbitration required by Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 89-11 (2012) to resolve the impasse. However, after a dispute arose over the selection of the neutral arbitrator under the MOA, both Employer and UPW filed prohibited practice complaints with the Hawai
'i Labor Relations Board (HLRB or 
Board). UPW also filed a motion to compel arbitration concerning 
3As used in labor law, the term "interest arbitration" means
"arbitration of a dispute concerning what provisions will be included in a new
collective bargaining agreement." Black's Law Dictionary 120 (9th ed. 2009).
"This type of arbitration is most common in public-sector collective
bargaining." Id.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this dispute with the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
Court).
 
The HLRB issued an order for interlocutory relief in
 
Employer's and UPW's prohibited practice cases that directed the
 American Arbitration Association (AAA) to select the neutral
 arbitrator. After the neutral arbitrator was selected,
 arbitration hearings were held and the arbitration panel issued
 its award. UPW filed a motion to confirm the arbitration award
 with the Circuit Court, which the Circuit Court granted. In
 these consolidated appeals, neither UPW nor Employer challenges
 the terms of the arbitration award or seeks to invalidate the
 award, which pertains to the 2009-2011 CBA. After the Circuit
 Court issued its order confirming the arbitration award, UPW
 filed a motion in Circuit Court to have Employer found in civil
 contempt for allegedly violating the arbitration award and
 disobeying the confirmation order by failing to meet and confer
 to complete the final drafting of the CBA. The Circuit Court
 denied UPW's motion.
 
On appeal, UPW argues that the Circuit Court erred in:
 
(1) determining that the HLRB, and not the Circuit Court, had
 
4
jurisdiction to resolve the parties'  dispute over the selection
of the neutral arbitrator; (2) determining that the HLRB had not
 exceeded its authority in issuing the order for interlocutory
 relief directing the AAA to select the neutral arbitrator; (3)
 determining that the HLRB had not erred or violated UPW's due
 process rights in ruling that UPW had committed a prohibited
 practice in connection with the selection of the neutral
 arbitrator; and (4) denying UPW's motion to find Employer in
 civil contempt.
 
We conclude that because neither UPW nor Employer
 
challenges or seeks to invalidate the terms of the arbitration
 
4Although the HLRB is a party in Appeal Nos. 30444 and CAAP-10-0000166,
which involve its decisions, when we refer to "the parties," we mean UPW and
Employer.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
award on appeal, and UPW, in particular, has moved to confirm and 
enforce the arbitration award, UPW's challenges to the selection of the neutral arbitrator in these appeals are moot. However, we further conclude that certain aspects of UPW's challenges to the selection of the neutral arbitrator, namely, whether the HLRB or the Circuit Court had original jurisdiction to resolve the parties' dispute over the selection and whether the HLRB exceeded its authority in the remedial interlocutory relief it granted, falls within the public interest exception to the mootness doctrine. See Hawaii Gov't Emps. Ass'n, AFSCME, Local 152, AFL­
CIO v. Lingle (hereinafter, "HGEA"), 124 Hawai
'i 197, 202 n.8, 
239 P.3d 1, 6 n.8 (2010). As explained in greater detail below, we hold that UPW's and Employer's dispute over the selection of the neutral arbitrator and UPW's motion for civil contempt involved controversies concerning prohibited practices over which the HLRB had exclusive original jurisdiction. We further hold that the HLRB did not exceed its authority in issuing its order for interlocutory relief. Accordingly, we hold that UPW is not entitled to the relief it requests in these consolidated appeals. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
5
HRS § 89-11 (2012)  establishes the process for
resolving an impasse between a public employer and the exclusive
 bargaining representative of a bargaining unit in negotiating the
 terms of a renewed CBA. HRS § 89-11(e), which applies to Unit
 10, provides for mediation if an impasse exists, and then
 submission to arbitration if the impasse continues for more than
 twenty days.
6 In this type of arbitration, known as "interest
 
5The version of HRS § 89-11 that was in effect as of 2012 is applicable
to these appeals. In 2013, HRS § 89-11(e) was amended in ways not material to
our analysis. See 2013 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 137, § 4 at 429. 
6HRS § 89-11(e) provides in relevant part:
 
(e) If an impasse exists between a public employer and the
exclusive representative of bargaining unit . . . (10),
(continued...)
 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arbitration," the arbitrator or arbitration panel is used to
 
resolve the impasse by determining the actual contract terms that
 will bind the parties during the life of their new collective
 bargaining agreement.
7
 
HRS § 89-11(e)(2)(A)-(D) sets forth procedures for
 
selecting a three-member panel to conduct the interest
 arbitration and deadlines for the arbitration panel to hold a
 hearing and issue the arbitration decision. HRS § 89-11(f)
 establishes the factors the arbitration panel must give weight to
 in reaching its decision and requires the panel to "include in
 its written report or decision an explanation of how the factors
 were taken into account[.]"
8 HRS § 89-11(a) authorizes the 
6(...continued)
institutional, health, and correctional workers . . . , the board
shall assist in the resolution of the impasse as follows:
 
(1)	 Mediation. During the first twenty days after the
date of impasse, the board shall immediately appoint a
mediator, representative of the public from a list of
qualified persons maintained by the board, to assist
the parties in a voluntary resolution of the impasse. 
(2)	 Arbitration. If the impasse continues twenty days
after the date of impasse, the board shall immediately
notify the employer and the exclusive representative
that the impasse shall be submitted to a three-member
arbitration panel who shall follow the arbitration
procedure provided herein.
 
7See, Charles B. Craver, The Judicial Enforcement of Public Sector
Interest Arbitration, 21 B.C.L. Rev. 557, 558 n.8 (1980). Interest
 arbitration is distinguished from grievance arbitration, in which the
arbitrator or arbitration panel is only empowered to decide disputes
concerning the interpretation and application of the terms of an already
existing collective bargaining agreement. Id. 
8HRS § 89-11(f) provides:
 
(f) An arbitration panel in reaching its decision shall give
weight to the following factors and shall include in its written
report or decision an explanation of how the factors were taken
into account:
 
(1)	 The lawful authority of the employer, including the
ability of the employer to use special funds only for
authorized purposes or under specific circumstances
because of limitations imposed by federal or state
laws or county ordinances, as the case may be; 
(continued...)
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parties to enter into a written agreement setting forth an
 
alternate impasse procedure to the one set forth in HRS § 89­11(e) that culminates in an arbitration decision pursuant to HRS
 § 89-11(f).
9 The alternate impasse procedure is required to
 
8(...continued)
(2)	 Stipulations of the parties; 
(3) 	The interests and welfare of the public; 
(4)	 The financial ability of the employer to meet these
costs; provided that the employer's ability to fund
cost items shall not be predicated on the premise that
the employer may increase or impose new taxes, fees,
or charges, or develop other sources of revenues; 
(5)	 The present and future general economic condition of
the counties and the State; 
(6)	 Comparison of wages, hours, and conditions of
employment of the employees involved in the
arbitration proceeding with the wages, hours, and
conditions of employment of other persons performing
similar services, and of other state and county
employees in Hawaii; 
(7)	 The average consumer prices for goods or services,
commonly known as the cost of living; 
(8)	 The overall compensation presently received by the
employees, including direct wage compensation,
vacation, holidays and excused time, insurance and
pensions, medical and hospitalization benefits, the
continuity and stability of employment, and all other
benefits received; 
(9)	 Changes in any of the foregoing circumstances during
the pendency of the arbitration proceedings; and 
(10)	 Such other factors, not confined to the foregoing,
which are normally or traditionally taken into
consideration in the determination of wages, hours,
and conditions of employment through voluntary
collective bargaining, mediation, arbitration, or
otherwise between the parties, in the public service
or in private employment. 
9HRS § 89-11(a) provides:
 
(a) A public employer and an exclusive representative may
enter, at any time, into a written agreement setting forth an
alternate impasse procedure culminating in an arbitration decision
pursuant to subsection (f), to be invoked in the event of an
impasse over the terms of an initial or renewed agreement. The
 alternate impasse procedure shall specify whether the parties
desire an arbitrator or arbitration panel, how the neutral
arbitrator is to be selected or the name of the person whom the
(continued...) 
7
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
specify whether the parties desire an arbitrator or arbitration
 
panel; how the neutral arbitrator will be determined or the name
 of the neutral arbitrator selected by the parties; and other
 details regarding the issuance of the arbitration decision. HRS
 § 89-11(a). Although HRS § 89-11(a) permits the parties to agree
 to an alternate impasse procedure for selecting arbitrators and
 conducting the arbitration, HRS § 89-11 requires that the impasse
 be resolved through arbitration.
10
 
II.
 
On November 20, 2008, UPW entered into negotiations
 
with Employer over the renewal of and modifications to the Unit
 10 CBA for the period from July 1, 2009, through June 30, 2011. 
The parties could not reach mutual agreement on all the terms
 being negotiated, and thus, the HLRB issued an order pursuant to
 HRS § 89-11(c)(2) declaring that the parties had reached an
 impasse. On March 3, 2009, UPW and Employer entered into an MOA
 
setting forth an alternative impasse procedure pursuant to HRS 
§ 89-11(a). The MOA named Dayton Nakanelua (Nakanelua), the UPW
 State Director, and Marie Laderta (Laderta), the Chief Negotiator
 for the State, as the representatives for UPW and Employer,
 respectively. 
The MOA set forth the procedure and deadlines for
 
selecting a panel of three arbitrators. Employer and UPW would
 
(...continued)
parties desire to be appointed as the neutral arbitrator, and
other details regarding the issuance of an arbitration decision.
When an impasse exists, the parties shall notify the board if they
have agreed on an alternate impasse procedure. In the absence of
 an alternate impasse procedure, the board shall assist in the
resolution of the impasse at times and in the manner prescribed in
subsection (d) or (e), as the case may be. If the parties
subsequently agree on an alternate impasse procedure, the parties
shall notify the board. The board shall immediately discontinue
the procedures initiated pursuant to subsection (d) or (e) and
permit the parties to proceed with their procedure. 
10The parties, however, may reach voluntary settlement of unresolved
issues at any time prior to issuance of the arbitration decision, HRS § 89­11(i), and may by mutual agreement amend or modify the arbitration decision.
HRS § 89-11(g).
 
8
  
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
each select a panel member, and a third neutral arbitrator would
 
be selected by mutual agreement of the parties to serve as the
 chair of the panel. If mutual agreement as to the neutral
 
arbitrator could not be reached by July 6, 2009, the MOA provided
 
that the HLRB would request a list of five potential arbitrators
 from the AAA, and each party would alternatively strike a name
 from the list until a single name remained.  The striking process
 
was to be completed within five working days after receiving the
 
list from the AAA.
 
By letter dated June 29, 2009, UPW designated Clifford
 
Uwaine to serve as its panel member. By letter dated July 13,
 2009, Laderta selected Georgina Kawamura as Employer's panel
 member, but later replaced Kawamura with Stanley Shiraki. 
UPW and Employer could not mutually agree on the
 
neutral arbitrator by the agreed upon deadline. Accordingly, on
 July 15, 2009, the AAA provided the parties with the following
 five names of potential arbitrators from which to select the
 neutral arbitrator: Sara Adler, Norman Brand, Fredric R. Dichter,
 Jonathan Dworkin, and William E. Riker. Under the MOA, the
 neutral arbitrator was to be selected by the parties on or before
 July 22, 2009. However, when that date passed without the
 
parties beginning the striking process, the parties agreed to
 
amend the MOA to extend the deadline for selecting the neutral
 arbitrator to July 28, 2009.
 
According to Employer, after receiving the AAA list,
 
Laderta attempted to contact Nakanelua regarding the selection of
 the neutral arbitrator prior to the amended deadline, but
 Nakanelua did not return her calls. On July 28, 2009, Herbert R.
 
Takahashi, Esq. (Takahashi), UPW's attorney, sent a letter to
 
each public employer (or its counsel) involved in the interest
 arbitration with Unit 10, stating that he would be selecting the
 arbitrator in behalf of UPW and requesting verification of "who
 will be doing the selection for the employer jurisdictions." 
Deputy Attorney General James E. Halvorson (Halvorson) informed
 
9
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Takahashi by letter dated July 31, 2009, that he had been
 
assigned to represent Employer and would be "selecting the
 [a]rbitrator in this matter." Takahashi responded with a letter
 dated August 3, 2009, requesting clarification from Halvorson
 regarding "which 'employer' you represent." Halvorson responded
 by letter dated August 6, 2009, reiterating that he represented
 Employer "in the upcoming Unit 10 interest arbitration" and would
 be conducting the selection of the neutral arbitrator. Halvorson
 also requested that Takahashi contact him to make arrangements to
 begin the selection process.
 
On August 10, 2009, Halvorson requested the HLRB's
 
assistance in facilitating selection of the neutral arbitrator. 
On August 13, 2009, the HLRB held a meeting with the parties
 where Halvorson proposed to initiate the striking procedure.
 Takahashi refused to begin the striking process at that meeting. 
Takahashi wrote to Halvorson by letter dated August 14, 2009,
 asking him to proceed with the first strike, but stating that
 such action would not constitute a waiver of UPW's right to
 contest Halvorson's authority to represent Employer.
 
Halvorson exercised Employer's first strike by striking
 
William E. Riker in an undated letter received by Takahashi on
 August 18, 2009. Takahashi responded by letter dated August 20,
 2009, which Halvorson asserted he received on August 24, 2009,
 striking Norman Brand.
 
In an August 21, 2009, email, AAA case manager Chris
 
Camardella (Camardella) advised the parties that none of the five
 arbitrators would likely be available to accommodate the
 September 11, 2009, date set by the MOA for commencement of the
 arbitration hearing due to the delay in selecting the neutral
 arbitrator. In his email, Camardella set a deadline of August
 
25, 2009, for the parties to select the neutral arbitrator and
 
stated that absent receipt of advice from the parties, AAA would
 administratively appoint an arbitrator at that time. Takahashi
 
responded to Camardella by letter dated August 24, 2009,
 
10
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
asserting that the AAA lacked the authority to set a deadline for
 
the selection of the neutral arbitrator or to appoint the neutral
 arbitrator. In his letter to AAA, Takahashi also noted that
 there was a "dispute over who the 'employer' is, and whether the
 selection of arbitrators by the State . . . is improper."
 
Employer subsequently sent a letter to Takahashi dated
 
August 26, 2009, asserting that Takahashi had "stonewalled any
 attempts to select [a neutral] arbitrator[,]" and that he had
 "delayed the selection by taking one week to make [his] strike." 
In addition, Employer claimed that Takahashi was "not acting in
 good faith" by continuing to challenge Halvorson's authority to
 act for Employer, and thus, UPW had waived certain of its rights
 related to the interest arbitration. Takahashi responded by
 
letter dated August 27, 2009, requesting Employer to make its
 
second strike, which Employer refused to do. 
III.
 
On August 24, 2009, Employer filed a prohibited
 
practice complaint with the HLRB against UPW and Nakanelua, State
 Director of UPW, in Case No. CU-10-278. Employer's complaint
 asserted, among other things, that: (1) Employer's Chief
 Negotiator (Laderta) attempted to contact UPW's State Director
 (Nakanelua) from July 15, 2009, until July 28, 2009, but that
 Nakanelua never returned Laderta's calls; and (2) UPW has refused
 to participate in the selection of an arbitrator or honor the
 AAA's August 25, 2009, deadline for selection. Employer alleged
 that UPW committed a prohibited practice through its wilful
 
11
violation of HRS § 89-13(b)(4)  by refusing to comply with HRS §
89-11. 
11
 HRS § 89-13(b)(4) (2012) provides:
 
(b) It shall be a prohibited practice for a public employee
or for an employee organization or its designated agent wilfully
to:
 
. . . ;
 
(4)	 Refuse or fail to comply with any provision of this
chapter[.]
 
11
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On August 31, 2009, UPW filed a prohibited practice 
complaint with the HLRB against Laderta, Chief Negotiator, Office 
of Collective Bargaining, State of Hawai 'i, in Case No. CE-10­
726. UPW's complaint asserted, among other things, that: (1) on
 
August 26, 2009, Laderta refused to exercise her second strike
 from the remaining members on the AAA list; and (2) on and after
 August 28, 2009, Laderta has willfully refused to proceed with
 the arbitrator selection process as required by the MOA. UPW
 alleged that Laderta committed a prohibited practice in wilful
 violation of HRS § 89-13(a)(8).
12
 
On September 2, 2009, the State filed a motion for
 
interlocutory relief in Case No. CU-10-278 (Motion for
 Interlocutory Relief), seeking a declaratory order that UPW: (1)
 is in violation of the MOA; (2) committed a prohibited practice;
 and (3) waived its right either (a) to participate in the
 interest arbitration or (b) to participate in the selection of
 the neutral arbitrator. On September 10, 2009, UPW filed a
 motion to dismiss Employer's complaint for lack of subject matter
 jurisdiction and failure to state a claim, or in the alternative,
 for summary judgment (Motion to Dismiss Case No. CU-10-278). On
 
September 10, 2009, UPW filed a motion for summary judgment on
 
its complaint in Case No. CE-10-726 (Motion for Summary
 Judgment).
 
The HLRB consolidated Case Nos. CU-10-278 and 
CE-10-726. On September 21, 2009, the HLRB held a hearing on (1)
 the State's Motion for Interlocutory Relief, (2) UPW's Motion to
 Dismiss Case No. CU-10-278, and (3) UPW's Motion for Summary
 Judgment in Case No. CE-10-726. 
12 HRS § 89-13(a)(8) (2012) provides:
 
(a) It shall be a prohibited practice for a public employer
or its designated representative wilfully to:
 
. . . ;
 
(8)	 Violate the terms of a collective bargaining
agreement[.] 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On September 25, 2009, the HLRB issued Order No. 2640,
 
which granted, in part, the State's Motion for Interlocutory
 
Relief, but did not rule on the other motions.  The HLRB
 
determined that "under [HRS] Chapter 89[,] the Board has
 
exclusive jurisdiction over disputes involving interest
 arbitration as it does over disputes involving other collective
 bargaining and collective bargaining agreements."   The HLRB
 
recited the numerous filings by and correspondences between UPW
 and Employer pertaining to the selection of the neutral
 arbitrator, and it concluded:
 
19.	 It is clear to the Board that there has been undue
 
delay in the selection of the neutral arbitrator.
Because it is the employer that moved the Board for
interlocutory relief, the Board's analysis is
therefore based upon whether or not the employer is
likely to prevail at trial. The Board concludes that,
given the history of events regarding the interest
arbitration procedure, the employer is likely to
prevail on the merits that the UPW committed a
prohibited practice by wilfully failing to comply with
the impasse procedure set forth in HRS § 89-11 and by
extension the alternate impasse procedure authorized
by HRS § 89-11 and entered into by the parties. 
20. 	With respect to balance of irreparable damage, the
balance favors interlocutory relief. The expiration
of the Unit 10 contract was June 30, 2009. The
 relatively short time frames for the interest
arbitration process contained in HRS § 89-11 evince
the legislature's intent that unresolved issues
between the parties be dealt with expeditiously. To
 wilfully refuse to comply with the interest
arbitration deadlines puts the interests of both
parties and the public employees belonging to Unit 10,
at risk. Additionally, the Unit 10 members do not
have the legal right to strike, and the interest
arbitration proceeding is their only means to obtain a
new or renewed collective bargaining agreement once
impasse occurs. Therefore, the interest arbitration
hearing should not be unduly delayed. 
21.	 For similar reasons, public interest supports
interlocutory relief. Additionally, public interest
favors interlocutory relief inasmuch as "[the need for
good faith bargaining or negotiation is fundamental to
bringing to fruition the legislatively declared policy
to promote harmonious and cooperative relations
between government and its employees and to protect
the public by assuring effective and orderly
operations of government." Board of Education v.
 
Hawaii Public Employment Relations Board, 56 Haw. 85,
87, 528 P.2d 809. 811 (1974).
 
(Footnote omitted.)
 
13
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The HLRB disagreed with Employer's claim that UPW 
waived its right to participate in the interest arbitration
 
hearing. The HLRB concluded that the severe remedy of not
 allowing UPW to participate in the interest arbitration hearing
 "would not be a fair remedy for the alleged prohibited practice
 committed" by UPW, especially since some of the delay in
 selecting the neutral arbitrator may be attributed to Employer. 
Instead, the HLRB only granted Employer's motion in part, and it
 ordered that "AAA shall select the neutral arbitrator, and the
 parties shall take all actions necessary to expedite the
 scheduling of the interest arbitration proceeding." Pursuant to
 HLRB Order No. 2640, AAA administratively appointed Jonathan
 Dworkin (Dworkin) on September 30, 2009, as the neutral
 arbitrator for the Unit 10 interest arbitration. 
UPW appealed the HLRB's Order No. 2640 to the Circuit
 
Court. After a hearing held on March 9, 2010, the Circuit Court
 affirmed the HLRB's Order No. 2640 and issued its "Decision and
 Order Affirming Board Order No. 2640, Dated September 25,
 2009."
13 On April 1, 2010, the Circuit Court filed its "Final
 
Judgment" pursuant to its Decision and Order. In Appeal No.
 30444, UPW appeals from the April 1, 2010, Final Judgment of the
 Circuit Court. 
IV.
 
A.
 
In the meantime, on September 10, 2009, UPW filed a
 
"Motion to Compel Arbitration, Appointment of Arbitrators, and
 Other Appropriate Relief" (Motion to Compel Arbitration) in the
 Circuit Court in S.P. No. 09-1-0305.  UPW relied on HRS Chapter
 
658A, Hawaii's Uniform Arbitration Act, as the basis for the
 
Circuit Court's jurisdiction and authority to provide the
 requested relief, which included a request for an order
 compelling arbitration and an order appointing or determining the
 method of appointing the neutral arbitrator.
 
13
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 
14
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 21, 2009, the Circuit Court issued an order
 
granting in part and denying in part UPW's Motion to Compel
 
Arbitration (Order Regarding UPW's Motion to Compel
 Arbitration).
14 The Circuit Court ruled that it "lack[ed]
 
subject matter jurisdiction over the issues presented regarding
 prohibited practices" and that the HLRB had jurisdiction over
 these issues under HRS § 89-14. The Circuit Court alternatively
 ruled that if it had jurisdiction, then: (1) under the primary
 jurisdiction doctrine, the HLRB should have the first opportunity
 to address the issues presented; and (2) the HLRB having rendered
 its ruling on the issues, the Circuit Court adopted the HLRB's
 rulings regarding the selection of the arbitration panel,
 including the selection of Dworkin by AAA, as ordered by the
 HLRB, as the neutral arbitrator. 
B.
 
After Dworkin was selected as the neutral arbitrator,
 
the arbitration hearings began on November 4, 2009, and the
 arbitration panel rendered a final decision and award
 (Arbitration Award) on January 14, 2010. The Arbitration Award
 ordered that the negotiated provisions of the prior 2007-2009 CBA
 be carried forward into the 2009-2011 CBA, except where modified
 by the Arbitration Award or by mutual agreement of the parties. 
The Arbitration Award further ordered the parties to "meet and
 confer, without undue delay, and draft such language for the
 2009-2011 [CBA] as is necessary and appropriate to give effect to
 the [awards set forth in the Arbitration Award]." 
On February 19, 2010, UPW filed a "Motion to Confirm
 
and Enforce Arbitration Award, Entry of Judgment, and Order
 Allowing Costs and/or Attorney's Fees" (Motion to Confirm
 Arbitration Award), pursuant to HRS Chapter 658A, with the
 Circuit Court in S.P. No. 09-1-0305. Employer opposed the
 
motion, arguing that the Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction under
 
14
 The Honorable Sabrina S. McKenna presided over the proceedings
related to UPW's Motion to Compel Arbitration. 
15
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS Chapter 658A to confirm the Arbitration Award.15 Following a
 
hearing on UPW's Motion to Confirm Arbitration Award, the Circuit
 
Court, on May 18, 2010, issued an order granting the motion
 (Order Confirming Arbitration Award).
16 On that same date, the
 
Circuit Court entered its Final Judgment. In Appeal No. 30568,
 UPW appeals from the May 18, 2010, Final Judgment of the Circuit
 Court.
17 The only aspect of the Final Judgment challenged by UPW
 
on appeal is the Circuit Court's October 21, 2009, Order
 Regarding UPW's Motion to Compel Arbitration.
 
C. 
On July 7, 2010, UPW filed its "Motion for Show Cause
 
Order and for Civil Contempt" (Motion for Civil Contempt). In
 its motion, UPW asserted that the Arbitration Award, which the
 Circuit Court had confirmed, required Employer and UPW to meet
 and confer, without undue delay, and draft language for the 2009­2011 CBA for Unit 10 employees. UPW asked the Circuit Court "to
 cite the Employer in civil contempt for refusal to meet and
 confer on and after May 18, 2010," and to impose judicial
 sanctions, including civil fines, attorney's fees, and costs
 against Employer. The Circuit Court denied UPW's Motion for
 Civil Contempt. On August 25, 2010, the Circuit Court issued its
 "Order Denying [UPW's] Motion for Show Cause Order and for Civil
 Contempt" (Order Denying Motion for Civil Contempt), in which the
 Circuit Court found that "there [was] no clear and convincing
 evidence that the [Employer] failed to comply with this Court's
 
15
 The City filed a statement of no opposition as to UPW's motion to
confirm and a statement of no position as to UPW's motion to enforce. 
16
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 
17On June 16, 2010, Employer, except for the City, filed a notice of
appeal from the May 18, 2010, Final Judgment, which became Appeal No. 30568.
On June 23, 2010, UPW filed a cross-appeal from this Final Judgment. Employer
(except for the City which had not appealed) subsequently filed a motion to
dismiss its appeal in Appeal No. 30568, which this Court granted. Thus only
UPW's cross-appeal from the May 18, 2010, Final Judgment remains.
 
16
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
order and judgment filed on May 18, 2010."18 UPW subsequently
 
filed a notice of appeal from the Circuit Court's Order Denying
 
Motion for Civil Contempt in Appeal No. 30568.
 
V.
 
Meanwhile, after issuing Order No. 2640 granting in
 
part the State's Motion for Interlocutory Relief, the HLRB, on
 February 9, 2010, issued Order No. 2686 in the parties'
 consolidated prohibited practice cases, Case Nos. CU-10-278 and
 CE-10-726. Among other things, Order No. 2686 decided UPW's
 Motion to Dismiss Case No. CU-10-278 and its Motion for Summary
 Judgment in Case No. CE-10-726. In Order No. 2686, the HLRB held
 that both Employer and UPW had "wilfully refused to complete the
 arbitration selection process for the Unit 10 interest
 arbitration[,]" and that such refusal constituted a violation of
 HRS § 89-11 and the parties' MOA. The HLRB held that Employer
 had committed a prohibited pursuant to HRS § 89-13(a)(8) and UPW
 had committed a prohibited practice pursuant to HRS § 89­13(b)(4). The HLRB ordered that a copy of its Order No. 2686 be
 posted for sixty days by the parties "on their website and in
 conspicuous places where employees of Unit 10 assemble[.]"
 
On February 12, 2010, UPW appealed Order No. 2686 to
 
the Circuit Court.
19 After a hearing held on October 12, 2010,
 
the Circuit Court affirmed the HLRB's Order No. 2686 and issued
 its "Order Affirming Board Order No. 2686 Dated February 9,
 2010."
20 On November 10, 2010, the Circuit Court entered its
 
Final Judgment pursuant to its Order. In Appeal No. CAAP-10­0000166, UPW appeals from the November 10, 2010, Final Judgment
 of the Circuit Court. 
18
 The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided.
 
19 UPW's appeal was docketed in Circuit Court as Civil No. 10-1-0323-02.
The State filed a separate appeal of Order No. 2686, which was consolidated
with UPW's appeal in Civil No. 10-1-0323-02.
 
20
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
In the three consolidated appeals, UPW appeals Circuit
 
Court rulings issued at various stages of the interest
 
arbitration proceedings. Certain of the issues UPW raises in the
 appeals are the same or overlap. In the consolidated appeals,
 UPW argues that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) determining that
 the HLRB, and not the Circuit Court, had jurisdiction to resolve
 the parties' dispute over the selection of the neutral
 arbitrator; (2) determining that the HLRB had not exceeded its
 authority in issuing the order for interlocutory relief directing
 the AAA to select the neutral arbitrator; (3) determining that
 the HLRB had not erred or violated UPW's due process rights in
 ruling that UPW had committed a prohibited practice in connection
 with the selection of the neutral arbitrator; and (4) denying
 UPW's motion to find Employer in civil contempt.
 
I.
 A.
 
We first address whether certain issues UPW raises on
 
appeal are moot. 
A case is moot if it has lost its character as a present,
 
live controversy of the kind that must exist if courts are
 to avoid advisory opinions on abstract propositions of law. 
The rule is one of the prudential rules of judicial self-
governance founded in concern about the proper -- and
properly limited -- role of the courts in a democratic
society. We have said the suit must remain alive throughout
the course of litigation to the moment of final appellate
disposition to escape the mootness bar. 
Simply put, a case is moot if the reviewing court can no
 
longer grant effective relief. 
Kaho'ohanohano v. State, 114 Hawai 'i 302, 332, 162 P.3d 696, 726 
(2007) (formatting altered; internal quotation marks, citations, 
and brackets omitted). 
As noted, in these consolidated appeals, neither UPW
 
nor Employer challenges the terms of the Arbitration Award or
 seeks to invalidate the award. Indeed, UPW filed a motion in
 Circuit Court to confirm the Arbitration Award and argues on
 appeal that the Circuit Court erred in denying UPW's motion to
 
18
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
find Employer in civil contempt for failing to comply with the
 
award. Under these circumstances, we conclude that the issues
 raised by UPW relating to the selection of the neutral arbitrator
 are moot because there is no live controversy between UPW and
 Employer regarding the terms of the Arbitration Award and thus no
 effective relief can be granted on such issues.
 
B.
 
UPW argues that the Arbitration Award did not erase the
 
HLRB's finding in Order No. 2686 that UPW committed a prohibited
 practice in connection with the selection of the neutral
 arbitrator. UPW does not identify any collateral consequences
 resulting from this finding, but argues that it may pursue an
 appeal to legally remove this finding. In support of its claim,
 
UPW cites NLRB v. Mexia Textile Mills, Inc., 339 U.S. 563 (1950). 
However, Mexia Textile does not support UPW's argument. In Order
 No. 2686, the HLRB held that both Employer and UPW had "wilfully
 refused to complete the arbitration selection process for the
 Unit 10 interest arbitration[,]" and that such refusal
 constituted a violation of HRS § 89-11 and the parties' MOA. 
In Mexia Textile, the National Labor Relations Board
 
(NLRB) ordered the employer to cease and desist from its refusal
 to bargain in good faith with the union. Id. at 566. The NLRB
 
then petitioned the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit to
 enforce its order. Id. The Fifth Circuit deferred action on
 
NLRB's petition, referring the case back to the NLRB to determine
 whether the employer had complied with the order and whether the
 order was moot. Id. at 566-67. On certiorari review, the
 
Supreme Court stated:
 
We think it plain from the cases that the employer's
compliance with an order of the Board does not render the
cause moot, depriving the Board of its opportunity to secure
enforcement from an appropriate court. . . . A Board order
 imposes a continuing obligation; and the Board is entitled
to have the resumption of the unfair practice barred by an
enforcement decree. 
Id. at 567. 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Unlike Mexia Textile, the HLRB is not seeking judicial
 
enforcement of Order No. 2686, and the HLRB's finding in Order
 
No. 2686 challenged by UPW does not impose any continuing
 obligation on UPW. The HLRB's Order No. 2686 related to the
 selection of the neutral arbitrator, found that both parties had
 engaged in prohibited practices, and ordered the posting of the
 HLRB's order for sixty days. UPW does not have any continuing
 obligation under Order No. 2686 that could save its challenge to
 that order from being moot. 
C.
 
Although UPW's issues regarding the selection of the 
neutral arbitrator are moot, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has 
recognized a public interest exception to the mootness doctrine. HGEA, 124 Hawai
'i at 202 n.8, 239 P.3d at 6 n.8. This exception 
applies "[w]hen the question involved affects the public interest and an authoritative determination is desirable for guidance of public officials[.]" Id. (internal quotation marks and citation 
omitted). In determining whether the public interest exception applies, "we look to (1) the public or private nature of the question presented, (2) the desirability of an authoritative determination for the future guidance of public officers, and (3) the likelihood of future reference of the question." Id. 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
In HGEA, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court applied the public 
interest exception to address issues concerning the jurisdiction of the HLRB and the circuit court to decide claims related to the imposition of furloughs on government employees, even though the furlough controversy was moot because the parties had settled the underlying litigation. Id. Similarly, we conclude that the 
issues of whether the HLRB or the Circuit Court had original jurisdiction to resolve the dispute over the selection of the neutral arbitrator, and whether the HLRB exceeded its authority in issuing its order for interlocutory relief, fall within the public interest exception. 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
First, these issues are public in nature as they relate
 
to the process for determining the terms of a CBA for a public-
employee bargaining unit through interest arbitration. Second, a
 determination of these issues would provide useful guidance to
 public officers involved in the collective bargaining process. 
Third, because interest arbitration is required by HRS § 89-11 to
 resolve impasses between government employers and many
 government-employee bargaining units in the negotiation of
 collective bargaining agreements, it is reasonably likely that
 these issues will arise again in the future. 
Accordingly, we address the issues raised by UPW
 
regarding whether (1) the HLRB or the Circuit Court had
 jurisdiction to determine the parties' dispute over the selection
 of the neutral arbitrator; and (2) whether the HLRB exceeded its
 authority in issuing the order for interlocutory relief directing
 the AAA to select the neutral arbitrator. We do not address the
 issue of whether the HLRB erred or violated UPW's due process
 rights in ruling that UPW had committed a prohibited practice in
 connection with the selection of neutral arbitrator. We conclude
 that this last issue turns on the particular facts and
 circumstances of this case and does fall within the public
 interest exception.
 
II. 
UPW argues that the Circuit Court, not the HLRB, had
 
original jurisdiction to resolve the parties' dispute over the
 selection of a neutral arbitrator for their interest arbitration. 
We disagree.
 
"Whether a court possesses subject matter jurisdiction 
is a question of law reviewable de novo." HGEA, 124 Hawai
'i at 
201, 239 P.3d at 5 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
A.
 
The HLRB is tasked with administering the provisions of
 
HRS Chapter 89, entitled "Collective Bargaining in Public 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Employment." See HRS § 89-1(b) (2012). The Legislature created
 
the HLRB "to ensure that collective bargaining is conducted in
 
accordance with [Chapter 89] . . . ." HRS § 89-5(a) (2012). 
Accordingly, the HLRB is required, among other things, to resolve
 controversies arising under HRS Chapter 89 and conduct
 proceedings on complaints of prohibited practices. See HRS § 89­
5(i)(3), (i)(4). 
Under HRS § 89-14 (2012),
21 the HLRB has "exclusive
 
original jurisdiction" over "[a]ny controversy concerning
 prohibited practices[.]"
22 HRS § 89-13 defines "prohibited
 
practices" as including to wilfully: (1) "[r]efuse to participate
 in good faith in the mediation and arbitration procedures set
 forth in section 89-11"; (2) "[r]efuse or fail to comply with any
 provision of [Chapter 89]"; and (3) "[v]iolate the terms of a
 collective bargaining agreement[.]" HRS § 89-13(a)(6), (a)(7),
 (a)(8); HRS § 89-13(b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(5).
23
 
21HRS § 89-14 provides:
 
Any controversy concerning prohibited practices may be
submitted to the board in the same manner and with the same effect
 
as provided in section 377-9; provided that the board shall have
exclusive original jurisdiction over such a controversy except
that nothing herein shall preclude (1) the institution of
appropriate proceedings in circuit court pursuant to section
[89-12(c)] or (2) the judicial review of decisions or orders of
the board in prohibited practice controversies in accordance with
section 377-9 and chapter 91. All references in section 377-9 to
 "labor organization" shall include employee organization.
 
(Brackets in original.) 
22In 1982, the Hawai' i Legislature amended HRS § 89-14 to legislatively
overrule the Intermediate Court of Appeals decision in Winslow v. State, 2Haw. App. 50, 56-57, 625 P.2d 1046, 1051-52 (1981), which held that circuitcourts and the predecessor to the HLRB shared concurrent jurisdiction overprohibited practice complaints filed under HRS Chapter 89. See HGEA, 124 
Hawai'i at 203, 239 P.3d at 7. In overruling Winslow, "the [L]egislature
clearly intended for the HLRB to have exclusive original jurisdiction overprohibited practice complaints[.]" Id. at 204, 239 P.3d at 8 (emphasis 
added). 
23 HRS § 89-13 provides in relevant part:
 
(a) It shall be a prohibited practice for a public
employer or its designated representative wilfully to:
 
(continued...) 
22
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For certain bargaining units including Unit 10, when
 
there is an impasse between a public employer and the exclusive
 
bargaining representative of the bargaining unit regarding the
 terms of a renewed CBA, HRS § 89-11 first provides for mediation. 
See HRS § 89-11(e). For these bargaining units, if the impasse
 continues for more than twenty days, HRS § 89-11 mandates that
 the impasse be submitted for resolution through arbitration. See
 
HRS § 89-11 (a), (e), (f), (g). HRS § 89-11(e) establishes a
 default procedure for selecting the arbitration panel and
 conducting the arbitration hearing. However, HRS § 89-11(a)
24
 
authorizes the parties to agree to an alternate impasse procedure
 culminating in an arbitration decision. Specifically, HRS § 89­11(a) provides in relevant part:
 
A public employer and an exclusive representative may
enter, at any time, into a written agreement setting forth
an alternate impasse procedure culminating in an arbitration
decision pursuant to subsection (f), to be invoked in the 
(...continued) 
. . . ;
 
(6)	 Refuse to participate in good faith in the mediation
and arbitration procedures set forth in section 89-11;
 
(7)	 Refuse or fail to comply with any provision of this
chapter;
 
(8)	 Violate the terms of a collective bargaining
agreement; 
. . . .
 
(b) It shall be a prohibited practice for a public
employee or for an employee organization or its designated agent
wilfully to:
 
. . . ;
 
(3)	 Refuse to participate in good faith in the mediation
and arbitration procedures set forth in section 89-11;
 
(4)	 Refuse or fail to comply with any provision of this
chapter; or
 
(5)	 Violate the terms of a collective bargaining
agreement. 
24See footnote 9, supra.
 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
event of an impasse over the terms of an initial or renewed
agreement.
 
Although HRS § 89-11(a) permits the parties to agree to an
 
alternate procedure for selecting arbitrators and conducting the
 arbitration, HRS § 89-11 requires that an impasse on which the
 parties cannot reach mutual agreement be resolved through
 arbitration. 
In this case, the parties agreed to an alternate
 
impasse procedure pursuant to HRS § 89-11(a). The MOA set forth
 the procedures and deadline for the selection of a neutral
 arbitrator. However, the parties failed to meet this deadline. 
Both Employer and UPW filed prohibited practice complaints with
 the HLRB. They each accused the other party of committing a
 prohibited practice under HRS § 89-13 by wilfully violating the
 MOA and HRS § 89-11 in refusing to comply with the procedures set
 forth in the MOA for selecting the neutral arbitrator.
 
As noted, HRS § 89-13 defines "prohibited practices" to
 
include the wilful refusal "to participate in good faith in the
 mediation and arbitration procedures set forth in section 89-11"
 as well as the wilful violation of any provision of HRS Chapter
 89 or the terms of a collective bargaining agreement. Under HRS
 § 89-14, the HLRB has "exclusive original jurisdiction" over
 "[a]ny controversy concerning prohibited practices[.]" Here, the
 parties' claims regarding their dispute over the selection of a
 neutral arbitrator, as alleged in their prohibited practice
 complaints, clearly involved a controversy concerning prohibited
 practices. See Borough of Nazareth v. Pennsylvania Labor
 
Relations Board, 626 A.2d 493, 496 (Pa. 1993) (holding that a
 government employer's refusal to name an arbitrator and failure
 to proceed to interest arbitration constituted an unfair labor
 practice within the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Labor
 Relations Board). We therefore conclude that the HLRB had
 exclusive original jurisdiction to determine the controversy
 concerning the selection of the neutral arbitrator. 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. 
UPW, however, asserts that the Circuit Court had 
exclusive original jurisdiction to resolve the parties' dispute 
over the selection of the neutral arbitrator under Hawai 'i's 
Uniform Arbitration Act, HRS Chapter 658A. We disagree. 
While the parties' prohibited practices complaints were
 
pending before the HLRB, UPW filed its Motion to Compel
 Arbitration with the Circuit Court. UPW brought the Motion to
 Compel Arbitration pursuant to HRS Chapter 658A and requested
 that the Circuit Court resolve the parties' dispute over the
 selection of the neutral arbitrator. 
HRS Chapter 658A governs "an agreement to arbitrate,"
 
HRS § 658A-3 (Supp. 2013), and provides that:
 
(a) A court of this State having jurisdiction over the
controversy and the parties may enforce an agreement to
arbitrate.
 
(b) An agreement to arbitrate providing for
arbitration in this State confers exclusive jurisdiction on
the court to enter judgment on an award under this chapter.
 
HRS § 658A-26 (Supp. 2013). 
UPW contends that the MOA is an "agreement to
 
arbitrate" within the meaning of HRS Chapter 658A, and therefore,
 
it appropriately sought relief from the Circuit Court pursuant to
 HRS Chapter 658A. Employer, on the other hand, argues that the
 MOA is not an "agreement to arbitrate" under HRS Chapter 658A,
 because it is not an agreement to submit their differences to
 arbitration.
25 Instead, Employer asserts that arbitration in
 
this case was mandated by statute, not by the agreement of the
 parties, and therefore HRS Chapter 658A does not apply.
 
25In support of their contentions, both UPW and Employer cite to HRS §
658A-6 (Supp. 2013), which provides in relevant part: 
(a) An agreement contained in a record to submit to
arbitration any existing or subsequent controversy arising between
the parties to the agreement is valid, enforceable, and
irrevocable except upon a ground that exists at law or in equity
for the revocation of a contract.
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
26HRS Chapter 658A is modeled after the Revised Uniform Arbitration Act
(RUAA), which revised the Uniform Arbitration Act (UAA).  Other jurisdictions
that have adopted general arbitration statutes modeled after the UAA or RUAA
have provided specific statutory guidance on whether their version of the UAAor RUAA apply to arbitrations under their collective bargaining laws.  See,
e.g., Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. ch. 251, § 1 (West, Westlaw through 2013 1st Annual
Sess.) (generally excluding provisions of Massachusetts's version of the UAAfrom applying to collective bargaining agreements to arbitrate); N.J. Stat.
Ann. § 2A:23B-3 (West, Westlaw through 2013 Legis. Sess.) (excluding "an
arbitration between an employer and a duly elected representative of employeesunder a [CBA] or collectively negotiated agreement" from New Jersey's version
of the RUAA);  Alaska Stat. Ann. § 09.43.010 (West, Westlaw through 2013 1st
Reg. Sess.) (excluding provisions of Alaska's version of the RUAA fromapplying to "a labor-management contract unless they are incorporated into the
contract by reference or their application is provided for by statute"); Me.
Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 26, § 1292 (West, Westlaw through 2013 1st Reg. Sess.)(specifying that review of interest arbitrations shall be in accordance with
the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B, relating to review of
governmental action); N.M. Stat. Ann. § 10-7E-18(A)(5) (West, Westlaw through2013 1st Reg. Sess.) (stating that in rendering a decision in an interest
arbitration, "[t]he arbitrator shall render a final, binding, written decision
resolving unresolved issues pursuant to . . . the Public Employee BargainingAct and the Uniform Arbitration Act" and providing that "[t]he decision shall
be subject to judicial review pursuant to the standard set forth in the
Uniform Arbitration Act"). 
26Unlike other jurisdictions, the Hawai# i Legislature has
not provided specific guidance on whether HRS Chapter 658A
applies to statutorily-mandated interest arbitrations under HRS
Chapter 89.26  Hawai#i appellate courts also have not addressed
this specific question.
Courts from other jurisdictions have discussed the
difference between voluntary arbitration based on an agreement to
arbitrate and compulsory arbitration mandated by statute:
[I]t should be observed that the essence of arbitration, as
traditionally used and understood, is that it be voluntary
and on consent.  The introduction of compulsion to submit to
this informal tribunal is to change its essence.  It is very
easy to transfer, quite fallaciously, notions and principles
applicable to voluntary arbitration to "compulsory"
arbitration, because, by doubtful logic but irresistible
usage, both systems carry the descriptive noun "arbitration"
in their names.  The simple and ineradicable fact is that
voluntary arbitration and compulsory arbitration are
fundamentally different if only because one may, under our
system, consent to almost any restriction upon or
deprivation of right, but similar restrictions or
deprivations, if compelled by government, must accord with
procedural and substantive due process.
Mount St. Mary's Hosp. of Niagara Falls v. Catherwood, 260 N.E.2d
508, 511 (N.Y. 1970) (citation omitted); see American Universal FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ins. Co. v. DelGreco, 530 A.2d 171, 175-79 (Conn. 1987); Board of
 
Educ. of Carlsbad Mun. Schools v. Harrell, 882 P.2d 511, 517-18
 (N.M. 1994). Relying on the distinction between voluntary and
 compulsory arbitration, these courts have concluded that the
 extremely deferential standard of review applicable to voluntary
 arbitration should not apply to compulsory arbitration. Mount
 
St. Mary's Hosp., 260 N.E.2d at 514-17; DelGreco, 530 A.2d at
 175-79; Harrell, 882 P.2d at 525-27.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has focused on the existence 
of an agreement to arbitrate in determining whether to compel arbitration. Siopes v. Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc. 
130 Hawai
'i 437, ---, 312 P.3d 869, 878 (2013). "When presented 
with a motion to compel arbitration, the court is limited to answering two questions: 1) whether an arbitration agreement exists between the parties; and 2) if so, whether the subject matter of the dispute is arbitrable under such agreement." Id. 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). The supreme court has also stated that HRS Chapter 658A "interpose[s] a written and otherwise valid contract to arbitrate as a precondition to enforcement." Id. at ---, 312 P.3d at 879 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
27 
Here, UPW argues that the parties' MOA constituted an
 
"agreement to arbitrate" that gave the Circuit Court exclusive
 original jurisdiction under HRS Chapter 658A to resolve the
 
27
As noted, HRS Chapter 658A is modeled after the RUAA. In a law review
 
article, Francis J. Pavetti, Chairman of the Drafting Committee for the RUAA,
stated that "[o]ne of the cornerstones of party autonomy under the RUAA is the
requirement that RUAA only applies if there is an agreement to arbitrate."
Francis J. Pavetti, Why the States Should Enact the Revised Uniform
Arbitration Act, 3 Pepp. Disp. Resol. L.J. 443, 444 (2003). Pavetti further
states that "[t]he RUAA does not apply to statutorily mandated arbitrations
not requiring an arbitration agreement." Id. at 444 n.4
 
The website for the Uniform Law Commission also contains a briefing on
the RUAA, which advises that: "Because RUAA only applies where there is an
agreement to arbitrate, arbitrations prescribed and required by state statute
are not covered by RUAA. Thus, statutory labor arbitrations and lemon law
arbitrations, and other such statutory arbitrations are not covered." Francis
 J.
 Pavetti,
 The Revised Uniform Arbitration Act (RUAA),
2 (Jan. 27, 2014), http://www.uniformlaws.o
 Uniform Law
Commission, rg/Shared/Docs/
RUAA%20Briefing%20Sheet_v2_030508.pdf. 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parties' dispute over the neutral arbitrator. The potential
 
difficulty with this argument is that while the MOA set forth an
 alternative impasse procedure for selecting the arbitrators and
 conducting the interest arbitration, the requirement that the
 parties' impasse be resolved through arbitration was mandated by
 HRS § 89-11. While HRS § 89-11(a) authorizes the parties to
 agree to alternate impasse procedures, it provides that these
 procedures will "culminat[e] in an arbitration decision pursuant
 to subsection (f)[.]"
 
However, we need not resolve the question of whether
 
HRS Chapter 658A applies to interest arbitrations under HRS
 Chapter 89.
28 This is because even if the MOA qualifies as an
 
"agreement to arbitrate" that is subject to the provisions of HRS
 Chapter 658A, the exclusive original jurisdiction granted to the
 HLRB over controversies concerning prohibited practices by HRS 
§ 89-14 would supersede HRS Chapter 658A. HRS § 89-19 (2012)
 explicitly states that the provisions of HRS Chapter 89 "shall
 take precedence over all conflicting statutes concerning this
 subject matter and shall pre-empt all contrary local ordinances,
 executive orders, legislation, or rules adopted by the State[.]" 
To the extent that there may be a conflict between the
 jurisdictional provisions of HRS Chapters 89 and 658A, Chapter 89
 takes precedence over Chapter 658A. 
C. 
Therefore, the Circuit Court did not err in: (1)
 
affirming the HLRB's determination in Order Nos. 2640 and 2686
 that the HLRB had exclusive original jurisdiction over the
 parties' dispute regarding the selection of the neutral
 arbitrator; and (2) denying UPW's Motion to Compel Arbitration
 for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
 
28We note, however, that the Legislature may wish to clarify its intent
on this question in light of the parties' conflicting views, and the lack of
specific guidance by the Legislature, on whether HRS Chapter 658A applies to
interest arbitrations under HRS Chapter 89.
 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
UPW argues that the HLRB exceeded its statutory
 
authority by ordering interlocutory relief which did not follow
 
the procedures for selecting the neutral arbitrator set forth in
 the MOA. UPW further argues that the HLRB erred in ordering
 interlocutory relief against UPW without evidence of UPW's wilful
 refusal to comply with the MOA. We disagree. 
The HLRB's authority when resolving the parties'
 
prohibited practice complaints was not limited by their agreement
 to an alternate impasse procedure. In addition, the HLRB was
 presented with evidence that supported its preliminary finding
 that UPW likely committed a prohibited practice by wilfully
 failing to comply with the MOA and HRS § 89-11, and the HLRB's
 remedy of directing AAA to select the neutral arbitrator was not
 an abuse of discretion under the circumstances presented and
 served to expedite an already delayed interest arbitration
 process. Accordingly, we conclude that the HLRB did not exceed
 its statutory authority or abuse its discretion in ordering that
 AAA would select the neutral arbitrator.
 
Whether the HLRB exceeded the bounds of its statutory 
authority to order remedies is a matter of statutory interpretation which we review de novo. See Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii), Inc. v. Int'l Longshore & Warehouse Union, Local 142, AFL-CIO, 112 Hawai
'i 489, 505, 146 P.3d 1066, 1082 
(2006). 
A. 
When determining the statutory authority granted to an
 
agency, we start with the text of the statute itself. Id. at
 
506, 146 P.3d at 1083. HRS § 89-5(i) (2012) provides, in
 relevant part:
 
(i) 
In addition to the powers and functions provided
in other sections of [chapter 89], the board shall:
 
. . . .
 
(3) Resolve controversies under [chapter 89]; [and] 
29
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4)	 Conduct proceedings on complaints of prohibited
practices by employers, employees, and employee
organizations and take such actions with respect
thereto as it deems necessary and proper[.]
 
(Emphases added.)29
 
Under HRS § 89-5(i), the HLRB is granted broad 
authority to determine what actions to take in resolving 
prohibited practice disputes under HRS Chapter 89. The Legislature's intent in this regard is manifested by its use of language granting the HLRB the authority to "take such actions . . . as it deems necessary and proper[.]" HRS § 89-5(i)(4); see also Del Monte Fresh, 112 Hawai
'i at 506, 146 P.3d at 1083. 
Accordingly, the HLRB has broad statutory authority to resolve prohibited practice controversies. 
Nevertheless, UPW contends that the HLRB's
 
discretionary power should be limited by the provisions in the
 MOA. Specifically, UPW argues that the HLRB is precluded from 
interfering with the alternate impasse procedures agreed to by
 the parties. We disagree.
 
UPW relies on the language in HRS § 89-11(a), which
 
states: "The board shall immediately discontinue the procedures
 initiated pursuant to subsection (d) or (e) [(the default impasse
 procedures under the statute)] and permit the parties to proceed
 with their procedure." (Emphasis added.) However, UPW takes this
 provision out of context. The two preceding sentences read:
 
In the absence of an alternate impasse procedure, the board
shall assist in the resolution of the impasse at times and
in the manner prescribed in subsection (d) or (e), as the
case may be. If the parties subsequently agree on an
alternate impasse procedure, the parties shall notify the
board.
 
HRS § 89-11(a). 
Read in context, the sentence upon which UPW relies to
 
limit the HLRB's authority simply provides that an alternative
 
29Pending the final determination of a controversy concerning a
prohibited practice, "the [HLRB] may, after hearing, make interlocutory orders
which may be enforced in the same manner as final orders." HRS § 377-9(d)
(Supp. 2013); HRS § 89-14. 
30
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
impasse procedure mutually agreed to by the parties will
 
supercede the default impasse procedure set forth in HRS § 89-11. 
HRS § 89-11(a), however, does not limit the HLRB's authority to
 intervene when a party commits a prohibited practice by refusing
 to comply with the alternate impasse procedure. 
B.
 
Having determined that the HLRB has broad discretion to 
resolve prohibited practices and that it was authorized to intervene and address prohibited practices arising out of the parties' failure to comply with the MOA, we consider whether the HLRB abused its discretion in the remedy it chose of having AAA select the neutral arbitrator. See Del Monte Fresh, 112 Hawai
'i 
at 508, 146 P.3d at 1085. The purpose of HRS § 89-11 is to facilitate the timely resolution of an impasse in negotiations over collective bargaining agreements by requiring impasse disputes to be resolved through arbitration. 
Here, Employer and UPW entered into the MOA, which set
 
forth an alternate impasse procedure, on March 3, 2009,
 approximately one month after the HLRB declared an impasse. 
Under the MOA, the deadline for selecting the neutral arbitrator
 was within five days of receiving the AAA list, or July 22, 2009.
 This date was amended by mutual agreement of the parties to 
July 28, 2009. However, the first strike did not occur until
 August 18, 2009.
 
The record indicates that certain delays in the process
 
could be attributed to UPW. This included evidence that between
 July 15, 2009, and July 28, 2009, Employer's chief negotiator
 (Laderta) attempted to contact UPW's authorized representative
 (Nakanelua), but that he never returned her calls; that by letter
 dated July 28, 2009, which was the extended deadline for
 selecting the neutral arbitrator agreed to by the parties, UPW's
 attorney (Takahashi) notified Employer that he would be
 representing UPW in the interest arbitration; and that there were
 delays in UPW's exercise of its first strike and its notification
 
31
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to Employer of this strike, which Employer asserted was not
 
received until August 24, 2009. 
After each party exercised its first strike, Employer
 
refused to continue with any strikes, because Employer asserted
 that UPW's "conduct throughout this process show[ed] bad
 faith."
30 Thus, the parties were at a stalemate in the selection
 
process under the MOA. Both parties then filed prohibited
 practice complaints accusing each other of misconduct in failing
 to comply with the selection of the neutral arbitrator under the
 MOA. The HLRB noted that although the parties had failed as of
 September 25, 2009, the date of its order for interlocutory
 relief, to select a neutral arbitrator, the parties had consumed
 vast amounts of time in correspondence and litigation accusing
 each other of misconduct. The HLRB also found that there had
 been undue delay in the selection of the neutral arbitrator.
 
The purpose of the interest arbitration was to settle
 
disputes over the terms of the renewed Unit 10 CBA for the period
 from July 1, 2009, to June 30, 2011, and the stalemate occurred
 in late August 2009. The prior CBA had expired on June 30, 2009. 
Moreover, the MOA set September 11, 2009, as the date for the
 interest arbitration to begin, but the parties' actions precluded
 the arbitration from commencing on that date and threatened the
 timely resolution of the impasse. In Order No. 2640, the HLRB 
specifically balanced the likelihood that Employer would succeed
 on its prohibited practice claim, any irreparable damage which
 may occur without intervention, and public interest
 considerations. Contrary to UPW's claim, we conclude that there
 
was sufficient evidence of UPW's wilful refusal to comply with
 
the MOA to justify the interlocutory relief granted by the HLRB. 
We conclude that the HLRB did not abuse its discretion in
 facilitating a timely resolution of the parties' stalemate in
 
30Employer cited the delays caused by UPW in the striking process and
UPW's refusal to relinquish its claim that Halvorson lacked authority to make
the strikes on behalf of the Employer.
 
32
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
selecting a neutral arbitrator by having AAA select the neutral
 
arbitrator.
 
IV.
 
UPW argues that the Circuit Court erred in denying its
 
Motion for Civil Contempt.31 UPW's Motion for Civil Contempt was
 
based on its claim that Employer had violated the Arbitration
 Award and the Circuit Court's Order Confirming Arbitration Award
 by failing to comply with the requirement of the Arbitration
 Award that the parties meet and confer, without undue delay, and
 draft language for the 2009-2011 CBA for Unit 10 employees. 
We conclude that the claims raised in UPW's Motion for
 
Civil Contempt were prohibited practice claims that fell within
 the exclusive original jurisdiction of the HLRB. For this
 reason, the Circuit Court did not err in denying the relief
 requested by UPW. 
The Arbitration Award provided that UPW and Employer
 
"shall meet and confer, without undue delay, and draft such
 language for the 2009-2011 [CBA] as is necessary and appropriate
 to give effect to the [awards set forth in the Arbitration
 Award]." In its Motion for Civil Contempt, UPW alleged that
 after the Arbitration Award was issued on January 14, 2010, UPW
 made repeated requests to Employer to meet and confer to draft
 and finalize the Unit 10 CBA covering the period from July 1,
 2009, to June 30, 2011, as required by the Arbitration Award, but
 that Employer failed and refused to meet and confer.
 
HRS § 89-11(g) states that "[t]he decision of the
 
[interest] arbitration panel shall be final and binding upon the
 parties on all provisions submitted to the arbitration panel." 
HRS § 89-11(g) further requires that the parties to an interest
 arbitration "take whatever action is necessary to carry out and
 
31We reject Employer's claim that UPW was barred from challenging the
Circuit Court's denial of UPW's Motion for Civil Contempt on the ground that
the challenged order was entered after UPW filed its cross-appeal. UPW's
 challenge to the Circuit Court's Order Denying Motion for Civil Contempt was
not based on its cross-appeal, but on its notice of appeal from the Order
Denying Motion for Civil Contempt. 
33
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
effectuate the final and binding agreement[,]" which includes the 
arbitration panel's decision. As noted, HRS § 89-13(a) provides that it is a prohibited practice for an employer wilfully to: "[r]efuse to participate in good faith in the mediation and arbitration procedures set forth in section 89-11"; "[r]efuse or fail to comply with any provision of [chapter 89]"; or "[v]iolate the terms of a collective bargaining agreement[.]" HRS § 89­13(a)(6), (a)(7), (a)(8). UPW's claim that Employer violated the terms of the Arbitration Award by failing to meet and confer as required by the Arbitration Award involved a "controversy concerning prohibited practices." See HRS § 89-14. Accordingly, 
the HLRB had exclusive original jurisdiction over the claims raised in UPW's Motion for Civil Contempt, and the Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction to decide the Motion for Civil Contempt. See 
id; HGEA, 124 Hawai
'i at 210, 239 P.3d at 14 ("[I]t would be 
unwise for us to bring about a policy that effectively circumscribes HLRB's exclusive original jurisdiction over 'any controversy concerning prohibited practices,' as mandated by the legislature in HRS § 89-14." (brackets omitted)). 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, (1) in Appeal No. 30444, we
 
affirm the Circuit Court's April 1, 2010, Final Judgment; (2) in
 Appeal No. 30568, (a) we affirm the Circuit Court's May 18, 2010,
 Final Judgment to the extent that it reflects the Circuit Court's
 ruling that the HLRB, and not the Circuit Court, had exclusive
 original jurisdiction over the parties' prohibited practice
 controversy regarding the selection of the neutral arbitrator,
 and (b) we vacate the Circuit Court's August 25, 2010, Order
 Denying Motion for Civil Contempt based on our conclusion that
 the HLRB, and not the Circuit Court, had exclusive original
 jurisdiction over the claims raised in UPW's Motion for Civil
 Contempt; and (3) in Appeal No. CAAP-10-0000166, we affirm the
 Circuit Court's November 10, 2010, Final Judgment, except that we
 decline on mootness grounds to address UPW's claim that the HLRB
 
34
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
erred or violated UPW's due process rights in ruling that UPW had
 
committed a prohibited practice in connection with the selection
 of a neutral arbitrator.
 
On the briefs:
 
Herbert R. Takahashi
 
Rebecca L. Covert
 Davina W. Lam
 (Takahashi and Covert, AAL)
for United Public Workers, AFSCME,
Local 646, AFL-CIO and
Dayton Nakanelua 
James E. Halvorson
 Nelson Y. Nabeta
 Jeffrey A. Keating
Deputy Attorneys General
Department of the Attorney
General, State of Hawai
'i 
for State of Hawai 'i; the Judiciary,
Hawaii Health Systems Corporation;and Neil Dietz 
Valri Lei Kunimoto
 Hawai
'i Labor Relations Board 
for the Hawai 'i Labor Relations Board
 and its members 
35
 