FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--–
 
In the Matter of the Application of
THE TRUSTEES UNDER THE WILL AND OF THE
 
ESTATE OF JAMES CAMPBELL, DECEASED,
to register and confirm title to land
situated at Kahuku, District of Ko 'olau Loa,
City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawai 'i
 
NO. 30006
 
APPEAL FROM THE LAND COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
(LAND COURT NO. 08-0054, APPLICATION NO. 1095)
 
JUNE 13, 2013
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, FOLEY, J., and
CIRCUIT JUDGE CASTAGNETTI, in place of FUJISE,
LEONARD, REIFURTH and GINOZA, JJ., all recused
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Petitioners-Appellees James Campbell Company LLC
 
(Campbell), James C. Reynolds, Inc. (Reynolds), and Continental
 
Pacific, LLC (Continental) (collectively referred to as 
"Petitioners") are the successors in interest to the Trustees
 under the Will and of the Estate of James Campbell, Deceased
 (Trustees), with respect to the property at issue in this appeal. 
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Respondent-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) is the successor in 
interest to the Territory of Hawai 'i (Territory). See Admissions 
Act of March 18, 1959, Pub. L. No. 86–3 (hereinafter, "Admissions 
Act"), § 5(a), 73 Stat. 4, reprinted in, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS), vol. 1 at § 5(a) of the Admissions Act.
1 
In 1934, the Trustees filed Application No. 1095 with
 
2
the Land Court of the Territory of Hawai 'i  to register title to
a large area of land located on the North Shore of the Island of O
'ahu. A small portion of the land covered by Application No. 
1095, which Petitioners describe as approximately 235 acres, is the subject of this appeal (Subject Property). The Territory filed an "Answer and Claim" to the Trustees' application and asserted certain interests in the land sought to be registered. A portion of the Subject Property is derived from Land Commission Awards with Royal Patents and a Royal Patent Grant that contained reservations of mineral or metallic mines in favor of the government. However, in its "Answer and Claim," the Territory did not assert any claim for the reservation of mineral or metallic mines. The Territory also did not assert a claim for a reserved easement for the free flowage of waters. 
On November 30, 1937, the Land Court issued its
 
"Decision" on the Trustees' Application No. 1095 (Original
 Decision), which stated that the claims of the Territory had been
 settled by agreement with the applicants or by exchange deeds
 filed in the record. The Original Decision held that the
 Trustees, subject to the exceptions noted, were the owners in fee
 
1 In Trustees of the Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. 
Yamasaki, 69 Haw. 154, 160, 737 P.2d 446, 450, the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court stated that "[u]nder section 5(a) of the Admission
Act, Pub. L. No. 86–3, 73 Stat. 4 (1959), the State and itspolitical subdivisions became the successors in title to theTerritory and its political subdivisions in the lands held by theTerritory and the counties." 
2 The Land Court of the State of Hawai 'i is the successor of 
the Land Court of the Territory of Hawai 'i, see Admissions Act §
12, and we will refer to both at the "Land Court." 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
simple of the lands described in the application. On January 24,
 
1938, the Land Court issued its original Decree of registration
 (Original Decree), which resulted in the issuance of the Original
 Certificate of Title No. 17,854 (Original Certificate of Title). 
The Original Decree and the Original Certificate of Title, which
 included the Subject Property, did not contain a reservation of
 mineral or metallic mines or an easement for the free flowage of
 waters with respect to the Subject Property.
 
Over seventy years after the issuance of the Original
 
Decree and Original Certificate of Title, Petitioners in 2008
 initiated the Land Court proceeding that is the subject of this
 appeal. In 2009, Petitioners filed an "Amended and Restated
 Petition for Consolidation and Resubdivision, Creation of
 Shoreline Setback Line, and Designation of Easements" (Amended
 Petition) regarding the Subject Property. The State filed an
 answer to the Amended Petition and claimed various interests,
 including that (1) "[t]he State owns all mineral and metallic
 mines of every kind or description on the [Subject Property],
 including geothermal rights, and the right to remove the same";
 and (2) "[t]he State has reserved an easement for the free
 flowage of any waters through, over, under, and across the
 
3
[Subject Property.]" The Land Court  rejected the State's claims
regarding these two interests and did not include them as
 encumbrances on the Subject Property. On July 16, 2009, the Land
 Court filed its "Findings of Fact, Decision and Order (Map 176)"
 and its "Decree (Map 176)."
 
On appeal, the State argues that the Land Court erred
 
in denying its claim of ownership of all mineral and metallic
 mines, including geothermal rights, on the Subject Property and 
its claim of a reserved easement for the free flowage of waters. 
As explained below, we hold, under the circumstances of this
 case, that the Land Court did not err in denying these claims. 
3 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Accordingly, we affirm the Land Court's "Decision and Order" on
 
the Amended Petition and its "Decree (Map 176)." 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The Subject Property is derived from four prior land
 
grants:
 
(1) Land Commission Award 8452 Apana 1, dated
March 21, 1854, and Royal Patent No. 5616, dated
October 15, 1867, both to A. Keohokalole (Royal
Patent No. 5616);
 
(2) Land Commission Award 7130, dated October
1, 1852, and Royal Patent No. 5693, dated April
19, 1873, both to Kinimaka (Royal Patent No.
5693);
 
(3) Royal Patent Grant No. 550 to Charles
Gordon Hopkins, dated March 12, 1851 (Grant No.
550); and
 
(4) the Deed of King Kamehameha III to
Charles Gordon Hopkins, dated September 10, 1851,recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the Stateof Hawai
'i in Liber 5, page 153 (Kamehameha III
Deed). 
Royal Patent No. 5616, Royal Patent No. 5693, and 
Grant No. 550, were subject to express reservations of mineral or
 
metallic mines in favor of the Hawaiian Government. The
 Kamehameha III Deed did not contain an express reservation of
 mineral or metallic mines. None of the four land grants
 contained a reservation in favor of the government of an easement
 for the free flowage of waters.
 
On July 16, 1934, the Trustees filed Application No. 
1095 with the Land Court to register title to approximately 15,000 acres of land on the North Shore of O
'ahu, of which the 
Subject Property was a small portion. The Trustees' application was brought pursuant to the then-exiting Land Court Registration Statute (the predecessor of HRS Chapter 501), and the Trustees sought to have their title to the land covered by their application "registered and confirmed as an absolute title." The Territory filed an "Answer and Claim" to the Trustees' application, asserting claims of title to and easements over 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
certain of the properties covered by the application.4 The
 
Territory, however, did not claim ownership of any mineral or
 
metallic mines or claim an easement for the free flowage of
 waters in its "Answer and Claim."
 
On November 30, 1937, the Land Court issued its
 
Original Decision in Application No. 1095. With respect to the
 Territory's claims, the Original Decision stated that all claims
 set forth in the Territory's "Answer and Claim" "have been
 settled by agreement with the applicants or by exchange deeds
 filed in the record herein." On January 24, 1938, the Land Court
 issued its Original Decree regarding Application No. 1095, which
 resulted in the issuance of the Original Certificate of Title on
 that same date. The Land Court decreed that the Trustees "are
 the owners in fee simple" of the land described in the Original
 
5
Decree,  which included the Subject Property, and that the
Trustees' title was subject to various encumbrances. The list of
 encumbrances set forth in the Original Decree and the Original
 Certificate of Title does not contain a reservation of mineral or
 metallic mines or a reserved easement for the free flowage of
 waters in favor of the government. The Territory did not appeal
 from the Land Court's Original Decision or its Original Decree in
 Application No. 1095.
 
II.
 
On July 2, 2008, Petitioners filed a "Petition for
 
Consolidation and Resubdivision, Creation of Shoreline Setback
 Line, and Designation of Easements" with respect to the Subject
 Property. On February 12, 2009, Petitioners filed their Amended
 Petition. In the Amended Petition, Petitioners asked the Land
 Court to (1) consolidate Lot 30 and 1198 of the Subject Property;
 
4 None of the various claims of interest asserted by the
Territory in their "Answer and Claim" are at issue in this
appeal. 
5 It appears that the Original Decree covered and included
almost all of the land the Trustees had sought to register in
their application. 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2) re-subdivide the Subject Property into Lots 1218 and 1219;
 
(3) issue new certificates of title showing Campbell as the sole
 owner of Lot 1219 and Reynolds and Continental as joint owners of
 Lot 1218; (4) designate a shoreline setback based on the current
 shoreline which had been affected by erosion; and (5) recognize
 certain easements and encumbrances not at issue in this appeal. 
The State filed an answer to the Amended Petition on
 
March 11, 2009. In its prayer for relief, the State claimed the
 following interests in the Subject Property:
 
1. The State owns all mineral and metallic mines of
 
every kind or description on the property, including
geothermal rights, and the right to remove the same;
 
2. The State owns the submerged land up to the
highest reaches of the wash of the waves, including the
34.113 acre eroded area;
 
3. The property is subject to the rights of native
tenants;
 
4. The State has reserved all right, title,
interest, or claim to waters having their source upon or
flowing over or under the property;
 
5. The State has reserved an easement for the free
 
flowage of any waters through, over, under, and across the
property;
 
6. The State has reserved its interests in all
 
religious, historical, and archeological sites on the
property; [and]
 
7. The State has reserved any other interest in the
property that may be revealed during the course of this
proceeding[.]
 
On July 16, 2009, the Land Court issued its "Findings 
of Fact, Decision and Order (Map 176)" regarding the Amended 
Petition. In Finding of Fact (FOF) 24, the Land Court found that the State "owns the submerged lands up to the highest reaches of the wash of the waves, including 34.113 acres of eroded land." In FOF 29, the Land Court found the State "has reserved an interest in the rights of native tenants, if any, that may affect the [Subject Property], but the interest of the State of Hawai
'i, 
if any, is not an easement or encumbrance upon registered title." These findings are not disputed or at issue in this appeal. 
7
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
With respect to the State's claim that it owns all
 
mineral and metallic mines on the Subject Property, the Land
 
Court made the following FOFs: 
30. The reservations of mineral and metallic mines in
 
(i) Royal Patent No. 5616 to A. Keohokalole, for the lands
in Malaekahana, (ii) Royal Patent No. 5693 to Kinimaka for
roughly one half of the lands in Keana, and (iii) Grant No.
550 to Charles Gordon Hopkins for the remaining one half of
the lands in Keana were extinguished by issuance of the
original decree in Land Court Application No. 1095 in 1938.
 
31. The land in Kahuku conveyed by Deed of Kamehameha
III to Charles Gordon Hopkins dated September 10, 1851,recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the State ofHawai'i in Liber 5, Page 153, never was subject to a
reservation of mineral and metallic mines in favor of anygovernment or person. 
With respect to the State's assertion of water rights
 
and a reserved easement for the free flowage of water concerning
 
the Subject Property, the Land Court made the following FOF:
 
28. The State of Hawai' i has asserted, and the Court
finds that the State of Hawai' i has reserved an interest in 
water rights, if any, that may affect the [Subject
Property], but the interest of the State of Hawai' i, if any,
is not an easement or encumbrance upon registered title. 
Based on its FOFs, the Land Court issued a "Decision
 
and Order," which ruled that except for the State's ownership of
 
submerged lands up to the highest reaches of the wash of the
 waves described in FOF 24, and the reserved rights, if any,
 regarding water rights and the rights of native tenants described
 in FOFs 28 and 29, the ownership interests or reservations
 asserted by the State in Paragraphs 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 of the
 State's prayer for relief were denied.
6 The Land Court granted
 
the Amended Petition and ordered the entry of a decree in
 conformity with its ""Findings of Fact, Decision and Order (Map
 
6 In FOF 32, the Land Court found that except for the rights
described in FOF 24 and the reserved rights, if any, described in
FOFs 28 and 29, the State "has not produced sufficient evidenceto support its argument that the State of Hawai
'i has the 
ownership or other reserved interests described in paragraphs 1,3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 of [its] prayer for relief[.]" 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
176)." The Assistant Registrar of the Land Court complied with
 
this directive by filing the "Decree (Map 176)" on July 16, 2009.
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, the State argues that the Land Court erred
 
in denying the State's claim of ownership of all mineral and
 metallic mines, including geothermal rights, on the Subject
 Property and its claim of a reserved easement for the free
 flowage of waters. The State also challenges the Land Court's
 FOFs which formed the basis for its denial of these claims. For
 the reasons discussed below, we conclude that the Land Court did
 not err in denying the State's claims regarding mineral and
 metallic mines and a reserved easement for the free flowage of
 waters. 
I.
 A.
 
Of the four prior land grants from which the Subject
 
Property is derived, Royal Patent No. 5616, Royal Patent No.
 5693, and Grant No. 550 were subject to express reservations of
 mineral or metallic mines in favor of the Hawaiian Government. 
The State acknowledges that the fourth land grant, the Kamehameha
 III Deed, did not expressly reserve the government's ownership of
 mineral or metallic mines, but argues that this reservation was
 implicit and "self-effectuating."
 
The State contends that the Land Court's issuance of
 
the Original Decree and the Original Certificate of Title in 1938
 did not extinguish the government's express or implied
 reservations of mineral and metallic mines on the Subject
 Property. The State also contends that the government's
 reservations of mineral and metallic mines includes geothermal
 rights. We conclude that the Land Court properly denied the
 State's claim that it owned all mineral and metallic mines on the
 Subject Property. We hold that the Original Decree and the
 Original Certificate of Title extinguished the express government
 reservations of mineral or metallic mines set forth in Royal
 Patent No. 5616, Royal Patent No. 5693, and Grant No. 550 and
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
also extinguished any implicit reservation in the Kamehameha III
 
Deed. 
B.
 
In this section, we will set forth the pertinent
 
provisions of the Land Court Registration Statute under which the
 Land Court decided the Trustees' 1934 application for
 registration and issued the Original Decree and the Original
 Certificate of Title in 1938. These provision are substantially
 the same as the current Land Court Registration Statute, HRS
 Chapter 501, with respect to the issues raised in this appeal. 
When citing the provisions of the Land Court Registration Statute
 applicable to the Original Decree and the Original Certificate of
 Title, we will note the corresponding provisions of HRS Chapter
 501. 
The following provisions were in effect and applicable
 
to the Land Court's determination of the Trustees' 1934
 application for registration:
 
The Revised Laws of Hawaii (RLH) § 5037 (1935)
 
(predecessor of HRS § 501-71) provided, in relevant part:
 
Every decree of registration of absolute title shall
bind the land, and quiet the title thereto, subject only to
7
the exceptions stated in [section 5041].[ ]  It shall be
 
conclusive upon and against all persons, including the
Territory, whether mentioned by name in the application,
notice or citation, or included in the general description
"to all whom it may concern". The decree shall not be
 opened by reason of the absence, infancy or other disability
of any person affected thereby, nor by any proceeding at law
or in equity for reversing judgments or decrees; subject,
however, to the right of any person deprived of land or of
any estate or interest therein by a decree of registration
obtained by fraud to file a petition for review within one
year after the entry of the decree; provided no innocent
purchaser for value has acquired an interest. If there is
 any such purchaser the decree of registration shall not be
 
7 RLH § 5037 refers to "exceptions stated in the following
section." However, the "following section," RLH § 5038 (1935),
does not refer to exceptions to absolute title, which are instead
set forth in RLH § 5041 (1935). The discrepancy was apparently
the result of the recodification of the Land Court Registration
Statute and the addition and renumbering of sections from the
1925 version to the 1935 version of the RLH. The discrepancy was
corrected in the 1945 RLH. See RLH § 12637 (1945).
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
opened but shall remain in full force and effect forever,
subject only to the right of appeal hereinbefore provided.
But any person aggrieved by the decree in any case may 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
pursue his remedy by action of tort against the applicant or
any other person for fraud, in procuring the decree.
 
(Emphasis added; emphasis in original omitted.)
 
RLH § 5038 (1935) (predecessor of HRS § 501-74)
 
provided, in relevant part:
 
Every decree of registration shall bear the date of
the year, day, hour and minute of its entry, and shall be
signed by the registrar. . . . It shall contain a
 
description of the land as finally determined by the court;
and shall set forth the estate of the owner, and also, in
such manner as to show their relative priority, all
particular estates, mortgages, easements, liens, attachments
and other encumbrances, including rights of husband or wife,
if any, to which the land or the owner's estate is subject;
and may contain any other matter properly to be determined
in pursuance of this chapter.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
RLH § 5041 (1935) (predecessor of HRS § 501-82),
 
provides in relevant part:
 
Every applicant receiving a certificate of title in
pursuance of a decree of registration, and every subsequent
purchaser of registered land who takes a certificate of
title for value and in good faith, shall hold the same free
from all incumbrances except those noted on the certificate,
and any of the following incumbrances which may be
8
subsisting . . . .[ ]
(Emphasis added.)
 
C.
 
Pursuant to these provisions, the registration of the
 
Subject Property through the Original Decree and the Original
 
Certificate of Title quieted title to the Subject Property in
 
8 RLH § 5041 goes on to list several encumbrances, such as
certain liens, unpaid taxes, public highways, and short-term
leases which are not extinguished by the Land Court's issuance of
a certificate of title. Campbell asserts, and the State does not
dispute, that the State's claim of a reservation of mineral and
metallic mines and an easement for the free flowage of waters are
not among the encumbrances mentioned in RLH § 5041 or HRS § 501­82. We note that consistent with RLH § 5041, the Original Decree
and the Original Certificate of Title provided that the Trustees'
registered title was "subject . . . to any of the encumbrances
mentioned in Section 5041 of said Revised Laws of Hawaii 1935" as
 well as the specific encumbrances listed in the Original Decree
and the Original Certificate of Title. 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
favor of the Trustees and against all persons, including the
 
Territory. RLH § 5037 (predecessor of HRS § 501-71). By virtue
 of the Land Court registration of the Subject Property, the
 Trustees held, and subsequent good faith purchasers of the
 Subject Property for value hold, the Subject Property free from 
all encumbrances, except for encumbrances noted on the
 certificate of title and encumbrances (not relevant to this
 appeal) set forth in RLH § 5041 and its successor HRS § 501-82. 
In discussing the principles underlying Hawai
'i's Land 
Court registration system, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has stated 
that "[t]he fundamental intent of HRS § 501-82 [(successor of RLH § 5041)] is to preserve the integrity of titles." Waikiki Malia 
Hotel, Inc. v. Kinkai Properties Ltd. Partnership, 75 Haw. 370, 391, 862 P.2d 1048, 1060 (1993). In Honolulu Memorial Park, Inc. v. City and County of Honolulu, 50 Haw. 189, 436 P.2d 207 (1967), the Hawai
'i Supreme Court rejected the City's contention that it 
had an equitable right to an easement for a sewer line, where the claimed easement had not been noted as an encumbrance on the certificate of title of property registered under the Land Court Registration Statute. The supreme court reasoned: 
[T]o allow the assertion of unregistered rights, be they
legal or equitable, would be to subvert the obvious intent
and purpose of the title registration system. The integrity
of titles can only be preserved if anyone dealing with
registered property is assured that the only rights or
claims of which he need take notice are those which are
 registered in the prescribed manner. If for that reason
 
alone, the provisions of the title registration statute must
be allowed to prevail over any contravening doctrine of the
common law.
 
Id. at 193-94, 436 P.2d at 210 (emphasis added).
 
The supreme court, in order to fulfill the purpose of
 
the Land Court Registration Statute, also held that "a
 
certificate of title is unimpeachable and conclusive except as
 otherwise provided by law" and that "knowledge of an unregistered
 encumbrance does not disqualify the holder of a certificate of
 title from the protection afforded him by the title registration
 statute." Id. at 192, 436 P.2d at 209-10. The supreme court
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
therefore affirmed the trial court's refusal to admit evidence
 
proffered by the City to show that the appellee and its
 predecessors in title had knowledge of the unregistered
 encumbrance, which the City contended supported its claim that
 the appellee was not entitled to the protection of the Land Court
 Registration Statute. Id. at 192, 436 P.2d at 209. The supreme
 
court explained:
 
"If, as we hold, a certificate of title is unimpeachable and
conclusive except as otherwise provided by law, it would be
illogical to say that it may be impeached if the purchaser
for value had knowledge of an existing unregistered
encumbrance. To do so would be to rob a certificate of
 title of its conclusive and unimpeachable character and
place it in the same category as the ordinary record in the
bureau of conveyances. If the intent and purpose of the law
pertaining to the registration of land titles is to be
preserved, the integrity of certificates of title must be
scrupulously observed and every subsequent purchaser of
registered land who takes a certificate of title for value,
except in cases of fraud to which he is a party, is entitled
under the provisions of section 5041 [(predecessor of HRS
§ 501-82] to hold the same free from all encumbrances
except those noted on the certificate and the
statutory encumbrances enumerated."
 
Id. at 192-93, 436 P.2d at 210 (quoting In re Bishop Trust Co.,
 
35 Haw. 816, 825 (Haw. Terr. 1941).
 
In Waikiki Malia, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court applied HRS 
9
§ 501-82 (successor of RLH § 5041)  in holding that a restrictive
covenant imposing a building height restriction, which was set
 forth in a deed previously filed with the Land Court but had not
 been separately noted as an encumbrance on the transfer
 
9 The supreme court quoted the relevant portion of HRS §
501-82 as follows:
 
Every applicant receiving a certificate of title in
pursuance of a decree of registration, and every
subsequent purchaser of registered land who takes a
certificate of title for value and in good faith, hold
the same free from all encumbrances except those noted
on the certificate in the order of priority of
recordation[.]
 
Waikiki Malia, 75 Haw. at 389, 862 P.2d at 1060 (emphasis and
brackets in original).
 
14
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
certificate of title, had been extinguished. Waikiki Malia, 75
 
Haw. at 376-77, 389-92, 862 P.2d at 1054, 1059-61. The supreme
 
court concluded that despite the current property owner's
 admitted knowledge of the height restriction, because the
 restriction was never explicitly and separately noted on the
 transfer certificate of title, the current property owner held
 the property free from the restriction. Id. at 390-92, 862 P.2d
 
at 1060-61.
 
Similarly, in United States v. Fullard-Leo, 156 F.2d
 
756 (9th Cir. 1946), the United States Court of Appeals for the
 Ninth Circuit applied Hawaii
's Land Court Registration Statute in 
rejecting the United States's claim that it had title to Palmyra
 Island. The Ninth Circuit upheld the trial court's decision that
 the Land Court's entry of a decree registering title to Palmyra
 Island in favor of Cooper, a private party, in proceedings in
 which the Territory of Hawai
'i had participated and disclaimed 
any interest, was binding on the United States and precluded its
 claim of title. Id. at 757, 759-60. In support of it holding,
 
the Ninth Circuit relied upon the conclusive effect of Land Court
 registration in quieting title to property:
 
Under the land registration laws of the Territory, embraced
in Chapter 154, Revised Laws of Hawaii 1905, a decree of
registration of absolute title binds the land and quiets the
title thereto. The decree is conclusive upon the world,
including the Territory. If it appears that the public may
have a claim adverse to that of the applicant for
registration, special notice of the application, in addition
to the published notice provided for, is required to be
served on the territorial attorney general. Accordingly
there can be no doubt that the Territory was properly made a
party to the Cooper application and that the attorney
general was authorized to appear on its behalf.
 
It is essential in this connection again to emphasize
the position occupied by the Territory in relation to the
public lands. If the land involved in the Cooper
application was public property, full authority in respect
of its management, administration and disposition had been
committed to the Territory by Congress by the terms of
§§ 91 and 73 of the Organic Act, and along with the
authority went the duty of asserting and maintaining the
true state of the title if, indeed, it were thought to rest
in the public. Hence the Territory, in disclaiming any
interest, was functioning in its capacity as trustee of the
public lands, of which, essentially, it was the beneficial
owner. And as was observed on the first appeal, it has been
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the practice of the Territory to resort to the Land Court
for registration or confirmation of title to public lands
where adverse claims thereto are asserted. 
Id. at 759-60 (citations and footnote omitted). 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D.
 
At oral argument, the State conceded that the
 
government's reservation of mineral or metallic mines constitutes
 
an encumbrance on property. The State further conceded that the
 reservation of mineral or metallic mines is an alienable right,
 which the State could convey, relinquish, or waive at its option. 
We proceed with our analysis in light of these concessions by the
 State.
 
In this case, the Trustees, Petitioners' predecessors
 
in interest, filed an application with the Land Court in 1934 to
 register lands which included the Subject Property. This
 proceeding culminated in the Land Court's issuance in 1938 of the
 Original Decree and the Original Certificate of Title. The
 Territory, the State's predecessor in interest, (1) actively
 participated in this registration proceeding; (2) filed an
 "Answer and Claim" which asserted the Territory's claims of
 interest in the lands sought to be registered; (3) did not assert
 any claim for a reservation of mineral or metallic mines on the
 Subject Property; and (4) had its claims resolved through
 settlement by agreement with the Trustees or by exchange deeds
 filed in the record. The Territory also did not appeal from the
 Original Decision or the Original Decree.
 
We conclude that the Land Court's 1938 registration of
 
the Subject Property, without noting any government reservation
 of mineral or metallic mines as an encumbrance in the Original
 Decree or the Original Certificate of Title, extinguished the
 reservations of mineral or metallic mines regarding the Subject
 Property set forth in Royal Patent No. 5616, Royal Patent No.
 5693, and Grant No. 550. See RLH § 5041 (predecessor of HRS 
§ 501-82). The Territory had the opportunity to assert a claim
 for the reservation of mineral or metallic mines on the Subject
 Property during the Trustees' 1934 registration proceeding, but
 failed to assert such a claim and resolved the adverse claims it
 did raise through agreement with the Trustees. By virtue of the 
Original Decree and the Original Certificate of Title,
 
17
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Petitioners hold the Subject Property free from any encumbrance
 
for the reservation of mineral or metallic mines set forth in
 Royal Patent No. 5616, Royal Patent No. 5693, and Grant No. 550.
 See Waikiki Malia, 75 Haw. at 376-77, 389-92, 862 P.2d at 1054,
 1059-61; Honolulu Memorial Park, 50 Haw. at 192-94, 436 P.2d at
 209-10; see also Fullard-Leo, 156 F.2d at 757, 759-60. 
Although the Kamehameha III Deed did not contain an
 
express reservation of mineral or metallic mines in favor of the
 government, the State argues that this reservation was implicit
 and "self-effectuating." We need not, and therefore do not,
 decide the State's contention that the Kamehameha III Deed should
 be read as including an implicit, self-effectuating government
 reservation of mineral or metallic mines. Assuming arguendo that
 the Kamehameha III Deed can be read in this fashion, we conclude
 that the Original Decree and the Original Certificate of Title
 extinguished any implicit reservation of mineral or metallic
 mines derived from the Kamehameha III Deed just as they
 extinguished the express reservations contained in Royal Patent
 No. 5616, Royal Patent No. 5693, and Grant No. 550. Accordingly,
 Petitioners hold the Subject Property free from any encumbrance
 for the reservation of mineral or metallic mines.
10
 
10 Because we conclude that the State does not have a
 
reserved ownership interest in mineral and metallic mines on the
Subject Property, we need not reach the State's contention that
its claimed reservation of mineral and metallic mines includes
 geothermal rights. Indeed, we would not reach this issue even if
we had come to the opposite conclusion regarding the State's
ownership of mineral and metallic mines on the Subject Property.
There is no indication that the Subject Property contains any
known geothermal resources. Thus, with respect to the instant
Land Court proceeding, the issue of whether a reservation of
mineral and metallic mines includes geothermal rights is an
abstract question that is not directly in controversy.
Accordingly, this case is not a proper vehicle to decide that
issue. See Wong v. Bd. of Regents, Univ. of Hawaii, 62 Haw. 391,
394-95, 616 P.2d 201, 204 (1980) (stating that the duty of the
court "is to decide actual controversies . . . and not to give
opinions upon moot questions or abstract propositions, or to
declare principles or rules of law which cannot affect the matter
(continued...)
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
10(...continued)
in issue in the case before it"); Kapuwai v. City and County of
Honolulu, 121 Hawai 'i 33, 41, 211 P.3d 750, 758 (2009)
(concluding that the "issuance of an advisory opinion on anunripe issue [over which no current controversy exists]implicates concerns 'about the proper -- and properly limited -­role of courts in a democratic society' and contravenes the'prudential rules of judicial self-governance'" (citationomitted)). 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E.
 
Relying on a Minnesota decision, Estate of Koester v.
 
Hale, 211 N.W.2d 778 (Minn. 1973), the State asserted in its
 
opening brief and at oral argument that the Land Court
 registration of the Subject Property could not extinguish the
 government's reservation of mineral and metallic mines because a
 certificate of title cannot create an interest in land and
 because extinguishing the government's reservation would result
 in manifest injustice. In Koester, a certificate of title was
 issued that mistakenly included a tract of land from an adjoining
 property that the applicant for registration (the defendants'
 predecessor in interest) had not acquired. Koester 297 N.W.2d at
 
779-81. The court held that "under the peculiar facts of this
 case" -- where the owners of the adjoining property had not
 received notice as a party who may claim an adverse interest in
 the lands to be registered; the owners of the adjoining property
 did not make any appearance in the registration proceeding; and
 there was no dispute that including the tract of land from the
 adjoining property in the applicant's certificate of title was a
 mistake and resulted in enlarging the area of land beyond that
 which the applicant had acquired -- it would be a manifest
 injustice to permit defendants to maintain title to the tract of
 land from the adjoining property based on the certificate of
 title. Id. at 781-82.
 
We are not persuaded by the State's reliance on
 
Koester. First, Koester, a Minnesota decision, is not binding on
 this court. More importantly, Koester, which the court
 acknowledged was based on its peculiar facts, is distinguishable.
 Unlike in Koester, the Territory appeared and participated in the
 registration proceeding, asserted adverse claims of interest, and
 reached agreement with the Trustees regarding its adverse claims. 
In addition, unlike in Koestner, the Original Decree and the
 Original Certificate of Title served to extinguish an encumbrance
 on the Subject Property concerning the government's reservation
 of mineral or metallic mines; it did not grant the Trustees title
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to additional areas of land to which they were not entitled. We
 
see no manifest injustice in concluding that the Land Court
 registration of the Subject Property extinguished the express
 government reservations and any implicit government reservation
 of mineral or metallic mines.
 
We are also unpersuaded by the State's argument that
 
the government's reservation of mineral or metallic mines is a
 "burden and incident" on land under HRS § 501-81 (2006)
11 that
 
cannot be extinguished by registration. The State does not cite
 any case holding that a government's reservation of mineral or
 metallic mines is a non-extinguishable burden and incident of
 land under the facts presented here. In addition, Petitioners
 argue and the State does not dispute that during the time
 relevant to the Trustees' application for registration, from the
 filing of the application in 1934 to obtaining the Original
 Decree and the Original Certificate of Title in 1938, there was
 no statute in effect that gave the Territory an ownership
 
11 HRS § 501-81 (successor of RLH § 5040 (1935)) provides:
 
Legal incidents of registered land. Registered
land, and ownership therein, shall in all respects be
subject to the same burdens and incidents which attach
by law to unregistered land. Nothing in this chapter
shall in any way be construed to relieve registered
land or the owners thereof from any rights incident to
the relation of husband and wife; or from liability to
attachment or mesne process or levy on execution; or
from liability to any lien of any description
established by law on land and the buildings thereon,
or in the interest of the owner in land or buildings;
or to change the laws of descent except as provided in
section 501-71; or the rights of partition between
coparceners and other cotenants; or the right to take
the same by eminent domain; or to relieve such land
from liability to be recovered by a trustee in
bankruptcy under the provisions of law relating to
preferences; or to change or affect in any way any
other rights or liabilities created by law and
applicable to unregistered land; except as otherwise
expressly provided in this chapter.
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
interest in mineral or metallic mines.12 Therefore, the State
 
has failed to demonstrate that the government's reservation of
 
mineral or metallic mines was an incident and burden of property
 that could not be extinguished by the issuance of the Original
 Decree and the Original Certificate of Title.
13
 
F.
 
12 "An Act to Organize the Executive Department of the
Hawaiian Islands," pt. I, Ch. VII, art. II, § 6, S.L. 1845-1846,
pp. 100-101 (reproduced in 2 RLH 2191 (1925)), prescribed theform for all royal fee simple patents and required that suchpatents include the following language: "excepting and reservingto the Hawaiian government, all mineral or metallic mines, ofevery description." In re Robinson, 49 Haw. 429, 431, 421 P.2d
570, 572-73 (1966) (quoting S.L. 1845-1846, pp. 100-101). This provision was repealed in 1859. See 2 RLH 2190-91 (1925);
Robinson, 49 Haw. at 442-43, 421 P.2d at 578. The next Hawai
'i 
statute dealing with the government's reservation of mineralrights was not enacted until 1963, long after the Original Decreeand the Original Certificate of Title had been entered. See 1963 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 11, §1 at 10 (codified at HRS § 182-2 (2011)(reserving minerals on State lands to the State, but authorizingthe board of land and natural resources to release, cancel, orwaive the reservation if it deems the land use other than miningis of greater benefit to the State).
13 Both the State and Petitioners cite In re Robinson, 49
 
Haw. 429, 421 P.2d 570 (1966), in support of their argument.
However, Robinson is not on point and does not provide meaningful
guidance for our decision. Elizabeth Cockett Robinson filed an
 application in Land Court to register title to two lots derived
from Land Court Awards with Royal Patents. Id. at 429-30, 421
 
P.2d at 572. The State appeared in the original registration
proceeding and claimed its right to government reservations of
mineral or metallic mines, which were set forth in the Royal
Patents but not in the corresponding Land Commission Awards. Id.
 at 430 & n.2, 421 P.2d at 572 & n.2. The Land Court denied the
 State's claim, and the State appealed. Id. at 430, 421 P.2d at
 
572. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that the State was entitled
to have the reservations of mineral or metallic mines noted as encumbrances on the original decree of registration. Id. at 441, 
421 P.2d at 577. The supreme court in Robinson did not addressthe question of whether the Land Court's issuance of an originaldecree and an original certificate of title that does not containa government reservation of mineral or metallic mines serves toextinguish such a reservation where the State or the Territoryparticipated in the original registration proceeding and did notassert a claim for the reservation of mineral or metallic mines. 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In sum, we hold, under the circumstances of this case 
-- where the Territory actively participated in the Trustees'
 
application for registration; the Territory raised certain
 adverse claims, but did not assert a claim for the reservation of
 mineral or metallic rights and agreed to resolve the claims it
 did raise; and there was no general law in effect that precluded
 the Territory from relinquishing a reservation of mineral or
 metallic mines -- that the Land Court's issuance of the Original
 Decree and the Original Certificate of Title, which did not
 identify a reservation of mineral or metallic mines in favor of
 the Territory as an encumbrance on the Subject Property,
 extinguished the express reservations and any implicit
 reservation of mineral or metallic mines on the Subject Property. 
Accordingly, we affirm the Land Court's denial of the State's
 claim that it owns all mineral and metallic mines on the Subject
 Property. 
II.
 
A.
 
In its answer to the Amended Petition, the State 
asserted that it had reserved (1) "all right, title, interest, or claim to waters having their source upon or flowing over or under the property"; and (2) "an easement for the free flowage of any waters through, over, under, and across the property[.]" The Land Court found that the State "has reserved an interest in water rights, if any, that may affect the [Subject Property]," but it also found that "the interest of the State of Hawai
'i, if 
any, is not an easement of encumbrance upon registered title." 
On appeal, the State contends that (1) pursuant to the
 
public trust doctrine, the State has reserved ownership of water
 in natural watercourses and rivers, and (2) it therefore must
 follow that the State is entitled to have an easement for the
 free flowage of waters noted as an encumbrance on the registered
 title for the Subject Property. Based on this reasoning, the
 State argues that the Land Court erred in denying its claim for
 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
an easement for the free flowage of waters to be noted as an
 
encumbrance on the Subject Property.
 
While the State's ownership of reserved water rights 
under the public trust doctrine is established by Hawai 'i 
precedents, the State provides no persuasive support for its argument that the ownership of such water rights means that the State is entitled to have an easement for the free flowage of waters noted as an encumbrance on the Subject Property. We affirm the Land Court's decision to deny the State's claim for a reserved easement for the free flowage of waters on the Subject Property. 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has recognized that under the 
public trust doctrine, the State retains ownership of water
 
rights in conveyed property. The supreme court, in In re Water
 Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai
'i 97, 9 P.3d 409 (2000) 
(Waiahole I), stated:
 
In McBryde Sugar Co. v. Robinson, 54 Haw. 174, 504
P.2d 1330, aff'd on reh'g, 55 Haw. 260, 517 P.2d 26 (1973),
appeal dismissed and cert. denied, 417 U.S. 962, 94 S.Ct.
3164, 41 L.Ed.2d 1135 (1974), we contemplated the public
interest in water resources. Consulting the prior laws and
practices of this jurisdiction, we observed that, in
granting land ownership interests in the Ma hele, the
Hawaiian Kingdom expressly reserved its sovereign
prerogatives "[t]o encourage and even to enforce the
usufruct of lands for the common good." See id. at 184–86,
94 S.Ct. 3164 504 P.2d at 1337–39 (quoting Principles
Adopted By The Board of Commissioners To Quiet Land Titles
In Their Adjudication Of Claims Presented To Them, 2 Statute
Laws of His Majesty Kamehameha III (SLH) 81, 85 (1847),
reprinted in 2 Revised Laws of Hawaii (RLH) 2124, 2128
(1925) [hereinafter Land Commission Principles]). "The
 right to water," we explained,
 
is one of the most important usufruct of lands, and it
appears clear to us that by the foregoing limitation
the right to water was specifically and definitely
reserved for the people of Hawaii for their common
 
good in all of the land grants.
 
Thus by the Ma hele and subsequent Land
Commission Award and issuance of Royal Patent right to
water was not intended to be, could not be, and was
not transferred to the awardee, and the ownership of
 water in natural watercourses and rivers remained in
 
the people of Hawaii for their common good.
 
Id. at 186–87, 504 P.2d at 1338–39 (footnote omitted)
(emphases added). In Robinson v. Ariyoshi, 65 Haw. 641, 658
P.2d 287 (1982), we elaborated on our McBryde decision,
comparing the retained sovereign "prerogatives, powers and
duties" concerning water to a "public trust":
 
[W]e believe that by [the sovereign reservation], a
 
public trust was imposed upon all the waters of the
 
kingdom. That is, we find the public interest in the
waters of the kingdom was understood to necessitate a
retention of authority and the imposition of a
concomitant duty to maintain the purity and flow of
our waters for future generations and to assure that
the waters of our land are put to reasonable and
beneficial uses. This is not ownership in the
corporeal sense where the State may do with the
property as it pleases; rather, we comprehend the
nature of the State's ownership as a retention of such
authority to assure the continued existence and
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
beneficial application of the resource for the common
 
good.
 
Id. at 674, 658 P.2d at 310 (emphases added).
 
Waiahole I, 94 Hawai 'i at 128-29, 9 P.3d at 440-41 (footnote 
omitted; emphasis and brackets in original). 
The State cites its reserved water rights under the
 
public trust doctrine as the basis for its entitlement to an
 
easement for the free flowage of waters over the Subject
 Property. The State, however, fails to explain why the existence
 of reserved water rights under the public trust doctrine entitles
 the State to have an easement for the free flowage of waters
 noted as an encumbrance on the Subject Property.
 
As Petitioners argue, the State has not provided any
 
specifics regarding the nature and scope of the flowage easement
 it seeks. The State has not identified where the requested
 flowage easement would run over the Subject Property or what
 actions affecting the Subject Property the State would be
 permitted to take under the requested easement. 
Although the State attempts to justify its asserted 
easement as necessary for the performance of its public trust
 duties, it fails to demonstrate that the notation of an easement
 for the free flowage of waters as an encumbrance on the Subject
 Property at the present time and in the context of this case is
 needed to perform such duties. The State has not identified any
 surface or underground water feature on the Subject Property,
 much less any water whose free flowage has been impeded or
 threatened. Moreover, the public trust water rights held by the
 State burden and attach to the Subject Property by operation of
 law and cannot be extinguished by the failure to identify the
 State's public trust interest as an encumbrance on the registered
 title. See HRS § 501-81 ("Registered land, and ownership
 
therein, shall in all respects be subject to the same burdens and
 incidents which attach by law to unregistered land."). 
Petitioners argue that the notation of a non-specific
 
State easement for the free flowage of waters as an encumbrance
 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
on the Subject Property would unfairly and unnecessarily cloud
 
their title. Petitioners contend that such an easement could
 potentially entitle the State to flood the Subject Property
 without any recourse by Petitioners. They further argue that the
 Commission on Water Resource Management, which was established
 under HRS Chapter 174C to manage the State's public trust water
 resources, is a more appropriate forum than the Land Court to
 determine whether the State would be entitled to a free flowage
 easement. The State does not provide a response that adequately
 or effectively addresses Petitioners' arguments. 
We conclude that the State has failed to demonstrate
 
its need or entitlement to have an easement for the free flowage
 of waters noted as an encumbrance on the Subject Property. We
 therefore affirm the Land Court's decision to deny the State's
 claim for such a reserved easement.
 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Land Court's
 
"Decision and Order" set forth in its "Findings of Fact, Decision
 and Order (Map 176)" and the Land Court's "Decree (Map 176)." 
Julie H. China
 
Linda L.W. Chow
 (Donna H. Kalama with
Julie H. China on the brief)
Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Respondent-AppellantState of Hawai
'i 
Jennifer A. Benck
 Mark K. Murakami
 (Christopher J. Cole with
Mark K. Murakami on the brief)
for Petitioner-Appellee
James Campbell Company LLC
 
James J. Bickerton
 
(Barry A. Sullivan with him
on the brief)
(Bickerton Lee Dang & Sullivan
A Limited Liability Law
Partnership)
for Petitioner-Appellee
James C. Reynolds, Inc.
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Regan M. Iwao
(Lani L. Ewart and Ronald
H. W. Lum, Jr., with him
on the brief)
(Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel
A Limited Liability Law
Partnership LLP)
for Petitioner-Appellee
Continental Pacific, LLC
 
Robert H. Thomas
 
(Damon Key Leong Kupchak Hastert)
on the brief for Amicus Curiae
 Pacific Legal Foundation Hawaii Center
 
28
 