NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30566
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHERENFANT PIERRE-LOUIS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CRIMINAL NO. 09-1-1843)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Cherenfant Pierre-Louis ("Pierre-
Louis") appeals from the Amended Judgment of Conviction and
 
1
Sentence Nunc Pro Tunc filed on May 25, 2010  ("Amended
Judgment") in the Family Court of the First Circuit 2 ("Family
 
Court"). Pierre-Louis was convicted by a jury of Abuse Of Family
 
And Household Members in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
3
("HRS") § 709-906 (Supp. 2010),  and was sentenced to two years
1
 The Family Court's original judgment was filed on May 20, 2010.
On June 16, 2010, Pierre-Louis filed his notice of appeal from the original
judgment, and attached it as Exhibit "A". The State identifies no prejudicearising from Pierre-Louis's failure to properly designate the Amended Judgmentin his notice of appeal. Consequently, and based on Rule 3(c)(2), Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure ("An appeal shall not be dismissed forinformality of form or title of the notice of appeal"), we treat this appealas though arising from the Amended Judgment. 
2
 The Honorable Edward Kubo, Jr. presided.
 
3
 HRS § 709-906(1) provides in relevant part:
 
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in
concert, to physically abuse a family or household member
. . . .
 
For the purposes of this section, "family or household
member" means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former
spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, persons who have a
child in common, parents, children, persons related by
consanguinity, and persons jointly residing or formerly
residing in the same dwelling unit.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
of probation, two days imprisonment with credit for time served,
 
and required to pay a Crime Victim Compensation Fee of $55.
 
On appeal, Pierre-Louis contends that the Family Court
 
erred: (1) in denying his request to introduce evidence of the
 complaining witness's ("CW") drug use and dishonesty regarding
 her drug use; (2) because there was no substantial evidence to
 support his conviction for Abuse of Family and Household Member;
 and (3) because Pierre-Louis received ineffective assistance of
 counsel, in that trial counsel failed to (a) object to opinion
 testimony offered by Honolulu Police Department Officer Rindell
 Lum, (b) introduce evidence of CW's abuse and neglect of her
 children, (c) object to CW's use of an interpreter during her
 testimony, and (d) object to the jury pool array.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm the
 Amended Judgment and resolve Pierre-Louis's points of error as
 follows:
 
(1) The Family Court did not abuse its discretion in 
refusing to admit evidence of CW's drug use or dishonesty about any such drug use. "The responsibility for maintaining the delicate balance between probative value and prejudicial effect lies largely within the discretion of the trial court." State v. 
Asuncion, 110 Hawai'i 154, 166, 129 P.3d 1182, 1194 (App. 2006) (quoting State v. Brantley, 84 Hawai' i 112, 118, 929 P.2d 1362, 
1368 (App. 1996)) (probative value of prior evidence of defendant's violent behavior toward CW outweighed prejudice in light of CW's recantation of her statement to the police). 
Evidence that the CW may have used drugs at some point
 
in the past is not probative of any material fact in the case. 
Consequently, it was inadmissible. Haw. R. Evid. 402, 404.
4
 
4
 Pierre-Louis contends, inter alia, that CW's credibility was an
issue at trial, and refers to State v. Sabog, 108 Hawaii 102, 117 P.3d 834
(2005) as holding that evidence of a witness's drug use is relevant to
determine credibility. Sabog, however, does not stand for the proposition
cited. Rather, the court in Sabog held that (1) drug addiction and use may
not be used to attack a witness's general reliability or veracity (108 Hawaii
at 109), but that (2) the defendant should have been permitted to cross­
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Evidence that the CW lied about that drug use, however, is
 
probative of the witness' untruthfulness. Haw. R. Evid. 608(b). 
In such a case, the court balances the probative value of the
 evidence against the danger of unfair prejudice. Haw. R. Evid.
 403. "While [Hawai' i Rules of Evidence ("HRE")] Rule 608 invests 
the trial judge with discretion to admit extrinsic evidence, the HRE Rule 403 balancing test will dictate exclusion of that extrinsic evidence in certain cases." State v. Culkin, 97 
Hawai'i 206, 221, 35 P.3d 233, 248 (2001) (citing HRE Rule 608 ­1992 Supplemental Commentary). 
Under the facts of this case, we cannot conclude that
 
the trial court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or
 disregarded rules or principles of law or practice in concluding
 that the prejudice outweighed the probative value of the
 evidence.
 
(2) Although the record reflects that the CW may have
 
initiated the encounter at the martial arts dojo, and that she
 may also have violated the terms of a June 24, 2009 Order for
 Protection entered by the Family Court in doing so, the record
 also discloses substantial evidence to support Pierre-Louis's
 conviction. 
Pierre-Louis contends that he did not hit, punch, or 
kick the CW, "and this was verified by two eyewitnesses." However, physical abuse does not require hitting, punching, or kicking. Physical abuse is to cause "bodily injury to another person." State v. Nomura, 79 Hawai' i 413, 416, 903 P.2d 718, 721 
(App. 1995). Meanwhile, the meaning of "bodily injury" includes "physical pain." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 707-700. 
It is undisputed that Pierre-Louis had a physical
 
altercation with the CW. Pierre-Louis admits that one of the
 witnesses, Serenia Bloomfield, saw Pierre-Louis "use[] his . . .
 hand to push away CW in her chest . . . [and his] open hand moved
 up to CW's face during the struggle." CW testified that Pierre-
examine the CW as to drug use and addiction at or near the time of the
incident to the extent that it affected her perception or recollection of the
alleged event (108 Hawaii at 111). Pierre-Louis did not raise the issue of
 the CW's "perception or recollection" below, focusing instead on
"truthfulness."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Louis struck her in the face and on her legs causing her physical
 
pain. Finally, Officer Lum testified that when he arrived at the
 scene, he interviewed the CW, documented her apparent injuries,
 and determined that Pierre-Louis was the aggressor.
 
Considering the evidence, as we must, in the strongest
 
light for the prosecution, the jury was entitled to infer based
 on the witness testimony in this case that Pierre-Louis caused
 bodily injury to, and hence physically abused, the CW. Thus,
 there was substantial evidence to support the jury's decision.
 
(3) Pierre-Louis fails to establish that his trial 
counsel committed errors or omissions that resulted in the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 
317, 326-27 (2003) (setting out the standard of review). 
(a) Pierre-Louis contends that when Officer Lum
 
testified that he determined that Pierre-Louis was the aggressor,
 his trial counsel should have objected to the use of the word
 "aggressor" as an improper opinion that lacked foundation as
 required by HRE Rule 701. Pierre-Louis cites no authority for
 the proposition that counsel's failure to raise a lack-of­foundation objection constitutes ineffective assistance, and we
 are aware of none. Pierre-Louis makes no other argument in
 support of his contention that counsel's failure to object to
 this testimony rendered her assistance ineffective.
 
(b) Pierre-Louis argues that his counsel should
 
have questioned CW on cross-examination about her "abuse and
 neglect of her children, pursuant to Family Court social studies
 and [Child Protective Services ("CPS")] investigations", because,
 according to Pierre-Louis, a "[r]igid cross-examination and
 follow-up would have been key in undermining CW's credibility and
 exposing CW as an unsafe and erratic person."
 
Pierre-Louis's argument is entirely speculative. Trial
 
counsel asked CW about the CPS investigations and CW admitted
 that CPS was monitoring her at the time of the incident. CW also
 acknowledged, in light of counsel's questioning, that she was
 only permitted supervised visitation with her children after the
 couple's divorce. Pierre-Louis offers no explanation for how
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
additional questions on the same topic or introduction of the CPS
 
report would have affected a potentially meritorious defense, nor
 do we determine that it would.
 
(c) Counsel's failure to object to CW's use of an
 
interpreter was objectively reasonable and did not amount to
 ineffective assistance. "Defense counsel's tactical decisions at
 trial normally will not be questioned by a reviewing court." 
State v. Onishi, 64 Haw. 62, 63, 636 P.2d 742, 743 (1981) (citing
 State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 352, 615 P.2d 101, 106 (1980).
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has held that "courts have 
inherent equity, supervisory, and administrative powers as well as inherent power to control the litigation process before them." State v. Sakamoto, 101 Hawai' i 409, 415, 70 P.3d 635, 641 (2003) 
(quoting State v. Harrison, 95 Hawai' i 28, 32, 18 P.3d 890, 894 
(2001)). As a result, "use of interpreters was a matter for the . . . court's discretion." Gonzales v. United States, 33 F.3d 
1047, 1051 (9th Cir. 1994) (citing United States v. Mayans, 17 F.3d 1174, 1179 (9th Cir. 1994)). 
(d) Pierre-Louis contends that his defense counsel
 
should have made "a record of [the] issue" that the CW was a
 female Japanese national and Pierre-Louis was a black man of
 Haitian ancestry, and (presumably) that counsel's failure to make
 such a record amounted to ineffective assistance. Pierre-Louis
 does not explain how the nationality or ancestry of the two
 parties relate to the jury array or warranted an objection to the
 jury's composition.
 
Although Pierre-Louis's counsel did not object to the
 
jury array, she did ask questions designed to determine whether
 jurors had preconceived notions of Pierre-Louis because he was a
 defendant, a member of the armed forces, or because he was male. 
Defense counsel also questioned jurors to determine whether they
 would feel sympathetic with the CW because she was allegedly the
 victim of abuse or because of her use of an interpreter.
 
There is no evidence that counsel's failure to object
 
to the jury array fell below the range of competence demanded of
 attorneys in criminal cases, prejudiced Pierre-Louis in any
 fashion, or impaired an otherwise meritorious defense.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Amended Judgment filed on
 
May 25, 2010 in the Family Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 16, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Nelson W.S. Goo 
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Brian R. Vincent,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 