  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30079
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
HERMAN-LEE KAOPUA, SR., Petitioner-Appellant,
vs. 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 09-1-0007)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard, and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Herman-Lee Kaopua Sr. (Kaopua)
 
appeals from the "Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law; Order
 
Denying Petitioner Herman Kaopua, Sr.'s Petition for Post-
Conviction Relief" (Order Denying Second Petition), which was
 filed on August 28, 2009, in the Circuit Court of the Fifth
 Circuit (circuit court).
1 We affirm.
 
I.
 
In Kaopua's underlying criminal case, Respondent-
Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged Kaopua by indictment 
with six counts of sexual assault. The same person (Minor) was 
named as the alleged victim in each count. The indictment 
alleged that Minor was less than fourteen years old at the time of the charged offenses. Counts 1 through 5 charged Kaopua with first degree sexual assault of Minor, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-730(1)(b) (1993).
2 Count 6 charged 
1 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided over the
proceedings relevant to this appeal.
2 During the times relevant to this case, HRS § 707­
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kaopua with continuous sexual assault against a minor under the
 
age of fourteen years, in violation of 707-733.5 (Supp. 1999).3
 
Count 6 encompassed the same time frame (November 6, 1995 to
 January 26, 2001) as the acts alleged in Counts 1 through 5. 
2(...continued)
730(1)(b) provided:
 
(1)
 A person commits the offense of sexual assault
in the first degree if:
 
. . . . 
(b) The person knowingly subjects to sexual
penetration another person who is less than
fourteen years old; provided this paragraph
shall not be construed to prohibit
practitioners licensed under chapter 453,
455, or 460, from performing any act within
their respective practices.
3 During the time relevant to this case, HRS § 707-733.5
provided in relevant part:
 
(1) Any person who:
 
(a) 	Either resides in the same home with a minor
 
under the age of fourteen years or has
recurring access to the minor; and
 
(b) Engages in three or more acts of sexual
penetration or sexual contact with the minor
over a period of time, but while the minor is
under the age of fourteen years, 
is guilty of the offense of continuous sexual assault
of a minor under the age of fourteen years.
 
. . . .
 
(3) No other felony sex offense involving the
same victim may be charged in the same proceeding with
a charge under this section, unless the other charged
offense occurred outside the time frame of the offense
 charged under this section or the other offense is
charged in the alternative. A defendant may be charged
with only one count under this section unless more than
one victim is involved, in which case a separate count
may be charged for each victim.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
After a jury-waived bench trial, the Family Court of
 
4
the Fifth Circuit (family court)  found that Kaopua had committed
four discrete acts of first degree sexual assault, as charged in
 
Counts 1 through 4, but found that there was insufficient
 evidence to support Count 5. Based on its findings that Kaopua
 had engaged in three or more acts of sexual penetration as
 charged in Counts 1 through 4, the family court found Kaopua
 guilty of Count 6. The family court, however, dismissed Counts 1
through 4 on the ground that convictions on those counts were
 precluded by the conviction on Count 6 for violating HRS § 707­ 
5
733.5. Under HRS § 707-733.5(3),  "[n]o other felony sex offense
involving the same victim may be charged in the same proceeding
 with a charge under this section [(for continuous sexual assault
 of a minor under the age of fourteen years)], unless the other
 charged offense occurred outside the time frame of the offense
 charged under this section or the other offense is charged in the
alternative." Neither exception set forth in HRS § 707-733.5(3)
 applied to Counts 1 through 4. Despite finding that Kaopua had
 committed acts of sexual penetration as charged in Counts 1
 thorough 4 and only dismissing those counts because of HRS § 707­733.5(3), the family court on April 9, 2002, entered a Judgment
 of Acquittal as to Counts 1 through 4 as well as on Count 5. 
 
Kaopua appealed his conviction on Count 6, and the 
State cross-appealed. 
On cross-appeal, the State argued that the 
family court's oral decision to dismiss Counts 1 through 4 as a matter of law under HRS § 707-733.5(3) was inconsistent with its subsequent entry of a Judgment of Acquittal on those counts. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court remanded the case for clarification as to 
the family court's disposition of Counts 1 through 5. On remand, the family court clarified that Counts 1 through 5 were dismissed as a matter of law pursuant to HRS § 707-733.5(3) because they 
4 The Honorable Clifford L. Nakea presided over Kaopua's
underlying criminal case.
5 See footnote 3,  supra.
 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
involved the same victim and time frame as Count 6 and were not
 
charged in the alternative to Count 6. The family court
 therefore entered an order that dismissed Counts 1 through 5, 
vacated the Judgment of Acquittal entered as to Counts 1 through
 5, and superceded the vacated Judgment of Acquittal with its
 order of dismissal. After the circuit court entered this order,
 the parties stipulated to the dismissal of the State's cross-
appeal. 
In the direct appeal of his judgment, Kaopua challenged 
his conviction on Count 6, claiming that his jury-trial waiver was invalid. On February 12, 2004, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
issued a summary disposition order affirming Kaopua's judgment of conviction in Appeal No. 25009. 
On January 20, 2006, Kaopua filed a Petition for Post-
conviction Relief pursuant to Rule 40 of the Hawaii Rule of Penal
Procedure (HRPP) (First Petition) in SPP No. 06-1-0001 and an
  
amended First Petition on February 27, 2006. The circuit court
6
 
denied the claims raised in the First Petition and the amended
 First Petition on November 24, 2006. On October 23, 2007, Kaopua
 filed a "Default Rule 55 (a)(e) HFCR and Rule 40(d) HRPP"
 
7
(Default Rule Motion) which the circuit court  denied on November
14, 2007. Kaopua appealed the denial of his Default Rule Motion
 
in Appeal No. 28907. This court dismissed Kaopua's appeal in
 
Appeal No. 28907 on January 26, 2009, for lack of appellate
 jurisdiction because there was no final appealable order. 
II.
 
On June 25, 2009, Kaopua filed a "Post-Conviction
 
Proceeding Rule 40(a)(1)(i, iii, iv) HRPP" (Second Petition),
 which forms the basis of this appeal. 
On August 28, 2009, the
 
circuit court denied the Second Petition without a hearing and
 issued its Order Denying Second Petition.
 
6 The Honorable George M. Masuoka presided. 
7 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Kaopua argues on appeal, as he did in the Second
 
Petition, that he was improperly convicted of Count 6 because the
 
trial court concluded that he did not commit the separate acts of
 sexual assault charged in Counts 1 through 5, and therefore, the
 trial court should not have convicted him of the offense of
 continuous sexual assault against a minor under the age of
 fourteen years charged in Count 6. He also claims that there was
 insufficient evidence to convict him of Count 6. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, we resolve Kapoua's claims as follows: 
1. Kaopua did not prove the existence of
 
extraordinary circumstances to justify his failure to raise the
 issues in the Second Petition in his direct appeal or in the
 First Petition. Therefore, he waived the issues raised in the
 Second Petition. HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) (2006).
8
 
2. Even if not waived, Kaopua's claims are without 
merit. Kaopua claims that his conviction on Count 6 is improper and violates double jeopardy because it is based on the acts underlying Counts 1 through 4 for which he as "acquitted" by the family court. This claim is based on the erroneous premise that the family court acquitted Kaopua of Counts 1 through 4. Although the family court initially entered a Judgment of Acquittal as to those counts, on remand from the Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court, the family court vacated its judgments of acquittal on Counts 1 through 4 and instead dismissed those counts. Because the family court did not acquit Kaopua of Counts 1 through 4, but instead dismissed those counts pursuant to HRS § 707-733.5(3) after finding that Kaopua had committed the acts of sexual penetration charged therein, the family court properly based Kaopua's conviction on Count 6 on Kaopua's commission of the acts alleged in Count 1 through 4. 
8 To the extent that Kaopua contends that he did previously
raise claims contained in the Second Petition, those claims are
barred as having been previously ruled upon. HRPP Rule 40(a)(3). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. We reject Kaopua's claims that there was
 
insufficient evidence to support his conviction and that his
 
conduct did not satisfy the requirements of the HRS § 707-733.5
 offense of continuous sexual assault of a minor under the age of
 fourteen years charged in Count 6. Kaopua's interpretation of
 HRS § 707-733.5 as requiring proof that a person "plac[ed] the
 penis into the vagina and then mov[ed] the penis back and forth
 three or more times within the vagina" is wrong. Kaopua also
 apparently contends that there was insufficient evidence of
 sexual penetration because the State used "only testimony" and
 the injuries observed during the vaginal examination of Minor
 could have been a normal variant. This contention is without
 merit as the prosecution can prove sexual penetration based on
 testimony that does not include corroborating evidence from a
 physical examination. 
III.
 
The Order Denying Second Petition that was filed by the
 
circuit court on August 28, 2009, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 30, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Herman-Lee Kaopua, Sr.
Petitioner-Appellant Pro Se Chief Judge 
Tracy MurakamiDeputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 