NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30085
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI fI 
MARSHALL KENNETH FLOWERS, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
UNITED SERVICES AUTOMOBILE ASSOCIATION, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 02-1-1679)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Marshall Kenneth Flowers (Flowers) 
timely appeals from the interlocutory order granting Defendant-
Appellee United Services Automobile Association's (USAA) motion 
to enforce the settlement agreement, entered on September 10, 
2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 
On appeal, Flowers argues two major points. He argues 
that the Circuit Court erred in (1) finding that he voluntarily 
entered into an agreement to terminate all claims not before the 
court; and (2) finding that it had jurisdiction to grant USAA's 
motion to enforce settlement. 
This action stems from insurance claims made by 
renters' insurance policyholder Flowers with his carrier, USAA. 
Claim 1 involved the loss of certain household items, including a 
weight bench, during Flowers's move to Australia. Claim 2 
pertained to the loss of a suitcase during a trip Flowers took 
between Hawai fi and Florida. When Flowers and USAA could not 
1 The Honorable Victoria S. Marks presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
agree on an adjustment of these claims, Flowers brought suit
 
against USAA, asserting claims of (1) breach of contract and (2)
 
bad faith arising from USAA's denial of some of Flowers's claims.
 
On March 30, 2005, the Circuit Court entered a final
 
judgment in favor of USAA and against Flowers on all asserted
 
claims; Flowers appealed.
 
On July 30, 2008, this court concluded that 
issues of material fact exist regarding whether USAA
breached Policy 1 with respect to Flower's claim for
replacement cost of the weight bench, whether USAA's denial
of payment for the weight bench was in bad faith, and
whether USAA's delay in paying replacement costs for the
other Claim 1 items was in bad faith.
 
Flowers v. United Services Auto. Ass'n, 118 Hawai fi 317, 188 P.3d 
831, Nos. 27057, 27128, and 27229, 2008 WL 2971478 at *26 (App. 
July 30, 2008)(mem.) (Flowers I). We therefore vacated and 
remanded (1) the March 30, 2005 judgment of the circuit court; 
(2) the Order Granting USAA's Motion for Summary Judgment filed
 
on April 12, 2004, and (3), the Order Granting USAA's Motion for
 
Attorney's Fees and Costs filed on August 25, 2004. Id. at *26. 
Summary judgment in favor of USAA with regard to Claim 2 was
 affirmed. Id. at *23.
 
Upon remand, the parties met with the Circuit Court
 
for, inter alia, a settlement conference. After lengthy
 
discussion, Flowers offered the following terms: "I will accept,
 
if they contribute 1500 to the [Hawaii High School Athletic
 
Association] . . . and just gave me 5,000, I would settle for
 
today." However, Flowers subsequently refused to sign the
 
written settlement agreement and stipulation for dismissal. The
 
Circuit Court did not dismiss the case but upon USAA's motion,
 
entered an order to enforce the settlement agreement. From that
 
interlocutory order, Flowers appeals.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relevant statutory and case law, we resolve USAA's challenge to
 
jurisdiction and Flowers's points of error as follows:
 
(1) This court has jurisdiction of this appeal under 
the collateral order doctrine. "[C]ertain collateral orders 
affecting rights which are independent of, and separable from, 
the rights asserted in the main action are immediately appealable 
since they may not be effectively reviewable and rights could be 
lost, perhaps irretrievably, if review invariably had to await 
final judgment. Siangco v. Kasadate, 77 Hawai fi 157, 161, 883 
P.2d 78, 82 (1994) (citations and internal quotations omitted). "In order to fall within the narrow ambit of the collateral order 
doctrine, the 'order must [1] conclusively determine the disputed 
question, [2] resolve an important issue completely separate from 
the merits of the action, and [3] be effectively unreviewable on 
appeal from a final judgment.'" Id. In this case, the 
September 10, 2009 order granting USAA's motion to enforce the settlement agreement satisfies all three Siangco prongs and is an 
appealable interlocutory order under the collateral order 
doctrine. See Cook v. Surety Life Ins., Co., 79 Hawai
fi 403, 
407-08, 903 P.2d 708, 712-13 (App. 1995). 
(2) We review "the totality of the circumstances 
surrounding the making of the agreement" in order to "ensure that the purported compromise agreement sought to be enforced is truly 
an agreement of the parties." Assocs. Fin. Servs. Co. of Hawai
fi 
v. Mijo, 87 Hawai fi 19, 28-29, 950 P.2d 1219, 1228-1229 (1998) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). In this case, 
we have the benefit of a transcript of the settlement 
discussions, which reveal repeated requests to Flowers that he 
provide his position regarding the total amount he sought to 
settle the entire case, his eventual response, which was accepted 
by USAA, and a discussion of the procedures that were to follow, 
including the preparation of a stipulation for dismissal. We 
agree with the Circuit Court that it was "clear that a settlement 
resolved everything with the case," and that "the entire case 
would be concluded." 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) The Circuit Court had the authority to enter its
 
order to enforce the settlement agreement. This court's judgment
 
on appeal vacated the judgment and order granting summary
 
judgment to USAA with regard to the weight bench issues and
 
remanded the case "for further proceedings consistent with this
 
opinion." Flowers I at *26. Enforcing a settlement agreement
 
which disposed of the entire case was not inconsistent with that
 mandate. Flowers's challenge to the Circuit Court's jurisdiction
 
is without merit.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the September 10, 2009
 
interlocutory order granting Defendant-Appellee USAA's motion to
 enforce the settlement agreement entered by the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
fi, May 17, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Marshall K. Flowers,
Plaintiff-Appellant, pro se.
 
Chief Judge
 
Terrance M. Revere and
 Katie L. Lambert
 (Motooka & Yamamoto),
for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 