 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30498
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ROBERT GRANT, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-521)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Robert Grant (Grant) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, filed on April 16, 2010,
 
in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court).1
 
After a jury trial, Grant was found guilty of the offense of
 manslaughter in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707­
702(1)(a) (Supp. 2009).
2
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided. 
2
 HRS § 707-702 states in relevant part:
 
§707-702 Manslaughter.  (1) A person commits the
offense of manslaughter if:
(a) The person recklessly causes the death of another
person; or
 
. . .
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Grant raises the following points of error: 
(1) the circuit court erred when issuing its reply to 
Jury Communication No. 1 (reply) because (a) the communication was prejudicially misleading and inconsistent with the Hawai' i 
Standard Jury Instructions Criminal 6.04 (1991), and (b) the circuit court issued its reply to the jury without allowing 
additional summation argument thus violating Grant's rights to 
due process and assistance of counsel; 
(2) the circuit court erred when it included the
 
definition of "deadly force" in instructing the jury on self-
defense because Grant was charged with Manslaughter in violation
 
of HRS § 707-702(1)(a), which entails a "reckless" state of mind,
 
not an "intentional" or "knowing" state of mind as required for
 
"deadly force"; 
(3) the circuit court denied Grant his right to due
 
process when it failed to rule on Grant's Motion for Hawaii Rules
 
of Evidence (HRE) Rule 104 Determination of Admissibility of Iuka
 
Akui's Alleged Communication of Threat to Witness Jerry Arnold
 
filed December 11, 2009; and
 
(4) there was insufficient evidence to support the
 
conviction in this case and the circuit court erred in denying
 
Grant's Motion for Judgment of Acquittal. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties,
 
Grant's points of error are resolved as follows.
 
As an initial matter, with regard to Grant's first, 
second, and third points of error, his opening brief fails to 
comply with Rule 28(b)(4) of the Hawai' i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP), which requires: 
[T]he appellant shall file an opening brief, containing . .
. [a] concise statement of the points of error set forth in
separately numbered paragraphs. Each point shall state: (i)
the alleged error committed by the court or agency; (ii)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
where in the record the alleged error occurred; and (iii)
where in the record the alleged error was objected to or the
manner in which the alleged error was brought to the
attention of the court or agency. 
(Emphasis added). In setting out the first three points of 
error, Grant's opening brief does not contain any citation 
showing where in the record the alleged error occurred, where the 
alleged errors were objected to or the manner in which the errors 
were brought to the circuit court's attention. We may therefore 
disregard these alleged points of error. See In re Contested 
Case Hearing on Water Use Permit Application Filed by Kukui (Molokai), Inc., 116 Hawai' i 481, 506, 174 P.3d 320, 345 (2007). 
Even if we reach the merits of each alleged point of error, we conclude there was no error. 
(1) The circuit court did not err in its reply to Jury
 
Communication No. 1 or in denying further summation argument.
 
Jury Communication No. 1 asked the court to define "cause,"
 
stating:
 
The first element to the offense of manslaughter as
listed on pg. 22 of the jury instructions states that "the
Defendant caused the death of another person". Please
 define "cause" - does the cause have to be the sole cause,
the predominate cause, or can it be a contributory cause.
 
The circuit court replied to the jury's communication in the
 
following manner:
 
Conduct is the cause of a result when it is an
 
antecedent but for which the result in question would not
have occurred. 
In the following instance, recklessly causing a
particular result is established even though the actual
result caused by the defendant may not have been within the
risk of which the defendant was aware: 
The actual result involves the same kind of injury or
harm as the probable result and is not too remote or
accidental in its occurrence. 
The jury is to consider this response in light of all
of the prior instructions given by the court including the
instruction on page 8 of the set of written instructions
given to the jury. 
The circuit court's reply defining "cause" is based on
 
the language in HRS § 702-214 (1993 Repl.) and HRS § 702-216
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1993 Repl.), and it accurately defines "cause." Grant argues
 
that the circuit court's reply somehow conflicted with,
 
undermined, or confused the instruction on "reckless" acts that
 
was given to the jury. We do not agree. The jury communication
 
did not ask for a definition of "reckless," and the circuit court
 
thus did not give one in its reply. Grant does not argue that
 
the reply in defining "cause" was erroneous. Grant does not
 
argue that there was any error in the instructions defining when
 
a person acts "recklessly." Importantly, the circuit court's
 
reply included the statement that "[t]he jury is to consider this
 
response in light of all of the prior instructions given by the
 
court."
 
"Because the circuit court's response to a jury
 
communication is the functional equivalent of an instruction, the
 
standard of review for jury instructions also applies to
 
reviewing a trial court's answers to jury communications." State
 
v. Miyashiro, 90 Hawai' i 489, 492, 979 P.2d 85, 88 (App. 1999). 
The circuit court's reply was not, when considered with the jury 
instructions as a whole, prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, 
inconsistent, or misleading. See State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai' i 
289, 292-93, 119 P.3d 597, 600-01 (2005). 
The circuit court also did not err in submitting its
 
reply to the jury without allowing for additional summation
 argument. Additional summation argument was not warranted in
 
this case because the circuit court's reply did not introduce a
 
new element or theory into the case, but rather, it simply
 
clarified the definition of "cause." Unless there is a new
 
theory or issue presented, a trial court is not required to allow
 
the parties to make additional summation arguments after a
 
supplemental instruction is given. See, e.g., United States v.
 
Fontenot, 14 F.3d 1364, 1368 (9th Cir. 1994); Durden v. State,
 406 N.E.2d 281, 283 (Ind. Ct. App. 1980). In this case, defense
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel already had an opportunity to argue the issue of
 
causation to the jury, and in fact did so during closing
 
arguments.
 
(2) The circuit court's inclusion of the definition of
 
"deadly force" in the instructions on self-defense did not
 
mislead the jury and was not inconsistent with the charged
 
offense of manslaughter. The instruction on self-defense and use
 
of deadly force stated, in relevant part:
 
Justifiable use of force, commonly known as self-
defense, is a defense to the charges of Manslaughter and the
included offenses of Assault in the Second Degree, and
Assault in the Third Degree. The burden is on the
 prosecution to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
force used by the defendant was not justifiable. If the
 prosecution does not meet its burden then you must find the
defendant not guilty.
 
....
 
The use of deadly force upon or toward another person
is justified when a person using such force reasonably
believes that deadly force is immediately necessary to
protect himself on the present occasion against death or
serious bodily injury. The reasonableness of the
 defendant's belief that the use of such protective force was
immediately necessary shall be determined from the viewpoint
of a reasonable person in the defendant's position under the
circumstances of which the defendant was aware or as the
 defendant reasonably believed them to be.
 
The use of deadly force is not justifiable if the
defendant, with the intent of causing death or serious
bodily injury, provoked the use of force against himself in
the same encounter, or if the defendant knows that he can
avoid the necessity of using such force with complete safety
by retreating.
 
....
 "Deadly force" means force which the actor uses with the
intent of causing, or which he knows to create a substantial
risk of causing death or serious bodily injury.
 
Grant takes issue with that part of the instruction that states:
 
"'[d]eadly force' means force which the actor uses with the
 
intent of causing, or which he knows to create a substantial risk
 
of causing death or serious bodily injury." 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"It is the trial judge's duty to insure that the jury 
instructions cogently explain the law applicable to the facts of 
the case and that the jury has proper guidance in its 
consideration of the issues before it." State v. Locquiao, 100 
Hawai'i 195, 205, 58 P.3d 1242, 1252 (2002) (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted). As long as there is evidence to 
support such a finding by the jury, the degree of force used by a 
defendant in self-protection is a question for the jury and 
giving self-defense instructions that include a definition of use 
of deadly force is appropriate. See State v. Van Dyke, 101 
Hawai'i 377, 387, 69 P.3d 88, 98 (2003); State v. Scott, 125 
Hawai'i 30, 251 P.3d 47, No. 30499, 2011 WL 1878851, at *2 (App. 
May 12, 2011) (SDO); State v. Sua, 122 Hawai' i 546, 229 P.3d 364, 
No. 29500, 2010 WL 1765670, at *7 (App. Apr. 29, 2010) (mem.). 
The evidence adduced at trial supported giving the
 
instruction on use of deadly force in self-defense and also
 
defining "deadly force" as part of the instruction. Grant
 
testified and claimed that: decedent Daniel Martina (Martina) was
 
the aggressor towards Grant; Martina made threats to Grant,
 
including "I'll beat your ass" and "I'll fuck you up"; Martina
 
was coming at Grant to hit him and took a swing at Grant before
 
Grant initially pushed Martina away; Grant tried to go to his car
 
but when he glanced behind, Martina was right there, almost on
 
him, and Martina tried to punch Grant so Grant kicked Martina in
 
the chest area; as a result of the kick, Grant saw Martina
 
stagger back and later saw Martina on the ground.
 
There was witness testimony by Jerry Arnold (Arnold)
 
and Talbert Lum Ho (Ho) that Grant and Martina got into an
 
argument after Grant did not offer or give Martina a beer. 
Arnold testified that Martina was the aggressor, asking Grant if
 
Grant wanted to "scrap." Arnold and Ho testified that during the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3
altercation, Grant punched Martina  and kicked Martina.  Arnold
 
described the kick as a "roundhouse" kick. As a result of the
 
kick, both Arnold and Ho testified that Martina fell and hit his
 
head on the asphalt. Ho testified that Martina went down "head
 
first" and "backwards."
 
There was testimony by Dr. Gayle Suzuki, the Deputy
 
Medical Examiner who conducted an autopsy on Martina, that
 
Martina sustained extensive and significant skull fractures that
 
resulted from an impact to the head that was "pretty severe, a
 
lot of force or trauma."
 
Because there was evidence justifying the self-defense
 
instruction and the inclusion of the definition of "deadly force"
 
in the instructions, the circuit court did not err. 
(3)
 Given the record in this case, Grant's due process 
rights were not violated when the circuit court did not rule on 
his Motion for HRE 104 Determination of Admissibility of Iuka 
Akui's Alleged Communication of Threat to Witness Jerry Arnold 
(motion). "The general rule is that an issue which was not 
raised in the lower court will not be considered on appeal." 
Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United Agri Prods., 86 Hawai' i 214, 248, 
948 P.2d 1055, 1089 (1997) (citation omitted). Grant does not point to anywhere in the record where he requested a hearing on 
the motion or otherwise made an objection to the lack of a ruling 
in order to preserve the issue for appeal. In this circumstance, 
there is no "ruling" to review, and the issue with respect to the 
lack of ruling has not been preserved for appeal. 
In addition, we reject Grant's argument that the
 
circuit court's failure to rule on the motion was effectively a
 
denial of the motion which constituted reversible error. "The
 
denial of a motion in limine, in itself, is not reversible error. 
3
 According to Arnold, Grant punched Martina twice. According to Ho,
Grant punched Martina once.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The harm, if any, occurs when the evidence is improperly admitted 
at trial." Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai' i 1, 7, 84 P.3d 509, 515 
(2004). Even if we were to assume there was, in effect, a denial 
of Grant's motion, the evidence in question (i.e., an alleged 
threat by Akui) was never admitted at trial. Grant made the 
decision not to call Akui as a witness, even though Grant had not 
sought a ruling on his motion and never objected to the court's 
non-ruling on the motion. 
Finally, we note that Grant fails to cite any authority
 
to support his claim that his due process rights were violated,
 
or that the circuit court reversibly erred, because it did not
 
affirmatively rule on his motion regarding admissibility of
 
evidence. Grant ignores the fact that he did not request a
 
hearing on the motion, did not object at trial to a lack of a
 
hearing, and apparently made no effort to raise the issue to the
 
attention of the circuit court.
 
We therefore find no merit in Grant's third point of
 
error.
 
(4) There was sufficient evidence to support the jury's
 
conclusion convicting Grant of manslaughter and the circuit court
 
did not err in denying Grant's Motion for Judgment of Acquittal. 
Grant claims that there are internal contradictions and
 
inconsistencies in the testimony of Arnold and Ho that make their
 
testimony unreliable and incredible.
 
The standard to be applied by the trial court in
ruling upon a motion for a judgment of acquittal is whether,
upon the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the
[trier of fact], a reasonable mind might fairly conclude
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. An appellate court employs
the same standard of review.
 
State v. Keawe, 107 Hawai' i 1, 4, 108 P.3d 304, 307 (2005). In 
the context of a manslaughter conviction, there must be 
sufficient evidence to show that the defendant recklessly caused 
the death of another person. See HRS § 707-702(1)(a). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Arnold testified that he saw Grant punch Martina twice
 
in the facial area and kick Martina in the head in a "roundhouse"
 
style. Arnold testified that the kick was a "hard" one. Arnold
 
further testified that Martina fell, his head hit the ground, and
 
it sounded like a bowling ball being dropped on the floor.
 
Ho testified that Grant punched Martina in the upper
 
torso area, and after Martina turned back from picking up his
 
hat, Grant kicked Martina in the chest or head. Ho testified
 
that, in terms of strength, the kick was "a pretty good kick" and
 
that Grant "had some skills." After getting kicked, Martina fell
 
backward and, according to Ho, the sound of Martina's head
 
hitting the asphalt sounded like a "coconut hitting a rock."
 
Grant testified that he pushed Martina as Martina was
 
approaching him. Grant further testified that when Martina came
 
at him again, he kicked Martina in the chest area and Martina
 
staggered backwards.
 
While their testimonies vary to some degree, Arnold, Ho
 
and Grant each testified that Grant kicked Martina just prior to
 
Martina falling to the ground.
 
Dr. Suzuki opined that Martina's cause of death was
 
"cranial cerebral injuries due to blunt force injuries of the
 
head due to an assault." Dr. Suzuki testified that the impact to
 
Martina's skull was severe enough to cause the fracture to extend
 
from the right side of the skull to the left side of the skull,
 
or a partial ring fracture. She testified that Martina's brain
 
was soft, swollen, bruised, and surrounded by blood. Dr. Suzuki
 
further testified that "[a] simple collapse to the . . . hard
 
surface wouldn't produce that severe a fracture." 
Although there are some inconsistencies in the
 
testimony of Arnold and Ho, reconciliation of such
 
inconsistencies is for the jury to resolve, and appellate courts
 
must limit their consideration to whether there is sufficient
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence to sustain the verdict. See State v. Mattiello, 90 
Hawai'i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 697 (1999) ("Verdicts based on 
conflicting evidence will not be set aside where there is 
substantial evidence to support the trier of fact's findings.") 
(brackets and citation omitted); State v. Carvelo, 45 Haw. 16, 
361 P.2d 45 (1961). The evidence in the record is sufficient to 
support the jury's conclusion that Grant recklessly caused the 
death of Martina. 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence, filed on April 16, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the
 Third Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 25, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Brian J. De Lima 
Francis R. Alcain (Crudele & De Lima)for Defendant-Appellant 
Chief Judge 
Mary Ann J. HollockerDeputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10
 