NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30017
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
WENDELL E.K. KEKUMU, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
LINDA MAY KEKUMU, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 07-1-0132)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Wendall E.K. Kekumu (Husband)
 
appeals from the July 6, 2009 Divorce Decree filed in the Family
 
1
 Court of the Third Circuit (family court), in which the family
court awarded alimony to Defendant-Appellee Linda May Kekumu
 
(Wife), entered a property division, and awarded Wife $
1,895.84
 
in attorney's fees. 
On appeal, Husband asserts the following points of
 
error: (1) the family court's conclusion of law regarding the
 wasting of equity in the marital residence is clearly erroneous;
 
(2) with regard to the family court's property distribution, the
 
family court erred when it failed to address tax refunds and
 
Wife's monetary withdrawals, and to award an "equivalence" to
 
1
 The Honorable Anthony K. Bartholomew presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Husband; (3) the family court clearly erred in its findings
 
related to Wife's medical condition and her reasonable efforts to
 
secure full time employment; (4) the family court clearly erred
 
in its findings concerning Wife's ability to obtain medical
 
coverage; (5) the family court erred in finding that "[a]t
 
DOCOEPOT,[ 2
] the parties had a joint account at [HFS Federal
Credit Union (HFS FCU)], with an account balance of $50.00[;]"
 (6) the family court erred in its conclusion that the facts of
 
the case analyzed in light of the statutory factors set forth in
 
HRS § 580-47 warrant an award of alimony in favor of Wife; and
 
(7)
 the family court abused its discretion in awarding Wife
 
$1,895.84 in attorney's fees.
 
Based upon a careful review of the record and the
 
briefs submitted by the parties, and having given due
 consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised
 
therein, we resolve Husband's issues as follows: 
(1) Husband argues that the family court erred in its
 
COL 1, which concludes that neither party will be charged with
 
wasting the equity held in the marital residence: 
1. Neither Plaintiff nor Defendant engaged in conduct
during the pendency of this case which warrants a conclusion
by the court that either party should be charged with
"wasting" the asset comprised of the equity the parties held
in the marital residence at the time it was subjected to
foreclosure. Therefore, the court declines to engage in a
deviation in favor of either party on the basis of the other
party's alleged wasting of the equity held in the marital
residence. 
Discussion
 
The general principle regarding the "wasting" of
marital assets has been succinctly stated by the Hawaii
Intermediate Court of Appeals as follows: 
A reduction of the dollar value of the marital
 estate chargeable to a divorcing party occurs
when, during the time of the divorce, a party's
action or inaction caused a reduction of the
 
2
 Date of the conclusion of the evidentiary part of the trial. 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
dollar value of the marital estate under such
 
circumstances that he or she equitably should be
charged with having received the dollar value of
the reduction. 
Higashi v. Higash[i], 106 Hawaii 228 (App. 2004), at 241
(emphasis added). 
The issue therefore, as reflected by the emphasized
language above, is not simply whether a reduction in the
value of the marital estate can be attributed to the "action
 or inaction" of one of the parties -- it is whether when
considering all of the circumstances it would be equitable
to charge the entirety of the loss to one or the other
party. 
It is plainly evident that the parties in this case
failed to maintain their mortgage payments and as a result
suffered the foreclosure of the marital residence. It is
 equally evident that the foreclosure cost the parties a
significant sum comprised of their equity at the time of the
foreclosure. 
Plaintiff insists that the loss should be laid at
 
Defendant's feet because she declined to agree to a sale of
the residence during the pendency of the divorce. Indeed,
Defendant's reluctance to sell the residence was
 acknowledged at trial, and made manifest by her conduct
during the litigation, i.e. her opposition to Plaintiff's
motion to list the house for sale. 
However, Plaintiff's argument is made less persuasive
by the fact that he agreed at the January 7, 2008, hearing
on his motion to list and several times thereafter to
 continue the motion until moved on and, eventually, until
the trial date in October, 2008, by which time the motion
had been mooted by events. Plaintiff's failure to press the
issue of the sale of the residence clearly undermines his
position. In addition, the undisputed fact that Plaintiff,
who had been making the mortgage payments, unilaterally
stopped making the payments in March, 2008, clearly
mitigates against laying all of the blame for the
foreclosure on Defendant. 
Defendant argues that the unilateral decision by
Plaintiff to stop paying the mortgage in March, 2008, is a
sufficient basis for attributing the loss entirely to
Plaintiff. Defendant's case is the closer case in the
 court's view, but still fails for several reasons. First,
although Defendant's intransigence with regard to selling
the residence is clearly insufficient to make her solely
responsible for the loss, it clearly was a factor along with
other factors to be considered. Further, like Plaintiff,
Defendant failed to pursue her legal remedies when she
agreed in late June and thereafter to continue her motion
for relief (seeking an order that Plaintiff make good on the
mortgage) until the time of trial. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In short, while it is easy to conclude that the
marital residence was subjected to foreclosure because of
the collective failures and even the negligence of both
parties, it does not seem so clear cut to the court that
either of the two parties was so clearly more to blame than
the other that it would be equitable to attribute the entire
loss to either of them.
 
The family court's COL 1 concerning marital "waste" 
presents a mixed question of law and fact, and thus this court 
reviews it under the clearly erroneous standard of review. See 
Booth v. Booth, 90 Hawai' i 413, 416, 978 P.2d 851, 854 (1999). 
Husband argues that the family court wrongly "assumes
 
that Plaintiff's attempts to settle by continuing the motion in
 favor of a settlement conference and agreement to continue the
 
trial to accommodate defense counsel's schedule act as a waiver
 
of Defendant's duty to not waste the marital asset." Husband
 
further argues that while he had discharged his duty not to waste
 
by making mortgage payments for as long as he could afford it and
 
until he started making rental payments when he moved out, Wife
 
stubbornly refused to either sell the house or to make mortgage
 
payments, which she could afford at the time. 
Because the family court's COL 1 is supported by its 
findings of facts, the findings of fact are not clearly 
erroneous, and the decision "reflects an application of the 
correct rule of law," it will not be disturbed. See Doe v. Doe, 
120 Hawai' i 149, 165, 202 P.3d 610, 626 (App. 2009) (citation 
omitted). As Husband concedes, the family court cited correct 
and applicable law. The correct rule of law regarding "waste" is 
as follows: 
A reduction of the dollar value of the marital estate
 
chargeable to a divorcing party occurs when, during the time
of the divorce, a party's action or inaction caused a
reduction of the dollar value of the marital estate under
 such circumstances that he or she equitably should be
charged with having received the dollar value of the
reduction.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Higashi v. Higashi, 106 Hawai' i 228, 241, 103 P.3d 388, 401 (App. 
2004). 
Furthermore, Husband does not challenge the findings of
 
fact that support COL 1. In determining that neither party
 
should be equitably charged with "waste" of the marital
 
residence, the family court essentially concluded that both
 
Husband and Wife contributed to the loss of equity in the marital
 
residence because Husband unilaterally stopped making payments in
 
March 2008, Wife actively opposed and failed to agree to the sale
 
of the residence during the pendency of the divorce, and Husband
 
failed to press the issue of the sale of the marital residence.
 
The conclusion that both parties were at fault such that neither
 
party could be equitably charged with waste is supported by the
 
family court's unchallenged findings of fact. Accordingly, COL 1
 
is not erroneous. 
(2) Husband challenges the family court's property
 
division, arguing that the family court failed to address or
 
consider tax refunds that Wife used, Wife's monetary withdrawals
 
from a credit union account, a tax debt owed by Husband, and to
 
assess an equalization amount. 
At an October 21, 2008 hearing, the parties testified
 
extensively with respect to tax refunds received by Wife.
 
Statements from the HFS Federal Credit Union account show a total
 
of $5,858.65 in deposits designated as tax refunds. Husband
 
testified that the tax refunds were to be split 50-50, or
 
alternatively, that they were to be used to pay for the mortgage
 
on the parties' house. Husband also testified that he owed the
 
IRS $583 dollars for 2007. Finally, the record reflects an
 
October, 2008 statement from the HFS Federal Credit Union account
 
that shows numerous withdrawals. Husband contends Wife made
 
withdrawals in the month before the trial totaling $4,900.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As asserted by Husband, there is no indication in the
 
record that the family court considered or addressed the above
 
items in making its property distribution award. Therefore, we
 
remand to the family court for further consideration of the
 
property division between the parties in light of the tax
 
refunds, monetary withdrawals, and Husband's tax liability,
 
including whether an equalization amount is warranted. 
(3) Husband argues that the family court's FOFs 55 and 
56 are clearly erroneous because they are inconsistent, and not 
supported by substantial evidence in the record. See Doe, 120 
Hawai'i at 165; 202 P.3d at 626. The family court's FOFs 55 and 
56 state: 
55. Defendant's medical condition places significant
limitations on her ability to seek and maintain full-time
employment. 
56. Notwithstanding her medical disability, Defendant
has made reasonable efforts to secure full-time employment
within her physical limitations.
 
There is substantial evidence in the record to support
 
FOFs 55 and 56. As to FOF 55, Wife testified that prior to the
 
marriage she sustained a knee injury in an industrial accident. 
The family court admitted into evidence a letter from Wife's
 
doctor, Christopher Linden, M.D., stating that Wife has "severe
 
progressive bilateral degenerative joint disease most notable in
 
both hips" and that it is recommended that Wife avoid "long
 
periods of standing and walking, carrying of moderate to heavy
 
weight, and forceful extension, flexion, or rotation at the hip."
 
Wife testified that she cannot walk for prolonged periods or lift
 
anything heavy. 
As to FOF 56, Wife testified that she currently
 
qualifies for unemployment, and in order to do so, she does job
 
searches every week, checks the newspapers and Work Force
 
Development Website for available jobs, and goes to all of the
 
interviews that she gets. Wife also introduced an exhibit,
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
received October 21, 2008, listing all of the employers she had
 
applied to in the last two months, including twenty-eight named
 
businesses. Furthermore, there is nothing inconsistent about the
 
two findings. FOFs 55 and 56 are not clearly erroneous. 
(4) Husband argues that FOFs 57 and 58 are clearly
 
erroneous because there was no evidence presented at trial as to
 
the cost of Defendant's healthcare. FOFs 57 and 58 state: 
57. Defendant presently qualifies for medical
coverage through Plaintiff's military retirement/disability
benefits; following the divorce, Defendant will have no
medical coverage unless she pays for it from her own
resources, and the cost for such coverage may be prohibitive
due to her pre-existing medical condition. 
58. Upon the divorce, Defendant will be eligible for
medical coverage for 18 months through the COBRA program, at
an estimated monthly cost of $686.00. 
As to FOF 57, there is substantial evidence to support
 
the finding. Wife testified that she currently had health
 
insurance through Husband's civil service retirement, and that
 
after the divorce she will no longer have health insurance. As
 
discussed above, there is substantial evidence that Wife has a
 
pre-existing condition. 
FOF 58 appears to be clearly erroneous because both
 
parties agree that the family court did not take judicial notice
 
that the cost of health insurance under COBRA was $686 and no
 
evidence was presented at trial as to the cost of health
 
insurance. However, Husband does not explain how or why FOF 58
 
was essential to any of the family court's COLs or decisions, and
 
thus any error in FOF 58 was harmless. 
(5) FOF 64 states that "[a]t the DOCOEPOT, the parties
 
had a joint account at HFS FCU, with [an] account balance of
 
$50.00." Husband argues that FOF 64 is clearly erroneous because
 
according to the additional exhibits admitted by the parties
 
after trial in October 2008, the HFS FCU Draft balance was
 
$1,086.50, the Share balance was $50, and Wife made three checks
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
payable to herself for $1,000.00 each, in addition to her monthly
 
grocery, debt payments, and other minor withdrawals. 
FOF 64 is not clearly erroneous. As Wife points out,
 
the "Share Draft" portion of the HFS FCU account had a widely
 
varying balance, was overdrawn by $88.19 during the month before
 
trial, and opened the month of trial with a balance of $45.03.
 
Moreover, Husband's own proposed finding as to the balance of the
 
account was $63. Thus, it was not clearly erroneous for the
 
family court to value the Share Draft portion of the HFS FCU
 
account at zero and the Regular Shares portion at $50. 
(6) Husband argues that the family court erred in
 
awarding Wife alimony, and challenges the court's COL 3, which
 
states:
 
3. The Court concludes that the facts of this case as
 
analyzed in light of the statutory factors set forth in HRS
sec. 580-47 warrant an award of alimony in favor of
Defendant as follows: (a) $1,500.00 a month for twenty-four
(24) months, and (b) $1,000.00 a month for the following
thirty-six months, and (c) $500.00 a month thereafter, until
the death of either party or Defendant's remarriage, subject
to Plaintiff's right to seek modification of the ordered
amounts should Defendant become qualified for social
security disability payments, or should Defendant secure
full-time employment providing her with an income equal to
or in excess of $3,000.00 a month.
 
Discussion 
HRS sec. 580-47 sets forth thirteen specific factors
the court must analyze in assessing whether to award
alimony. The court's analysis of the facts of this case in
light of each of those factors is as follows: 
(1) The financial resources of the parties.
 
The parties have significantly unequal financial
 
resources. Plaintiff enjoys a guaranteed income in excess
of $4,000 a month, and also receives medical care and drug
coverage at a nominal monthly cost. Defendant's present
physical condition makes full-time employment problematic,
although not necessarily impossible, as her works skills
tend toward clerical, administrative and technical areas,
which tend to involve less physical stress. Defendant does
 have seasonable and some part time employment, and
prospects, however uncertain, of full-time employment in the
future. In addition, Defendant may qualify for social
 
8
  
 
 
  
Plaintiff is fifty-nine; Defendant is fifty-seven.
The court's award is intended to appropriately account for
the age related considerations at play, specifically factors
related to when the Defendant may expect to begin qualifying
for other means of support, such as social security and
medicare, etc.
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
security disability, and will presumably qualify for social
security retirement benefits when she attains the age of 62.
 
(2) Ability of the party seeking support and
maintenance to meet his or her needs independently. 
As noted above, Defendant's ability to meet her needs
independently are presently limited by her medical
condition. 
(3) Duration of the marriage. 
The marriage at issue in this case lasted for
twenty-three years. The duration of the marriage reflects a
serious commitment and investment by both of the parties,
and it is fair to consider that Defendant's sustained
 contributions, material and otherwise, to the marital
partnership entitle her to a measure of support as she
continues her life alone. 
(4) Standard of living established during the
marriage. 
The alimony awarded by the court is reasonably
calculated to enable both parties to approximate the
standard of living which their joint enterprise had
supported. Clearly, two households must necessarily incur
expenses more efficiently absorbed by one; this is the
inevitable and unavoidable consequence of the parties'
decision to separate. 
(5) The age of the parties.
 
(6) The physical and emotional condition of the
parties. 
Clearly, the Defendant's physical/medical condition
establishes her present and on-going need for support. The
 
parties' emotional needs have not emerged as a significant
issue in this case.
 
(7) The usual occupation of the parties during the
marriage.
 
Plaintiff has been unemployed for nearly the entirety
of the marriage, and will likely remain so. Defendant has
 worked for substantial portions of the marriage, generally
in clerical, administrative, technical and service oriented
positions. Defendant's present ability to work is limited
by her physical difficulties, which comprises the most
significant factor in favor of the court's alimony award.
 
9
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(8) The Vocational and employability of the party
seeking support and maintenance. 
As discussed at length above, Defendant['s] present
employability is problematic due to her physical
difficulties.
 
(9) Needs of the parties. 
The court's award is designed to substantially meet
Defendant's present needs, and seems reasonably calculated
to serve that purpose, taking into account that Defendant
reports consistent part-time and seasonal income.
Considering the outstanding debts of both parties, the court
does not imagine that either party will enjoy anything more
than a frugal lifestyle in the future. 
(10) Custodial and child support responsibilities.
 
The parties' only child is no longer a minor, and does
not presently require support. However, should he return to
full-time pursuit of his college education, the parties may
return to the court to address the issue of support in light
of the circumstances as they then exist. 
(11) Ability of the party from whom support and
maintenance is sought to meet his or her own needs while
meeting the needs of the party seeking support and
maintenance. 
Plaintiff enjoys the security of guaranteed income,
and guaranteed medical care at a nominal cost. The alimony
awarded by the court is approximately one third of that
income for two years and will decrease thereafter.
Plaintiff will be able to claim a tax deduction for the
 alimony he pays. Under the circumstances, Plaintiff should
be reasonably able to meet his needs going forward.
 
(12)
 Other factors which measure the financial
condition in which the parties will be left as the result of
the action under which the determination of maintenance is
 made. 
The most significant consequence of the divorce to
either party will be its impact on Defendant's ability to
secure health care. It appears to the court that Defendant
may at some point qualify for social security disability, at
which point her situation may be significantly altered. The
 conditions placed upon the court's award are intended to
allow for a reasonable adjustment of the ordered payments to
reflect changing conditions as they occur. 
(13) 
Probable duration of the need of the party
seeking support and maintenance. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Defendant's present need is manifest. Defendant's
 
needs over time are likely to persist, but may diminish as
other resources become available, and the court's award is
structured accordingly. 
Because Husband's challenge to COL 3 regarding alimony
 
is a mixed question of law and fact, this court reviews it under
 
the clearly erroneous standard of review. Booth, 90 Hawai' i at 
416, 978 P.2d at 854. First, Husband argues that the family
 court erred when it did not make a finding as to the amount of
 
money that is needed to maintain Wife's standard of living.
 
Husband cites to Wong v. Wong, where the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
held that when deciding the issue of spousal support, there are
 three relevant circumstances that a court must consider: 
[t]he first relevant circumstance is the payees' need. What
 
amount of money does he or she need to maintain the standard
of living established during the marriage? The second
relevant circumstance is the payee's ability to meet his or
her need without spousal support. Taking into account the
payee's income, or what it should be, including the net
income producing capability of his or her property, what is
his or her reasonable ability to meet his or her need
without spousal support? The third relevant circumstance is
the payor's need. What amount of money does he or she need
to maintain the standard of living established during the
marriage? The fourth relevant circumstance is the payor's
ability to pay spousal support. Taking into account the
payor's income, or what it should be, including the income
producing capability of his or her property, what is his or
her reasonable ability to meet his or her need and to pay
spousal support? 
87 Hawai' i 475, 485, 960 P.2d 145, 155 (App. 1998) (emphasis 
added) (quoting Vorfeld v. Vorfeld,  8 Haw. App. 391, 402-03, 804
 
P.2d 891, 897-98 (1991)). 
While both 
Wong and Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 580-47 require a court to consider the payees' need when
 
deciding whether to award alimony, they do not require a court to
 
make an explicit finding as to the dollar amount a payee needs to
 
maintain the standard of living established during the marriage. 
See also Smith v. Smith, 56 Haw. 295, 299-300, 535 P.2d 1109,
 
1113-14 (1975) (rejecting appellant's argument that the trial
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court failed to consider the factors enumerated in HRS § 580-47,
 
noting that "[t]hese complex and detailed arrangements evince a
 
careful examination of the financial situation of the parties,
 
rather than a mechanical application of a rule of property
 
law."). It is apparent from the family court's analysis that
 
Wife's needs were central to its decision, when the court stated
 
that "[t]he court's award is designed to substantially meet
 
Defendant's present needs, and seems reasonably calculated to
 
serve that purpose, taking into account that Defendant reports
 
consistent part-time and seasonal income." 
Second, Husband argues that the family court erred in
 
not making an explicit finding as to the second factor under
 
Wong, which is "the payee's ability to meet his or her need
 
without spousal support[,] [t]aking into account the payee's
 
income[.]" Wong, 87 Haw. at 485, 960 P.2d at 155. Just as with
 
Husband's first argument, Husband does not cite to any authority
 that requires a court to make an explicit finding as to the
 
payee's income. While the family court did not make an explicit
 
finding as to Wife's income, it is apparent that it considered
 
the fact that Wife's income is small and sporadic, as it noted
 
that Wife only received income from part time and seasonal
 
employment.
 
Specifically, Husband argues that Wife is likely fully
 
employed, and points to a "$6700.00 deposit" into Wife's bank
 
account. However, the so-called "$6700 deposit" is actually a
 
$3,700 deposit that Wife claims is from a loan against her life
 
insurance, immediately followed by three $1,000 withdrawals,
 
later followed by three separate $1,000 deposits. Husband also
 
points to a September 2008 statement showing a $1,900 deposit
 
from Custom House, followed by an immediate withdrawal of $1,900. 
The record reflects that the $1,900 deposit was from ProFantasy
 
Software, income that Wife has declared throughout the divorce. 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Third, Husband argues that the family court erred in
 
failing to take into account both the third and fourth factors
 
under Wong. The third factor under Wong is the payor's need, or
 
"What amount of money does he or she need to maintain the
 
standard of living established during the marriage?" Id. The
 
fourth factor under Wong is the payor's ability to pay spousal
 support, or "[t]aking into account the payor's income, or what it
 
should be, including the income producing capability of his or
 
her property, what is his or her reasonable ability to meet his
 
or her need and to pay spousal support[.]" Id. Husband contends
 
that the family court failed to take into account the fact that a
 majority of the parties' debt was assessed to Husband and that
 
his income and expense statement reflects that his monthly
 
expenses exceed his monthly income, such that he should not be
 
required to pay alimony.
 
In this case, it is evident that the family court did
 
consider Husband's needs and his ability to pay spousal support. 
As a backdrop, the record establishes that both parties incurred
 
fairly significant debt in their own names and, based on the
 
parties' agreement, the family court ruled that each would be
 
responsible for the debts incurred in their own names. Moreover,
 
although Husband's income and expense statement reflects monthly
 
expenses greater than his monthly income, his credit payments
 
(which make up a majority of the listed expenses) are for fairly
 
sizeable amounts each month. There is no indication how the
 
credit payment amounts were derived or whether they are more than
 
the required minimum payments each month.
 
In this context, although the family court did not
 
directly address husband's income and expense statement, the
 
family court specifically ruled with respect to the needs of the
 
parties that "[c]onsidering the outstanding debts of both
 
parties, the court does not imagine that either party will enjoy
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
anything more than a frugal lifestyle in the future." (Emphasis
 
added.) The court thus expressly considered the debts being
 
carried by each of the parties. Moreover, in specifically
 
addressing the ability of Husband to meet his own needs while
 
paying alimony, the family court ruled that
 
Plaintiff enjoys the security of a guaranteed income,
and guaranteed medical care at a nominal cost. The alimony
awarded by the court is approximately one third of that
income for two years and will decrease thereafter.
Plaintiff will be able to claim a tax deduction for the
 alimony he pays. Under the circumstances, Plaintiff should
be reasonably able to meet his needs going forward.
 
(Emphasis added.) The family court reduced the alimony payments
 
after the first two years, and then again reduced the payments
 
after the following three years, thus balancing Wife's needs with
 
Husband's needs and ability to pay.
 
We thus conclude that the family court properly
 
considered the required factors in awarding alimony to Wife and
 
did not abuse its discretion in awarding alimony as set forth in
 
COL 3.
 
(7) Husband challenges the family court's award of
 
attorney's fees to Wife, which provided: 
Attorney's Fees 
Plaintiff shall be responsible for his own attorneys
fees, and shall pay $2,000.00 toward Defendant's attorneys
fees, minus the amount of $104.16, which was previously
awarded to Plaintiff by the court, for a total of $1,895.84. 
Defendant shall be responsible for any of her
attorneys fees in excess of the amount contributed by
Plaintiff. 
HRS § 580-47(f) states: 
(f) Attorney's fees and costs. The court hearing any
motion for . . . an order for the support and maintenance of
one party by the other . . . may make such orders requiring
either party to pay or contribute to the payment of the
attorney's fees, costs, and expenses of the other party
relating to such motion and hearing as shall appear just and
equitable after consideration of the respective merits of
the parties, the relative abilities of the parties, the
economic condition of each party at the time of the hearing,
the burdens imposed upon either party for the benefit of the
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
children of the parties, and all other circumstances of the
 
case.
 
As this court has previously noted,
 
[T]he purpose of HRS § 580-47 is to allow the court to shift
the burden of paying for the costs of litigation from one
party to another when justice so requires. The award of
 attorney's fees under HRS § 580-47 is discretionary, and the
family court may grant attorney's fees thereunder when the
family court feels it is 'just and equitable' to do so. 
Owens v. Owens, 104 Hawai' i 292, 307, 88 P.3d 664, 679 (App. 
2004). 
Because we remand as to the family court's property
 
distribution, we vacate the family court's award of attorney's
 
fees and also remand this issue for further consideration.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that we vacate the
 
Family Court of the Third Circuit's July 6, 2009 Divorce Decree
 
with respect to the property distribution and the award of
 
attorney's fees. This case is remanded to the family court for
 
further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition
 
Order. In all other respects, we affirm the Divorce Decree.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 20, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Joy A. San Buenaventura
for Plaintiff-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Brian J. De Lima (Crudele & De Lima)for Defendant-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
15
 