NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30564
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
DARA L. HEINZMAN, Claimant-Appellant,
v.
 
CENDANT CORPORATION, Employer-Appellee,
and
 
CNA CLAIMPLUS, INC., Insurance Carrier-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2007-510 (2-04-04598))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this workers' compensation case, Claimant-Appellant
 
Dara L. Heinzman (Heinzman) appeals from the May 17, 2010
 
Decision and Order (Decision and Order) of the Labor and
 
Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB). 
The LIRAB affirmed
 
the November 2, 2007 decision of the Director of the Department
 of Labor and Industrial Relations (Director's Decision), in which
 
the Director denied Heinzman's request to reopen her March 4,
 
2004 work-related injury claim against Employer-Appellee Cendant
 
Corporation (Cendant) and Insurance Carrier-Appellee CNA
 
Claimplus, Inc. (CNA Claimplus, Inc.) (collectively, Cendant). 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1
On appeal,  Heinzman maintains that the LIRAB erred in
finding and concluding that her March 4, 2004 work-related injury
 
did not result in Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS).2
 
Heinzman raises the following points of error: 
(1) The LIRAB erred in entering Finding of Fact (FOF)
 
27, crediting the opinions of Peter Diamond, MD (Dr. Diamond) and
 Linda Rowan, MD (Dr. Rowan) over physicians who had diagnosed
 
Heinzman with CRPS or Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD) and
 
concluding that neither diagnosis was supported by the evidence. 
(2) The LIRAB erred in Conclusion of Law (COL) 2 when
 
it concluded that Heinzman did not suffer from CRPS or RSD. 
1 The opening brief does not comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b). There are numerous references to a trial 
transcript that was not made part of the record on appeal. HRAP Rule 28(b)(3)requires a concise statement of the case with "record references supportingeach statement of fact or mention of court or agency proceedings." Further,Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 12-47-56(b) requires the appellant toorder the transcript or file a certificate that no transcript is to beordered. HAR § 12-47-56(b) ("Within ten days after filing the notice ofappeal the appellant shall order . . . a transcript of the [LIRAB's] audiotape recording of the proceedings which are not already on file. . . . If notranscript is to be ordered . . . the appellant shall file a certificate tothat effect."). The record does not contain any transcripts of proceedingsbefore the LIRAB or a request by Heinzman for transcripts. Heinzman's counsel is warned that, pursuant to HRAP Rule 51, future non-compliance with HRAP28(b) may result in sanctions against him.
2 According to Section 16.5e of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment, 5th Edition (AMA Guides), which was relied upon by both
Cendant and Heinzman, CRPS, also known as Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD),
is characterized by "burning pain that is present without stimulation or
movement, that occurs beyond the territory of a single peripheral nerve, and
that is disproportionate to the inciting event." The AMA Guides state that
 diagnosis of CRPS is complicated by the subjective nature of the pain, "many
of the associated physical signs and radiologic findings can be the result of
disuse," and that "the approach to the diagnosis of [CRPS] should be
conservative and based on objective findings." Under the AMA Guides, a
diagnosis of CRPS is based on "objective findings that can be identified
during a standard physical examination and demonstrated by radiologic
techniques. At least eight of these findings must be present concurrently for
a diagnosis of CRPS." (Emphasis added). Objective clinical signs are:
(1) mottled or cyanotic skin color; (2) cool skin; (3) edema; (4) dry or
overly moist skin; (5) smooth, nonelastic skin texture; (6) soft tissue
atrophy, especially in fingertips; (7) joint stiffness and decreased passive
motion; (8) nail changes (blemished, curved, talonlike); (9) hair growth
changes (fall out, longer, finer). Radiographic signs are: trophic bone
changes, osteoporosis; bone scan findings consistent with CRPS. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve
 
Heinzman's points of error as follows:
 
The LIRAB did not err in FOF 27 regarding the
 
credibility of the expert medical opinions. FOF 27 states:
 
[FOF] 27. The [LIRAB] credits the opinions of Dr.
Diamond and Dr. Rowan over those physicians that diagnosed
[CRPS] or [RSD]. Such diagnoses are inconsistent with, and
not supported by, the medical records or applicable
diagnostic criteria.
 
We review an administrative agency's FOFs "under the 
clearly erroneous standard to determine if the agency decision 
was clearly erroneous in view of reliable, probative, and 
substantial evidence on the whole record." Igawa v. Koa House 
Rest., 97 Hawai' i 402, 406, 38 P.3d 570, 574 (2001). In this 
case, substantial evidence is evidence of sufficient quality and 
probative value to support the LIRAB's finding that the opinions 
of Dr. Diamond and Dr. Rowan were credible and that a diagnosis 
of CRPS or RSD was inconsistent with the medical records and 
applicable diagnostic criteria.
 Furthermore, it is well-established that "the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given their 
testimony are within the province of the trier of fact and, 
generally, will not be disturbed on appeal." Tamashiro v. 
Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai' i 86, 92, 34 P.3d 16, 22 
(2001). 
Dr. Diamond had seen Heinzman on November 23, 2004 for
 
the purpose of an Independent Medical Evaluation (IME) and a
 
disability rating in regards to Heinzman's work injury. At that
 
time, Dr. Diamond also reviewed other medical records, including
 
x-rays, a bone scan of the feet and ankles, and reports from
 
other physicians. On August 29, 2007, and September 21, 2007,
 
Dr. Diamond reviewed additional physicians' reports and other
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
medical records dated between October 2005 and July 2007. 
Dr. Diamond disputed the clinical diagnosis of RSD made by
 
A. Robert Lagone, DPM (Dr. Lagone). Dr. Diamond acknowledged
 
that Heinzman had "sufficient subjective clinical complaints to
 
entertain a diagnosis of [RSD]" but concluded that Heinzman did
 
not meet the objective diagnostic criteria as set forth in the
 
AMA Guides. 
The LIRAB also credited the report of Dr. Rowan, who 
was a referral for consult by Jeffrey Harpstrite, MD and who saw 
Heinzman on February 3, 2005, nearly a year after the injury 
occurred. In her report, Dr. Rowan stated that "[t]here is 
certainly no diagnostic evidence or physical exam evidence to 
support the diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome." It is 
within the province of the LIRAB to determine the credibility of 
the opinions submitted by the doctors and to weigh the evidence 
accordingly; we find no reason to disturb the LIRAB's finding. 
Tamashiro, 97 Hawai' i at 92, 34 P.3d at 22. 
We are also not persuaded by Heinzman's argument that
 
the LIRAB improperly credited the opinions of Dr. Diamond and
 
Dr. Rowan because they had not conducted updated physical
 
examinations of her. Both doctors had physically examined
 
Heinzman within a year after the work injury and determined that
 
their examination and the records did not support the diagnosis
 
of RSD or CRPS. Furthermore, a report of a bone scan taken
 
subsequently on March 12, 2007 specifically found no evidence of
 
RSD. 
Heinzman points to certain medical records and the
 
reports by M. Katherine Schaefer, MD (Dr. Schaefer), Dr. Lagone,
 
and Timothy Olderr, MD (Dr. Olderr), to assert that the LIRAB
 
should have credited the opinions of these doctors, who diagnosed
 
her with CRPS or RSD. Review of the medical records and the
 
reports by Dr. Schaefer, Dr. Lagone, and Dr. Olderr establish
 
that some of the objective indications of CRPS are indicated for
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Heinzman. However, the records and the reports by these doctors
 
do not establish eight objective findings as required under the
 
AMA Guides for a diagnosis of CRPS.
 
We also note that in weighing the evidence, the LIRAB
 
did not find Heinzman's testimony to be credible as to the
 
alleged changes in her leg and foot; additionally, they found her
 
testimony to be inconsistent with the medical records. 
Moreover, Heinzman failed to challenge FOF 23 and FOF
 
24, in which the LIRAB further credited Dr. Diamond's opinion. 
She also failed to challenge FOF 14, wherein the LIRAB adopted
 
the October 12, 2005 Director's Decision FOFs/COLs, in which the
 
Director concluded that Heinzman's foot injury resolved on
 
December 15, 2004. 
Because Heinzman failed to challenge these findings, we 
are bound by them. Taylor–Rice v. State, 91 Hawai' i 60, 65, 979 
P.2d 1086, 1091 (1999) (findings of fact not challenged on appeal are binding on the appellate court); see also Kawamata Farms, 
Inc. v. United Agri Prods., 86 Hawai' i 214, 252, 948 P.2d 1055, 
1093 (1997) ("[i]f a finding is not properly attacked, it is binding; and any conclusion which follows from it and is a 
correct statement of law is valid") (citation omitted). 
Considering the record as a whole, we conclude that the 
LIRAB's FOF 27 is supported by reliable, probative, and 
substantial evidence. HRS § 91-14(g) (2012 Repl.); Igawa, 97 
Hawai'i at 406, 38 P.3d at 574. 
The LIRAB also did not err in entering COL 2, which
 
states:
 
2. The Board further concludes that Claimant did not
 
suffer from Complex Regional Pain syndrome.
Table 16-16 on page 496 of the Guides provides the
following "Objective Diagnostic Criteria for CRPS (RSD and
causalgia)":
-Skin color: mottled or cyanotic
-Skin temperature: cool
-Edema
 
-Skin dry or overly moist
- Skin texture: smooth, nonelastic
-Soft tissue atrophy: especially in fingertips
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
-Joint stiffness and decreased passive motion
-Nail change: blemished, curved, talonlike 
-Hair growth change: fall out, longer, finer
-Radiographs: trophic bone changes,
osteoporosis
-Bone scan: findings consistent with CRPS
The Guides provide that "[a]t least eight of these
findings must be present concurrently for a diagnosis of
CRPS. Signs are objective evidence of disease perceptible to
the examiner, as opposed to symptoms, which are subjective
sensations of the individual." The Guides caution that
 "[s]ince a subjective complaint of pain is the hallmark of
these conditions, and many of the associated physical signs
and radiologic findings can be the result of disuse, the
differential diagnosis is extensive . . . Consequently, the
approach to the diagnosis of these syndromes should be
conservative and based on objective findings."
Claimant has not established that she has Complex
Regional Pain syndrome or Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy.
Claimant does not meet the criteria set forth in the Guides
 for such a diagnosis, and the bone scan did not support such
a diagnosis. At no time did Claimant concurrently have
eight or more of the foregoing signs.
 
A conclusion of law will not be overturned if supported 
by the findings of fact and the application of the correct rule 
of law. Tamashiro, 97 Hawai' i at 93, 34 P.3d at 23 (citation 
omitted). Here, the LIRAB's uncontested FOFs and FOF 27, finding that a diagnosis of CRPS was not supported by the evidence, 
support the conclusion that Heinzman did not establish that she 
has CRPS. Heinzman does not contend the LIRAB applied an 
incorrect rule of law. Therefore, COL 2 was not in error. 
In addition, Heinzman failed to challenge COL 1,
 
wherein the LIRAB concluded that Heinzman failed to present
 
substantial evidence that there had been a change in her physical
 
condition. She also failed to challenge the LIRAB's conclusion
 
that her left foot contusion had resolved on or by December 15,
 
2004. 
Thus, we hold that the LIRAB did not err when it
 
affirmed the November 2, 2007 Director's Decision not to reopen
 
Heinzman's workers' compensation case.
 
Therefore,
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the May 17, 2010 Decision and
 
Order of the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 30, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Charles H. Brower 
for Claimant-Appellant 
Chief Judge 
Leighton K. OshimaDarlene Y. F. Itomura (Wong & Oshima)for Employer-Appellee andInsurance Carrier-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
7
 