_____ 
______ NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30736
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
CIVIL NO. 08-1-0977
 
ISLAND HELICOPTERS-KAUAI, INC., Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
TESORO HAWAII CORPORATION, fka BHP PETROLEUM AMERICAS
REFINING, INC., a subsidiary of TESORO CORPORATION,
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and
 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-100, Defendants
 
TESORO HAWAII CORPORATION, fka BHP PETROLEUM AMERICAS
REFINING, INC., a subsidiary of TESORO CORPORATION,
Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAII, by and through its
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION,
Third-Party Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-100, Defendants
 
STATE OF HAWAII, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION,
Fourth-Party Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
TURBOMECA ENGINE CORP., TURBOMECA USA,
Fourth-Party Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and
 
SAFRAN Group, SAFRAN USA, Inc.,
Fourth-Party Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
DOES 1-100, Fourth-Party Defendants
 ______ 
______ 
______ NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CIVIL NO. 08-1-1038
 
CHARLES DIPIAZZA and DRAGONFLY DEFERRED
 
TRUST dated 6 October 2006,
Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
TESORO HAWAII CORPORATION, fka BHP PETROLEUM AMERICAS
REFINING, INC., a subsidiary of TESORO CORPORATION,
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and
 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-100, Defendants
 
TESORO HAWAII CORPORATION, fka BHP PETROLEUM AMERICAS
REFINING, INC., a subsidiary of TESORO CORPORATION,
Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAII, by and through its
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION,
Third-Party Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-100, Defendants
 
STATE OF HAWAII,
Fourth-Party Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
TURBOMECA ENGINE CORP., TURBOMECA USA,
Fourth-Party Defendant-Cross-Appellant,
and
 
SAFRAN Group, SAFRAN USA, Inc.,
Fourth-Party Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
DOES 1-100, Fourth-Party Defendants
 
and
 
CIVIL NO. 08-1-2235
 
JACK HARTER HELICOPTERS, INC.,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
TESORO HAWAII CORPORATION, fka BHP PETROLEUM,
Defendants-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and
 
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE NON-PROFIT ENTITIES 1-10; and DOE
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
2
   ______ NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
TESORO HAWAII CORPORATION fka BHP PETROLEUM,
Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAII, by and through its
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION,
Third-Party Defendant-Appellee,
 
STATE OF HAWAII,
Fourth Party Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
TURBOMECA S.A., TURBOMECA USA, INC.,
Fourth-Party Defendant-Cross-Appellant,
and
 
SAFRAN Group, SAFRAN USA, INC.,
Fourth-Party Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
DOES 1-100, Fourth-Party Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NOs. 08-1-0977, 08-1-1038, 08-1-2235)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff/Third-Party
 
Plaintiff/Third-Party Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant/Cross-
Appellee Tesoro Hawaii Corporation, fka BHP Petroleum Americas
 
Refining, Inc., a subsidiary of Tesoro Corporation (Tesoro),
 
1
appeals  from the "Order Granting Petition for Approval of Good
Faith Settlements By & Between Plaintiffs and Third-Party
 
Defendants/Fourth-Party Plaintiff State of Hawaif i Department of 
Transportation-Airports Division, Filed June 16, 2010," (Order
 Granting State's Petition) filed on August 23, 2010 in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).
2 The Order
 
1
 Tesoro also appealed from the "Order Granting Petition for
Determination of Good Faith Settlement and Dismissing All Claims Against
Fourth-Party Defendants Turbomeca S.A. and Turbomeca USA, Inc.," (Order
Granting Turbomeca's Petition) filed on August 23, 2010 in the circuit court.
On April 26, 2011, this court entered the "Order Approving Stipulation for
Partial Dismissal of Appeal," which, inter alia, dismissed Tesoro's appeal of
the Order Granting Turbomeca's Petition, but specifically noted that Tesoro's
appeal of the Order Granting State's Petition remained pending. 
2
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Granting State's Petition found that the settlement agreement 
between the State of Hawaif i Department of Transportation-
Airports Division (the State) and Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellees Island Helicopters-Kauai, 
Inc. (Island Helicopters) and Jack Harter Helicopters, Inc., 
(Harter) and Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellees Charles 
Dipiazza and Dragonfly Deferred Trust dated 6 October 2006 
(Dipiazza) (collectively, Plaintiffs) was entered into in good 
faith. 
On appeal, Tesoro contends the circuit court erred when
 
it
 
(1) entered the Order Granting State's Petition because
 
the settlement agreement failed as a matter of law for lack of
 
consideration,
 
(2) entered the Order Granting State's Petition because
 
the evidence shows that the settlement agreement was not made in
 
good faith pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 663-15
 
(Supp. 2010), and
 
(3) did not specifically state "that Tesoro's indemnity
 
and contribution claims against the State should not be barred."
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Plaintiffs, who operated commercial helicopter tours on
 
Kauai, alleged Tesoro supplied them with contaminated Jet A fuel,
 
"which caused its helicopter engines to freeze up after being
 
shut off, preventing the engines from re-starting properly
 
('coking problem')." Plaintiffs filed complaints against Tesoro
 
in Civil Nos. 08-1-0977-05, 08-1-2235-10, and 08-1-1038-05.
3 On
 
January 22, 2010, the circuit court consolidated the three cases
 for purposes of liability. 
The State was joined in the action based on Tesoro's
 
third-party complaint that the State's negligent maintenance and
 
operation of its fuel dispensing system at Lihue Heliport caused
 
3
 The Plaintiffs' Complaints were nearly identical and the allegations
contained in Island Helicopter's Civil No. 08-1-0977-05 were representative of
the allegations in the other two civil suits. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Plaintiffs' coking problems and damages. Cross­
Appellants/Fourth-Party Defendants Turbomeca S.A. and Turbomeca
 
USA (Turbomeca Defendants) were joined in the action based on the
 
State's complaint that Turbomeca Defendant's defective design and
 
manufacture of the Arriel engine caused the fuel coking problem
 
and the subsequent alleged economic damages.
 
On June 15, 2010, the State filed a "Petition for
 
Approval of Good Faith Settlements By & Between Plaintiffs and
 
Third-Party Defendant/Fourth-Party Plaintiff [State]." On August
 
23, 2010, the circuit court determined the parties had settled in
 
good faith and entered the Order Granting State's Petition.
 
On September 10, 2010, Tesoro filed a notice of appeal
 
pursuant to HRS § 663-15.5(e).
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
[T]he determination of whether a settlement is in good faith
[is left] to the sound discretion of the trial court in light of
the totality of the circumstances surrounding the
settlement . . . . On appeal, the trial court's determination
will be reviewed for abuse of discretion.
 
[Troyer v. Adams, 102 Hawaif i 399, 427, 77 P.3d 83, 111 (2003)]. An 
appellate court should consider the decision "in light of all of therelevant circumstances extant at the time of settlement." Id. at 402, 
77 P.3d at 86. 
"An abuse of discretion occurs when the decisionmaker 'exceeds the 
bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice tothe substantial detriment of a party.'" In re Water Use Permit 
Applications, 94 Hawaif i 97, 183, 9 P.3d 409, 495 (2000)[.] 
Brooks v. Dana Nance & Co., 113 Hawaif i 406, 412, 153 P.3d 1091, 
1097 (2007). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The circuit court did not err when it entered the
 
Order Granting State's Petition.
 
(1) The settlement agreement did not fail for lack of
consideration.
 
Tesoro contends that the settlement agreement fails for 
lack of consideration. A settlement agreement is a form of 
contract, and like other contractual agreements, must be 
supported by consideration. Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du 
Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 Hawaif i 277, 288, 290 172 P.3d 1021, 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1032, 1034 (2007). A settlement is supported by consideration
 
"if the parties make or promise mutual concessions as a means of
 
terminating their dispute; no additional consideration is
 
required." Sylvester v. Animal Emergency Clinic of Oahu, 72 Haw.
 
560, 567, 825 P.2d 1053, 1057 (1992) (quoting 15A Am. Jur. 2d
 
Compromise and Settlement § 13 (1976)). A release or covenant
 
not to sue applies to a good faith settlement. HRS § 663­
15.5(a).4
 
Pursuant to the settlement agreement, Plaintiffs and
 
the State agreed to dismiss with prejudice all claims between
 
them "arisen, arising, or to arise out of the 'subject claims.'" 
In consideration for this release, the State paid Plaintiffs a
 
total of $75,000.5 Plaintiffs were precluded from pursuing any
 
potential claims against the State related to the coking
 problems. Tesoro argues that any future claims by Plaintiffs are
 
time-barred by the statute of limitations and as such,
 
Plaintiffs' promise not to bring a claim did not represent
 
consideration.
 
4
 HRS § 663-15.5(a) provides:
 
§663-15.5 Release; joint tortfeasors; co-obligors; good faith
settlement. (a) A release, dismissal with or without prejudice, or a
covenant not to sue or not to enforce a judgment that is given in good
faith under subsection (b) to one or more joint tortfeasors, or to one
or more co-obligors who are mutually subject to contribution rights,
shall:
 (1) Not discharge any other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor notreleased from liability unless its terms so provide;
 (2) Reduce the claims against the other joint tortfeasor orco-obligor not released in the amount stipulated by therelease, dismissal, or covenant, or in the amount of theconsideration paid for it, whichever is greater; and
 (3) Discharge the party to whom it is given from all liabilityfor any contribution to any other joint tortfeasor orco-obligor. 
This subsection shall not apply to co-obligors who have expressly agreed
in writing to an apportionment of liability for losses or claims among
themselves.
5
 The Plaintiffs -- Island Helicopters, Harter, and Dipiazza -- each
settled for $25,000.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The statute of limitations for tort actions is two
 
years, unless the alleged violation is a continuing tort. HRS 
6
§ 662-4 (1993),  Anderson v. State, 88 Hawaif i 241, 247, 965 P.2d 
783 (1998). The coking problem had been occurring over a number 
of years and Plaintiffs could have conceivably argued in the 
future that the State was liable for a continuous tort. 
Additionally, Plaintiffs could experience a new coking problem, 
which would start anew the running of the statute of limitations. 
Anderson, 88 Hawaif i at 247, 956 P.2d at 789 ("[T]he statute does 
not begin to run until the plaintiff knew or should have known of the defendant's negligence.") (internal quotation marks and 
citation omitted). 
At the July 20, 2010 hearing on the petition for the
 
determination of good faith settlements, Plaintiffs pointed out
 
they had not asserted any claims against the State because they
 
had yet to discover any cause of action. By settling, Plaintiffs
 
gave up their right to bring such a claim against the State, the
 
State gave up their right to bring a related claim against the
 
Plaintiffs, and the State provided a monetary settlement. The
 
terms of the settlement agreement were not devoid of
 
consideration.
 
Tesoro contends that $75,000 was not fair 
consideration, alleging that the settlement amount was 
"inordinately disproportionate with respect to the state's 
liability," and should have been "approximately $4,977,454 or 
fifty-percent of the damages sought." Whether the State had any 
liability in this case had yet to be determined. Settlements 
often take place before all the facts are known because the 
parties want to avoid the high costs of litigation and the 
uncertainty of the outcome. Exotics Hawaii-Kona, 116 Hawaif i at 
301, 172 P.3d at 1045. "In every settlement, the agreed upon 
6
 HRS § 662-4 provides in relevant part:
 
§662-4 Statute of limitations. A tort claim against the State
shall be forever barred unless action is begun within two years after
the claim accrues[.]
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
amount undoubtedly is not the 'best case scenario' for either
 
side, but rather is a compromise of their respective positions to
 
avoid the multiple risks of trial where they might face their
 
'worse case scenario.'" Exotics Hawaii-Kona, 116 Hawaif i at 301, 
172 P.3d at 1045. Furthermore, 
[t]he fact that a proposed settlement may only amount to a
fraction of the potential recovery does not, in and of
itself, mean that the proposed settlement is grossly
inadequate and should be disapproved. In fact[,] there is no
reason, at least in theory, why a satisfactory settlement
could not amount to a hundredth or even a thousandth part of
a single percent of the potential recovery.
 
In re Warner Commc'ns Sec. Litig., 618 F.Supp. 735, 745
(S.D.N.Y.1985) (quoting City of Detroit v. Grinnell Corp., 495
F.2d 448, 455 n. 2 (2d Cir.1974)) (ellipsis and other citations
omitted).
 
Exotics Hawaii-Kona, 116 Hawaif i at 301, 172 P.3d at 1045. 
The State denied any liability for the coking problems, 
but avoided the expense and uncertainty of protracted litigation 
by settling with Plaintiffs. As long as there is no fraud or 
material misrepresentation, the parties may freely bargain for a 
settlement that satisfies both sides to the agreement. Exotics 
Hawaii-Kona, 116 Hawaif i at 288, 172 P.3d at 1032. The 
settlement agreement did not fail for lack of consideration. 
(2) The settlement agreement was made in good faith
under the Troyer factors.
 
Tesoro contends the circuit court erred when it entered
 
the Order Granting State's Petition because the settlement
 
agreement between Plaintiffs and the State was not made in good
 
faith. A good faith settlement (1) discharges the settling party
 
from liability for contribution to other joint tortfeasors, (2)
 
bars other joint tortfeasors from any further claims against the
 
settling joint tortfeasor, except where there is a written
 
indemnity agreement, and (3) results in dismissal of all cross-
claims against the settling joint tortfeasor, except where there
 
is a written indemnity agreement. HRS § 663-15.5(a) and (d). 
Troyer v. Adams, 102 Hawaif i 399, 77 P.3d 83 (2003), is 
the seminal case in Hawaif i interpreting the good faith language 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of HRS § 663-15.5. The Hawaif i Supreme Court adopted a "totality 
of the circumstances" approach for determining whether a 
settlement was made in good faith under HRS § 663-15.5. Troyer, 
102 Hawaif i at 425, 77 P.3d at 109. In adopting this approach, 
the supreme court recognized the legislative intent to simplify 
procedures and reduce costs while still providing courts the 
"opportunity to prevent collusive settlements aimed at injuring 
non-settling tortfeasors' interests." Id. at 427, 77 P.3d at 
111. 
"[T]he good faith of the parties is substantially a 
function of their states of mind and the circumstances of which they are aware at the time of settlement[.]" Troyer, 102 Hawaif i 
at 430, 77 P.3d at 114. Tesoro bears the burden of proving the settlement was not made in good faith. HRS § 663-15.5(b).
7 On 
appeal, the trial court's determination is reviewed for abuse of discretion. Id. at 427, 77 P.3d at 111. "[T]he question whether 
a settlement is given in good faith for purposes of HRS § 663-15.5 is a matter left to the discretion of the trial court 
in light of all the relevant circumstances extant at the time of 
settlement[.]" Troyer, 102 Hawaif i at 434, 77 P.3d at 118. 
To determine whether parties have entered into a good
 
faith settlement, the court may consider, among others, the
 
following Troyer factors:
 
(1) the type of case and difficulty of proof at trial, e.g.,
rear-end motor vehicle collision, medical malpractice,
product liability, etc.; (2) the realistic approximation of
 
7
 HRS § 663-15.5 (b) provides in relevant part:
 
(b) For purposes of subsection (a), any party shall petition the
court for a hearing on the issue of good faith of a settlement entered
into by the plaintiff or other claimant and one or more alleged
tortfeasors or co-obligors, serving notice to all other known joint
tortfeasors or co-obligors.
 
The petition shall indicate the settling parties and, except for a
settlement that includes a confidentiality agreement regarding the case
or the terms of the settlement, the basis, terms, and settlement amount.
 
. . . [A] nonsettling alleged joint tortfeasor or co-obligor may
file an objection to contest the good faith of the settlement. . . . A
nonsettling alleged joint tortfeasor or co-obligor asserting a lack of
good faith shall have the burden of proof on that issue.
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
total damages that the plaintiff seeks; (3) the strength of
the plaintiff's claim and the realistic likelihood of his or
her success at trial; (4) the predicted expense of
litigation; (5) the relative degree of fault of the settling
tortfeasors; (6) the amount of consideration paid to settle
the claims; (7) the insurance policy limits and solvency of
the joint tortfeasors; (8) the relationship among the
parties and whether it is conducive to collusion or wrongful
conduct; and (9) any other evidence that the settlement is
aimed at injuring the interests of a non-settling tortfeasor
or motivated by other wrongful purpose. The foregoing list
is not exclusive, and the court may consider any other
factor that is relevant to whether a settlement has been
 given in good faith.
 
Id. at 427 77 P.3d at 111.
 
In applying the Troyer factors to the settlement
 
between the State and Plaintiffs, Tesoro maintains that the
 
fifth, sixth, seventh, and ninth factors weighed against a
 
finding of good faith.
 
The fifth factor is "the relative degree of fault of 
the settling tortfeasors." Troyer, 102 Hawaif i at 427, 77 P.3d 
at 112. Tesoro argues that the evidence "strongly indicated" that the State's fuel dispensing system caused the coking 
problems and, therefore, "the State is responsible for 
approximately half of the damages claimed by [Plaintiffs]." The 
State offers evidence that contaminated fuel provided by Tesoro 
was the cause of the coking problem. The relative degree of 
fault of the State, if any, had yet to be determined, but as 
noted by the Hawaif i Supreme Court, the Hawaif i Legislature's 
codification of HRS § 663-15.5 indicated that the legislature "was more interested in encouraging settlements than ensuring the 
equitable apportionment of liability." Troyer, 102 Hawaif i at 
426, 77 P.3d at 110. Plaintiffs acknowledged that "[t]he State is buying its peace with regard to claims we may discover against 
the State." The parties are free to settle before the relative 
degree of fault of the settling tortfeasors is fully known. 
The sixth Troyer factor is "the amount of consideration
 
paid to settle the claims[.]" Id. at 427, 77 P.3d at 111.
 
Similar to its argument regarding the fifth Troyer factor, Tesoro
 argues that the State was at least 50% at fault and, therefore,
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
was liable for 50% of Plaintiffs' claim of $9,954,908 in damages. 
The State argues it had strong defenses, but felt $75,000 was an 
amount it was willing to pay to immunize itself against any 
future litigation in this case. In Troyer, the supreme court 
noted that "the price of a settlement alone rarely appears to be 
the outcome-dispositive factor regarding a settlement's bad 
faith." Troyer, 102 Hawaif i at 427, 77 P.3d at 111. As 
previously discussed, the amount of consideration paid under the terms of the settlement agreement is generally left to the 
settling parties to decide. 
Under the seventh Troyer factor, regarding insurance 
policy limits, Tesoro argues that because the State had an 
insurance policy of over $400 million, settling for $75,000 was 
unreasonable and collusive. Troyer, 102 Hawaif i at 427, 77 P.3d 
at 111. Tesoro points to nothing to support the contention that, in a case where liability has not been determined, a defendant is 
settling in bad faith if its settlement amount is substantially 
less than its insurance policy limit. 
Tesoro contends the ninth Troyer factor, "any other 
evidence that the settlement is aimed at injuring the interests 
of a non-settling tortfeasor or motivated by other wrongful 
purpose," supports a determination of bad faith. Troyer, 102 
Hawaifi at 427, 77 P.3d at 111. In its brief, Tesoro argues that 
the settlement agreement between Plaintiffs and the Turbomeca 
Defendants somehow implicates the State as entering into a 
collusive agreement aimed at injuring Tesoro. Tesoro cites to 
Turbomeca Defendants' Memorandum in Support of Petition for 
Determination of Good Faith Settlement, in which Turbomeca 
Defendants quote from an e-mail from the mediator to "counsel for 
Plaintiffs, counsel for the Turbomeca Defendants, and the 
[circuit court]." According to the quoted e-mail, one of the 
terms of the settlement between the Plaintiffs and Turbomeca 
Defendants was that "[s]ettling defendants agree to provide 
litigation-related assistance to the settling [P]laintiffs on 
terms that the parties will formally agree to." Tesoro argues 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that this statement indicates collusion by the State, Turbomeca
 
Defendants, and Plaintiffs. Tesoro fails to explain how a
 
settlement agreement between Plaintiffs and Turbomeca Defendants
 
implicates the State. 
Finally, Tesoro contends that when the State entered
 
into the settlement agreement with Plaintiffs, the State was not
 
acting in good faith because it was seeking "to accomplish
 
indirectly that which it could not do directly, i.e. secure the
 
dismissal of Tesoro's claims . . . without prevailing on a
 
summary judgment motion."
 
Tesoro cites to Brooks v. Dana Nance & Co., 113 Hawaif i 
406, 153 P.3d 1091 (2007), in which the Hawaif i Supreme Court 
held "that a settlement, wherein a party seeks to accomplish indirectly that which it is expressly barred by applicable law 
from accomplishing directly, is not in good faith." Id. at 417, 
153 P.3d at 1102. Brooks does not apply to the instant case 
because HRS § 663-15.5 does not bar the State from settling with 
Plaintiffs. 
In Brooks, the United States Veterans Administration
 
(VA) held the mortgage on Brooks' home. Id. at 409, 153 P.3d at
 
1094. A mortgage servicing company, Seasons, serviced the
 mortgage payments and contracted with a maintenance company,
 
Fidelity, to do maintenance work on mortgaged properties in
 
default or abandoned. Id. at 409, 153 P.3d at 1094. Seasons and
 
Fidelity entered into a contract with a mutual indemnification
 clause. Id. at 409, 153 P.3d at 1094. The defaulting homeowner,
 
Brooks, filed suit against Seasons and Fidelity after Seasons
 instructed Fidelity to "secure the property" and Fidelity changed
 
the lock on the front door and removed abandoned vehicles and
 
other debris, in spite of the VA's instructions not to secure the
 
property until after foreclosure. Id. at 409, 153 P.3d at 1094. 
Fidelity and Seasons filed cross-claims against one another for
 contribution and indemnification. Id. at 410, 153 P.3d at 1095. 
Subsequently, Brooks and Seasons entered into a settlement
 agreement that was conditioned on the circuit court's dismissal
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of Fidelity's cross-claim against Seasons. Id. at 411, 153 P.3d
 
at 1096. The circuit court determined the settlement was made in
 
good faith, in spite of the fact that a good faith settlement
 
does not bar claims among joint tortfeasors based on a written
 
indemnity agreement. HRS § 663-15.5(d).8 In other words, in the
 
settlement agreement, Seasons was accomplishing indirectly what
 the statute prohibited him from accomplishing directly; namely,
 
the dismissal of Fidelity's cross-claim against Seasons, even
 
though the claim was based on a written indemnity agreement which
 
is not dismissed as a result of a good faith settlement. That is
 
not the situation in the instant case.
 
Here, in an effort to save litigation costs, expedite
 
resolution, and achieve some protection, the State and Plaintiffs
 
entered into a settlement agreement. In the State's memorandum
 
in support of its petition to the circuit court for a
 
determination of a good faith settlement, the State explained
 
that in mediation, the mediator suggested that
 
if the STATE would be willing to make a settlement offer to
Plaintiffs in an amount which Plaintiffs would accept, and
the agreement is deemed a good faith settlement, it would
result in a dismissal with prejudice of the third party
complaint filed by Tesoro against the STATE, which would
extricate the STATE from litigation it feels it should never
have been dragged into in the first place.
 
Tesoro's third-party complaint against the State was
 
not based on a written indemnification agreement, but instead,
 
was based on a claim that the State was the tortfeasor. Tesoro
 
further claimed that if Tesoro and the State were found to be
 
joint tortfeasors, Tesoro was "entitled to contribution,
 
8
 HRS § 663-15.5(d) provides:
 
(d) A determination by the court that a settlement was made in
good faith shall:
 
(1)	 Bar any other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor from any
further claims against the settling tortfeasor or
co-obligor, except those based on a written indemnity
agreement; and
 
(2)	 Result in a dismissal of all cross-claims filed
 against the settling joint tortfeasor or co-obligor,
except those based on a written indemnity agreement.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
subrogation, reimbursement and/or indemnification," based on
 
joint liability. The State did not ask for, nor did the circuit
 
court grant, a dismissal of any claim based on a written
 
indemnification agreement. See infra Sec. B. 
A determination of a good faith settlement protects the
 
settling tortfeasor against claims brought by any non-settling
 
tortfeasor, and thereby, encourages settlement. The State used
 
the statute to accomplish precisely what the statute is designed
 
to accomplish -- settlement.
 
B.	 Tesoro's contractual claims for indemnity are not
barred by the good faith settlement agreement
between the State and Plaintiffs.
 
Tesoro contends the circuit court erred when it did not 
specifically state "that Tesoro's indemnity and contribution 
claims against the State should not be barred." Tesoro does not 
argue for a right to contribution and so waives that point on 
appeal. Hawaif i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28 (b) 
(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived.").
 
Tesoro argues it had an April 13, 1994 indemnity
 
contract with the State that allows Tesoro's claims against the
 State for indemnification to survive a good faith settlement
 
determination. We find nothing in the circuit court's Order
 
Granting State's Petition that precludes Tesoro from pursuing a
 
claim for indemnification based on a written indemnification
 
agreement. The circuit court ordered that "[p]ursuant to [HRS] 
§ 663-15.5(d), this determination [of good faith settlement
 
between the State and Plaintiffs] shall bar any other joint
 
tortfeasor or co-obligor from any further claims against [the
 
State] for equitable comparative contribution, or partial or
 
comparative indemnity, based on comparative negligence or
 
comparative fault." The circuit court made no order precluding
 
Tesoro's right under HRS § 663-15.5(d) to pursue a claim for
 
indemnification based on a written indemnification agreement. We
 
conclude that the circuit court did not err when it did not
 
specifically state that Tesoro retained its right under HRS 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 663-15.5(d) to pursue its claim against the State based on a
 
written indemnification agreement.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The "Order Granting Petition for Approval of Good Faith 
Settlements By & Between Plaintiffs and Third-Party 
Defendants/Fourth-Party Plaintiff State of Hawaif i Department of 
Transportation-Airports Division, Filed June 16, 2010," filed on August 23, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, February 13, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
George W. Playdon, Jr.
(on the opening brief)Jeffre W. Juliano Kristi L. Arakaki (on the opening and reply
briefs)Michael J. McGuiganKelvin H. Kaneshiro (on the reply brief)(O'Connor Playdon & Guben)for Defendant-AppellantTesoro Hawaii Corporation Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
Randall Y. Yamamoto 
Brian Y. Hiyane(Kawashima, Lorusso)
a n d
 
James L. Michaelis, pro hac viceKenneth L. Crowder, pro hac vice(Michaelis, Montanari & Johnson)and 
Associate Judge 
Bruce Wakuzawa for Third-Party Defendant/Fourth-Party Plaintiff-AppelleeState of Hawaii, Department ofTransportation 
15
 