NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30699
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
THE BUREAUS INVESTMENT GROUP, NO. 2, LLC, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BLASE HARRIS, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-357K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
residing Judge, Reifurth and (By: Leonard, P  Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Blase Harris (Harris) appeals from
 
a Judgment filed August 9, 2010, in the Circuit Court of the
 
1
 Third Circuit (circuit court), in which the circuit court ruled
in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee The Bureaus Investment Group,
 
No. 2, LLC (Bureaus LLC) and against Harris. 
Judgment was
 
entered pursuant to an "Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for
 Summary Judgment as to (1) Plaintiff's Claim Against Defendant
 and (2) Defendant's Counterclaim" filed on February 2, 2010.
 
On appeal, Harris contends that the circuit court erred
 
by (1) not barring Bureaus LLC's claims against Harris pursuant
 to the statute of limitations; (2) finding no genuine issue of
 material fact concerning Harris' alleged new promise to pay
 Bureaus LLC on an account stated; (3) failing to issue a
 determination as to whether Bureaus LLC is a real party in
 interest; (4) finding no genuine issue of material fact
 
1
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concerning the amount Harris is alleged to have promised to pay
 
Bureaus LLC; (5) concluding that Harris was indebted to Bureaus
 LLC based on evidence for which a sufficient evidentiary
 foundation had not been established under Hawaii Rules of
 Evidence (HRE) Rule 803(b)(6); and (6) not dismissing Bureaus
 LLC's First Amended Complaint based upon Bureaus LLC's failure to
 fulfill conditions set forth in an "Order Granting Plaintiff's
 Motion to Set Aside Order of Dismissal" (Order Setting Aside
 Dismissal) filed on October 28, 2008 by the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit (First Circuit Court). 
For the reasons discussed below, there are genuine
 
issues of material fact as to whether Bureaus LLC's claims are
 time barred and thus the circuit court properly did not grant
 summary judgment for Harris on his statute of limitations
 defense. Likewise, there are genuine issues of material fact
 whether Bureaus LLC is entitled to collect on the alleged debt
 and therefore it was error to grant summary judgment in favor of
 Bureaus LLC. We vacate the judgment and remand for further
 proceedings.
I. Background
 
In this case, Bureaus LLC seeks to recover sums that it
 
alleges Harris owes on an outstanding credit card debt. Bureaus
 
LLC contends that it was assigned the rights to become the
 creditor on the debt. Harris contends, inter alia, that he
 previously cleared any outstanding debt, that Bureaus LLC's claim
 is barred by the statute of limitations, and that Bureaus LLC has
 failed to establish it is a real party in interest.
 
On November 6, 2007, Bureaus LLC filed a complaint in 
the First Circuit Court asserting that Harris had an outstanding credit card debt of $20,936.16, plus interest. On July 11, 2008, the First Circuit Court dismissed the complaint for want of service. On September 24, 2008, Bureaus LLC filed a "Motion to Set Aside Order of Dismissal Filed on July 11, 2008" pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 60(b). In seeking 
to set aside the dismissal, Bureaus LLC asserted, inter alia, 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
that the statute of limitations had expired on November 14,
 
2007.2 On October 28, 2008, the First Circuit Court filed the
 
Order Setting Aside Dismissal, which included an order that the
 case be transferred to the Third Circuit. 
Bureaus LLC thereafter filed a First Amended Complaint
 
in the Third Circuit on February 6, 2009. On October 22, 2009,
 Bureaus LLC filed a Motion for Summary Judgment. In support of
 its summary judgment motion, Bureaus LLC adduced evidence that
 Harris became delinquent on a credit card issued by First USA
 Bank, N.A. (First USA) and that on or around January 2000, First
 USA "charged off" Harris's credit card account, removing it as an
 asset from First USA's books. Bureaus LLC asserted that it
 acquired the rights to Harris's outstanding credit card debt by
 way of a bill of sale and assignment of rights. Bureaus LLC
 argued that Harris made five payments to Bureaus LLC after it had
 acquired rights to his account, the last of which was a check
 made payable to "The Bureaus Inc." dated November 8, 2001, in the
 amount of $148. 
On November 23, 2009, Harris filed an opposition to 
Bureaus LLC's summary judgment motion, as well as a motion to dismiss. In opposing Bureaus LLC's summary judgment motion and in his affirmative motion to dismiss, Harris argued, inter alia, that the claims against him were time barred. We note that as to his motion to dismiss, Harris attached thereto his declaration and exhibits and we will thus treat this motion as a motion for summary judgment. Wong v. Cayetano, 111 Hawai
'i 462, 476, 143 
P.3d 1, 15 (2006) ("[A] motion seeking dismissal of a complaint is transformed into a Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 56 motion for summary judgment when the circuit court considers matters outside the pleadings[.]"); HRCP Rule 12(c) ("If, on a motion for judgment on the pleadings, matters outside the pleadings are presented to and not excluded by the court, the 
2
 Attached to its later motion for summary judgment, Bureaus LLC
submitted a declaration asserting that a check from Harris dated November 8,
2001, made payable to The Bureaus Inc., was received on November 14, 2001.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
motion shall be treated as one for summary judgment and disposed
 
of as provided in Rule 56."). 
In an order filed January 6, 2010, the circuit court
 
denied Harris's motion to dismiss. Harris then filed a Motion
 for Summary Judgment on January 27, 2010.
 
On February 2, 2010, the circuit court issued an order
 
granting Bureaus LLC's motion for summary judgment. On
 February 17, 2010, Harris filed two motions, one seeking relief
 from the order denying his motion to dismiss and one seeking
 relief from the order granting summary judgment for Bureaus LLC.
 
On April 21, 2010, the circuit court denied both of
 
Harris's motions for relief. On April 26, 2010, the circuit
 court issued an order finding Harris's motion for summary
 judgment moot in light of its prior rulings. 
On August 9, 2010, the court entered judgment in favor
 
of Bureaus LLC and against Harris, awarding principal in the
 amount of $18,623.63 and interest in the amount of $570 on the
 debt.
3
 
II.	 Summary Judgment For Harris On His Statute of Limitations
Defense Was Not Warranted 
Harris's first contention on appeal is that the circuit
 
court reversibly erred in failing to rule that Bureaus LLC's
 claims are time-barred. Harris asserts that the six-year statute
 of limitations should have been calculated from January 2000,
 when First USA "charged off" the debt, and thus Bureaus LLC's
 claims are time barred. Harris contends the circuit court
 instead erroneously determined that he was liable on an account
 stated theory and erroneously determined that a check from him
 dated November 8, 2001 effectively reset the start of the
 limitations period.
 
Bureaus LLC argues, in turn, that it never claimed that
 
the November 8, 2001 check, specifically, created an account
 
3
 The circuit court also awarded attorneys' fees ($4,655.90) and costs
($840.14).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
stated.4 Rather, at least on appeal, Bureaus LLC's position with
 
regard to Harris's statute of limitations defense is that the
 
November 8, 2001 check implied a new promise to pay, citing to
 First Hawaiian Bank v. Zukerkorn, 2 Haw. App. 383, 385, 633 P.2d
 550, 552 (1981).
 
Harris has the burden of establishing his statute of
 
limitations defense and any facts necessary to support that
 defense. See Henry Waterhouse Trust Co. v. Freitas, 33 Haw. 139,
 
148 (Haw. Terr. 1934); GECC Fin. Corp. v. Jaffarian, 79 Hawai
'i 
516, 526 n.3, 904 P.2d 530, 540 n.3 (App. 1995) (Acoba, J.
 concurring). Moreover, given the procedural history of this
 case, Harris essentially contends that the circuit court should
 have granted either his motion to dismiss or his motion for
 summary judgment on statute of limitations grounds. Because
 Harris's motion to dismiss was actually a summary judgment
 motion, we review de novo whether Harris was entitled to summary
 judgment based on his statute of limitations defense. Wong, 111
 
Hawai
'i at 476, 143 P.3d at 15.
 [S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
 proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other
 words, we must view all of the evidence and the
inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable
to the party opposing the motion.
 
4
 Although Bureaus LLC may not rely specifically on the November 8,
2001 check to establish an account stated, Bureaus LLC does rely on an account
stated theory to establish Harris's liability for the debt (apparently based
on account statements sent to Harris in late 1999 and early 2000). Indeed,
Harris's First Amended Complaint asserts that "an account was stated in
writing between Plaintiff and Defendant. It was agreed that Defendant was
indebted to Plaintiff for the monies loaned and/or advanced by Plaintiff."
 
As to the statute of limitations defense raised by Harris, Bureaus LLC's
position was less than clear while before the circuit court.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai 'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) 
(citation omitted). 
On the current record, Harris failed to carry his
 
burden of proof to establish that Bureaus LLC's claims are barred
 
by the statute of limitations. Harris presents no evidence as to
 when the statute of limitations began to run. Instead, he simply
 relies on the "charge off" date established by Bureaus LLC's
 evidence and then argues that Bureaus LLC cannot establish an
 account stated based on his November 8, 2001 check (which he does
 not dispute he wrote). Harris misses the point, however,
 regarding the importance of the November 8, 2001 check as it
 pertains to his statute of limitations defense. Under Zukerkorn,
 "[a] new promise by the debtor to pay his debt, whether then
 barred by the applicable statute of limitations or not, binds the
 debtor for a new limitations period." 2 Haw. App. at 385, 633
 P.2d at 552. Zukerkorn further establishes that part payment of
 
the debt is prima facie evidence of a new promise, but that it
 "may be rebutted by other evidence and by the circumstances under
 which it is made." Id.
5
 
Thus, Harris's November 8, 2001 check in the amount of
 
$148, submitted into the record by Bureaus LLC and on which the
 account number for the First USA credit card is written, raises a
 genuine issue of material fact whether Harris made a part payment
 on the alleged debt that was prima facie evidence of a new
 promise to pay (and that would trigger a new limitations period). 
Even if, as Harris contends, the November 8, 2001 check does not
 establish his overall liability for the debt under the separate
 
5 As explained in Maciel v. Kalua , 24 Haw. 216, 220 (Haw. Terr. 1918):
 
The ground upon which a part payment is held to take
the case out of the statute is that such payment is a
voluntary admission by the debtor that the debt is then due,
which raises a new promise by implication to pay it or the
balance. 
To have this effect it must be such an
 
acknowledgment as reasonably leads to the inference that the
debtor intended to renew his promise of payment.
 
(Citation and quotation marks omitted).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
theory of an account stated, the check could be evidence in
 
support of creating a new limitations period if Bureaus LLC can
 establish that the check was part payment on the alleged debt and
 that it constituted a new promise to pay. Id. at 386, 633 P.2d
 
at 552-53.
 
Harris therefore was not entitled to summary judgment
 
based on his statute of limitations defense.
 
III. Bureaus LLC Was Not Entitled To Summary Judgment
 
Harris next argues that the circuit court erred by
 
granting Bureaus LLC's motion for summary judgment because there
 
are genuine issues of material fact concerning Harris's liability
 on the debt, whether Bureaus LLC is a proper party to collect any
 debt, and what the total amount of the debt should be. Bureaus
 LLC argues that the circuit court properly granted summary
 judgment in its favor based on breach of contract and an account
 stated. Harris is correct, however, that genuine issues of
 material fact exist as to whether Bureaus LLC is entitled to
 prevail on its claims.
 
We again review these issues de novo, under the summary 
judgment standards. Querubin, 107 Hawai
'i at 56, 109 P.3d at 
697. However, because the circuit court granted Bureaus LLC's 
motion for summary judgment, Bureaus LLC is the movant in this regard and has the burden to "convince the court that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that the moving party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law." Stanford Carr 
Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai
'i 286, 295-96, 141 
P.3d 459, 469 (2006) (citation omitted and block quote format altered). 
In support of its summary judgment motion, Bureaus LLC
 
submitted the declaration of John Hedges (Hedges), who attests he
 is the Compliance Manager for The Bureaus, Inc. (Bureaus, Inc.),
 "which is the master servicer of Plaintiff." No further
 explanation is provided regarding the relationship between
 Bureaus LLC and the Bureaus, Inc. Hedges attests that he has
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
custody and control of Bureaus LLC's records in connection with
 
Harris's debt on the First USA credit card and attached to
 Hedges' declaration are inter alia: account statements showing
 balances owing from October 1999 up to January 2000; a Bill of
 Sale between First USA and Bureaus LLC, signed by Bureaus LLC on
 February 11, 2000, but which does not specifically reference
 Harris's account; an Assignment of Claim assigning the rights of
 First USA in Harris's account to Bureaus LLC, executed on
 October 22, 2002; a copy of the November 8, 2001 check made
 payable to "The Bureaus Inc." in the amount of $148 and
 containing Harris's account number; a December 17, 2002 letter
 from Sidney Quintal (Harris's attorney at the time) to Bureaus
 LLC's counsel, which states "my client hereby disputes the
 $10,405.06 debt set forth in your July 27, 2002 letter to him." 
Hedges attests that, based on the Bill of Sale and
 
Assignment of Claim, Bureaus LLC is now the owner of the rights
 and interest in Harris's First USA account. He further attests
 that since Bureaus LLC acquired Harris's account (without
 specifying when that occurred), Bureaus LLC has received five
 payments from Harris which consist of payments on April 23, 2000,
 June 24, 2000, July 12, 2001, August 27, 2001, and November 14,
 2001 (this last payment being the check dated November 8, 2001). 
Of note, however, the November 8, 2001 check was made payable to
 "The Bureaus Inc." and not to Bureaus LLC, and moreover the
 Assignment of Claim from First USA to Bureaus LLC was not
 executed until October 22, 2002, which is after each of these
 alleged payments by Harris.
 
On this evidence, genuine issues of material fact exist
 
as to whether the claims are barred by the statute of
 limitations. Bureaus LLC takes the position that its November 6,
 2007 complaint was timely because the statute of limitations
 expired on November 14, 2007, which is six years after Harris's
 November 8, 2001 check was allegedly received. This position
 acknowledges that the statute of limitations had expired on the
 debt. Bureaus LLC is thus completely reliant on the check, or
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
any subsequent event, to mark the date at which the statute of
 
limitations period restarted in order for its complaint to be
 timely. As discussed in Section II above, Bureaus LLC will need
 to establish on remand that the November 8, 2001 check was a new
 promise to pay that triggered a new limitations period.
 
In this regard, as noted above, the promise may be
 
implied from part payment on the debt.
6 However, a debtor must
 
make the new promise to the creditor, an agent of the creditor,
 or to a third party with the intent and understanding that the
 promise should be communicated to the creditor. First American
 
Savings & Trust Co. of Hawaii v. Low, 23 Haw. 696, 700 (Haw.
 Terr. 1917); see 4 Williston on Contracts § 8:38 (4th ed. 2008)
 ("An admission or promise to a stranger is ineffectual.");
 Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 92 (1981) ("The new promise
 referred to in §§ 82-85 is not binding unless it is made to a
 person who is then an obligee of the antecedent duty."); City of
 Fort Scott v. Hickman, 112 U.S. 150, 161 (1884) ("[T]he
 acknowledgment, to be effective, must be made, not to a stranger,
 but to the creditor, or to some one acting for or representing
 him."); Bulmer v. Belcher, 527 P.2d 1237, 1239 (Ariz. Ct. App.
 1974) ("The weight of authority in this country is that an
 acknowledgment or promise must be made either to the creditor or
 someone acting for him, or to some third person with the intent
 that it be communicated to the creditor.").
 
6 Part payment is only prima facie evidence of a new promise which may
be rebutted by other evidence and by the circumstances under which it is made.
The court "cannot imply a promise from the mere fact of acknowledgment or part
payment as an inference of law. It must be left to the trier of fact." 
Zukerkorn, 2 Haw. App. at 386, 633 P.2d at 552 (holding that Defendant's
denial that he acknowledged the existence of two stale debts, agreed to pay
them, or that he paid them, balanced against the fact he made a payment to
Plaintiffs constituted a genuine issue of material fact precluding summary
judgment) (citing Ahlo v. Lung, 9 Haw. 272, 275 (Haw. Prov. Gov. 1893)); see
also Maciel, 24 Haw. at 218 ("[T]he court cannot imply a promise from the mere
fact of part payment, as an inference of law. It must be left to the jury.")
(citation and internal quotation mark omitted); Schnack v. Cremmer, 11 Haw.
706, 707 (Haw. Terr. 1899) ("The burden is on the plaintiff to prove, by
preponderance of the evidence, a promise sufficient to revive the debt.");
White v. Jordan, 14 Shep. 370 (Me. 1847).
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Based on the current record, and considering the
 
evidence in the light most favorable to Harris as the non-movant,
 
it is unclear if the November 8, 2001 check was a new promise on
 the debt and also, given that the check was made payable to
 Bureaus, Inc., whether Bureaus, Inc. was an agent of the lawful
 creditor at the time or a third party whom Harris intended would
 relay the new promise to the lawful creditor. It is also unclear
 if at the time the November 8, 2001 check was sent, Bureaus LLC
 was the creditor. Bureaus LLC appears to assert that the Bill of
 Sale signed in February 2000 transferred all rights, title and
 interest in Harris's account from First USA. However, nowhere on
 this document is Harris's account number identified. The Bill of
 Sale states that First USA assigned "all rights to [Bureaus LLC],
 title and interest of [First USA] in and to those certain
 receivables, judgments or evidences of debt described in Exhibit
 'B' attached hereto and made part hereof for all purposes." No
 "Exhibit 'B'" is in the record on appeal. Based on the evidence
 in the record, it was not until October 2002 that First USA
 specifically assigned the claim on Harris's account to Bureaus
 LLC. Bureaus LLC has presented insufficient evidence to
 demonstrate conclusively that Harris made a new promise to pay
 the debt to Bureaus LLC and that Bureaus LLC was the creditor at
 that time.
 
Moreover, beyond the statute of limitations issue,
 
Bureaus LLC failed to carry its burden to establish its
 entitlement to summary judgment on its theories of breach of
 contract and account stated. Because Bureaus LLC acknowledges
 that the operative statute of limitations is based on the
 November 8, 2001 check, it cannot proceed on a standard breach of
 contract claim. That is, it cannot simply show that at some
 point in the past Harris owed the debt. Thus, Bureaus LLC must
 establish its right to recover on the debt by way of an account
 stated.
 
"Liability upon an account stated requires an admission
 
of indebtedness in a definite sum and a promise, express or
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
implied, to pay the same. As a general rule, (i)t is always said
 
that there is no account stated unless both parties have
 expressed assent to it as correct." Hew v. Aruda, 51 Haw. 451,
 
459, 462 P.2d 476, 481 (1969) (internal citations and quotation
 marks omitted); 29 Williston on Contracts, § 73:56 (4th ed. 2003)
 ("The basic requirement of an account stated is that an exact and
 definite balance must be struck as to which both the creditor and
 the debtor assent.").
 
Bureaus LLC has produced no evidence indicating that
 
the parties had a meeting of the minds as to the total debt due. 
The November 8, 2001 check does not acknowledge a specific amount
 due, and Bureaus LLC has produced no evidence indicating what
 prompted the check. The only other evidence in the record
 regarding any possible creation of an account stated which would
 render the complaint timely are two letters (one dated July 27,
 2002, and the other dated June 21, 2004) sent by Bureaus LLC to
 Harris or Harris's legal representation demanding payment of an
 outstanding balance of $10,405.06. However, in a letter dated
 December 17, 2002, Harris's counsel expressly disputed the debt
 stated in the July 27, 2002 letter. Based on this record,
 Bureaus LLC has failed to demonstrate summary judgment is
 appropriate on an account stated theory.
 
Because we conclude that the circuit court erred in
 
granting summary judgment in favor of Bureaus LLC we need not
 address Harris's challenge to the evidence based on HRE Rule
 803(b)(6).
IV.	 Dismissal Was Not Warranted Due To Bureaus LLC's Alleged
Failure to Comply With the First Circuit Court's Order 
Harris next contends that the circuit court erred in
 
not dismissing the First Amended Complaint because Bureaus LLC
 
failed to comply with conditions in the First Circuit Court's
 Order Setting Aside Dismissal. Harris also contends the circuit
 court should have dismissed the First Amended Complaint because
 Bureaus LLC did not establish good cause to support the Order
 Setting Aside Dismissal.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Harris's argument that Bureaus LLC failed to comply
 
with conditions set by the First Circuit Court has no merit. The
 
Order Setting Aside Dismissal did not set "conditions" for
 setting aside the dismissal. Moreover, Harris failed to raise
 this argument before the circuit court until his motion for
 relief from the order denying his motion to dismiss, which in
 effect was an untimely motion for reconsideration. The circuit
 court did not err in denying Harris's motion for relief.
 
Likewise, we reject Harris's argument that the circuit
 
court should have dismissed the case because Bureaus LLC failed
 to establish good cause before the First Circuit Court to set
 aside the dismissal. Harris raised this argument in his motion
 to dismiss, which the circuit court properly determined was an
 untimely motion to reconsider the First Circuit Court's decision
 to reinstate the case. Harris filed his motion to dismiss over a
 year after the First Circuit Court issued the Order Setting Aside
 Dismissal.
 
V. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Judgment filed
 
August 9, 2010 and the "Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for
 
Summary Judgment as to (1) Plaintiff's Claim Against Defendant
 and (2) Defendant's Counterclaim" filed on February 2, 2010. We
 remand the case to the circuit court for further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 29, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Paul J. Sulla Jr.
 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Marvin S.C. Dang
Jason M. Oliver
 Paul T. Holtropp for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
12
 