 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30283
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DESTIN GALLARDE, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. 08-1-1834)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Destin Gallarde (Destin) appeals 
from the Judgment filed on December 8, 2009, in the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 Plaintiff-Appellee State 
of Hawai' i (State) charged Destin with: (1) first-degree 
terroristic threatening with the use of a dangerous weapon, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-716(1)(e) (Supp. 
2
2008) (Count 1); and (2) third-degree assault, in violation of
1 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-716(1)(e) states:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of terroristic threatening in the
first degree if the person commits terroristic threatening:
 
. . . 
(e) With the use of a dangerous instrument.
 
At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 707-715 (1993), in turn,
(continued...)
  3
 HRS § 707-712(1)(a) (1993) provides:
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
HRS § 707-712(1)(a) (1993)  (Count 2).  The complaining witness
 
for both counts was Jeremy Goulette (Jeremy), who was the
 
boyfriend of Destin's daughter and the father of Destin's
 grandson. A jury found Destin guilty of first-degree terroristic
 threatening and not guilty of third-degree assault. The Circuit
 Court sentenced Destin to a five-year term of probation, subject
 to special conditions that she serve a nine-day term of
 imprisonment and perform seventy-five hours of community service.
 
On appeal, Destin argues that the Circuit Court: (1)
 
erred in refusing over Destin's objection to give the jury a
 defense-of-others instruction; (2) plainly erred in failing to
 instruct the jury that Destin had no duty to retreat; and (3)
 erred in refusing over Destin's objection to modify its "true
 threat" instruction. 
As explained below, we conclude that the
 
Circuit Court erred in refusing to give a defense-of-others
 instruction. We vacate Destin's conviction for first-degree
 terroristic threatening and remand the case for a new trial.
 
BACKGROUND
 
At the time of the charged incident, Destin's daughter,
 
Tiffany, was seventeen years old and was living with her
 boyfriend, Jeremy, who was twenty-one years old. Tiffany and
 Jeremy had a child (Child) who was about two and one-half years
 old. Tiffany, Jeremy, and Child lived at the residence of
 
2(...continued)
defined terroristic threatening, in pertinent part, as follows:
 
A person commits the offense of terroristic threatening if
the person threatens, by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury
to another person or serious damage to property of another or to
commit a felony:
 
(1)	 With the intent to terrorize, or in reckless disregard
of the risk of terrorizing, another person[.]
 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the third
degree if the person:
 
(a)	 Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causes bodily
injury to another person[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Jeremy's family along with Jeremy's mother, his mother's
 
boyfriend, and Jeremy's younger brother. The charged offenses
 stemmed from a dispute between Jeremy and Tiffany. Tiffany
 wanted to take Child to visit her family. Jeremy told Tiffany to
 leave Child behind. At trial, the State and Destin presented
 markedly different versions of the pertinent events. 
I.
 
The State called Jeremy who testified that his
 
objection to Tiffany's taking Child was based on his concern that
 Tiffany would spend money and that she could avoid spending money
 if she left Child behind. According to Jeremy, he heard Destin's
 truck stop in front of his house and heard Tiffany yelling into
 the phone that Jeremy refused to allow Tiffany's family to take
 Child. When Jeremy went outside, he saw Destin who threatened to
 kill Jeremy and demanded that he give Child to her. Tiffany came
 outside and punched Jeremy. Destin picked up a hammer from the
 ground and approached Jeremy while holding the hammer slightly
 above her head. As Jeremy began backing up, Tiffany hit him
 again, and Destin, who no longer was holding the hammer, also
 punched Jeremy in the eye/nose area. Jeremy denied striking
 Destin or coming at her, standing over her, bumping her, or
 yelling at her. Jeremy also denied striking Tiffany before or
 after Destin's arrival. 
II.
 
The witnesses for the defense included Tiffany and
 
Destin. Tiffany testified that her older sister Chastity called
 and asked if Tiffany and Child could come for a visit. Although
 Jeremy initially gave Tiffany permission to visit her family with
 Child, he later accused Tiffany of "trying to run away from him." 
Jeremy told Tiffany to call her family and tell them that either
 Tiffany or Child could go for a visit, but not both of them. As
 Tiffany called her family to relay this message, Jeremy yelled at
 her, slapped the phone out of her hand, and assaulted her by
 punching her head and slapping her face, pushing her onto a bed,
 and placing a pillow over her face. Tiffany started screaming,
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and she heard Destin outside the house screaming Tiffany's name.
 
Tiffany testified that Jeremy ran outside and told
 
Destin that he wanted to kill Tiffany and her family. Tiffany
 
saw Destin fall, "like Jeremy pushed [Destin] down[,]" and Jeremy
 challenged Destin to "hit him." Tiffany intervened and struck
 Jeremy "to get him away from [her] mom." Jeremy noticed that
 Tiffany was carrying a box, which contained her belongings, and
 Jeremy said that "everything was all one plan, that . . . the
 whole time [Tiffany] was planning on leaving him." Jeremy
 grabbed the box and told Tiffany that she was not going anywhere. 
Tiffany and Jeremy fought over the box. Destin tried to separate
 them, and Tiffany thought Destin had a hammer in her hand at that
 time. Jeremy "was going crazy" so Destin threw the hammer on the
 side, Destin and Tiffany left the yard, and Destin called the
 police. Child remained in the house. Tiffany recounted three
 prior incidents in which Jeremy had physically abused her by: (1)
 slapping and choking her; (2) slapping her, pulling her hair,
 punching her face, choking her, and shoving her; and (3) forcing
 her out of a car after she opened the door by accelerating and
 abruptly turning. 
Destin testified that Chastity had called Tiffany about
 
spending the day with them, but Tiffany called back and said they
 had to choose between seeing her or Child. Chastity passed the
 phone to Destin, and Destin heard Tiffany screaming and yelling,
 "[H]elp, mommy. Help." Destin also heard slapping sounds before
 the phone went dead. Destin, Chastity, and Tiffany's younger
 brother, "raced" to Jeremy's house in Destin's truck to "stop
 [Jeremy] from hitting [Tiffany]." When they arrived, Destin
 could hear Tiffany screaming for Destin. Destin opened a gate
 and entered the yard fronting the house.
 
According to Destin, Jeremy came out of the house. He
 
was angry and yelled at Destin to "get the fuck out of my yard." 
He told Destin he hated her family, threatened to hurt them, and
 said he would take Child so Destin's family would never see Child
 again. Destin responded that there was "no fucking way" she was
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
going to let Jeremy "do this to Tiffany." Jeremy dared Destin to
 
punch him and demonstrated by punching himself. Destin was
 scared because "the veins in [Jeremy's] neck started popping
 out[,]" he made groaning noises, "[a]nd he wen look like one
 miniature red Incredible Hulk. . . . It looked really scary." 
Tiffany came out with a box, and Jeremy tried to stop her by
 grabbing the box. Destin went toward them, grabbed Tiffany and
 told her to go to the truck, and told Jeremy to "[l]eave my
 fucking daughter alone."
 
Jeremy came toward Destin and kept daring her to punch
 
him. Jeremy came so close that he was touching Destin's body
 with his body. Jeremy ignored Destin's instruction to "step
 back," and so Destin pushed him. Jeremy took a couple steps
 back, then came towards Destin again until he was up against her
 body. He continued to yell and scream at her. Destin pushed
 Jeremy away a second time. When Jeremy again came toward Destin,
 she looked around for something to protect herself because Jeremy
 was bigger than her. The defense adduced evidence that Jeremy
 was about 5'11", weighed 180 pounds, and regularly lifted
 weights; Destin was about 4'10" and weighed about 125 pounds; and
 Tiffany was 5'0" and weighed 110 pounds. 
Destin testified that she picked up a hammer, so she
 
would have something "to protect herself with," and she held the
 hammer by her head. Tiffany "came from the other side" and hit
 Jeremy twice in the face. This made Jeremy's even "more nuts"
 and he began "growling more." Destin decided to throw the hammer
 aside and leave because she felt Jeremy was "gonna end up hurting
 people." Destin left the yard with Tiffany and called the police
 on her phone. Jeremy remained in the yard.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 A.
 
Destin argues that the Circuit Court erred in refusing
 
to provide the jury with an instruction on the justification
 defense of use of force for the protection of other persons
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(defense of others) under HRS § 703-305 (1993) and that this
 
error requires that we vacate her terroristic threatening
 conviction. HRS § 703-305 provides in relevant part:
 
(1) . . . the use of force upon or toward the person
of another is justifiable to protect a third person when:
 
(a)	 Under the circumstances as the actor believes
 
them to be, the person whom the actor seeks to
protect would be justified in using such
protective force; and 
(b)	 The actor believes that the actor's intervention
 is necessary for the protection of the other
person. 
"[U]nder HRS § 703-305, in order to use force to protect a third 
person, the actor must have a reasonable belief that, as to the third person, (1) 'force is immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting [herself] against the use of unlawful force by the other person on the present occasion . . . .'" State v. Mark, 
123 Hawai' i 205, 220, 231 P.3d 478, 493 (2010) (quoting HRS 
§ 703-304(1) (1993), relating to use of force in self-protection). 
B.
 
The Circuit Court had initially included defense-of­
others instructions regarding the assault charge (Court's
 Supplemental Instruction No. 4) and the terroristic threatening
 charge (Court's Supplemental Instruction No. 5) in its proposed
 jury instructions. However, during the settlement of jury
 instructions, the Circuit Court refused, over Destin's objection,
 to give any defense-of-others instruction. In explaining its
 refusal to give the Court's Supplemental Instruction No. 4, the
 Circuit Court stated that neither Jeremy's testimony nor Destin's
 testimony showed a threat of force by Jeremy at the time Destin
 picked up the hammer. The Circuit Court then considered whether
 Tiffany's testimony supported a defense-of-others instruction,
 and concluded that it did not:
 
So the only evidence that the Court was concerned
about was whether or not [Tiffany's] testimony would raise a
scintilla of evidence with regards to use of force in
defense of another person. But viewing her testimony or
reviewing her testimony again, her testimony was that she
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
came out of the house, saw her mother on the ground,
surmised that the complainant had pushed her down. She got
in between the complainant and the defendant. The defendant
 
[sic][ 
4
] turned his attention to a box that she dropped on
the ground with her belongings, accused her of setting him
up, namely that she was going to leave him. 
He grabbed the
box. Tiffany then grabbed the box, in which case Destin
Gallarde -- her testimony is Destin Gallarde picked up a
hammer. The complainant released the box, and Tiffany then
proceeded to run to the car.
 
So [Court's Supplemental Instruction No. 4] is refused
over the objection of defendant.
 
The Circuit Court also refused to give a defense-of­
others instruction for the terroristic threatening charge
 
contained in the Court's Supplemental Instruction No. 5.  Defense
 counsel objected to this ruling as follows:
 
Same argument, Judge. I'll just add to the Court's
recitation of the facts testified to. I believe the facts 
-- I believe the testimony taken as a whole that morning
given that Tiffany had testified that she had been abused
that morning by Jeremy Goulette as well as Destin Gallarde's
testimony that she had heard what sounded like abuse from
Jeremy Goulette -- I think incorporating those facts and
viewing the evidence in the totality does support the
defense-of-others instruction. 
C.
 
The trial court is required to give an instruction
 
requested by a defendant on any defense that has "any support in
 
the evidence, provided such evidence would support the
 consideration of that issue by the jury, no matter how weak,
 inconclusive, or unsatisfactory the evidence may be." State v.
 
Locquiao, 100 Hawai' i 195, 205, 58 P.3d 1242, 1252 (2002) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted); State v.
 Hironaka, 99 Hawai' i 198, 204, 53 P.3d 806, 812 (2002). The 
State argues that the Circuit Court properly refused to give a
 defense-of-others instruction because there was insufficient
 evidence to support a reasonable belief by Destin that Tiffany
 would have been justified in using protective force against
 Jeremy. We disagree. 
4 It appears that the Circuit Court here meant to say "the complainant"
(i.e., Jeremy), rather than "[t]he defendant." 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We conclude that there was sufficient evidence
 
presented at trial to support the jury's consideration of a
 
defense-of-others defense and that the Circuit Court therefore
 erred in refusing, over Destin's objection, to give a defense-of­others instruction. There was evidence that: (1) Jeremy was 
physically abusing Tiffany; (2) Destin overheard the abuse
 (slapping sounds) over the phone, while the abuse was in
 progress, along with Tiffany's cries for help; (3) Destin rushed
 over to Jeremy's house to protect her daughter and heard Tiffany
 screaming when Destin arrived; (4) Jeremy ran outside and angrily
 confronted Destin, telling Destin that he wanted to kill Tiffany
 and her family and that Destin's family would never see Child
 again; (5) Jeremy acted irrationally by daring Destin to hit him
 and by making growling noises; (6) Jeremy accused Tiffany of
 planning to leave him, said she was not going anywhere, and tried
 to stop Tiffany from leaving by fighting with Tiffany over a box
 Tiffany was carrying, which contained her belongings; (7) Destin
 went to assist Tiffany and told Jeremy "to leave my fucking
 daughter alone"; (8) Jeremy kept coming towards Destin despite
 her instructions to step back and her pushing him away; (9)
 Jeremy was much bigger than Destin and Tiffany; and (10) Destin
 picked up the hammer and held it by her head for protection
 against Jeremy. 
The trial evidence was sufficient to raise a question
 
for the jury over whether Destin had a valid defense-of-others
 defense. Moreover, the evidence that Jeremy had previously
 physically abused Tiffany served to distinguish this defense from
 a claim of self-defense by Destin. We conclude that the Circuit
 Court should have allowed Destin's defense-of-others defense to
 go to the jury and that the Circuit Court's error in refusing to
 give the jury a defense-of-others instruction requires that we
 vacate Destin's conviction for first-degree terroristic
 threatening. 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
Destin argues that in instructing the jury on her claim
 
of self-defense, the Circuit Court plainly erred in failing to
 
instruct the jury that Destin had no duty to retreat. HRS § 703­304 (1993 & Supp. 2001), which sets forth the justification
 defense of use of force in self-protection (self-defense),
 provides in pertinent part as follows:
 
(1) . . . the use of force upon or toward another
person is justifiable when the actor believes that such
force is immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting
himself against the use of unlawful force by the other
person on the present occasion.
 
. . . .
 
(3) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (4)
and (5) of this section, a person employing protective force
may estimate the necessity thereof under the circumstances
as he believes them to be when the force is used without
 retreating, surrendering possession, doing any other act
which he has no legal duty to do, or abstaining from any
lawful action.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The self-defense instruction given by the Circuit Court
 
did not include a reference to HRS § 703-304(3)'s language that a
 
person may estimate the necessity of employing protective force
 "without retreating[.]" The Circuit Court's self-defense
 instruction provided in relevant part:
 
The reasonableness of the defendant, Destin Gallarde's
belief that the use of such protective force was immediately
necessary shall be determined from the viewpoint of a
reasonable person in the defendant, Destin Gallarde's
position under the circumstances of which the defendant,
Destin Gallarde, was aware or as the defendant, Destin
Gallarde, reasonably believed them to be.
 
Destin argues that because the prosecutor's cross-
examination of Destin implied that she had a duty to retreat,5
 
5 The prosecutor cross-examined Destin, in pertinent part, as follows:
 
Q: . . . . 
When you told [Tiffany] let's get out of here, were you and
Tiffany in Jeremy's yard?
 
(continued...)
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Circuit Court's failure to correct this false impression by
 
instructing the jury that Destin had no duty to retreat
 constituted plain error. The State does not dispute that under
 HRS § 703-304(3), Destin was entitled to estimate the necessity
 of using protective force without retreating. However, it
 counters that: (1) in closing arguments, the prosecutor did not
 argue that Destin had a duty to retreat and the defense did not
 
5(...continued)
A: Yes.
 
Q: Okay. And when you told Tiffany let's get out of here
because he's gonna hurt somebody, did you -- were you able to get
out of the yard?
 
A: Yes. 
Q: Was there anything blocking your way? 
A: No. Q: Was there anybody blocking your way? 
A: No. 
Q: Was Jeremy at the gate blocking your way? 
A: No. Q: So nobody was in your way; is that right? 
A: Right. 
Q: Nobody was in your way between you and the gate when you
grabbed the hammer; is that right?
 A: Right.
 
Q: Okay. So you could have left. Before you grabbed the
hammer, you could have left; is that right?
 A: Yes.
 Q: Okay. Before you grabbed that hammer, you and Tiffany could
have left; is that right?
 A: Yes.
 
Q: Okay. So nobody was blocking you way, right?
 
A: No. Well, my grandson was still in the house.
 
Q: Okay. But nobody was blocking your way; is that right?
 
A: 	
Right.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
address this issue at all; (2) the prosecutor's cross-examination
 
of Destin did not create the false impression that Destin had a
 legal duty to retreat; and (3) therefore, there was no
 misconception on the part of the jury concerning the duty to
 retreat that needed to be corrected and no plain error in the
 Circuit Court's failure to address the duty to retreat in its
 self-defense instruction. 
We conclude that the prosecutor's cross-examination of 
Destin raised the issue of whether she had a duty to retreat to a sufficient extent that the Circuit Court should have instructed the jury that Destin was entitled to estimate the necessity of using protective force without retreating. However, we have already determined that Destin's conviction must be vacated due to the Circuit Court's error in refusing to give a defense-of­others instruction. Accordingly, we need not decide whether the Circuit Court's failure to instruct on Destin's entitlement to estimate the necessity of using protective force without retreating affected Destin's substantial rights. See Hawai' i 
Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 52 (1977) 
We note that the portion of the Circuit Court's 
instruction challenged by Destin tracked the language of the Hawai'i Standard Jury Instructions Criminal (HAWJIC) Instruction 
7.01 (2008) on "Self-Defense," which was then in effect. 
However, the HAWJIC Instruction 7.01 (2008) used by the Circuit
 Court was subsequently repealed and replaced by HAWJIC
 Instructions 7.01A and 7.01B (2011). The new HAWJIC Instructions
 7.01A and 7.01B incorporate the language of HRS § 703-304(3) and
 provide that in cases where deadly force was not used or is not
 in issue:
 
The defendant may estimate the necessity for the use of
force under the circumstances as he/she reasonably believes
them to be when the force is used, without [retreating]
[surrendering possession] [doing any other act that he/she
has no legal duty to do] [abstaining from lawful action].
 
(Brackets in original).
 
III.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Destin argues that the Circuit Court erred in refusing,
 
over Destin's objection, to modify its "true threat" instruction. 
The Circuit Court's "true threat" instruction, which tracked the
 language of HAWJIC Instruction 9.31 (2008) on "Terroristic
 Threatening in the First Degree -- Dangerous Instrument,"
 provided, in relevant part:
 
The prosecution must also prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the threat was objectively capable of causing
fear of bodily injury in a reasonable person at whom the
threat was directed and who was familiar with the
 circumstances under which the threat was made, and:
 
1. The threat on its face and in the circumstances in
 
which it was made must have been so clear, unconditional,
immediate, and specific as to the person threatened, that
the threat communicated a seriousness of purpose and an
imminent likelihood of being carried out; or
 
2. The defendant, Destin Gallarde, possessed the
apparent ability to carry out the threat, such that the
threat was reasonably likely to cause fear of bodily injury
in Jeremy Goulette.
 
(Emphasis added.) Destin contends that the Circuit Court's
 
instruction was deficient because the above-quoted paragraph "2."
 of the instruction failed to require the that threat communicate
 a seriousness of purpose.
6 We disagree.
 
In State v. Valdivia, 95 Hawai' i 465, 24 P.3d 661 
(2001), the Hawai' i Supreme Court discussed the "true threat" 
requirement for a terroristic threatening prosecution as follows:
 
As our discussion reflects, [State v. Chung, 75 Haw.
398, 862 P.2d 1063 (1993)] judicially narrowed the meaning
of the word "threat," as employed in HRS § 707-715, in order
to salvage the statutes defining terroristic threatening
offenses from unconstitutional overbreadth. As a result,
Chung mandates that, in a terroristic threatening
prosecution, the prosecution prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that a remark threatening bodily injury is a "true threat,"
 
6 The modification to above-quoted paragraph (2) that Destin proposed,
which was refused by the Circuit Court, read as follows:
 
(2) the threat on its face and in the circumstances in which it
was made must have been so clear, unconditional, immediate, and
specific as to the person threatened, that the threat communicated
a seriousness of purpose and the Defendant possessed the apparent
ability to carry out the threat, such that the threat was
reasonably likely to cause fear of bodily injury in Jeremy
Goulette.
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
such that it conveyed to the person to whom it was directed
a gravity of purpose and imminent prospect of execution. In
 
other words, the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the alleged threat was objectively capable of
inducing a reasonable fear of bodily injury in the person at
whom the threat was directed and who was aware of the
 circumstances under which the remarks were uttered. Under
 
the particular circumstances of Chung, as we have indicated,
the "true threat" was "so unequivocal, unconditional,
immediate, and specific as to the person threatened, as to
convey a gravity of purpose and imminent prospect of
execution."
 
. . . .
 
We agree with the California Supreme Court that the
"imminency" required by [United States v. Kelner, 534 F.2d
1020 (2d Cir. 1976], and hence by Chung, can be established
by means other than proof that a threatening remark will be
executed immediately, at once, and without delay. Rather,
as a general matter, the prosecution must prove that the
threat was objectively susceptible to inducing fear of
bodily injury in a reasonable person at whom the threat was
directed and who was familiar with the circumstances under
 which the threat was uttered. See Sovie, 122 F.3d at 125;
cf. In re M.S., 10 Cal. 4th at 711-715, 42 Cal. Rptr. 2d
355, 896 P.2d at 1372-74. Of course, one means of proving
the foregoing would be to establish, as in Chung and Kelner,
that the threat was uttered under circumstances that
 rendered it "so unequivocal, unconditional, immediate, and
specific as to the person threatened, as to convey a gravity
of purpose and imminent prospect of execution." See Chung,
75 Haw. at 416-17, 862 P.2d at 1073; Kelner, 534 F.2d at
1026-27. But another would be to establish that the
 
defendant possessed "the apparent ability to carry out the
threat," such that "the threat . . . would reasonably tend
to induce fear of bodily injury in the victim." In re M.S.,
10 Cal. 4th at 712-15, 42 Cal. Rptr. 2d 355, 896 P.2d at
1372-74.
 
Valdivia, 95 Hawai' i at 476-77, 24 P.3d at 672-73 (brackets in 
original omitted; ellipsis points in original; emphasis added). 
We conclude that the Circuit Court's "true threat"
 
instruction complied with the requirements for a true threat set
 
forth in 
Valdivia and Chung.7 Accordingly, the Circuit Court's
 
"true threat" instruction was not "prejudicially insufficient,
 erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading," State v. Vanstory, 91
 
7 Even assuming arguendo, as Destin contends, that the second means of
proving a true threat set forth in Valdivia requires that the threat
communicate a gravity or seriousness of purpose, that requirement would appear
to be satisfied by proof that the threat was objectively capable of causing
fear of bodily injury in a reasonable person at whom the threat was directed
and that the defendant possessed the apparent ability to carry out the threat,
such that the threat was reasonably likely to cause fear of bodily injury in
the alleged victim.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i 33, 42, 979 P.2d 1059, 1068 (1999) (block quote format 
and citations omitted), and the Circuit Court did not err in 
refusing Destin's request to modify the instruction. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's Judgment. We remand the case for a new trial on the
 first-degree terroristic threatening charge and for further
 proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 31, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Craig W. Jerome
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
James M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
14
 