 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
» I 
---o0o-- 
 
DR. ROBERT V. JUSTICE, an individual, Plaintiff-Appellant,
vs. 
LORETTA FUDDY,1 Director of the Department of Health,
and the STATE OF HAWAI» I-DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, an agency
of the State of Hawai» i, Defendants-Appellees. 
NO. 30176
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0783)
 
APRIL 7, 2011
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, and FUJISE, J.; with
LEONARD, J., concurring separately
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
This appeal involves a request for disclosure of
 
President Barack Obama's birth certificate under the Hawai
» i 
Uniform Information Practices Act (Modified) (UIPA), Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 92F. Plaintiff-Appellant Dr.
 
1
 Dr. Chiyome Fukino, M.D. (Dr. Fukino), was sued in her official
capacity as the Director of the Department of Health of the State of Hawai »i. 
Dr. Fukino's term as Director expired on December 6, 2010, and the current
Director is Loretta Fuddy. Pursuant to Hawai »i Rules of Appellate Procedure
Rule 43(c)(1) (2010), Director Loretta Fuddy has been substituted as a partyfor Dr. Fukino.  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Robert V. Justice (Plaintiff), appearing pro se, filed a 
complaint, pursuant to the UIPA, seeking an order directing the Department of Health (DOH) of the State of Hawai» i to permit him 
"to inspect and copy" President Obama's original birth certificate. The trial court dismissed Plaintiff's complaint for failure to state a claim upon which relief could be granted. 
To be eligible to serve as President of the United
 
States, a person must be a natural born citizen.
2 Plaintiff
 
seeks disclosure of President Obama's birth certificate so that
 Plaintiff can assure himself that President Obama is eligible to
 serve as President. Plaintiff contends that he is entitled to
 such disclosure based on a provision of the UIPA which requires
 the disclosure of "[g]overnment records pursuant to a showing of
 
compelling circumstances affecting the health or safety of any
 individual[.]" HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3) (1993). 
The sole argument Plaintiff raises on appeal, which is
 
also the only specific basis for relief he asserted in the trial
 court, is that his complaint states a claim for relief under this
 "compelling circumstances" provision. That provision, however,
 is directed at requiring access to records in medical or safety
 emergency situations. We hold that Plaintiff failed to state a
 claim for relief based on the "compelling circumstances"
 provision (HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)). Accordingly, we affirm the trial
 court's dismissal of Plaintiff's complaint. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A.
 
By letter dated December 31, 2008, Plaintiff wrote to
 
Dr. Chiyome Fukino, M.D. (Dr. Fukino), who was then the Director
 
of the DOH (Director),
3 "requesting the inspection of the
 
original birth certificate for Barack Hussein Obama II," pursuant
 
2 Article II, Section 1 of the United States Constitution provides in
relevant part that "No Person except a natural born Citizen, or a Citizen of
the United States, at the time of the Adoption of this Constitution, shall be
eligible to the Office of President[.]" 
3
 See footnote 1, supra.
 
2
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to the UIPA. Plaintiff stated that "[t]he inspection of the
 
original birth certificate will allow me and other fellow
 Americans to determine whether or not Mr. Obama is eligible to
 hold the Office of President."
 
The Director responded by writing a letter to Plaintiff
 
dated January 23, 2009, denying Plaintiff's request. The
 Director explained that HRS ÿÿ 338-18(b) (2010) prohibited the DOH
 from disclosing to Plaintiff the records he sought and that HRS 
ÿÿ 92F-13(4) (1993) of the UIPA did not require disclosure of
 government records protected from disclosure by state law.
 
On April 7, 2009, Plaintiff instituted the instant
 
action in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)
4
 
by filing a "Complaint to Compel Agency to Disclose Public
 
Records Under the Uniform Information Practices Act (UIPA)"
 against Dr. Fukino, in her official capacity as the Director, and
 the DOH (collectively, "Defendants"). In his complaint,
 Plaintiff alleged that he had previously requested, in accordance
 with the UIPA, "access to and copies of the alleged records in
 the possession or control of [the DOH]" and that his request had
 been denied by the Director. Plaintiff attached as exhibits to
 the complaint and incorporated by reference the December 31,
 2008, letter he had sent to the Director as well as the
 Director's response. Plaintiff asserted that the "specific
 document requested is detailed in [the December 31, 2008, letter
 he sent to the Director]." Plaintiff sought a judgment, pursuant
 to the UIPA, directing Defendants "to permit Plaintiff to inspect
 and copy the alleged subject record(s) in the supposed custody of
 
[Defendants] to which access has been denied[.]" 
B.
 
Defendants filed a motion to dismiss Plaintiff's 
complaint pursuant to Hawai» i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
4
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided.
 
3
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Rule 12(b)(6) (2000).5 Defendants argued that Plaintiff's
 
complaint to compel Defendants to grant Plaintiff access to
 
President Obama's birth record failed to state a claim upon which
 relief could be granted because: (1) HRS ÿÿ 338-18(b) prohibits
 Defendants from disclosing public health statistics records,
 which include birth records, unless the applicant is a person
 with a "direct and tangible interest" in the records; (2)
 Plaintiff had not alleged that he falls within the categories of
 people considered to have a direct and tangible interest in
 President Obama's birth record under HRS ÿÿ 338-18(b), and
 Plaintiff does not qualify as a person with a direct and tangible
 interest; and (3) the UIPA, under which Plaintiff brought his
 suit, provides in HRS ÿÿ 92F-13(4) that disclosure is not required
 
with respect to government records which are protected from
 disclosure pursuant to state law. 
Plaintiff filed a memorandum in opposition to
 
Defendants' HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss. The only
 ground Plaintiff raised in his memorandum for opposing
 Defendants' motion was that his complaint stated a claim for
 relief based on HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3) of the UIPA, which he asserted
 Defendants had failed to address in their motion. HRS ÿÿ 92F­12(b)(3) provides:
 
(b) Any provision to the contrary notwithstanding,
each agency shall also disclose:
 
. . . 
(3)	 Government records pursuant to a showing of
compelling circumstances affecting the health or
safety of any individual[.]
 
Plaintiff contended that he was entitled to obtain disclosure of
 
or to inspect President Obama's birth certificate pursuant to HRS
 
5
 HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) provides:
 
(b) How Presented. Every defense, in law or fact, to a
claim for relief in any pleading, whether a claim, counterclaim,
cross-claim, or third-party claim, shall be asserted in the
responsive pleading thereto if one is required, except that the
following defenses may at the option of the pleader be made by
motion: . . . (6) failure to state a claim upon which relief can
be granted . . . .
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3), arguing in relevant part as follows:
 
Plaintiff Dr. Justice takes the position that UIPA
requires Defendants under Section 92F-12(b)(3) to disclose
or allow for the inspection by Plaintiff Dr. Justice of the
original birth certificate of Barack Hussein Obama II
purportedly existing. Section 92F-12(b)(3) requires
Defendants disclose or allow inspection of a government
record (birth certificate is a government record as defined
in Section 92F-3) otherwise prohibited under UIPA when there
is a "showing of compelling circumstances affecting the
 health or safety of any individual".  The United States
 
Constitution under Article II Section 1 requires that an
individual be a natural born citizen of the United States in
 order to be eligible to hold the highest office in the land,
which is the Office of President. The Office of President
 is the heart of our nation and the individual holding that
office has the responsibility of ensuring national security
for the health and safety of the 300 million Americans
living on American soil. The individual holding the Office
of President is entrusted with our nuclear arsenal and every
American, including Plaintiff Dr. Justice, has a right to
know whether or not that individual is a true American
 eligible to hold the Office of President. North Korea has
 made several threats to America wherein North Korea has
 
stated that "we will wipe the United States off the face of
 
the earth". That is an act of war and Hawai
»i is in the 
middle of it. There is no question that a compelling
circumstance exists because the health and safety of every
American is at stake. 
(Emphases in original.) 
C.
 
On August 26, 2009, the Circuit Court held a hearing on
 
Defendants' motion to dismiss and orally granted Defendants'
 
motion. The Circuit Court subsequently issued a written order
 which stated in relevant part:
 
The Court, having considered all pleadings filed
herein, the memoranda both in support of and in opposition
to the motion, the arguments of counsel and Plaintiff Pro
Se, the applicable law, and the record and files in this
case, and having taken all of the material allegations in
the Complaint as true and construed in the light most
favorable to plaintiff, hereby finds as follows:
 
1. Vital statistics records maintained by the State
of Hawai
»i are confidential except to those persons who have
a direct and tangible interest in those records by virtue ofspecific relationships that must be established pursuant toHawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") ÿÿ338-18(b). 
2. It is undisputed that Plaintiff has not asserted
that he has one of those relationships which would give him
a direct and tangible interest in the particular vital
statistics record that he seeks.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. Plaintiff's claim to the vital statistics records
 
of Barack Hussein Obama, II is based on his contention that
the UIPA requires Defendants to disclose the records to him.
 
4. While it is true that HRS ÿÿ92F-11 establishes the
general rule that the UIPA favors affirmative agency
disclosure responsibilities, HRS ÿÿ92F-13(4) specifically
excludes from disclosure those government records which
pursuant to state or federal law are protected from
disclosure, such as vital statistics records.
 
5. Plaintiff contends that HRS ÿÿ92F-12(b)(3) operates
to supplant the exception provided by HRS ÿÿ92F-13(4) in
cases where there is a showing of compelling circumstances
affecting the health or safety of any individual.
Defendants admit they would defer to that provision if there
were in fact compelling circumstances affecting the health
or safety of any individual.
 
6. Plaintiff's argued threat to his health or safety
stems from quotes he attributes to North Korea that "we will
wipe the United States off the face of the earth."
Plaintiff claims that those quotes are an act of war and
that "there is no question that a compelling circumstance
exists because the health and safety of every American is at
stake."
 
7. Plaintiff has not made any showing of
circumstances showing anything affecting his health or
safety, nor has he alleged anything that would indicate he
might have a right to access the vital statistics records he
seeks.
 
THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ADJUDGED, ORDERED, AND DECREED
that Plaintiff has failed to state a claim upon which relief
can be granted under any authority. Defendants' Motion to
 
Dismiss Complaint to Compel Agency to Disclose Public
Records under the Uniform Information Practices Act (UIPA)
is granted. All of Plaintiff's claims against the
Defendants are dismissed with prejudice.
 
Pursuant to its order granting Defendants' motion to
 
dismiss, the Circuit Court issued a final judgment on October 9,
 
2009, in favor of Defendants and against Plaintiff on all claims
 contained in Plaintiff's complaint. Plaintiff timely filed a
 
notice of appeal from the final judgment. After the parties'
 respective appellate briefs were filed, the case was assigned to
 a merit panel of this court on July 20, 2010.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Motion to Dismiss
 
We review a trial court's ruling on a motion to dismiss
 
under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) 
de novo. Wright v. Home Depot U.S.A.,
 
6
  In re Estate of Rogers , 103 Hawai» i 275, 280-81, 81 P.3d 1190, 
1195-96 (2003) (internal citations, brackets, and ellipsis points
 
omitted). A dismissal under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) "is warranted
 only if the claim is clearly without any merit; and this want of
 merit may consist in an absence of law to support a claim of the
 sort made, or of facts sufficient to make a good claim, or in the
 disclosure of some fact which will necessarily defeat the
 claim[.]" Rosa v. CWJ Contractors, Ltd., 4 Haw. App. 210, 215,
 664 P.2d 745, 749 (1983) (internal quotation marks and citation
 omitted). "[T]he court is not required to accept conclusory
 allegations on the legal effect of the events alleged." Marsland
 v. Pang, 5 Haw. App. 463, 474, 701 P.2d 175, 186 (1985).
6
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Inc., 111 Hawai» i 401, 406, 142 P.3d 265, 270 (2006). 
A complaint should not be dismissed for failure to
state a claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the
plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of his or her
claim that would entitle him or her to relief. We must
 
therefore view a plaintiff's complaint in a light most
favorable to him or her in order to determine whether the
 allegations contained therein could warrant relief under any
alternative theory. For this reason, in reviewing a circuit
court's order dismissing a complaint[,] our consideration is
strictly limited to the allegations of the complaint, and we
must deem those allegations to be true.
 
B. Statutory Interpretation
 
6 We note that as exhibits to Plaintiff's memorandum in opposition to
Defendants' HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion, Plaintiff attached evidence of oathsthat he, the Circuit Court judge, Defendants' attorneys, and the Hawai
»i 
Attorney General had taken to "support and defend the Constitution of theUnited States." Under HRCP Rule 12(b) (2000), if, on an HRCP Rule 12(b)(6)motion to dismiss, "matters outside the pleading are presented to and notexcluded by the court, the motion shall be treated as one for summary judgmentand disposed of as provided in [HRCP] Rule 56, and all parties shall be givenreasonable opportunity to present all material made pertinent to such a motion
by Rule 56." The Circuit Court did not expressly exclude Plaintiff's exhibitsin considering Defendants' HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion, but made it clear at the
outset of the hearing that the Circuit Court was treating the motion as an
HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion. 
The standard, both at trial and on appellate review, for an HRCP Rule
12(b)(6) motion is more difficult for Defendants to satisfy than the standard
for an HRCP Rule 56 motion. See HRCP Rule 56 (2000); Kulwicki v. Dawson, 969
F.2d 1454, 1462 (3d Cir. 1992) (construing the parallel federal rules); Jorge
v. Rumsfeld, 404 F.3d 556, 558 n.2 (1st Cir. 2005) (same). For purposes of
this our analysis, we apply the standard for an HRCP 12(b)(6) motion, the
standard more favorable to Plaintiff, without deciding whether Defendants'
motion to dismiss should be viewed as having been converted to a summary
judgment motion. This is because, as discussed below, even under standard
more favorable to Plaintiff, we affirm the Circuit Court's final judgment.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Questions of statutory interpretation are questions of
law to be reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard.
 
Our statutory construction is guided by the following
well established principles:
 
[When construing a statute] our foremost
obligation is to ascertain and give effect to the
intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained
primarily from the language contained in the statute
itself. And we must read statutory language in the
context of the entire statute and construe it in a
 manner consistent with its purpose.
 
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used
in a statute, an ambiguity exists.
 
In construing an ambiguous statute, the meaning
of the ambiguous words may be sought by examining the
context, with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and
sentences may be compared, in order to ascertain their
true meaning. Moreover, the courts may resort to
extrinsic aids in determining legislative intent. One
 
avenue is the use of legislative history as an
interpretive tool.
 
This court may also consider the reason and spirit of
the law, and the cause which induced the legislature
to enact it to discover its true meaning.
 
Lingle v. Hawai» i Gov't Emps. Ass'n, AFSCME, Local 152, AFL-CIO , 
107 Hawai» i 178, 183, 111 P.3d 587, 592 (2005) (brackets and 
ellipsis points omitted).
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Defendants argue that HRS ÿÿ 338-18(b) prohibits them
 
from permitting Plaintiff to inspect or copy birth records
 
pertaining to President Obama. Plaintiff does not directly
 dispute this argument but contends that he is entitled to obtain
 disclosure of President Obama's birth records pursuant to the
 UIPA's "compelling circumstances" provision, HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3). 
We begin with an analysis of HRS ÿÿ 338-18 (2010).
 
A.
 
HRS ÿÿ 338-18 is part of the State Public Health
 
Statistics Act (Health Statistics Act), which authorizes the DOH
 to collect, compile, and preserve "public health statistics." 
Birth records are included within the definition of "public
 
8
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
health statistics."7 HRS ÿÿ 338-18(a) makes it unlawful for any
 
person to permit access to vital statistics records unless
 
authorized by the Health Statistics Act or rules adopted by the
 DOH. HRS ÿÿ 338-18(a) provides:
 
ÿÿ 338-18. Disclosure of records. (a) To protect the
integrity of vital statistics records,[8] to ensure their
proper use, and to ensure the efficient and proper
administration of the vital statistics system, it shall be
unlawful for any person to permit inspection of, or to
disclose information contained in vital statistics records,
or to copy or issue a copy of all or part of any such
record, except as authorized by this part or by rules
adopted by the department of health.
 
HRS ÿÿ 338-18(b) specifically prohibits the DOH from
 
permitting the inspection, or issuing certified copies, of public
 
health statistics records, including birth records, unless "the
 applicant has a direct and tangible interest in the record." HRS
 
ÿÿ 338-18(b) identifies thirteen categories of persons that shall
 be considered to have a "direct and tangible interest." These
 categories of persons include the registrant; persons with a
 family relationship with or who are acting on behalf of the
 registrant; persons who require information in the records to
 establish rights related to adoption, monetary payments, or
 property; and persons whose right to disclosure is established by
 court order. HRS ÿÿ 338-18(b) provides:
 
(b) The department shall not permit inspection of
public health statistics records, or issue a certified copy
of any such record or part thereof, unless it is satisfied
that the applicant has a direct and tangible interest in the
record. The following persons shall be considered to have a
direct and tangible interest in a public health statistics
record:
 
(1) The registrant; 
(2) The spouse of the registrant; 
7 The term "public health statistics" is defined to include "the
registration, preparation, transcription, collection, compilation, and
preservation of data pertaining to births, adoptions, legitimations, deaths,
fetal deaths, morbidity, marital status, and data incidental thereto." HRS 
ÿÿ 338-1 (2010).
 
8 The term "vital statistics" is not defined in HRS Chapter 338, but
appears to be used synonymously with the term "public health statistics."
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(3) 	A parent of the registrant; 
(4) 	A descendant of the registrant; 
(5)	 A person having a common ancestor with the
registrant; 
(6)	 A legal guardian of the registrant; 
(7)	 A person or agency acting on behalf of the
registrant; 
(8)	 A personal representative of the registrant's
estate; 
(9)	 A person whose right to inspect or obtain a
certified copy of the record is established by
an order of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(10)	 Adoptive parents who have filed a petition for
adoption and who need to determine the death of
one or more of the prospective adopted child's
natural or legal parents; 
(11)	 A person who needs to determine the marital
status of a former spouse in order to determine
the payment of alimony; 
(12)	 A person who needs to determine the death of a
nonrelated co-owner of property purchased under
a joint tenancy agreement; and 
(13)	 A person who needs a death certificate for the
determination of payments under a credit
insurance policy. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
B.
 
Plaintiff does not dispute Defendants' assertion (and
 
the Circuit Court's finding) that he does not qualify as a person
 
with a "direct and tangible interest" in President Obama's birth
 records within the meaning of HRS ÿÿ 338-18(b). Plaintiff,
 however, sought disclosure of President Obama's birth records 
pursuant to the UIPA. As discussed below, the restrictions on
 access to birth records set forth in HRS ÿÿ 338-18(b) are
 
incorporated into the UIPA. 
Part II of the UIPA, HRS ÿÿÿÿ 92F-11 through 92F-19,
 
entitled "Freedom of Information," contains the provisions at
 issue in this appeal. 
HRS ÿÿ 92F-11 (1993 & Supp. 2010) sets 
10
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
forth the general responsibility of Hawai» i government agencies 
to make records available for inspection and copying. HRS ÿÿ 92F­
11 (1993) provides, in relevant part, as follows:
 
[§ 92F-11] Affirmative agency disclosure
responsibilities. (a) All government records are open to
public inspection unless access is restricted or closed by
law.
 
(b) Except as provided in section 92F-13, each
agency upon request by any person shall make government
records available for inspection and copying during regular
business hours[.] 
HRS ÿÿ 92F-12 (1993 & Supp. 2010) identifies specific
 
categories of records that each agency is required to disclose.9
 
Pertinent to this appeal, HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3) states: "Any
 
provision to the contrary notwithstanding, each agency shall 
. . . disclose: . . . (3) Government records pursuant to a
 
showing of compelling circumstances affecting the health or
 
9 HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(a) sets forth sixteen categories of records that Hawai »i 
government agencies are required to disclose, including such things as agency
rules and opinions; purchasing information; land ownership records; minutes of
agency meetings; agency loan program records; certified payroll records;consulting contracts; licensee and permit records; and agency employees' andofficers' names, compensation, job description, education and trainingbackground, and work experience. HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b), which sets forth an
additional six categories of records or information that are required to be
disclosed, provides as follows: 
(b) Any provision to the contrary notwithstanding, each
agency shall also disclose:
 
(1)	 Any government record, if the requesting person has
the prior written consent of all individuals to whom
the record refers; 
(2)	 Government records which, pursuant to federal law or a
statute of this State, are expressly authorized to be
disclosed to the person requesting access; 
(3)	 Government records pursuant to a showing of compelling
circumstances affecting the health or safety of any
individual; 
(4)	 Government records requested pursuant to an order of a
court; 
(5)	 Government records pursuant to a subpoena from either
house of the state legislature; and 
(6)	 Information from the motor vehicle registration files,
provided that the person requesting such files shall
have a legitimate reason as determined by rules. 
11
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
safety of any individual[.]" HRS ÿÿ 92F-13(4), in turn, provides
 
that Part II of the UIPA "shall not require disclosure of: . . .
 (4) Government records which, pursuant to state or federal law 
. . . , are protected from disclosure[.]"
10
 
C.
 
Defendants assert that the affirmative duty of agencies
 
to disclose government records under the UIPA is subject to the
 HRS ÿÿ 92F-13(4) exception for government records protected from
 disclosure by state law. 
They further assert that HRS ÿÿ 338­
18(b) prohibits the DOH from permitting Plaintiff to inspect
 President Obama's birth records because Plaintiff does not have a
 direct and tangible interest in those records. Defendants reason 
that because the HRS ÿÿ 92F-13(4) exception incorporates the
 
prohibitions against disclosure set forth in HRS ÿÿ 338-18(b), the 
10 HRS ÿÿ 92F-13 sets forth five categories of records that are
exceptions to the UIPA's general rule of disclosure:
 
§ 92F-13 Government records; exceptions to general rule.
 
This part shall not require disclosure of:
 
(1)	 Government records which, if disclosed, would
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal
privacy; 
(2)	 Government records pertaining to the prosecution or
defense of any judicial or quasi-judicial action to
which the State or any county is or may be a party, to
the extent that such records would not be
 discoverable; 
(3) 	Government records that, by their nature, must be
confidential in order for the government to avoid the
frustration of a legitimate government function; 
(4) 	Government records which, pursuant to state or federal
law including an order of any state or federal court,
are protected from disclosure; and 
(5) 	Inchoate and draft working papers of legislative
committees including budget worksheets and unfiled
committee reports; work product; records or
transcripts of an investigating committee of the
legislature which are closed by rules adopted pursuant
to section 21-4 and the personal files of members of
the legislature. 
12
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
UIPA does not permit the DOH to disclose President Obama's birth
 
records to Plaintiff.11
 
Plaintiff, however, contends that the UIPA's
 
"compelling circumstances" provision, HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3), is
 controlling. In effect, Plaintiff argues that HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3)
 overrides the HRS ÿÿ 92F-13(4) exception to disclosure and HRS 
ÿÿ 338-18(b). 
HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b) and ÿÿ HRS 92F-13 provide conflicting 
directions on which section takes precedence in the event of a
 request for records that satisfies the criteria of both sections. 
HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b) provides that " [a]ny provision to the contrary
 
notwithstanding, each agency shall . . . disclose" the six
 categories of records or information listed in HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b). 
(Emphasis added.) On the other hand, HRS ÿÿ 92F-13 states that
 "[t]his part," which includes HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b) , "shall not require
 
disclosure of" the five categories of records set forth in HRS 
ÿÿ 92F-13. Assuming, without deciding, that HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3)
 may override HRS ÿÿ 92F-13(4), we conclude that Plaintiff failed
 to state a claim for relief based on HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3) in his
 complaint. 
D. 
Plaintiff's stated reason for seeking to inspect
 
President Obama's birth records is to permit Plaintiff to verify
 whether President Obama is eligible to serve as President. In
 his letter to the Director, Plaintiff asserted that his
 inspection of President Obama's original birth certificate was
 necessary "to determine whether or not Mr. Obama is eligible to
 
hold the Office of President." On appeal, in support of his
 claim that compelling circumstance under HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3) exist
 for his inspection request, Plaintiff states that "the President 
11
 Defendants did not argue in the Circuit Court, and do not argue on
appeal, that President Obama's birth records are protected from disclosure by
federal law.
 
13
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of the United States is the Commander-in-Chief of our military
 
and entrusted with our nuclear and chemical arsenals . . . ." 
Plaintiff further argues that his inspection of "the purported
 birth certificate for [President Obama] will ensure the health
 and safety of all 300 million of us by making sure that our
 military and our nuclear and chemical arsenals are still under
 our control and not in the control of any one of our enemies." 
As noted, HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3) requires the disclosure of
 
"[g]overnment records pursuant to a showing of compelling
 circumstances affecting the health or safety of any
 individual[.]" The word "compelling" is defined by dictionary to
 mean, among other things: 1) ". . . overpowering," 2) "having a
 powerful and irresistible effect," Random House Webster's
 
unabridged dictionary 417 (2d ed. 2001), and 3) "[u]rgently
 
requiring attention." American Heritage Dictionary of the
 
English Language, 376 (4th ed. 2006). 
HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3) uses language that is substantially
 
identical to Section 552a(b)(8) of the federal Privacy Act, 5
 
U.S.C. ÿÿ 552a(b)(8), which provides in relevant part:
 
(b) Conditions of disclosure.--No agency shall disclose any
record which is contained in a system of records . . . ,
except pursuant to a written request by, or with the prior
written consent of, the individual to whom the record
pertains, unless disclosure of the record would be-­
. . . .
 
(8) to a person pursuant to a showing of compelling
circumstances affecting the health or safety of an
individual if upon such disclosure notification is
transmitted to the last known address of such
 individual[.] 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The Senate and House committee reports regarding
 
Privacy Act Section 552a(b)(8) indicate that it was intended to
 
apply in rare situations when the requested disclosure was
 necessary to save the life or protect the safety of an individual
 
in a medical or safety emergency. The Senate committee report
 states:
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
This subsection is designed to protect an employee or agency
from being in technical violation of the law when they
disclose personal information about a person to save the
life or protect the safety of that individual in a unique
emergency situation. The subsection requires a showing,
which should be documented, of compelling circumstances
affecting the health or safety of the person, or enabling
identification for purposes of aiding a doctor to save such
person's life. The discretion authorized here is intended
 to be used rarely and a precise record of the reasons for
the disclosures must be made, including a description of the
actions taken to notify the individual at the last known
address. 
S. Rep. No. 93-1183, at 71, 93rd Cong., 2d Sess. (1974),
 
reprinted in  1974 U.S.C.C.A.N. 6916, 6985. The House committee
 
report states:
 
The Committee is of the view that special
consideration must be given to valid emergency situations,
such as an airline crash or epidemic, where consent cannot
be obtained because of time and distance and instant action
 is required, perhaps as a matter of life and death.
 
H.R. Rep. No. 93-1416, at 13, 93rd Cong., 2d Sess. (1974).
 
In DePlanche v. Califano , 549 F.Supp. 685, 704 (W.D.
 
Mich. 1982), the court concluded that the legislative history of 
Section 552a(b)(8) indicates that it was intended to apply only
 to "life and death situations" where instant action was required. 
In DePlanche , a non-custodial father sought disclosure of his
 
children's address based on his affidavit statement that the
 children were being neglected. Id. at 703-04. The court held
 
that the father's affidavit was insufficient to show "compelling
 circumstances affecting the health or safety of the children." 
Id.
 at 704 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Given their substantially identical language and
 
similar subject matter, we conclude that HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3)
 
should be interpreted in the same fashion as Section 552a(b)(8). 
See  French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc. 105 Hawai» i 462, 467, 99 
P.3d 1046, 1051 (2004) (noting in construing a Hawai» i statute 
with language similar to a federal statute that "we may look 'to
 the interpretations of analogous federal law[] by the federal
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
courts for guidance'").12 Here, Plaintiff's asserted reason for
 
wanting to inspect President Obama's birth records is so that
 
Plaintiff can verify whether President Obama is a natural born
 citizen and thus eligible to serve as President. While Plaintiff
 may have a strong desire to personally verify President Obama's
 eligibility, we conclude that such desire does not constitute
 "compelling circumstances affecting the health or safety of any
 individual" within the meaning of HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3).
 
Plaintiff's reason for seeking disclosure of President
 
Obama's birth records does not state an "overpowering" or urgent
 need for the records to save the life or protect the safety of an
 individual in a medical or safety emergency. Under the United
 States Constitution, the power to remove a sitting President
 
resides in Congress. Barnett v. Obama , No. 09-0082, 2009 WL
 
3861788, at *15-*16 (C.D. Cal. Oct. 29, 2009). Plaintiff's
 asserted need to inspect President Obama's birth records is
 diminished by the fact that Plaintiff does not have the power or
 authority to determine President Obama's eligibility to serve as
 President. Moreover, Plaintiff's complaint did not allege any
 basis for questioning that President Obama is a natural born
 citizen and that he is eligible to serve as President. Under
 these circumstances, we conclude that Plaintiff failed to state a
 claim for relief based on HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3). 
12 In addition, the lineage of HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3) indicates it was
modeled upon Section 552a(b)(8) of the Privacy Act. HRS ÿÿ 92F-12(b)(3) of the
UIPA incorporated language previously contained in HRS ÿÿ 92E-4(4) (1985) of
Hawai»i's Fair Information Practice Act, which was repealed by the enactment
the UIPA. See 1988 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 262, ÿÿ 4 at 482. HRS ÿÿ 92E-4(4), in
turn, was apparently based on ÿÿ 3-101(6) (1980) of the Uniform Information
Practices Code (Model Code) of the National Conference of Commissioners on
Uniform State Laws, which was in draft form when HRS ÿÿ 92E-4(4) was enacted.
See S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1005-80, in 1980 Sen. Journal, at 1517. Model 
Code ÿÿ 3-101(6) contains language which parallels Section 552a(b)(8) of thePrivacy Act. The committee reports on the UIPA and the Fair Information
Practices Act and the commentary to the Model Code do not provide any helpful
guidance concerning the interpretation of the phrase "compelling circumstances
affecting the health or safety of any individual" as used in HRS ÿÿ 92F­12(b)(3). 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We affirm the final judgment of the Circuit Court.
 
On the briefs:
 
Dr. Robert V. Justice
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Pro Se
 
Heidi M. Rian
 
Jill T. Nagamine
Deputies Attorney General
for Defendants-Appellees
 
17
 