 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 30218
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
STEPHEN R.K. RAMOS, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
WAILUKU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 2P109-00972)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Stephen R.K. Ramos (Ramos) was

 
charged by complaint with disorderly conduct as a petty
 
misdemeanor (Count 1); third degree assault (Count 2); and
 prohibitions involving minors for consuming liquor while being
 under twenty-one years of age (Count 3). After a bench trial,
 
1
the District Court of the Second Circuit (District Court)  found
Ramos guilty as charged on Counts 1 and 2 and acquitted him of
 Count 3. The District Court sentenced Ramos to concurrent terms
 of six months of probation on the disorderly conduct count and
 one year of probation on the third degree assault count. The
 terms of probation were each subject to the condition that Ramos
 serve thirty days in jail, of which twenty-five days were
 suspended for one year. Ramos was also sentenced to fines
 totaling $600 and additional fees and assessments.
 
1
 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ramos appeals from the Judgment filed on October 30, 
2009, in the District Court.2 On appeal, Ramos contends that the 
District Court erred: (1) in convicting him of disorderly conduct 
as a petty misdemeanor, because Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) failed to present sufficient evidence "that Ramos 
was given a reasonable warning or request to desist, but nonetheless persisted in disorderly conduct"; and (2) in convicting him of third degree assault, because the State failed to present any evidence that the person named in the complaint was the person that Ramos assaulted and failed to present sufficient evidence that Ramos caused bodily injury to the alleged victim. 
For the reasons set forth below, we conclude that there
 
was insufficient evidence to convict Ramos of disorderly conduct
 as a petty misdemeanor but sufficient evidence to find that he
 committed the lesser included offense of disorderly conduct as a
 violation. We therefore vacate Ramos's disorderly conduct
 conviction and remand the case with instructions that the
 District Court enter a judgment that Ramos committed disorderly
 conduct as a violation. We conclude that there was sufficient
 evidence to support Ramos's third degree assault conviction and
 therefore affirm that conviction.
 
2 The District Court's Judgment appears to include two pages, the first
page of which reflects the sentence on the disorderly conduct count and the
second page of which reflects the sentence on the third degree assault count.We note that Ramos's notice of appeal refers only to the disorderly conductcount in the caption and only attaches the first page of the Judgment as anexhibit. The body of the notice of appeal, however, states that Ramos isappealing from the Judgment "entered on October 30, 2009." As his openingbrief makes clear, Ramos seeks to challenge both his disorderly conduct andhis third degree assault convictions on appeal. Because the body of thenotice of appeal did not limit Ramos's appeal to the disorderly conduct countand because Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i has not disputed Ramos's
entitlement to challenge his third degree assault conviction or alleged anyprejudice from any deficiency in Ramos's notice of appeal, we construe Ramos'snotice of appeal as encompassing the Judgment with respect to bothconvictions. See Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 3(c)(2) (2006)
("An appeal shall not be dismissed for informality of form or title of thenotice of appeal."). More careful attention in preparing the notice of appealwould have obviated our need to address this issue. 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
The State's main witness at trial was Jeanne Carol
 
3
(Carol),  who was a contract security guard at the Ka 'ahumanu 
Shopping Center. Carol was on duty on April 10, 2009, at about 
7:15 p.m., when she observed Ramos, at a bus stop by the shopping
 center, punching someone who was sitting down on a bench. There
 was a full crowd of people at the bus stop at that time. Carol
 testified that Ramos was standing in front of "the guy that was
 sitting down and just waling on [the guy], right-left, right-
left, and the guy's head was like (inaudible)."
4 Ramos assumed a
 
wide stance while throwing punches, which Carol described as
 "right-left, right-left . . . . boom, boom." The guy sitting
 down did not fight back. Carol estimated that Ramos threw about
 six or seven punches before the guy got up.
 
According to Carol, the bus stop was full, there were 
maybe twenty to thirty people in the immediate vicinity, and
 Ramos's conduct caused people nearby to scatter. "[E]verybody
 was screaming and yelling." Carol recalled that a man with a
 baby had to quickly move the baby carriage out of the way. Carol
 and three other security officers intervened and separated Ramos
 from "the victim." The victim told Carol that he would be "cool"
 and went back and sat on the bench. Carol observed injuries on
 the victim. The victim's mouth was cut, there was blood on his
 mouth, and his eye was "a little bit red."
 
The three other security officers restrained Ramos who
 
kept attempting to grab or claw at the victim. Eventually, the
 security officers placed Ramos on the ground and handcuffed him. 
Ramos was swearing and yelling and making verbal threats to the
 security officers and people in the area, including threats that
 he would come back and break the security officers' jaws. The
 
3
 Although the State spells the witness's last name as "Carroll" in its
brief, we will use the spelling set forth in the trial transcript.
 
4
 Carol did not identify the person whom Ramos was punching by name but
referred to this person as "the guy" or "the victim."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
security officers moved Ramos to a stairwell about 30 feet away. 
While detained in the stairwell, Ramos vacillated between being
 nice and angry. He continued making threats and acting in a
 bizarre manner, and Carol believed Ramos "was under the influence
 of something." The only people in the area where Ramos was
 detained were security officers; no members of the public were
 present.
 
Toward the end of Carol's direct testimony, the
 
following exchange took place between the prosecutor and Carol:
 
[Prosecutor]: Did you at any time ask the defendant to
stop his threatening and yelling and fighting behavior. 
[Carol]: Yes.
 [Prosecutor]: And how did you do that?
 [Carol]: You know -­[Prosecutor]: And how many times?
 [Carol]: I told him, "Oh, you know, just relax. Just
relax." and he would, and then he would get mad again. 
Carol did not explain when during the sequence of events she told
 
Ramos to "just relax." 
Carol called the Maui Police Department (MPD), and MPD
 
officers arrived a short time later. MPD Officer Leighann
 Galario-Guzman (Officer Galario-Guzman) testified that Ramos was
 already in the stairwell when Officer Galario-Guzman arrived. 
Ramos was yelling and screaming at the security officers, calling
 them names, and later also swore at the police officers. 
Officer Galario-Guzman testified that Ramos appeared to be
 intoxicated. Officer Galario-Guzman arrested Ramos for
 disorderly conduct and transported Ramos to the police station.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
We apply the following standard of review in evaluating
 
the sufficiency of the evidence:
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution
when the appellate court passes on the legal
sufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction;
the same standard applies whether the case was before
a judge or a jury. The test on appeal is not whether
guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact. . . .
 
"Substantial evidence" as to every material element of
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a [person]
of reasonable caution to support a conclusion. And as trier
 of fact, the trial judge is free to make all reasonable and
rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including
circumstantial evidence.
 
State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992)
 
(citations omitted).
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.
 1.
 
The offense of disorderly conduct can be charged as a
 
petty misdemeanor or a violation. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 711-1101 (1993 & Supp. 2010) provides in relevant part as
 follows:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct
if, with intent to cause physical inconvenience or alarm by
a member or members of the public, or recklessly creating a
risk thereof, the person:
 
(a)	 Engages in fighting or threatening, or in
violent or tumultuous behavior; or 
(b)	 Makes unreasonable noise; or 
(c)	 Subjects another person to offensively coarse
behavior or abusive language which is likely to
provoke a violent response; . . .
. . .
 
(2) Noise is unreasonable, within the meaning of
subsection (1)(b), if considering the nature and purpose of
the person's conduct and the circumstances known to the
person, including the nature of the location and the time of
the day or night, the person's conduct involves a gross
deviation from the standard of conduct that a law-abiding
citizen would follow in the same situation; or the failure
to heed the admonition of a police officer that the noise is
unreasonable and should be stopped or reduced.
 
. . . .
 
(3) Disorderly conduct is a petty misdemeanor if it is
the defendant's intention to cause substantial harm or
 
serious inconvenience, or if the defendant persists in
disorderly conduct after reasonable warning or request to
desist. Otherwise disorderly conduct is a violation.
 
(Emphases added).
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Count 1 of the complaint charged Ramos with disorderly
 
conduct as a petty misdemeanor based on the prong of HRS § 711­
1101(3) which requires proof that the "defendant persists in
 disorderly conduct after reasonable warning or request to
 desist." Count 1 charged Ramos as follows:
 
That on or about the 10th day of April, 2009, in the
Division of Wailuku, County of Maui, State of Hawai' i,
STEPHEN R.K. RAMOS, with intent to cause physical
inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the public,or recklessly creating a risk thereof, did persist indisorderly conduct, to wit, engage in fighting orthreatening, or in a violent or tumultuous behavior, and/ormake unreasonable noise, and/or subject another person tooffensively coarse behavior or abusive language, which waslikely to provoke a violent response, after reasonablewarning or request to desist, thereby committing the offenseof Disorderly Conduct in violation of Section 711­1101(1)(a)(b)(c) of the Hawaii Revised Statutes. 
(Emphases added.)
 
2.
 
Ramos argues that his conviction for disorderly conduct
 
as a petty misdemeanor cannot stand because the State failed to

 
present sufficient evidence that he persisted in disorderly
 
conduct after reasonable warning or request to desist. We
 agree.
5
 
In State v. Leung, 79 Hawai 'i 538, 543, 904 P.2d 552, 
557 (App. 1995), this court concluded that police officers
 "cannot be considered 'members of the public' for the purpose of
 establishing Defendant's culpability under the disorderly conduct
 statute. Arguments with the police, without more, do not fall
 within the ambit of the disorderly conduct statute[.]" In
 
5 We note that Ramos's Opening Brief at page 11 cites an unpublished
decision issued by the Hawai' i Supreme Court in 2004. The citation to this 
2004 decision violates Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule
35(c)(1) (2008) because: the cited case was decided prior to July 1, 2008; it
does not establish the law of this case; it does not have res judicata orcollateral estoppel effect in this case; and it does not involve "the samerespondent." HRAP Rule 35(c)(1). The case should not have been cited, andthis court did not consider the improperly cited case in deciding this appeal.Ramos's counsel is cautioned that future violations of HRAP Rule 35(c)(1) mayresult in sanctions. 
6
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support of this conclusion, this court quoted the commentary to
 
HRS § 711-1101, which provides in relevant part:
 
A person may not be arrested for disorderly conduct as a
result of activity which annoys only the police, for
example. Police officers are trained and employed to bear
the burden of hazardous situations, and it is not infrequent
that private citizens have arguments with them. Short of
 conduct which causes "physical inconvenience or alarm to a
member or members of the public" arguments with the police
are merely hazards of the trade, which do not warrant
criminal penalties.
 
Leung, 79 Hawai 'i at 543, 904 P.2d at 557 (emphases in original 
omitted) (quoting commentary to HRS § 711-1101 (1993) (footnote 
omitted)). 
The security officers in Ramos's case were performing
 
duties that were functionally analogous to certain duties
 performed by police officers. We conclude that neither the
 security officers nor the police officers who later arrived at
 the scene can be considered members of the public for purposes of
 determining Ramos's culpability under the disorderly conduct
 statute. See id. 
The State relies on Carol's testimony that she told
 
Ramos to "'just relax[,] [j]ust relax' and he would, and then he
 would get mad again" as the evidence which established that Ramos
 persisted in disorderly conduct after reasonable warning or
 request to desist. Assuming, arguendo, that Carol's statement to
 Ramos to "just relax" constituted a reasonable warning or request
 to desist, there was insufficient evidence that Ramos persisted
 in disorderly conduct after being told to "just relax." The
 State did not establish when in the sequence of events Carol told
 Ramos to "just relax." Thus, Carol may have told Ramos to "just
 relax" after Ramos had already been removed to the stairwell away
 from the public in handcuffs. When Ramos was in the stairwell,
 however, he was only in the presence of security officers and
 police officers. Because it is unclear when Carol told Ramos to
 "just relax," the State failed to present substantial evidence
 that after Carol told Ramos to "just relax" (which may have
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
occurred while Ramos was in the stairwell), Ramos engaged in the
 
charged acts of disorderly conduct "with intent to cause physical
 inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the public," or
 recklessly created the risk thereof. Accordingly, the State
 failed to produce sufficient evidence that Ramos persisted in
 disorderly conduct after reasonable warning or request to desist. 
We therefore vacate Ramos's conviction for disorderly conduct as
 a petty misdemeanor. 
3.
 
There was sufficient evidence that Ramos committed the
 
offense of disorderly conduct as a violation based on Ramos's
 conduct that occurred before he was removed to the stairwell. 
This included evidence that the bus stop was crowded and that in
 response to Ramos's conduct in punching the victim, people
 scattered and were yelling and screaming. Ramos concedes that
 there was sufficient evidence to show that he committed
 disorderly conduct as a violation within the meaning of HRS 
§ 711-1101(1)(a), (b), and (c). Accordingly, we remand the case
 with instructions that the District Court enter a judgment for
 the lesser included offense of disorderly conduct as a violation
 on Count 1.
 
B.
 1.
 
In Count 2, Ramos was charged with third degree
 
assault, in violation of HRS § 707-712(1)(a) (1993). HRS § 707­712(1)(a) states: "A person commits the offense of assault in
 the third degree if the person: (a) Intentionally, knowingly, or
 recklessly causes bodily injury to another person[.]" 
Count 2 charged Ramos as follows:

 
That on or about the 10th day of April, 2009, in the
Division of Wailuku, County of Maui, State of Hawaii,
STEPHEN R.K. RAMOS did intentionally, knowingly, or
recklessly cause bodily injury to Holden Bingham, thereby
committing the offense of Assault in the Third Degree in
violation of Section 707-712(1)(a) of the Hawaii Revised
Statutes. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2.
 
Ramos contends that the District Court erred in
 
convicting him of the third degree assault count because there
 
was insufficient evidence to support the conviction. Ramos
 argues that the evidence was insufficient because the State
 failed to prove that the alleged victim named in the complaint,
 Holden Bingham, was the person that Ramos assaulted. Ramos
 asserts: "The State did present evidence that Ramos assaulted a
 male sitting at a busstop. However, the State presented NO
 evidence that the male was the same male specified in the
 Complaint (i.e., Holden Bingham)." (Record citations omitted.) 
Ramos also argues that there was insufficient evidence that Ramos
 caused bodily injury to the victim because, notwithstanding the
 injuries to the victim observed by Carol, there was no testimony
 regarding the victim's appearance before the incident.
 
Although the State concedes error on both of Ramos's
 
arguments, 
it is incumbent on the appellate court first to ascertain
that the confession of error is supported by the record and
well-founded in law and second to determine that such error
 is properly preserved and prejudicial. In other words, a
confession of error by the prosecution is not binding upon
an appellate court, nor may a conviction be reversed on the
strength of the prosecutor's official action alone.
 
State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai 'i 333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, ellipsis points, and 
brackets omitted). We disagree with Ramos's arguments and conclude that the State's concession of error is not supported by the record or well-founded in law. Accordingly, we affirm Ramos's third degree assault conviction. 
3.
 The State alleged in the complaint that Ramos
 
assaulted "Holden Bingham," but at trial, it failed to present
 evidence of the identity of the person Ramos assaulted. Instead,
 Carol referred to the person whom Ramos was observed punching as 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"the guy" or "the victim." Ramos acknowledges that this 
discrepancy between the matters proved at trial and the allegations in the complaint "can be viewed as a 'variance' problem." We conclude that this claimed error should be analyzed under variance principles. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court, on 
numerous occasions, "has recognized that a conviction will not be set aside due to a variance between the evidence proved and the allegations in the indictment or information unless the variance is material." State v. Sanchez, 9 Haw. App. 315, 320, 837 P.2d 
1313, 1317 (1992). "To be fatal, a variance must be both material to an essential element of the offense and prejudicial to a substantial right of the accused. State v. Sword, 68 Haw. 
343, 345-46, 713 P.2d 432, 434 (1986) (citations omitted). 
In State v. Nases, 65 Haw. 217, 649 P.2d 1138 (1982), 
the Hawai
'i Supreme Court addressed circumstances similar to 
those presented in Ramos's case. Nases was convicted of theft of a calculator. Id. at 218, 649 P.2d at 1139. Nases sought to 
overturn his conviction on appeal, claiming that there was a fatal variance between the charge and the proof, because "in the charge, the calculator was alleged to be the property of Setsuko Yokoyama and Setsuko Yokoyama doing business as Kalakaua Kleaners, whereas it was actually the property of Kalakaua Kleaners, a corporation." Id. 
The supreme court rejected Nases's claim, reasoning
 
that because proof of the particular ownership of the property in
 question was not an essential element of the crime, there was no
 fatal variance between the charge and the proof. Id. at 218, 649
 
P.2d 1139-40. The court stated:
 
It has long been settled that where the offense is obtaining
control over the property of another, proof that the
property was the property of another is all that is
necessary and the naming of the person owning the property
in the indictment is surplusage. It is undisputed that the
calculator did not belong to [Nases] but was the property of
another. The particular ownership of the property in
question was not an essential element in proving the crime
and there is no fatal variance between the charge and the
proof.
 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. (citations omitted).6
 
Here, as in Nases, the particular name or identity of
 
the victim is not an essential element of the assault charge. 
Third degree assault requires proof that the defendant assaulted
 "another person"; it does not require proof of that person's
 name. See HRS § 707-712(1)(a). In this case, the evidence at
 
trial proved that Ramos repeatedly punched another person ("the
 guy" or "the victim") who was sitting on a bench. We conclude
 that the failure to identify the person that Ramos punched as
 "Holden Bingham" did not amount to a material or fatal variance
 that requires Ramos's assault conviction to be overturned.
7
 
Ramos does not contend that the identification of the
 
alleged assault victim in the complaint by name deprived him of
 adequate notice or affected his ability to prepare for trial. We
 reject Ramos's argument that the failure to present evidence of
 the victim's identity exposes him to a second prosecution for the
 same offense. Ramos was convicted of Count 2, which charged him
 with assaulting Holden Bingham on or about April 10, 2009. 
Ramos's conviction precludes the State from bringing another
 prosecution accusing Ramos of assaulting Holden Bingham based on
 the same incident.
 
4.
 
We reject Ramos's claim that there was insufficient
 
evidence that Ramos caused bodily injury to the victim. The term
 "bodily injury" is defined to include "physical pain." HRS 
§ 707-700 (1993). Ramos cites no authority for the proposition
 that evidence of the victim's appearance before the assault was 
6
 To similar effect is State v. Pokini, 45 Haw. 295, 300-06, 367 P.2d
499, 503-05 (1961) (concluding that in a robbery prosecution, there was no
fatal variance where the indictment charged that the alleged victim was the
owner of the property, but the evidence at trial showed that the property
taken from the victim was itself stolen property).
 
7 Our conclusion is supported by decisions from other jurisdictions that
have held that the name of the victim is not an essential element of the crime
 of assault. E.g., State v. Plano, 838 P.2d 1145, 1147-49 (Wash. Ct. App.
1992); United States v. Morlan, 756 F.2d 1442, 1445-46 (9th Cir. 1985).
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
necessary to establish that Ramos caused bodily injury to the
 
victim. 
The evidence at trial showed that Ramos stood in front
 
of the victim in a wide stance "just waling" on the victim. 
Ramos threw six or seven punches while the victim was seated on a
 bench and did not fight back. After security officers
 intervened, Carol observed that the victim was cut and bleeding
 from the mouth and that the victim's eye was red. When viewed in
 the light most favorable to the State, it was reasonable for the
 trier of fact to infer that Ramos's punches had caused the
 injuries observed to the victim's face and that Ramos's multiple
 punches (his "waling" on the victim) caused the victim physical
 pain. We conclude that there was sufficient evidence that Ramos
 intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly caused bodily injury to
 the victim.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the October 30, 2009, Judgment of the
 
District Court with respect to Ramos's conviction and sentence
 for disorderly conduct as a petty misdemeanor, and we remand the
 case with instructions that the District Court enter a judgment
 that Ramos committed disorderly conduct as a violation. We
 affirm the District Court's Judgment with respect to Ramos's
 conviction and sentence for third degree assault.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April, 27, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Phyllis J. Hironaka
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Renee Ishikawa Delizo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
12
 