FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
MARK K. ADAMS and JOANIE ADAMS and NELSON KOON SUNG NG
 
and ZINNIA K. L. NG, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
DOLE FOOD COMPANY, INC., DOLE FRESH FRUIT COMPANY, STANDARD FRUIT
COMPANY, STANDARD FRUIT AND STEAMSHIP COMPANY, PINEAPPLE GROWERS
ASSOCIATION OF HAWAII, AMVAC CHEMICAL CORPORATION, SHELL OIL
COMPANY, THE DOW CHEMICAL COMPANY and OCCIDENTAL CHEMICAL
CORPORATION, Defendants-Appellees.
 
NO. 30673
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-1204)
 
JANUARY 22, 2014
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD AND GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Mark K. Adams (Adams), Joanie
 
Adams, Nelson Koon Sung Ng (Ng), and Zinnia K.L. Ng (collectively
 
"Plaintiffs") appeal from a Revised Final Judgment filed on
 July 14, 2010 by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
 
1
court)  which entered judgment in favor of Defendants-Appellees
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim (Judge Kim) and the Honorable Rom A.
Trader (Judge Trader) presided.
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Dole Food Company, Inc. and Dole Fresh Fruit Company (Dole
 
2
Defendants)  and against Plaintiffs.
The Revised Final Judgment was entered in light of the 
circuit court's grant of the Dole Defendants' motion to dismiss 
the claims asserted against them (Motion to Dismiss) and the circuit court's denial of the Plaintiffs' motion to amend their complaint (Motion to Amend). Following the circuit court's rulings on the Motion to Dismiss and the Motion to Amend, the circuit court granted the Plaintiffs' motion pursuant to Hawai
'i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b) for certification and entry of final judgment as to the Dole Defendants.
3 
On appeal, the Plaintiffs contend that the circuit
 
court erred by granting the Motion to Dismiss and abused its
 discretion in denying their Motion to Amend.
 
For the reasons set forth below, we hold that: (1) the
 
circuit court did not err in dismissing the claims against the
 Dole Defendants based on the allegations in the complaint; but
 (2) the circuit court abused its discretion in denying the
 Plaintiffs leave to amend their complaint.
I. Case Background
A. Complaint
 
The Plaintiffs filed the complaint on June 29, 2007
 
against the Dole Defendants, the Pineapple Growers Association of
 Hawaii (PGAH), Amvac Chemical Corporation (Amvac), Shell Oil
 Company (Shell), The Dow Chemical Company (Dow), and Occidental
 Chemical Corporation (Occidental). Plaintiffs seek recovery for
 alleged damages to their health, welfare, and lives resulting
 from exposure to a chemical pesticide, dibromochloropropane
 (DBCP), which was allegedly manufactured by the defendants or
 
2
 In the complaint, Standard Fruit Company and Standard Fruit and
Steamship Company were identified as part of the "Dole Defendants," but on
April 7, 2008, the parties stipulated to dismiss Standard Fruit Company and
Standard Fruit and Steamship Company.
3
 Claims remained in the case against the other defendants.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
utilized by the defendants on commercial pineapple farms where
 
Adams and Ng worked during the 1970s. 
According to the complaint, Adams was exposed to DBCP 
between 1974 and 1975, while employed as a pineapple field worker by the Dole Defendants, their subsidiaries or agents in Wahiaw
a, 
O'ahu. As a result of this exposure, Adams alleges he suffered 
serious and permanent injuries, including, but not limited to, testicular cancer. 
The complaint alleges that Ng was exposed to DBCP 
between 1971 and 1973, while employed as a pineapple harvester by the Dole Defendants, their subsidiaries or agents at the Dole Pineapple Plant located in L
ana'i City, Maui County. As a result 
of this exposure, Ng alleges he suffered serious and permanent injuries including, but not limited to, severe injury to his reproductive capacities and testicular cancer. 
The complaint alleges claims for negligence,
 
conspiracy, strict liability, intentional tort, and breach of
 implied warranty, and requests compensatory and punitive damages.
B. Procedural Background
 
Amvac, Occidental, Dow, Shell, and PGAH filed answers
 
from December 2007 to February 2008.
 
The Dole Defendants did not file an answer and instead,
 
on March 3, 2008, filed the Motion to Dismiss, seeking dismissal
 of the claims against them or, in the alternative, a more
 definitive statement of certain claims. 
A little over four months later, on July 21, 2008, and
 
while the Motion to Dismiss was pending, the Plaintiffs filed the
 Motion to Amend. A combined hearing on both motions was held on
 December 2, 2008, wherein the circuit court orally granted the
 Motion to Dismiss and denied the Motion to Amend. 
3
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On April 20, 2009, the circuit court entered separate
 
written orders granting the Motion to Dismiss and denying the
 
Motion to Amend.4
 
On July 14, 2010, the circuit court entered its Revised
 
5
Final Judgment,  from which the Plaintiffs timely appealed.
On appeal, Dow, Occidental, and Shell each filed
 
Notices of Being Nominal Appellee, stating that they have no
 interest in the outcome of this appeal and would not be filing an
 answering brief. 
II. Standards of Review
 
A. Motion to Dismiss
 
We review the circuit court's ruling on a motion to
 
dismiss de novo. Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117
 
Hawai
'i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). 
A complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state a
claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove
no set of facts in support of his or her claim that would entitle
him or her to relief. This court must, therefore, view a
plaintiff's complaint in a light most favorable to him or her in
order to determine whether the allegations contained therein could
warrant relief under any alternate theory. Consequently, in
reviewing the circuit court's order dismissing the plaintiffs'
complaint in this case, our consideration is strictly limited to
the allegations of the complaint, and we must deem those
allegations to be true.
 
Kahala Royal Corp. v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 113 
Hawai'i 251, 266, 151 P.3d 732, 747 (2007) (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted).
B. Motion to Amend
 
We review the denial of leave to amend a complaint 
under the abuse of discretion standard. Gonsalves v. Nissan 
Motor Corp. in Hawai 'i, Ltd., 100 Hawai 'i 149, 158, 58 P.3d 1196, 
1205 (2002); see also Dejetley v. Kaho 'ohalahala, 122 Hawai 'i 251, 
4
 On March 11, 2009, this case was reassigned from Judge Kim to Judge
Trader. 
5
 The circuit court entered its original Final Judgment on August 6,
2009, from which the Plaintiffs appealed. However, on January 7, 2010, this
court entered an Order Dismissing Appeal for Lack of Jurisdiction because the
August 6, 2009 Final Judgment did not satisfy the requirements for an
appealable judgment. 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
269, 226 P.3d 421, 439 (2010). "An abuse of discretion occurs 
where the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Dejetley, 122 
Hawai
'i at 269, 226 P.3d at 439 (citation and internal quotation 
marks omitted). "The trial court abuses its discretion if it bases its ruling on an erroneous view of the law or on a clearly erroneous assessment of the evidence." Id. at 270-71, 226 P.3d 
at 440-41 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
III. Discussion
 
A. The Motion to Dismiss Was Properly Granted
 
In the order granting the Motion to Dismiss, the
 
circuit court states that it dismissed the claims against the
 
Dole Defendants "for all of the reasons set forth in the Motion
 and other related submissions by the Dole Defendants, in the Dole
 Defendants' Memorandum in Opposition to Plaintiffs' Motion to
 Amend Complaint . . . and in the argument related thereto[.]"
 
In its Motion to Dismiss, the Dole Defendants argued
 
that the Plaintiffs' claims were barred by the exclusivity
 provision of Hawaii's Workers' Compensation Law (WCL), set forth
 in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 386-5 (1993), and that the
 circuit court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over Plaintiffs'
 claims under HRS § 386-73 (Supp. 2012). Additionally, the Dole
 Defendants argued that the conspiracy and intentional tort claims
 should be dismissed because the Plaintiffs failed to state
 cognizable causes of action. In the alternative, the Dole
 Defendants moved for a more definite statement as to both of
 these claims under HRCP Rule 12(e).
 
On appeal, the Plaintiffs argue that the circuit court
 
erred in dismissing their complaint because (1) only one
 employing entity can claim the protection of the WCL exclusive
 remedy; (2) the civil conspiracy claim does not involve "work
 injuries" and thus should not be barred by HRS § 386-5; and
 (3) the intentional tort claim also is not barred by HRS § 386-5.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The applicable standard of review regarding a motion to
dismiss requires that we construe the complaint's allegations as
 
true and view them in the light most favorable to the non-movant
 Plaintiffs. See Kahala Royal Corp., 113 Hawai
'i at 266, 151 P.3d 
at 747. The relevant allegations set forth in the Plaintiffs'
 complaint are as follows:
  
6. . . . . Dole Food Company, Inc. is the successor
in interest to Castle & Cooke, Inc.
 
. . . . 
12. . . . . Dole Food Company, Inc. is the ultimate
parent corporation of Standard Fruit Company, Standard Fruit
and Steamship Company, and Dole Fresh Fruit Company
(collectively "the Dole Defendants"). These subsidiaries
 
are so integrated and controlled by Dole Food Company, Inc.
that they are alter egos of Dole Food Company, Inc. The
 Plaintiffs are suing the Dole Defendants for the tortious
activities performed at the behest, and under the control
of, Dole Food Co., Inc. and/or its predecessors-in-interest.
 
. . . . 
15. . . . . Dole Fresh Fruit Company is an alter ego
of Standard Fruit Company, Standard Fruit and Steamship
Company and/or Dole Food Company, Inc. These subsidiaries
 are so integrated and controlled by Dole Fresh Fruit Company
that they are alter egos of Dole Fresh Fruit Company.
 
16. Defendants The Dow Chemical Company, Occidental
Chemical Corporation, Shell Oil Company, Standard Fruit
Company, Standard Fruit and Steamship Company, Dole Food
Company, Inc., Dole Fresh Fruit Company, The Pineapple
Growers Association, their subsidiaries and/or affiliates or
predecessors-in-interest, developed, manufactured, sold,
distributed, and used nematocides containing the chemical
dibromocholoropropane, commonly known as DBCP.
 
. . . . 
19. Plaintiff Mark Adams alleges he was exposed to
Defendants' products between 1974 and 1975 and, as a result,
has suffered serious and permanent injuries including, but
not limited to, testicular cancer. He discovered his
 injuries were related to DBCP exposure less than 2 years
prior to filing this Complaint (or a complaint in another
jurisdiction tolling the statute of limitations), and did
not discover and could not have discovered his injuries and
their cause prior to that time.
 
20. Plaintiff Mark Adams was employed as a pineapple
field worker by the Dole Defendants, their subsidiaries oragents in Wahiawa, Oahu between 1974 and 1975. He was 
exposed to the Defendants' DBCP products while employed inthe commercial cultivation of pineapples in Hawai' i. 
. . . . 
6
   Pursuant to HRS § 386-3 (Supp. 2012), the WCL covers
 
employees who suffer "personal injury either by accident arising
 
out of and in the course of employment or by disease proximately
 caused by or resulting from the nature of the employment[.]" The
 exclusivity provision relied on by the Dole Defendants is set
 forth in HRS § 386-5, which states that 
FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
22. Plaintiff Mark Adams, while an employee of Dole,
was routinely exposed to DBCP manufactured by the various
Defendants.
 
. . . .
 
24. Plaintiff Nelson Ng alleges he was exposed to
Defendants' products between 1971 and 1973 and, as a result,
has suffered serious and permanent injuries including, but
not limited to, severe injury to his reproductive capacities
and testicular cancer. He discovered his injuries were
related to DBCP exposure less than 2 years prior to filing
this Complaint (or a complaint in another jurisdiction
tolling the statute of limitations), and he did not discover
and could not have discovered his injuries and their cause
prior to this time.
 
25. Plaintiff Nelson Ng was employed as a pineapple
harvester by the Dole Defendants, their subsidiaries oragents at the Dole Pineapple Plant located in Lanai City,Maui County in or around 1971 to 1973. He was exposed to
the Defendants' DBCP products while employed in thecommercial cultivation of pineapples in Hawai' i. 
26. Plaintiff Nelson Ng while an employee of Dole,
assisted in pesticide chemical research conducted at the
Dole Pineapple Plant.
 
27. Plaintiff Nelson Ng worked around plants and
soils that had been routinely treated with DBCP manufactured
by the various Defendants.
 
(emphases added). In sum, the complaint alleges injury to Adams
 
and Ng by exposure to DBCP while they were employed by the Dole
 Defendants and that the Dole Defendants were alter egos of each
 other.
 
[t]he rights and remedies herein granted to an employee or
6
the employee's dependents on account of a work injury[ ]
suffered by the employee shall exclude all other liability
of the employer to the employee, the employee's . . .
 
6
 HRS § 386-1 (1993) defines "work injury" as "a personal injury
suffered under the conditions specified in section 386-3." 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7
spouse[ ]. . . or anyone else entitled to recover damages
from the employer, at common law or otherwise, on account of
the injury, except for sexual harassment or sexual assault
and infliction of emotional distress or invasion of privacy
related thereto, in which case a civil action may also be
brought.
 
(emphases added). Thus, if the complaint alleges a "work injury"
 
within the meaning of HRS § 386-1 and § 386-3, then pursuant to
 HRS § 386-5, Plaintiffs' claims against Adams and Ng's employer
 are barred.
 
Even when construed in a light most favorable to 
Plaintiffs, the complaint alleges the Dole Defendants to be Adams and Ng's employer. The complaint also alleges an occupational disease within the meaning of HRS § 386-3.
8 As to this type of 
work injury, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has stated 
an employee's injury caused by a disease is compensable as
an "injury by disease," pursuant to HRS § 386-3, when the
disease (1) is caused by conditions that are characteristic
of or peculiar to the particular trade, occupation, or
employment, (2) results from the employee's actual exposure
to such working conditions, and (3) is due to causes in
excess of the ordinary hazards of employment in general[.]
 
Flor v. Holguin, 94 Hawai 'i 70, 81, 9 P.3d 382, 393 (2000), 
modified on rehr'g by Flor v. Holguin, 94 Hawai 'i 92, 9 P.3d 404 
(2000) (internal citations omitted). Here, Adams and Ng allege 
that they suffered from testicular cancer and other reproductive injuries (1) which were caused by the Dole Defendants' use of DBCP in pineapple cultivation (a condition particular to their employment); (2) which resulted from their actual exposure to DBCP in pineapple cultivation; and (3) which were due to workplace exposure to a harmful pesticide, DBCP (a cause in excess of ordinary employment hazards). Thus, given the allegations in the complaint and the exclusivity provision in 
7
 Under HRS § 386-5, liability of Adams and Ng's employer to their
spouses is also excluded on account of a work injury suffered by Adams or Ng.
8
 "A disease 'resulting from the nature of the employment' is, by
definition, an 'occupational disease.'" Flor v. Holguin, 94 Hawai' i 70, 80, 9
P.3d 382, 392 (2000) modified on rehr'g by Flor v. Holguin, 94 Hawai' i 92, 9
P.3d 404 (2000). 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 386-5, the WCL is the exclusive remedy for claims against
 
the Dole Defendants for the alleged injuries to Adams and Ng.
 
We disagree with the Plaintiffs' argument that only one 
employing entity can claim the liability protection of the WCL exclusive remedy provision. The Plaintiffs cite no authority for this argument. The plain language of the relevant statutory provision, HRS § 386-5, refers to "liability of the employer" but does not indicate that only one employing entity can claim such exclusivity. See HRS § 386-5. Similarly, the definition of 
"employer" contained in HRS § 386-1 does not indicate that there can only be one employer for purposes of WCL exclusivity. Based on the Plaintiffs' express allegations that they were employed by the Dole Defendants and that the Dole Defendants were alter egos of each other, the circuit court properly dismissed the Plaintiffs' claims as to all Dole Defendants. See Suzuki v. 
Castle & Cooke Resorts, 124 Hawai
'i 230, 232-34, 239 P.3d 1280, 
1282-84 (App. 2010) (recognizing that a parent company would be entitled to immunity under WCL exclusivity if it were an alter ego of its subsidiary which employed the Plaintiff). 
Plaintiffs further argue that, even if the WCL applies
 
to the Dole Defendants, the conspiracy and intentional tort
 claims in the complaint are not barred by the WCL's exclusive
 remedy provision. We disagree.
 
Plaintiffs cite no authority holding that a conspiracy 
claim is outside the WCL's exclusive remedy provision. Rather, they rely on Hough v. Pacific Ins. Co., 83 Hawai
'i 457, 927 P.2d 
858 (1996), where the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that tort and 
other claims by an employee against the workers' compensation insurance carrier did not involve "work injuries" and were not barred by the WCL. Plaintiffs argue that their conspiracy claim is similar to Hough because the alleged wrongful actions in this case, i.e., suppressing the truth and promoting misleading information about DBCP, are separate from the day-to-day conduct of an employer. This argument is unavailing. In Hough, the 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
claims were based on the harm that arose from the insurer's
 
conduct in handling the workers' compensation insurance claim and
 were not based on the underlying work injuries. Id. at 462, 927
 
P.2d at 863. Here, the Plaintiffs' complaint seeks recovery for
 the injuries that Adams and Ng sustained from their employment. 
Hough is inapposite.
 
As to the intentional tort claim asserted by 
Plaintiffs, the WCL does not provide a general exception to allow intentional tort claims against an employer. The Plaintiffs point to Furukawa v. Honolulu Zoological Soc'y, 85 Hawai
'i 7, 18, 
936 P.2d 643, 654 (1997) as recognizing that intentional tort claims are outside the workers' compensation system. However, as noted in Yang v. Abercrombie & Fitch Stores, 128 Hawai
'i 173, 
181, 284 P.3d 946, 954 (App. 2012), the Furukawa decision allowed an employee's discrimination claim to proceed based in part on a statute that explicitly provides that the WCL does not bar such claims filed with the Hawai
'i Civil Rights Commission. In other 
words, the legislature had established an exception to WCL exclusivity for the claim asserted in Furukawa. Moreover, this court in Yang declined to "read Furukawa's recognition of decisions in other states [regarding intentional torts] as creating an exception to the exclusivity provision[.]" Yang, 128 
Hawai
'i at 182, 284 P.3d at 955. Noting that the legislature has 
created exceptions to the exclusivity provision for specific intentional acts, but not others, this court held in Yang inter alia that "Furukawa does not create an exception to the exclusive remedy provision under HRS § 386-5 for all intentional torts[.]" Id. at 183, 284 P.3d at 956. See also Iddings v. Mee-Lee, 82 
Hawai
'i 1, 8 n.5, 919 P.2d 263, 270 n.5 (1996) (recognizing that 
the WCL allows claims against a co-employee for "wilful and wanton misconduct" but noting that "[w]e express no opinion regarding, nor do we acknowledge the existence of, any analogous exceptions to employer immunity.") 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The circuit court thus properly granted the Motion to
 
Dismiss, thereby dismissing the claims against the Dole
 
Defendants based on the allegations in the complaint.
B. The Amended Complaint Should Have Been Allowed
 
We next address Plaintiffs' contention that the circuit
 
court abused its discretion in denying their Motion to Amend. 
The Plaintiffs sought to amend their complaint pursuant to HRCP
 Rule 15(a). Because this motion followed the Motion to Dismiss,
 HRCP Rule 15(a)(2) applied. See HRCP Rule 15(a)(2); see also
 
Hirasa v. Burtner, 68 Haw. 22, 25-26, 702 P.2d 772, 775 (1985).
 This rule provides that "a party may amend the party's pleading
 only by leave of court or by written consent of the adverse
 party; and leave shall be freely given when justice so requires." 
HRCP Rule 15(a)(2) (emphasis added). 
The Plaintiffs sought to make several changes to their
 
complaint purportedly after they reviewed Adams and Ng's federal
 social security records and after receiving the Dole Food
 Company, Inc.'s May 16, 2008 response to Plaintiff's request for
 admissions.
9 First, instead of alleging that "Dole Food Company,
 
Inc. is the successor in interest to Castle & Cooke, Inc.," the
 Plaintiffs sought to allege that "Dole Food Company, Inc. may
 have an interest in Castle & Cooke, Inc." Second, instead of
 alleging that Adams and Ng were employed by the "Dole Defendants,
 their subsidiaries or agents," the Plaintiffs sought to allege
 that Adams and Ng were employed by "Castle & Cooke, Inc., and/or
 Dole Packaged Foods, Inc."
10 Third, the Plaintiffs sought to add
 
allegations that Plaintiffs had "non-work related" exposure to
 
9
 As discussed further infra, the Dole Food Company, Inc.'s response to
Plaintiffs' request for admissions stated that information known or obtainable
by the company was insufficient to admit or deny that Adams and Ng were not in
its "employment" during the time periods alleged in the complaint. 
10 Castle & Cooke, Inc. and Dole Packaged Foods, Inc. are not named
parties in this case.
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
DBCP.11 According to the Plaintiffs, the proposed amendments to
 
the complaint would clarify that their injuries arose outside the
 
scope of employment and that their alleged employer was not a
 party to the suit, thus their claims are not barred by the WCL
 exclusivity provision. 
"A denial of leave to amend under HRCP Rule 15(a) is 
within the discretion of the trial court." Gonsalves, 100 
Hawai
'i at 158, 58 P.3d at 1205. In interpreting HRCP Rule 
15(a), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has looked to the general 
standard applied by federal courts: 
In the absence of any apparent or declared reason - such as undue
delay, bad faith or dilatory motive on the part of the movant,
repeated failure to cure deficiencies by amendments previously
allowed, undue prejudice to the opposing party by virtue of
allowance of the amendment, futility of amendment, etc. - the
leave sought should, as the rules require[], be "freely given."
 
Id. at 160, 58 P.3d at 1207 (quoting Fed. Home Loan Mortg. Corp.
 
v. Transamerica Ins. Co., 89 Hawai 'i 157, 162, 969 P.2d 1275, 
1280 (1998)); Dejetley, 122 Hawai 'i at 270, 226 P.3d at 440. 
"Rule 15(a) of the HRCP is functionally identical to Rule 15(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Where a Hawai
'i rule of 
civil procedure is identical to the federal rule, the interpretation of this rule by federal courts is highly persuasive." Dejetley, 122 Hawai
'i at 270, 226 P.3d at 440 
(citing Fed. Home Loan Mortg. Corp., 89 Hawai 'i at 162 n.1, 969 
P.2d at 1280 n.1) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
The circuit court's order denying Plaintiffs' Motion to
 
Amend states that it is based on "all of the reasons set forth in
 the Dole Defendants' Memorandum in Opposition to Plaintiffs'
 Motion, . . . in the Motion to Dismiss . . . and other related
 submissions by the Dole Defendants, and in the argument related
 thereto." Essentially, the Dole Defendants argued below that the
 proposed amendments were made in bad faith to avoid the WCL
 
11 For instance, Plaintiffs sought to amend the complaint to allege
that Adams and Ng had resided in housing provided by Castle & Cooke, Inc.,
which was near to the pineapple fields and which also exposed them to DBCP.
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
exclusivity bar asserted in the Dole Defendants' Motion to
 
Dismiss; and that granting leave to amend would further delay the
 action, cause prejudice, and prove futile because the proposed
 amendments did not escape WCL exclusivity and the conspiracy and
 intentional tort claims still failed to state claims upon which
 relief could be granted.
 
1. Bad Faith
 
Given the general explanation of its ruling, the
 
circuit court apparently accepted the Dole Defendants' argument
 that the Plaintiffs were precluded from amending their complaint
 because such amendments were inconsistent with the original
 complaint. The Dole Defendants argue that Plaintiffs' attempt to
 amend their complaint was in bad faith and that the proposed
 amended complaint amounts to a sham pleading, citing in part to
 HRCP Rule 11(b)(3)
12 and Reddy v. Litton Industries, Inc., 912
 
F.2d 291, 296-97 (9th Cir. 1990) ("Although leave to amend should
 be liberally granted, the amended complaint may only allege
 'other facts consistent with the challenged pleading.'")
 (citation omitted). The circuit court, however, made no finding
 one way or another as to any violation of HRCP Rule 11. See HRCP
 
Rule 11(c)(3). Moreover, it is questionable whether Reddy
 provides support for the Dole Defendants' position.
 
In PAE Government Services, Inc. v. MPRI, Inc., 514
 
F.3d 856 (9th Cir. 2007), the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals
 (Ninth Circuit) directly addressed the question of whether an
 amended complaint containing allegations contrary to a prior
 
12 HRCP Rule 11(b)(3) provides in relevant part:
 
(b) Representations to court. By presenting to the court (whether
by signing, filing, submitting, or later advocating) a pleading,
written motion, or other paper, an attorney or unrepresented party
is certifying that to the best of the person's knowledge,
information, and belief, formed after an inquiry reasonable under
the circumstances:
 . . . 
(3) the allegations and other factual contentions have evidentiary
support or, if specifically so identified, are likely to have
evidentiary support after a reasonable opportunity for further
investigation or discovery[.]
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complaint necessarily constituted a sham pleading or was brought
 
in bad faith. Id. at 858. There, the district court had struck
 
allegations in an amended complaint because they contradicted
 allegations in a prior complaint. The Ninth Circuit noted that:
 
By striking the allegations in PAE's amended complaint
as a "sham," the district court effectively resolved those
allegations on the merits. In other words, it determined
that the allegations in the amended complaint were unfounded
because they contradicted (in the district court's view)
earlier allegations PAE made in its original complaint. But
the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure do not authorize a
 district court to adjudicate claims on the merits at this
early stage in the proceedings; the court may only review
claims for legal sufficiency. See Fed.R.Civ.P. 12(b).
Adjudication on the merits must await summary judgment or
trial.
 
Id.
 
The court thus directly posed the question before it,
 
and answered the question, as follows: "Does the fact that an
 
amended complaint (or answer) contains an allegation that is
 apparently contrary to an earlier iteration of the same pleading
 render the later pleading a sham? The answer is: not
 necessarily." Id. The court explained that:
 
Even assuming that the two pleadings were irreconcilably at
odds with each other, this would not, by itself, establish
that the later pleading is a sham.
 
At the time a complaint is filed, the parties are
often uncertain about the facts and the law; and yet, prompt
filing is encouraged and often required by a statute of
limitations, laches, the need to preserve evidence and other
such concerns. In recognition of these uncertainties, we do
not require complaints to be verified, see Fed.R.Civ.P.
 
11(a), and we allow pleadings in the alternative—even if the
alternatives are mutually exclusive. As the litigation
progresses, and each party learns more about its case and
that of its opponents, some allegations fall by the wayside
as legally or factually unsupported. This rarely means that
those allegations were brought in bad faith or that the
pleading that contained them was a sham. Parties usually
abandon claims because, over the passage of time and through
diligent work, they have learned more about the available
evidence and viable legal theories, and wish to shape their
allegations to conform to these newly discovered realities.
We do not call this process sham pleading; we call it
litigation.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Id. at 858-59.13
 
However, if Rule 11 procedures are followed and bad
 
faith is established, this would certainly warrant denial of a
 
motion to amend a pleading. As expressed by the Ninth Circuit:
 
This does not mean, of course, that allegations in a
complaint can never be frivolous, or that a district court
can never determine that a complaint or answer was filed in
bad faith. But the mechanism for doing so is in Rule 11,
which deals specifically with bad faith conduct. MPRI points
to Rule 11 as a source of the district court's authority for
the order it entered here. But Rule 11 can play no role in
this case because the district court did not invoke the
 rule's procedural safeguards, nor did it employ the rule's
substantive standard, which would have required a finding
that PAE or its counsel acted in bad faith.
 
Id. at 859.
 
We adopt the above views quoted from PAE Government
 
Services, Inc.  Moreover, as to Reddy, the Ninth Circuit in PAE
 
Government Services, Inc. read its own precedent as simply
 
"stand[ing] for the unremarkable proposition that, where a
 complaint cannot be cured by amendment, the district court may
 deny leave to amend under Rule 15." 514 F.3d at 859 n.4; but see
 Bradley v. Chiron Corp., 136 F.3d 1317, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 1998)
 (holding that the district court did not abuse its discretion in
 striking allegations in an amended complaint that were materially
 different than prior allegations and relying in part on Reddy). 
Even if we fully consider the statement in Reddy that an amended
 complaint "may only allege other facts consistent with the
 challenged pleading[,]" 912 F.2d at 297 (internal quotation marks
 omitted), we do not believe that it sets the better course. 
Rather, as discussed in PAE Government Services, Inc., we hold
 that a proposed amended complaint asserting allegations that are
 inconsistent or contrary to a prior complaint does not, in and of
 itself, constitute bad faith or a sham pleading. However,
 
13 The HRCP does not require complaints to be verified and allows
pleadings in the alternative. See HRCP Rule 11(a); HRCP Rule 8(a) and (e)(2). 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
proceedings pursuant to HRCP Rule 11 can establish bad faith
 
warranting a court's denial of leave to file such an amendment.14
 
We conclude that under the circumstances in this case,
 
Plaintiffs' Motion to Amend was not brought in bad faith. 
Although Plaintiffs' counsel certainly had an obligation to
 comply with HRCP Rule 11 in filing the initial complaint and any
 other pleadings, no proceedings were undertaken pursuant to Rule
 11 and the circuit court's denial of the Motion to Amend was not
 based on a bad faith determination under Rule 11. Further, it is
 significant that before filing the Motion to Amend, Plaintiffs
 received discovery responses from Dole Food Company, Inc. which
 raised a question about whether Dole Food Company, Inc. was an
 employer of Adams or Ng. Specifically, in its responses to
 Plaintiffs' request for admissions, Dole Food Company, Inc.
 stated that the information known to or readily obtainable by it
 was insufficient to admit or deny: that Adams or Ng were not in
 the "employment" of Dole Food Company, Inc. during the times
 alleged in the complaint; or that Dole Food Company, Inc. did not
 issue any federal IRS forms W-4, W-2, or 1099 to Adams or Ng
 during time periods alleged in the complaint. The Plaintiffs'
 request for leave to amend the complaint based upon this recently
 discovered information was not in bad faith.
 
2. Undue Delay and Prejudice
 
The circuit court apparently accepted the Dole
 
Defendants' argument that permitting the Plaintiffs to amend
 their complaint would be prejudicial because the Motion to
 Dismiss had already been filed, further delay would result, and
 the parties would have to work up another motion to dismiss.
 
Plaintiffs' filing of the Motion to Amend after the 
Motion to Dismiss was filed does not in and of itself warrant denial of the Motion to Amend. In Hirasa, the Hawai
'i Supreme 
14 By our holding, we do not preclude the possibility that other
procedures or grounds may establish bad faith for purposes of denying leave to
amend a complaint.
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court held that the trial court abused its discretion in denying
 
a motion to amend, even though it was filed after a motion to
 dismiss, because the trial court failed to state any substantial
 reasons for the denial and, with the amended complaint, claims
 could be asserted on the merits. 68 Haw. at 25-26, 702 P.2d 772,
 775-76. Here, the circuit court did not provide any substantial
 reasons for denying the Motion to Amend, and as discussed in
 section III.B.3 below, the proposed amended complaint asserts
 non-futile claims.
 
Additionally, prejudice or undue delay warranting
 
denial of leave to amend has been found in cases where the movant
 has waited multiple years to request leave to amend. See Keawe
 
v. Hawaiian Elec. Co., 65 Haw. 232, 239, 649 P.2d 1149, 1154
 (1982) (upholding the trial court's denial of a motion to amend
 on prejudice grounds where the movant waited approximately four
 years and after dismissal had been granted to request leave to
 amend the complaint); see also R.S. Ellsworth, Inc. v. AMFAC Fin.
 Corp., 65 Haw. 345, 352, 652 P.2d 1114, 1119 (1982) (rejecting
 party's request for remand to amend complaint filed six years
 prior). In this case, Plaintiffs filed their complaint on
 June 29, 2007; the Dole Defendants filed their Motion to Dismiss
 on March 3, 2008; Plaintiffs served Dole Food Company, Inc. with
 a request for admissions on April 18, 2008; the Dole Food
 Company, Inc. served its responses to the request for admissions
 on May 16, 2008; and Plaintiffs filed their Motion to Amend on
 July 21, 2008. Thus, Plaintiffs requested leave to amend
 approximately one year after filing their complaint, four months
 after the Dole Defendants filed their Motion to Dismiss (which
 was still pending), and two months after Dole Food Company, Inc.
 served its response to the request for admissions. These
 circumstances do not rise to the level of undue delay or
 prejudice.
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3. Futility
 
The circuit court apparently accepted the Dole 
Defendants' argument that permitting Plaintiffs to amend would be 
futile. Where proposed amendments to a complaint would not survive a motion to dismiss, this court should affirm the denial of leave to amend on futility grounds. See Office of Hawaiian 
Affairs v. State, 110 Hawai
'i 338, 365, 133 P.3d 767, 794 (2006).
a. No WCL Bar
 
The Dole Defendants assert that even if amended, the
 
claims would be barred by the WCL. We disagree. The proposed
 amended complaint would no longer allege that the Dole Defendants
 were Adams and Ng's employer, but rather that non-parties
 Castle & Cook, Inc. and Dole Packaged Foods, Inc. were the
 employers. Taking the amended allegations as true, for purposes
 of a motion to dismiss, the WCL would not bar the claims against
 the Dole Defendants.
15
 
b. Conspiracy and Intentional Tort Claims
 
The Dole Defendants further argue that, even without
 
WCL exclusivity, the conspiracy and intentional tort claims would
 not survive a motion to dismiss because they fail to state
 cognizable claims.
 
"Under Hawai
'i's notice pleading approach, it is no 
longer necessary to plead legal theories with precision." Tokuhisa v. Cutter Mgmt. Co., 122 Hawai
'i 181, 192, 223 P.3d 246, 
257 (App. 2009) (quoting Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 93 Hawai 'i 
1, 4, 994 P.2d 1047, 1050 (2000)) (internal quotation marks and ellipses omitted). "Hawaii's rules of notice pleading require that a complaint set forth a short and plain statement of the claim that provides defendant with fair notice of what the 
15 Whether the amended allegations can stand up against a summary
judgment motion is a separate matter that we do not address. In this regard,
we note that we have denied the Dole Defendants' motion requesting that we
take judicial notice of certain documents they contend bear on the question of
which entity employed Adams and Ng. Such information is outside the pleadings
and not relevant to our review in this appeal as to the Motion to Dismiss and
the Motion to Amend decided by the circuit court.
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
plaintiff's claim is and the grounds upon which the claim rests. 
Pleadings must be construed liberally." Id. (quoting Genesys 
Data Techs., Inc. v. Genesys Pac. Techs., Inc., 95 Hawai 'i 33, 
41, 18 P.3d 895, 903 (2001)). 
Moreover, consistent with the mandate of HRCP Rule 8(f) that
'[a]ll pleadings shall be so construed as to do substantialjustice,' the Hawai' i Supreme Court has rejected 'the
approach that pleading is a game of skill in which onemisstep by counsel may be decisive to the outcome and inturn accepted the principle that the purpose of pleading isto facilitate a proper decision on the merits. 
Id. (quoting Hall v. Kim, 53 Haw. 215, 221, 491 P.2d 541, 545
 
(1971)).
 
HRCP Rule 9(b) provides in relevant part that "[i]n all 
averments of fraud or mistake, the circumstances constituting fraud or mistake shall be stated with particularity." As the Hawai
'i Supreme Court stated in Larsen v. Pacesetter Systems, 
Inc., 74 Haw. 1, 30, 837 P.2d 1273, 1288 (1992), "[t]he rule is designed, in part, to insure the particularized information necessary for a defendant to prepare an effective defense to a claim which embraces a wide variety of potential conduct."
(1) Conspiracy Claim
 
With respect to the conspiracy claim, the Dole 
Defendants argued, and the circuit court apparently agreed, that the conspiracy claim was futile because it did not set forth any underlying tort as required by the Hawai
'i Supreme Court in Ellis 
v. Crockett, 51 Haw. 45, 57, 451 P.2d 814, 822 (1969). 
The proposed amended conspiracy claim is similar as
 
alleged in the original complaint, except that the amended
 complaint no longer alleges that the Dole Defendants employed
 Adams and Ng, were alter egos of their employers, or are
 vicariously liable for their employers. Plaintiffs instead
 submit that the amended complaint would clarify that their claims
 do not seek to recover for "work injuries." In this context, the
 proposed amended conspiracy claim alleges:
 
40. . . . Defendants and/or their predecessors in
interest, their subsidiaries and/or affiliates, knowingly
agreed, contrived, combined, confederated and conspired
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
among themselves and with others to cause the Plaintiffs'
injuries, illnesses, and diseases by exposing the Plaintiffs
to harmful and dangerous DBCP-containing products and to
deprive the Plaintiffs of the opportunity of informed free
choice as to whether to use the DBCP-containing products and
to expose themselves to the dangers. Defendants committed
 
the above-described wrongs by willfully misrepresenting and
suppressing the truth as to the risks and dangers associated
with the use of, and exposure to, Defendants' DBCP-
containing products. Each of the Defendants aided and
 abetted the other Defendants in committing the tortious acts
that caused the Plaintiffs' injuries.
 
41. In furtherance of these conspiracies, Defendants
performed the following overt acts, among others:
 
a. For many years, Defendants, individually,
jointly and in conspiracy with each other,
possessed medical and scientific data, and
test reports, which clearly indicated
DBCP-containing products were unreasonably
dangerous, hazardous, deleterious,
carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic and
potentially deadly;
 
b. despite medical and scientific data,
literature and test reports possessed by or available
to Defendants, Defendants, individually, jointly and
in conspiracy with each other, fraudulently, willfully
and maliciously withheld, concealed and suppressed the
medical and scientific data, literature and test
reports regarding the risks of DBCP-containing
products from the workers who were exposed to them and
using them, the public, and the agricultural
community;
 
c. caused to be released, published, and
disseminated medical and scientific data, literature,
and test reports containing information and statements
regarding the risks of DBCP-containing products which
Defendants knew were incorrect, incomplete, outdated,
and misleading;
 
d. distorted the results of medical
 
examinations conducted upon persons, who were using
DBCP-containing products and being exposed to the
products by falsely stating and/or concealing the
nature and extent of the harm which they had suffered;
 
e. by the false and fraudulent
representations, omission, and concealments set forth
above, the Defendants individually, jointly, and in
conspiracy with each other, intended to induce the
Plaintiffs to rely upon the false and fraudulent
representations, omissions, and concealments and to
continue to expose them to the dangers inherent in the
use of and exposure to Defendants' DBCP-containing
products.
 
42. The Plaintiffs reasonably and in good faith,
relied upon the false and fraudulent representations,
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
omissions, and concealments made by the Defendants regarding
the nature of the DBCP-containing products.
 
43. As a direct and proximate result of the
Plaintiffs' reliance on the Defendants' false and fraudulent
 representations, omissions, and concealments, Plaintiffs
have sustained damages as described below.
 
(emphasis added).
 
The Dole Defendants correctly assert that "there can be 
no civil claim based upon a conspiracy alone." Ellis, 51 Haw. at 
57, 451 P.2d at 822; see also Weinberg v. Mauch, 78 Hawai 'i 40, 
49, 890 P.2d 277, 286 (1995) (dismissing conspiracy claim because 
the party failed to set forth any actionable claim based upon deceit). However, viewing the allegations in the light most favorable to the Plaintiffs and in light of Hawaii's liberal notice pleading requirements, the allegations sufficiently allege an underlying actionable claim of fraudulent misrepresentation. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has set forth the following elements 
for such a claim: 
(1) false representations were made by the defendants;
(2) with knowledge of their falsity (or without knowledge of
their truth or falsity); (3) in contemplation of plaintiff's
reliance upon these false representations; and (4) plaintiff
did rely upon them.
 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Newton Meadows v. Venture 15, Inc., 
115 Hawai 'i 232, 263, 167 P.3d 225, 256 (2007) (quoting Shoppe v. 
Gucci Am., Inc., 94 Hawai 'i 368, 386, 14 P.3d 1049, 1067 (2000)) 
(internal brackets omitted). Moreover, this claim contains sufficient particularity as required by HRCP Rule 9(b). Specifically, the Plaintiffs allege that the Dole Defendants conspired to cause the Plaintiffs' injuries by: (1) willfully misrepresenting and suppressing the truth as to the risks and dangers associated with DBCP; (2) knowingly releasing incorrect information on DBCP; (3) intending to induce the Plaintiffs to rely on these false misrepresentations; and (4) the Plaintiffs reasonably, and in good faith, relied upon these representations. 
Thus, the circuit court abused its discretion to the
 
extent that it denied leave to amend on grounds that the amended
 conspiracy claim was futile.
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2) Intentional Tort Claim
 
The Dole Defendants argued, and the circuit court
 
apparently agreed, that the intentional tort claim would be
 
futile because it is not a cognizable claim and is not specific
 enough. The proposed amended intentional tort claim is similar
 as alleged in the original complaint, except that the amended
 complaint no longer alleges that the Dole Defendants employed
 Adams and Ng, were alter egos of their employers, or are
 vicariously liable for their employers. Plaintiffs instead
 submit that the amended complaint would clarify that their claims
 do not seek to recover for "work injuries." In this context, the
 amended intentional tort claim alleges: 
52. The injuries of the Plaintiffs are also due to
the intentional malfeasance of Defendants and/or their
subsidiaries and/or affiliates and are the direct and
proximate result of these Defendants' volitional acts. Each
 of these Defendants knew of the dangers caused by DBCP-
containing products, yet they knowingly, consciously and
with substantial certainty of the consequences of their
actions proximately caused the Plaintiffs' injuries in the
following respects:
 
a. Defendants knowingly concealed information
concerning the adverse health effects of DBCP or DBCP-
containing products from the Plaintiffs, the public,
and the medical, scientific and agricultural
communities;
 
b. Defendants knew of the hazards posed by
DBCP-containing products, yet, intentionally exposed
Plaintiffs to DBCP products in operations involving
the Plaintiffs and/or sold and distributed those DBCP
products for use involving the Plaintiffs;
 
c. Defendants knew of the hazards to the
 
Plaintiffs posed by DBCP-containing products and by
the methods of application utilized, yet continued to
use these methods and/or to allow others to continue
to use these methods;
 
d. Defendants knew of the hazards to the
 
Plaintiffs posed by DBCP-containing products, yet,
failed to provide adequate protective clothing and
equipment to the Plaintiffs and/or take steps to
ensure that the Plaintiffs were provided adequate
protection;
 
e. Defendants knew of the hazards to the 
Plaintiffs posed by DBCP-containing products, yet, did not
instruct consumers of the product, including the Plaintiff,
in proper application techniques; and 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
f. Defendants continued to sell, purchase and
use DBCP-containing products after their use was
suspended or banned by the United States government
and, therefore, after Defendants were indisputably on
notice of DBCP dangerous properties.
 
53. Plaintiffs further allege Defendants are liable
to the Plaintiffs for continuing harm resulting from the
following volitional acts of Defendants:
 
a. knowingly concealing from the Plaintiffs
knowledge of the existence, nature, and severity of
their health risks, and;
 
b. knowingly failing to take steps to enable,
alert or cause the Plaintiffs to seek medical
 treatment for their injuries.
 
(emphasis added).
 
Plaintiffs argue that this claim should be liberally 
read and construed as a claim for fraudulent concealment and/or 
for battery. We disagree that this claim can be read to support a claim for fraudulent concealment or misrepresentation. It does not contain sufficient particularized information, especially with respect to the third and fourth elements of such a claim (that the Dole Defendants falsely represented information in contemplation of the Plaintiffs' reliance and that the Plaintiffs did in fact rely upon such information). See Venture 15, Inc., 
115 Hawai
'i at 263, 167 P.3d at 256 (quoting Shoppe, 94 Hawai 'i at 
386, 14 P.3d at 1067)). 
However, we agree with the Plaintiffs that this claim 
is sufficient to allege a cause of action for battery against the Dole Defendants in their alleged capacity as non-employers of Adams and Ng. "[A] defendant causes battery when he or she intentionally causes bodily contact to the plaintiff in a way not justified by the plaintiff's apparent wishes or by a privilege, and the contact is in fact harmful or against the plaintiff's will." Williams v. Aona, 121 Hawai
'i 1, 13, 210 P.3d 501, 513 
(2009) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). The Restatement (Second) of Torts § 18 (1965) provides, in relevant part: 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
§ 18. Battery: Offensive Contact
 
(1) An actor is subject to liability to another for
battery if
 (a) he acts intending to cause a harmful or
offensive contact with the person of the other or a
third person, or an imminent apprehension of such a
contact, and
 (b) an offensive contact with the person of the
other directly or indirectly results.
 
In explaining the "contact with another's person" that is
 
required for a battery claim, comment c to this section states,
 in pertinent part:
 
It is not necessary that the contact with the other's person
be directly caused by some act of the actor. All that is
 necessary is that the actor intend to cause the other,
directly or indirectly, to come in contact with a foreign
substance in a manner which the other will reasonably regard
as offensive.
 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 18 cmt. c at 31 (1965).
 
Plaintiffs' intentional tort claim alleges that the
 
Dole Defendants, in a non-employer capacity, intentionally
 
exposed Adams and Ng to DBCP knowing of the hazards posed by the
 chemical and knowing of the hazards posed by the method of
 application utilized. This is sufficient to allege a non-futile
 battery claim. See Field v. Philadelphia Elec. Co., 565 A.2d
 
1170, 1178 (Pa. Super. 1989) (holding that allegations that
 defendant deliberately exposed plaintiff to dangerous levels of
 radiation was sufficient to allege a cause of action for
 battery).
 
The circuit court thus abused its discretion to the
 
extent that it denied leave to amend on grounds that the amended
 intentional tort claim was futile.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
We affirm the circuit court's order dismissing the
 
claims against the Dole Defendants based on the allegations in
 the complaint. However, we vacate the circuit court's order
 denying the Plaintiffs' Motion to Amend. Therefore, the Revised
 Final Judgment entered on July 14, 2010 by the Circuit Court of
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the First Circuit is vacated, and the case is remanded to the
 
circuit court for further proceedings, consistent with this
 opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Scott M. Hendler
 
(HendlerLaw, P.C.)
Jonathan Massey
(Massey & Gail LLP)
Leslie S. Fukumoto, AAL, ALC
 
for Plaintiffs-Appellants
 Melvin M. Miyagi
Ross T. Shinyama
Angela T. Thompson
(Watanabe Ing LLP)
Andrea E. Neuman
 (Gibson Dunn & Crutcher LLP)
 
for Defendants-Appellees
Dole Food Company and
Dole Fresh Fruit Company
 
25
 