NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 30500
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ORLANDO V. PECPEC, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CRIMINAL NO. 09-1-2378)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Ginoza, J.; and
Reifurth, J. concurring in part and dissenting in part)
 
Defendant-Appellant Orlando V. Pecpec ("Pecpec")
 
appeals from the Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
("Judgment"), filed on June 4, 2010, in the Family Court of the
 First Circuit ("Family Court").
1 After a jury trial, the Family
 
Court convicted Pecpec of nineteen counts of Violation of an
 Order for Protection ("Protective Order") (Counts 7-25 of the
 Complaint), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS")
 § 586-11 (Supp. 2009). The Family Court sentenced Pecpec to a
 one-year term of imprisonment for each of Counts 7-12 and 14-25,
 with terms to run concurrently. With respect to Count 13, the
 Family Court sentenced Pecpec to one year of imprisonment
 consecutive to the other sentences. 
On appeal, Pecpec argues that the Family Court erred
 
by: (1) violating his constitutional right to a unanimous verdict
 
1
 The Honorable Edward H. Kubo, Jr. presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by failing to specifically instruct the jury that its verdict
 
must be unanimous as to each count of the Complaint; and
 (2) sentencing him to a consecutive term of imprisonment in Count
 13 without giving the jury a specific unanimity instruction and
 unilaterally assigning to Count 13 conduct described in State's
 exhibit 17. Pecpec asks that we set aside his conviction and
 remand this case for a new trial on Counts 7-25. Alternatively,
 if the convictions are allowed to stand, he asks that we remand
 the case for concurrent sentencing as to Count 13. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Pecpec's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Pecpec does not identify if, or where in the 
record, he objected below to the Family Court's alleged failure to issue a specific unanimity instruction; consequently, we review for plain error. State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai' i 1, 33, 928 
P.2d 843, 875 (1996). We conclude that there was no error by the Family Court in not giving a specific unanimity instruction in this case. 
The jury was afforded sufficient guidance to know what
 
it had to conclude in order to convict on the multiple counts
 asserted against Pecpec, and there is no genuine possibility of
 jury confusion given the record in this case. The prosecution
 presented evidence and asserted throughout this case that Pecpec
 committed a total of twenty-five acts (voice mails or texts)
 which were the basis for the twenty-five counts of violating a
 Protective Order that prohibited Pecpec from contacting the
 complainant, his ex-wife.
 
Counts 1-6 asserted that Pecpec violated the Protective
 
Order on October 19, 2009. Count 7 asserted that Pecpec violated
 the Protective Order on October 22, 2009. Counts 8-15 asserted
 that Pecpec violated the Protective Order on November 6, 2009. 
Count 16 asserted that Pecpec violated the Protective Order on
 November 7, 2009. Count 17 asserted that Pecpec violated the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Protective Order on November 8, 2009. Counts 18-22 asserted that
 
Pecpec violated the Protective Order on November 6, 2009. Counts
 23-25 asserted that Pecpec violated the Protective Order on
 November 7, 2009.
 
In the presentation of the State's evidence, the
 
complaining witness testified that she had saved voice mails that
 Pecpec had left on her office phone. The voice mails were
 recorded onto CD's that were admitted into evidence and played
 for the jury, as follows: on October 22, one voice mail (exhibit
 23); on November 6, 2009, eight voice mails (exhibits 15 through
 22); on November 7, 2009, one voice mail (exhibit 14); on
 November 8, 2009, one voice mail (exhibit 13). Each of the CD's
 were marked with the date of the voice mail.
 
The complaining witness further testified that Pecpec
 
had sent her text messages on her cell phone, which she
 photographed with a digital camera and had enlarged. The
 photographs of the text messages were admitted into evidence and
 published to the jury, as follows: on November 6, 2009, five text
 messages (exhibits 5 through 9); and on November 7, 2009, three
 text messages (exhibits 10 through 12). Each of the photographs
 of the text messages was marked with the date of the text
 message.
 
There were no exhibits admitted into evidence
 
pertaining to contacts by Pecpec on October 19, 2009, which were
 charged in Counts 1-6.
 
During the defense case, the prosecution's cross-
examination of Pecpec focused on and elicited testimony about the
 voice mails that had already been played in court and one
 particular text message. When the deputy prosecutor asked about
 the voice mails that had been played in court, Pecpec affirmed
 that he had heard the voice mails played in court, that it was
 his voice on the voice mails, and that those were voice mails he
 had left for complainant. The deputy prosecutor also questioned
 Pecpec about a text message reflected in exhibit 5, with Pecpec
 admitting that he wrote it and sent it to complainant on
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
November 6, 2009. Although Pecpec, on direct examination by his
 
counsel, testified variously as to whether he had contacted the
 complainant as she asserted, the prosecution limited its cross-
examination of Pecpec to alleged contacts supported by the
 exhibits.
 
For each of the twenty-five counts, the Family Court
 
instructed the jury as to the date of the alleged offense and the
 elements the prosecution was required to prove. The Family Court
 further instructed the jury that their verdict must be unanimous
 in two ways. First, the Family Court gave the following
 instruction:
 
You must not reveal to the Court or to any other
person how the jury stands numerically or otherwise until
you have reached a unanimous verdict and it has been
received by the Court.
 
A verdict must be –- must represent the considered
judgment of each juror. In –- and in order to return a
 verdict, it is necessary that each juror agree thereto. In
 other words, your verdict must be unanimous.
 
(Emphasis added). Second, the Family Court instructed,
 
separately as to each count, that: "you may bring in either one
 of the following verdicts: 1) not guilty, or 2) guilty as charged
 of Violation of an Order for Protection. Your verdict must be
 
unanimous." (Emphasis added).
 
In closing argument, the prosecution tied the twenty-
five counts to the twenty-five alleged incidents of Pecpec
 contacting complainant.
 
Okay. So we're talking about 25 counts of Violation
of an Order for Protection. We know that they fall into two
categories -– voice mails and text messages. The voice
 mails would be your first 17 counts, Counts [1] to [17].
The text messages would be your next eight counts, Counts
[18] to [25].
 
Now, let's look first at the voice mails. The voice
 
mails are grouped in terms of the dates of incident. Counts
 [1] through [6] are from October 19, 2009; Count [7] is from
October 22; Counts [8] to [15] are November 6; Count [16]
from November 7; and Count [17] is from November 8.
 
Now, you listened to the voice mails. These voice
 
mails are also associated with these dates. Exhibit 23 is
 the voice mail from October 22; Exhibit[s] 15 to 22 are from
November 6; Exhibit 14 is from November 7; Exhibit 13 is
from November 8.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5Switching now to the text messages.  Counts [18] to
[25], they are also grouped in terms of the dates of
incident.  Counts [18] to [22] are from November 6; Counts
[23] to [25] are from November 7.  For each of these text
messages there are exhibits.  Exhibits 5 through 9 are the
text messages from November 6; and Exhibits 10 to 12 are the
text messages from November 7.
After deliberations, the jury returned a verdict
finding Pecpec guilty as to Counts 7-25.  Pecpec was found not
guilty with respect to Counts 1-6, in other words for each count
alleged to have occurred on October 19, 2009 for which there had
been no exhibits admitted.
Relying on Arceo, Pecpec contends that each of the
counts could be supported by numerous contacts and that "[i]t
cannot be assumed that the Jury took each exhibit identified by
number, date and time, and unanimously ascribed it to a
particular count of the complaint."  He thus argues that either
the prosecution was required to elect the specific act upon which
it was relying (for each count) or the Family Court was required
to instruct that each juror must agree that the same criminal act
has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt (for each count).  
The decision in Arceo addressed a significantly
different situation, and the ruling and reasoning in that case do
not suggest that a specific unanimity instruction would be
required in the straightforward circumstances of this case.  In
Arceo, the defendant was charged with two counts, one count of
sexual assault in the third degree (sexual contact) and one count
of sexual assault in the first degree (sexual penetration).  In
its presentation of the evidence, the prosecution elicited
testimony from the victim about numerous incidents of sexual
contact and numerous incidents of sexual penetration.  After
reviewing decisions from other states and a line of federal
cases, the Hawai #i Supreme Court concluded that:
when separate and distinct culpable acts are subsumed within
a single count charging a sexual assault-any one of which
could support a conviction thereunder-and the defendant is
ultimately convicted by a jury of the charged offense, the
defendant's constitutional right to a unanimous verdict is
violated unless one or both of the following occurs: (1) atNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or before the close of its case-in-chief, the prosecution is
required to elect the specific act upon which it is relying
to establish the "conduct" element of the charged offense;
or (2) the trial court gives the jury a specific unanimity
instruction, i.e., an instruction that advises the jury that
all twelve of its members must agree that the same
underlying criminal act has been proved beyond a reasonable
doubt.
 
84 Hawai' i at 32-33, 928 P.2d at 874-75 (emphasis added). As the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court further explained in State v. Valentine, 93 
Hawai'i 199, 208, 998 P.2d 479, 488 (2000): 
two conditions must converge before an Arceo unanimity
instruction, absent an election by the prosecution, is
necessary: (1) at trial, the prosecution adduces proof of
two or more separate and distinct culpable acts; and (2) the
prosecution seeks to submit to the jury that only one
offense was committed.
 
Unlike in Arceo, in the instant case there was a separate count
 
charged for each alleged incident in which Pecpec contacted the
 complainant, either by voice mail or text message.
 
Other Hawai' i cases are similarly distinguishable. In 
State v. Mundon, 121 Hawai' i 339, 219 P.3d 1126 (2009), the 
defendant was charged with two counts of terroristic threatening in the first degree (TT1), the prosecution argued to the jury that there were two incidents where the defendant had threatened the complainant, but the jury convicted on only one count of TT1. The Hawai' i Supreme Court concluded that, because a specific 
unanimity instruction was not given, a specific act was not tied to a specific count, and the defendant was acquitted on one of the TT1 counts, 
there is a "genuine possibility" that different jurors
concluded that Mundon committed different acts. In other
 words, it is possible that some jurors concluded that Mundon
committed TT1 when he used the knife in the truck and others
 concluded that Mundon committed such offense when Mundon and
 the complainant were struggling with the knife in the sand.
 
Id. at 354-55, 219 P.3d at 1141-42.
 
Similarly, in State v. Auld, 114 Hawai' i 135, 157 P.3d 
574 (App. 2007), this court held that the defendant was entitled 
to a specific unanimity instruction where the State contended and presented evidence that the defendant had threatened different individuals and in one of the counts it was alleged that 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defendant had threatened "Salina, Kiana 'and/or' Liane." Id. at
 
143, 157 P.3d at 582 (emphasis added). In that circumstance,
 
without an instruction requiring the jury to agree as to the
 person(s) threatened, the jury could have convicted based on
 different findings as to who had been threatened.
 
In the case at bar, because the prosecution developed 
its evidence and argued to the jury such that each alleged contact by Pecpec supported a count against him on a particular date, there is no "genuine possibility" that jurors concluded that Pecpec committed different underlying acts to support the convictions. The constitutional right articulated in Arceo, Mundon and Auld concerns whether there is unanimous agreement by the jurors as to the conduct committed by the defendant to support conviction. In the context of this case, that right has not been violated. In Arceo, the Hawai' i Supreme Court relied in 
part on a line of federal cases arising out of United States v. Echeverry, 719 F.2d 974 (9th Cir. 1983). In Echeverry, although the facts in that case required a specific unanimity instruction, the Ninth Circuit noted that "in a routine case when a jury is presented with multiple counts or schemes," a general instruction to the jury that their verdict had to be unanimous could be sufficient. Id. at 974. See also United States v. Anguiano, 873 
F.2d 1314, 1319 (9th Cir. 1989) (holding that specific unanimity instruction was not required where there was no indication of jury confusion and defendant's assertion of jury confusion was based on mere speculation); United States v. Wright, 742 F.2d 1215, 1222 (9th Cir. 1984) (holding that there was nothing in the record to suggest "a genuine possibility of jury confusion[]" and "[b]ecause there is no showing that this case was unique, the standard unanimity instruction was adequate."), overruled on other grounds by United States v. Powell, 469 U.S. 57 (1984); United States v. Ferris, 719 F.2d 1405, 1407 (9th Cir. 1983) (stating that "[i]n the ordinary case, . . . the general instruction that a unanimous verdict is required will suffice.") 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Here, with respect to the dates on which multiple
 
counts were charged for Counts 7-25, there was a one to one
 
relationship between the number of counts and the number of
 exhibits reflecting the prohibited contacts. The prosecution
 explained this relationship, without contradiction, in closing
 argument. Most significantly, for Counts 7-25, the jury
 convicted on all the counts for dates on which multiple counts
 were charged. For this to occur, the jury must have unanimously
 found that Pecpec engaged in each of the prohibited contacts
 reflected in the exhibits. Accordingly, Pecpec is not entitled
 to any relief on his claim that the Family Court erred in failing
 to give a specific unanimity instruction.
 
That said, we note that the specific unanimity issue
 
raised in this appeal stems from the manner in which the
 prosecution chose to charge the alleged offenses. In particular,
 for the dates on which multiple counts were charged, the
 prosecution did not include details in the charging language that
 would distinguish one count from another. Given the evidence
 presented, that would have been easy for the prosecution to do. 
The prosecution could have distinguished the counts by alleging
 the time in which the voice mails and text messages were received
 or the content of the voice mails and text messages. Charging in
 this fashion would have eliminated any claim or issue regarding
 specific unanimity.
 
(2) Pecpec's second point of error is also reviewed
 
for plain error because he does not point to where in the record
 he objected to consecutive sentencing for Count 13, and it does
 not appear that any such objection was made. Pecpec argues that,
 without a specific unanimity instruction, the Family Court erred
 when it "unilaterally assigned to this particular count, the
 conduct portrayed in State's Exhibit 17." Pecpec's arguments are
 unavailing. First, the Family Court did not "unilaterally"
 assign exhibit 17 to Count 13. Rather, the Family Court
 determined that Count 13 was based on exhibit 17 after conferring
 with counsel for both the prosecution and the defense, and
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defense counsel did not object but simply indicated he did not
 
know which count related to exhibit 17 because he did not have
 his complete file. Second, similar to our analysis as to
 Pecpec's first point of error, it is clear from the record in
 this case that the voice mail left on November 6, 2009, as
 contained in exhibit 17, was an act by Pecpec upon which the jury
 unanimously agreed to convict. Not only were the convictions for
 contacts on November 6, 2009 supported by an equal number of
 exhibits submitted by the prosecution, but as noted above, Pecpec
 admitted on cross-examination that he had left each of the voice
 mails that had been played in court, which included exhibit 17. 
We find no merit in Pecpec's second point of error.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the June 4, 2010 Amended
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed in the Family Court of
 the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 25, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Stuart N. Fujioka
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Chief Judge
Donn Fudo
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
 
9
 