Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAD-13-0000451 17-JUL-2013 
07:55 AM 
SCAD-13-0000451
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
OFFICE OF DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL, Petitioner,
 
vs.
 
DIANA R. DANMEYER, Respondent.
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING
 
(ODC 11-060-8984)
 
ORDER IMPOSING A PUBLIC CENSURE
 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, Acoba, McKenna, and Pollack, JJ.)
 
Upon consideration of the April 26, 2013 Report and
 
Recommendation of the Disciplinary Board of the Supreme Court of
 
the State of Hawai' i, and the record, it appears Respondent 
Diana R. Danmeyer and the Office of Disciplinary Counsel (ODC)
 have voluntarily stipulated to facts, conclusions of law, and
 
recommended discipline in ODC Case No. 11-060-8984, which the
 
Disciplinary Board has endorsed and submitted to this court. 
This court is not bound by the stipulations of the parties or the
 
recommendation of the Board but reviews the matter de novo and
 
may impose discipline based upon the factual admissions set forth
 
in parties’ stipulations. See Office of Disciplinary Counsel v.
  
Au, 107 Hawai 'i 327, 336, 113 P.3d 203, 212 (2005); Rule 2.7(e) 
of the Rules of the Supreme Court of the State of Hawai' i (RSCH). Based upon a review of the stipulated facts, this court 
concludes, by clear and convincing evidence, that Respondent 
Danmeyer, by failing to perform basic legal research and failing 
to inquire with the relevant government authorities regarding the 
veracity of the “redemption theory” of finance, failed to 
demonstrate the requisite legal knowledge, skill, thoroughness, 
and preparation reasonably necessary to fulfill her professional 
obligations to the trial court, in violation of Rule 1.1 of the 
Hawai'i Rules of Professional Conduct (HRPC), with every oral and 
written assertion of the discredited “redemption theory” of finance submitted to the court a separation violation of HRPC 
Rule 1.1, and further that Respondent Danmeyer, by asserting the 
veracity of the “redemption theory” of finance, without having 
performed the requisite research or preparation to determine its 
veracity, asserted arguments to the trial court that were 
baseless and frivolous, in violation of HRPC Rule 3.1, every oral 
and written submission in support of the veracity of “redemption 
theory,” and its purported ability to lawfully discharge debt, a 
separation violation of HRPC Rule 3.1. Such conduct warrants a 
period of suspension, in the absence of mitigating factors. See, 
e.g., ODC v. Ng, SCAD-12-0000414 (March 1, 2013); ODC v. Shea, 
SCAD-11-0000777 (May 1, 2012). The court further concludes, in 
aggravation, Danmeyer’s conduct evinced a pattern of misconduct 
and represents multiple violations of the HRPC, but, in 
mitigation, notes Danmeyer’s full and free disclosure to the 
disciplinary authorities, her cooperative attitude, the sincere 
expressions of remorse Danmeyer has made in regards to the 
2
 matter, and the absence of any prior disciplinary record. 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Respondent Diana R. Danmeyer
 
is publicly censured, pursuant to RSCH Rule 2.3(a)(3).
 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that, pursuant to RSCH Rule
 
2.3(d), Respondent Danmeyer shall complete, within 180 days from
 
the date of entry of this order, at her own expense, a course on
 
effective legal research offered by the Practicing Attorneys
 
Liability Management Society or an equivalent, accredited course
 
and shall submit proof of completion to this court within 190
 
days from the date of entry of this order or good cause for an
 
extension. Failure to timely complete the required course or to
 
timely submit proof of completion may result in further
 
sanctions, including a period of suspension.
 
IT IS FINALLY ORDERED that, pursuant to RSCH Rule
 
2.3(c), Respondent Danmeyer shall bear the costs of these
 
proceedings, upon the timely submission of a verified bill of
 
costs by ODC.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 17, 2013. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 
/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr. 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
3
 