Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAD-16-0000037 21-APR-2016 01:21 PM 
SCAD-16-0000037
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
OFFICE OF DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL,
Petitioner,
 
vs.
 
LANCE CASTROVERDE,
Respondent.
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING
 
(ODC CASE NO. 14-003-9146)
 
ORDER OF DISBARMENT
 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, Pollack, and Wilson, JJ.,
and Intermediate Court of Appeals Associate Judge Ginoza,
in place of McKenna, J., recused)
 
Upon consideration of the January 21, 2016 report 
submitted to this court by the Disciplinary Board of the Supreme 
Court of the State of Hawai' i and the record, we find and 
conclude, by clear and convincing evidence, that the record supports the Board’s Findings of Fact, with the exception that we find a portion of the Board’s Finding of Fact No. 17 is clearly erroneous, insofar as a review of the record demonstrates Respondent Lance Castroverde included the notation “CFT Loan” on the relevant checks, not “ACFT Loan” as found by the Board. See Dockets 1:12, 3:298, 302, 306-07, 309, 311, 327, 329, 336-37,
 
343-44, 347, 368, 371. 
We conclude by clear and convincing evidence that 
Respondent Castroverde violated the following provisions of the Hawai'i Rules of Professional Conduct (HRPC) (1994) through the 
following conduct: 
Respondent Castroverde engaged in prohibited conflicts
 
of interest with multiple clients, representing three separate
 
violations of HRPC Rule 1.7(a), by representing both the sellers
 
and the buyers of the home at 722 Lalani Circle, in Wailuku,
 
Maui, including by drafting and overseeing the execution of the
 
Agreement of Sale, where the interests of the parties were
 
directly adverse to each other and it was not reasonable for
 
Respondent Castroverde to believe the representation of each
 
party would not adversely affect his relationship with the other
 
party and where, even if such a belief were reasonable, he did
 
not obtain the consent of the parties after consultation; again
 
by engaging in the same conduct in drafting and executing the
 
“Collection Agreement and Holding Agreement for Agreement of
 
Sale” (hereinafter, the “Collection and Holding Agreement”); and
 
again by overseeing the administration of the Collection and
 
Holding agreement.
 
We conclude Respondent Castroverde violated HRPC Rule
 
2
 1.7(b) by representing the sellers and the buyers as a result of
 
an introduction by the Principal at TLI, a mortgage broker, when
 it was unreasonable to believe the representations would not be
 adversely affected by Respondent Castroverde’s pre-existing
 relationship with, and responsibilities to, the Principal of TLI,
 who was Respondent Castroverde’s client and with whom Respondent
 Castroverde was involved in the personal lending of funds, and
 where Respondent Castroverde did not obtain the consent of the
 sellers or the buyers after consultation, even if it had been
 reasonable to believe there would be no adverse effect. 
We conclude Respondent Castroverde misappropriated
 
client funds, in violation of HRPC Rule 1.15(c), by removing from
 his client trust account, between November 30, 2007 and December
 18, 2007, at least $6,258.91 of the buyers’ funds to which he was
 not entitled, removing between December 18, 2007 and January 25,
 2008 at least $12,912.91 of the buyers’ funds to which he was not
 entitled, removing from his client trust account, by a December
 3, 2007 check, the “base collection fee portion of the Initial
 Reserve” (being account fees for 12 months, at $104.17 per month)
 and the “account costs portion of the Initial Reserve” (being
 account costs for 12 months, of $5.00 per month), in violation of
 the aforementioned Collection and Holding Agreement, which
 required those funds to be held in trust as a reserve.
 
We conclude Respondent Castroverde violated HRPC Rule
 
3
 1.5(a) by charging an unreasonable fee as follows: Pursuant to
 
HRS § 449-3 (1996), Respondent Castroverde, as an attorney, was
 exempt from the regulation of escrow deposits if he did not
 charge an escrow fee. However, we find Respondent Castroverde
 did charge an escrow fee, as the buyers paid Respondent
 Castroverde $10,625.00 to arrange the transaction and escrow, and
 paid monthly charges of $104.17 and $5.00 to administer the
 escrow. By charging said fee, Respondent Castroverde was
 obligated to comply with the requirements of HRS Ch. 449 and, as
 he did not comply with those requirements and therefore could not
 justify the escrow fees he charged, those fees were unreasonable,
 in violation of HRPC Rule 1.5(a).
 
In the Collection and Holding Agreement, Respondent
 
Castroverde agreed to provide both parties periodic reports when
 appropriate, including an annual report, but did not, and,
 therefore, did not timely render accounts to any of the parties
 concerning the funds held in trust, in escrow, in violation of
 HRPC Rule 1.15(f)(3).
 
Respondent Castroverde did not record the Agreement of
 
Sale with the Bureau of Conveyances, which was necessary to
 protect the rights and interests of the buyers, conduct which we
 conclude rises to the level of incompetence, in violation of HRPC
 Rule 1.1. 
In addition, we conclude Respondent Castroverde’s
 
4
 failure to record the Agreement of Sale with the Bureau of
 
Conveyances assisted his client in successfully obtaining,
 through the Principal at TLI, a mortgage on the property under
 false pretenses, in violation of HRPC Rules 1.2(d) and 8.4(c),
 and that Respondent Castroverde failed to otherwise disclose the
 Agreement of Sale to the new mortgagee, thereby violating HRPC
 Rule 4.1(b). We note Respondent Castroverde specifically
 referenced the potential for said mortgage in the Agreement of
 Sale which he drafted for the parties.
 
As required by the Collection and Holding Agreement,
 
Respondent Castroverde provided the sellers with interest
 payments from funds paid by the buyers to Respondent Castroverde,
 but Respondent Castroverde’s checks to the sellers characterized
 the funds as interest on a loan from a Castroverde Family Trust,
 a false notation requested by the sellers in order to meet income
 requirements to obtain a loan concerning other property in
 Wailuku. By placing the false notations on the checks provided
 by him to the sellers, Respondent Castroverde violated HRPC Rules
 1.2(d) and 8.4(c). 
With regard to a loan from the sellers to Respondent
 
Castroverde of the $50,000.00 down payment held in Respondent
 Castroverde’s client trust account, Respondent Castroverde
 violated HRPC Rule 1.8(a) by engaging in a business transaction
 with the sellers where the transaction and terms on which
 
5
 Respondent Castroverde acquired an interest were not fair or
 
reasonable to the sellers, where the loan was made without giving
 the sellers a reasonable opportunity to seek the advice of
 independent counsel regarding the transaction, and where
 Respondent Castroverde did not obtain from his clients, the
 sellers, written consent to the inherent conflicts.
 
By misappropriating all but, at most, $5.17 of the
 
$50,000.00 for his use and benefit, Castroverde violated HRPC
 Rule 1.15(c).
 
With regard to a separate $61,000.00 loan made by one
 
of the sellers to Respondent Castroverde, Respondent Castroverde
 violated HRPC Rule 1.8(a) by entering into the $61,000.00 loan
 transaction with his client, the seller, where the transaction
 and its terms were not fair and reasonable to the seller, where
 Respondent Castroverde did not fully disclose in writing to the
 client the transaction or its terms, and did not provide the
 client with a reasonable opportunity to consult independent
 counsel concerning the transaction.
 
By misappropriating all but, at most, $5.17 of the
 
borrowed $61,000.00, Respondent Castroverde violated HRPC Rule
 1.15(c).
 
Finally, with regard to the documents requested by the
 
Office of Disciplinary Counsel (ODC) in its investigation of the
 above conduct, and not subsequently provided by Respondent
 
6
 Castroverde, we conclude that Respondent Castroverde violated
 
HRPC Rules 8.1(b) and 8.4(d) by failing to provide upon request
 (1) a copy of the Castroverde Family Trust, (2) checks from a
 Castroverde Family Trust account and related deposit slips which
 demonstrate transfers from the trust to Respondent Castroverde’s
 client trust account were made to pay the interest on the two
 loans discussed above, (3) subsidiary ledgers for client funds
 during the relevant period, and (4) quarterly lists of all client
 funds held in trust, the grand total of which agreed with the
 reconciled balance of Respondent Castroverde’s client trust
 account.
 
We conclude that, by failing to maintain subsidiary
 
ledgers for client funds for six years after the employment to
 which they related, Respondent Castroverde violated HRPC Rule
 1.15(g)(2) and that, by failing to maintain for six years after
 the representation to which they related the quarterly listings
 of his client trust accounts, the grand total of which agreed
 with his reconciled client trust account, Respondent Castroverde
 violated HRPC Rule 1.15(g)(9).
 
We adopt the Board’s recommended aggravating and
 
mitigating factors with two exceptions. 
We find Respondent
 
Castroverde had substantial experience in the practice of law,
 acted with a dishonest or selfish motive, in a pattern of
 misconduct in which he committed multiple offenses. He engaged
 
7
 in bad faith obstruction of the disciplinary process by avoiding
 
service of process, refused to acknowledge the wrongful nature of
 his conduct, and is indifferent to making restitution. However,
 insofar as this court has found violations of HRPC Rules 8.1(b)
 and 8.4(d), we decline to adopt ABA Standard 9.22(e) in
 aggravation and, insofar as ODC did not successfully establish,
 clearly and convincingly, that Respondent Castroverde knew the
 falsity of the promises made to provide documentation at the time
 he made the relevant statements, we decline to adopt ABA Standard
 9.22(f) in aggravation. 
We concur with the Board that Respondent Castroverde’s
 
conduct was knowing and intentional and, under Standard 4.11 of
 the American Bar Association’s Standards for Lawyer Discipline,
 his conduct warrants disbarment. We adopt the conditions
 recommended by the Board to be placed upon any future
 reinstatement sought by Respondent Castroverde. Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Respondent Lance Castroverde 
is disbarred from the practice of law in this jurisdiction, effective 30 days after the date of entry of this order, pursuant to Rule 2.16(c) of the Rules of the Supreme Court of the State of Hawai'i (RSCH). 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Respondent Castroverde
 
shall, in accordance with RSCH Rule 2.16(d), file with this court
 within 10 days after the effective date of his disbarment, an
 
8
 affidavit showing compliance with RSCH Rule 2.16(d) and this
 
order.
 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that, as a condition of any 
future reinstatement of his license to practice law in this jurisdiction, in addition to any other requirement imposed by RSCH Rule 2.17, Respondent Castroverde shall repay all misappropriated funds as detailed in the Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law in this matter, shall complete training in the proper handling of client funds as set forth in the Hawai' i Rules 
of Professional Conduct and the Hawai' i Rules Governing Trust 
Accounting, shall take and pass the Hawai' i bar examination, and 
shall submit proof of the foregoing appended to any petition for reinstatement. 
IT IS FINALLY ORDERED that Respondent Castroverde shall
 
pay all costs of these proceedings as approved upon the timely
 submission of a bill of costs and an opportunity to respond
 thereto, as prescribed by RSCH Rule 2.3(c).
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 21, 2016. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson
 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
 
9
 