Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAD-12-0000490 04-JUN-2012 10:32 AM 
NO. SCAD-12-0000490
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
OFFICE OF DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL, Petitioner,
 
vs.
 
STEVEN H.S. WONG, Respondent.
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING
 
(ODC 10-067-8901)
 
ORDER
 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, Acoba, and McKenna, JJ.
and Intermediate Court of Appeals Associate Judge Foley,
assigned by reason of vacancy)
 
Upon consideration of the Report and Recommendation of 
the Disciplinary Board of the Supreme Court of the State of 
Hawai'i, the stipulated facts, and the evidence in the record, it 
appears that Respondent Steven H.S. Wong neglected a client’s probate matter for seventeen months and failed, during the same 
period of time, to keep the client reasonably informed about the 
status of the matter or to explain the matter to the extent 
reasonably necessary to permit the client to make informed 
decisions, in violation of Rules 1.3, 1.4(a), 1.4(b), and 8.4(a) 
of the Hawai' i Rules of Professional Conduct. In aggravation, it 
appears Respondent Wong’s acts and omissions resulted in financial injury to the estate, the multiple violations occurred 
over an extended period of time, Respondent Wong received an 
informal admonition in 2007 for similar violations, and Respondent Wong has significant experience in the practice of
 
law. In mitigation, Respondent Wong cooperated with disciplinary
 
authorities, has expressed remorse and recognized the
 
shortcomings in his practice that led to the violations, has
 
taken steps to address those shortcomings, and was under
 
significant emotional distress during the period in question. 
Therefore, it appearing that a public censure is appropriate,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Respondent Steven H.S. Wong 
is publicly censured by the Supreme Court of the State of 
Hawai'i, pursuant to Rule 2.3(a)(3) of the Rules of the Supreme 
Court of the State of Hawai' i (RSCH). 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that, within 30 days after the
 
entrance of this order, Respondent Steven H.S. Wong shall submit
 proof to the Supreme Court of the completion of a Practicing
 
Attorneys Liability Management Society course addressing the
 
shortcomings in the case-management system in Respondent Wong’s
 
law practice, or good cause for an extension of time within which
 
to complete said course.
 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Respondent Wong shall pay
 
all costs of the proceedings, as approved upon a timely
 
submission of a bill of costs, as prescribed by RSCH Rule 2.3(c).
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 4, 2012. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 
/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ Daniel R. Foley
 
2
 