Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAD-12-0001034 05-FEB-2013 
09:05 AM 
SCAD-12-00001034
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
OFFICE OF DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL, Petitioner,
 
vs.
 
KEONI K. AGARD, Respondent.
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING
 
(ODC 10-051-8885, 10-078-8912, 11-076-9000, 12-006-9022)
 
ORDER OF SUSPENSION
 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, Acoba, McKenna, and Pollack, JJ.)
 
Upon consideration of the Report and Recommendation of
 
the Disciplinary Board of the Supreme Court of the State of
 
Hawai'i, the stipulated facts, and the evidence in the record, it 
appears that Respondent Keoni K. Agard deposited client funds
  
directly into a business account that was not an approved IOLTA
 account, thereby commingling client funds with his own, allowed
 the balance in the account to fall below the sum covered by the
 deposited client funds, thereby misappropriating client funds,
 failed to timely refund one client’s retainer, and negotiated an
 agreement with the same client for a refund in exchange for the
 withdrawal of the client’s complaint lodged with the Office of
 Disciplinary Counsel, thereby violating Rules 1.15(c), 1.15(d),
 1.15(f)(4), and 8.3(d)(2)(i) of the Hawai' i Rules of Professional 
Conduct (HRPC). In aggravation, this court finds Respondent 
Agard has substantial experience in the practice of law, and committed multiple ethical violations in the present matter. In mitigation, we find an absence of a dishonest or selfish motive in Agard’s conduct, and note his clean disciplinary record, his sincere expressions of remorse, his full and free disclosure concerning the circumstances surrounding his misconduct, his timely good faith efforts to rectify the consequences of his misconduct, and his strong reputation for community service. Therefore, in light of the significant mitigating factors and the appropriateness of some period of suspension, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Respondent Keoni K. Agard is 
suspended from the practice of law in this jurisdiction for a period of 30 days, effective 30 days after the date of entry of this order, as provided by Rules 2.3(a)(2) and 2.16(c) of the Rules of the Supreme Court of the State of Hawai' i (RSCH). 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Respondent Agard shall
 
submit to this court within 90 days after the date of entry of
 this order proof of completion of a financial practices course
 and audit conducted by the Practicing Attorneys Liability
 Management Society.
 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that, in addition to any other
 
requirements for reinstatement imposed by the Rules of the
 
2
 Supreme Court of the State of Hawai' i, Respondent Agard shall pay 
all costs of these proceedings as approved upon the timely 
submission of a bill of costs, as prescribed by RSCH Rule 2.3(c). 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Respondent Agard shall,
 
within ten days after the effective date of his suspension, file
 with this court an affidavit in full compliance with RSCH Rule
 2.16(d).
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 5, 2013. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 
/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr. 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
3
 