Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAD-12-0000180 22-JUN-2012 
11:34 AM 
NO. SCAD-12-0000180
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
OFFICE OF DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL, Petitioner,
 
vs.
 
EMMANUEL G. GUERRERO, Respondent.
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING
 
(ODC 10-061-8895)
 
ORDER
 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, and McKenna, JJ.,
Intermediate Court of Appeals Chief Judge Nakamura,
in place of Acoba, J., recused,
and Intermediate Court of Appeals Associate Judge Reifurth,
assigned by reason of vacancy)
 
Upon consideration of the Report and Recommendation of 
the Disciplinary Board of the Supreme Court of the State of 
Hawai
'i and the record, it appears: (1) that Respondent Emmanuel 
G. Guerrero (Guerrero) requested and was granted a deferred
 acceptance of a no-contest plea to three misdemeanor counts of
 
willful failure to file a general excise tax return, in violation
 
of HRS § 237-33 (2001); (2) that based on Guerrero's fulfillment
 
of the conditions of the deferred acceptance plea, the district
 
court dismissed the charges; (3) that the Office of Disciplinary
 
Counsel and Guerrero, who was represented by counsel, entered
 
into a "Proposed Stipulation of Facts, Conclusions of Law, and
 
Recommendation for Discipline" (Proposed Stipulation), in which
 
they agreed to stipulated facts, conclusions of law, factors in
 
aggravation and mitigation, and a recommendation for discipline
 of the imposition of a public censure by this court; (4) that the 
Disciplinary Board, with minor changes, accepted and adopted the 
Proposed Stipulation and recommends that we impose the sanction 
of public censure upon Guerrero; (5) that Respondent Guerrero’s 
actions constitute violations of Rules 8.4(a) and (b) of the 
Hawai'i Rules of Professional Conduct; (6) in mitigation, 
Respondent Guerrero promptly informed the Office of Disciplinary Counsel, provided full cooperation, implemented measures to avoid 
a reoccurrence of the violations, and has performed significant 
pro bono work in the community; and (7) that public censure is 
warranted, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Respondent Emmanuel Guerrero 
is publicly censured, pursuant to Rule 2.3(a)(3) of the Rules of 
the Supreme Court of the State of Hawai' i (RSCH). 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Respondent Guerrero shall
 
pay all costs of the proceedings, as approved upon a timely
 
submission of a bill of costs, as prescribed by RSCH Rule 2.3(c).
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 22, 2012. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ Craig H. Nakamura
 
/s/ Lawrence M. Reifurth
 
2
 