Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAD-11-0000025 24-MAR-2011 
02:35 PM 
SCAD-11-0000025

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
OFFICE OF DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL, Petitioner,

vs.

LEE T. MIKI, Respondent.

ORIGINAL PROCEEDING

(ODC 06-106-8446, 07-146-8606)

ORDER OF SUSPENSION

(By: Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, Acoba, Duffy and McKenna, JJ.)

Upon consideration of the Disciplinary Board’s Report 
and Recommendation to suspend Respondent Lee T. Miki from the 
practice of law for 2 years, the Board’s recommendation for 
conditions of reinstatement, and Respondent Miki’s lack of 
response thereto, it appears that in the representation of two 
clients, Respondent Miki committed multiple violations of the 
following Hawai
'i Rules of Professional Conduct: 
HRPC Rule 1.2(a) A lawyer shall abide by a client’s
decisions concerning the objectivesof representation, subject toparagraphs(c), (d) and (e), andshall consult with the client as to the means by which the objectivesare to be pursued. 
HRPC Rule 1.3 A lawyer shall act with reasonablediligence and promptness inrepresenting a client. 
HRPC Rule 1.4(a) A lawyer shall keep a client  
 HRPC Rule 1.4(b)
 
HRPC Rule 1.16(a)
 
HRPC Rule 1.16(d)

HRPC Rule 3.2

HRPC Rule 3.4(e)

HRPC Rule 8.4(a)

HRPC Rule 8.4(c)

reasonably informed about the
status of a matter and promptly
comply with reasonable requests for
information.

A lawyer shall explain a matter to
the extent reasonably necessary to
permit the client to make informed
decisions regarding the
representation.

Except as stated in paragraph (c),
a lawyer shall not represent a
client or, where representation has
commenced, shall withdraw from the
representation if:
(1) the representation will result
in the violation of the Rules

of Professional Conduct or

other law.

Upon termination of representation,
a lawyer shall take steps to the
extent reasonably practicable to
protect a client’s interests, such
as giving reasonable notice to the
client, allowing time for
employment of other counsel,
surrendering papers and property to
which the client is entitled, and
refunding any advance payment that
has not been earned.

A lawyer shall make reasonable
efforts to expedite litigation
consistent with the legitimate
interests of the client.

A lawyer shall not knowingly
disobey an obligation under the
rules of a tribunal except for an
open refusal based on an assertion
that no valid obligation exists.

It is professional misconduct for a
lawyer to violate the rules of
professional conduct.

It is professional misconduct for a

2

 lawyer to engage in conduct
involving dishonesty, fraud,
deceit, or misrepresentation.

It further appears the recommended discipline and 
conditions are warranted under the stipulated facts, except that 
the recommendation to require participation in the Attorneys and 
Judges Assistance Program is not warranted pursuant to Rule 2.3 
of the Rules of the Supreme Court of the State of Hawai' i. 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Respondent Miki is suspended 
from the practice of law in this jurisdiction for 2 years, effective 30 days after entry of this order as provided by Rule 
2.16(c) of the Rules of the Supreme Court of the State of Hawai' i 
(RSCH). 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that before Respondent Miki may

apply for reinstatement, he must, in addition to all other

standards for reinstatement set out in RSCH Rule 2.17(b):

1.		pay and provide proof of payment of restitution in

the amount of $1,481.20 to Arson Yoshikawa;
 
2.		take and pass the Multi-State Professional

Responsibility Examination; and

3.		reimburse the Office of Disciplinary Counsel and

the Disciplinary Board for any costs ordered in

these proceedings.

DATED: 	 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 24, 2011. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama

/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.

/s/ James E. Duffy, Jr.

/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna

3

