Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAD-16-0000540 27-SEP-2016 
09:58 AM 
SCAD-16-0000540
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
OFFICE OF DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL,
Petitioner,
 
vs.
 
JERRY I. WILSON,
Respondent.
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING
 
(ODC Case No. 15-006-9225)
 
ORDER OF SUSPENSION
 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, McKenna, and Wilson, JJ.,
and Intermediate Court of Appeals Associate Judge Foley,
in place of Pollack, J., recused) 
Upon consideration of the Report and Recommendation of 
the Disciplinary Board of the Supreme Court of the State of 
Hawai'i, the Stipulation of Facts, Conclusions of Law and 
Proposed Recommendation for Discipline reached by Respondent Jerry I. Wilson and the Office of Disciplinary Counsel (ODC), and 
the record, we conclude that, between February 1, 2014 and 
January 31, 2015, the client trust account maintained by 
Respondent Wilson primarily received his monthly Social Security 
payments, with no deposits of client funds identified and, during 
the same period, Respondent Wilson made 61 withdrawals by check in favor of himself as well as payments by check to a variety of 
Honolulu businesses and 150 electronic transfers to local and 
national companies, at a time when there were substantial federal 
and state tax liens outstanding against him. We further conclude 
Respondent Wilson misrepresented, in his 2014 and 2015 
registration with the Hawai' i State Bar Association, that he was 
operating his client trust account in accordance with the relevant court rules, including Rule 11 of the Rules of the 
Supreme Court of the State of Hawai' i and Rule 1.15 of the Hawai' i 
Rules of Professional Conduct (HRPC), when he was not. We conclude this conduct violated HRPC Rules 1.15(a), 1.15(b), and 
8.4(c) (2014) and caused actual and potential harm to the legal 
system and the public. 
In aggravation, we find Respondent Wilson had a
 
dishonest or selfish motive, substantial experience of more than
 
35 years in the practice of law, and one prior discipline in 1992
 
and that, in the present matter, there were multiple offenses and
 
a pattern of misconduct. We note that, in his initial answer to
 
ODC, Wilson did not admit the wrongful nature of his conduct.
 
In mitigation, we note Wilson has expressed remorse and
 
a cooperative attitude toward the proceedings and that, once
 
notified of the client trust account violations by ODC, took
 
steps to rectify the situation by opening a regular account and
 
redirecting his benefits to the new account. Therefore, it
 
appearing suspension is warranted, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Respondent Jerry I. Wilson is
 
suspended for a period of 120 days from the practice of law in
 
2
 this jurisdiction, effective 30 days after the date of entry of 
this order, as authorized by Rules 2.3(a)(2) and 2.16(d) of the 
Rules of the Supreme Court of the State of Hawai' i (RSCH). 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Respondent Wilson shall
 
submit an affidavit demonstrating compliance with RSCH Rule
 
2.16(d) within 10 days after the effective date of his
 
suspension.
 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Respondent Wilson shall pay
 
all costs of the proceedings, as approved upon a timely
 
submission of a bill of costs, as authorized by RSCH Rule 2.3(c).
 
IT IS FINALLY ORDERED that the Disciplinary Board shall
 
remind Respondent Wilson that he may not resume the practice of
 
law until reinstated by order of this court, pursuant to RSCH
 
Rule 2.17.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 27, 2016. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Daniel R. Foley 
3
 