Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAD-12-0000559 31-OCT-2012 
08:20 AM 
NO. SCAD-12-0000559
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I
 
OFFICE OF DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL, Petitioner,
 
vs.
 
CAROLYN S. KIYOTA, Respondent.
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING
 
(ODC 08-079-8722)
 
ORDER OF SUSPENSION
 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, Acoba, and Pollack, JJ.
and Intermediate Court of Appeals Associate Judge Ginoza,
in place of McKenna, J., recused)
 
Upon consideration of the Disciplinary Board’s Report
 
and Recommendation for the Disbarment of Respondent Carolyn S.
 
Kiyota, and upon full consideration of all the evidence in the
 
record, this court concludes by clear and convincing evidence
 
that Respondent Kiyota on multiple occasions commingled and
 
misappropriated client funds held in trust, on one occasion paid
 
personal expenses directly from the trust account maintained for
 
client funds, failed to promptly notify third parties of her
 
receipt of funds in which those parties had an interest, failed
 
to promptly pay to those third parties the funds requested and in
 
her possession which those parties were entitled to receive,
 knowingly failed, ultimately, to pay those known debtors funds 
due them, failed to maintain required financial records, 
including disbursement journals for trust accounts, subsidiary 
ledgers for each client reflecting the balance of monies held in 
trust for each client, monthly trust account reconciliations, and 
records reconciling the subsidiary client trust accounts with the 
overall trust account balance, in violation of Rules 1.15(c), 
1.15(e), 1.15(f)(1), 1.15(f)(3), 1.15(f)(4), 1.15(g)(1), 
1.15(g)(2), 1.15(g)(8), 1.15(g)(9) and 8.4(c) of the Hawai' i 
Rules of Professional Conduct (HRPC). This court further concludes, based upon clear and convincing evidence, that, after 
June 29, 2011, Respondent Kiyota, in connection with 
a disciplinary matter, knowingly failed to respond to lawful 
demands for information from the Office of Disciplinary Counsel 
and the Disciplinary Board and failed to cooperate with the 
subsequent disciplinary proceedings, in violation of HRPC Rules 
8.1(b) and 8.4(d). In aggravation, this court finds Respondent 
Kiyota has substantial experience in the practice of law and, in 
her actions, a pattern of violations over a three-year period 
involving multiple offenses. In mitigation, this court notes 
Respondent Kiyota’s initial forthright and cooperative attitude, 
ODC’s two-year delay in initiating disciplinary proceedings 
against her, Respondent Kiyota’s expressions of contrition and 
acknowledgment of her errors, the lack of real injury to any 
client, her subsequent actions to reimburse parties monies owed 
them, a lack of a selfish motive, personal events that placed her 
under considerable stress, and her clean disciplinary record 
2
 prior to the present matter. Therefore, suspension being
 
warranted, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Respondent Kiyota is 
suspended from the practice of law in this jurisdiction for one 
year and one day, effective 30 days from the date of entry of 
this order, as provided by Rules 2.3(a)(2) and 2.16(c) of the 
Rules of the Supreme Court of the State of Hawai' i (RSCH). 
Respondent Kiyota shall be allowed to apply for reinstatement to the practice of law after the passing of one half the period of 
suspension, as provided by RSCH Rule 2.17(b). 
IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ORDERED that, in addition to any 
other requirements for reinstatement imposed by the Rules of the 
Supreme Court of the State of Hawai' i, Respondent Kiyota shall 
pay all costs of these proceedings as approved upon timely submission of a bill of costs, as authorized by RSCH Rule 2.3(c). 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Respondent Kiyota shall,
 
within 10 days after the date of this order, file with this court
 
an affidavit in full compliance with RSCH Rule 2.16(d).
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 31, 2012. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
 
3
 