Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAD-10-0000250 27-MAY-2011 
09:17 AM 
SCAD-10-0000250 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
OFFICE OF DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL, Petitioner,
 
vs.
 
SCOTT T. STRACK, Respondent.
 
ORIGINAL PROCEEDING
 
(ODC 08-056-8699, 09-096-8819)
 
ORDER OF SUSPENSION
 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., Nakayama, Acoba, and Duffy, JJ.,
and Intermediate Court of Appeals Chief Judge Nakamura,
assigned by reason of vacancy)
 
We have considered the Disciplinary Board’s Report and
 
Recommendation submitted to this court in the matter of Office of
 
Disciplinary Counsel v. Strack that Respondent Strack be
 
suspended from the practice of law in this jurisdiction for a
 
period of one year and one day. We have also given due
 
consideration to the arguments set forth in the briefs filed by
 
both parties in the matter.
 
It appears that Respondent Strack missed important
 
deadlines in an ongoing immigration matter due to a lack of
 
diligence and then failed to act to correct his lack of diligence
 
in a responsible and timely manner or to refund any of the fees
 
associated with his mistake, causing real harm to the interests
 
of his client. It also appears that Respondent Strack failed to
 communicate with his clients in a timely manner, misused client 
funds, failed to maintain required paperwork involving client 
monies or to manage client funds as required by the Hawai' i Rules 
of Professional Conduct, improperly organized his practice as an LLC, and misrepresented the nature of his law offices, resulting 
in multiple violations of Hawai' i Rules of Professional Conduct 
Rules 1.1, 1.3, 1.4(a), 1.15(b), (c), (d), (e), (f)(3), (g)(1), (g)(2), (g)(7), (g)(8) and (g)(9), 7.5(f), and 8.4(a), as well as 
the Rules of the Supreme Court of the State of Hawai' i (RSCH) 
Rule 6(g). Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Respondent Strack is
 
suspended from the practice of law in this jurisdiction for one
 year and one day, effective 30 days after the entry of this
 
order, as provided by RSCH Rule 2.16(c).
 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Respondent Strack, in
 
addition to the requirements of RSCH Rules 2.16 and 2.17, as a
 
condition of reinstatement, is required to successfully complete
 
a Practicing Attorneys Liability Management Society (PALMS)
 
program or its equivalent and to reimburse Petitioner for all
 
costs ordered upon a timely submitted bill of costs and any
 
objections thereto.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 27, 2011. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 
/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 
/s/ James E. Duffy, Jr.
 
/s/ Craig H. Nakamura
 
2
 