***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o---  
 
 
PEER NEWS LLC, dba CIVIL BEAT,  
Plaintiff -Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU and 
DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND FISCAL SERVICES,  
Defendants -Appellees.  
 
 
SCAP-16-0000114  
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-16- 0000114; CIV. NO. 15- 1-0891-05) 
 
DECEMBER 21, 2018 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH N AKAYAMA, J ., 
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
  Hawai ‘i law has long stated that “[o]pening up the 
government processes to public scrutiny and participation is the 
only viable and reasonable method of protecting the public ’s 
interest.”  Hawaii Revised Statutes § 92F -2 (2012).  The refore, 
in establishing the legal framework governing public access to Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-16-0000114
21-DEC-2018
08:12 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
2 government records, the  Hawai‘i legislature declare d “that it is 
the policy of th is State that the formation and conduct of 
public policy --the discussions, deliberations, decisions, and 
action of government a gencies--shall be conducted as openly as 
possible. ”  Id.   
  This case concerns the propriety of State and local 
agencies withholding certain inter - and intra -office 
communications when disclosure is formally requested by a member 
of the public .  In a seri es of eight opinion letters issued 
between 1989 and 2007, t he State of  Hawaii Office of Information 
Practices took the position that, based on a statutory exception 
provided in Hawai‘i’s public record law that permits the 
nondisclosure of records that would frustrate a legitimate 
government function if revealed , a “deliberative process 
privilege” exists that protects all pre-decisional, deliberative 
agency records without regard for the relative harm that would 
result from any specific disclosure .  Relying on these opinion 
letters, the Office of Budget and Financial Services for the 
City and County of Honolulu denied a public records request for 
certain internal documents generated during the setting of the 
City and County’s annual operating budget.  
  We hold that, because the deliberative process 
privilege attempts to uniformly shield records from disclosure 
without an individualized determination that disclosure would ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
3 frustrate a legitimate government function, it is clearly 
irreconcilable with the plain language and legislative history 
of Hawai‘i’s public record law s.  The Office of Information 
Practices therefore palpably erred in interpreting the statutory 
exception to create this  sweeping privilege.  Accordingly, we 
vacate the grant of summary judgment in this case and remand for 
a redetermination of whether t he records withheld pursuant to 
the purported privilege fall within a statutory exception to the 
disclosure requirement.   
I. BACKGROUND  AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY  
A. Developing Honolulu’s  Operating Budget  
 
 Each year, the City and County of Honolulu (City) sets 
its annual operating budget through a series of exchanges 
between its various departments and branches.  The process 
begins with the Mayor providing a list of intended policies and 
priorities for the coming fiscal year to the Department of 
Budget and Fiscal Services (BFS).  BFS in turn sends a notice 
detailing the Mayor’s policies and  priorities to the directors 
of the departments that make up the City ’s executive branch 
(with limited exceptions1), soliciting an operating budget 
request from each department.   Thereafter, the departments each 
                                                           
 1 Pursuant to Sections 7 -106(i) and 17 -103(2)(f) of the Revised 
Charter of the City and County of Honolulu, the Board of Water Supply and the 
Honolulu Rapid Transit Authority prepare their own operating budgets.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
4 prepare and submit a  formal memorand um to BFS justifying  all 
proposed expenditures for the coming fiscal year in relation to 
the Mayor’s policies and priorities , thus providing  an initial 
recommendation  regarding  the money to be allocated to the 
department.   Those departments that generate revenue also 
provide preliminary projections outlining the funds they expect 
to take in, thereby giving BFS an estimate of the City’s 
expected revenues and expenditures for the coming fiscal year . 
  During the months  following BFS’s receipt of the 
operating budget request, various parties from BFS engage with  
the requesting agencies and the office of the City’s Managing 
Director in a series of discussions regarding each department’s  
proposed budget, revising the request as needed to account for 
budgetary considerations and changes in the Mayor’s policies and 
priorities .  The budget request is eventually submitted to the 
Mayor, who may make further adjustments based on  additional 
discussion s with the BFS Director and Managing Director.  Once 
the Mayor makes final decisions regarding each department’s 
budget, BFS produces  a combined executive budget  for submission  
to the City Council.   After a public hearing, the City Council 
revises the executive budget as it deems appropriate before 
formally adopting it, at which point it is presented to the 
Mayor to be signed or vetoed in the same manner as other ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
5 legislation.  See  Revised Charter of the City and County of 
Honolulu § 9 -104 (1998). 
B. Civil Beat’s Request  
  On March 5, 2015, Nick Grube, a reporter for the 
online news outlet Peer News LLC d/b/a Civil Beat  (Civil Beat), 
sent an email to BFS requesting access to or copies of the 
“narrative budget memo for Fiscal Year 2016” for each of the 
City’s departments.   Grube stated in his email that the request 
was made pursuant to the Hawai i public records law.2 
  On March 13, 2015, BFS sent a notice to Grube 
acknowledging hi s request and informing him that the agency was 
invoking the “extenuating circumstances” exception contained in 
the Hawaii  Administrative Rules (HAR) to extend its time limit 
for responding .3  Then, o n April 7, 2015, BFS provided Grube with 
                                                           
 2 Although Grube did not further identify the legal authority for 
his request, the disclosure of government records in Hawai ‘i is broadly 
governed by the Uniform Information Practices Act, which is codified in 
Hawaii Revised Statutes Chapter 92F.  HRS § 92F -11 (2012), which sets forth 
an agency’s affirmative disclosure obligations, provides in relevant part as 
follows: 
(a) All government records are open to public inspection 
unless access is restricted or closed by law.  
(b) Except as provided in section 92F -13, each agency upon 
request by any person shall make government records 
available for inspection and copying during regular 
business hours.  
 3 With some exceptions, HAR § 2 -71-13(b) (1999) requires an agency 
to provide notice of whether it intends to withhold or disclose a record 
within ten business days of receiving a formal public records request and, 
when appropriate, to disclose the document within five business days 
thereafter.  HAR §§ 2 -71-13(c) and 2- 71-15 (1999) allow an agency to extend 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
6 a second notice, this time denying his request in its entirety,  
stating that the legitimate government function of agency 
decision-making would be frustrated by disclosure of the 
requested records.4   
 
 In a memorandum attached to the second notice, BFS 
cited a series of opinion letters from the State of Hawai‘i 
Office of Information Practices (OIP) interpreting the provision 
of the Hawai‘ i Uniform Information and Practices Act (UIPA ) 
codified in Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 92F-13(3) (2012), 
which exempts documents from  disclosure when disclosure would 
frustrate a legitimate government function.5  The memorandum 
stated that HRS § 92F-13(3) creates a “deliberative process 
                                                                        
(. . . continued) 
 
the period to twenty business days for providing notice of its intent when 
extenuating circumstances apply.  In its form notice to Grube, BFS checked 
the boxes indicating that extenuating circumstances were present because 
Grube’s request required “extensive agency e fforts to search, review, or 
segregate the records, or otherwise prepare the records for inspection or 
copying” and that the agency needed additional time “to avoid an unreasonable 
interference with its other statutory duties and functions.”  
 4 BFS or Grube could have requested that the State of Hawai‘ i Office 
of Information Practices review the record request pursuant to Hawaii Revised 
Statutes §§ 92F- 15.5(a) or 92F -42(1)-(2) (2012), but neither party elected to 
do so.  
 5 HRS § 92F -13 (2012) provides in relevant part as follows:  
This part shall not require disclosure of:  
 . . . . 
 (3) Government records that, by their nature, must be 
confidential in order for the government to avoid the 
frustration of a legitimate government function[.]  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
7 privilege ” that shields government records from disclosure when 
they are pre -decisional and deliberative in nature.   (Citing OIP 
Op. Ltr. No. 00 -01 (Apr. 12, 2000); OIP Op. Ltr. No. 90 -8 (Feb. 
12, 1990).)   Under the privilege, BFS stated,  agencies are not 
required to dis close “‘recommendations, draft documents, 
proposals, suggestions, and other subjective documents’ that 
comprise part of the process by which the government formulates 
decisions and policies.”   (Quoting O IP Op. Ltr. No. 0 4-15 at 4 
(Aug. 30, 2004).)   
  Construing Grube’s request to refer to the operating 
budget memoranda  from each of the City’s departments, BFS argued 
that disclosure of the se documents  would have a chilling effect 
that would lower the quality of the information provided to BFS 
and consequently impair its decision -making.  The requests were 
thus the precise sort of records the deliberative process 
privilege created by HRS § 92F-13(3) was intended to exempt from 
disclosure, BFS concluded.  
  On April 13, 2015, Civil Beat submitted a letter from 
its counsel encouraging BFS to favor public access, waive any 
concerns about the frustration of government functions, and 
produce the records in the interest of transparency.  On April 
30, 2015 , BFS provided Civil Beat with a third notice revising ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
8 its denial to allow partial disclosure of the requested 
information.6  The revised notice stated that BFS still intended 
to withhold the proposed budget amounts and those budget 
justifications that involved “safety inspections, staffing, 
training and equipment. ”7 
C. Circuit Court Proceedings  
  
On May 8, 2015, Civil Beat filed a two -count complaint 
against the City and BFS  in the Circuit Court of the First Court 
(circuit court) seeking declaratory and injunctive relief.8  
Count I of the complaint sought an order declaring that the OIP 
precedent adopting the deliberative process privilege was 
palpably erroneous, as well as an order enjoining the City and 
BFS from invoking the purported privilege to deny public access 
                                                           
 6 The City and BFS  have at various stages of this case 
characterized this notice as a waiver of the deliberative process privilege 
with respect to the portions of the requested records BFS intended to 
disclose.  During oral argument before this court, however, counsel for the 
City and BFS stated that BFS determined these portions of the records were 
not protected by the privilege, making a waiver unnecessary.  Oral Argument 
at 00:49:20- 58, Peer News LLC v. City & Cty. of Honolulu  (No. SCAP -16-114), 
http://oaoa.hawaii.gov/jud/oa/17/SCOA_060117_SCAP_16_114.mp3.  
 7 Additionally, BFS stated that it intended to withhold information 
regarding specific staff salaries pursuant to HRS § 92F -13(1), which provides 
as follows: “This part shall not require disclosure of . . . (1) Governme nt 
records which, if disclosed, would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion 
of personal privacy.”  HRS § 92F -14(b)(6) (2012) elaborates, “The following 
are examples of information in which the individual has a significant privacy 
interest: . . . (6) In formation describing an individual’s finances, income, 
assets, liabilities, net worth, bank balances, financial history or 
activities, or creditworthiness.”  Civil Beat does not challenge BFS’s right 
to withhold this information, and we therefore do not address the matter 
further. 
 8 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
9 to governmental records.  Count II  sought access to copies of 
the departmental budget  memoranda identified in Civil Beat’s  
March 5, 2015 request, subject  to the redaction of specific 
salaries.   
  
The City and BFS filed a joint answer on June 1, 2015,9 
and then filed t wo joint motions for partial summary judgment on 
October 19, 2015--one for each count in Civil Beat’s complaint.   
Civil Beat responded by filing two combined opposition/ cross-
motions for summary judgment on November 13, 2015.    
  In its oppositions/cross- motions,10 Civil Beat asserted 
that a broad deliberative process privilege would contradict the 
legislature’s plainly stated intent that , under the UIPA, 
agency 
“deliberations . . .  shall be conducted as openly as possible. ”  
(Quoting HRS § 92F-2  (2012).)   Civil Beat further contended that 
the UIPA’s legislative history indicates that the legislature 
made a purposeful decision 
not to adopt a deliberative process 
privilege, which at the time of the UIPA’s enactment was
 
                                                           
 9 The City and BFS initially filed a third -party complaint against 
OIP, arguing that any declaratory relief or litigation expenses that Civil 
Beat was entitled to should be granted  against OIP and not the City or BFS.  
OIP answered arguing, inter alia, that it had never issued any opinion 
regarding the records at issue in this case and that it was not responsible 
for the City or BFS’s application of its precedents.  On July 23, 2015 , the 
City, BFS, and OIP stipulated to the dismissal without prejudice of the 
third-party complaint against OIP, which the circuit court approved and 
ordered. 
 10 Civil Beat first presented the arguments contained in its 
oppositions/cross- motions in a prior  motion for summary judgment, which was 
denied.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
10 codified in  both federal law  and the model statute upon which  
the UIPA  was based .   
  Even assuming that  the UIPA contains a deliberative 
process privilege , Civil Beat continued, the exception  should be 
read narrowly to require weighing the public’s interest in 
disclosure against the government’s need for secrecy .  The 
privilege should also apply only to documents containing the 
personal opinions of agency staff , Civil Beat argued,  and it 
should last only as long as the agency decision to which the 
records pertain remains pending.  Here, the public’s interest in 
the disclosure of the budget requests outweigh ed the City’s need 
for secrecy, Civil Beat contended , arguing that  the documents 
reflected the policy o f the various departments rather than the 
personal opinions of individual  staff and that the Mayor’s 
executive budget had already been finalized and publicly 
released .  The budget requests  would therefore not be covered by 
a deliberative process privilege even if such a privilege 
existed, Civil Beat concluded . 
  By contrast, t he City and BFS  argued that the UIPA’s 
legislative history does not show that the legislature intended 
to omit the deliberative process privilege , but rather to  
mindfully incorporate  it into the  broader “frustration of a 
legitimate government function” exception.   Furthermore, they 
continued, because the privilege originated under the federal ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
11 common law, it is alternately supported by HRS § 92F-13(4), 
which shields “[g]overnment records which, pursuant to state or 
federal law including an order of any state or federal court, 
are protected from disclosure.”11   
 
 On December 3, 2015, following a hearing on all four 
motions, the circuit court orally ruled in favor of the City and 
BFS on all issue s.  The court first found that the OIP opinions  
adopting the deliberative process privilege were  not palpably 
erroneous because they were not clearly contrary to the 
legislative intent of HRS § 92F -13(3).  The court further found 
that the requested budget memoranda were pre-decisional, 
deliberative documents prepared as part of the budget-setting  
process and were thus covered by the deliberative process 
privilege.  On January 13, 2016, the circuit court entered 
written orders granting the City and BFS ’s motions , and final 
judgment was entered on February 5, 2016.   Civil Beat filed a 
timely notice of appeal. 
D. ICA Proceedings and Transfer  
  Before the ICA, Civil Beat raised three points of 
error:  
                                                           
 11 The State of Hawai i was granted leave to participate as amicus 
curiae and filed a brief supporting the City’s stance that a deliberative 
process privilege exists under the UIPA.  The State took no position, 
however, as to whether the City properly applied the privilege when it 
withheld access to the requested records in the present case.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
12 1. Whether OIP and the circuit court erred in recognizing a 
deliberative process privilege, and thus a presumption of 
secrecy for records of government deliberations . . . . 
2. Whether the circuit court erred in applying the 
deliberative process privilege standard to bar disclosure 
of the requested departmental budget memoranda, without 
weighing the public interest in disclosure of government 
financial information, the lack of harm to the privilege’s 
core concern for personal opinions of vulnerable employees, 
or the passage of time. . . .  
3. Whether the circuit court erred when it held that the 
requested departmental budget memoranda “are protected by 
the deliberative process privilege ” – allowing the City to 
entirely withhold the memoranda – even though the court 
acknowledged that purely factual information within a 
privileged record is not protected and the City conceded 
that portions of the requested records contained purely 
factual information .[12] 
  On September 9, 2016, Civil Beat applied for transfer 
to this court, arguing that the case present s novel legal issues 
and questions of fundamental public importance.  This court 
granted Civil Beat’s application for transfer  on October 12, 
2016. 
II. STANDARD S OF REVIEW  
The legislature has directed that OIP’s opinions be 
considered as precedent in a UIPA enforcement action such as 
                                                           
 12 In their answering brief, the City and BFS argue that these 
points of error are a “gross mischaracterization” of th e arguments made below 
and urge the court to instead accept their alternate points of error.  As 
discussed, Civil Beat argued in its cross -motion for summary judgment in 
Count II that the circuit court should consider the public’s interest in 
disclosure when determining whether the operating budget requests were 
protected by the privilege.  Civil Beat also contended that OIP’s adoption of 
the deliberative process privilege effectively created a presumption that all 
agency deliberations are confidential.  We  therefore hold that all of Civil 
Beat’s points of error were properly preserved, and we consider them 
accordingly. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
13 this so long as they are not “palpably erroneous.”  HRS § 92F-
15(b) (2012 & Supp. 2017) .   
  This court reviews a  grant or denial of summary 
judgment de novo.  Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai‘ i  48, 56, 109 
P.3d 689, 697 (2005).  
III. DISCUSSION 
  Although OIP has opined for nearly thir ty years that a  
deliberative process privilege exempts certain inter- and intra-
agency documents from the UIPA’s  disclosure requirements, see, 
e.g., OIP Op. Ltr. No. 89-9 (Nov. 20, 1989); OIP Op. Ltr. No. 
F19-01 (Oct . 11, 2018), this court has not heretofore had an 
opportunity to consider the propriety of this interpretation.  
We first consider the privilege in relation to the plain 
language of the UIPA before turning to the UIPA’s legislative 
history for indications of the legislat ure’s intent regarding 
the public disclosure of deliberative agency records. 
A. The Language of the UIPA 
  As we have often stated, “ the fundamental starting 
point for statutory interpretation is the language of the 
statute itself.”  State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai‘ i 383, 390, 219 
P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009) (q uoting Citizens Against Reckless Dev. 
v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of City & Cty. of Honolulu (CARD), 114 
Hawai‘i 184, 193, 159 P.3d 143, 152 (2007)).  “[W] here the 
statutory language is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty is to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
14 give effect to its plain and obvious meaning. ”  Id. (quoting 
CARD, 114 Hawai ‘i at 193, 159 P.3d at 152). 
  In adopting the deliberative process privilege, OIP 
relied upon HRS § 92F- 13(3), which shields from disclosure those 
“[g]overnment records that, by their nature, must be 
confidential in order for the government to avoid the 
frustration of a legitimate government function.”  The 
unambiguous meaning of this provision is that, to fall within 
its parameters, a record must be of such a nature that 
disclosure would impair the government’s  ability to fulfil its 
proper duties.  But the deliberative process privilege as 
formulated by OIP gives no direct consideration to whether a 
particular disclosure would negatively impact a legitimate 
government function.  Instead, a record is shielded by the 
privilege anytime it is “pre-decisional ” and “deliberative.”   
OIP Op. Ltr. No. 90-3 at 12 ( Jan. 18, 1990) (explaining that a 
communication is protected by the privilege if it is made prior 
to an agency decision and “ makes recommendations or expresses 
opinions on . . . policy matters” (quoting Vaughn v. Rosen, 523 
F.2d 1136, 1143-44 (D.C. Cir. 1975)).   
  The City and BFS argue that all  pre-decisional, 
deliberative records would frustrate a legitimate government 
function if disclosed.  Administrators faced with the 
possibility that their remarks will be publicly disseminated are ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
15 less likely to offer frank and uninhibited opinions for fear of 
public criticism or ridicule, they argue, and inhibiting the 
free exchange of ideas will in turn diminish the quality of 
agency decision-making.  Thus,  a determination that a record is 
pre-decisional and deliberative is functionally equivalent to a 
finding that disclosure of the record would impair a legitimate 
government function, the City and BFS appear to conclude. 
  But the UIPA  itself makes clear that these generalized 
concerns alone are not sufficient to constitute frustration of  a 
legitimate government function  within the meaning of the 
statute.  HRS § 92F- 2, which sets forth the legislature’s 
purposes in enacting the UIPA and provides principles for 
interpreting the law, states in relevant part the following:  
In a democracy, the people are vested with the ultimate 
decision- making power.  Government agencies exist to aid 
the people in the formation and conduct of public policy.  
Opening up the government processes to public scrutiny and 
participation is the only  viable and reasonable method of 
protecting the public ’s interest.  Therefore the 
legislature declares that it is the policy of this State 
that the formation and conduct of public policy--the 
discussions, deliberations, decisions, and action of 
government agencies--shall be conducted as openly as 
possible. 
(Emphases added .)  The statute goes on to provide that the UIPA 
“shall be applied and construed to promote its underlying 
purposes and policies, ” including , inter alia, to “[p]romot e the 
public interest in disclosure” and “ [e]nhance governmental 
accountability through a general policy of access to government 
records.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
16   Insofar as a tradeoff exists between inhibiting the 
frank exchange of ideas and ensuring agency accountability 
through public oversight, HRS § 92F -2 clearly expresses a policy 
preference in favor of “[o] pening up the government processes to 
public scrutiny.”  The list of the UIPA’s underlying purposes 
and policies, which was provided to guide our interpretation, 
repeatedly emphasizes that ensuring 
government accountability 
through public access and disclosure was among the legislature’s 
13top priorities in enacting the statute.   Moreover, t
he law 
expressly states that “the formation . . . of public policy,” 
including “discussions” and “deliberations ,
” “shall be conducted 
as openly as possible .”  HRS § 92F -2.   
  As the City and BFS readily admit, the deliberative 
process privilege is specifically designed to protect from 
public scrutiny “documents reflecting advisory opinions, 
recommendations[,] and deliberations comprising part of a 
process by which government decisions and policies are 
formulated”
--the precise opposite of the policy HRS § 92F-2 
explicitly declares 
the UIPA should be interpreted to promote.   
(Emphasis added) (quoting NLRB v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 421 U.S. 
                                                           
 13 The only countervailing consideration included in the rules of 
construction is the personal privacy of individuals.  See HRS § 92F -2(5) 
(stating the UIPA should be interpreted to “[b]alance the individual privacy 
interest and the public access interest, allowing access unless it would 
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy”).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
17 132, 150 (1975)).  Indeed, adopting the City and BFS’s argued 
interpretation would render 
much of HRS § 92F-2 a dead letter, 
for one is hard pressed to imagine “deliberations” or 
“discussions” constituting the “format ion . . . of government 
14policy” that are not pre -decisional and deliberative.   Such a 
result would be contrary to the “ cardinal rule of statutory 
construction that courts are bound, if rational and practicable, 
to give effect to all parts of a statute .”  Coon v. City & Cty. 
of Honolulu, 98 Hawai ‘i 233, 259, 47 P.3d 348, 374 (2002) 
(quoting Franks v. City & Cty.  of Honolulu, 74 Haw. 328, 339, 
843 P.2d 668, 673 (1993)).   As this court has long held , “no 
clause, sentence, or word shall be construed as superfluous, 
void, or insignificant if a construction can be legitimately 
found which will give force to and preserve all words of the 
statute.”  Id. (quoting Franks , 74 Haw. at  339, 843 P.2d at  
673). 
                                                           
 14 Communications between decision -makers and their subordinates 
regarding adopting available courses of action prior to the making of a 
decision is the very definition of deliberations in common usage, case law, 
and the OIP’s own precedents.  See Deliberation , Black’s Law Dictionary  (10th 
ed. 2014) (“The act of carefully considering issues and options before making 
a decision or taking an action[.]”); Abramyan v. U.S. Dep't of Homeland Sec., 
6 F.Supp.3d 57, 64 (D.D.C. 2013) (“A record is deliberative if ‘it re flects 
the give- and-take of the consultative process.’” (emphasis added) (quoting 
Judicial Watch, Inc. v. FDA, 449 F.3d 141, 151 (D.C. Cir. 2006)); OIP Op. 
Ltr. No. 90- 3 at 12 (explaining that a document is deliberative when it 
“makes recommendations or ex
presses opinions on . . . policy matters”).  
Thus, the City and BFS’s analysis effectively read s out of HRS § 92F -2 the 
express “policy of this State that the formation and conduct of public 
policy--the discussions, deliberations 
. . . of government agencies--shall be 
conducted as openly as possible.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
18   In light of the policy statement and rules of 
construction contained in HRS § 92F-2,  the disclosure of pre -
decisional, deliberative records cannot be said to inherently 
frustrate a legitimate government 
function within the meaning of 
the UIPA.15  Thus, because the deliberative process privilege 
                                                           
 15 This is not to say that certain types of deliberative 
communications will not qualify for withholding when the government can 
identify a concrete connection between disclosure and frustration of a 
particular legitimate government function.  For instance, if disclosed prior 
to a final agency decision, many pre -decisional draft documents may impair 
specific agency or administrative processes in addition to inhibiting agency 
personnel from expressing candid opinions.  However, an agency must clearly 
describe what will be frustrated by disclosure and provide more specificity 
about the impeded process than simply “decision making.”  See infra Section 
III.D.   
  Additionally, writings that are truly preliminary in  nature, such 
as personal notes and rough drafts of memorandum that have not been finalized 
for circulation within or among the agencies, may not qualify as government 
records for purposes of an agency’s disclosure obligations.  See OIP Op. Ltr. 
No. 04-17 (Oct. 27, 2004) (“[W]e find, in line with the number of other state 
and federal courts that have similarly construed other open records laws, 
that the determination of whether or not a record is a ‘government record’ 
under the UIPA or a personal record of an official depends on the totality of 
circumstances surrounding its creation, maintenance and use. . . . [C]ourts 
have distinguished personal papers. . .  from public records where they ‘are 
generally created solely for the individual’s convenience or to refresh the 
writer’s memory, are maintained in a way indicating a private purpose, are 
not circulated or intended for distribution within agency channels, are not 
under agency control, and may be discarded at the writer's sole discretion.’” 
(internal citations omitted)(quoting Yacobellis v. Bellingham, 780 P.2d 272, 
275 (Wash. App. 1989)); Shevin v. Byron, Harless, Schaffer, Reid & Assocs., 
Inc., 379 So.2d 633, 640 (Fla. 1980) (“To be contrasted with ‘public records’ 
are materials prepared as drafts or notes, which constitute mere precursors 
of governmental ‘records’ and are not, in themselves, intended as final 
evidence of the knowledge to be recorded . . . .  [unless] they supply the 
final evidence of knowledge obtained in connection with the transaction of  
official business.”); cf. Conn. Gen. Stat. § 1 -210(e)(1) (2018) 
(“[D]isclosure shall be required of: . . . [i]nteragency or intra -agency 
memoranda or letters, advisory opinions, recommendations or any report 
comprising part of the process by which governmental decisions and policies 
are formulated, except disclosure shall not be required of a preliminary 
draft of a memorandum, prepared by a member of the staff of a public agency, 
which is subject to revision prior to submission to or discussion among the 
members of such agency.”).   
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
19 attempts to uniformly shield records from disclosure without a 
determination that disclosure would frustrate a legitimate 
government function, it is inconsistent with the plain language 
of HRS § 92F- 13(3).   
B. The Legislative History of the UIPA 
  A review of the UIPA’s legislative history confirms 
that HRS § 92F -13(3) was not intended to create a blanket 
privilege for deliberative documents. 
  Prior to 1988, public access to government records in 
Hawai‘i was governed by two primary statutes that were often in 
tension, as well as a wide range of other statutes concerning 
access to specific records.  S ee 1 Report of the Governor’s 
Committee on Public Records and Privacy apps. B-D (1987) 
(setting forth statutes governing disclosure of government 
records) (hereinafter Governor’s Report ).  Hawai‘i’s “Sunshine 
Law,” codified in HRS Chapter 92,  contained a broad disclosure 
mandate.  The law stated  that “[a]ll public records shall be 
available for inspection by any person” with limited exceptions 
for documents related to litigation, certain records that would 
                                                                        
(. . . continued) 
 
  It is also noted that, when there is a true concern that 
disclosure of deliberative communications may expose specific individuals to 
negative consequences, the individuals’ identities may potentially qualify 
for withholding pursuant to HRS § 92F -13(1) if their privacy interests 
outweigh the public’s interest in disclosure.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
20 damage the “character or reputation of any person ,” and specific 
records for which state or federal law provided otherwise.  HRS 
§ 92-51 (1985) .  Hawai ‘i’s Fair Information Practice  law, on the 
other hand, contained a broad prohibition on the disclosure of 
“personal records,” which were expansively defined to include 
“any item, collection, or grouping of information about an 
individual that is ma intained by an agency.”  HRS §  92E-1 
(1985); see also HRS § 92E -4 (1985). 
  The tension between HRS Chapters 92 and 92E, which 
were “written at different times for different purposes and 
without regard for each other,” created substantial conflict and 
uncertainty, leading Governor John Waihee to convene an Ad Hoc 
Committee on Public Records and Privacy Laws in 1987 to consider 
possibilities  for reform.  Governor’s Report  at 2-3.  After 
receiving public comment and holding a series of public 
hearings, the Committee produced a four- volume Governor’s Report 
that comprehensively detail ed the competing interests implicated 
on a wide range of related issues in order to provide a factual 
foundation for sound policy making.  Id. at 5. 
  In its chapter on “Current Issues and Problems,” the 
Governor’s Report contain ed a section entitled “Internal  
Government Processes .”  Id. at 101.  The Report described the 
internal processes of government as “[o]ne of the areas of 
greatest tension in any review of public records law,” noting ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
21 the conflict between ensuring government accountability and 
permitting agencies to freely communicate internally.  Id.  
While discussing the differing interests at stake in the 
disclosure of internal agency correspondence and memoranda, the 
Governor’s Report noted that, based on testimony from the 
Honolulu Managing Director, “ [t]hese materials are not currently 
viewed as public records by government officials under Chapter 
92, HRS, though there are records which the courts have opened 
up on an individual basis.”  Id.   
  However, a review of applicable statutes and caselaw 
makes clear that this view was inaccurate.  Under HRS Chapter 
92, public records were expansively defined to include 
essentially all written materials created or received by an 
agency, save only those “records whi ch invade the right of 
privacy of an individual.”  HRS § 92 -50 (1985)  (“As used in this 
part, ‘public record ’ means any written or printed report, book, 
or paper . . . of the State or of a county . . . in or on which 
an entry has been made . . . or which any public officer or 
16employee has received . . . .” (emphases added)) .  The 
definition did not exclude deliberative communications, nor were 
                                                           
 16 The dissent’s attempted narrowing of HRS § 92 -50’s parameters, 
Dissent at 22 n.3, is contrary to the plain text of the statute.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
22 such public records excluded from the broad disclosure mandate 
contained in HRS § 92- 51.   
  
Thus, prior to the enactment of the UIPA, 
deliberative, pre-decisional agency records were open to public 
inspection under the plain language of HRS Chapter 92.  It is 
therefore unsurprising that both available court decisions on 
the subject resulted in an order that the government agency 
disclose the deliberative materials sought.  See Pauoa- Pacific 
Heights Cmty. Grp. v. Bldg. Dep’t, 79 HLR 790543, 790556 (Jan. 
9, 1980) 
(ordering disclosure of “ building applications, 
building plans, specifications, supporting
 documentation and 
inter and intra office memorandum, reports and recommendations 
requested by Plaintiffs ” (emphasis added)); Honolulu Advertiser, 
Inc. v. Yuen, 79 HLR 790117, 790120, 790128 (Oct. 10, 1979) 
(ordering the release of “ all interoffice and intraoffice 
memorandum, memos to file, or telephone logs pertaining to the 
17Mililani Sewage Treatment Plant ”). 
                                                           
 17 In the order issued in Yuen , the court initially stated that “the 
state of Hawaii has no discretion to withhold the requested records contained 
in its files from the public unless the records requested are specifically 
exempted from public inspection by constitution, statute, regulation, court 
rule, or common law privilege.”  Yuen, 79 HLR at 790128.  Prior to filing its 
order, however, the court crossed out “or common law privilege,” appearing to 
specifically reject upon further consideration any argument that the 
government could rely upon common law principles like the deliberative 
process privilege to resist its statutory disclosure obligations.  See id. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
23   Spurred by the release of the Governor’s Report , 
legislators in the Hawai ‘i House of Representatives in 1988 
introduced the bill that would become the UIPA, largely basing 
the law on the Model Uniform Information Practices Code (MUIPC) 
that had been promulgated in 1980 by the National Conference of 
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws.  H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 
342-88, in 1988 House Journal, at 972.  As adopted by the House, 
the bill incorporated twelve exceptions to disclosure derived 
from Section 2- 103 of the MUIPC, including an exemption for 
deliberative agency records:  
§ -13 Information not subject to duty of disclosure.  (a) 
This chapter shall not require disclosure of:  
 (1) Information compiled for law enforcement 
purposes, including victim or witness assistance 
program files, if the disclosure would:  
 (A) Materially impair the effectiveness of an 
ongoing investigation, criminal intelligence 
operation, or law enforcement proceeding;  
 (B) Identify a confidential informant;  
 (C) Reveal confidential investigative 
techniques or procedures, including criminal 
intelligence activity; or  
 (D) Endanger the life of an individual;  
 (2) Inter -agency or intra -agency advisory, 
consultative, or deliberative material other than 
factual information if:  
 (A) Communicated for the purpose of decision -
making; 
  and 
 (B) Disclosure would substantially inhibit the 
flow of communications within an agency or 
impair an agency ’s decision -making processes[.]  
 (3) Material prepared in anticipation of litigation 
which would not be available to a party in litigation ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
24 with the agency under the rules of pretrial discovery 
for actions in a circuit court of this State;  
 (4) Materials us ed to administer a licensing, 
employment, or academic examination if disclosure 
would compromise the fairness or objectivity of the 
examination process;  
 (5) Information which, if disclosed, would frustrate 
government procurement or give an advantage to any 
person proposing to enter into a contract or 
agreement with an agency including information 
involved in the collective bargaining process 
provided that a roster of employees shall be open to 
inspection by any organization which is allowed to 
challenge existing employee representation;  
 (6) Information identifying real property under 
consideration for public acquisition before 
acquisition of rights to the property; or information 
not otherwise available under the law of this State 
pertaining to real prop erty under consideration for 
public acquisition before making a purchase 
agreement;  
 (7) Administrative or technical information, 
including software, operating protocols, employee 
manuals, or other information, the disclosure of 
which would jeopardize the security of a record -
keeping system;  
 (8) Proprietary information, including computer 
programs and software and other types of information 
manufactured or marketed by persons under exclusive 
legal right, owned by the agency or entrusted to it;  
 (9) Trade s ecrets or confidential commercial and 
financial information obtained, upon request, from a 
person; 
 (10) Library, archival, or museum material 
contributed by private persons to the extent of any 
lawful limitation imposed on the material;  
 (11) Information that is expressly made 
nondisclosable or confidential under federal or state 
law or protected by the rules of evidence.  
 (12) An individually identifiable record not 
disclosable under part III.  
H.B. 2002, 14th Leg., Reg. Sess. , § 1 at 8-10 (1988) (emphasis  
added). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
25   During consideration by the Senate, the Senate 
Government Operations Committee heard testimony from a number of 
parties critical of the exemption  for inter -agency or intra-
agency advisory, consultative, or deliberative material.   The 
witnesses argued that the exemption would close many agency 
records that were open to the public under then- existing law.  
The Chairman of the non- profit government watchdog group Common 
Cause Hawai ‘i, for example, testified that the exemption 
“relating to inter and intra -agency records . . . would result 
in closing off access to records which are currently open to the 
public,” resulting in “a  major NET loss of public information. ”  
The Honolulu Advertiser and KHON- TV also objected to the 
exemption, stating that i t would “ appear to deny access to 
documents which are now public records under existing law and 
which are critical to the public’s right to know. ”  And one of 
the former members of the Ad Hoc  Committee on Public Records and 
Privacy that created the Governo r’s Report testified that the 
provision “relating to inter-  and intra- agency records would 
result in closing off access to records which are currently open 
to the public.”18 
                                                           
 18 The former Ad Hoc Committee member noted that “although access to 
such records is resisted in practice, the only Hawaii legal case resulted in 
the disclosure of this type of internal agency corres pondence.” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
26   After receiving this testimony, the Senate version of 
the bill was amended to rem ove the twelve specific exemptions in 
the House bill and add four of the more general exemptions 
contained under c urrent law, including the frustration of a 
legitimate government function exception now codified in HRS §  
92F-13(3).  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2580, in 1988 Senate 
Journal, at 1095.  Nine of the twelve exemptions contained in 
the House bill were included in the Standing Committee Report--
in the same order in which they occurred in the House bill-- as 
examples of records for which disclosure would frustrate a 
legitimate government function:  
(b) Frustration of legitimate government function.  The 
following are examples of records which need not be 
disclosed,  if disclosure would frustrate a legitimate 
government function,  
(1) Records or information compiled for law 
enforcement purposes;  
(2) Materials used to administer an examination 
which, if disclosed, would compro mise the validity, 
fairness or  objectivity of the examination;  
(3) Information which, if disclosed, would raise the 
cost of government procurements or give a manifestly 
unfair advantage to any person proposing to enter 
into a contract agreement with an agency, including 
information  pertaining to collective ba rgaining;  
(4) Information identifying or pertaining to real 
property under consideration for future public 
acquisition, unl ess otherwise available under State 
law; 
(5) Administrative or technical information, 
including software, operating protocols and employee 
manuals, which, if disclosed, would jeopardize the 
security of a record- keeping system; 
(6) Proprietary information, such as research 
methods, records and data, computer programs and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
27 software and other  types of information  manufactured 
or marketed by persons under exclusive legal right, 
owned by an agency or  entrusted to it;  
(7) Trade secrets or confidential commercial and 
financial information;  
(8) Library, archival, or museum material contributed 
by private persons to the extent of any lawful 
limitation  imposed by the contributor; and  
(9) Information that is expressly made nondis closable 
or confidential under Federal or State law or 
protected by  judicial rule .   
Id.  Of the three exemptions contained in the House bill that 
were not included as examples of records that would frustrate a 
legitimate government interest if disclosed, two were 
19encompassed by other provisions of the Senate bill.   Only one 
exemption that was present in the House bill was omitted 
entirely: the deliberative process provision that the testifying 
witnesses had objected to on the basis that it would close 
records that were open under then-existing law.  Compare id., 
with H.B. 2002, 14th Leg., Reg. Sess., § 1  at 8-10 (1988).   
  That  the omission was intentional is confirmed by the 
report of the Conference Committee, which  opted to adopt the 
general exceptions to disclosure contained in the Senate’s 
version of the bill.  In discussing the frustration of a 
                                                           
 19 Section - 13(a)(3), which exempted nondiscoverable litigation 
materials, was recodified as a separate exception to disclosure in the 
provision that would become HRS § 92F -13(2).  Similarly, section -13(a)(12), 
which exempted individually identifiable records, was encompassed by the 
provision that would become the HRS § 92F -13(1) exception that shields 
records when disclosure would constitute “a clearly unwarranted invasion of 
personal privacy.” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
28 legitimate government function exception, the Conference 
Committee Report referenced the examples listed in the Senate 
Standing Committee Report before stating, “ The records which 
will not be required to be disclosed under [this section] are 
records which are currently unavailable.  It is not the intent 
of the Legislature that this section be used to close currently 
available records, even though these records might fit within 
one of the categories in this section. ”  Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 
112-88, in 1988  House Journal,  at 818 (emphasis added). 
  Thus, the legislative history of the UIPA indicates 
that the legislature made  a conscious choice not  to include a 
deliberative process privilege in the UIPA because it would 
close off records that were historically available to the public 
under Hawai ‘i law.20  OIP’s adoption of such a privilege is 
                                                           
 20 Other legislative history further demonstrates the Hawai ‘i 
legislature’s rejection of the deliberative process privilege.  When adopting 
the Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) in 1980, for instance, the Hawai i 
legislature disclaimed all common law privileges that were not codified by 
statute--including the deliberative process privilege that existed under 
federal common law.  See HRE Rule 501 & cmt.  In choosing which privileges to 
so codify, the legislature and judiciary declined to adopt a deliberative 
process privilege despite one being contained in the  proposed federal rules 
after which the HRE were modeled.  See Rules of Evidence for the United 
States Courts & Magistrates, 56 F.R.D. 183, 251 -52 (Nov. 20, 1972) 
(containing a proposed Rule 509 granting the government a privilege to refuse 
disclosure of “official information,” which was defined to include 
“intragovernmental opinions or recommendations submitted for consideration in 
the performance of decisional or policymaking functions”); HRE Rule 501 cmt. 
(noting that the proposed Rules of Evidence for U.S. Courts and Magistrates 
served as a model for the HRE).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
29 therefore contrary to the clear signals the legislature provided 
as to the intended functioning of the statute.  
C. OIP’s Interpretation of HRS § 92F- 13(3) is Palpably Erroneous 
  T he legislature has provided that OIP’s 
interpretations of the UIPA in an action to compel disclosure 
should generally be considered precedential.   HRS § 92F-15(b).   
Nevertheless, our precedents and the UIPA itself make clear that 
we are not bound to acquiesce in OIP’s interpretation when it is 
“palpably erroneous.”  Peer News LLC v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 
138 Hawai‘ i 53, 67, 376 P.3d 1, 15 (2016); HRS § 92F -15(b).  This 
is to say that “ judicial deference to an agency’s interpretation 
of [even] ambiguous statutory language is ‘constrained by our 
obligation to honor the clear meaning of a statute, as revealed 
by its language, purpose, and history.’”  Kanahele v. Maui Cty. 
Council, 130 Hawai ‘i 228, 244, 307 P.3d 1174, 1190 (2013) 
(quoting Morgan v. Planning Dep’t, Cty. of Kaua ‘i, 104 Hawai ‘i 
173, 180, 86 P.3d 982, 989 (2004)).   
  We have held that, even when OIP has maintained a 
position for many years without challenge, it is this court’s 
duty to reject that position if  it is plainly at odds with the 
UIPA.  In ‘ Ōlelo: The Corp. for Community Television v. OIP , for 
instance, this court considered the “totality of the 
circumstances” test OIP had adopted from out-of- jurisdiction 
precedent to identify an “agency” for purposes of the UIPA.  116 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
30 Hawai‘i 337, 346-49, 173 P.3d 484, 493 -96 (2007).  Though the 
test had been applied in nine OIP opinions over the course of 
21seventeen years,  this court nonetheless held it invalid because 
it was contrary to the “plain and unambiguous” definition of 
“agency” contained in HRS § 92F– 3 (1993).  Id. at 351, 173 P.3d 
at 498.  Similarly, in a previous case also entitled Peer News 
LLC v. City & County of Honolulu, this court determined that a 
nineteen-year-old OIP opinion stating that police officers have 
only a de minimis privacy interest 
in employment -related 
misconduct information was palpably erroneous because the 
interpretation rendered portions of the UIPA a “nullity.” 138 
Hawai‘i at 67, 376 P.3d at 15.  Such a result was “inconsistent 
with [the] underlying legislative intent ” of the statute, we 
held.  Id. at 67 n.10, 376 P.3d at 15 n.10 . 
  Like OIP’s interpretation of HRS § 92F -3 in ‘Ōlelo, OIP 
has maintained in multiple opinions issued over an extended 
period that HRS § 92F-13(3) creates a deliberative process 
22privilege.   As discussed, however, such an interpretation is 
                                                           
 21 See OIP Op. Ltr. Nos. 05 -09, 04-02, 02 -08, 94-24, 94-23, 94-05, 
93-18, 91-05, 90-31. 
 22 See OIP Op. Ltr. No. F19 -01 at 9 (Oct. 11, 2018) (“OIP has issued 
a long line of opinions since 1989 tha
t recognize and limit the deliberative 
process privilege as a form of the frustration exception in section 92F -
13(3).”); see also, e.g. ,  OIP Op. Ltr. Nos. 07 -11, 04-15, 00-01, 93-19, 91-
24, 90-8, 90-3, 89-9.   
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
31 contrary to the clear and unambiguous language of HRS § 92F-
13(3) and the statement of purposes  and policies contained in 
HRS § 92F-2.  And, like in Peer News, the privilege is plainly 
inconsistent with the legislative history of the UIPA, which 
indicates that the legislature specifically rejected a 
23deliberative process exception before enacting the law.   OIP 
therefore palpably erred in adopting an interpretation of HRS § 
92F-13(3) that is irreconcilable with the plain text and 
                                                                        
(. . . continued) 
 
  The City and BFS argue that, by failing to act to correct these 
OIP opinions, the legislature has tacitly approved OIP’s interpretation of 
HRS § 92F- 13(3).  As the United States Supreme Court has stated, even a very 
long period of legislative silence cannot be invoked to validate a statutory 
interpretation that is otherwise impermissible.  Zuber v. Allen, 396 U.S. 
168, 185 n.21 (1969).  Legislative inaction may indicate a range of 
conditions other than approval, including “unawareness, preoccupation, [] 
paralysis,” or simply trust in the state’s court system to correct a clearly 
inconsistent interpretation.  Id.   We therefore decline to recognize 
legislative acquiescence in OIP’s interpretation of HRS § 92F -13(3). 
 23 The OIP opinions do not truly engage with  the clear negative 
implication of the UIPA’s legislative history.  In the 1989 opinion adopting 
the privilege, OIP set forth the Senate Committee Report’s examples of 
records that may fall under HRS § 92F -13(3) before summarily asserting that 
“[a]nother example of government records which if disclosed may result in the 
frustration of a legitimate government function are inter -agency and intra -
agency memoranda or correspondence.”  OIP Op. Ltr. No. 89- 9 at 9.  The 
opinion then discussed a number of federal cases interpreting the 
deliberative process exception contained in the federal Freedom of 
Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(5).  OIP Op. Ltr. No. 89- 9 at 9-11.  But 
these cases interpreting the federal statute are relevant to the Hawai ‘i 
legislature’s intent when enacting the UIPA only insofar as they demonstrate 
that the legislature was clearly aware that other jurisdictions had codified 
the deliberative process privilege, thus making their rejection of such a 
privilege all the more clear.  Importantly, in  adopting the privilege, OIP 
failed to consider or even mention those aspects of the UIPA’s legislative 
history that demonstrate that the privilege had been intentionally omitted 
from the final version of the statute.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
32 24legislative intent of the statute.   See Peer News , 138 Hawai ‘i 
at 67, 376 P.3d at 15; ‘ Ōlelo, 116 Hawai ‘i at 349, 173 P.3d at  
496.  We accordingly conclude that the circuit court erred by 
upholding OIP’s interpretation and by granting summary judgment 
to the City and BFS. 
D. The Requirements of HRS § 92F- 13(3) 
  Because we hold that OIP palpably erred in adopting a 
deliberative process privilege pursuant to the HRS § 92F- 13(3) 
exception for documents that would frustrate a legitimate 
government function if disclosed, we now provide guidance as to 
the provision’s proper application.  The 1988 Senate Standing 
Committee Report, which inclu ded examples of records that may 
fall under the HRS § 92F- 13(3) exception “[t]o assist the 
                                                           
 24 The City and BFS alternatively argue that the deliberative 
process privilege may be based on the HRS § 92F -13(4) exemption for 
“[g]overnment records which, pursuant to state or federal law including an 
order of any state or federal court, are protected from disclosure,” 
contending that the provision incorporates the federal common law 
deliberative process privilege.  This novel theory has not been adopted by 
OIP, which has made some statements indicating that it takes a contrary 
position.  See, e.g., OIP Op. Ltr. No. 05- 06 at 3 (Mar. 22, 2005)  (stating 
that HRS § 92F
-13(4) applies “only where that record is made confidential by 
another statute” (emphasis omitted and added)).  Whether reviewed under a 
palpably erroneous or de novo standard, the government’s argument fails to 
regenerate the privilege from federal common law.  
  Further, as stated, a deliberative process privilege is contrary 
to the plain language of HRS § 92F -2 and the legislative history of the UIPA 
as a whole.  We accordingly hold that the legislature did not intend HRS § 
92F-13(4) to incorporate the federal common law deliberative process 
privilege, which applies exclusively in federal courts when jurisdiction is 
based on a question of federal law.  
See Young v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 
No. CIV 07- 00068 JMS -LEK, 2008 WL 2676365, at *4 (D. Haw. July 8, 2008); 
supra note 20 (describing the Hawai ‘i legislature’s rejection of the common 
law privilege when enacting the HRE).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
33 Judiciary in understanding the legislative intent ,” is highly 
instructive.  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2580, in 1988 Senate 
Journal, at 1095; 
see also Kaapu v. Aloha Tower Dev. Corp., 74 
Haw. 365, 387-89, 846 P.2d 882, 891-92 (1993)  (holding that 
competing development proposals would frustrate a legitimate 
government function within the meaning of HRS § 92F- 13(3) if 
disclosed prior to the agency’s final selection of a developer 
because, inter alia, the records fell “ within one or more of the 
classes of information described in the ” Senate Standing 
Committee Report).  Although it is not necessary that a record 
fall within or be analogous to one of the enumerated 
categories 
for it to be shielded from disclosure under HRS § 92F-13(3), the 
list and the text of the Senate Standing Committee report 
provides guidance as to the provision’s operation.  
  Notably, each of the legislature’s provided examples 
implicates a specific legitimate government function,  including 
the enforcement of laws, the procurement of property, the fair 
administration of exams, and the maintenance of secure record-
keeping systems.  By  contrast, the City and BFS argued that the 
legitimate government function that may be frustrated by the 
disclosure of deliberative records was simply agency decision-
making.  But “decision -making” is such a broad and ill -defined 
category that it threatens to encompass nearly all government 
actions, which almost inevitably involve decisions of some sort.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
34 Indeed, even illegitimate actions beyond the government’s legal 
authority could likely be described as decisions .  Thus, to 
claim the protections of HRS § 92F- 13(3), an agency must define 
the government function that would be frustrated by a record’s 
disclosure with a degree of specificity sufficient for a 
reviewing court to evaluate the legitimacy of the contemplated 
function.25  To hold otherwise would result in  the provision 
having no meaningful limitations. 
  Further, the Senate Standing C ommittee R eport 
indicates that not even the expressly enumerated categories of 
records are automatically exempt from disclosure; the report 
describes the enumerated documents as “examples of records which 
need not be disclosed, if disclosure would frustrate a 
legitimate government function .”  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2580, 
in 1988 Senate Journal, at 1095 (emphasis added).  Thus, HRS § 
92F-13(3) calls for an individualized determination that 
disclosure of the particular record or portion thereof would 
26frustrate a legitimate government function.
  That a record is 
of a certain type--whether that type is deliberative, pre-
                                                           
 25 Under HRS § 92F -15(c), “[t] he agency has the burden of proof to 
establish justification for nondisclosure .”   
 26 As BFS correctly determined in this case, redaction and 
disclosure of the remainder of the record is appropriate when the portion of 
a document that qualifies for withholding under one of HRS § 92F -13’s 
exceptions is reasonably separable from the record as  a whole.  See Peer 
News, 138 Hawai‘ i at 73, 376 P.3d at 21. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
35 decisional, or even a type included in or analogous to the 
examples set forth in the Senate Standing Committee Report--is 
not alone sufficient to shield the record from disclosure under 
the provision.  While such a designation may be instructive, an 
agency must nonetheless demonstrate  a connection between 
disclosure of the specific record and the likely frustration of 
a legitimate government function, including by clearly 
describing the particular frustration and providing concrete 
information indicating that the identified outcome is the likely 
result of disclosure.   See OIP Op. Ltr. No. 03- 16 at 8 (Aug. 14, 
2003) (stating that withholding disclosure of a coaching 
contract under HRS § 92F-13(3) was not justified  because the 
university “has provided us with no specific examples of or any 
concrete information as to how disclosure of the contract will 
frustrate the Athletic Department’s ability to function”). 
  In sum, to justify withholding a record under HRS § 
92F-13(3), an agency must articulate a real connection between 
disclosure of the particular record it is seeking to withhold 
and the likely frustration of a specific legitimate government 
function.  The explanation must provide sufficient detail such 
that OIP or a reviewing court is capable of evaluating the 
legitimacy of the government function and the likelihood that 
the function will be frustrated in an identifiable way if the 
record is disclosed.
  See id. at 8, 16 ( stating that “ [w]e would ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
36 be remiss in our statutory duties if we simply accepted UH’s 
statement that disclosure [of the Head Coach’s compensation 
package] will frustrate a legitimate government function without 
any factual basis to support UH’s assertion”  that disclosure 
“could have the impact of frustrating the Athletic Director’s 
ability to maintain a cohesive coaching team and a successful 
athletic program”) .  In the absence of such a showing , 
withholding disclosure under the provision is not warranted. 
E. The Dissent’s Proposed Rule 
  
The dissent characterizes our holding --that a 
deliberative process privilege is clearly unsupported by the 
plain text and legislative history of the UIPA-- as an “extreme 
position[],”27 and instead advocates for an approach similar to 
                                                           
 27 It is noted that several other states have provided through 
statute and judicial determination that, as we hold today, deliberative 
agency records are generally not exempted from public records request.  See, 
e.g., Conn. Gen. Stat. § 1 -210(e)(1); Vt. Stat. tit. 1, § 317(c)(4); Braddy 
v. State, 219 So.3d 803, 820 (Fla. 2017)(“Inter -office memoranda and intra -
office memoranda communicating information from one public employee to 
another or merely prepared for filing, even though not a part of an agency's 
later, formal public product, would nonetheless constitute public records . . 
. .” (quoting Shevin v. Byron, Harless, Schaffer, Reid & Assocs., Inc., 379 
So. 2d 633, 640 (Fla. 1980)).  And an administrative decision in at least one 
other state has adopted a similar position in the absence of judicial 
guidance or an explicit statutory directive.  See McKitrick v. Utah Attorney 
General’s Office, No. 2009 -14, ¶ 7 (Utah State Records Comm. Sept. 17, 2009), 
https://archives.utah.gov/src/srcappeal -2009-14.html (“The AG’s Office also 
argued that access should be restricted . . . because the common law 
recognizes . . . a ‘deliberative process privilege’ for documents created 
within the executive branch of government.  However, the cases proffered by 
the AG’s office supporting such position clearly predate the enactment of 
[Utah’s public record’s law].”); see also S. Utah Wilderness All. v. 
Automated Geographic Reference Ctr., Div. of Info. Tech., 200 P.3d 643, 656 
(Utah 2008) (holding that the requested internal agency records did not fall 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
37 that taken by the Colorado Supreme Court in City of Colorado 
Springs v. White.  Dissent at 4-5 (citing 
967 P.2d 1042 (Colo. 
1998) (en banc)).  From White , the dissent derives a  proposed 
framework for applying a circumscribed variation of the 
deliberative process privilege that shields  agency deliberations 
only when an agency provides a detailed explanation of why the 
record qualifies for the privilege and the government’s interest 
in confidentiality outweighs the requester’s interest in 
disclosure.  Dissent at 30-32 .  But material differences in 
Colorado’s public records statute and evidentiary rules make 
White inapposite to Hawai ‘i’s UIPA , and the dissent would thus 
usurp the role of the legislature by reading a complex exception 
into the statute that has no basis in its text or legislative 
history. 
  In White, the Colorado Supreme Court held that a 
deliberative process privilege inhered not in a public records 
exception for records that would frustrate government functions 
if disclosed, but rather an exception that expressly protected 
“privileged information” from disclosure.  967 P.2d at 104 5-46 
(citing Colo. Rev. Stat. § 24-72-204(3)(a)(IV) (1998)).  Unlike 
                                                                        
(. . . continued) 
 
within the narrow exception in Utah’s public record law for “temporary 
drafts” produced by an agency).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
38 the Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE), the Colorado Rules of 
Evidence (CRE) provide that claims of privilege are governed by, 
inter alia, “
the principles of the common law as they may be 
interpreted by the courts of the State of Colorado in light of 
reason and experience.”  CRE Rule 501.  The Colorado Supreme 
Court was thus acting within the bounds the legislature had 
established when in White  it recognized a qualified deliberative 
process privilege “as part of the common law of Colorado ” and 
held that the privilege and the balancing test it encompassed 
had been incorporated into the statutory 
public records 
exception for “privileged information.”  967 P.2d at 1050, 54 -
55. 
  In contrast, the dissent does not attempt to ground 
its deliberative process privilege in a UIPA exemption for 
documents that would be undiscoverable in litigation due to an 
evidentiary privilege
.  This is unsurprising because, as 
discussed supra, note 20, the HRE do not allow for common law 
privileges, and the legislature specifically declined to adopt a 
deliberative process privilege when codifying those evidentiary 
privileges that are available.  See HRE Rule 501 (2006).  Thus, 
unlike in the Colorado public records law that was interpreted 
in White, there is no basis to incorporate a common law 
qualified deliberative process privilege or the balancing test 
it encompasses into the UIPA. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
39   Indeed, not only is the dissent’s interpretation 
lacking in affirmative support, but there are strong textual 
signals in the UIPA actively weighing against such a reading.  
HRS § 92F-14 (2012) provides a statutory framework for 
evaluating when a record qualifies for withholding under HRS § 
92F-13(1), which shields “[g]overnment records which, if 
disclosed, would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of 
personal privacy.”  HRS § 92F -14(a) explicitly calls for a 
balancing test similar to the test the dissent would apply here, 
stating that a record will not qualify for withholding when “the 
public interest in disclosure outweighs the privacy interest of 
the individual. ”  No analogous provision exists for the HRS § 
92F-13(3) frustration of a legitimate government function 
exception.  The implication of this absence is that “the 
legislature clearly knew how to” prescribe a  balancing test, and 
its failure to do so with respect to HRS 92F-13(3) represents a 
conscious decision that one should not be applied.  Lales v. 
Wholesale Motors Co., 133 Hawai‘i 332, 345, 328 P.3d 341, 354 
(2014) (quoting White v. Pac. Media Grp., Inc. , 322 F.Supp.2d 
1101, 1114 (D. Haw. 2004)). 
  The dissent’s approach may well represent sound 
policy, and we express no opinion as to its advisability as 
matter of public administration.  But  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
40 [w]e are not at liberty to interpret a statutory provision 
to further a policy that is not articulated in either the 
language of the statute or the relevant legislative 
history, even if we believe that such an interpretation 
would produce a more beneficent result, for the Court's 
function in the application and interpretation of such laws 
must be carefully limited to avoid encroaching on the power 
of the legislature to determine policies and make laws to 
carry them out.  
Lopez v. State, 133 Hawai ‘i 311, 323, 328 P.3d 320, 332 (2014) 
(original alterations and quotations omitted) (quoting Ross v. 
Stouffer Hotel Co. Ltd., Inc., 76 Hawai ‘i 454, 467, 879 P.2d 
1037, 1050 (1994) (Klein, J., concurring and dissenting)).  The 
determination as to whether and to what extent deliberative 
documents should be shielded from disclosure must be made by the 
legislature and not by judicial fiat.  So long as no such 
exception exists in the UIPA, this court may not supply its own. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
  T he circuit court in this case erred in determining 
that the City and BFS were entitled to withhold the budget 
requests pursuant to a deliberative process privilege , which 
finds no basis in the plain text or legislative history of the 
UIPA.  Accordingly, we vacate the circuit court’s January 13, 
2016 Order Granting Defendants City and County of Honolulu and 
Department of Budget and Fiscal Services ’ Motion for Partial 
Summary Judgment on Count I of the Complaint filed October 19, 
2015; January 13, 2016 Order Granting Defendants City and County 
of Honolulu and Department of Budget and Fiscal Services ’ Motion 
for Partial Summary Judgment on Count II of the Complaint filed ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
41 October 19, 2015; and February 5 , 2016 Judgment.  We remand this 
case for further proceedings consistent with the principles set 
forth in this opinion. 
Robert Brian Black 
Sarah Goggans 
for appellant 
 
Duane W.H. Pang 
for appellees  
 
Marissa H.I. Luning
for amicus curiae 
State of Hawai‘ i  
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
