***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
HERMINA M. MORITA, 
Petitioner/Plaintiff- Appellant,  
 
vs. 
 
THOMAS GORAK and STATE OF HAWAI I, 
Respondents/Defendants
-Appellees . 
 
 
SCAP-16-0000686  
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-16-0000686 ; S.P. NO. 16-1 -0251) 
 
NOVEMBER 18, 2019 
 
NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.,  
WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J., DISSENTING  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
  In accordance with the structure of our political 
system, the appointment of many government officials is a shared 
responsibility of the executive and legislative branches.  The 
governor is entitled to choose a nominee for such 
positions, but 
the nominee typically may not take office until the senate has Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-16-0000686
18-NOV-2019
07:54 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
2 voted to confirm the individual, thus ensuring the appointment 
is generally agreeable to both elected branches.
 
 
 Balanced against these political considerations are 
the practical realities of ensuring the day- to-day operations of 
public institutions.  Governmental agencies may experience 
difficulties fulfilling their duties when offices that are 
necessary for their administrative functioning are left vacant.  
To protect against disruption, the Hawai‘i Constitu
tion permits 
the governor to make interim appointments to offices that 
require senate confirmation when a vacancy arises and the senate 
is not in session.  Additionally, the legislature has 
statutorily provided for certain office holders to continue 
their service as a “holdover” official following the expirati on 
of their term, remaining in office until their successor is 
appointed. 
  This case presents a question as to the interaction of 
these provisions: is the governor entitled to make an interim 
appointment when the term of an official who is statutorily 
permitted to holdover expires and the senate is not in session?  
Because there is no indication in the language or the 
legislative history of the holdover statutes to limit  the 
governor’s authority to make interim appointments and the 
statutes would be constitutionally suspect if the legislature 
intended to achieve such an outcome, we conclude that the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
3 governor is permitted to make an interim appointment under these 
circumstances. 
I. BACKGROUND  
A. Facts 
  
The facts in this case are undisputed.1  Prior to June 
30, 2016, the Hawai i Public Utilities Commission (PUC) was 
composed of three commissioners: Randall Iwase, Lorraine Akiba, 
and Michael Champley.  Champley’s term as commissioner was 
scheduled to expire on June 30, 2016.   The 2016 legislative 
session ended on May 5, 2016, without Governor David Ige 
submitting a nomination for a new commissioner to replace 
Champley to the Senate for confirmation. 
  
On June 21, 2016, Governor Ige sent Champley a letter 
informing him of the imminent expiration of his term and 
thanking him for his service.  Champley responded in a letter 
dated June 28, 2016, stating that he intended to continue to 
serve as a “holdover” commissioner until  his successor was  
appointed and confirmed by the senate pursuant to Hawai‘i Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 269-2(a)  (2007).  Nevertheless,  Governor Ige 
announced the following day that he intended to  exercise  the 
governor’s constitutional authority to temporarily fill 
                     
 1 After the filing of the Complaint, the parties filed Joint 
Stipulated Facts, which detail the events leading to the current suit.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
4 vacancies that occur while the s enate is in recess to appoint 
Thomas Gorak to  replace Champley following the expiration of 
Champley’s term.  Gorak was sworn in as commissioner on an 
interim basis on July 1, 2016. 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings 
  
On July 15 , 2016, Hermina Morita, a member of a public 
utility cooperative that is regulated by the PUC , filed a 
complaint and quo warranto petition (Complaint) against Gorak 
and the State of Hawai i in the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (circuit court)
.2  The Complaint alleged that since Gorak 
was sworn in, he had wrongfully occupied the office of the 
commissioner of the PUC  because Champley was still the lawful 
officeholder until his successor was confirmed by the senate.   
Quoting HRS § 269-2, the C omplaint stated that “ [e]ach member 
[of the PUC] shall hold office until the member’s successor is 
appointed and qualified.”  The Complaint pointed to language 
included in a 1980 Hawai i Attorney General Opinion to argue that 
no vacancy exists at the expiration of an incumbent’s term when 
a statute allows the incumbent to continue in office until a  
successor is appointed.  (Citing Op. Att’y Gen . No. 80- 4 
(1980).)  Thus, the Complaint alleged, because no vacancy 
                     
 2 The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
5 existed, the interim appointment power of the governor was not 
implicated.  (Citing Op. Att’y  Gen No. 80-4, at 2.) 
  The C omplaint contained four counts of relief, though 
only two are relevant in this appeal.3  Count I sought an  order 
pursuant to HRS § 659-6 (2016)4, the quo warranto statute,  
declaring that Gorak did not properly hold the office of PUC 
commissioner and prohibiting him from further performing any of 
the post’s official duties .5  Count III sought a declaratory  
judgment as to whether Gorak  lawfully held the office of PUC  
commissioner.   
  The State a
nd Gorak (collectively, Gorak) filed  a 
joint Answer denying that Gorak wrongfully occupied or usurped 
the office of PUC commissioner and that Champley was the lawful 
                     
 3 The parties stipulated to the dismissal of Count II (“Common Law 
Quo Warranto” against Gorak) and Count IV (“Private Attorney General 
Doctrine” against the State) of the Complaint without prejudice.  
 4 HRS § 659-6 provides the following in relevant part:  
[(a)] If a person to whom an order is directed with respect 
to an office of which the person performs the duties does 
not answer within the time allowed or the answer is 
insufficient or it is found that the person has usurped the 
office or continues in it unlawfully, the court in addition 
to declaring the person not qualified to fill the office 
and forbidding the person to perform the duties of the 
office any longer, may direct that a new appointment be 
made and may grant other appropriate relief.  
 5 The parties stipulated to the issuance of an order of quo 
warranto, which directed Gorak to file an answer to the Complaint and to 
“state the authority under which” he “claim[ed] to act as a Commissioner” of 
the PUC. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
6 officeholder.6  On the same day that Gorak filed his  Answer, he 
also filed a Motion for Summary Judgment arguing  that he was  
properly appointed as a commissioner of the PUC  under the 
interim appointments provision of the Hawai i Constitution, which 
authorized the governor to fill a vacancy in any office when the 
senate is not in session.  Gorak contended that this provision, 
contained in article V, section 6 of the Hawai i Constitution, 
did not include the phrase “as provided by law,” and the interim 
appointment power was therefore self- executing; that is, it 
could be exercised on its own without any requirement for 
implementing legislation.  (C iting State v. Rodrigues, 63 Haw. 
412, 414, 629 P.2d 1111, 1113 (1981). )  As a result, Gorak 
asserted, the governor’s interim appointment authority was 
subject only to the limitations stated in the const itutional 
provision itself, and any statutes touching upon interim 
appointments are effective only if consistent with the 
provision. 
  The statute in dispute in  this case, Gorak stated, was 
HRS § 269- 2, which provides that “[e]ach member [of the PUC] 
shall hold office until the member’s successor is appointed and 
                     
 6 Gorak admitted that an “actual controversy” existed regarding 
whether Gorak was properly appointed and qualified so as to end Champley’s 
term on July 1, 2016.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
7 qualified.”7  This statute allows, though does  not require, a 
member of the PUC to continue to serve in the position after the 
expiration of the member’s term as a “holdover,” Gorak 
explained.  But, Gorak argued, this statute cannot be 
interpreted to circumvent the g overnor’s interim appointment 
authority.  Therefore the statute cannot prevent a vacancy from 
occurring upon the expiration of a term, Gorak contended; 
otherwise the governor’s co nstitutional authority would be 
“substantially--and in individual cases, completely
--undercut”  
as it would allow the legislature to define when the 
governor 
can exercise a power that the c onstitution granted solely to the 
governor.  Defining “vacancy” to i nclude the end of a set term 
is consistent with the authorities granted to the 
governor in 
the Hawai i Constitution, Gorak asserted.   Accordingly, Gorak 
concluded that the expiration of Champley’s term constituted a 
                     
 7 Gorak argued that it was significant that the statute uses the 
word “qualified” rather than the phrase “confirmed by the senate,” which is 
used in similar statutes.  (Citing HRS §§  302A-123 (Supp. 2016), 304A -104 
(Supp. 2016).)  Because the legislature chose to use a different term in HRS 
§ 269-2(a), Gorak contended, the court should presume that the difference is 
intentional and give the difference effect when construing the statute.  
(Citing Agustin v. Dan Ostrow Const. Co., 64 Haw. 80, 83, 636 P.2d 1348, 1351 
(1981).)  “Qualified,” Gorak  contended, means the governor has reviewed the 
appointee’s qualifications and the appointee has taken the oath of office, 
whereas “confirmation” is a function of the senate that is used for full -term 
appointments.  (Citing Haw. Const. art. XVI, §  4; Haw. Const. art. V, §  6; 
Sierra Club v. Castle & Cooke Homes Hawai i, Inc., 132 Hawai i 184, 192, 320 
P.3d 849, 857 (2013).)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
8 “vacancy” that Governor Ige  could fill using his interim 
appointment power.8 
  
Morita responded by fil ing a consolidated Cross-Motion 
for Partial Summary Judgment (cross-motion) and opposition to 
Gorak’s motion, arguing that the Hawai i Constitution only grants 
the governor the interim appointment power when there is a 
“vacancy,” and the term “vacancy” means only an office that is 
unoccupied or empty.  (C iting Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. 
Cayetano, 94 Hawai i 1, 6 P.3d 799 (2000).)  Here, Morita 
contended that there was no “vacancy”  for which Governor Ige 
could utilize his interim appointment power because Champley did 
not resign and was not otherwise removed from office.  Morita 
also argued that the meaning of “vacancy”  necessarily derives  
from statutory authority because the Hawaii Constitution is 
silent as to the duration of a PUC c ommissioner’s term.   Under 
HRS § 269-2(a), Morita asserted, there was not a vacancy because 
Champley was entitled to 
hold the commissioner position until 
Champley’s successor was confirmed by the s enate--a necessary 
legal requirement to be “qualified” as a commissioner of the PUC 
under the statute.  Thus, Morita concluded that the governor’s 
                     
 8 Regarding declaratory relief, Gorak also argued that Morita 
lacked standing because the Complaint made no allegations on which a 
“distinct and palpable” injury to Morita could be based and “[a]ny such 
allegation would likely be based on speculation and conjecture in any event.”  
(Citing Hanabusa v. Lingle, 119 Hawai i 341, 347, 198 P.3d 604, 610 (2008).)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
9 interim appointment power was not implicated because there was 
not an actual vacancy at the time of Gorak’s appoin tment.9 
  Pursuant to the parties’ stipulation, the 
Hawai‘i State 
Senate filed an amicus curi ae brief in support of Morita.  
Included as exhibits to the brief were two attorney general 
opinions.  The first was the 1980 letter cited by the C omplaint, 
Opinion 80-4, which was issued in response to inquiries by the 
chairman of a senate committee regarding the length of time a 
holdover official is authorized to continue serving if
 the 
official’s  nomination for a second term is rejected by the 
senate.  In explaining the operation of a holdover statute, the 
opinion stated the following:
 
Where a statute specifies that the incumbent shall continue 
to hold office until his successor is appointed and 
qualified, it is well settled that the incumbent retains 
his office as a de jure officer and no vacancy exists at 
the expiration of the incumbent’s term.  Therefore, the 
interim appointment power of the governor is not activated.  
Op. Att’y Gen. No. 80-4, at 2.   
  Also attached to the amicus curiae brief was a second, 
more recent attorney general opinion.  In response to questions 
posed by the Senate President following Gorak’s ostensible 
interim appointment, the attorney general issued Opinion 16-3, 
which concluded that “the Governor is authorized by article V, 
                     
 9 Morita argued that she had standing to obtain declaratory relief 
because she suffered an injury in fact as a result of the State wrongfully 
paying Gorak’s salary using funds she contributed to as taxpayer.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
10 section 6 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution to appoint a successor 
member to the PUC when the term of the incumbent member expires, 
and irrespective of whether the incumbent continues to serve as 
a holdover member.”  Op. Att’y Gen. No. 16-3, at 1 (2016).  The 
opinion “acknowledge[d] that some portions of Attorney General 
Opinion No. 80-4 included statements that indicated otherwise.”  
Id.  
The opinion stated, however, that “those issues were not 
central to the issue resolved in that opinion and are superseded 
by the analysis offered here.”  Id. 
  T he Senate asserted in its brief that the conflicting 
attorney general opinions exemplified the actual controversy at 
issue in the case.  The latter opinion misinterpreted article V, 
section 6, the Senate argued, by ignoring the different ways in 
which the Hawai ‘i 
Constitution provides for the appointment and 
removal of single executive department heads, members of boards 
and commissions that head principal departments, and all other 
officers that require senate confirmation.  The constitution 
makes only single executive department heads removable at the 
governor’s discretion, the Senate contended.  By contrast, the 
terms of office and removal of department- head commission 
members and all other officers requiring senate confirmation are 
set by statute, the Senate continued, and the governor cannot 
use the interim appointment power to circumvent the requirements 
the legislature has prescribed.
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
11   In a consolidated reply  to Morita and the Senate’s 
respective filings, Gorak reiterated the arguments from his 
motion, stating that t
he legislature may define a “vacancy” only 
if it does so in a manner consistent with the grant of power in 
article V, section 6 of the Hawai i Constitution.  
Morita’s  
interpretation of “vacancy”  under HRS § 269 -2, Gorak contended, 
impermissibly limited the governor’s constitutional  interim 
appointment power and threatened the balance between the 
executive and legislative branches of government
. 
  The circuit court granted Gorak’s Motion for Summary 
Judgment and denied Morita’s cross-motion.  The court found that 
“Champley’s term of office  . . . expired on June 30, 2016, and 
that a vacancy occurred for purposes of article V, section 6 of 
the Hawai i
 Constitution upon the expiration of Mr. Champley’ s 
term of office.”  Therefore, the court concluded that “Governor 
Ige’s interim appointment of Mr. Thomas Gorak as a commissioner 
on the PUC when the Senate  was not in session was valid.”10  
Counts I and III were accordingly dismissed without prejudice.  
On October 17, 2016, Morita  filed a timely notice of appeal 
challenging the circuit court’s Final Judgment in Favor of 
                     
 10 The court also found that Morita failed to establish that she had 
standing to obtain declaratory relief.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
12 Respondent-Defendants Thomas Gorak and the State of Hawai‘i and 
Against Petitioner-Plaintiff Hermina M. Morita (judgment).    
C. Subsequent Events  
  On March 28, 2017, during the course of briefing 
before the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA), Governor Ige 
submitted Gorak’s interim appointment as PUC commissioner to the 
Senate for confirmation.  2017 Senate Journal, at 396 (Gov. Msg.  
No. 703); see also G ov. Msg. No. 703, 29th Leg., Reg. Sess. 
(2017).11  One month later, the Senate voted to reject Gorak’s  
confirmation.  2017 Senate Journal, at 591 -94.  Following the 
close of the 2017 regular legislative session, Governor Ige 
again invoked his interim appointment powers to name  James P. 
Griffin as PUC commissioner on an interim basis.   Press Release, 
Hawai‘i Governor’s Office, Governor Ige Appoints UH Faculty 
Member, Researcher James Griffin to Public Utilities Commission 
(May 19, 2017).12  Thereafter, Governor Ige submitted Griffin’s 
appointment to the Senate during a special session for 
confirmation, and Griffi n was unanimously confirmed by the 
                     
 11 https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/Archives/measure_indiv_  
Archives.aspx?billtype=GM&billnumber=703&year=2017 [https://perma.cc/VGG9 -
A98U]. 
 12 https://governor.hawaii.gov/newsroom/governors -office-news-
release- governor- ige-appoints- uh-faculty- member-researcher- james-griffin- to-
public-utilities- commission/  [https://perma.cc/857Q -FAAY].  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
13 Senate on August 31, 2017.13  2017 Senate Journal, Spec. Sess., 
at 1 (Gov. Msg. No. 3); id. at 40 .  Although it had participated 
as amicus curiae before the trial court, the Senate made no 
further filings or appearances throughout the appeal  of this 
case. 
  After  the close of briefing, Morita filed an 
application for transfer to this court, arguing that the case 
involved a matter of fundamental public importance that turned 
on a novel question of law.  Gorak filed a response stating he 
had no objection to transfer, and this court accepted Morita’s 
application on July 19, 2017.    
II. STANDARD  OF REVIEW 
  This court reviews questions  of constitutional law de 
novo under the “right/wrong” standard.  State v. Sasai, 143 
Hawaii 285, 294, 429 P.3d 1214, 1223 (2018); State v. Arceo, 84 
Hawaii 1, 11, 928 P.2d 843, 853 (1996). 
III. DISCUSSION 
  Article V, section 6 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution 
empowers the governor to make interim appointments to offices 
                     
 13 Although the Senate’s rejection of Gorak’s confirmation and 
Griffin’s subsequent appointment and confirmation is n ot in the record, we 
have the discretion to take judicial notice of such matters under Hawai i 
Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 201 (2016) as “it is a matter of public record 
and easily verifiable.”  Williams v. Aona, 121 Hawai i 1, 11 n.6, 210 P.3d 
501, 511 n.6 (2009). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
14 that require senate confirmation  when a vacancy arises in such 
office and the s enate is not in session.  Rather than following 
the typical procedure, under which the governor nominates an 
individual who takes office for  a full term if the senate votes 
to confirm the nominee, an interim appointee may be sworn into 
office at the time the appointment is made effective, and the 
senate may thereafter vote to confirm the interim  appointment.  
Haw. Const. art. V, §  6.  If the senate declines to do so, the 
interim appointment expires at  the end of the next legislative 
session.  Id. 
  T he constitution itself requires s enate confirmation  
for the appointment of the heads of principle executive 
departments, but the governor’s interim appointment power is not 
limited to these offices.  It applies when there is a vacancy in 
“any office, appointment to which requires the confirmation of 
the senate,” including those that the legislature has chosen to 
statutorily condition appointment on senate confirmation.  See  
id.  The legislature has so conditioned appointment to the 
office of PUC commissioner, which is established by HRS § 269-2.  
HRS § 269 -2(a) states in relevant part, “There shall be a public 
utilities commission of three members, to be called 
commissioners, and who shall be appointed in the manner 
prescribed in section 26- 34, except as otherwise provided in 
this section.”  HRS § 26-34(a) (2009) in turn provides that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
15 (continued . . .)  “[t]he members of each board and commission established by law 
shall be nominated and, by and with the advice and consent of 
the senate, appointed by the governor. ”  There is accordingly no 
dispute that the governor is entitled to exercise the interim 
appointment power if a vacancy occurs on the PUC  when the s enate 
is not in session. 
  
This case instead turns on when  the office of PUC  
commissioner may be considered vacant for purposes of the 
interim appointment power.14  Under HRS § 269-2(a), “[a] ll 
members [of the PUC] shall be appointed for terms of six years 
each,
” and “[e] ach member shall hold office until the member ’s 
successor is appointed and qualified. ”  A PUC commissioner thus  
typically serves for a designated  term,15 then continues to hold 
                     
 14 As a threshold matter, Morita preemptively argues that any 
concerns about mootness may be overcome by the public interest exception to 
the doctrine that this court has recognized.  This court has stated that we 
may decide the merits of a case  in which we cannot order the requested relief 
if there are public interests at stake and the question at the heart of the 
case is likely to recur, making an authoritative determination of the legal 
issues involved desirable for the future guidance of public officers.  Wong 
v. Bd. of Regents, 62 Haw. 391, 395 -96, 616 P.2d 201, 204 (1980) (quoting 
Johnston v. Ing, 50 Haw. 379, 381, 441 P.2d 138, 140 (1968)).  PUC 
commissioners make important decisions regarding public utilities, and their 
terms of office routinely expire after the last day of the regular 
legislative session.  A conflict over the governor’s authority to make an 
interim appointment during a commissioner’s holdover service is thus likely 
to recur, and it is in the public interest that this court  resolves this 
case.  We thus agree that a mootness argument would easily be dispensed with 
because this case would fall into the public interest exception in any event.  
 15 Although HRS § 269 -2 states that a commissioner’s term shall be 
six years, HRS § 26- 34(c), which applies to the PUC whe n HRS § 269 -2 does not 
provide otherwise, specifies that “[a] vacancy occurring in the membership of 
any board or commission during a term shall be filled for the unexpired term 
thereof, subject to Article V, section 6 o f the Constitution of the State.”  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
office as an out- of-term “holdover” until the commissioner’s 
successor is appointed and qualified.  If the office of PUC 
commissioner was vacant during the commissioner’s out -of-term 
holdover service, Governor Ige was authorized to exercise his 
interim appointment power following the June 30, 2016  expiration 
of Champley’s term, making his appointment of Gorak lawful.  If 
the PUC holdover provision precludes a vacancy, however, Gorak 
could not be lawfully appointed to the position.  
16   “The doctrine of ‘constitutional doubt,’ a 
well-settled canon of statutory construction, counsels that 
‘where a statute is susceptible of two constructions, by one of 
which grave and doubtful constitutional questions 
arise and by 
the other of which such questions are avoided, our duty is [to] 
adopt the latter.’”  In re Doe , 96 Hawai ‘i 73, 81, 26 P.3d 562, 
570 (2001) (quoting Jones v. United States, 529 U.S. 848, 857 
(2000)).  We therefore begin by considering  the text and history 
of the interim appointments clause  and the role it plays within 
the constitutional balance of power to determine whether an 
interpretation of the holdover provisions that prevents a 
vacancy from arising would be constitutionally permissible.   We 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
Consequently, when Champley was appointed following his predecessor’s 
resignation, his term was scheduled to expire six years from his 
predecessor’s original appointment rather than six years from his own.  No 
party has argued that HRS § 26 -34(c) is inconsistent with HRS § 269 -2.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
17 then turn to the language, structure, and legislative history of 
HRS §§ 26- 34 and 269- 2 to determine whether the holdover 
provisions were in fact intended to prevent a vacancy from 
arising. 
A. The Holdover Provisions Would Be Constitutionally Suspect if 
Interpreted to Preclude a Vacancy for Purposes of the Governor’s 
Interim Appointment Power   
1. By Its Terms, the Interim Appointment Power I s Self-Executing 
and Not Subject to Statutory Limitations 
  The i nterim a ppointment s clause of article V, section 
6 of the Hawai
i Constitution states in relevant part as follows:  
When the senate is not in session and a vacancy occurs in 
any office, appointment to which requires the confirmation 
of the senate, the governor may fill the office by granting 
a commission which shall expire, unless such appointment is 
confirmed, at the end of the next session of the senate.   
Notably, the clause does not contain the phrase “as provided by 
law,” which is included in a number  of other provisions in the 
constitution that govern appointments.  For example, article X, 
section 2 states that “[t]he governor shall nominate and, by and 
with the advice and consent of the senate, appoint the members 
of the board of education, as provided by law. ”  (Emphasis 
added.)  Similarly, article X, section 6 provides that the 
members of the Board of Regents of the University of Hawai‘i 
“shall be nominated and, by and with the advice and consent of 
the senate, appointed by the governor from pools of qualified 
candidates presented to the governor by the candidate advisory ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
18 council for the board of regents of the University of Hawaii, as 
provided by law. ”  (Emphasis added.)  
  The omission is significant.   The phrase “as provided 
by law” indicates that, as long as it complies with the basic 
text of the provision, the subject matter “may be dealt with by 
the Legislature as it deems appropriate.”  State v. Rodrigues, 
63 Haw. 412, 415, 629 P.2d 1111, 1114 (1981) (quoting Agnew v. 
Schneider, 253 N.W.2d 184, 187 (N.D. 1977)).  Its absence in the 
interim appointments clause suggests the constitution does not 
contemplate a role for the legislature in prescribing the time 
and manner in which the g overnor may make interim appointments.   
  This impression is strengthened by a rticle XVI, 
section 16 of the Hawai‘i Constitu
tion, which  requires this court 
to interpret constitutional provisions to “ be self-executing to 
the fullest extent that their respective natures permit. ”  To 
fulfill this mandate, we set forth the test for identifying a 
self-executing constitutional provision in State v. Rodrigues, 
63 Haw. at 414, 629 P.2d at  1113.  Adopting the standard 
articulated by the United States Supreme Court, we stated, 
A constitutional provision may be said to be self -executing 
if it supplies a sufficient rule by means of which the 
right given may be enjoyed and protected, or the duty 
imposed may be enforced; and it is not self -executing when 
it merely indicates principles, without laying down rules 
by means of which those principles may be given the force 
of law. 
Id. (quoting Davis v. Burke, 179 U.S. 399, 403 (1900)). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
19 (continued . . .)    Under this test, it is clear that the governor’s 
interim appointment power is self- executing.  Rather than laying 
out only general principles and leaving the details to be 
defined through legislation, the clause outlines definite 
standards as to when and how the governor may utilize the power.  
There is thus no doubt that the interim appointment clause 
carries the force of law on its own accord, and it is axiomatic 
that a self-executing constitutional provision may not be 
curtailed or qualified by statute.  
See State v. Handa, 66 Haw. 
82, 84, 657 P.2d 464, 466 (1983) (“[T]he constitution as the 
highest . . . expression of the law-making power, operates to 
repeal or supersede . . . all statutes that are . . . 
inconsistent with the ful l operation of its provisions.” (first 
alteration in original) (quoting 16 C.J.S. Constitutional Law § 
43, at 135)).  In sum, the text of the constitution indicates 
that the governor’s c onstitutional authority to make interim 
appointments was meant to supersede any restrictions that the 
legislature might attempt to place upon it.16 
                     
 16 The dissent contends that the self -executing nature of the 
interim appointments provision is irrelevant because “the provision does not 
conflict with any statute.”  Dissent at 1 8.  Holdover provisions that 
preclude vacancies do not conflict with the governor’s interim appointment 
power, the dissent argues, because “[t]aken to its logical end, this argument 
cannot support a functioning government because any otherwise -valid law that 
bears on appointing an officer would in some small way necessarily limit the 
interim appointments clause by causing the position not to be vacant.”  Id.  
The dissent’s contention is clearly incorrect.  The logical end of our 
position is that the legislature cannot prevent a vacancy from arising at the 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
20 2. The Constitutional History Demonstrates a Choice by the 
Delegates to Utilize Interim Appointments Instead of Holdover 
Service 
  To the extent the interim appointments clause is 
ambiguous as to its interaction with a statutory holdover 
provision, “extrinsic aids may be examined to determine the 
intent of the framers and the people adopting the proposed 
amendment.”  State v. Kahlbaun, 64 Haw. 197, 201-02, 638 P.2d 
309, 314 (1981).  The committee reports and floor debates of the 
1950 constitutional convention during which the clause was 
drafted make no specific mention of the governor’s interim 
appointment power.  But a closer examination of the proposals 
bearing on executive power indicates that the delegates 
specifically considered and rejected holdover provisions similar 
to the ones now appearing in HRS §§ 26- 34 and 269 -2. 
  Two  proposals bearing on the issue were submitted to 
the Committee on Executive Powers and Functions when it was 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
end of a legislatively prescribed term.  The power of the legislature, for 
example, to set the dates of terms of office, prescribe the length and number 
of terms, and provide for the removal of PUC commissioners is unaffected by 
our conclusion that the legislature cannot preclude vacancies from arising 
outright, which would substantially constrict the interim appointment power 
granted by article V, section 6.  Whether, and to what extent, the 
legislature’s otherwise lawful authority could constitutionally restrict the 
governor’s interim appointment power is a grave constitutional question.  
Because the dissent’s  interpretation of HRS §  269-2 presents that question, 
and our construction avoids it, “our duty is [to] adopt the latter.”  In re 
Doe, 96 Hawai‘ i 73, 81, 26 P.3d 562, 570 (2001) (quoting Jones v. United 
States, 529 U.S. 848, 857 (2000) ).  This conclusion is further militated by 
the absence of any legislative intent that HRS §  269-2 restricts the 
governor’s interim appointment power.  See infra Part III.B.2.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
21 drafting the committee proposal that would eventually become 
article V, section 6 of the Hawai‘i 
Constitution.  The first,  
proposal 22, was entitled “Appointment, Removal and Tenure of 
Department Heads and High Governmen tal Officers.”  Proposal No. 
22 (April 14, 1950) at 1, in 1950 Constitutional Convention 
materials, Box 12  (on file with the Hawai i State Archives).  The 
proposal provided that  
the members of all boards and commissions of a public 
character that may be created by law . . . . shall be 
appointed for terms to expire with the term of the 
governor, and until their successors are appointed and 
qualified; provided, that the terms of members of boards 
and commissions may otherwise expire if so provided by law.  
Id. at 1-2 (emphasis added).  Similarly, proposal 176, entitled 
“A Proposal Relating to Power of Appointment to Fill Vacancies - 
Tenure of Appointees,” stated, “The Governor shall fill  all 
vacancies in public offices unless otherwise provided by this 
constitution and law, and his appointees shall serve until their 
successors are duly elected or appointed and qualified .”  
Proposal No. 176 (May 20, 1950) at 1, in 1950 Constitutional 
Convention materials, Box 12 (emphasis added) (on file with the 
Hawai
i State Archives).  But the Committee on Executive Powers 
and Functions rejected the language from both proposals, and no 
holdover provision was included in the committee proposal that 
was ultimately reported to the Committee on the Whole.  See 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 67, 1  Proceedings of the Constitutional 
Convention of Hawaii of 1950,  at 215-22 (1960) (I Proceedings) ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
22 (containing copy of measure as referred by the Committee on 
Executive Powers and Functions to the Committee on the Whole). 
  Instead, the committee proposal included the interim 
appointments clause as it now appears in article V, section 6 of 
the Hawai ‘i Const
itution.  This suggests a conscious decision on 
the part of the framers that the composition of a commission 
following the expiration of a commissioner’s term should be 
determined by the governor when the s enate is not in session--
and not by the previous office holder ’s decision as to whether 
or not to holdover.   And while the legislature may certainly act 
to ensure these commissions are able to fulfill their 
administrative functions when the governor has not moved to make 
such an appointment, the framers do not appear to have intended 
that the legislature could deprive the governor of this core 
power.   
 
 The dissent maintains that the framers’ rejection of 
the holdover provision does not demonstrate a preference for 
interim appointments,  but instead indicates that the framers 
intended to leave the application of a holdover provision “open 
for legislative treatment as future conditions may require.”  
Dissent at 9 (quoting Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 67 in I Proceedings,  
at 215).  However, the language quoted by the dissent does not 
relate directly to either interim appointments or holdover 
provisions.  Instead, it  is a general statement that certain ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
23 specified matters should be left open for legislative treatment 
as required by future conditions.17  See Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 67 
in I Proceedings, at 215.  Indeed, the very next sentence of 
Committee Report No. 67
, after the passage quoted by the 
dissent, states the following:  
Your Committee believes that it is only through such 
delegation  to the Legislature that the flexibility 
necessary to keep government in step with economic and 
social development is possible.  
 
Id. (emphasis added).  Thus, the drafters of the Committee 
Report expressly indicated that subjects  left “open for 
legislative treatment ” were those that had been delegated to the 
legislature.  Id.   
  For example, the Committee stated that “[i]n case of a 
tie vote or a contested election, the selection of a Governor 
shall be determined in such manner as may be provided by law .”  
Id. at 216 (emphasis added).  In regard to the Lieutenant 
Governor, the Committee stated that the Lieutenant Governor 
would “perform such duties as may be prescribed by law. ”  Id. 
(emphasis added).  The Committee also recommended that the 
“Legislature by law allocate the usual duties of the Secretary 
[of State] . . . to the office of Lieutenant Governor .”  Id. at 
                     
 17 It is noted that the Committee Report relied upon by the dissent 
also states the following: “Th e fundamental principle upon which your 
Committee Proposal was drafted is that of concentration of executive power in 
the Governor, which would give the best government.”  Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 
67 in I Proceedings, at 215. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
24 (continued . . .)  216-17 (emphasis added).  As related to the principal 
departments in the executive branch, the Committee stated that 
“the number . . . shall be l imited to not more than 20 and the 
Legislature shall be required to allocate the existing 
departments, boards and other agencies among and within the 20 . 
. . departments.”  Id. at 217 (emphasis added).  In regard to 
the leadership of these departments, the Committee recommended 
that “[e] ach . . . department shall be headed by a single 
executive unless otherwise provided by law.”  Id. (emphasis 
added).  Significantly, the Committee recommended that the 
members of quasi-judicial or quasi
-legislative bodies, such as 
the PUC, should be protected from removal and that “restrictions 
on removal should be provided by law.”  Id. at 217.18  These 
                     
 18 The dissent maintains that because article V, section 6 delegates 
the manner of removal of PUC commissioners to the legislature, the 
legislature is empowered to prevent a vacancy from arising on the PUC.  
Dissent at 5-6 .  Thus, the dissent argues, the phrase “ [e]ach member shall 
hold office until the member’s successor is appointed and qualified” in HRS 
§ 269-2(a) is in fact a restriction on the governor’s ability to remove a 
holdover PUC commissioner.  Id. at 6-7; HRS § 269-2(a).  First, this case 
turns on whether the position was “vacant” for the purposes of the interim 
appointment power, not on the governor’s ability to remove PUC commissioners, 
which the constitution specifies in article V, section 6 shall be provided by 
law unless otherwise prescribed by the constitution.  
  Second, the dissent’s conclusion that the phrase “shall hold 
office until the member’s successor is appointed and qualified” bears on 
removal is without basis and inconsistent with the manner in which HRS 
§§ 269-2 and 26- 34 interrelate.  HRS §  269-2(a) provides that PUC 
commissioners 
shall be appointed in the manner prescribed in section 26 -
34, except as otherwise provided in this section. . . .  
Section 26 -34 shall not apply insofar as it relates to  the 
number of terms and consecutive number of years a member 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
25 examples demonstrate that when  the Committee intended to leave a  
subject open for legislative treatment, it stated  as much. 
  Moreover, all of these express delegations of 
authority to the legislature are embodied in a rticle V of the 
Hawaii Constitut ion.  Not part of the Committee Report,  and not 
included in article V, is a delegation of authority to the 
legislature that it may provide by law restrictions on the 
governor’s interim appointment power.   Thus, it appears clear 
that the composition of a commission following the expiration of 
a commissioner’s term should be determined by the governor when 
the senate is not in session as this authority was not “provided 
by law” to the legislature by article V. 
3. Interpreting HRS §§ 269-2 and 26-34 To Be Subject to the 
Interim Appointment Authority Preserves the Constitutional 
Balance of Power 
  Under longstanding canons of statutory construction, 
“if one construction would make it possible for a branch of 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
can serve on the commission; provided that no member shall 
serve more than twelve consecutive years.  
HRS § 269-2(a) (emphasis added).   
 Notably absent from the listed derogations is removal.  This is because 
the removal of PUC commissioners is governed by HRS  § 26-34(d) and not by HRS 
§ 269-2(a).  See HRS § 26-34(d) (“The governor may remove or suspend for 
cause any member of any board or commission after due notice and public 
hearing.”).  To read HRS §  269-2(a) as bearing on removal is contrary to the 
legislature’s expressed intent to have HRS §  26-34(d) govern the removal of 
PUC commissioners.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
26 government substantially to enhance its power in relation to 
another, while the opposite construction would not have such an 
effect, the principle of checks and balances would be better 
served by a choice of the latter interpretation.”  Staebler v. 
Carter, 464 F.Supp. 585, 599 –600 (D.D.C. 1979).  From a 
functional standpoint, permitting the legislature to preclude a 
vacancy from arising upon the expiration of a PUC commissioner’s 
term would represent a significant shift in the balance of power 
between the branches of government.   
  If , upon the expiration of a PUC  commissioner’s term,  
the governor is permitted to make an interim appointment that 
the legislature disapproves of, the legislature maintains the 
option of holding a special session in order to swi
ftly remove 
the interim office holder by rejecting the temporary appointment 
or simply adjourning without confirming it.  See  Haw. Const. 
art. V, § 6 (“When the senate is not in session and a vacancy 
occurs in any office, appointment to which requires the 
confirmation of the senate, the governor may fill the office by 
granting a commission which shall expire, unless such 
appointment is confirmed, at the end of the next session of the 
senate.” (e mphasis added)); see also Sierra Club v. Castle & 
Cooke Homes Hawai‘ i, Inc., 132 Hawai‘i 184, 196, 320 P.3d 849, 
861 (2013) (rejecting an interpretation of a statutory holdover 
provision that would allow a previously appointed commissioner ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
27 to remain in office after the s enate has declined to confirm the 
member’s nomination). 
  
By contrast, were we to allow the legislature to 
preclude a vacancy from arising upon the conclusion of a 
commissioner’s term , the governor would be without recourse to 
replace a holdover commissioner if the l egislature refuses to 
confirm a new appointment.  A holdover whom the g overnor does 
not wish to be in office could therefore serve until at least 
the end of the second regular legislative session after the 
expiration of the commissioner’s  term, and possibly for a full 
second six-year term.19 
  This court has stated that “the subject of appointment 
of members to boards and commission must necessarily be 
considered to be the joint responsibility of the governor and 
senate.”  Life of the Land v. Burns, 59 Haw. 244, 251, 580 P.2d 
405, 410 (1978).  Permitting the legislature to prevent the 
governor from exercising a constitutional prerogative would 
represent a substantial diminishment in the executive power 
                     
 19 HRS § 26- 34(b), which applies to the PUC unless HRS § 269 -2 
provides otherwise, states that “a holdover member shall not hold office 
beyond the end of the second regular legislative session following the 
expiration of the member’s term of office.”  HRS § 269 -2(a) states that 
“Section 26- 34 shall not apply insofar as it relates to the number of terms 
and consecutive number of years a member can serve on the commission; 
provided that no member shall serve more than twelve consecutive years.”  We 
need not now decide whether the limitation on holdover service included in 
HRS § 26- 34(b) is consistent with HRS § 269 -2 and thus would be applicable to 
PUC commissioners. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
28 granted by the Hawai ‘i Constitution, and it is questionable 
whether our constitution would allow such a rebalancing. 
  Contrary to the foregoing, the dissent asserts that 
prohibiting the legislature from precluding a vacancy from 
arising unduly rebalances  power in favor of the g overnor.  See 
Dissent at 21 -22.  This is because, the dissent argues, terms of 
office for PUC commissioners always expire when the senate is 
not in session.  Id. at 2 2.  The dissent hypothesizes  that the 
governor could “refrain from nominating individuals for senate 
confirmation while the senate is in session and utilize the 
interim appointment power instead, wholly depriving the senate 
of a role in the appointment process.”  Id.  First, t his 
ostensible threat is not a product of our interpretation.  As 
the dissent acknowledges, a t the very least a holdover member 
may not remain in office “ beyond the end of the second regular 
legislative session following the expiration of the member’s 
term of office.”   Id. at 22 n.14 (emphasis added) (quoting HRS 
§ 26-34(b) ).  And, as the dissent also acknowledges,  “[o]nce 
that period expires, a vacancy in office is created allowing the 
governor to utilize the interim appointment power if the senate 
is not in session pursuant to article V, section 6.”  Id. at 22-
23 n.14.  Thus, the holdover period for PUC commissioners, like 
the regular term of office,
 would always expire while the senate 
is not in session.  Accordingly, even under the dissent’s ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
29 position, the gover nor could “deprive the senate of a role in 
the appointment process.”20   
  However , the threat posited by the dissent is 
illusory.  As discussed above, the legislature maintains the 
option of holding a special session in order to remove the 
interim office holder.  The legislature may remove the interim 
appointee by rejecting the temporary appointment or by 
adjourning the special session without confirming the appointee.  
Haw. Const. art. V, § 6.  Rather than revealing a re balancing of 
power, the dissent’s h ypothetical merely demonstrates how the 
checks and balances embodied in our constitution operate between 
the branches of government.  Furthermore, the expiration of the 
PUC commissioner’s term is set by statute.   See HRS § 26-34 
(“Unless otherwise provided by law, each term shall commence on 
July 1 and expire on June 30. ”).  If the legislature determines 
that the expiration of the term outside of the legislative 
session leads to executive overreach, it may simply change when 
the term expires.  Haw. Const. a rt. V, § 6 (“ The term of office 
                     
 20 Additionally, this contended “threat” is not unique to holdovers.  
If the interim appointment power was limited to vacancies caused by death, 
incapacity, resignation, or removal that occurred outside of the legislative 
session and the g overnor’s interim appointee is not confirmed by the senate, 
the appointee’s commission would expire at the end of the next session of the 
senate.  Haw. Const. art. V, §  6 (“[An interim appointee’s] commissi on . . . 
shall expire, unless such appointment is confirmed, at the end of the next 
session of the senate.”).  Thus, even the most constricted view of the 
interim appointment power poses the purported threat to the balance of power 
that the dissent surmises.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
30  
(continued . . .)  and removal of [board, commission, or other body] members shall 
be as provided by law. ”).   
B. The Legislative History and Structure of HRS §§ 26-34 and 
269-2 Indicate Holdover Commissioners Serve in an Acting 
Capacity that Does Not Preclude a Vacancy  
  We now turn to HRS §§ 26- 34 and 269- 2 to determine 
whether the legislature intended the holdover provisions to 
prevent the governor from exercising the interim appointment 
power upon the expiration of a commissioner’s term --a result 
that, as discussed, would be constitutionally suspect.  Based on 
the structure and legislative history of the statutes, we 
conclude that holdover members of commissions serve in an acting 
capacity, leaving the office of in -term commissioner vacant for 
purposes of the governor’s interim appointment power.  
1. The Language and Structure of Statutes Governing Board 
Appointments Suggest Holdovers Serve in an Acting Capacity 
  The re are textual and structural indications in the 
statutes governing the appointment of PUC  commissioners that 
holdover members serve in an acting capacity that does not 
preclude a vacancy.  HRS §  269-2(a) specifies that a PUC 
commissioner “shall hold office until the member’ s successor is 
appointed and qualified .”21  Notably, the provision makes no 
                     
 21 Although this court has stated that “where a statute contains the 
word ‘shall,’ the provision generally will be construed as mandatory,” 
Malahoff v. Saito, 111 Hawai ‘i 168, 191, 140 P.3d 401, 424 (2006), we have 
also long held that “this court may depart from a plain reading of a statute ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
31 mention of senate confirmation, but instead conditions the end 
of a holdover members service on “appoint[ment] and 
qualif[ication].”  This is significant because  appointment 
occurs both in the normal senate confirmation pr ocess and when 
the interim appointment power is exercised.  See  Haw. Const. 
art. V, § 6 (“ When the senate is not in session and a vacancy 
occurs in any office, appointment to which requires the 
confirmation of the senate, the governor may fill the office by 
granting a commission which shall expire, unless such 
appointment is confirmed . . .” (emphasis added) ; id. (“The 
governor shall nominate and, by and with the advice and consent 
of the senate, appoint all officers for whose election or 
appointment provision is not otherwise provided for by this 
constitution or by law. ” (emphasis added) ).   
  By contrast, the holdover provisions  applicable to 
members of the Board of Education and the Board of Regents for 
the University of Hawai ‘i--for which article X, 
sections 2 and 6 
specify that the governor’s appointment authority shall be “as 
provided by law”--both clearly state that “[e]very member may 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
where a literal interpretation would lead to absurd and/or unjust results.” 
Iddings v. Mee– Lee, 82 Hawai ‘i 1, 15, 919 P.2d 263, 277 (1996).  It is self -
evident that a commissioner may not be made to hold office against the 
commissioner’s will, see U.S. Const. amend. XIII, and we do not believe the 
legislature would provide a holdover commissioner with more protections from 
removal than an in- term commissioner.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
32 serve beyond the expiration date of the member’s term of 
appointment until the member’s successor has been  appointed by 
the governor and confirmed by the senate .”  HRS §§ 302A-123(d) 
(Supp. 2018), 304A-104(a) (2007) (emphasis added).22  That the 
legislature chose to use the term “appointed” rather than 
“confirmed” in HRS § 269-2(a) suggests a holdover’s service may 
be ended through either a full- term appointment or  an interim 
appointment--the latter of which would occur only if the office 
of in-term PUC commissioner is vacant upon the expiration of a 
commissioner’s term .  See Agustin v. Dan Ostrow Const. Co., 64 
Haw. 80, 83, 636 P.2d 1348, 1351 (“[D] ifferent words in a 
statute are presumed to have different meanings. ”).  Thus, the 
text of HRS § 269- 2(a)’s holdover provision suggests that a 
holdover commissioner does not occupy the office of in- term 
commissioner, but rather serves in an acting capacity that does 
not prevent a vacancy from arising. 
  The dissent contends that our interpretation of the 
word “qualified” in HRS § 269-2(a) should encompass senate 
confirmation.  Dissent at 19.  According to the dissent, our 
interpretation should be controlled by the language of the 
Organic Act, which established the Territory of Hawai i.  Id.; 
                     
 22 HRS § 304A -104(a) was amended in 2019.   Act 172 (June 27, 2019).  
These amendments do not affect our analysis.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
33  
(continued . . .)  Organic Act of April 30, 1900, ch. 339, 31 Stat. 141.  The 
Organic Act uses “appointed and qualified” to mean appointed by 
the governor and confirmed by the senate, asserts the dissent.   
Dissent at 19-20.  Thus, t he dissent theorizes  that the Act was 
the origin of the language used in the PUC holdover provision 
and the general holdover provision, and it therefore concludes 
that the language from the Organic Act should control.  Id. at 
10-11. 
  Notwithstanding the uncertainty as to the origins of 
the language used in HRS §§ 269-2(a) or 26- 34, upon inspection, 
there is no indication that the language of the Organic Act 
conflates “qualification” with “confirmation.”  See 31 Stat. 
141, 156-157.  Rather, within the very same section referenced 
by the dissent, the Organic Act uses the term “confirmed” in one 
sentence and the term “qualified”  in another.23  Id.  There is no 
                     
 23 Section 80 of the Organic Act, which governs the appointment, 
removal, tenure, and salaries of officers states in relevant part as follows:  
[T]he governor shall nominate and, by and with the advice 
and consent of the senate of the Territory of Hawaii, 
appoint the attorney -general, treasurer, . . . and any 
other boards of a public character that may be created by 
law; and he may make such appointments when the senate is 
not in session by granting commissions, which shall, unless 
such appointments are confirmed, expire at the end of the 
next session of the senate.  He may, by and with the advice 
and consent of the senate of the Territory of Hawaii, 
remove from office any of such officers.  All such officers 
shall hold office for four years and until their successors 
are appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed, except 
the commissioners of public instruction and the members of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
34 evidence overcoming the presumption that Congress intended these 
“different words . . . to have different meanings.”24  Agustin, 
64 Haw. at 83, 636 P.2d at 1351.   
  Additionally, w ith the exception of HRS §  26-34(c)’s 
procedure for filling vacancies that arise from a death, 
resignation, or removal that takes place during a commissioner’s 
term, neither HRS § 26-34 nor HRS §  269-2 explicitly specifies 
when the governor shall appoint new board and commission 
members.  The statutes state that board members shall be 
appointed to terms of a specific number of years, however, 
implying that members may be replaced following the expiration 
of this period.25  Some qualitative difference exists, then, 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
said boards, whose terms of office shall be as provided by 
the laws of the Territory of Hawaii.   
31 Stat. 141, 156 (emphases added).  
 24 Morita, similar to the dissent,  argues that the term “qualified” 
in HRS § 269-2(a) means fulfilling all legal requirements to take office, 
which she maintains include senate confirmation.  Senate confirmation is not 
a legal requirement for an interim appointee to take office, however.  As 
stated, when the interim appointment power is used, an individual takes 
office before senate confirmation occurs.  Thus, an official is qualified 
once an interim appointment has occurred and the oath of office has been 
administered provided the individual satisfies all other requirements for the 
office.  See, e.g., HRS §  269-2(a) (requiring that PUC commissioners have 
“experience in accounting, business, engineering, government, finance, law, 
or other similar fields” and prohibiting commissioners from holding other 
office or employment and from owning stock in a public utility).  
 25 As related above, HRS §  26-34(a) states in relevant part, “Unless 
otherwise provided by this chapter or by law hereafter enacted, the terms of 
the members shall be for four years[.]”  HRS §  269-2(a) provides in relevant 
part, “All members shall be appointed for terms of six years each[.]”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
35 between a member’s in -term service --during which the member 
cannot be replaced absent death , resignation, or removal from 
office--and a member’s out-of-term holdover service, during 
which a successor  may be appointed .  The distinction may be 
attributed to holdover members serving in an acting capacity, 
leaving the office of the in-term commission member vacant and 
available for appointment.  This reading is further supported by 
the legislative history that is available from the enactment of 
the holdover provisions appearing in HRS §§ 26
-34(b) and 269-
2(a). 
2. The “Acting Capacity” Interpretation of HRS § § 269-2 and 
26-34 is Consistent with Indications of Legislative Intent 
  Legislative history gives us limited insight into the 
intended interaction of the statutory holdover provisions and 
the governor’s interim appointment power.  The standing 
committee and conference reports from when the legislature 
enacted the 1976 legislation that 
added the holdover provision 
for the PUC to HRS § 269- 2(a) made no mention of the clause as 
it relates to interim appointments (nor indeed did it reference 
the holdover provision at all).  See Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 46 , in 
1976 Senate Journal, at 895-96, 1976 House Journal, at 1155- 56; 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 513 , in 1976 Senate Journal, at 1104-
06; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 654, in 1976 Senate  Journal, at ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
36 1172-74; H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 334, in 19 76 House  Journal, at 
1424-26. 
  H owever, t he 1984 committee reports from when the 
legislature added the similar holdover provision applicable to 
all members of commissions or boards to HRS § 26
-34 indicate 
that the addition was made for larg ely administrative purposes.  
See S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1725 , in 1984 Senate  Journal, at 
1087; H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 604 , in 1984 House  Journal, at 
1148.  The House of Representatives standing committee report 
states that the change was based on testimony from the State 
Planning Council on Developmental Disabilities indicating that 
logistical problems arose when less than a full complement of 
commission members were available.  H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 
604, in 1984 House Journal, at  1148.  The apparent implication 
of the testimony is that certain commissions experienced 
difficulties fulfilling their duties when a vacancy occurred and 
the governor did not exercise appointment authority, as such 
problems would not arise when the governor acted promptly to 
fill a vacancy.  This would indicate that the holdover 
provisions are meant to address situations in which the g overnor ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
37 has not acted to fill a vacancy, and they are not meant to 
prevent the governor from mak ing such an appointment.26   
  There is no sugges tion in the history of the two 
statutes that the legislature intended the 1976 or 1982 
legislation to limit the g overnor’s interim appointment power, 
and, indeed, it is doubtful that the governor would have signed 
the respective bills if the g overnor believed the statutes 
diminished executive authority in this regard.  This court will 
not read such a sweeping rebalancing of power in what appears to 
be a minor administrative accommodation.  See Whitman v. Am. 
Trucking Assocs., 531 U.S. 457, 468 (2001) (noting that 
legislatures do not “hide elephants in mouseholes”).  
  Indeed, when considering a nearly directly analogous 
situation, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit 
                     
 26 The dissent claims this infringement of the governor’s interim 
appoint power was precisely the purpose of the holdover provisions and cites 
the governor’s practice of nominating prospective board and commission 
members for service during the legislative sessions preceding the 
commencement of their terms in office as evidence that holdover provisions 
preclude the governor from making an interim appointment.  Dissent at 8.  The 
fact that the governor generally nominates prospective board and commission 
members in this manner does not limit or define the governor’s interim 
appointment power.  Indeed, the governor has duly exercised the interim 
appointment power to fill a position after the natural expiration of the 
preceding holder’s term in various circumstances.  See Press Release, Hawai i 
Governor’s Office, Governor Appoints 3 Members to Board of Land and Natural 
Resources, (July 11, 2014) https://dlnr.hawaii.gov/wp -content/uploads  
/2012/12/GOV- NR-BLNR-Appointments-7- 11-14.pdf [https://perma.cc/69DL -TVWF]; 
Press Release, Hawai i Governor’s Office, Governor appoints Edmund (Fred) Hyun 
as interim chair of the Hawai i Paroling Authority, (Sept . 6, 2016) 
https://governor.hawaii.gov/newsroom/governors -office-news-release-governor-
appoints- edmund-fred-hyun-as-interim -chair-of-the-hawaii-paroling -authority/ 
[https://perma.cc/3U64 -WDXF]. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
38 declined to adopt such a reading of a statutory holdover 
provision in the organic act of the National Credit Union 
Administration (NCUA) because the legislative history suggested 
the clause was intended for the same administrative purposes 
involved here.  Swan v. Clinton, 100 F.3d 973, 985 –86 (D.C. Cir. 
1996).  In concluding  that it was unnecessary to determine 
whether a vacancy existed because the holdover board member no 
longer enjoyed protections against removal by the p resident 
following the expiration of the member’s enumerated term, the 
D.C. Circuit relied in part on the lack of obvious legislative 
intent to curtail the president’s  constitutional authority:  
Removal protection for holdover members might be necessary 
if the purpose of the  holdover clause were not just to 
prevent gaps in agency leadership generally, but more 
specifically to prevent gaps from occurring during the time 
it takes the Senate to confirm a successor--in other words, 
if the purpose of the holdover clause was to prevent a 
successor from being appointed via the recess appointment 
clause.  But there is no indication in the language of the 
NCUA statute or the legislative history of the 1978 
amendments that Congress intended the holdover clause to 
serve any such purpose of precluding recess appointments.  
Cf. Staebler [v. Carter], 464 F.Supp. [585,] 592 [(D.D.C. 
1979)] (although several congressional reports describe 
holdover clauses as allowing the Senate an opportunity to 
confirm successor officials, “in none of these r eports is 
there any indication that the Committees considered, much 
less that they intended to rule out, the constitutionally -
prescribed recess appointment option”).  And we are 
unwilling to infer that the NCUA statute precludes the 
President from exercising a constitutionally granted power 
absent clear evidence that this was Congress ’ intent. 
Id. (emphases added).   
  Similarly, i n Staebler v. Carter, the U.S. District 
Court for the District of Columbia considered whether a holdover 
provision of the Federal Elections Campaign Act, 2 U.S.C. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
39 § 437c(a)(2)(B), prevented the president from making an 
appointment pursuant to the constitutional recess appointment 
power following the expiration of a 
federal election 
commissioner’s enumerated term .  464 F.Supp. at 58 8.  As here, 
the plaintiff argued that a vacancy did not arise upon the 
expiration of the enumerated term and that a replacement could 
be “appointed only through nomination by the President and 
confirmation by the Senate.”  Id. at 589.  In rejecting this 
argument, the court observed that  
there is no basis either in the language of the statute or 
in its legislative history to support the conclusion that 
Congress meant to rein in the President in such an 
unprecedented manner.  In the absence of a clearly-
expressed legislative intent, the Court will not speculate 
that the Congress sought to achieve a result which would be 
both unusual and probably beyond its constitutional power.  
Id. at 591.  Thus, the district court found no reason to 
interpret the holdover statute in a way that precluded a 
vacancy--which would result in serious questions about its 
constitutionality--because the legislature did not evince any 
manifest intention to limit the executive’s interim appointment 
authority.  See also id. at 592 (“The Court finds it difficult 
to believe that, had the Congress intended to take the 
significant step of attempting to curtail the President ’s 
constitutional recess appointment power, or even to legislate in 
the area of that power, it would not have considered the matter ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
40 with more deliberation or failed to declare its purpose with 
greater directness and precision. ”). 
  Just as in Swan  and Staebler , here “there is no 
indication in the language . . . or the legislative history” of 
HRS § 269-2(a) that the legislature “intended the holdover 
clause to serve any such purpose of precluding recess 
appointments.”  
Swan, 100 F.3d at 985 –86.  This court is 
likewise “unwilling to infer that the  . . . statute precludes 
the [governor] from exercising a constitutionally granted power 
absent clear evidence that this was [the l egislature’s] 
intent.”27  Id. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
  In sum, the language, structure, and legislative 
history of the holdover provisions in HRS §§ 26- 34(b) and 269-
2(a) do not evince an intention to limit the governor’s 
authority to make interim appointments upon the expiration of a 
PUC commisioner’s term  if the senate is not in session, and the 
statutes would be highly suspect as a constitutional matter if 
they sought to achieve this outcome.  We therefore hold that a 
                     
 27 It is noted that the Senate unanimously confirmed Gorak’s 
successor, James P. Griffin, who was also appointed by Governor Ige pursuant 
to the interim appointment power.  If no vacancy existed at the time Governor 
Ige appointed Gorak, it would follow that no vacancy existed at the time 
Governor Ige appointed Griffin because C hampley, Gorak’s predecessor, neither 
relinquished office nor reached either of the statutory limits that may be 
applicable to the length of his holdover service.  See supra note 19.  It is 
also noted that the Senate did not participate in this appeal.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
41 vacancy existed upon the expiration of Champley’s term as PUC 
commissioner, and Governor Ige was thus entitled to appoint 
Gorak on an interim basis pursuant to article V, section 6 of 
the Hawai‘ i
 Constitution.28  Accordingly, the judgment of the 
circuit court is affirmed. 
Harold Bronstein 
for appellant 
 
Deirdre Marie-Iha 
for appellee 
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
                     
 28 Given this disposition, we need not address the circuit court’s 
dismissal of Morita’s claim for declaratory relief based on a lack of 
standing. 
