                                                                 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAP-12-0000018 27-JUN-2013 
09:23 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
LIBERTY DIALYSIS-HAWAII, LLC,
a Delaware limited liability company,
Petitioner/Appellant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
RAINBOW DIALYSIS, LLC,
a Delaware limited liability company,
Respondent/Appellee-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
 
and
 
STATE HEALTH PLANNING & DEVELOPMENT AGENCY,
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, STATE OF HAWAI' I,
an administrative agency of the State of Hawai' i,
Respondent/Appellee-Appellee. 
                                                                 
SCAP-12-0000018
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CAAP-12-0000018; CIV. NO. 11-1-0532-03)
 
JUNE 27, 2013
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND McKENNA, JJ.,
WITH ACOBA, J., DISSENTING, WITH WHOM POLLACK, J., JOINS
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
This appeal requires us to consider whether the
 
Department of Health’s general administrative rules concerning
 
disqualification apply to State Health Planning & Development
 Agency (SHPDA) committees that are established to reconsider the
 agency’s approval of a Certificate of Need. 
Briefly stated,
 
SHPDA granted Rainbow Dialysis, LLC a conditional Certificate of
 Need to establish two outpatient dialysis facilities at Kaiser
 Foundation Health Plan, Inc., facilities on Maui. Another Maui
 dialysis provider, Liberty Dialysis-Hawaii, LLC, sought
 reconsideration of SHPDA’s decision. Thereafter, a five-member
 Reconsideration Committee unanimously approved Rainbow’s
 conditional Certificate of Need.
 
Liberty appealed the Reconsideration Decision to the
 
circuit court, arguing that SHPDA Administrator Ronald E. Terry
 and another Reconsideration Committee member, Anne Trygstad,
 should have been disqualified from participating in the
 Reconsideration Decision under the Department of Health rules. 
Liberty also argued that the Reconsideration Committee failed to
 review Rainbow’s application de novo, and thereby improperly
 placed the burden of proof on Liberty. The circuit court
 affirmed, holding that the SHPDA Administrator should have been
 disqualified, but that his participation in the Reconsideration
 
-2­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Decision was harmless.1 The circuit court rejected Liberty’s
 
remaining points of error.
 
On appeal to this court, Liberty argues that
 
Administrator Terry’s participation was not harmless and, in any
 
event, Rainbow did not timely raise this argument. Liberty also
 argues that the Reconsideration Committee erred in refusing to
 disqualify Trygstad. Finally, Liberty argues that, if this court
 remands for a new reconsideration hearing based on Liberty’s
 disqualification arguments, it also should advise the
 Reconsideration Committee that Rainbow bears the burden of proof
 on remand. Rainbow cross-appealed, and argues that the circuit
 court erred in determining that Administrator Terry should have
 been disqualified.
 
We hold that neither Administrator Terry nor Trygstad 
was disqualified from participating in the Reconsideration Decision. With regard to Administrator Terry, Liberty relies on Hawai'i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 11-1-25(a)(4), a Department 
of Health rule that prohibits a hearings officer from hearing or deciding a contested case in which he or she “substantially participated in making the decision or action contested[.]” However, in crafting the reconsideration statute, Hawai' i Revised 
Statutes § 323D-47, the legislature clearly intended that the SHPDA administrator participate in both the initial decision on a 
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 
-3­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Certificate of Need, and in any reconsideration of that decision. 
Because HAR § 11-1-25(a)(4) conflicts with this intent, it would
 be invalid if applied in the circumstances here. Accordingly, we
 hold that HAR § 11-1-25(a)(4) is inapplicable.
 
With regard to Trygstad, Liberty relies on HAR § 11-1­
25(a)(2), a Department of Health rule that provides for
 disqualification where a hearings officer, director or member is
 “related within the third degree by blood or marriage to any
 party to the proceeding or any party’s representative or
 attorney[.]” Liberty alleges that Trygstad’s brother-in-law is
 the “Kaiser Permanente physician-in-charge for Maui,” and
 testified as a Kaiser representative in three SHPDA advisory
 panel hearings prior to the initial decision on Rainbow’s
 application, and that, accordingly, Trygstad should have been
 disqualified from the Reconsideration Committee. We hold that
 HAR § 11-1-25 is inapplicable to the SHPDA reconsideration
 proceedings. SHPDA’s more specific rule, HAR § 11-185-32,
 governs disqualification practices and procedures in these
 proceedings, and does not require that Trygstad be disqualified.
 
Because our resolution of these issues is dispositive,
 
we do not address Liberty’s remaining points of error. Based on
 the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court’s judgment, which
 affirmed the Reconsideration Decision.
 
I. Background
 
The following factual background is taken from the
 
-4­ 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
record on appeal.
 
A. Rainbow’s Certificate of Need application
 
Rainbow filed a Certificate of Need (CON) application2
 
with SHPDA for the establishment of two outpatient dialysis
 facilities on Maui. Rainbow is and was a wholly owned affiliate
 
of Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc. (Kaiser). Rainbow’s two
 
facilities would be located in or near existing Kaiser clinics in
 
Wailuku and Lahaina. Rainbow asserted that internalizing
 dialysis services within Kaiser’s health care system would
 improve management of patient care, provide benefits to patients
 in isolated parts of West Maui, bring competition to the dialysis
 market and lower prices, create savings over the dialysis
 services then being provided by Liberty, allow for more robust
 provision of services for QUEST patients, and allow Kaiser to
 pass savings on to the community in the form of financial and in-
kind donations to community partners.
 
Liberty opposed Rainbow’s CON application, asserting
 
that the application failed to meet several criteria for the
 grant of a CON. Additionally, Liberty asserted that it has
 provided dialysis services on Maui since 2006, and that there
 were several reasons that Kaiser’s dialysis expenditures had
 increased, including an increase in the number of Kaiser patients
 
2
 “‘Certificate of need’ means an authorization, when required 
pursuant to section 323D-43, to construct, expand, alter, or convert a health
care facility or to initiate, expand, develop, or modify a health careservice.”  Hawai 'i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 323D-2 (2010). 
-5­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
receiving dialysis, regulatory changes, and inflation. Liberty
 
also asserted that its mission “includes providing a safety
 net[,]” and that its ability to continue to provide services was
 dependent on its ability “to spread the real costs across a broad
 base of commercial patients[.]” Liberty asserted that Rainbow’s
 proposal would jeopardize Liberty’s “ability to maintain its
 current scope of services for persons who are not insured by
 Kaiser.” Specifically, “[i]f the small percentage of patients
 with commercial insurance declines or disappears, Liberty [] will
 be unable to continue to subsidize operations in more remote
 regions or care for a substantial portion of the underinsured or
 uninsured patients who currently receive care from Liberty [].”
 
3
 three separate
 As required under HRS § 323D-44(a),
SHPDA advisory panels considered Rainbow’s CON application: the
 Tri-Isle Subarea Health Planning Council, the CON Review Panel,
 and the Statewide Health Coordinating Council (SHCC). 
Each
 
advisory panel held public meetings in which they received
 
extensive testimony both for and against the proposal, and each
 
issued non-binding recommendations. By a 4-1 vote, the Tri-Isle
 
Subarea Health Planning Council recommended approval of the
 application. By a 5-0 vote (with one abstention), the CON Review
 Panel recommended denial of the application. By a 7-4 vote, the
 
3
 Pursuant to HRS § 323D-44(a) (2010), SHPDA “shall transmit the
 
completed [CON] application to the appropriate subarea councils, the review
panel, the statewide council, appropriate individuals, and appropriate public
agencies.”
 
-6­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
SHCC recommended denial of the application.
 
On May 3, 2010, SHPDA, through Administrator Terry,
 
filed a Decision on the Merits, approving Rainbow’s application
 
and issuing a conditional CON.  In so doing, SHPDA imposed three
 
conditions on Rainbow. First, Rainbow was required to submit a
 
“detailed long-term implementation plan” regarding how it and
 Kaiser would allocate cost reductions to the public and
 community. Second, Rainbow was required to provide a written
 acknowledgment that failure to fulfill the implementation plan
 would constitute a breach of the HAR and could result in
 withdrawal of the CON. Finally, Rainbow was required to enter
 into a joint and several written undertaking with Kaiser to
 provide chronic renal dialysis services to Hana and Molokai,
 should Liberty cease providing services in those communities
 within 10 years of the Decision on the Merits. Rainbow
 subsequently informed SHPDA by letter that it accepted the
 conditions set forth in the conditional CON and modified its
 application accordingly.
 
Liberty sought reconsideration of the Decision on the
 
4 5
Merits pursuant to HRS § 323D-47(5)  and HAR § 11-186-82. 
4
 HRS § 323D-47 (Supp. 2009) provides in relevant part:
 
The state agency may provide by rules adopted in
conformity with chapter 91 for a procedure by which
any person may, for good cause shown, request in
writing a public hearing before a reconsideration
committee for purposes of reconsideration of the
agency’s decision.  The reconsideration committee
 shall consist of the administrator of the state agency
(continued...)
 
-7­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Liberty argued that there was good cause for reconsideration
 
because SHPDA’s decision differed from the recommendation of the
 SHCC.
 
Pursuant to HRS § 323D-47, a five-member
 
Reconsideration Committee was convened, composed of Administrator
 Terry, and the chairpersons of the SHCC, the CON review panel,
 the plan development committee of the SHCC, and the Tri-Isle
 Subarea Health Planning Council. On June 14, 2010, four of the
 five Reconsideration Committee members convened a public meeting
 and voted to convene a public hearing for reconsideration of the
 Decision on the Merits.
6 SHPDA appointed Andrew Tseu as Hearings
 
Officer “to facilitate pre-hearing conferences and hearing
 procedures for the Reconsideration Committee.”
 
Prior to the hearing on Liberty’s reconsideration
 
request, Liberty filed a motion to disqualify Administrator Terry
 
4(...continued)
and t
he chairpersons of the statewide council, the
review panel, the plan development committee of the
statewide council, and the appropriate subarea health
planning council.  The administrator shall be the
 chairperson of the reconsideration committee.  A
 request for a public hearing shall be deemed by the
reconsideration committee to have shown good cause,
if:
 
. . . .
 (5)	 The decision of the administrator differs
 from the recommendation of the statewide
 council.
 
5
 HAR § 11-186-82(a) (1988) provides procedures for requesting
 
reconsideration, and for the reconsideration process.
 
6
 Elaine Slavinsky, chairperson of the Tri-Isle Subarea Health
 
Planning Council, participated in the June 14, 2010 meeting, but later recused
herself and was replaced by Anne Trygstad. 
-8­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
from the Reconsideration Committee pursuant to HAR § 11-1­
7
25(a)(4) and (5),  on the ground that he could not sit in review
of his own decision and had a personal bias or prejudice that
 
would prevent him from rendering a fair and impartial decision. 
Specifically, Liberty argued:
 
In the present matter, HAR § 11-1-25 mandates
Terry’s disqualification from the reconsideration
hearing because, not only did Terry substantially
participate in the certificate of need review process
but, as the SHPDA administrator, he was the ultimate
decision-maker on the Application.  Moreover, Terry
unilaterally approved the Application despite the
recommended rejections by the CON Review Panel and
Statewide Council, without providing a written
explanation as required by agency rule.  Terry further
has a personal bias or prejudice which will prevent a
fair and impartial decision on this contested case.[
8]
 
Rainbow opposed Liberty’s motion. Rainbow argued that
 
HRS § 323D-47 mandates that the SHPDA administrator serve as a
 
member of the Reconsideration Committee, even if the
 administrator is reviewing his or her own decision. Rainbow also
 argued that, to the extent HAR § 11-1-25 conflicts with HRS
 
§ 323D-47, HRS § 323D-47 governs.  Additionally, Rainbow argued
 
7	 HAR § 11-1-25 (2005) provides in pertinent part:
 
Disqualification. (a) A hearings officer, director, or
member of an attached entity is disqualified from
hearing or deciding a contested case if the hearings
officer, director, or member of the attached entity:
. . . .
 (4)	 Has substantially participated in making
the decision or action contested; or
 
(5)	 Has a personal bias or prejudice
concerning a party or matter that will
prevent a fair and impartial decision
involving that party or matter.
 
8
 Liberty argued, inter alia, that Administrator Terry exhibited
 
personal bias or prejudice by approving the CON application despite the votes
to reject the application by the CON Review Panel and the SHCC.
 
-9­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that the SHPDA disqualification rules set forth in HAR chapters
 
11-185 and 11-186 applied, rather than HAR § 11-1-25. Finally,
 Rainbow argued that Liberty’s allegation of Administrator Terry’s
 personal bias was “unfounded and frivolous.”
 
Liberty also filed a motion to disqualify a second
 
Reconsideration Committee member, Anne Trygstad, pursuant to HAR
 § 11-1-25(a)(2).
9 Liberty alleged that Trygstad is the sister­
in-law of Dr. George Talbot, who Liberty described as Kaiser’s
 “physician-in-charge of Maui[.]” Liberty argued that Kaiser was
 a party to the proceeding and/or a party’s representative, and
 that Dr. Talbot offered testimony in favor of Rainbow’s CON
 application at the hearings before each of the three review
 panels. Liberty also argued that Trygstad should be disqualified
 pursuant to HAR § 11-1-25(a)(5) because she had a personal bias
 or prejudice due to her relationship to Dr. Talbot.
 
Rainbow opposed Liberty’s motion to disqualify
 
Trygstad. Along with its motion, Rainbow submitted a declaration
 from Dr. Talbot in which he stated:
 
1. I am employed by the Hawaii Permanente
Medical Group (“HPMG”), a Hawaii corporation that
contracts with [Kaiser] to provide physician servicesfor members of [Kaiser] and other patients seen atKaiser’s medical facilities in Hawai 'i. 
2. I am currently the HPMG physician in charge
of Maui and in that role, I oversee the physician
services for Kaiser’s Maui clinics, which includes the
Kaiser Wailuku Medical Clinic.  I am not in charge of
the administrative oversight of the Wailuku Medical
 
9
 HAR § 11-1-25(a)(2) (2005) requires disqualification if a person
 
is “related within the third degree by blood or marriage to any party to the
proceeding or any party’s representative or attorney[.]”
 
-10­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Clinic, nor am I in charge of the affiliated health
care services provided by non-physicians at the
Wailuku Medical Clinic.  The administrative operation
of the Wailuku Clinic is overseen by employees of the
Kaiser Foundation Hospitals, Inc., a separate
corporation that owns and/or manages Kaiser’s
hospital and clinic facilities and employs certain
affiliated care providers for those facilities.
3. I am the brother-in-law of Anne Trygstad. 
Other than testimony I presented to the Tri-Isle
Subarea Council at its December 3, 2009 public meeting
on [Rainbow’s CON] Application, at which Ms. Trygstad
was present, I have had no communication with Ms.
Trygstad in the past two or three years.
4. I own a home in the same subdivision as Ms.
 
Trygstad owns a home. The subdivision consists of over
20 separate houses.  My house is at the opposite end
of the subdivision from the house owned by Ms.
Trygstad.
5. I did not participate in the preparation of
the Rainbow CON Application.  My only involvement in
the CON proceedings has been as a witness, not as a
party.  I am not an employee or representative of
Rainbow.
 
The Reconsideration Committee denied Liberty’s
 
disqualification motions.  The Reconsideration Committee did not
 
state its reasoning on the record.
 
Following a reconsideration hearing,10 the
 
Reconsideration Committee issued its Decision unanimously
 
approving the conditional certification of Rainbow’s application. 
The Reconsideration Committee found that “[i]t was unconstested
 that Liberty had the burden of proof in this Reconsideration
 
10 Thirty-one individuals presented testimony at the hearing.  Each
 
individual was afforded a maximum of two and a half minutes to testify.  Ten
 
individuals testified against the CON.  One individual testified as a neutral. 
Twenty individuals testified in favor of the CON, including Dr. Talbot and six
other individuals who identified themselves as being professionally affiliated
with a Kaiser entity.
In addition, several parties were afforded five minutes to
 
testify.  First, representatives of Liberty and of Unite Here! Local 5, which
also sought reconsideration of the Decision on the Merits, testified against
the CON for five minutes each.  Subsequently, the President and Executive
Medical Director of Hawaii Permanente Medical Group testified in favor of the
CON on behalf of Rainbow, also for five minutes.
 
-11­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
proceeding pursuant to HRS § 91-10(5) because Liberty initiated
 
the Reconsideration proceeding and acknowledged in writing its
 burden of proof.” The Reconsideration Committee also made
 detailed findings and conclusions regarding the ways in which
 Rainbow’s CON application either met the CON criteria, or would
 meet the criteria if modified by the conditions set forth in the
 Committee’s decision. Accordingly, the Reconsideration Committee
 ordered that a conditional CON be approved and issued, with
 Rainbow to modify its proposal to incorporate the following
 conditions: that (1) Kaiser members be permitted to receive
 dialysis services from Liberty “for as long as they wish”; (2)
 Rainbow accept all dialysis patients regardless of ability to
 pay; and (3) Rainbow and Kaiser provide chronic renal dialysis
 services to Hana and Molokai, should Liberty cease providing
 services to those communities within 10 years of the Decision on
 the Merits.
 
B. Circuit court appeal
 
Liberty appealed the Reconsideration Decision to the
 
circuit court, raising numerous points of error. Relevant to the
 
issues on appeal, Liberty argued in its opening brief that the
 Reconsideration Committee erred in denying its motions to
 disqualify Administrator Terry and Trygstad. Liberty also argued
 that the Reconsideration Committee failed to review Rainbow’s
 application de novo, and “thereby improperly placed the burden of
 proof on Appellant Liberty in contradiction of HAR § 11-186­
-12­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
42[.]”
 
The circuit court held a hearing on Liberty’s appeal
 
and orally ruled that “Administrator Terry should have
 
automatically disqualified himself from sitting on the
 reconsideration committee and his failure to do so was error.” 
Accordingly, the circuit court stated that it would remand to
 SHPDA with instructions to hear the reconsideration request with
 an acting SHPDA administrator other than Terry.
 
Rainbow subsequently filed an ex parte motion for an 
expedited status conference to address this court’s holding in Waikiki Resort Hotel, Inc. v. City and County of Honolulu, 63 Haw. 222, 624 P.2d 1353 (1981), and the ICA’s holding in Hui Malama Aina O Ko' olau v. Pacarro, 4 Haw. App. 304, 666 P.2d 177 
(1983). Rainbow argued that, pursuant to these cases, an agency’s decision will not be invalidated on the ground that a disqualified official participated in the decision, so long as the decision was passed by a majority of legally competent members. Accordingly, Rainbow argued, Liberty failed to meet its burden of establishing a legal basis for remand. Liberty opposed the motion, arguing, inter alia, that Rainbow’s arguments were untimely, the motion was procedurally improper, and Waikiki Resort Hotel was distinguishable. 
The circuit court construed Rainbow’s motion as a
 
motion for reconsideration, and denied it without a hearing on
 the ground that Rainbow “waived its right to assert those cases
 
-13­ 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and make related arguments due to failure to cite those cases in
 
its answering brief.” The circuit court subsequently issued a
 written order granting Liberty’s appeal on the ground that
 Administrator Terry should have been disqualified, and remanding
 to SHPDA with instructions to hold the reconsideration hearing
 with an acting SHPDA administrator other than Administrator
 Terry.
 
Liberty thereafter attempted to draft a proposed final
 
judgment. Rainbow objected to Liberty’s proposed final judgment
 because, inter alia, the circuit court had not resolved all of
 
the issues and claims raised in Liberty’s appeal. SHPDA also
 
objected to Liberty’s proposed final judgment and submitted its
 
own proposed final judgment, which would have granted judgment in
 favor of Liberty on its first claim for relief relating to
 Administrator Terry and dismissed all other claims. Liberty
 subsequently submitted a revised proposed final judgment.
 
While Liberty’s revised proposed final judgment was 
pending, the circuit court sua sponte requested supplemental briefing on, inter alia, “whether all remaining issues should be decided on the merits, including issues related to Waikiki Resort 
Hotel . . . and/or Hui Malama Aina O Ko' olau[.]” Following the 
receipt of supplemental briefing and a hearing, the circuit court 
issued an order affirming the Reconsideration Decision in its entirety. The circuit court reiterated its conclusion that the 
-14­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Reconsideration Committee erred in failing to disqualify
 
Administrator Terry, but held that the error was harmless
 pursuant to Waikiki Resort Hotel. The circuit court also
 affirmed the Reconsideration Committee’s retention of Anne
 Trygstad on the ground that the Reconsideration Committee’s
 determination that Dr. Talbot was not a party or a party’s
 representative was not clearly erroneous. Finally, the circuit
 court concluded that Liberty was judicially estopped from
 contesting its burden of proof because it had represented to the
 Reconsideration Committee that Liberty bore the burden of proof. 
The circuit court also affirmed on other issues unrelated to this
 appeal.
 
The circuit court filed its Final Judgment on
 
December 13, 2011, entering judgment in favor of SHPDA and
 Rainbow and against Liberty. Liberty timely filed a notice of
 appeal on January 10, 2012.
 
C.	 Appeal to this court
11
 
Liberty raises four points of error in its appeal:
 
(1)	 The Circuit Court abused its discretion by
reconsidering three of its prior orders and
entertaining Rainbow’s belated argument that the
Reconsideration Committee’s failure to
 disqualify Terry should be excused as harmless
error under Waikiki.
 
. . . .
 (2) 	The Circuit Court erred in concluding that the
Reconsideration Committee’s error in failing to
 
11
 This court granted Liberty’s application to transfer its appeal
 
from the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) to this court. 
-15­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
12
disqualify Ronald Terry was harmless.[ ]
. . . . 
(3) 	The R
econsideration Committee erred in refusing
to disqualify Anne Trygstad from serving on the
Reconsideration Committee, and the Circuit Court
erred in upholding this decision.
. . . .
 (4)	 The Reconsideration Committee erroneously placed
the burden of proof on Liberty rather than
13
Rainbow.[ ]
Rainbow raises a single point of error in its appeal:
 
“The circuit court erred when it determined in its December 13,
 
2011 Order that Administrator Terry should have been disqualified
 due to the application of HAR § 11-1-25 and based its Final
 Judgment on that portion of the December 13, 2011 Order.” 
(Record citations omitted). Rainbow argues that “HRS [c]hapter
 323D, and HRS § 323D-47 in particular, make clear that the SHPDA
 Administrator can and should participate in the Decision on the
 Merits 
and serve on the Reconsideration Committee that reviews
 
such decisions.” (Emphasis in original).
 
Although “Rainbow agrees with the ultimate ruling of
 
the circuit court in entering Final Judgment in favor of
 Rainbow,” it nonetheless seeks review of its point of error to
 
12 Because we conclude that neither Administrator Terry nor Trygstad
 
was disqualified, we do not reach Liberty’s points of error regarding the
harmlessness of Administrator Terry’s participation.
 
13
 Liberty acknowledges that, before the Reconsideration Committee,
 
it “erroneously took the position that, because it had requested
reconsideration, it bore the burden of proof.”  Liberty also acknowledges that
it is estopped from taking a contrary position on appeal, and from raising
this issue as an independent ground for reversal. Nevertheless, Liberty
argues that, if this court remands for reconsideration before a new
Reconsideration Committee based on Liberty’s disqualification arguments, we
should also order the Reconsideration Committee to apply the “proper
allocation of the burden of proof[.]”  Because we affirm the Reconsideration
 Decision, we do not reach this point of error.
 
-16­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
ensure that “Liberty (and others) cannot use the circuit court’s
 
erroneous holding regarding HAR § 11-1-25 and the Administrator’s
 ‘disqualification’ from the Reconsideration Committee as law of
 the case here or through offensive use of collateral estoppel in
 any other proceedings.”
 
SHPDA did not file an appeal or cross-appeal, but did
 
file a unified answering brief in response to both Liberty’s and
 Rainbow’s appeals. SHPDA’s answering brief generally supported
 Rainbow’s arguments in both the appeal and the cross-appeal.
 
II. Standards of Review
 
A.	 Review of agency decisions
 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon its
 
review of an administrative decision is a secondary appeal. Ahn
 
v. Liberty Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 126 Hawai' i 1, 9, 265 P.3d 470, 
478 (2011) (citation omitted). The circuit court’s decision is reviewed de novo. Id. The agency’s decision is reviewed under 
the standards set forth in HRS § 91-14(g). Id. HRS § 91-14(g) 
(1993) provides: 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may
reverse or modify the decision and order if the
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings,
conclusions, decisions, or orders are:
 
(1)	 In violation of constitutional or
 statutory provisions; or 
(2) 	In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
 
(3) 	Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
(4) 	Affected by other error of law; or 
(5) 	Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
 
-17­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
probative, and substantial evidence on the
whole record; or 
(6) 	Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized
by abuse of discretion or clearly
unwarranted exercise of discretion.
 
“Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are 
reviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions 
regarding procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact under subsection (5); and an agency’s exercise of discretion under subsection (6).” Sierra Club v. Office of Planning, 109 
Hawai'i 411, 414, 126 P.3d 1098, 1101 (2006) (citation, internal 
quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
B.	 Statutory interpretation
 
“Statutory interpretation is a question of law 
reviewable de novo.” Kaleikini v. Yoshioka, 128 Hawai' i 53, 67, 
283 P.3d 60, 74 (2012) (citation omitted). C.	 Interpretation of agency rules
 
General principles of statutory construction apply in
 
interpreting administrative rules. Id. “As in statutory
 
construction, courts look first at an administrative rule’s
 
language. If an administrative rule’s language is unambiguous,
 and its literal application is neither inconsistent with the
 policies of the statute the rule implements nor produces an
 absurd or unjust result, courts enforce the rule’s plain
 meaning.” Id. (citation omitted). While an agency’s
 
interpretation of its own rules is generally entitled to
 deference, this court “does not defer to agency interpretations
 
-18­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that are plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the underlying
 
legislative purpose.” Id. (citation and internal quotation marks
 
omitted).
 
III. Discussion
 
A.	 Administrator Terry was not disqualified from participating
in the Reconsideration Decision
 
In order to determine whether Administrator Terry was
 
disqualified from participating in the Reconsideration Decision,
 
this court must consider whether the Department of Health (DOH)
 rule regarding disqualification, HAR § 11-1-25(a)(4), is
 applicable to the Reconsideration Committee members.
14 As
 
explained in detail below, HAR § 11-1-25(a)(4) prevents a
 hearings officer from hearing or deciding a contested case in
 which he or she “substantially participated in making the
 decision or action contested[.]” Because Administrator Terry
 made the initial decision to approve Rainbow’s CON application,
 Liberty argues that he was disqualified from the reconsideration
 hearing.
 
Rainbow argues that this rule is inapplicable here
 
because it would conflict with HRS § 323D-47, which, Rainbow
 argues, requires the Administrator to issue the initial decision
 on a CON application, chair any resulting reconsideration
 committee, and participate in the reconsideration decision. 
14
 It is undisputed that HAR § 11-1-25, if applicable, would require
 
disqualification of Administrator Terry in the circumstances presented here.
 
-19­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Rainbow also argues that the more specific SHPDA disqualification
 
rule, HAR § 11-185-32, applies in lieu of the DOH
 disqualification rule, and would not require Administrator
 Terry’s disqualification in the circumstances of the instant
 case.
 
Liberty argues that there is no conflict between the
 
DOH rule and HRS § 323D-47 because nothing in HRS § 323D-47
 requires the SHPDA Administrator to personally issue a decision
 on a CON application. In addition, Liberty argues that the SHPDA
 disqualification rule does not displace the DOH rule because it
 covers only a narrow category of disqualifications and does not
 conflict with the DOH rule.
 
As set forth below, the legislature, in enacting HRS
 
§ 323D-47, envisioned that the SHPDA Administrator would
 participate in both the initial decision on a CON application and
 any subsequent reconsideration decision. However, HAR § 11-1­25(a)(4) would preclude the SHPDA Administrator from
 participating in both of these decisions. Accordingly, HAR § 11­1-25(a)(4) conflicts with HRS § 323D-47, and would be invalid if
 applied in the circumstances presented here. Moreover, HAR § 11­1-25(a)(4) is inapplicable because the more specific
 disqualification rule contained in HAR § 11-185-32 governs SHPDA
 hearings officers in CON proceedings. Liberty does not argue
 that Administrator Terry should have been disqualified pursuant
 to HAR § 11-185-32, and nothing in this rule would appear to
 
-20­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
require Administrator Terry’s disqualification. Accordingly,
 
Administrator Terry was not disqualified from participating in
 the Reconsideration Decision.
 
1.	 The legislature envisioned that the SHPDA administrator
would issue the initial decision on a CON application
and participate in any reconsideration of that decision
 
HRS § 323D-47 governs requests for reconsideration of
 
SHPDA’s decision on a CON application, and provides in relevant
 
part:
 
The state agency may provide by rules adopted in
conformity with chapter 91 for a procedure by which
any person may, for good cause shown, request in
writing a public hearing before a reconsideration
committee for purposes of reconsideration of the
agency’s decision.  The reconsideration committee
 
shall consist of the administrator of the state agency
and t
he chairpersons of the statewide council, the
review panel, the plan development committee of the
statewide council, and the appropriate subarea health
planning council.  
The administrator shall be the
 
chair
person of the reconsideration committee.  A
 
request for a public hearing shall be deemed by the
reconsideration committee to have shown good cause,
if:
 
. . . .
 (5)
 The decision of the administrator differs
from the recommendation of the statewide
 council.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Rainbow argues that this provision requires the SHPDA
 
administrator to sit in reconsideration of his or her own
 
decision because it requires that the administrator issue the
 initial decision on a CON application, as well as “be a member
 of, [and] also serve as the chairperson of, any Reconsideration
 Committee tasked with deciding a challenge to a decision by the
 Administrator which differs from the recommendation of the SHCC.” 
-21­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Liberty argues that this provision does not require the
 
administrator to personally issue the initial decision on a CON
 application and, thus, does not require that the administrator
 sit in reconsideration of his or her own decision.
15
 
Liberty is correct that nothing in HRS § 323D-47, nor
 
any other provision of chapter 323D, explicitly states that the
 administrator must personally issue the initial decision on a CON
 application. See HRS chapter 323D. Rather, HRS chapter 323D
 
repeatedly references the CON being issued by the “state agency,”
 see, e.g., HRS § 323D-43(a); HRS § 323D-44(b), meaning SHPDA, see
 HRS § 323D-2. Similarly, the relevant administrative rules state
 that the decision on the merits will be issued by “the agency,”
 and do not specify that the agency must act through its
 administrator. HAR § 11-186-70.
 
Nevertheless, the plain language of HRS § 323D-47
 
reflects the legislature’s understanding that the administrator
 is responsible for issuing the decision on a CON application on
 behalf of the agency. Pursuant to HRS § 323D-47, a person may
 request a hearing “for purposes of reconsideration of the
 agency’s decision” on a CON application where, inter alia, “[t]he
 
15
 Liberty does not dispute that the administrator has the power to
 
issue a decision on a CON application, but rather argues that the
administrator is not required to personally issue such a decision.  For
 example, Liberty argues that the administrator may delegate any such decision
making authority to another, in order to preserve his or her ability to sit on
the reconsideration committee.  However, as set forth below, the statute
reflects the legislature’s intent that the administrator participate in both
decisions.
 
-22­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
decision of the administrator differs from the recommendation of
 
the statewide council.” (Emphasis added). Thus, HRS § 323D-47
 appears to view the decision of the agency and the decision of
 the administrator as being one and the same.
 
Moreover, even assuming there is an ambiguity as to
 
whether the legislature understood that the administrator was
 responsible for the initial decision on a CON application, this
 interpretation is supported by legislative history. HRS § 323D­47 was enacted along with the rest of chapter 323D in 1977. 1977
 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 178, § 2 at 366-67. Under the 1977 version
 of the statute, the decision on a reconsideration request was
 made by the agency itself, rather than by a reconsideration
 committee. Id. At that time, the statute did not provide that a
 
disagreement between the administrator’s decision and the SHCC’s
 recommendation provided a good cause basis for reconsideration. 
Id.
 
HRS chapter 323D was substantially amended in 1987. 
1987 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 270, §§ 1-18 at 825-33. Two bills to
 amend HRS chapter 323D were introduced during the 1987
 legislative session: Senate Bill 749, and House Bill 1025.
16
 
S.B. 749, 14th Leg., Reg. Sess. (1987); H.B. 1025, 14th Leg.,
 
Senate Bill 213 also was introduced during the 1987 session, and
 
would have repealed HRS chapter 323D and abolished SHPDA and the CON process
on the ground that it “inhibits, rather than promotes, health care cost
containment.”  S.B. 213, 14th Leg., Reg. Sess., § 1 at 1, § 7 at 8 (1987). 
Senate Bill 213 favored “a policy of increased, relatively unfettered
competition in the health care industry[.]”  Id., § 1 at 2.
 
-23­16 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Reg. Sess. (1987). Senate Bill 749, which ultimately did not
 
become law, would have amended the reconsideration process to
 require that the decision on a reconsideration request be made by
 the CON Review Panel, rather than the agency. S.B. 749, S.D. 1,
 § 10 at 12-14. In addition, Senate Bill 749 would have added as
 a ground for reconsideration that “[t]he decision of the
 administrator differs from the decision of the [SHCC].” Id.,
 
§ 10 at 13 (emphasis added).
 
The Senate Health Committee noted that the initial
 
proposal would “[a]uthorize the review panel to veto a decision
 by the state agency regarding a certificate of need
 application[.]” S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 574, in 1987 Senate
 Journal, at 1132. However, testimony was received in opposition
 to this proposal. SHPDA testified, “We do not agree with giving
 the Review Panel veto authority over the administrator’s CON
 decisions[.]” SHPDA, Testimony to the Senate Health Committee on
 S.B. 749, 14th Leg., Reg. Sess. (Feb. 23, 1987) (emphasis added). 
The Department of Health also testified, “While we are
 sympathetic to the idea of some appeals mechanism over the SHPDA
 Administrator’s decision, we believe that use of the review panel
 may build unnecessary conflict into the Agency’s operation.” 
Department of Health, Testimony to the Senate Health Committee on
 S.B. 749, 14th Leg., Reg. Sess. (Feb. 23, 1987) (emphasis added). 
Accordingly, the Senate Health Committee amended the bill to
 delete “the review board veto power but granted the review board
 
-24­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the authority to hear and rule on requests for reconsideration of
 
a state agency decision[.]” S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 574, in
 1987 Senate Journal, at 1132.
 
Meanwhile, House Bill 1025, as initially introduced,
 
did not contain any amendments that would have affected the CON
 reconsideration process.
17 See H.B. 1025, 14th Leg., Reg. Sess.
 
(1987). 
However, when the bill crossed over to the Senate, the
 
Senate Health Committee received testimony from SHPDA regarding
 the reconsideration process:
 
As the law now stands, the only appeal (short of
court) of an Agency’s decision is to request the
Agency itself to reconsider.  The Senate version would
 give the reconsideration authority to the Review
Panel.  The Agency does not believe that the Review
Panel should have the ultimate authority.  We suggest
the reconsideration authority rest with a small
committee made up of the administrator, and the
chairpersons of the Statewide Council, the Review
Panel, the Plan Development Committee, and the
appropriate Subarea Health Planning Council. This
 would provide a check and balance system with the
administrator retaining a strong position but with the
possibility of having his decision changed under
limited circumstances.
 
SHPDA, Testimony to the Senate Health Committee on H.B. 1025,
 
H.D. 1, 14th Leg., Reg. Sess., at 3 (Mar. 27, 1987) (emphasis
 added).
 
Along with its testimony, SHPDA submitted proposed
 
amendments to HRS § 323D-47, which would have provided for a
 
17
 The purposes of the bill included removing parts of the law that
 
were no longer pertinent due to the repeal of related federal legislation;
reforming the CON process by allowing some proposals to bypass the full review
process; increasing data gathering, analysis, and reporting; tasking SHPDA
with looking at emerging health issues; and extending the subarea councils’
authority.  H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 63, in 1987 House Journal, at 1111; see
also H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 703, in 1987 House Journal, at 1439.
 
-25­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
reconsideration committee consisting of “the administrator and
 
the chairpersons of the statewide council, the review panel, the
 plan development committee of the statewide council and the
 appropriate subarea health planning council.” Id., attachment,
 
§ 13 at 20. Under SHPDA’s proposal, the administrator would be
 the chairperson of the reconsideration committee. Id.,
 
attachment, § 13 at 20-21. In addition, SHPDA proposed adding as
 a ground for reconsideration that “[t]he decision of the
 administrator differs from the recommendation of the statewide
 council.” Id., attachment, § 13 at 21.
 
The Healthcare Association of Hawaii (HAH) testified
 
regarding SHPDA’s proposed amendments:
 
With respect to a reconsideration committee under
section 13 of the agency’s proposed draft, this is
clearly the best proposal we have seen seeking to
address the controversy surrounding some past
decisions by the agency.  HAH does, however, believe
that the ultimate responsibility for a decision of the
agency should rest with the administrator, as it
currently does.
 
HAH, Testimony to the Senate Health Committee on H.B. 1025, H.D.
 
1, 14th Leg., Reg. Sess., at 2 (Mar. 30, 1987) (emphasis added).
 
The Senate Health Committee amended the bill,
 
consistent with SHPDA’s proposal, to “[p]rovide[] for a
 reconsideration panel for CON’s consisting of the administrator
 of the statewide agency, the chairperson of the statewide
 council, the appropriate subarea councils, the review panel, and
 the plan development committee of the statewide council, with the
 SHPDA administrator as chairperson of the panel[.]” S. Stand.
 
-26­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Comm. Rep. No. 1089, in 1987 Senate Journal, at 1365. The final
 
bill enacted into law is in all relevant respects substantively
 identical to that proposed by SHPDA. Compare SHPDA, Testimony to
 
the Senate Health Committee on H.B. 1025, H.D. 1, 14th Leg., Reg.
 Sess., attachment, § 13 at 20-21 with HRS § 323D-47. 
Accordingly, with these amendments, the legislature added the
 provision that required the good cause determination to be made
 by a reconsideration committee, rather than solely by the agency. 
1987 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 270, § 13 at 832. In addition, the
 legislature added the provision that specified that a person may
 request a hearing “for purposes of reconsideration of the
 agency’s decision” where “[t]he decision of the administrator
 differs from the recommendation of the statewide council.” Id.
 
(emphasis added).
 
At the time the legislature amended the statute, the
 
CON review process had been in place for approximately ten years. 
The testimony in support of the 1987 amendments indicates that
 the legislature was aware that the SHPDA administrator was
 responsible for the agency’s decisions on a CON application prior
 to these amendments. See HAH, Testimony to the 1987 Legislature
 
on H.B. 1025, H.D. 1, 14th Leg., Reg. Sess., at 2 (Mar. 30, 1987)
 (“[T]he ultimate responsibility for a decision of the agency
 should rest with the administrator, as it currently does.”);
 SHPDA, Testimony to the Senate Health Committee on H.B. 1025,
 H.D. 1, 14th Leg., Reg. Sess., at 3 (Mar. 27, 1987) (“This would
 
-27­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
provide a check and balance system with the administrator
 
retaining a strong position but with the possibility of having
 his decision changed under limited circumstances.”).
 
Accordingly, the legislative history reflects that the
 
legislature was aware of the administrator’s participation in the
 initial CON decision, but nonetheless deliberately included the
 administrator in the reconsideration committee to maintain the
 administrator’s “strong position” with regard to CON
 applications. Accordingly, HRS § 323D-47 reflects the
 legislature’s intent that the administrator participate in both
 the initial decision on the merits and the reconsideration
 decision.
 
2. HAR § 11-1-25(a)(4) conflicts with HRS § 323D-47
 
Despite the clear legislative intent for the
 
administrator to participate in both the decision on the merits
 
and the reconsideration decision, application of HAR § 11-1­25(a)(4) to the Reconsideration Committee would prohibit the
 administrator from carrying out both of these duties. HAR § 11­1-25 provides in relevant part:
 
(a) A hearings officer, director, or member of an
attached entity is disqualified from hearing or
deciding a contested case if the hearings officer,
director, or member of the attached entity:
. . . .
 (4)	 Has substantially participated in making the
decision or action contested[.]
 
An agency’s authority “is limited to enacting rules
 
which carry out and further the purposes of the legislation[.]” 
-28­  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Puana v. Sunn, 69 Haw. 187, 189, 737 P.2d 867, 870 (1987). “It 
is axiomatic that an administrative rule cannot contradict or conflict with the statute it attempts to implement.” Agsalud v. 
Blalack, 67 Haw. 588, 591, 699 P.2d 17, 19 (1985) (citations omitted); see also Tamashiro v. Dep’t of Human Servs., 112 Hawai'i 388, 427, 146 P.3d 103, 142 (2006). As applied here, HAR 
§ 11-1-25(a)(4) would prohibit the SHPDA administrator from carrying out his or her duties as intended by the legislature and as reflected in HRS § 323D-47. Because, HAR § 11-1-25(a)(4) conflicts with HRS § 323D-47, it would be invalid if applied to CON reconsideration proceedings.
18
 
Nevertheless, Liberty argues that this interpretation
 
of the statute would lead to the absurd requirement that no one
 other than the administrator could make the initial CON decision
 and participate on behalf of SHPDA in the reconsideration
 proceedings. However, nothing in the statute would require the
 SHPDA administrator to personally issue the decision on a CON
 application and a reconsideration in all cases. The SHPDA rules
 indicate that a decision may be made by the administrator or the
 acting administrator. HAR § 11-185-2 (1981) (“‘Administrator’
 means the administrator or the acting administrator of the state
 health planning and development agency.”). Accordingly, it would
 
18
 HAR § 11-1-25(a)(4) is a general DOH rule that presumably applies
 
to various types of proceedings.  Neither party suggests that the rule would
be invalid if applied to other proceedings where the legislature has not
expressed its intent for a hearings officer, director, or member to review a
decision in which he or she substantially participated.
 
-29­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
appear that the agency’s decision making authority rests with the
 
office, rather than the individual office holder. Thus, for
 example, if the administrator issued the decision on the merits,
 but then left his or her position, the acting administrator or a
 new administrator would participate in the reconsideration
 decision. HAR § 11-185-2; HRS § 323D-47.
 
In addition, as discussed in detail below, SHPDA’s own
 
disqualification rule, HAR § 11-185-32 (1981), provides that a
 hearings officer may be disqualified for certain conflicts of
 interest:
 
Disqualification of hearing officer.  (a) No hearing
officer shall preside at any public hearing relating
to any matter in which the hearing officer, the
hearing officer’s spouse, or the hearing officer’s
child has (or within the twelve months preceding the
hearing, had) any substantial ownership, directorship,
officership, employment, prospective employment for
which negotiations have begun, medical staff,
fiduciary, contractual, creditor, debtor,
consultative, pecuniary, or business interest.
(b) Where any other conflict of interest exists,
the hearing officer shall be disqualified from
presiding at the public hearing. The provisions of
chapter 84, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and the
decisions, advisory opinions, and informal advisory
opinions of the state ethics commission shall serve as
guidelines in determining whether a conflict of
interest exists.
 
Thus, if the administrator were disqualified from the
 
initial decision on the merits pursuant to HAR § 11-185-32, an
 
acting administrator could participate in both the decision on
 the merits and the reconsideration decision. HAR § 11-185-2; HRS
 § 323D-47.
 
Moreover, unlike HAR § 11-1-25(a)(4), HAR § 11-185-32
 
does not conflict with the legislature’s intent behind the
 
-30­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
reconsideration process set forth in HRS § 323D-47. Although the
 
legislature generally intended the administrator to participate
 in both the decision on the merits and the reconsideration
 decision, it also presumably was aware of prohibitions against
 conflicts of interest for public officers and employees, see HRS
 § 84-14(a),
19 and would not have intended that the administrator
 
participate in a decision where such a conflict existed.20 HAR §
 
11-185-32 is consistent with HRS § 84-14. Compare HAR § 11-185­
32 with HRS § 84-14.
 
Significantly, these conflict of interest provisions
 
19 HRS § 84-14(a) (1993) provides:
 
No employee shall take any official action directly
affecting:
 
(1) A business or other undertaking in which he has a
substantial financial interest; or
 
(2) A private undertaking in which he is engaged as
legal counsel, advisor, consultant, representative, or
other agency capacity.
 
A department head who is unable to disqualify himself
on any matter described in items (1) and (2) above
will not be in violation of this subsection if he has
 complied with the disclosure requirements of section
84-17; and
 
A person whose position on a board, commission, or
committee is mandated by statute, resolution, or
executive order to have particular qualifications
shall only be prohibited from taking official action
that directly and specifically affects a business or
undertaking in which he has a substantial financial
interest; provided that the substantial financial
interest is related to the member’s particular
qualifications.
 
20
 In addition, as discussed in detail below, SHPDA hearings officers
 
would also be subject to disqualification where they exhibit bias or
prejudice, or there is an appearance of impropriety or partiality.  Cf. State
 v. Ross, 89 Hawai 'i 371, 377, 974 P.2d 11, 17 (1998). 
-31­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
are much more limited than those set out in HAR § 11-1-25. Under
 
HAR § 11-185-32 and HRS § 84-14, the administrator is able to
 participate in both the decision on the merits and the
 reconsideration decision, so long as he or she is not
 disqualified by a limited category of personal interests. In
 contrast, application of HAR § 11-1-25, as Liberty urges, would
 turn this limited exception into the rule, disqualifying the
 administrator from participation in all reconsideration decisions
 in which he or she has made the initial decision on behalf of
 SHPDA on the CON application. Such a blanket rule is contrary to
 the legislature’s intent, and HAR § 11-1-25(a)(4) therefore
 cannot be applied in the instant case. See Agsalud, 67 Haw. at
 
591, 699 P.2d at 19.
 
In sum, HAR § 11-1-25(a)(4) would conflict with HRS
 
§ 323D-47 if applied in the instant case. Instead, the SHPDA
 disqualification rule contained in HAR § 11-185-32 applies in
 lieu of HAR § 11-1-25. Liberty has not asserted that
 Administrator Terry should have been disqualified pursuant HAR
 § 11-185-32, and we find no basis for his disqualification under
 this provision.
21 Accordingly, the circuit court erred in
 
21
 Liberty argued below that Administrator Terry should be 
disqualified pursuant to HAR § 11-1-25(a)(5) based on personal bias or
prejudice because he approved Rainbow’s CON application despite votes against
the application by the CON Review Panel and the SHCC. However, theseallegations are not sufficient to cause a reasonable person to question
Administrator Terry’s impartiality.  See Ross , 89 Hawai 'i at 380, 974 P.2d at 
20. First, the recommendations of the CON Review Panel and the SHCC were not
binding on Administrator Terry.  HAR § 11-186-45(e) (1981).  Second, another
review panel, the Tri-Isle Subarea Health Planning Council, recommended
(continued...)
 
-32­  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
concluding that Administrator Terry was disqualified from
 
participating in the Reconsideration Decision.
 
B.	 Trygstad was not disqualified from participating in the
Reconsideration Decision
 
Liberty argues that Trygstad should have been
 
disqualified from sitting on the Reconsideration Committee
 
pursuant to HAR § 11-1-25(a)(2).22 Liberty alleges that Trygstad
 
should be disqualified because her brother-in-law, Dr. George
 
Talbot, is the “Kaiser Permanente physician-in-charge for Maui”
 and testified on behalf of Rainbow in support of its CON
 application. Accordingly, Liberty argues, Dr. Talbot was a
 “party’s representative” and, therefore, Trygstad’s
 disqualification was mandatory.
 
Rainbow argues that HAR § 11-1-25 is inapplicable to
 
SHPDA proceedings, and that the more specific SHPDA
 disqualification rule, HAR § 11-185-32, should apply instead.
23
 
21(...continued)
appro
val of the application.  Third, the conditions that Administrator Terry
imposed on Rainbow’s application address some of the concerns that led the CON
Review Panel and SHCC to recommend denying the application.  Finally, four
other independent members of the Reconsideration Committee agreed to approve
Rainbow’s CON application, despite the recommendations of the CON Review Panel
and the SHCC. 
22 HAR 11-1-25(a)(2) provides for disqualification where a hearings
 
officer, director or member “[i]s related within the third degree by blood
or marriage to any party to the proceeding or any party’s representative or
attorney[.]”
 
23
 HAR § 11-185-32(a) also addresses disqualification based on family
 
relationships, but to a more limited degree, providing for disqualification
where:
 
the hearing officer, the hearing officer’s spouse, or
the hearing officer’s child has (or within the twelve
(continued...)
 
-33­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Rainbow also argues that Dr. Talbot was not a representative of
 
Kaiser as envisioned under HAR § 11-1-25 because Dr. Talbot’s
 employer (Hawaii Permanente Medical Group (HPMG)), and Kaiser are
 “separate corporate entities.”
 
We conclude that HAR § 11-1-25 is inapplicable here
 
because the more specific SHPDA disqualification rule contained
 in HAR § 11-185-32 governs SHPDA hearings officers.
 
The DOH rules of practice and procedure are contained
 
in HAR chapter 11-1. HAR § 11-1-1 (2005) provides a “Statement
 of scope and purpose” for HAR chapter 11-1, and provides in
 relevant part:
 
(a) This chapter governs the practice and procedure
before the department of health, State of Hawaii,
provided that an attached entity may adopt and shall
be governed by its own specific rules of practice and
procedure if it has rulemaking authority , and provided
that the director may adopt more specific rules of
practice and procedure for any specific program, and
those more specific rules shall govern the practice
and procedure in proceedings for that program.  Where
 such specific rules fail to cover particular practices
and procedures, then these rules shall apply.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Here, SHPDA is an “attached entity” of the DOH with
 
rulemaking authority. HAR § 11-1-3 (2005); HRS § 323D-44(b). 
Accordingly, SHPDA has authority pursuant to HAR § 11-1-1 to
 adopt its own specific rules of practice and procedure. SHPDA
 
23(...continued)
month
s preceding the hearing, had) any substantial
ownership, directorship, officership, employment,
prospective employment for which negotiations have
begun, medical staff, fiduciary, contractual,
creditor, debtor, consultative, pecuniary, or business
interest.
 
-34­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
exercised this authority by adopting HAR chapter 11-185. 
Accordingly, chapter 11-185 “shall govern the practice and
 procedure” in SHPDA proceedings, unless it “fail[s] to cover
 particular practices and procedures[.]” HAR § 11-1-1.
 
As discussed above, HAR § 11-185-32 is SHPDA’s general
 
disqualification rule, and provides in relevant part:
 
(a) No hearing officer shall preside at any
public hearing relating to any matter in which the
hearing officer, the hearing officer’s spouse, or the
hearing officer’s child has (or within the twelve
months preceding the hearing, had) any substantial
ownership, directorship, officership, employment,
prospective employment for which negotiations have
begun, medical staff, fiduciary, contractual,
creditor, debtor, consultative, pecuniary, or business
interest.
 
(b) Where any other conflict of interest exists,
the hearing officer shall be disqualified from
presiding at the public hearing.  The provisions of
chapter 84, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and the
decisions, advisory opinions, and informal advisory
opinions of the state ethics commission shall serve as
guidelines in determining whether a conflict of
24
interest exists.[ ]
24 HAR chapter 11-186 governs the CON process, and also contains a
 
separate conflict of interest provision that is substantially similar to HAR
§ 11-185-32:
 
(a)  No member of a subarea council, a countywide
review committee, the review panel, or the statewide
council shall vote on any matter respecting an
applicant with which the member, the member’s spouse,
the member’s child, or the member’s parent has (or
within the twelve months preceding the vote, had) any
substantial ownership, directorship, officership,
employment, prospective employment for which
negotiations have begun, medical staff, fiduciary,
contractual, creditor, debtor, or consultative
relationship.
 
(b)   If such a relationship exists or has existed,
the member shall make a written disclosure of the
 
relationship before any action is taken with respect
to the applicant by the subarea council, countywide
review committee, review panel, or statewide council
to which the member belongs and the member shall make
the relationship public in any meeting in which action
is to be taken with respect to the applicant.
(continued...)
 
-35­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Liberty argues that this rule does not displace “the
 
more comprehensive provisions” of HAR § 11-1-25 because HAR
 
§§ 11-1-25 and 11-185-32 do not conflict.  However, Liberty’s
 
argument is misplaced. In general, where rules overlap in their
 
application but do not irreconcilably conflict, effect will be
 given to both, if possible. 
See Cnty. of Hawai' i v. C&J Coupe 
Family Ltd. P’ship, 120 Hawai' i 400, 405, 208 P.3d 713, 718 
(2009). However, HAR § 11-1-1 qualifies this general rule by
 stating that, “specific rules of practice and procedure for any
 specific program . . . shall govern the practice and procedure in
 proceedings for that program.” Thus, HAR § 11-1-1 applies only
 where “such specific rules fail to cover particular practices and
 procedures[.]” (Emphasis added). As a result, the relevant
 question is not whether HAR §§ 11-185-32 and 11-1-25 conflict,
 
24(...continued)
(c)   Whe
re any other conflict of interest exists, a
member of a subarea council, countywide review
committee, review panel, or statewide council shall be
disqualified from voting in the review of an
application. The provisions of chapter 84, Hawaii
Revised Statutes, and the decisions, advisory
opinions, and informal advisory opinions of the state
ethics commission shall serve as guidelines in
determining whether a conflict of interest exists.
 
HAR § 11-186-51.
Because Trygstad participated in the Reconsideration Committee as
a representative of the Tri-Isle Subarea Health Planning Council, this
provision also could be read to apply to her disqualification.  See HAR § 11­186-51(a) (providing that a member of a subarea council shall not vote “on any
matter respecting an applicant” where the member has a conflict of interest). 
However, HAR § 11-186-51 also could be read as applying solely to actions
taken “by the subarea council, countywide review committee, review panel, or
statewide council[,]” but not the Reconsideration Committee.  See HAR § 11­
186-51(b).  Because HAR §§ 11-186-51 and 11-185-32 do not differ materially,
and because SHPDA’s and Rainbow’s arguments rely on HAR § 11-185-32, we need
not resolve whether HAR § 11-186-51 also applies.
 
-36­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
but rather whether HAR § 11-185-32 “fail[s] to cover”
 
disqualification practices and procedures, such that HAR chapter
 11-1 applies. Because HAR § 11-185-32 does cover
 disqualification practices and procedures for SHPDA hearings
 officers, it applies in lieu of HAR § 11-1-25.
 
Nevertheless, Liberty argues that HAR § 11-1-25 applies
 
because it covers a broader range of disqualifications than HAR
 § 11-185-32. However, this argument is not supported by HAR
 § 11-1-1. HAR chapter 11-1 is not intended to fill every gap in
 an attached entity’s more specific rules. Rather, it applies
 only where an attached entity’s rules do not “cover particular
 practices and procedures[.]” Here, SHPDA’s rules cover
 disqualification practices and procedures. Accordingly, DOH’s
 general disqualification rule does not apply, even though it
 would provide for disqualification under a broader range of
 circumstances. This is logical given that, in certain
 circumstances, such as those presented here, the general DOH
 rules may conflict with the legislature’s intent that certain
 practices or procedures be performed by specific administrative
 authorities.
 
Liberty also argues that, because HAR § 11-185-32
 
contains no express prohibition against a biased or prejudiced
 hearings officer, application of only HAR § 11-185-32 would allow
 a hearings officer who harbored a bias or prejudice against a
 party to sit on the Reconsideration Committee. Liberty further
 
-37­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
argues that, if the phrase “any other conflict of interest” in
 
HAR § 11-185-32(b) is read broadly to include bias or prejudice,
 it must also be read to include all of the bases for
 disqualification contained in HAR § 11-1-25.
 
These arguments are unpersuasive. First, bias or 
prejudice is a form of conflict of interest. See, e.g., Daiichi 
Hawaii Real Estate Corp. v. Lichter, 103 Hawai' i 325, 339-40, 82 
P.3d 411, 425-26 (2003) (“Under Hawai' i law, ‘evident partiality’ 
sufficient to vacate an arbitration award may be demonstrated when a conflict of interest exists with the arbitrator. . . . Hawai'i courts have explained that evident partiality not only 
exists when there is actual bias on the part of the arbitrator, but also when undisclosed facts demonstrate a ‘reasonable impression of partiality.’”) (citation omitted) (emphasis added). Accordingly, it is not necessary to resort to HAR § 11-1-25 to conclude that “conflict of interest” includes “bias or prejudice.” 
Second, bias or prejudice would be a basis for 
disqualification even if the Department of Health and SHPDA failed to promulgate any rules regarding disqualification. This is because due process requires disqualification where “circumstances fairly give rise to an appearance of impropriety and reasonably cast suspicion on [the adjudicator’s] impartiality.” Ross, 89 Hawai' i at 377, 974 P.2d at 17 (citation 
-38­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and ellipses omitted).25 Otherwise, the multitude of agency
 
disqualification rules that fail to directly address bias or
 
prejudice would absurdly allow for participation by biased or
 prejudiced adjudicators.
26 Accordingly, Liberty is incorrect in
 
arguing that HAR § 11-185-32 is inadequate because it does not
 directly address bias or prejudice.
 
Finally, although Liberty argued in the circuit court
 
that the Reconsideration Committee members were not hearings
 officers and that HAR § 11-185-32 was therefore inapplicable, it
 
has abandoned this argument on appeal.  Indeed, Liberty now
 
asserts that both rules “must be given effect.” Accordingly,
 
Liberty has waived any argument that HAR § 11-185-32 is
 inapplicable to the Reconsideration Committee members. Hawai' i 
25 In Ross, the applicable statute expressly provided for 
disqualification where a judge had a “personal bias or prejudice[.]”  89 
Hawai'i at 376, 974 P.2d at 16.  However, this court looked beyond the statute
to due process to determine, not actual bias or prejudice, but “whethercircumstances fairly give rise to an appearance of impropriety and reasonablycast suspicion on the judge’s impartiality.” Id. at 377, 974 P.2d at 17
(internal quotation marks, ellipses, and brackets omitted).  Because of the statutory disqualification requirement, this court was not required todetermine whether a judge’s actual bias or prejudice would also implicate dueprocess.  However, it would be incongruous to conclude that an appearance ofimpropriety or partiality violates due process, but actual impropriety orpartiality does not. 
26 See, e.g., HAR §§ 3-90-3 (1987) (conflicts of interest for State 
Foundation of Culture and the Arts), 6-23-45 (2009) (disqualification incontested case proceedings before Department of Budget and Finance), 6-61-28(1992) (disqualification in hearings before the Public Utilities Commission),11-62-58 (2004) (conflicts of interest in review of wastewater managementpermits), 11-175-4(c) (1988) (conflicts of interest for State Council onMental Health and Substance Abuse), 11-271-104 (1994) (disqualification incontested case proceedings relating to hazardous waste management), 13-167-61(1988) (disqualification in contested case proceedings before Commission onWater Resource Management), 13-197-20 (1989) (disqualification in contestedcase proceedings before Hawai 'i Historic Places Review Board), 13-300-62
(1996) (disqualification in administrative appeals relating to burial sitesand human remains). 
-39­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7) (“Points not argued
 
may be deemed waived.”). Although this issue was not addressed
 in the parties’ appellate briefing, the dissent nevertheless
 concludes that HAR § 11-185-32 is inapplicable because the
 Reconsideration Committee members are not hearings officers. 
Dissenting opinion at 18-19. We respectfully disagree.
 Before the Reconsideration Committee and on appeal,
 
SHPDA has consistently argued that HAR § 11-185-32 governs the
 
disqualification of Reconsideration Committee members. As SHPDA
 
explained in the circuit court, the SHPDA rules preceded the DOH
 
rules by many years. SHPDA stated,
 
So for years, the two chapters, 11-185 and 11­
186 specifically in the certificate of need matters
governed.  Perhaps Rule No. 11-185-32 is not as
comprehensive or as eloquent as it could be if revised
today, but it is a clear disqualification of hearing
officer rule. 
 And in this instance in the
 
recon
sideration committee situation it is the
 
reconsideration committee who is the hearing officer
of the reconsideration.
 
. . . .  And these rules were promulgated with
the understanding that the public hearing that would
follow the grant of a reconsideration would be heard
by the reconsideration committee.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
SHPDA’s interpretation of its own rules is entitled to 
deference unless it is clearly erroneous or inconsistent with the 
underlying legislative purpose. See Kaleikini, 128 Hawai' i at 
67, 283 P.3d at 74. 
HAR § 11-185-32 must be construed in pari materia with
 
HRS § 323D-47 and the other rules governing SHPDA and the CON
 process. HRS § 1-16 (1993) (“Laws in pari materia, or upon the
 
-40­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
same subject matter, shall be construed with reference to each
 
other.”). HRS § 323D-47 and HAR § 11-186-82(d) make clear that,
 where there is good cause for reconsideration, the
 Reconsideration Committee must hold a public hearing and then
 issue a decision on behalf of SHPDA.
27 It is beyond dispute that
 
the hearing conducted by the Reconsideration Committee in the
 instant case constituted a public hearing. See HAR § 11-185-30
 
(“At any public hearing held by the agency, any person shall have
 the right to present oral or written arguments and evidence
 relevant to the matter which is the subject of the hearing.”). 
The Reconsideration Committee members presided at this hearing,
 ruling on evidentiary objections and motions, and issuing the
 Reconsideration Decision. Accordingly, it was not clearly
 erroneous for SHPDA to conclude that the Reconsideration
 Committee members are hearings officers whose disqualification is
 governed by HAR § 11-185-32.
 
Moreover, although HAR § 11-185-31 indicates that a
 
separate hearings officer may be appointed for the purpose of
 ensuring the “orderly and just conduct of the hearing,” nothing
 in HAR § 11-185-31 indicates that the Reconsideration Committee
 members are thereby excluded from the disqualification provisions
 of HAR § 11-185-32. In other words, the fact that SHPDA
 
27
 HAR § 11-186-82(d) states that “the committee  shall schedule a
 
public hearing for reconsideration of the decision” and “[t]he committee shall
file a decision on the reconsideration within forty-five days after the
conclusion of the hearing.”  (Emphasis added).  Here, the Reconsideration
Decision was filed by all five Reconsideration Committee members.
 
-41­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
designated Andrew Tseu as a hearings officer to assist the
 
Reconsideration Committee in conducting the hearing did not
 render HAR § 11-185-32 inapplicable to the Reconsideration
 Committee members.
 
Lastly, the dissent argues that, prior to the adoption
 
of the DOH rules, SHPDA’s rules “did not explicitly provide
 disqualification rules for reconsideration committee members,”
 and, therefore, the DOH rule should apply. Dissenting opinion at
 23. However, this argument is unpersuasive. Under the dissent’s 
analysis, no disqualification rules would have governed the Reconsideration Committee members from the establishment of the Reconsideration Committee procedure in 1987 until the promulgation of the DOH rule in 2005. Thus, according to the dissent, during that almost 20-year period, SHPDA had conflict of interest rules governing non-binding advisory committee members and hearings officers who preside over non-substantive matters, but neglected to provide any disqualification rules governing the persons responsible for the agency’s final action on a CON application. We decline to adopt an interpretation of the rules that would lead to such a result. See Sierra Club v. Dep’t of 
Transp., 120 Hawai' i 181, 227, 202 P.3d 1226, 1272 (2009) (“[I]t 
is well-settled that statutory construction dictates that an interpreting court should not fashion a construction of statutory text that . . . creates an absurd or unjust result.” (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). 
-42­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In sum, HAR § 11-185-32 applies in the instant case. 
Because Liberty has not raised any arguments to suggest that
 
Trygstad should have been disqualified pursuant to HAR § 11-185­32, its arguments are without merit.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
Although we do not adopt the circuit court’s reasoning,
 
we affirm its December 13, 2011 final judgment, which affirmed
 the Reconsideration Committee’s February 17, 2011 Reconsideration
 Decision. 
Daniel P. Collins for 
petitioner
 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
Ellen Godbey Carson for
respondent RainbowDialysis, LLC
 
Ann V. Andreas for
 respondent State of Hawaii
 
-43­