         
       
         ***  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAII  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER  ***
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAP-30603 15-AUG-2012 
09:14 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
IN RE 'ÎAO GROUND WATER MANAGEMENT AREA HIGH-LEVEL
 
SOURCE WATER USE PERMIT APPLICATIONS AND PETITION
 
TO AMEND INTERIM INSTREAM FLOW STANDARDS OF
 
WAIHE'E RIVER AND WAIEHU, ' ÎAO, AND WAIKAPÛ
 
STREAMS CONTESTED CASE HEARING
 
NO. SCAP-30603
 
APPEAL FROM THE COMMISSION ON WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
 
(CASE NO. CCH-MA06-01)
 
AUGUST 15, 2012
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND MCKENNA, JJ.,
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE TRADER, IN PLACE OF DUFFY, J., RECUSED,
WITH ACOBA, J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.
 
I. INTRODUCTION
 
N
â Wai 'Ehâ, or “the four great waters of Maui,” is the 
collective name for the Waihe' e River and the Waiehu, 'Îao, and 
Waikapû Streams. The case before the court began in June 2004 
1
when Petitioners-Appellants/Cross-Appellees Hui  O Nâ Wai 'Ehâ 
1
 A “hui” is defined as, inter alia, a “[c]lub, association,
 
society, corporation, company, institution, organization, band, league, firm,
joint ownership, partnership, union, alliance, troupe, [or] team.” Mary
continue...
           
 
           
          
              
          
            
          
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
and Maui Tomorrow Foundation, Inc. (“Hui/MTF”), through 
Earthjustice, petitioned Appellee/Cross-Appellee Commission on Water Resource Management (“the Commission”) to amend the Interim Instream Flow Standards (“IIFS”) for Nâ  Wai 'Ehâ, which had been 
in place since 1988. Around the same time, several parties, including Applicant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant Maui County Department of Water Supply (“MDWS”), and Applicants-Appellees/Cross-Appellees Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar Company (“HC&S”) and Wailuku Water Company (“WWC”), filed Water Use Permit Applications (“WUPA”) for the same area. The Commission held a combined case hearing to resolve the IIFS and WUPA; in addition to the petitioner and applicants, the Office of Hawaiian Affairs (“OHA”) applied to participate in the hearing. The current appeal seeks review of the Commission’s resulting Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law (“FOF/COL”), and Decision and Order (“D&O”), in which the Commission amended the IIFS for two of the four streams, and substantially retained the existing IIFS for the two remaining streams as measured above diversions.
2 
1...continue
 
Kawena Pukui & The FOF/COL and D&O also resolved several WUPA; the Commission’s 
Samuel H. Elbert, H
awaiian Dictionary 86 (rev. ed. 1986).
 
2
 The Commission’s FOF/COL D&O differs from the 1988 IIFS in one
 
important respect. In 1988, the Commission set the IIFS as the status quo at
 
that time “without further amounts of water being diverted offstream through
new or expanded diversions.” Haw. Admin. Rules § 13-169-48 (1988). The
 FOF/COL D&O states that the IIFS will “remain” as established above
 diversions, but does not contain the restriction limiting new or expanded
diversions.
 
2
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
resolution of the WUPA is not before the court on appeal.
 
Hui/MTF and OHA appeal on related grounds. Their
 
primary complaint is that the Commission erred in balancing
 
instream and noninstream uses, and therefore the IIFS do not
 properly protect traditional and customary native Hawaiian
 rights, appurtenant water rights, or the public trust. Both
 parties also contest the Commission’s treatment of diversions,
 including the alternative source Well Number 7 (“Well No. 7”), a
 water well on HC&S’s plantation that could be used to irrigate
 HC&S’s cane fields. The parties contest the Commission’s
 determination that HC&S will not be required to pump Well No. 7
 to its full capacity, a decision that resulted in a higher
 estimated allowable diversion for HC&S, and lower IIFS for the
 streams. 
MDWS’s cross-appeal asks the court to clarify the
 
priority of noninstream municipal use in setting the IIFS.
 
And finally, the Commission, HC&S, and WWC argue that
 
the court does not have jurisdiction to hear Hui/MTF’s and OHA’s
 appeals. 
As explained below, the court holds that it has 
jurisdiction in the instant case, and takes this opportunity to expand upon the jurisdictional analysis from In re Water Use Permit Applications “Waiâ hole I”, 94 Hawai' i 97, 9 P.3d 409, 
(2000). In reviewing Hui/MTF’s and OHA’s points of error, the 
3
           
        
           
         
        
            
           
           
            
            
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
court concludes that the Commission on Water Resource Management 
erred in several respects. First, in considering the effect of the IIFS on native Hawaiian practices in Nâ Wai 'Ehâ, the 
Commission failed to enter findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding the effect of the amended IIFS on traditional and customary native Hawaiian practices in Nâ Wai ' Ehâ, and regarding 
the feasibility of protecting any affected practices. Second, the Commission’s analysis of instream uses was incomplete, as it focused on amphidromous species and did not fully consider other instream uses to which witnesses testified during the hearings. Third, the Commission erred in its consideration of alternative water sources and in its calculation of diverting parties’ acreage and reasonable system losses. The court must vacate the Commission’s June 10, 2010 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order, and remand the case for further proceedings. 
II. BACKGROUND
 
A. Nâ Wai 'Ehâ Water Systems 
1. Surface Water
3
 
Nâ Wai 'Ehâ are the Waihe' e River and Waiehu, ' Îao, and 
3
 “‘Surface water’ means both contained surface water—that is, water 
upon the surface of the earth in bounds created naturally or artificially
including, but not limited to, streams, other watercourses, lakes, reservoirs,and coastal waters subject to state jurisdiction—and diffused surfacewater—that is, water occurring upon the surface of the ground other than incontained water bodies. Water from natural springs is surface water when itexits from the spring onto the earth’s surface.” Hawai 'i Revised Statutes 
(“HRS”) § 174C-3 (1993). Diffused surface water is “Water, such a rainfallrunoff, that collects and flows on the ground but does not form awatercourse.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1728 (9th ed. 2009). 
4
           
          
          
              
               
            
 
           
              
              
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Waikapû Streams. The Waihe' e River is the principal water source 
in Nâ Wai ' Ehâ; it is about 26,585 feet long, and its watershed 
covers 4,500 acres. From 1984-2005, United States Geological 
Survey (“USGS”) data shows streamflow upstream of all diversions 
4
as follows: the Q50  flow was 34 million gallons per day (“mgd”),
5
the Q70  flow was 29 mgd, the Q90 flow was 24 mgd, and the Q100
flow was 14 mgd. 
The Waihe' e River’s two main diversions are 
Waihe'e Ditch and Spreckels Ditch. See Section II.A.3., 
infra, 
for more information about the ditches. The two ditches are capable of diverting all of the dry-weather flow available at the intakes, however, even if all the water is being diverted, streamflow immediately downstream of the intakes may exist because of leakage through or subsurface flow beneath the dams at these sites. The dry-weather flow downstream of the intakes is commonly about 0.1 mgd, but the stream may not have continuous mauka-to-makai surface flow. 
The Waiehu Stream is formed by the confluence of North
 
and South Waiehu Streams; it is about 23,700 feet long, and its
 
4
 Discussions of the volume of water in a stream utilize flow-
duration curves to express the percentage of time that streamflows were
equaled or exceeded during a given period of record. The Q50 flow, also known
as the median flow, is the flow that is equal or exceeded 50 percent of the
time; the Commission found that the Q50 flow is “reflective of typical flow
 conditions.”
 
5
 To illustrate the previous footnote, the Q70 flow is the volume of 
water that is equaled or exceeded 70 percent of the time during any given timeperiod. The Waihe 'e River showed streamflows of at least 29 mgd 70 percent of
the time from 1984-2005. 
5
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
watershed covers about 6,600 acres. Gaging stations on both
 
branches of the Waiehu Stream were discontinued in 1917, but USGS
 used historical data and record-extension techniques to estimate
 flows above all diversions for North Waiehu Stream from 1984-2005
 as follows: the Q50 flow was between 3.1 to 3.6 mgd, the Q70 flow
 was between 2.3 to 2.7 mgd, the Q90 flow was between 1.4 to 2.7
 mgd, and the Q100 flow was 1.6 mgd (as measured in March 1915). 
For South Waiehu Stream, USGS utilized the same record extension
 techniques, and estimated the 1984-2005 flows as follows: the Q50
 flow was between 2.4 to 4.2 mgd, the Q70 flow was between 1.9 to
 2.8 mgd, the Q90 flow was between 1.3 to 2.0 mgd, and the Q100 flow was 1.5 mgd (recorded in July 1913). The Waihe' e and 
Spreckels Ditches divert water from both North and South Waiehu Streams; in addition, the North Waiehu Ditch diverts from the North Waiehu Stream and the Cerizos Kuleana Ditch diverts from the South Waiehu Stream. There is extensive channel erosion below the Spreckels Ditch on South Waiehu Stream, with a 12-foot drop in the elevation of the stream just below the diversion, and there is a vertical concrete apron located in Waiehu Stream. Most of the water is diverted from North and South Waiehu Streams at the North Waiehu Ditch and Spreckels Ditch, respectively; due to these diversions and leakage, Waiehu Stream does not flow continuously from mauka to makai. 
'Îao Stream is the second-largest stream in Nâ  Wai 'Ehâ; 
6
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
it is about 38,000 feet long, and its watershed covers about 
14,500 acres. USGS calculated the 1984-2005 flows above all diversions as follows: the Q50 flow was 25 mgd, the Q70 flow was 18 mgd, the Q90 flow was 13 mgd, and the Q100 flow was 7.1 mgd. The two main diversions off the ' Îao Stream are the ' Îao­
Waikapû/ 'Îao-Maniania Ditches at an altitude of 780 feet, and the 
Spreckels Ditch at 260 feet. The United States Army Corps of Engineers channelized significant portions of ' Îao Stream’s lower 
reaches and hardened the stream bed and banks with concrete for flood control and drainage. About 2.5 miles above the mouth of the Stream, the concrete channel includes a 20-foot vertical drop. USGS estimates that ' Îao Stream loses 6.3 mgd in reaches 
downstream of the ' Îao-Maniania ditch diversion that are not 
lined with concrete. In absence of ditch return flows or runoff during and following rainfall, ' Îao Stream is dry and does not 
flow continuously from mauka to makai. 
The Waikapû Stream is the southern-most stream and the
 
longest of the four streams; it is about 63,500 feet in length,
 with a watershed of about 9,000 acres. USGS, using record
 extension techniques, estimated the 1984-2005 flows above all
 diversions as follows: the Q50 flow was between 4.8 to 6.3 mgd,
 the Q70 flow was between 3.9 to 5.2 mgd, and the Q90 flow was
 between 3.3 to 4.6 mgd. The lowest recorded flow for Waikapû
 Stream was 3.3 mgd, in October 1912. There are three diversions
 
7
           
          
         
         
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
off the Waikapû  Stream: the South Side Waikapû Ditch (also known 
as the South Waikapû  Ditch) near an altitude of 1,120 feet, the 
Waihe'e Ditch, and the Reservoir 6 Ditch. The Waikapû Stream is 
commonly dry downstream of all diversions, both because of the 
diversions and because of infiltration losses into the streambed; the Stream does not flow continuously from mauka to makai. 
2. Ground Water
6
 
There are three types of ground water in Nâ Wai 'Ehâ 
water systems: dike-impounded, the basal freshwater lens, and perched. Dike-impounded ground waters occur at high elevations; basal freshwater lenses and perched waters occur at lower elevations and closer to the coast. 
The dikes at higher elevations are low-permeability, so 
water builds up behind them. The upper reaches of Nâ Wai 'Ehâ 
streams intersect the dike-impounded ground water so the upper reaches have year-round streamflow, even during dry periods. The portions of the stream joined by the dike-impounded water are described as “gaining” because ground water contributes to streamflow. 
The basal freshwater lens system is contained in
 
volcanic rocks and sedimentary deposits. Perched water also
 
6
 “‘Ground water’ means any water found beneath the surface of the
 
earth, whether in perched supply, dike-confined, flowing, or percolating in
underground channels or streams, under artesian pressure or not, or
otherwise.” HRS § 174C-3.
 
8
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
occurs in the sedimentary deposits. In the lower reaches of the
 
streams where an unsaturated zone exists between the streams’
 channel bottoms and the water table, stream waters migrate from
 the stream beds to the basal lenses, and the streams are
 described as “losing.” Some of the stream channels intersect the
 basal freshwater lens near the mouths of the streams, making the
 streams “gaining” in those areas. 
The Commission considered the IIFS for Nâ Wai ' Ehâ with 
the WUPA for the high-level dike-impounded ground water. As the Hearings Officer, Dr. Lawrence H. Miike, explained, the Commission decided to combine the issues into one contested case hearing because the water systems are all connected and considering the WUPA and IIFS together would allow the Commission “to get a bigger picture and to be able to try to reach a more rational and reasonable decision . . . .” One example of the interconnectedness of the high-level dike-impounded ground water and the surface waters is the tunnel system. Several tunnels tap dike-impounded ground water and discharge directly into the streams. In some cases, denial of a WUPA for dike-impounded ground water results in additional water contributing to streamflow. 
3. Ditches
 There are two primary and two secondary systems that 
distribute water diverted from Nâ Wai 'Ehâ. The primary systems 
9
           
          
           
            
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
are WWC’s ditch system and HC&S’s reservoir/ditch system. Nine 
active diversions feed the primary distribution system: two on Waihe'e River, one on North Waiehu Stream, one on South Waiehu 
Stream, two on ' Îao Stream, and three on Waikapû Stream. There 
are two major ditches in the system: the Waihe' e and Spreckels 
Ditches. The WWC distribution system involves eleven registered stream diversions, two major ditches, seven minor ditches, and sixteen reservoirs; HC&S shares in the cost and maintenance of portions of this system. HC&S also operates a diversion intake on South Waiehu Stream at the Spreckels Ditch, a diversion intake on 'Îao Stream at the Spreckels Ditch, and the Spreckels Ditch 
from Reservoir 25 to its terminus at HC&S’s Reservoir 73. The waters that enter the distribution system travel by gravity flow in primary ditches through uplands into reservoirs that in turn deliver the water into smaller ditches for end use. 
The secondary systems are the so-called “kuleana”
7
 
ditches/pipes that either have an intake directly in a stream or
 receive water from the primary systems and the MDWS water
 treatment plants. The Commission identified seventeen kuleana
 ditch/pipe systems. Fourteen kuleana systems are connected to
 the primary distribution systems; three kuleana intakes connect
 
7
 The term “kuleana” is used by the parties to describe the
 
distribution system and users who were not charged for water delivery; whether
the users have riparian or appurtenant rights had not been determined at the
time of the Commission’s hearings.
 
10
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
directly to the streams.
 
B. Procedural History
 
On July 21, 2003, the Commission designated the ' Îao 
Aquifer System a Ground Water Management Area (“GWMA”). After a 
water source is designated as a GWMA, existing users have one year to file WUPA. See Hawai' i Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 174C­
50(c) (1993) (“An application for a permit to continue an existing use must be made within a period of one year from the effective date of designation.”) The water code provides that the Commission may issue permits for existing reasonable and beneficial uses, and places the burden of proof on the applicant to show that it satisfies the relevant criteria. HRS §§ 174C­49(a), 174C-50 (1993). As discussed in the following subsection, several parties filed such WUPA for ground water sources. 
The water code also provides that “[a]ny person with
 
the proper standing may petition the commission to adopt an
 interim instream flow standard for streams in order to protect
 the public interest pending the establishment of a permanent
 instream flow standard.” HRS § 174C-71(2)(A) (1993). Hui/MTF
 filed such a petition; it is the Commission’s resolution of this
 petition that is currently before the court on appeal.
 
On March 13, 2008, during the pendency of the Hearings, 
the Commission also designated the four streams of Nâ Wai 'Ehâ a 
Surface Water Management Area (“SWMA”). Like the GWMA 
11
           
 
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
designation, the SWMA designation triggered WUPA requirements. 
The resolution of those WUPA are not currently before the court,
 but they are relevant because the Commission utilized estimates
 of expected surface water use permits in determining the IIFS for
 the water system. 
1.	 Water Use Permit Applications 
MDWS, HC&S, and WWC’s predecessor in interest, Wailuku
 
8
Agribusiness Company, Inc.,  filed timely WUPA for ' Îao Aquifer 
sources. Hui/MTF and OHA filed objections to the WUPA. The Commission held public hearings on the WUPA on October 28, 2004; April 22, 2005; and February 2, 2006. Prior to the close of the third hearing, several attendees, including MDWS, WWC, Hui/MTF, and OHA, verbally requested that the Commission hold a Contested Case Hearing (“CCH”) regarding the WUPA. Subsequently, the parties filed written petitions to that effect. 
2. Petition to Amend Interim Instream Flow Standards
 In June of 2004, Hui/MTF filed a Petition to Amend
 
Interim Instream Flow Standards. 
In its petition, Hui/MTF argued
 
that the then-existing standards, which had been in place since
 1988, lacked any scientific basis and merely preserved the status
 quo without addressing the public trust, environmental concerns,
 native Hawaiian practices, outdoor and recreational activities,
 
8
 WWC filed Requests to Transfer Wailuku Agribusiness’s permits to
 
WWC.
 
12
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
or aesthetic and scenic values, as required by the water code. 
Hui/MTF requested that the Commission establish scientifically-
based IIFS and order restoration of all streamflows not currently
 put to beneficial use. 
HC&S and Wailuku Agribusiness Company filed comments to
 
the petition, largely arguing that their use is reasonable and
 beneficial, that the petition did not prove the necessity of
 establishing new standards, and that the Petition did not show
 how native Hawaiian practitioners would use the water or how much
 they would need to use. Hui/MTF responded that the burden falls
 on the Commission, not on Hui/MTF, to determine reasonable IIFS
 and to protect instream public trust uses and native Hawaiian
 rights. 
3. Contested Case Hearing
 At its February 15, 2006 meeting, the Commission
 
decided that a CCH would be held for the ground water WUPA and
 the IIFS together. On May 4, 2006, the Commission released a
 “Notice of a Combined Contested Case Hearing (CCH-MA-06-01)
 Concerning Water Use Permit Applications For Maui Department of
 Water Supply, Hawaiian Commercial and Sugar, and Wailuku Water
 Company, LLC; Iao Ground Water Management Area, Maui, and
 Petitions to Amend the Interim Instream Flow Standards for Iao,
 Waiehu, Waihee, & Waikapu Streams.” One of the Commissioners,
 Dr. Lawrence Miike, was appointed Hearings Officer. After a
 
13
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
hearing, Dr. Miike granted standing to five of the parties
 
presently before the court: HC&S, Hui/MTF, MDWS, OHA, and WWC. 
Dr. Miike held twenty-three days of hearings between 
December 3, 2007 and March 4, 2008; by the end of the evidentiary phase of the hearing, seventy-seven witnesses had testified and over six hundred exhibits had been accepted into evidence. After the conclusion of the Hearings, Dr. Miike reopened evidence, on motions of two parties, to admit two additional exhibits: HC&S offered a study it commissioned from John Ford, an environmental consultant, which had not been completed at the time of the Hearing, and OHA offered a portion of an Environmental Impact Statement Preparation Notice for the Wai' ale Water Treatment 
Facility. HC&S, MDWS, WWC, and Hui/MTF submitted proposed Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law. OHA joined Hui/MTF’s proposals. 
4.	 Dr. Miike’s Proposed Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
Law, Decision and Order 
On April 9, 2009, Dr. Miike released his proposed 
FOF/COL D&O (“Proposed FOF/COL”). The Proposed FOF/COL consisted of 617 FOF regarding Nâ Wai ' Ehâ’s water systems, fish and 
wildlife habitats, traditional and customary native Hawaiian practices, users and uses, and the projected economic impact of restricting noninstream uses. The Proposed FOF/COL also included
 297 COL, on topics including instream values, users and uses,
 
14
           
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
alternative water resources, system losses, economic impacts of
 
restricting noninstream uses, IIFS, and WUPA. Many of the
 Proposed FOF/COL were ultimately adopted by the Commission in the
 final FOF/COL, as discussed in subsequent sections, infra.
 
Dr. Miike’s Proposed Decision amended the IIFS for all 
four streams, as follows: the IIFS for the Waihe' e River would be 
14 mgd downstream of diversions; for North and South Waiehu Streams, the IIFS would be 2.2 mgd and 1.3 mgd, respectively; for 'Îao Stream, the IIFS would be 13 mgd; and for Waikapû Stream, 
the IIFS would be 4 mgd, with contingencies to adjust the IIFS or 
its point of measurement. The proposed IIFS limited diversions 
enough to increase streamflow to a level that should have 
established mauka-to-makai flow in all four streams. The Proposed FOF/COL also concluded that Well No. 7 is an alternative source for HC&S, and that it can supply 14 mgd of HC&S’s water requirements. 
The Commission permitted parties to file written
 
Exceptions to Dr. Miike’s Proposed FOF/COL and D&O; each party
 
filed such Exceptions. On October 15, 2009, the Commission
 
convened to hold a hearing on the parties’ Exceptions.
 
In their written exceptions and their presentations to
 
the Commission, Hui/MTF and OHA argued that the IIFS should be
 
higher for several reasons. They argued that the Commission
 should allow fewer commercial diversions because the companies’
 
15
           
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
actual water needs are lower than the Commission’s estimates,
 
that the diverting parties should be required to eliminate system
 waste by lining ditches and reservoirs, and that HC&S should be
 required to pump Well No. 7 to full capacity. Regarding kuleana
 rights, Hui/MTF and OHA claimed that while the provisions made
 for kuleana users were adequate for current and planned uses of
 kuleana users who testified, they were inadequate to provide for
 all kuleana users in the system. Furthermore, they argued that
 the Commission should not defer to future proceedings for
 determinations of appurtenant rights and the reasonable-
beneficial uses of noninstream users. 
MDWS objected to several of the Proposed FOF/COL. MDWS 
argued that the IIFS for ' Îao Stream would restrict diversions 
such that it could not operate its ' Îao Water Treatment Facility 
to serve domestic needs of Maui residents. MDWS also objected to several of the Proposed FOF/COL indicating that the IIFS should be set without considering “offstream public trust uses, such as the public water supply.” 
WWC’s exceptions argued that the Proposed FOF/COL did
 
not properly balance instream and noninstream uses, and were too
 severe in their limitations of noninstream uses. WWC argued that
 nothing in the water code required the Commission to establish
 mauka-to-makai streamflows, and that the Proposed FOF/COL’s
 efforts to do so reflect an improper emphasis on instream values. 
16
           
          
           
         
           
              
             
           
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
HC&S offered similar exceptions, arguing that the
 
Proposed FOF/COL tipped the balance too sharply in favor of
 
stream restoration. HC&S encouraged the Commission to consider
 the water system as a whole, instead of focusing on
 reestablishing mauka-to-makai streamflow in each individual
 stream. HC&S also argued that the Proposed FOF/COL did not
 adequately consider the economic impact of restricting HC&S’s
 noninstream uses or of requiring HC&S to pump Well No. 7. HC&S
 emphasized that it employed about eight hundred workers on Maui,
 and that reduction in water “would jeopardize the viability of
 HC&S.” If HC&S were to cease operation, HC&S argued, those eight
 hundred jobs, and the HC&S’s other substantial contributions to
 the Maui economy would be lost. 
5.	 The Commission’s Final Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
Law, Decision and Order
 On June 10, 2010, the Commission released its final
 
FOF/COL and D&O. The Commission reached 617 FOF and 276 COL,
 adopting most of the Proposed FOF/COL but revisiting some. Most notably, the D&O amended the IIFS for only the Waihe' e River (to 
10 mgd) and the North and South Waiehu Streams
9
 (to 1.6 and 0.9
9
 The IIFS for South Waiehu Stream has not been implemented.
 
Hui/MTF, OHA, MDWS, WWC, and HC&S entered into a series of stipulations
suspending the implementation; the Commission approved each stipulation. The
 impetus for the stipulations appears to be complaints from kuleana users who
did not participate in the CCH and who take water from the ditch system off
South Waiehu Stream. South Waiehu Stream was one of the streams for which
 actual streamflow measurements were not available at the time of the hearings;
the Commission utilized USGS estimates based on record extension techniques to
continue...
 
17
           
             
           
         
           
         
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
mgd, respectively); it maintained the status quo, thereby not 
restricting any of the parties’ diversions, for the ' Îao and 
Waikapû Streams. It also lowered the amount of water HC&S was required to pump from Well No. 7 to 9.5 mgd, a significant decrease of 4.5 mgd from the Proposed FOF/COL. 
Dr. Miike dissented from the decision. Dr. Miike
 
agreed with the Commission majority regarding water requirements
 for kuleana users, MDWS, and WWC. Dr. Miike also agreed with
 most of the analysis regarding HC&S’s irrigation requirements. 
The basis for Dr. Miike’s dissent was the Commission majority’s
 allocation of water between instream uses and HC&S’s diversions. 
His strongest objection was to the Commission’s treatment of Well
 No. 7; Dr. Miike would have required HC&S to pump higher
 quantities of water from the well during dry-weather conditions,
 thereby retaining more water in the streams for instream and
 downstream uses. Dr. Miike argued that the Commission’s decision
 reflected a residual approach in that it set the IIFS as the
 amount of water remaining after satisfying all noninstream uses. 
Last, Dr. Miike objected to the Commission majority’s evaluation
 
of the economic impact of restricting HC&S’s water. He asserted
 
9...continue
 
s
et the IIFS. In the time since the first stipulation, the Commission has
worked on collecting actual streamflow data, and it started the process of
determining and quantifying appurtenant rights of users on South Waiehu
Stream. HC&S repaired a portion of its diversion infrastructure, and the
parties have discussed modifications to the ditch system, pending final
determination of appurtenant rights.
 
18
           
        
        
        
         
         
     
          
       
       
        
      
      
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
that the Commission cannot assume that the Proposed FOF/COL would
 
have resulted in HC&S’s “doomsday scenario” in which the water
 restrictions render its entire operation impractical. Dr. Miike
 argued that the accurate point of analysis would be the economic
 effect of limiting availability of water to the 15 percent of
 HC&S’s fields that are in west Maui. Dr. Miike noted that,
 rather than providing this analysis, HC&S “instead outlined the
 consequences if its entire 35,000 acre sugar operations were
 ended.” As Dr. Miike explained:
 
Absent an economic analysis by HC&S, the Commission cannot
assume that HC&S’s doomsday scenario would result from anoccasional 10.5 to 13.4 percent decrease of its irrigationrequirements for 15 percent of its entire operations. Those decreases equate to only 1.6 to 2.0 percent of itsirrigation requirements for its entire 35,000-acreoperations, and then only on an occasional basis. In the absence of any information supporting its doomsday scenario,the Commission could not assume that HC&S’s assertions overcame the presumption in favor of the public trustresource, the streams of N â Wai 'Ehâ. 
Dr. Miike concluded that the Commission majority “has failed in
 
its duties under the Constitution and the State Water Code as
 trustee of the state’s public water resources.” 
6. Appellate Filings
 On July 14, 2010, OHA and Hui/MTF filed their Notices
 
of Appeal. On July 30, 2010, MDWS filed its Notice of Cross-
Appeal. On February 23, 2011, MDWS, OHA, and Hui/MTF filed their
 
Opening Briefs in the Intermediate Court of Appeals. On April
 
18, 2011, Hui/MTF filed an application to transfer the case to
 the supreme court; OHA joined this motion. On June 23, 2011,
 
19
           
          
         
        
        
      
     
      
 
       
    
     
       
       
      
 
      
       
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
this court accepted the application for transfer.
 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Judicial Review of the Water Commission’s Decisions
 
The water code provides that “[j]udicial review of
 
rules and orders of the commission under this chapter shall be
 
governed by chapter 91. Trial de novo is not allowed on review
 of commission actions under this chapter.” HRS § 174C-12 (1993). 
Chapter 91 articulates the standards of review applicable to
 appeals of agency decisions and provides:
 
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the decision
of the agency or remand the case with instructions for
further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:
 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion.
 
HRS § 91-14 (g) (1993). “This court’s review is . . . qualified
 
by the principle that the agency’s decision carries a presumption
 of validity, and appellant has the heavy burden of making a
 convincing showing that the decision is invalid because it is
 unjust and unreasonable in its consequences.” In re Wai' ola O 
Moloka'i, Inc., 103 Hawai' i 401, 420, 83 P.3d 664, 683 (2004) 
20
           
          
       
        
          
         
        
          
 
           
        
       
      
        
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
(citations, brackets omitted). 
B. Findings of Facts
 
“FOFs are reviewable under the clearly erroneous
 
standard to determine if the agency decision was clearly
 
erroneous in view of reliable, probative, and substantial
 evidence on the whole record.” Id. at 421, 83 P.3d at 684
 
(citations, brackets omitted). 
C. Conclusions of Law
 
“COLs are freely reviewable to determine if the
 
agency’s decision was in violation of constitutional or statutory
 
provisions, in excess of statutory authority or jurisdiction of
 agency, or affected by other error of law.” Id. (citations,
 
brackets omitted).
 
D. Mixed Questions of Law and Fact
 
A COL that presents mixed questions of fact and law is
reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the
conclusion is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of
the particular case. When mixed questions of law and fact
are presented, an appellate court must give deference to the
agency’s expertise and experience in the particular field.
The court should not substitute its own judgment for that of
the agency.
 
Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 119, 9 P.3d at 431 (citations, brackets 
omitted).
 
An FOF or a mixed determination of law and fact is clearly
erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to
support the finding or determination, or (2) despite
substantial evidence to support the finding or
determination, the appellate court is left with the definite
and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.
 
Id. (citation). “We have defined ‘substantial evidence’ as
 
21
           
          
         
           
         
           
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative
 
value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
 conclusion.” Id. (citation).
 
E. The State Water Resources Trust
 
The public trust in state water resources is a 
constitutional doctrine, and as such, “the ultimate authority to interpret and defend the public trust in Hawai' i rests with the 
courts of this state.” Wai'ola, 103 Hawai' i at 421, 83 P.3d at 
684. 
This is not to say that this court will supplant its
judgment for that of the legislature or agency. However, it
does mean that this court will take a ‘close look’ at the
 action to determine if it complies with the public trust
doctrine and it will not act merely as a rubber stamp for
agency or legislative action.
 
Id. at 422, 83 P.3d at 685.
 
F. Constitutional Questions
 
“We answer questions of constitutional law by 
exercising our own independent constitutional judgment based on 
the facts of the case. Thus, we review questions of constitutional law under the right/wrong standard.” State v. 
Hanapi, 89 Hawai' i 177, 182, 970 P.2d 485, 490 (1998) (citations 
omitted). 
IV. JURISDICTION
 
Before the court can consider the parties’ points of
 
error, it must first resolve a jurisdictional argument. Kernan
 
v. Tanaka, 75 Haw. 1, 15, 856 P.2d 1207, 1215 (1993) (cert.
 
22
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
denied, 510 U.S. 1119 (1994)) (“Appellate courts have an
 
obligation to insure they have jurisdiction to hear and determine
 each case.”) The Commission, HC&S, and WWC argue that Hui/MTF
 and OHA do not have a right of appeal, and therefore the court
 has no jurisdiction in this matter. Hui/MTF and OHA both contend
 that the court’s opinion in Waiâhole I resolves the issue and
 clearly establishes that the court has jurisdiction over appeals
 of IIFS determinations. As explained below, the court holds that
 it has jurisdiction in this case, and takes this opportunity to
 elaborate on the jurisdictional analysis from Waiâhole I. 
The water code provides that “[j]udicial review of 
rules and orders of the commission under this chapter shall be governed by chapter 91.” HRS § 174C-12. HRS § 91-14, the portion of chapter 91 relating to judicial review, states that, “[a]ny person aggrieved by a final decision and order in a contested case . . . is entitled to judicial review thereof under this chapter.” HRS § 91-14(a) (1993). In previous cases interpreting this provision, the court has defined “contested case” as “an agency hearing that 1) is required by law and 2) determines the rights, duties, or privileges of specific parties.” Pele Defense Fund v. Puna Geothermal Venture, 77 
Hawai'i 64, 67-68, 881 P.2d 1210, 1213-14 (1994). Further, the 
court determined that a hearing is “required by law” if it is required by statute, by administrative rule, or by constitutional 
23
           
         
      
      
         
        
         
       
        
       
         
    
         
        
       
         
     
         
        
        
         
       
 
          
        
          
           
         
       
         
        
        
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
due process. Id. at 68, 881 P.2d at 1214.
 
In this case, neither statute nor administrative rule
 
mandates a hearing to establish an IIFS. HRS § 174C-7110 governs
 
the Commission’s actions vis-a-vis the state’s Instream Use
 
Protection Program, and nothing in that statute requires the
 Commission to hold a hearing before establishing or amending an
 
10 HRS § 174C-71, Protection of Instream Uses, provides, in relevant
 
part, that the Commission shall:
 
(2) Establish interim instream flow standards;
 
(A) Any person with the proper standing may petition the
commission to adopt an interim instream flow standard for
streams in order to protect the public interest pending the
establishment of a permanent instream flow standard;
 
(B) Any interim instream flow standard adopted under this
section shall terminate upon the establishment of a
permanent instream flow standard for the stream on which the
interim standards were adopted;
 
(C) A petition to adopt an interim instream flow standard
under this section shall set forth data and information
 
concerning the need to protect and conserve beneficial
instream uses of water and any other relevant and reasonable
information required by the commission;
 
(D) In considering a petition to adopt an interim instream
flow standard, the commission shall weigh the importance of
the present or potential instream values with the importance
of the present or potential uses of water for noninstream
purposes, including the economic impact of restricting such
uses;
 
(E) The commission shall grant or reject a petition to adopt
an interim instream flow standard under this section within
 
one hundred eighty days of the date the petition is filed.
The one hundred eighty days may be extended a maximum of one
hundred eighty days at the request of the petitioner and
subject to the approval of the commission;
 
(F) Interim instream flow standards may be adopted on a
stream-by-stream basis or may consist of a general instream
flow standard applicable to all streams within a specified
area[.]
 
HRS § 174C-71(2) (1993).
 
24
           
          
         
           
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
IIFS. In fact, the code indicates that the Commission need not
 
hold a hearing; the Code defines the IIFS as “a temporary
 instream flow standard of immediate applicability, adopted by the
 commission without the necessity of a public hearing, and
 terminating upon the establishment of an instream flow standard.” 
HRS § 174C-3. The Commission’s administrative rules are
 identical to the water code in relevant regard, so there is no
 rule-based requirement to hold a hearing.
11
 
This does not foreclose judicial review of the 
Commission’s actions, as there remains a third route whereby a hearing may be “required by law”: there may be a constitutional due process requirement. In determining whether a party has a due process right to an administrative hearing, the court must first resolve whether the party’s asserted interest is “‘property’ within the meaning of the due process clauses of the federal and state constitutions.” Sandy Beach Defense Fund v. 
City Council of City and Cnty. of Honolulu, 70 Haw. 361, 376, 773 P.2d 250, 260 (1989) (citing Aguiar v. Hawai' i Housing Auth., 55 
Haw. 478, 495, 522 P.2d 1255, 1266 (1974)). “To have a property interest in a benefit, a person clearly must have more than an abstract need or desire for it. He must have more than a 
11
 As Hawai 'i Administrative Rules § 13-169-2 states, an IIFS is “a 
temporary instream flow standard of immediate applicability, adopted by the
commission without the necessity of a public hearing, and terminating upon theestablishment of an instream flow standard.” Haw. Admin. Rules § 13-169-2. 
25
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
unilateral expectation of it. He must, instead, have a
 
legitimate claim of entitlement to it.” Id. (quoting Bd. of
 
Regents v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 577 (1972)).
 
The court has had several opportunities to interpret 
due process property interests as affected by the water code. In the case most similar to the current case, Waiâhole I, this court considered new and existing WUPA and IIFS for the Waiâ hole ditch 
system, a water system that provides water from Oahu’s windward side to the island’s leeward side. Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 
110, 9 P.3d at 422. Waiâhole I contains extensive analysis and 
interpretation of the water code, and will be discussed in subsequent sections of this opinion. Regarding jurisdiction, however, the opinion provides only brief analysis. First, the court explained that it had jurisdiction over the appeal of the existing WUPA because both the HRS and the administrative rules required a hearing as part of the WUPA process. Waiâhole I, 94 
Hawai'i at 119-20 n.15, 9 P.3d at 431-32 n.15. Second, with 
regard to the petitions to amend the IIFS and the new WUPA, the court stated that “constitutional due process mandates a hearing in both instances because of the individual instream and offstream ‘rights, duties, and privileges’ at stake.” Id. 
(quoting Puna Geothermal, 77 Hawai' i at 68, 881 P.2d at 1214). 
The parties dispute the import of the above-quoted
 
sentence. Hui/MTF argues that this “holding” from Waiâhole I
 
26
           
         
         
      
     
       
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
“made clear that [the court] had independent jurisdiction over
 
IIFS petitions.” The Commission, HC&S, and WWC argue that the
 Waiâhole I court’s citation to Puna Geothermal indicates that the
 court had jurisdiction over the IIFS in that case only because
 the appeal also challenged the Commission’s resolution of WUPA;
 they argue that because no party appealed from the WUPA in the
 present case, Waiâhole I is distinguishable and the court,
 therefore, lacks jurisdiction. 
First, a review of Puna Geothermal. There, the court 
considered whether it had jurisdiction over an appeal following the Department of Health’s (“DOH”) resolution of Puna Geothermal Ventures’s (“PGV”) applications for permits to build a well field and a power plant. 77 Hawai' i at 66, 881 P.2d at 1212. The DOH 
held two “public informational hearings,” denied PGV’s request for a CCH, and ultimately granted PGV’s permit applications. Id. 
When the Pele Defense Fund (“PDF”) sought judicial review of the DOH’s actions, PGV filed a motion to dismiss, arguing that the court lacked jurisdiction because there had been no contested case. Id. On appeal, this court concluded that PDF had a 
constitutional due process right to a hearing before the DOH. Id. at 68, 881 P.2d at 1214. The court held, 
as a matter of constitutional due process, an agency hearing
is also required where the issuance of a permit implicating
an applicant’s property rights adversely affects the
constitutionally protected rights of other interested
persons who have followed the agency’s rules governing
participation in contested cases.
 
27
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Id. (emphasis added). The court concluded that the hearings in
 
that case satisfied the “contested case” requirement for purposes
 of judicial review under HRS § 91-14. Id. at 71, 881 P.2d at
 
1217. 
The Commission, WWC, and HC&S argue that the Waiâ hole I
 
court’s citation to Puna Geothermal indicates that the court
 exercised jurisdiction over the appeal of the IIFS only because
 the parties also appealed the Commission’s resolution of permit
 applications. Hui/MTF reads Waiâhole I as holding that the court
 has independent jurisdiction to review IIFS. The court concludes
 that the jurisdictional language from Waiâhole I is susceptible
 to both interpretations. However, the court’s due process cases
 indicate that the court has jurisdiction to hear Hui/MTF’s appeal
 because the IIFS, independent of any WUPA, affects property
 interests of Hui/MTF’s members. 
John Duey, President of Hui O Nâ Wai ' Ehâ, testified 
that the Hui’s members “live, work, and play in the areas of Nâ Wai 'Ehâ,” and that the Hui is “committed to restoring these 
streams’ natural and cultural values and protecting Maui’s quality of life for present and future generations.” 'Îao Stream 
runs through the property owned by Duey and his wife, Marie Ho'oululâhui Lindsey Duey. Marie is native Hawaiian; she gave 
their property her Hawaiian name: Ho' oululâhui. Ho' oululâhui 
28
           
 
         
          
              
             
            
             
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
12
 , but the Dueys contains at least seventeen ancient lo' i 
currently cultivate only two small lo' i with stream water, which 
they take directly from, and return to, 
'Îao Stream. John 
testified that he would like to restore the remaining lo' i on his 
land, but that “[t]he only limiting factor is the availability of 
water.” 
Ron Sturtz, President of the Board of Directors of Maui 
Tomorrow Foundation, Inc., submitted a letter stating that the organization’s supporters engage in traditional and customary gathering practices. One such supporter, Roselle Keli' ihonipua 
Bailey, a kuma hula and native Hawaiian practitioner, submitted written testimony explaining the gathering practices she would like to practice in ' Îao Stream and its nearshore waters, and 
testifying that the lack of flowing water makes her practices impossible. 
Kalo
13 farmer and Hui O Nâ Wai ' Ehâ member Hôkûao 
Pellegrino testified that his 2.175-acre farm, Noho' ana, contains 
several restored ancient lo' i, ready to be cultivated. The 
12
 “Lo'i” is defined as an “[i]rrigated terrace, especially for taro, 
but also for rice; paddy.” Pukui & Elbert at 209. 
13
 “Kalo” is the Hawaiian word for taro. Pukui & Elbert at 123. “In 
Hawai'i, taro has been the staple from earliest times to the present, and here
its culture developed greatly, including more than 300 forms. All parts of
the plant are eaten, its starchy root principally as poi, and its leaves aslû'au.” Id. 
29
           
          
        
          
          
            
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Noho'ana lo'i are irrigated via a traditional ' auwai14 that diverts 
water from Waikapû Stream, and the water that leaves the lo' i 
returns to the Stream. Pellegrino testified that he is only able 
to cultivate two of his lo' i at a time because of insufficient 
water in Waikapû Stream. 
The interests of the Dueys, Roselle Bailey, and Hôkûao 
Pellegrino are selected examples of testimony presented to the Commission, but dozens of others testified about their similar interests. Indeed, in its FOF/COL D&O, the Commission found that “Cultural experts and community witnesses provided uncontroverted testimony regarding limitations on Native Hawaiians’ ability to exercise traditional and customary rights and practices in the greater Nâ Wai ' Ehâ area due to the lack of freshwater flowing in 
Nâ Wai 'Ehâ’s streams and into the nearshore marine waters.” 
The question before the court today, a question we answer in the 
15
 affirmative , is whether these interests constitute “property
interests” for the purpose of due process analysis. 
The court has explained that a party has a property
 
interest in the subject of litigation for purposes of due process
 analysis if the party has “more than an abstract need or desire
 
14
 “'Auwai” means “ditch or canal.” Pukui & Elbert at 33. 
15
 Hui/MTF also has standing to pursue this appeal, having 
demonstrated that “their interests were injured” and that they were “involved 
in the administrative proceeding that culminated in the unfavorable decision.”Puna Geothermal , 77 Hawai 'i at 69, 881 P.2d at 1215 (quoting Mahuiki v.
Planning Comm’n , 65 Haw. 506, 514-15, 654 P.2d 874, 879-80 (1982)). 
30
           
        
        
        
        
       
     
        
       
         
       
         
         
        
       
  
         
        
         
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
for it. He must have more than a unilateral expectation of it. 
He must, instead, have a legitimate claim of entitlement to it.” 
Sandy Beach Defense Fund, 70 Haw. at 376, 773 P.2d at 260. The
 court has cited with approval the U.S. Supreme Court’s analysis
 that: 
Property interests, of course, are not created by the
Constitution. Rather they are created and their dimensions
are defined by existing rules or understandings that stem
from an independent source such as state law—rules or
understandings that secure certain benefits and that support
claims of entitlement to those benefits.
 
Int’l Broth. of Painters and Allied Trades v. Befitel, 104
 
Hawai'i 275, 283, 88 P.3d 647, 655 (2004) (quoting Bd. of Regents 
v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 576 (1972)). See also Aguiar v. Hawai' i 
Housing Auth., 55 Haw. 478, 496, 522 P.2d 1255, 1267 (1974)
 (citing federal authority to support the conclusion that “a
 benefit which one is entitled to receive by statute constitutes a
 constitutionally-protected property interest”).
 The interests asserted by Hui/MTF have a statutory basis in the
 water code. As stated in HRS § 174C-101, 
(c) Traditional and customary rights of ahupua 'a tenants who 
are descendants of native Hawaiians who inhabited the 
Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778 shall not be abridged or
denied by this chapter . Such traditional and customary
rights shall include, but not be limited to, the cultivation
or propagation of taro on one's own kuleana and the
gathering of hihiwai, opae, o‘opu, limu, thatch, ti leaf,aho cord, and medicinal plants for subsistence, cultural,and religious purposes. 
(d) The appurtenant water rights of kuleana and taro lands ,
along with those traditional and customary rights assured in
this section, shall not be diminished or extinguished by a
failure to apply for or to receive a permit under this
chapter.
 
31
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
HRS §§ 174C-101(c) and (d) (1993). HRS § 174C-63 is yet another
 
section of the water code that entitles native Hawaiian farmers
 to their water; it states: “Appurtenant rights are preserved. 
Nothing in this part shall be construed to deny the exercise of
 an appurtenant right by the holder thereof at any time.” HRS §
 174C-63 (1993). 
HC&S argues that these interests do not rise to the
 
level of property for due process purposes, citing Sandy Beach
 Defense Fund, for support that native Hawaiian practices are
 similar to “aesthetic and environmental interests” which the
 court has held to be insufficient to establish a property
 interest. In that case, the City and County of Honolulu issued
 Special Management Area (“SMA”) use permits for a proposed
 development. 70 Haw. at 364, 773 P.2d at 253. Area residents
 and community groups alleged that the County was required to hold
 a CCH before issuing the permits, expressing concerns “regarding
 the development’s impact on coastal views, preservation of open
 space, traffic, potential flooding, and sewage treatment.” Id. 
The supreme court held that the community groups were not
 entitled to a CCH because their “aesthetic and environmental”
 claims did not constitute “legitimate claims of entitlement.” 
Id. at 376, 773 P.2d at 260. The court also noted that the
 community groups did not cite authorities to support their
 argument, and that none of the area residents owned property
 
32
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
contiguous to the development. Id. at 377, 773 P.2d at 261. 
Sandy Beach is readily distinguishable. First, the affected 
parties before the court today own or reside on land in the area of Nâ Wai ' Ehâ, and rely upon that water to exercise traditional 
and customary rights, including kalo farming. Second, as cited above, there is statutory authority found throughout the water code to support their entitlement to water for kalo farming. 
HC&S also argues that downstream kalo farmers cannot 
assert property interests to more water than they currently use because it “would be a grave departure from the principle that ‘the range of interests protected by procedural due process is not infinite.’” (quoting Int’l Bd. of Painters & Allied Trades v. Befitel, 104 Hawai' i at 283, 88 P.3d at 655). This argument is 
rejected for several reasons. First, as both Hui/MTF and OHA argue, the fact that HC&S and WWC have historically deprived downstream users of water does not negate those downstream users’ interest in the water. Second, neither statute quoted above provides for abandonment of appurtenant rights; in fact, the text specifically protects against abandonment by stating that appurtenant rights will “not be diminished or extinguished by a failure to apply for or to receive a permit.” HRS § 174C-101(d). Furthermore, as the court explained in Waiâhole I, “The constitution and Code, [. . .] do not differentiate among ‘protecting,’ ‘enhancing,’ and ‘restoring’ public instream values 
33
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
[like native Hawaiian rights], or between preventing and undoing 
‘harm’ thereto.” 94 Hawai' i at 150, 9 P.3d at 462. 
The court also disagrees with the Commission’s, WWC’s, 
and HC&S’s argument that setting the IIFS in this case did not determine individual water rights. When the Commission issued a D&O retaining the existing IIFS for ' Îao and Waikapû Streams, it 
necessarily affected the Dueys’ and Pellegrino’s access to water because it endorsed the upstream diversions that remove water from 'Îao and Waikapû Streams, apparently finding that the 
“importance” of those diversions outweighed the importance of downstream uses. HRS § 174C-71(2)(D). 
Though the conclusions above are sufficient to support 
today’s holding, the analysis of one more case merits consideration. In Ko' olau Agr. Co., Ltd. v. Comm’n On Water Use 
Mgmt. (“Ko' olau Ag”), an agriculture company unsuccessfully 
sought review of the Commission’s designation of several O' ahu 
aquifers as Water Management Areas (“WMA”). 83 Hawai' i 484, 486, 
927 P.2d 1367, 1369 (1996). The court explained that the company did not have a property interest in whether the aquifers in question received the WMA designation. Id. at 493, 927 P.2d at 
1376. In so concluding, the court drew a distinction between WMA designations, which do not require a hearing, and WUPA decisions, which do require hearings. As the court explained, this disparity in procedure is “eminently logical given the difference 
34
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
between the issues presented for decision.” Id. First, the
 
court noted the difference in analysis required before the two
 
resolutions. When considering a WMA designation, the Commission
 must determine whether “the water resources in the area may be
 threatened by existing or proposed withdrawals or diversions of
 water.” Id. (quoting HRS § 174C-41(a)). Contrast a WUPA, where
 
the Commission’s analysis is much more robust; the Commission
 must consider several factors when granting a WUPA, including
 whether the water use is “a reasonable-beneficial use as defined
 in [the Code];” whether the use is “consistent with the public
 interest;” and whether it is consistent with governmental land
 use plans. Id. at 492, 927 P.2d at 1375 (quoting HRS § 174C-48). 
Second, the court considered the necessity of judicial review. 
The court recognized that “the consequences of an erroneous [WMA]
 designation decision by the Commission do not indicate a need for
 judicial review because the rights of individual water users are
 fully protected in the permitting process.” Id. at 493, 927 P.2d
 
at 1376. And third, the court noted that WMA designations do not
 affect the interests of any potential water users; the impact of
 such a designation is only that the user’s water source is
 subject to the Commission’s regulation, which does not, in and of
 itself, affect the user’s water rights. Id. Contrast a WUPA,
 
where the outcome is a permit directly specifying a user’s rights
 to water. Id. 
35
           
   
         
        
        
        
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
All parties cite Ko' olau Ag for assistance on the 
question of whether there is a property interest at stake in this 
case. The Commission, HC&S, and WWC argue that an IIFS determination is similar to designating a WMA because neither directly determines property rights. The court concludes that each of the factors listed above counsel in favor of judicial review in this case. First, the analysis the Commission must undertake in setting an IIFS is complicated. The statute specifies the factors the Commission must consider: 
In considering a petition to adopt an interim instream flow
standard, the commission shall weigh the importance of the
present or potential instream values with the importance of
the present or potential uses of water for noninstream
purposes, including the economic impact of restricting such
 uses.
 
HRS § 174C-71(2)(D). As the voluminous record in this case
 
readily establishes, each of these factors is complex and
 involves significant and thorough analysis and factfinding. 
Unlike establishing a WMA, the analysis supporting a
 determination of an IIFS requires more than a yes/no decision,
 but rather requires the Commission to weigh serious and
 significant concerns, including: “the need to protect and
 conserve beneficial instream uses of water,” “the importance of
 the present or potential instream values,” “the importance of the
 present or potential uses of water for noninstream purposes,” and
 “the economic impact of restricting such uses.” HRS §
 174C-71(2)(C) and (D). Indeed, in Waiâ hole I, the Commission
 
36
           
        
     
        
       
        
         
       
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
itself advocated for due process rights in proceedings to
 
determine IIFS. One of the Commission’s own Orders, cited in the
 court’s opinion with approval, states
 
A petition to modify instream flows at ... specific
locations is a fact-intensive, individualized determination
at each site that may directly affect downstream and
off-stream interests.... [I]ndividual claims may need to be
examined. The site-specific inquiry required in this case is
not compatible with rule making, but with a method which
provides the due process procedures necessary to assess
individual interests.
 
94 Hawai' i at 152, 9 P.3d at 464. 
Second, the ramifications of an erroneous IIFS could 
offend the public trust, and is simply too important to deprive 
parties of due process and judicial review. As the court stated in Waiâhole I, “[t]he public trust . . . is a state constitutional doctrine. As with other state constitutional guarantees, the ultimate authority to interpret and defend the public trust in Hawai' i rests with the courts of this state.” 94 
Hawai'i at 143, 9 P.3d at 455. The courts serve an important 
function with regard to the water code; as the court noted in Waiâhole I, “[t]he check and balance of judicial review provides a level of protection against improvident dissipation of an irreplaceable res.” Id. (quoting Arizona Cent. for Law in Pub. 
Interest v. Hassell, 837 P.2d 158, 168–69 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1991), review dismissed, 837 P.2d 158 (Ariz. 1992) (brackets and citation omitted)). 
Finally, in Ko' olau Ag, the court specified that there 
37
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
was little necessity for judicial review because the permitting 
process would adequately protect individual rights. 83 Hawai' i 
at 493, 927 P.2d at 1376. This protection does not exist in today’s case for several reasons. First, as the Commission itself acknowledges, setting an IIFS is a final action and it would be “inappropriate for the Commission to reevaluate the IIFS during the upcoming surface water use permit proceedings.” This argument indicates that downstream users cannot ask the Commission to raise the IIFS to a level that would accommodate a permit to fulfill their kuleana needs. Second, as the court noted in Waiâhole I, the water code envisions that “Once the Commission translates the public interest in instream flows into ‘a certain and manageable quantity[, t]he reference to consistency with the public interest in the definition of reasonable beneficial use likewise becomes a reference to that quantity.’” 94 Hawai' i at 149, 9 P.3d at 461 (quoting Douglas W. 
MacDougal, Private Hopes and Public Values in the “Reasonable Beneficial Use” of Hawai' i’s Water: Is Balance Possible?, 18 U. 
Haw. L. Rev. 1, 62 (1996)). In short, the IIFS matter. They have both immediate and lasting impacts on individual water users. They are also an opportunity for the Commission to consider the needs of our state’s water systems. “Under the [Water] Code, [. . .] instream flow standards serve as the primary mechanism by which the Commission is to discharge its 
38
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
duty to protect and promote the entire range of public trust 
purposes dependent upon instream flows.” 94 Hawai' i at 148, 9 
P.3d at 460. The court therefore holds that Hui/MTF had a due process right to a hearing, and therefore has a right to judicial review, in this case. 
V. ANALYSIS OF POINTS OF ERROR
 
A.	 This Court Must Dismiss MDWS’s Cross-Appeal, As It Seeks
Resolution of an Abstract Proposition of Law.
 
MDWS filed a cross-appeal in this case seeking
 
“clarification” of several COL, in which the Commission
 
articulated that it established the IIFS prior to considering
 noninstream uses, including MDWS’s diversions for the public
 water supply. MDWS contends that Waiâhole I established a
 “higher status” for public trust uses as compared to commercial
 noninstream uses, and that municipal use, though a noninstream
 use, should be afforded higher status and preferential
 consideration as a public trust use. 
Hui/MTF filed an answering brief to MDWS’s opening
 
brief; OHA joined the brief. In its answering brief, Hui/MTF
 argues that MDWS’s point of error is not reviewable by the court
 because MDWS seeks clarification of language in the Commission’s
 D&O but does not argue that the Commission’s alleged error
 affected MDWS’s rights or interests. Hui/MTF reasons that
 because MDWS sought and was issued water use permits in the
 
39
           
          
          
         
       
           
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
amounts requested, any treatment of their point of error would be
 
an “advisory opinion.” Hui/MTF accordingly requests that the
 court dismiss MDWS’s cross-appeal.
 
Hui/MTF’s argument is well-taken. This court has 
recently affirmed its practice not to issue “advisory opinions on abstract propositions of law.” Kemp v. State of Hawai' i Child 
Support Enforcement Agency, 111 Hawai' i 367, 385, 141 P.3d 1014, 
1032 (2006)) (citing Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Group v. Lyman, 69 Haw. 81, 87, 734 P.2d 161, 165 (1987)). This is a longstanding value of the court. 
The duty of this court, as of every other judicial tribunal,
is to decide actual controversies by a judgment which can be
carried into effect, and not to give opinions upon moot
questions or abstract propositions, or to declare principles
or rules of law which cannot affect the matter in issue in
 the case before it.
 
Wong v. Bd. of Regents, 62 Haw. 391, 394-95, 616 P.2d 201, 204
 
(1980) (citing Anderson v. Rawley Co., 27 Haw. 150, 152 (1923))
 (further citations omitted). 
MDWS’s point of error seeks resolution of an abstract 
proposition because any possible resolution of MDWS’s point of error would not affect MDWS’s right—or any other party’s right—to the water use permits issued by the Commission. MDWS sought permits for 1.042 mgd for the Kepaniwai Well (Well No. 5332-05), and 1.359 mgd for the ' Îao Tunnel (Well No. 5332-02). The 
Commission found that MDWS’s applications met all the permitting criteria and awarded the permits in full. Analysis of MDWS’s 
40
           
 
         
     
        
       
       
         
      
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
point of error would not affect this determination because MDWS’s
 
request was granted, even without the requested treatment as a
 public trust use. MDWS’s cross-appeal is therefore dismissed.
 
B.	 The Commission Failed To Enter Findings of Fact and
Conclusions of Law Regarding The Effect Of Its Amended IIFS
On Traditional And Customary Native Hawaiian Practices.
 
OHA and Hui/MTF argue that the IIFS established by the
 
Commission did not protect traditional and customary native
 
Hawaiian rights to the extent feasible. More specifically, both
 
parties contend that the Commission erred in failing to
 
articulate FOF and COL regarding the impact of its decision on
 traditional and customary native Hawaiian rights. OHA also
 argues that the Commission failed to weigh traditional and
 customary rights when it balanced instream values and noninstream
 uses. 
The Commission articulated a general conclusion of law
 
relevant to this point of error:
 
19. In addition to appurtenant rights when practiced for
subsistence, cultural and religious purposes, traditional
and customary rights include, but are not limited to,kuleana water for domestic purposes, kalo cultivation, andother irrigation purposes, and the gathering of hihiwai, opae, o 'opu, limu, thatch, ti leaf, aho cord, and medicinal
plants for subsistence, cultural, and religious purposes. 
COL 19 is, in large part, a quotation from HRS § 174C-101(c), the
 
provision in the water code protecting native Hawaiian rights; it
 provides an illustrative list of the activities that can be
 protected under the water code. During the hearing, Hui/MTF and
 
41
           
          
         
          
       
           
      
      
  
       
        
        
        
   
  
           
        
         
         
         
            
        
       
         
          
         
          
          
        
         
         
   
           
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
OHA presented several witnesses who testified about native
 
Hawaiian practices specific to Nâ Wai 'Ehâ, and the Commission 
found several facts on the subject. First, as for historical
 practices, the Commission found several facts indicating a
 distinct connection between Nâ Wai ' Ehâ and Hawaiian history and 
culture. The Commission found:
 
34. Due to the profusion of fresh-flowing water in ancient
times, N â Wai 'Ehâ supported one of the largest populations
and was considered the most abundant area on Maui; it also
figured centrally in Hawaiian history and culture ingeneral. 
35. The abundance of water in N â Wai 'Ehâ enabled extensive 
lo'i kalo (wetland kalo) complexes, including varieties
favored for poi-making such as “throat-moistening lehua 
poi.” 
[. . .]
 40. In addition to extensive agricultural production,
traditional and customary practices thrived in N â Wai 'Ehâ,
including the gathering of upland resources, such as thatch
and ti, and protein sources from the streams, including'o'opu, 'ôpae, and hihiwai. 
[. . .]
 
43. The waters of N â Wai 'Ehâ were renowned for the 
traditional and customary practice of hiding the piko, or
the naval cord of newborn babies. “[T]he spring Eleilecontained an underwater cave where the people of the areawould hide the piko (umbilical cords) of their babies afterbirth. . . . The location of where one buries or hides the piko is a traditional custom that represents Native Hawaiiancultural beliefs about an individual’s connection to the land.” 
44. Upper 'Îao Valley contained the royal residences of
chiefs in both life and the afterlife. In a secret 
underwater cave, Native Hawaiians hid the bones of “all the ruling chiefs who had mana and strength, and the kupua, andall those attached to the ruling chiefs who were famous fortheir marvelous achievements. There were several hundred in all who were buried there.” Thus, the burial of sacredchiefs required a deep freshwater body to ensure the utmostprotection of their bones. 
45. Nâ Wai 'Ehâ is home to several important heiau. Of
particular significance are Haleki 'i and Pihana Heiau, 
42
           
         
        
         
      
        
    
  
          
        
          
            
        
        
         
   
       
       
      
        
        
      
       
   
  
          
         
         
         
         
  
  
          
         
          
      
         
       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
located between Waiehu and 'Îao Streams. These heiau were 
re-consecrated in 1776 as an offering before the famousbattle between Hawai 'i and Maui. It is said that 
Kalanikaukooluaole, a high chiefess and daughter ofKamehamehanui, bathed in the stream water near the heiau,before she entered the heiau. 
[. . .]
 54. The spiritual practice of hi 'uwai, also known as kapu
kai, often occurred around the time of makahiki, when
individuals “would go into the rivers or into the ocean inorder to do a cleansing for the new year[.]” This type ofcleansing, which required immersion in the water, was alsoconducted “before you start or end certain ceremonies[.]”For ceremonies dedicated to K âne, “having a hi 'uwai in a 
stream magnifies the mana[.]” 
The Commission heard testimony explaining that native
 
Hawaiian practices still continue in Nâ  Wai 'Ehâ: 
51. Despite significant challenges, some Native Hawaiian
practitioners in N â Wai 'Ehâ continue to exercise 
traditional and customary rights and practices, including“gathering stream life such as hihiwai, 'ôpae, 'o'opu, and 
limu for subsistence and medicinal purposes,” as well as “cultivating taro for religious and ceremonial uses,gathering materials for hula, lua (ancient Hawaiian martialarts), and art forms.” 
[. . .]
 53. Kumu hula Akoni Akana gathers materials such as hau,
palapalai, la 'î, and laua 'e from Waihe 'e and Waiehu for hula 
ceremonies and performances. “As part of the protocol for
gathering these items, we always soak the leaves we gatherin the stream flow nearby. This practice necessitates a flowing stream.” 
[. . .]
 55. Other practitioners would like to expand the scope of
their traditional and customary practices and plan to do so
if water is returned to the streams. For example, H ôkûlani 
Holt-Padilla testified that “[m]any families seek toreestablish the tradition of growing kalo” in N â Wai 'Ehâ. 
The Commission also found facts to explain the
 
connection between current traditional and customary practices
 
and streamflow levels:
 
49. Cultural experts and community witnesses provided
 
43
           
     
      
           
          
    
           
         
          
         
          
      
  
          
        
       
        
      
          
        
       
         
         
           
          
       
     
           
          
       
        
      
        
       
       
         
      
      
         
      
        
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
uncontroverted testimony regarding limitations on Native
Hawaiians’ ability to exercise traditional and customaryrights and practices in the greater N â Wai 'Ehâ area due to 
the lack of freshwater flowing in N â Wai 'Ehâ’s streams and 
into the nearshore marine waters. 
50. “'O'opu must once have been plentiful in N â Wai 'Ehâ 
streams; the wind in Waihe 'e is called ka makani kili 'o'opu,
which means the wind that brings the faint odors of the
'o'opu.” Today, however, “[i]t is very difficult to find 
'ôpae, hihiwai, and 'o'opu in the streams of N â Wai 'Ehâ,
large portions of which are frequently dry.” 
[. . .]
 57. According to testimony, “N â Wai 'Ehâ continues to hold 
the potential to once again support enhanced traditional and
customary rights and practices if sufficient water isrestored.” Restoring streamflow to N â Wai 'Ehâ “would 
enormously benefit” Native Hawaiians and other communities who seek to reconnect with their culture and live a self-sustaining lifestyle, and more people would be able toengage in traditional and customary practices with morewater. 
58. Testimony contended that “Restoration of mauka to makai 
flow to the streams is critical to the perpetuation and
practice of Hawaiian culture in N â Wai 'Ehâ.” “If we are not 
able to maintain our connection to the land and water and teach future generations our cultural traditions, we losewho we are as a people.” 
59. According to testimony, “The return of the waters of N â 
Wai 'Ehâ to levels that can sustain the rights of native
Hawaiians and Hawaiians to practice their culture will
result in the betterment of the conditions of native Hawaiians and Hawaiians by restoring spiritual well-beingand a state of ‘pono’ (goodness, righteousness, balance) tothe people and communities of N â Wai 'Ehâ.” 
60. Testimony contended that cold, free-flowing water is
essential for kalo cultivation, which in turn is integral to
the well-being, sustenance, and cultural and religious
practices of native Hawaiians and Hawaiians. Kalo
cultivation provides not only a source of food, but also
spiritual sustenance, promotes community awareness and a
connection to the land, and supports physical fitness and
mental well-being.
 
OHA and Hui/MTF both argue that the Commission had a
 
duty to make specific findings of fact and conclusions of law
 
with regard to the effect of its D&O on traditional and customary
 native Hawaiian practices. Their argument is grounded in Ka
 
44
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Pa'akai O Ka 'Aina v. Land Use Comm’n, 94 Hawai' i 31, 7 P.3d 1068 
(2000). 
In Ka Pa' akai O Ka ' Aina, native Hawaiian groups 
appealed the State Land Use Commission’s (“LUC”) grant of a land 
developer’s petition to reclassify land in a conservation district to an urban district. 94 Hawai' i at 33, 7 P.3d at 1070. 
The LUC held hearings on the petition, and reached several findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding native Hawaiian practices. Id. at 36-37, 7 P.3d at 1073-74. The LUC determined 
that the developer would develop and implement a Resource Management Plan (“RMP”) to coordinate coastal access for the purpose of traditional and customary practices; the LUC specifically found that one family gathered salt in the area, and that the shoreline is used for fishing, gathering limu, ' opihi, 
and other resources. Id. at 37, 7 P.3d at 1074. The LUC 
mandated that the RMP will preserve these practices, archaeological sites and the coastal trail, and required the developer to preserve and protect native Hawaiian rights. Id. at 
38, 39, 7 P.3d at 1075, 1076. On appeal, this court recognized that Article XII, section 7 of the state constitution “places an affirmative duty on the State and its agencies to preserve and protect traditional and customary native Hawaiian rights,” while giving the State and its agencies the power to discharge this duty. Id. at 45, 7 P.3d at 1082. The court then provided an 
45
           
        
        
       
          
     
        
          
        
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
“analytical framework” to guide the State in its decisions
 
affecting native Hawaiian rights, specifying that the agency
 must, at a minimum, articulate:
 
(1) the identity and scope of “valued cultural, historical,
 
or natural resources” in the petition area, including the
extent to which traditional and customary native Hawaiian
rights are exercised in the petition area; (2) the extent to
which those resources-including traditional and customary
native Hawaiian rights-will be affected or impaired by the
proposed action; and (3) the feasible action, if any, to be
taken by the LUC to reasonably protect native Hawaiian
rights if they are found to exist.
 
Id. at 46-47, 7 P.3d at 1083-84 (internal footnotes omitted). 
The court held that the LUC failed to satisfy those criteria for
 several reasons: (1) the LUC did not enter definitive findings
 regarding the extent of the native Hawaiian practices, but rather
 delegated the determination to the developer; (2) the LUC did not
 enter findings about the practices undertaken outside the RMP,
 despite evidence that the area outside the RMP could require
 protection; (3) “the LUC made no specific findings or conclusions
 regarding the effects on or the impairment of any Article XII,
 section 7 uses, or the feasibility of the protection of those
 uses.” Id. at 48-49, 7 P.3d at 1085-86 (emphasis in original). 
As the court explained, “the promise of preserving and protecting
 customary and traditional rights would be illusory absent
 findings on the extent of their exercise, their impairment, and
 the feasibility of their protection.” Id. at 50, 7 P.3d at 1087. 
Hui/MTF and OHA argue that the Commission’s FOF/COL D&O 
do not satisfy the analytical framework of Ka Pa' akai O Ka ' Aina. 
46
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
They cite the Commission’s own findings that the lack of 
freshwater in Nâ Wai ' Ehâ limits the native Hawaiian practices of 
kalo cultivation and gathering, and argue that the Commission did not fulfill its duty to protect native Hawaiian rights because “nothing in the Decision indicates that the majority even considered the feasibility of protecting those traditional and customary rights.” 
The court concludes that Hui/MTF and OHA are correct; 
the Commission’s FOF/COL D&O, while very thorough in several respects, including its documentation of the area’s native Hawaiian practices, lacks findings or conclusions articulating the effect of the amended IIFS on the native Hawaiian practices of Nâ Wai ' Ehâ. It also lacks findings or conclusions explaining 
the feasibility of protecting the practices. This is particularly apparent with regard to kalo cultivation, considering the Commission’s decision not to restore any streamflow to ' Îao and Waikapû Streams. In its FOF/COL D&O, the 
Commission identified seventeen kuleana ditch/pipe systems, and divided those seventeen into two categories: the fourteen that are connected to one of the primary distribution systems (and thus rely on diverted water for their kalo cultivation), and the three that divert water directly from a stream (and thus rely on sufficient instream flows from which to pull their water). While the Commission’s analysis considered the needs of the former 
47
           
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
category of kuleana users, there was no mention of the kuleana 
users who access their water directly from the streams. This is particularly troublesome for the users who take from two of the ditches, described in the record as the Pellegrino and Duey Kuleana Ditches, which draw water directly from Waikapû and ' Îao 
Streams, respectively. The users on those Ditches testified that their water is insufficient, and urged the Commission to amend upward the IIFS for their streams so they could irrigate their lo'i kalo. The Commission’s FOF/COL D&O justifies its decision 
not to restrict diversions from Waikapû  and 'Îao Streams due to 
the streams’ lack of potential to support certain native species, described as amphidromous.
16 The Commission does not state the 
effect of this decision, which is to deny the Pellegrino and Duey Ditch users the water they need to cultivate the lo' i kalo on 
their property; furthermore, the Commission did not articulate whether it would be feasible to return flow sufficient to support the kuleana. 
In addition to neglecting this portion of the kalo
 
cultivation analysis, the FOF/COL D&O does not provide any
 analysis of the decision’s effect on gathering rights. HC&S
 argues that the Commission’s FOF/COL were adequate on this point,
 reasoning that “if instream fauna populations increase as a
 
16
 A full discussion of this analysis follows in Section V.C.1.
 
48
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
result of the amended IIFS as [the Commission] anticipates they 
will, that would support gathering practices.” This argument fails for two main reasons. First, the FOF/COL do not satisfy the analytical framework articulated in Ka Pa' akai O Ka ' Aina. It 
appears as though the first step of analysis, identification of the scope of traditional and customary native Hawaiian rights, is satisfied by the above-quoted FOF regarding gathering rights, which identify the several items gathered from Nâ  Wai 'Ehâ. 
However, subsequent steps of the analysis require the administrative agency to articulate “the extent to which those resources [. . .] will be affected or impaired by the proposed action,” and then to specify what feasible action can be taken to protect native Hawaiian rights. Ka Pa'akai O Ka ' Aina, 94 Hawai' i 
at 47, 7 P.3d at 1084. The FOF/COL do not contain any information on these two steps of analysis. Furthermore, even if the court accepted HC&S’s post hoc explanation to be adequate, this would only resolve rights to gather amphidromous species, but the Commission concluded that gathering rights in Nâ Wai ' Ehâ 
also encompassed several other species. The Commission’s analysis does not examine whether the amended IIFS impact these gathering rights, or whether any negative impact may be avoided. 
Having concluded that the Commission did not discharge
 
its duty with regard to the feasibility of protecting native
 Hawaiian rights, the court must vacate the Commission’s FOF/COL
 
49
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
D&O and remand to the Commission for further consideration of the
 
effect the IIFS will have on native Hawaiian practices, as well
 as the feasibility of protecting the practices. Should the
 Commission determine that the amended IIFS will negatively impact
 protected native Hawaiian practices and that protection of those
 practices is feasible, the Commission may enter amended IIFS to
 reflect that protection.
 
C.	 The Commission’s D&O Does Not Adequately Justify Its
Decision Not To Restore Streamflow To The ' Îao And Waikapû 
Streams. 
Hui/MTF challenges the Commission’s failure to restore 
flow to the ' Îao and Waikapû Streams. Hui/MTF argues that such 
an action was not supported by the record and disregards all 
instream uses other than sustaining amphidromous species. Hui/MTF further contends that the Commission did not properly weigh the competing interests in this case, and that the Commission arbitrarily misused the USGS’s temporary flow release figures. 
1.	 The Commission’s Analysis Regarding Instream Use Is
Incomplete.
 
The Commission explained its reasoning in the FOF/COL
 
D&O section titled “The Commission’s Analysis and Conclusions.” 
That section of analysis shows a clear emphasis placed on the
 potential to restore amphidromous species in the streams. This
 was a main area of controversy in the hearing; the parties
 
50
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
presented the Commission with several expert witnesses, all
 
promoting different opinions on the issue. 
The term “amphidromous” describes species of fish that 
undergo regular, obligatory migration between fresh water and the sea at some stage in their life cycle other than the breeding period. Native Hawaiian amphidromous species exhibit “freshwater amphidromy,” where spawning takes place in fresh water, and the newly hatched larvae are swept into the sea by stream currents. While in the sea, the larvae undergo development as zooplankton before returning to fresh water to grow to maturity. The Commission found that these species suffer in Nâ Wai 'Ehâ due to 
the disruption of natural flow caused by the offstream water diversions; the diversions degrade or destroy habitat, diminish food sources, diminish larval drift by capturing eggs and larvae, and impair flows necessary to transport larvae to the ocean. The Commission also found that discharge of sufficient duration and volume is necessary to attract and accommodate upstream migration of post-larval fish, mollusks, and crustaceans; there is a direct correlation between stream volume and recruitment, such that increased streamflow correlates with increased recruitment at the stream mouth. 
Dr. Mark Eric Benbow, an Assistant Professor at
 
Michigan State University, testified on behalf of Hui/MTF as an
 expert in aquatic biology, ecology, and the Central Maui streams. 
51
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Dr. Benbow testified that the amphidromous life cycle requires 
continuous mauka-to-makai flow, though he acknowledged that he did not know the precise volume and duration necessary to sustain the species. Dr. Benbow reached his opinions after conducting multi-year studies of Central Maui streams in which he found that the largest migrations of species occur in streams with minimal or no diversions, while the greatest reductions in recruitment during drought occur in diverted streams. Dr. Benbow made two specific recommendations to the Commission: first, he recommended that the Commission require sufficient flow levels to increase the quantity and quality of habitat in order to have a functioning reproduction population of organisms; second, he recommended maintaining continuous mauka-to-makai flow in Nâ Wai 'Ehâ. Dr. Benbow testified that, without additional studies, he 
cannot recommend maintaining the streams at less than 75 percent of their median flow. As the Commission found, however, Benbow’s 75-percent figure was an “informed guess,” and the precise volume and duration of streamflow needed to sustain the life cycle of amphidromous organisms is not known. 
John Ford, Program Director and Office Lead for SWCA
 
Environmental Consultants, testified on behalf of HC&S as an
 expert in aquatic biology, with specific emphasis on native
 species in Hawaiian streams. Ford presented a different account
 of the importance of mauka-to-makai flow for amphidromous
 
52
           
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
species. Ford distinguished “ecological connectivity” from 
“physical connectivity”; the former is the term for streamflows sufficient to allow the normal distribution of a species within an entire watershed, the latter is the term for continuous flow from a specific stream’s headwaters to its mouth. Ford noted that there are naturally interrupted and intermittent streams in Hawai'i with amphidromous organism populations, and suggested 
that amphidromous species therefore may not require the continuous physical connectivity of each stream to sustain their population. 
HC&S retained Ford’s consulting company, SWCA, to 
evaluate amphidromous species in Nâ Wai ' Ehâ. In 2007 and early 
2008, SWCA performed a series of larval drift sampling to evaluate the reproduction of amphidromous species; this survey lasted one week in total, so the Commission found it was “just a snapshot” and could not support “broad extrapolations over time” or “to other streams.” SWCA observed that Waihe' e River was the 
only stream in Nâ Wai ' Ehâ with significant reproductive 
populations of native amphidromous species. SWCA also observed 
amphidromous species in Waikapû and ' Îao Streams, which may be 
evidence of ecological connectivity as those streams do not have 
physical connectivity to the sea except during prolonged intense flooding events. There may be another explanation, however, as Dr. Benbow testified that he and Division of Aquatic Resources 
53
           
       
          
        
      
       
         
      
        
         
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
biologist Skippy Hau have planted specimens of amphidromous 
species above the diversions of those streams. SWCA concluded that ecological connectivity exists under diverted conditions in the Waihe' e River and Waiehu Stream. Ford opined that the 
addition of flow to Waihe' e River and Waiehu Stream would be the 
most beneficial for increasing populations of native amphidromous species in Nâ Wai ' Ehâ. With regard to ' Îao Stream, SWCA’s final 
conclusion was that the channelization “is the primary factor” impeding recruitment of amphidromous species. SWCA also found no definitive evidence that Waikapû Stream ever flowed continuously from mauka to makai. 
The Commission’s Final FOF/COL D&O accepted Ford’s view
 
of the streams with regard to amphidromous species. As the
 Commission explained in its final analysis section, it 
concluded that the restorative potentials are highest for
Waihe'e River and Waiehu Stream. 'Îao Stream can be restored 
to enhance recruitment and increase stream life, but itsreproductive potential is severely limited because ofextensive channelization in the 2.5 miles immediately aboveits mouth. Waikap û Stream likely has minimal to no
reproductive potential, because there probably was nopre-diversion continuous flow to the mouth, and even ifthere had been continuous flow, Kealia Pond and the deltabelow most likely inhibited recruitment. 
Hui/MTF argues that the Commission’s treatment of ' Îao and 
Waikapû Streams is not supported by the record and disregards all 
instream uses other than amphidromous species. 
In setting the IIFS, the Commission was charged with
 
weighing “present or potential instream values.” HRS § 174C­
54
           
        
        
         
       
      
   
      
   
       
 
   
    
       
      
      
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
71(2)(D). The water code contains a definition of instream uses,
 
as well as an illustrative list of examples. It provides:
 
“Instream use” means beneficial uses of stream water for
 
significant purposes which are located in the stream and
which are achieved by leaving the water in the stream.
Instream uses include, but are not limited to:
 
(1) Maintenance of fish and wildlife habitats;
 
(2) Outdoor recreational activities;
 
(3) Maintenance of ecosystems such as estuaries,
wetlands, and stream vegetation;
 
(4) Aesthetic values such as waterfalls and scenic
waterways;
 (5) Navigation;
 
(6) Instream hydropower generation;
 
(7) Maintenance of water quality;
 
(8) The conveyance of irrigation and domestic water
supplies to downstream points of diversion; and
 (9) The protection of traditional and customary
Hawaiian rights.
 
HRS § 174C-3. As Hui/MTF shows, the record contains substantial 
evidence that establishing mauka-to-makai flow in all of the streams of Nâ Wai ' Ehâ would support the public interest by 
fostering many of the statutorily-designated instream uses. Hui/MTF argues that the Commission focused on amphidromous species, a subset of parenthesis (1) in the statute, and disregarded evidence supporting the other instream uses. 
HC&S replies that the Commission is not required to
 
restore streamflow, or even to establish an IIFS, for each
 stream. The water code requires the Commission to establish IIFS
 in some instances; as the code provides, the Commission “shall”
 
55
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
set an IIFS “in order to protect the public interest”. HRS § 
174C-71(2)(A). Accordingly, in resolving the petition to amend the IIFS for Nâ  Wai 'Ehâ, the Commission was not precluded from 
retaining the existing IIFS in some or all of the streams, had it concluded that the public interest was sufficiently protected by the existing IIFS. 
In undertaking a close review of the Commission’s 
decision, it is apparent that the decision focuses on the flow standards as they relate to amphidromous species, and justifies the decision not to restore water to ' Îao and Waikapû Streams due 
to the conclusion that those streams show limited “reproductive potential” for amphidromous species. HC&S, the Commission, and WWC draw the court’s attention to the evidence in the record, especially the SWCA evaluation reviewed supra, that supports the Commission’s conclusion. However, Hui/MTF’s point of error does not merely contend that the Commission’s decision is not supported by the record; it also alleges that the Commission erred in disregarding the evidence of other instream uses. In Waiâhole I, this court held that where “the record demonstrates considerable conflict or uncertainty in the evidence, the agency must articulate its factual analysis with reasonable clarity, giving some reason for discounting the evidence rejected.” Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 163-64, 9 P.3d at 475-76. In its 
FOF/COL D&O, the Commission does not explain its focus on 
56
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
amphidromous species above the evidence of other instream uses. 
Even if the ' Îao and Waikapû Streams may not support amphidromous 
species, evidence that they can support other instream uses must be weighed against noninstream uses, as required by HRS § 174C­71(2)(D). The Commission erred in not considering this evidence; on remand, the Commission must undertake and articulate this analysis. Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 158, 9 P.3d at 470 
(remanding where the Commission “made invalid, inadequate, or incomplete findings.”) (citation). 
2.	 The Commission Did Not Err In Using USGS Data As A
Starting Point For Analysis. 
In federal fiscal year 2006, the USGS initiated a study 
of Nâ Wai ' Ehâ. The study consisted of eight parts: (1) 
compiling and analyzing existing information relevant to the Waihe'e River, and Waiehu, ' Îao, and Waikapû Streams, (2) 
conducting baseline reconnaissance surveys of the streams to identify sites of diversion and return flow and significant gaining and losing reaches, (3) establishing low-flow partial-record stations in reaches with flowing water to characterize natural and current diverted flows in Nâ Wai ' Ehâ streams, (4) 
establishing temperature-monitoring sites in reaches with flowing water to provide information on temperature variations for diverted and undiverted conditions, (5) monitoring the frequency
 of dry days in selected reaches of the diverted streams to
 
57
           
        
            *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
establish the number of days during which continuous mauka-to­
makai flow is available for the upstream movement of native
 species, (6) surveying the presence or absence of native and non­native aquatic species in selected stream reaches to provide
 baseline data for assessing effects of streamflow restoration,
 (7) collecting macrohabitat, microhabitat, and channel-geometry
 information in selected study reaches downstream from existing
 diversions to characterize the effects of diversions on habitat
 for native stream macrofauna, and (8) analyzing data and
 producing a report summarizing the study findings. 
Photographic information from cameras mounted at three 
selected sites downstream of all diversions established that from September 2006 to July 2007, North Waiehu Stream was dry about 79 percent of the time, ' Îao Stream was dry about 70 percent of the 
time, and Waikapû Stream was dry about 37 percent of the time. At the time of the Commission’s decision, USGS had requested, as part of its study, to partially or fully restore mauka-to-makai 
17
 flow to Waihe' e River, Waiehu Stream, and ' Îao Stream  to allow 
measurements of streamflow, infiltration, and physical habitat for different flow conditions in sections of the stream that are commonly dry due to diversions. 
The proposal sought to release 
water into the streams in three phases, each involving a higher 
17
 USGS Hydrologist Delwyn Oki stated that controlled releases would
 
be helpful for Waikap û Stream, too, and could be developed in the future.
 
58
           
       
        
     
     
          
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
flow than the last; each phase would be maintained for about a
 
month and long enough to allow flow conditions to stabilize for
 observation. 
For Waihe' e Stream, USGS proposed flows near the coast 
of 6.5 mgd, 13 mgd, and 26 mgd; this would require flows just downstream of the Spreckels Ditch diversion of 10 mgd, 17 mgd, and 30 mgd, respectively, for each of the three phases. For North and South Waiehu Streams, USGS proposed flows near the coast
18 of 0.6 mgd, 1.6 mgd, and 2.6 mgd. USGS estimated that 
this would require the following flows: South Waiehu Stream at Spreckels Ditch would be 0.9 mgd, 1.3 mgd, and 1.6 mgd, respectively; North Waiehu Stream at the North Waiehu Ditch would be 1.6 mgd, 2.2 mgd, and 2.9 mgd, respectively. For ' Îao Stream, 
USGS proposed flows near the coast of 3.2 mgd, 9.7 mgd, and 16 mgd; this would require flows just downstream of the ' Îao-
Maniania Ditch diversion of 9.5 mgd, 16 mgd, and 22 mgd, respectively. For the Waikapû Stream, USGS deferred controlled releases entirely. 
With regard to the USGS controlled release proposals,
 
the Commission specifically found: 
606. “The results [following the controlled releases] are
intended to be used along with other biological and
hydrological information in development, negotiations, or
mediated settlements for instream flow requirements.”
 
18
 Recall that the North and South Waiehu Streams join downstream of
 
diversions and flow together until reaching the sea.
 
59
           
   
         
        
         
          
        
         
         
    
          
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
(Gingerich and Wolff, 2005).
 
The quote originated in a 2005 USGS Study of Nâ Wai ' Ehâ; HC&S’s 
biologist, Thomas R. Payne, quoted that language to make his 
greater point that the USGS controlled releases would not be, in his opinion, conclusive to determine IIFS. This is because the controlled releases are designed to study the effect of flow conditions on habitat, not to predict the biological response of the stream to the flow condition; therefore, the scientists have to infer the effect of streamflow on population, “without any direct quantification or prediction of individual species.” In Payne’s words, “considerable work remains to be done before defensible instream flow standards could be recommended from [the controlled release] studies alone.” 
In its Final FOF/COL
19 the Commission concluded that:
 
The most credible proposals for amending the IIFS are USGS’s
proposed controlled flows. Of the three proposed phases, the[first] phase, totaling 12.5 mgd and comprised of 10.0 mgdfor Waihe 'e River, 1.6 mgd for North Waiehu Stream, and 0.9
mgd for South Waiehu Stream, provide the best balancebetween instream values and offstream uses, and are the onlyviable IIFS when stream flows are low and all available practical alternatives are in use. 
Hui/MTF argues that the Commission “arbitrarily
 
misused” USGS’s temporary flow release figures, noting that the
 
USGS’s figures were not proposals for IIFS, but rather a proposal
 for scientific study of the area. Hui/MTF argues that USGS
 
19
 Dr. Miike’s Proposed FOF/COL set different IIFS, and did not reach
 
this finding.
 
60
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
certainly did not consider instream values, and adoption of USGS
 
flow levels could not possibly discharge the Commission’s duty to
 balance instream values and noninstream uses. OHA shares
 Hui/MTF’s criticism; it describes the above-quoted COL as
 “inexplicabl[e].” 
In making their argument, Hui/MTF and OHA appear to 
misstate the Commission’s actual treatment of the USGS figures. Even though COL 261, quoted above, suggests that the Commission simply adopted the USGS figures, the entirety of the FOF/COL D&O actually indicate that the Commission merely utilized the USGS figures as a starting point. First, the Commission explained the utility of the USGS figures; the figures “were chosen to correspond to specified flows at the stream mouths, after adjusting for losses into the stream beds in the lower reaches of each stream.” As described earlier, the Commission focused its analysis on establishing mauka-to-makai streamflow in streams that would support amphidromous species; for this the USGS estimation of loss in the streams’ losing reaches is helpful data. Second, the Commission did not simply adopt the USGS figures, but rather adapted one of the three USGS figures as part of its analysis; the USGS proposed release for ' Îao Stream was 
9.5 mgd, but the Commission decided not to limit diversions of
 that stream based on its conclusion that restoration was unlikely
 to support amphidromous species. Even though, as explained
 
61
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
above, this reasoning does not adequately discharge its duties in
 
this case, the Commission did not err in utilizing the USGS
 figures as a starting point for its analysis. 
D.	 The Commission Violated The Public Trust In Its Treatment Of
 
Diversions.
 
Hui/MTF argues that the Commission erred in its
 
estimation of HC&S, MDWS, and WWC’s diversions. Hui/MTF alleges
 
that the Commission did not hold the diverters to their burden of
 proof and then “penalized the public trust” for the absence of
 data, that the Commission failed to consider variable offstream
 demands in setting the IIFS, and that the Commission did not
 properly require the diverters to justify system losses. Both
 Hui/MTF and OHA argue that the Commission erred in its
 consideration of Well No. 7; Hui/MTF also argues that the
 Commission erred in its consideration of recycled water as an
 alternative source. Finally, Hui/MTF contends that the
 Commission erred in calculating HC&S’s acreages. The following
 sections consider each argument in turn.
 
1.	 The Commission Did Not Err In Articulating The Burden
Of Proof In Determining An IIFS. 
Hui/MTF argues that the Commission erred because it did
 
not hold the diverting parties to a burden of proof; they argue
 that Waiâhole I requires noninstream users to justify their
 diversions in light of the water uses protected by the public
 trust. The flaw of their argument is that the portions of
 
62
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Waiâhole I that they cite apply to the WUPA process. In the 
context of IIFS petitions, the water code does not place a burden of proof on any particular party; instead, the water code and our case law interpreting the code have affirmed the Commission’s duty to establish IIFS that “protect instream values to the extent practicable” and “protect the public interest.” In re 
Water Use Permit Applications “Waiâhole II”, 105 Hawai' i 1, 11, 
93 P.3d 643, 653 (2004); HRS § 174C-71(2)(A). Accordingly, our review of the Commission’s analysis of the stream diversions must focus on whether or not the Commission properly discharged this duty. Where the Commission’s decisionmaking evinces “a level of openness, diligence, and foresight commensurate with the high priority these rights command under the laws of our state,” the decision satisfies close look review governing public trust resources. Wai'ola, 103 Hawai' i at 422, 83 P.3d at 685. 
2.	 The Commission Did Not Err In Using Dr. Fares’s Model
Of Irrigation Requirements As A Starting Point For
Analysis.
 
Hui/MTF argues that the Commission erred in its 
treatment of testimony from Dr. Ali Fares, a hydrologist who testified as an expert witness for Hui/MTF, OHA, and MDWS. Dr. Fares is an Associate Professor in the Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Management at the University of Hawai'i, Mânoa. Dr. Fares testified regarding his estimation of 
the optimal irrigation requirements for HC&S’s sugar cane fields. 
63
           
       
            
              
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Dr. Fares’s model considered historical rainfall data,
 
20
 evapotranspiration or pan evaporation data , and data regarding
the soil; he then calculated, over the historical period covered
 
by the rainfall data, how much irrigation water would have been
 required to grow the sugar crop. Dr. Fares statistically
 analyzed the results to calculate the average amount of
 irrigation water needed in the wettest year and the driest year,
 as well as the amount of water that would have supplied the
 irrigation requirement between the two extremes. Dr. Fares
 calculated the optimal irrigation requirements using the 80
 percent probability standard because it’s the industry standard
 utilized in both government and the private sector. Under the 80
 percent probability standard, water meeting or exceeding
 requirements is available four out of every five days. 
HC&S employees testified that they used a different
 
model called a water balance model, which differs from Fares’s
 model in that it uses “real-time data” collected from four rain
 stations and two evaporation stations located in the west Maui
 fields. 
The Commission found that real-time data is more
 
reliable than long-term daily averages to calculate irrigation
 requirements. 
20
 Evotranspiration (or evapo-transpiration) is the loss of water
 
from the soil by evaporation and by transpiration from plants growing in the
soil. Pan evaporation is a measurement of water from an open pan, which can
be correlated to the water demands of a specific crop.
 
64
           
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Both models also consider irrigation efficiency, or the
 
percentage of water that is actually delivered to the plants, as
 
opposed to the amount that is channeled through, and possibly
 lost in, the irrigation system. Fares used an 85 percent
 irrigation efficiency figure for his calculations; this is
 industry standard. HC&S’s estimations takes into account the
 different types of tubing, the length of tubes, and variations in
 topography; HC&S’s estimations utilize an 80 percent efficiency
 
standard. The Commission accepted Fares’s use of 85 percent
 
irrigation efficiency. 
HC&S stressed the importance of basing water management
 
on actual field conditions, rather than models. The Commission
 
found that Fares had not personally visited the HC&S fields or
 inspected the HC&S irrigation system; he also never studied
 actual water usage for sugar cane. Moreover, HC&S
 representatives testified that Fares’s model does not account for
 several factors increasing water usage, including water run
 through irrigation lines to detect leaks and irrigation water
 that is “lost” because it is applied just before it rains. HC&S
 also testified that it is impractical to assume that HC&S can
 irrigate to restore soil moisture exactly when necessary; this is
 not always the case for several reasons, including the facts that
 only a fraction of the fields actually receive water at any given
 time, and sometimes fertilizers and herbicides preclude watering. 
65
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
In its FOF/COL D&O, the Commission accepted Fares’s
 
estimates of irrigation requirements, but added five percent to
 
account for the above-listed factors identified by HC&S that
 Fares’s model does not incorporate. Hui/MTF argue that this was
 error because the five percent increase is “random” and accounts
 for “unsubstantiated excuses.” HC&S responds that the Commission
 was not limited to choosing between Dr. Fares’s model and HC&S’s
 estimates, but rather that the Commission was empowered to
 utilize the information presented as it saw fit, as long as its
 decision was supported by the evidence. 
The court has held that, due to the fact that the 
Commission must articulate an IIFS at an “early planning stage” of water management, the Commission “need only reasonably estimate instream and offstream demands.” Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i 
at 155 n.60, 9 P.3d at 467 n.60. The court also explained that the IIFS may be based “not only on scientifically proven facts, but also on future predictions, generalized assumptions, and policy judgments.” Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai 'i at 155, 9 P.3d at 467. 
In this case, the Commission concluded, based on the above-listed facts showing an incongruity between Fares’s model and field conditions, that the model would be insufficient to quantify actual irrigation requirements. The Commission then added five percent to Fares’s figures to account for this difference. The Commission fully explained its logic in predicting the irrigation 
66
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
requirements, and it settled on a figure that is a small
 
deviation from the Hui/MTF expert’s proposal. Faced with the
 question of whether the record lacks substantial evidence to
 support the estimates, the answer must be no; the court therefore
 concludes that the Commission did not err in its use of Fares’s
 model numbers as a starting point in articulating irrigation
 requirements for HC&S’s fields.
 
3. The Commission Erred In Calculating HC&S’s Acreage.
 Hui/MTF argues that the Commission erred in including
 
fields 921 and 922 when calculating HC&S’s acreage. Hui/MTF
 alleges error on two grounds: first, the Commission wrongfully
 took judicial notice of facts affecting an alternative water
 source for the fields, and second, the soil quality of fields 921
 and 922 is poor and it is unreasonable to provide fresh water to
 cultivate them.
 
As the Commission found, fields 921 and 922 are sandy
 
“scrub land” that HC&S had never cultivated until sometime
 between 1995 and 1997 when it entered into an agreement with Maui
 Land and Pine (“MLP”), under which MLP delivered wastewater from
 its pineapple cannery to irrigate the fields for seed cane. 
After the close of evidence, the Commission took judicial notice
 of newspaper reports that: (1) MLP announced that it would cease
 pineapple operations, (2) Haliimaile Pineapple Company would
 “revive” the fresh fruit operations, and (3) this “should not
 
67
           
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
result in a restoration of the wastewater source.” Hui/MTF
 
argues that it was error for the Commission to take judicial
 
notice of these three “facts”. 
Hawai'i Rules of Evidence (“HRE”) Rule 201, limits the 
scope of judicial notice to facts “not subject to reasonable dispute in that it is either (1) generally known within the territorial jurisdiction of the trial court, or (2) capable of accurate and ready determination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned.” HRE Rule 201(b). In this case, the Commission took judicial notice of facts presented in two newspaper articles. There is precedent for taking judicial notice of facts as reported by newspapers. Application 
of Pioneer Mill Co., 53 Haw. 496, 497 n.1, 497 P.2d 549, 551 n.1 (taking judicial notice that a land court judge had announced his candidacy for public office, based upon newspaper articles submitted by the parties). In this case, however, the Commission went further than taking notice of facts reported in newspapers: it predicted the impact of those facts on HC&S’s water supply. HRE Rule 201 does not permit the Commission to take judicial notice of a possible effect of a change in ownership in the pineapple cannery. First, this prediction fits neither prong of the relevant rule of evidence; the effect of the change of ownership on HC&S’s water supply is neither “generally known within the territorial jurisdiction” nor “capable of accurate and 
68
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
ready determination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannot
 
reasonably be questioned.” HRE Rule 201(b). Second, the
 prediction that wastewater will no longer be available is purely
 speculative. In fact, one of the Commission’s FOF contradicts
 this speculation, stating “due to the shutdown of MLP’s cannery
 operation, MLP mill wastewater will only be able to supply
 approximately half of the irrigation requirements of Fields 921
 and 922 in the future.” Furthermore, it is entirely possible
 that the company that “revived” operations also “revived” the
 practice of providing wastewater to HC&S. Hui/MTF are correct
 that the Commission’s taking judicial notice in this instance was
 improper. 
Hui/MTF also argues that the Commission erred in
 
permitting HC&S to include fields 921 and 922 in its acreage
 because it is marginal farm land, or, as found by the Commission,
 “sandy ‘scrub land.’” Hui/MTF argues that the burden is on HC&S
 to show “the propriety of draining water from public streams” to
 irrigate this land which had been uncultivated until a wastewater
 source was available. 
The Commission found that fields 921 and 922 are
 
similar to field 920, another “sandy ‘scrub land’” field on which
 HC&S ceased cultivation because it “has a very sandy soil and has
 consumed more water than other fields.” The Commission also
 explicitly excluded field 920 from HC&S’s acreage and water duty
 
69
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
calculations, “because it has consumed more water because of the 
porosity of its sandy soil and its use for seed cane.” HC&S points to testimony from HC&S’s agronomist that HC&S is able to grow sugar on those fields because the sandy area has loam soil underneath it, thus permitting HC&S to achieve “good crop growth.” Though HC&S draws the court’s attention to this testimony in its briefing, this testimony is not included in the Commission’s FOF/COL D&O. In fact, the Commission found no explicit facts regarding the propriety of cultivating the fields; instead the Commission included fields 921 and 922 in HC&S’s acreage without explanation. As evinced by HC&S’s and the Commission’s treatment of field 920, the wisdom of irrigating fields 921 and 922 with Nâ Wai ' Ehâ water is questionable. The 
record does not contain sufficient analysis to support the conclusion that fields 921 and 922 should be treated differently from field 920. Similarly, the record does not contain sufficient analysis showing that the Commission considered these fields with “a level of openness, diligence, and foresight” required when authorizing the diversion of our public trust res. On remand, the Commission must reevaluate its determination that HC&S should be permitted to divert Nâ Wai ' Ehâ water to irrigate 
fields 921 and 922. 
70
           
          
       
          
             
          
  
          
         
         
        
  
      
           
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
4.	 The Commission Erred In Its Treatment Of Some Of The 
Diverters’ System Losses.
 
Hui/MTF also argues that the Commission erred in
 
failing to hold HC&S and WWC to their burdens of proof regarding
 losses. Hui/MTF contends that diverting parties bear a burden of
 justifying losses and adopting practicable mitigation. WWC
 argues that there is no burden of proof on diverting parties in
 an IIFS proceeding; WWC also notes that “[n]othing within HRS §
 174C-71(2) mandates that the Commission consider or not consider
 system losses. Likewise nothing within the public trust doctrine
 mandates that the Commission consider or not consider system
 losses.” HC&S responds that “some system loss, such as
 evaporation from open ditches and reservoirs, is unavoidable and
 not unreasonable,” and that the Commission’s determination of
 
system losses is reasonable and not clearly erroneous. 
With regard to losses, the Commission found:
 
375. The great majority of WWC’s ditches are open and
unlined. All of WWC’s reservoirs are unlined.
 
376. WWC did not address the feasibility of minimizing the
losses from its system except to state that it “may . . . in
 
the future” have plans to line the unlined portions of their
 system.
 
[. . .]
 423. HC&S estimates that it loses 6-8 mgd through seepage
from the Waiale reservoir, depending on the level of the
reservoir. Seepage throughout the rest of the HC&S ditch and
reservoir system is estimated to be 3-4 mgd.
 
[. . .]
 425. HC&S acknowledges that “high density polyethylene
lining could negate much of the seepage, not all of it” and
 
that concrete lining “is obviously another option.” HC&S
 
71
           
           
       
         
  
           
        
           
             *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
has no estimates of the cost to line Waiale Reservoir or the
 
other reservoirs and ditches and has undertaken no
 engineering or financial analysis of what it would take to
reduce the losses.
 
The Commission concluded that WWC and HC&S have “not established
 
the lack of practicable mitigating measures to address these
 losses.” The Commission then “assum[ed]” that “losses could be
 halved” by lining most of WWC’s reservoirs, and concluded that
 WWC’s reasonable losses are 2.0 mgd. The Commission also deemed
 HC&S’s reasonable losses to be 2.0 mgd, after estimating that
 HC&S could line the Waiale Reservoir to prevent 6-8 mgd, and,
 like WWC, could halve remaining losses. 
First, in considering these losses, it is necessary to
 
recognize the magnitude of the losses. If the Commission’s
 
21
 estimates are correct and system losses run between 13-16 mgd ,
then the minimal estimation of that loss is approximately twice 
the 6.84 mgd the Commission estimated for deliveries to all kuleana system users in Nâ Wai ' Ehâ. The lowest estimation of 
losses, 13 mgd, is higher than the total volume that the final IIFS restore to the Waihe' e and Waiehu 
Streams.22 Briefly stated, 
losses in the water system of Nâ Wai ' Ehâ are massive. The 
Commission’s order that HC&S line the Waiale Reservoir to prevent a large portion of these losses is commendable and shows the 
21 This includes 6-8 mgd for the Waiale Reservoir, 3-4 mgd for HC&S’s
 
water system, and 4 mgd for WWC’s water system.
 
22 This includes 10 mgd for Waihe 'e Stream, 1.6 mgd for North Waiehu 
Stream, and 0.9 mgd for South Waiehu Stream, for a total of 12.5 mgd. 
72
           
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
“diligence” and “foresight” expected of the Commission in its
 
management of the public trust.
 
Second, WWC contends that the Commission, when setting
 
an IIFS, does not have to consider system losses. The Commission
 does not respond to the argument in its answering brief, but the
 water code indicates that a diverter’s system losses may factor
 into the Commission’s estimations of noninstream uses when it
 sets an IIFS. The statute articulating the IIFS standards
 mandates that the Commission “weigh the importance of the present
 or potential instream values with the importance of the present
 or potential uses of water for noninstream purposes, including
 the economic impact of restricting such uses[.]” HRS § 174C­71(2)(D). The plain meaning of the word “importance” requires
 the Commission to judge the value of a party’s noninstream use
 against the other present or potential uses. The value of
 diverting water, only to lose the water due to avoidable or
 unreasonable circumstances is unlikely to outweigh the value of
 retaining the water for instream uses. Therefore, the Commission
 did not err in considering losses.
 
However, it appears that the Commission erred in its
 
articulation of the burden of proof regarding losses. The
 Commission’s FOF/COL D&O twice cites Waiâhole I and Waiâhole II
 for authority that “[o]ffstream users have the burden to prove
 that any system losses are reasonable-beneficial by establishing
 
73
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
the lack of practicable mitigation measures, including repairs, 
maintenance, and lining of ditches and reservoirs.” The Commission erred placing the burden of proof on the parties in the IIFS proceeding, as the authorities cited by the Commission apply in the context of a WUPA. In Waiâhole I, the cited discussion of losses considered Waiâhole Irrigation Company’s (“WIC”) request for 2.0 mgd to compensate for the losses of its ditch system. 94 Hawai' i at 118, 9 P.3d at 430. There, the 
Commission denied WIC’s request, but suggested that WIC could draw “non-regulated” surface water to cover the losses; on appeal, this court concluded that the Commission’s suggestion was erroneous for several reasons, and held that the Commission must consider the 2.0 mgd as a “‘use’ pursuant to the permitting process.” 94 Hawai' i at 118, 173, 9 P.3d at 430, 485. On 
remand, the Commission found that “[o]perational losses are a normal component of any water delivery system” and therefore issued a permit to WIC’s successor in interest, Agribusiness Development Corporation (“ADC”), to cover the losses. Waiâhole 
II, 105 Hawai' i at 27, 93 P.3d at 669. When that decision 
returned to this court on further appeal, this court held that the Commission’s decision was incomplete because it did not include findings that ADC met its burden as a permit holder 
74
           
 
          
           
        
         
          
      
           
          
          
         
    
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
pursuant to HRS § 174C-49(a) .  23 Id. This burden is articulated 
in the WUPA statute, but is absent from the statutes governing 
IIFS. The Commission erred when it imposed a WUPA burden on the diverting parties in the IIFS CCH. As noted above, the burden in setting an IIFS is on the Commission to “protect instream values to the extent practicable.” Waiâhole II, 105 Hawai 'i at 11, 93 
P.3d at 653; HRS § 174C-71(2)(A). 
The court concludes that the Commission did not meet
 
this burden when it “assum[ed]” that WWC’s and HC&S’s losses
 
could be halved. As discussed above, the court has held that,
 
due to the fact that the Commission must articulate an IIFS at an 
“early planning stage,” the Commission “need only reasonably estimate instream and offstream demands.” Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i 
at 155 n.60, 9 P.3d at 467 n.60. Though reasonable estimates are 
23 HRS § 174C-49(a) states that “[t]o obtain a permit pursuant to
 
this part, the applicant shall establish that the proposed use of water:
 
(1) Can be accommodated with the available water source;
 
(2) Is a reasonable-beneficial use as defined in section 174C-3;
 
(3) Will not interfere with any existing legal use of water;
 
(4) Is consistent with the public interest;
 
(5) Is consistent with state and county general plans and land use
designations;
 
(6) Is consistent with county land use plans and policies; and
 
(7) Will not interfere with the rights of the department of
Hawaiian home lands as provided in section 221 of the
Hawaiian Homes Commission Act.
 
HRS § 174C-49(a) (1993).
 
75
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
permitted at this stage, the Commission did not provide any
 
analysis on how it reached that figure to show that it had
 “reasonably estimate[d]” that half of the losses could be
 eliminated. In choosing a number that appears to be arbitrary,
 the Commission could have significantly over- or underestimated
 the potential for mitigation of losses in HC&S’s and WWC’s water
 systems. On remand, the Commission must “reasonably estimate”
 losses, mindful of its duty to “protect instream values to the
 extent practicable.” 
5. The Commission Erred In Its Consideration Of HC&S’s 
Well No. 7.
 
Hui/MTF argues that the Commission arbitrarily
 
minimized Well No. 7’s potential contributions. OHA raises a
 similar challenge regarding Well No. 7; it contends that the
 Commission did not properly weigh HC&S’s potential use from the
 well. More specifically, OHA claims that HC&S did not
 demonstrate that Well No. 7 is not a practicable alternative, and
 that the Commission’s lowering of Well No. 7’s yield was
 arbitrary and capricious. 
Well No. 7 is the only one of HC&S’s sixteen brackish 
water wells on its plantation that is able to introduce water into HC&S’s internal ditch system. From 1927 until the 1980s, Well No. 7 was HC&S’s primary source of irrigation water for the 3,650-acre Waihe' e-Hopoi Fields; HC&S pumped an average of about 
76
           
         
            
             
              
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
21 mgd from Well No. 7 until 1988, when a competing sugar company 
ceased operations, freeing up a great amount of Nâ Wai ' Ehâ water 
for HC&S use. For the past twenty-five years, HC&S has minimized use of Well No. 7, but it has occasionally used the well; in fact, it used the well heavily on two occasions: for six months from June through November of 1996, HC&S pumped an average of 25 mgd, and for six months from May through October 2000, HC&S pumped an average of 18.9 mgd. 
Well No. 7 is currently configured with three pumps: 
pumps 7A and 7B are at water level and can each pump 17.5 mgd to ground level, for a total of 35 mgd, which it can distribute to about 800 acres of the 3,650 acres of the Waihe' e-Hopoi Fields. 
The third pump, Pump 7C, is a booster pump at ground level that 
24
 HC&S claims can pump 14 mgd  from pump 7A to Waihe' e Ditch for 
distribution to all of the Waihe' e-Hopoi Fields except for the 
175-acre Field 715. 
During the hearings, HC&S offered four explanations for
 
its argument that it would be impracticable to rely heavily on
 water pumped from Well No. 7. 
First, HC&S estimates that it
 
would incur an estimated $1 million dollars in capital costs to
 install new pipelines and pumps. Second, HC&S claims that it
 
24
 The Commission’s FOF indicate suspicion about the accuracy of this 
figure. FOF 497 states, “According to HC&S, as currently configured, Well No.
7 can supply only 14 mgd to the Waihe 'e-Hopoi Fields, with the exception of 
Field 715. However, HC&S’s records do not indicate that Well. No. 7 was everconfigured differently than its current configuration.” 
77
           
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
does not have adequate electrical power to run the pumps on a
 
consistent and sustained basis because of its power contract with
 Maui Electric Company (“MECO”). HC&S estimates it would incur
 costs of $777,650 to upgrade its pumps and electrical equipment
 to meet MECO’s standards for servicing such equipment; HC&S also
 claims it would cost $7,440 per day for energy to run Well No. 7,
 and that HC&S would lose $1.8 million in revenues under its
 contract with MECO as well as a decrease in HC&S’s avoided cost
 rate and penalties three times the power rate for power it does
 not deliver. Third, HC&S claims that increased pumping would
 exacerbate the degree to which sustainable yield is already being
 exceeded and reduce the recharge from the imported surface water
 that sustains the Kahului aquifer. Fourth, HC&S claims that
 increased pumping of the well would increase the salinity of the
 water. 
The Commission’s Final D&O considered the first three
 
factors listed above (the capital costs, energy costs, and
 aquifer recharge) and determined that HC&S must pump only 9.5 mgd
 from Well No. 7. The Commission determined that Well No. 7 is an
 alternative that most likely would not be available on a daily
 basis, citing the uncertainties about the recharge rate and
 electrical power. In determining that HC&S must pump 9.5 mgd,
 the Commission required that HC&S pay additional energy costs to
 pump the water, but did not require HC&S to accrue any capital
 
78
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
costs. The D&O requires HC&S to provide monthly ground water use
 
reports documenting the volume of water pumped from Well No. 7,
 along with ground water levels and salinity measurements. 
In his dissent, Dr. Miike criticized the Commission 
majority for its treatment of Well No. 7, writing that the 9.5 mgd figure is “without any credible foundation.” This is a main point of error on appeal for Hui/MTF and OHA; they argue that the Commission arbitrarily minimized Well No. 7’s potential contributions as an alternative source to Nâ  Wai 'Ehâ water. 
The Commission’s response is contradictory and makes it
 
clear that guidance is necessary in this area. First, the
 Commission responds that “neither the statutes nor the
 administrative rules require an analysis of practicable
 alternatives in setting the IIFS.” The Commission then asserts
 that Well No. 7 “had a place” in the IIFS analysis because it is
 a consideration when weighing instream values with offstream
 purposes when establishing the IIFS. 
The analysis with regard to alternative sources is
 
similar to the analysis with regard to system losses, supra. The
 water code requires the Commission to “weigh the importance of
 the present or potential instream values with the importance of
 the present or potential uses of water for noninstream purposes,
 including the economic impact of restricting such uses[.]” HRS §
 174C-71(2)(D). The plain meaning of the word “importance”
 
79
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
requires the Commission to judge the value of a party’s 
noninstream use against the other present or potential uses. Furthermore, as the water code’s Declaration of Policy explains, “[t]he state water code shall be liberally interpreted to obtain maximum beneficial use of the waters of the State . . . .” HRS § 174C-2(c) (1993). Allowing a water user to divert water from the public trust res when that user has exclusive access to an alternative water source that is currently un- or under-used would not effect the Legislature’s policy as expressed in the water code. This suggests that the Commission’s second argument is correct; Well No. 7, as an alternative source, “has a place” in the analysis of setting an IIFS because the availability of alternative water sources necessarily diminishes the “importance” of diverting Nâ  Wai 'Ehâ water for noninstream use. 
Hui/MTF, OHA, HC&S, and WWC do not dispute the
 
relevance of Well No. 7 water to the IIFS analysis; they do,
 however, disagree on whether the diverting party bears a burden
 of proof with regard to this point of analysis. Hui/MTF argues
 that HC&S bears a burden to prove that using Well No. 7 is not
 practicable, and that the Commission is “duty bound” to hold HC&S
 to its burden. OHA agrees that the burden falls to HC&S to
 demonstrate that Well No. 7 is not a practicable alternative. 
HC&S and WWC both argue that the burden falls to the Commission
 to determine IIFS that best serve the public interest. The
 
80
           
            
        
        
       
          
            
         
           
        
          
           
   
          
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Commission’s FOF/COL D&O does not specify a burden of proof for
 
alternative sources, as it did for system losses. In its
 introduction, however, the Commission does specify a general
 standard that “[f]or those seeking private, commercial uses of
 water, there is a higher level of scrutiny. In practical terms,
 this means that the burden ultimately lies with those seeking or
 approving such uses to justify them in light of the purposes
 protected by the trust.” More specific to alternative sources,
 the Commission stated that it “is not obliged to ensure that any
 particular user enjoys a subsidy or guaranteed access to less
 expensive water sources when alternatives are available and
 public values are at stake,” and also that “[a]n applicant’s
 inability to afford an alternative source of water, standing
 alone, does not render that alternative impracticable.” 
In evaluating Well No. 7 and HC&S’s four arguments
 
listed above, the Commission found the following:
 
494. [. . .] From 1927 until additional Na Wai ‘Eha water 
became available in the l980s, HC&S’s primary source of
irrigation water for its Waihe 'e-Hopoi Fields was Well No.
7, [. . .] a brackish water well. 
495. Between 1927 and 1985, HC&S pumped an average of about
21 mgd from Well No. 7. Since the additional Na Wai ‘Eha
 
flows became available. HC&S has minimized its use of Well
 No. 7 but used it heavily on to occasions: e.g., for the
six-month period from June through November of 1996, an
average of 25 mgd was pumped; and for the six-month period
from May through October of 2000, an average of 18.9 mgd was
pumped.
 
[. . .]
 497. According to HC&S, as currently configured, Well No. 7
can supply only 14 mgd to the Waihe 'e-Hopoi Fields, with the 
81
           
        
        
   
        
       
        
           
           
    
          
           
        
        
       
        
          
        
         
        
        
        
        
     
         
       
          
       
      
       
         
      
        
      
                  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
exception of Field 715. However, HC&S’s records do not
indicate that Well No. 7 was ever configured differently
than its current configuration.
 
498. HC&S estimates that it would cost approximately
$525,000 to add another booster pump and additional
distribution pipeline to increase the volume that can bepumped from Well No. 7 to HC&S’s Waihe 'e Ditch from 14 mgd
to 28 mgd; and the cost of an additional pipeline to reachField 715 would be $475,000. 
499. HC&S also claims that it does not have adequate
electrical power to run the pumps for Well No. 7 on a
consistent and sustained basis because of its power contract
with Maui Electric Company (“MECO”) and limitations of its
capacity to generate electricity through its system of
burning bagasse and other supplemental fuels in its power
plant and the operation of its hydro power turbines on its
ditch system which are supplied by East Maui water[.]
 
500. HC&S also claims that any increased pumping of water
from the Kahului aquifer to replace surface water being
imported from the West Maui Ditch System would both
exacerbate the degree to which the sustainable yield is
already being exceeded and reduce the recharge from imported
surface water that sustains the aquifer.
 
These findings of fact are plainly descriptions of testimony. In
 
its conclusions of law section examining “Reasonable Offstream
 Uses,” the Commission restated several of these “findings,”
 indicating that the Commission adopted the testimony as fact. 
The Commission then stated 
The combined facts that the current sustainable yield of the
aquifer is already being exceeded; that increased pumping
from Well No. 7 may exacerbate that strain; and that the
historically higher levels of pumping occurred during a
period where furrow irrigation methods were affecting
recharge rates for the aquifer, the practical alternative
from Well No. 7 is lower than historic rates. Considering
these uncertainties in combination with the Commission’s
 decision to place the full burden of remedying losses
immediately upon HC&S, discussed intra, the practical
alternative from Well No. 7 is deemed 9.5 mgd. This
 alternative will not require capital costs, only the costs
of pumping.
 
The Commission erred in adopting HC&S’s testimony
 
without any assessment of the evidence on the record that
 
82
           
         
          
           
          
          
         
           
        
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
contradicted HC&S’s arguments. As the court explained in 
Waiâhole I, where “the record demonstrates considerable conflict or uncertainty in the evidence, the agency must articulate its factual analysis with reasonable clarity, giving some reason for discounting the evidence rejected.” 94 Hawai' i at 163-64, 9 P.3d 
at 475-76. The record shows that the Commission did not explain its analysis with “reasonable clarity” regarding any of the “facts” recited above. 
For example, OHA shows that, with regard to HC&S’s 
claim that pumping Well No. 7 would result in a diminished aquifer, HC&S had represented the exact opposite to the Commission in another context but around the same time as the hearings in this case. OHA’s exhibit C-90 is a letter dated January 11, 2008 to the Commission from HC&S’s Senior Vice President, Rick Volner, regarding the Public Review Draft Water Resource Protection Plan (“WRPP”) for parts of West Maui, including the Kahului aquifer. In its letter, HC&S states that it has five wells in the Kahului aquifer and eleven wells in the Pâ'ia aquifer. HC&S writes 
Over the last twenty years, the daily average rate of
withdrawal, by year, for all 16 of these wells combined has
ranged from approximately 40 mgd to as much as 112 mgd far
in excess of the combined sustainable yield of between 7 and
8 mgd for the Kahului and Paia aquifers recommended in the
Draft WRPP. Several of these wells have been in operation
for more than a hundred years, and all have been in place
and operated for many decades without any long term
deterioration in water quality.
 
Though these written comments contradict the evidence it
 
83
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
presented regarding its inability to pump Well No. 7 due to the
 
alleged recharge problem, the Commission does not explain why it
 disregarded the written comments in favor of HC&S’s evidence
 supporting the existence of a recharge problem.
 
The Commission attempted to analyze the economic impact 
of requiring HC&S to augment Nâ Wai ' Ehâ water with water from 
Well No. 7. HC&S claimed that the economic consequences of reduced allowable diversion or increased requirements to pump Well No. 7 would result in HC&S discontinuing all operations on Maui. The Commission found that: 
HC&S  had  not  “done  any  economic  analysis  on  how  a  reduction
of  available  surface  water  in  this  case  would  force  HC&S  to
 
shut  down”;  Mr.  Holiday[,  President  of  HC&S’s  Agricultural
Group,]  “[could  not]  say  yes  or  no”  when  asked  whether
 
shifting  9  mgd  of  Nâ  Wai  'Ehâ  surface  water  to  another 
purpose  would  prevent  HC&S  from  being  viable,  but  testified
that  HC&S  is  “assuming”  that  impact  “for  planning  purposes.”  
As the Commission recited in its FOF/COL, Catherine Chan-Halbrendt, Professor in the Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Management at the University of Hawai
'i, Mânoa, 
testified that “the lack of any economic analysis, or the data required to conduct such an analysis, prevents anyone, including this Commission, from evaluating HC&S’s claims of economic impact.” The Commission agreed that the record was insufficient, stating “It would have been more helpful to the Commission if either or both parties had provided information on incremental decreases in surface water to the 5,000 acres of HC&S’s West Maui 
84
           
 
     
        
       
        
         
      
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Fields.” Nonetheless, the Commission stated that “the lack of
 
such analyses does not prohibit the Commission from its duty of
 weighing instream values with non-instream uses.” 
The record shows, however, that the Commission did not
 
merely weigh instream values with noninstream uses; rather, the
 Commission’s own explanation of how it arrived at the 9.5 mgd
 requirement shows that cost to HC&S was the determinative factor. 
The Commission concluded first that there were uncertainties
 regarding the aquifer recharge, and that therefore “the practical
 alternative from Well No. 7 is lower than historic rates.” That
 is, even though the Commission found that historical rates for
 Well No. 7 showed that “[b]etween 1927 and 1985, HC&S pumped an
 average of about 21 mgd from Well No. 7,” the Commission decided
 that a lower number would be more appropriate. Then, in
 determining that lower number, the Commission explained:
 
Considering these uncertainties [regarding aquifer recharge]
in combination with the Commission’s decision to place the
full burden of remedying losses immediately upon HC&S ,
discussed intra, the practical alternative from Well No. 7
is deemed 9.5 mgd. This alternative will not require
capital costs, only the costs of pumping.
 
(emphasis added). That is, since the Commission already required
 
HC&S to pay to eliminate some of its system losses, it would not
 
require HC&S to incur any capital costs to improve Well No. 7. 
The Commission erred when it made its decision
 
regarding Well No. 7 based on cost while explicitly acknowledging
 that it did not have the data it needed to truly analyze cost. 
85
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
“[T]he Commission must not relegate itself to the role of a mere 
‘umpire passively calling balls and strikes for adversaries appearing before it,’ but instead must take the initiative in considering, protecting, and advancing public rights in the resource at every stage of the planning and decisionmaking process.” Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 143, 9 P.3d at 455 
(citations). When such critical information is missing, the Commission must “take the initiative” to obtain the information it needs. Where the Commission’s decisionmaking does not display “a level of openness, diligence, and foresight commensurate with the high priority these rights command under the laws of our state,” the decision cannot stand. Wai'ola, 103 Hawai 'i at 422, 
83 P.3d at 685. On remand, the Commission must revisit its analysis of Well No. 7 as an alternative source to diverting Nâ Wai 'Ehâ water, as explained in this opinion. 
6.	 The Commission Erred In Its Consideration of Recycled
Wastewater.
 
Hui/MTF argues that the Commission erred in failing to
 
consider the practicability of using recycled wastewater from the
 
Wailuku/Kahului wastewater treatment plant. In its FOF/COL D&O,
 the Commission concluded that at least 5 mgd of recycled
 wastewater “is currently disposed of via underground injection.” 
In response to Hui/MTF’s urging that HC&S be required to utilize
 this water, the Commission found that “the County currently has
 
86
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
no existing infrastructure to deliver recycled wastewater to 
HC&S’s fields.” The Commission also heard testimony that “private parties could construct their own pipeline to the plant.” The Commission appears to have concluded that this alternative did not merit consideration, based solely on the current lack of infrastructure. This decision does not evince “a level of openness, diligence, and foresight commensurate with the high priority these rights command under the laws of our state.” Wai'ola, 103 Hawai' i at 422, 83 P.3d at 685. The recycled 
wastewater was quantified as “at least 5 mgd”; 5 mgd is nearly enough water to satisfy all kuleana users in Nâ Wai ' Ehâ and 
would be a significant contribution to HC&S’s water needs. On remand, the Commission must evaluate this alternative with “openness, diligence, and foresight” to determine whether it is a viable alternative to diverting Nâ  Wai 'Ehâ water. 
VI. CONCLUSION
 
As explained in Section V.A., supra, MDWS’s cross-
appeal is dismissed. 
We recognize and appreciate the substantial time,
 
energy, and diligence that the Commission, Dr. Miike, and the
 parties have invested in this case. However, for the reasons
 stated above, the Commission on Water Resource Management’s 
June 10, 2010 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision and
 
87
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 
Order is hereby vacated and remanded to the Commission for
 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
Isaac H. Moriwake and 
D. Kapua' ala Sproat of
Earthjustice for AppellantHui O Nâ  Wai 'Ehâ and 
Maui Tomorrow Foundation, Inc. 
Anna Elento-Sneed and 
Pamela W. Bunn of Alston Hunt
 Floyd & Ing for Appellant
Office of Hawaiian Affairs
 
Patrick K. Wong, Corporation
Counsel and Jane E. Lovell,
Deputy Corporation Counsel,
County of Maui, and Jon M.
Van Dyke, for Appellee/Cross-
Appellant County of Maui,
Department of Water Supply
 
Donna H. Kalama and Julie H.
 
China, Deputy Attorneys
General, for Appellee
Commission on Water Resource
 Management
 
David Schulmeister and Elijah
Yip of Cades Schutte LLP for
Appellee Hawaiian Commercial
and Sugar Company
 
Paul R. Mancini and James W. 
Geiger of Mancini, Welch &
Geiger and Gilbert S.C. Keith-
Agaran for Appellee Wailuku
Water Company, LLC
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 /s/ Rom A. Trader 
88
 