 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAII ORGANIZATION OF POLICE OFFICERS,  
exclusive representative for Bargaining Unit 12, Police,  
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee, 
vs. 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU,  
Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellee, 
 
and 
 
HONOLULU CIVIL BEAT, INC.,  
Intervenor-Defendant/Cross-Claimant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant.  
 
 
 
SCAP-19-0000450 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-19-0000450; CIV. NO. 18-1-0823-05) 
 
SEPTEMBER 17, 2021 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND WILSON, JJ., AND 
CIRCUIT JUDGE CAHILL, IN PLACE OF POLLACK, J., RECUSED 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
  The Uniform Information Practices Act (UIPA) promotes 
government transparency and accountability by requiring state Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-19-0000450
17-SEP-2021
07:57 AM
Dkt. 105 OP2 
 agencies to make their records available for public scrutiny.  
Hawai
‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 92F-2 (2012); HRS § 92F-11(a) 
(2012).  However, “[t]he policy of conducting government 
business as openly as possible must be tempered by a recognition 
of the right of the people to privacy, as embodied in section 6 
. . . of article I of the [Hawai
‘i Constitution.]”  HRS § 92F-2.  
Accordingly, UIPA mandates disclosure of public records but 
furnishes an exception for “[g]overnment records which, if 
disclosed, would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of 
personal privacy[.]”  HRS § 92F-13(1) (2012).   
  This case requires us to apply this exception to 
records about police misconduct.  We have recognized a 
“compelling public interest in instances of police misconduct 
given the importance of public oversight of law enforcement.”  
Peer News LLC v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 138 Hawai‘ i 53, 74, 376 
P.3d 1, 22 (2016).  But under UIPA, the public’s interest must 
be balanced against any countervailing privacy interests.  HRS 
§ 92F-14(a) (2012).  Here, plaintiff State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers (SHOPO) sued under UIPA to 
prevent the disclosure of certain police misconduct records, 
invoking the privacy exception.  Preliminarily, we hold that 
there is no private cause of action to prevent, as opposed to 
compel, the release of public records under UIPA.  The Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) correctly dismissed 3 
 SHOPO’s UIPA claims for that reason.  It erred, however, by 
conflating the constitutional privacy right with the statutory 
privacy interests codified in UIPA; the core protections of the 
Hawai
‘i Constitution remain unaltered when the legislature 
chooses to extend greater protections than article I, section 6 
requires. 
  Nonetheless, we hold that UIPA requires the release of 
the requested records.  This issue compels us to revisit two 
cases in which we have previously considered the required scope 
of disclosure of police misconduct records: State of
  Hawaiʻi
Organization of Police Officers v. Society of Professional 
Journalists – University of Hawaiʻi (SHOPO v. SPJ), 83 Hawaiʻ i 
378, 927 P.2d 386 (1996), and Peer News.  While SHOPO v. SPJ 
made clear that police officers did not enjoy a constitutional 
privacy interest in their misconduct records, Peer News 
acknowledged that the legislature had recognized a significant privacy interest by statute.  Act 47, however, subsequently 
rescinded that recognition.  2020 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 47, § 1 at 364.  We apply Act 47 here, and to the extent the records fall 
within the categories enumerated by HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B)(i)-(v) 
(2012) (excepting certain kinds of misconduct information from 
the general privacy interest in a personnel file), SHOPO v. 
SPJ’s holding applies – only a scintilla of public interest will 
compel disclosure, a threshold easily surpassed here.  To the 4 
 extent the records fall outside those categories, the balancing 
test prescribed by Peer News applies.  We agree with the circuit 
court that, applying the Peer News test, the public interest in 
disclosure outweighs the significant privacy interest at stake.  
Moreover, SHOPO’s challenges to the procedures employed by the 
circuit court and the City, and to the circuit court’s 
application of the balancing test, are unconvincing.  We 
accordingly affirm the circuit court’s judgment mandating the 
records’ release.1 
II. BACKGROUND 
  In September 2014, video from a restaurant’s surveillance camera surfaced and was widely disseminated; the 
video appeared to show, and was widely reported as portraying, 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Sergeant Darren Cachola in a 
physical altercation with a woman.
2  In the aftermath of the 
video, Sergeant Cachola was terminated from HPD.  But after arbitration, he was reinstated with back pay, and the disciplinary action was reduced to a suspension.   
                     
1  On December 16, 2020, we lifted the stay of the judgment, and the 
circuit court thereafter released the records.  We retained concurrent 
jurisdiction to issue this opinion.  See, e.g., In re AB, 145 Hawai‘i  498, 
513, 454 P.3d 439, 454 (2019). 
 
2  The events giving rise to this litigation were widely publicized, 
and many of the news articles covering the video and its aftermath are in the 
record.  The complaint did not name Sergeant Cachola, and SHOPO has at times 
objected during this litigation to publicly naming the officer.  However, 
even before this court ordered the lifting of the stay of the circuit court’s 
judgment, the record was replete with instances of his name. 5 On February 22, 2018, Civil Beat requested that the 
City release “the arbitration decision involving Darren Cachola” 
pursuant to UIPA.  According to SHOPO’s complaint, HPD notified 
SHOPO that it was considering releasing the records on April 12, 
2018; on April 14, 2018, SHOPO wrote to the Chief and Deputy 
Chief of HPD to voice its “strenuous[] object[ion]” to the 
records’ release.  HPD officials subsequently informed SHOPO 
that “the public’s interest in the subject records outweighed the privacy interest of [the] officers” and that it intended to 
release the records in redacted form.   
A.
Circuit Court Proceedings
1. SHOPO’s Complaint
SHOPO sued the City in the circuit court.3  The
complaint requested declaratory and injunctive relief under the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution, UIPA, and the collective bargaining 
agreement (CBA) between SHOPO and the City.4  SHOPO alleged that 
the release of information related to an officer’s suspension, 
including the arbitration decision which ordered his 
reinstatement, would violate the officer’s right to privacy.
3The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided. 
4SHOPO also filed a class grievance under the CBA and a prohibited 
practice complaint with the Hawaiʻ i Labor Relations Board (HLRB).  The record 
indicates that SHOPO obtained a temporary restraining order from the HLRB, 
blocking the release of the records pending a final decision in the instant case.  
 6 Specifically, SHOPO’s complaint stated that both the 
“informational privacy” protection enshrined in article I, 
section 6 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution  and UIPA’s statutory 
protections in HRS §§ 94F-13  and 92F-14(b)  precluded the City
from releasing those records to the public.   7 65
 
SHOPO also challenged the lack of “written 
confirmation or explanation” about HPD’s application of the Peer 
News balancing test and the basis for the City’s conclusion that 
the public interest outweighed the privacy interest here.  The 
City’s “failure to provide a written explanation” regarding the 
balancing test “stripped SHOPO and its affected members with 
their right of appeal to the [Office of Information Practices 
5Article I, section 6 provides: “The right of the people to 
privacy is recognized and shall not be infringed without the showing of a 
compelling state interest.  The legislature shall take affirmative steps to 
implement this right.” 
6HRS § 92F-13 provides: “[UIPA] shall not require disclosure of 
. .
 . [g]overnment records which, if disclosed, would constitute a clearly 
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy[.]” 
7HRS § 92F-14(a) provides: “Disclosure of a government record 
shall not constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy if 
the public interest in disclosure outweighs the privacy interest of the 
individual.”
 
In turn, HRS § 92F-14(b) provides that “information in an 
agency’s personnel file” is an “example[] of information in which the 
individual has a significant privacy interest.”  While “employment misconduct that results in an employee’s suspension or discharge” is typically excluded from that example, and therefore disclosable, at the time this litigation 
commenced, misconduct by “a county police department officer” that did not 
“result[] in the discharge of the officer” was exempted from the exclusion.  
HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B) (2012).  Thus, under HRS § 92F-14 as it existed when 
the complaint was filed, a county police officer has a significant privacy 
interest in their personnel file, even if the information therein pertains to 
misconduct, unless the officer was discharged.  In September 2020, the 
legislature removed the “county police officer” exception from HRS § 92F-14.  
2020 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 47, § 3 at 365- 66.   7 
 (OIP)] or Circuit Court,” citing HRS § 92F-42 (2012) (“The 
director of the [OIP] . . . [s]hall, upon request, review and 
rule on an . . . agency’s granting of access[.]”).  Further, 
SHOPO stated that the CBA between SHOPO and the City was 
violated by the attempt to release the records because the CBA – 
which is “consistent with the right to privacy under Hawaii’s 
Constitution and the UIPA” - required the City to keep 
confidential all discipline and dismissal matters.   
  Accordingly, SHOPO requested: (1) “a declaration that 
Defendant City’s decision to release the subject confidential 
and private information is a violation of the individual police 
officers’ privacy rights and in violation of [UIPA]”; (2) “a 
declaration that Defendant City’s failure to provide SHOPO and 
its members with information on how it reached its conclusion 
. . . stripped SHOPO and its affected members [of] their right 
of appeal to the OIP or Circuit Court” and likewise violated 
UIPA; (3) “a declaration of law that the right to privacy and the UIPA precludes and prohibits the release of any information 
regarding HPD officers who were the subject of discipline, 
unless those officers have exhausted all their administrative 
remedies and have been discharged due to disciplinary 
infractions”; and (4) “temporary, preliminary and permanent 8 
 injunctive relief to prevent and enjoin Defendant City from 
disclosing the requested information.”8   
2. 
August 13, 2018 Order  
 
  Civil Beat was allowed to intervene and moved to 
dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction and failure to 
state a claim upon which relief can be granted or, 
alternatively, for summary judgment (Motion).  The City joined 
in the Motion.  Civil Beat argued that SHOPO failed to state a claim for a constitutional violation because “police officers do 
not have a constitutional right of privacy against disclosure of 
disciplinary suspension records.”  Civil Beat further contended 
that UIPA furnished no private right of action to parties like 
SHOPO who “seek[] to withhold records from the public,” and 
therefore, the court lacked subject matter jurisdiction.  “The 
UIPA is not a confidentiality law that confers rights on any 
third party to conceal government information from public view,” 
Civil Beat contended, but it argued that UIPA compelled the documents’ release in any event.   
  SHOPO opposed the Motion, arguing that “police 
officers have a ‘significant privacy interest’ in their 
disciplinary suspension records,” and those records “must be 
                     
8  The City’s answer to the complaint largely admitted the factual 
allegations, but claimed it did not violate UIPA and that SHOPO was not 
entitled to information about how the City reached its conclusion.   
 9 
 kept private unless the public’s interest in disclosure 
outweighs the privacy interest of the individual police 
officer.”  SHOPO contended it was permitted to enforce UIPA 
because it had standing to do so.  It also disagreed with the 
contention that UIPA is not a confidentiality law; as a result, 
SHOPO argued it could bring this suit because a purpose of UIPA 
is to assure open access in balance with individual privacy 
rights.    
 The circuit court granted the Motion “to the extent 
[SHOPO]’s claim is based on a violation of the [UIPA]” and denied the Motion in all other respects (August 13, 2018 Order).  
In the August 13, 2018 Order, the court concluded that “[SHOPO] 
has no private cause of action for disclosure of government 
records under the UIPA.”  However, the circuit court “f[ound] 
SHOPO has a cause of action and standing to assert the 
constitutional privacy claim.”  It ordered the City to produce 
the documents for in camera review.   
3. September 28, 2018 Order 
 
  SHOPO moved to “clarify, modify, or correct” the 
August 13, 2018 Order (Motion to Clarify).  It argued 
clarification, modification, or correction was necessary for 
four reasons: (1) SHOPO “sought declaratory relief pursuant to 
HRS § 632-1 [(2016)], and injunctive relief to enjoin Defendant 
City from releasing the subject records” until it performs the 10 
 balancing test, not “a private cause of action under UIPA”; (2) 
because its requested relief included a declaration of the 
City’s UIPA obligations, “[i]t is not clear what is left of 
Plaintiff’s Complaint . . . because UIPA is the mechanism 
intended to protect the right to privacy which SHOPO’s Complaint 
seeks to enforce”; (3) dismissal of all UIPA claims and ordering 
in camera review contradicted each other; and (4) “[i]t is 
unclear if Plaintiff will be given the opportunity to conduct discovery” and what information the court would consider.  The 
City and Civil Beat opposed the motion.  
 
  The circuit court issued an Order (September 28, 2018 
Order) clarifying that it would “apply a constitutional 
balancing test as discussed in Peer News.”  It saw “no 
inconsistency between a constitutional balancing test and its finding of no private cause of action under UIPA” per the 
August 13, 2018 Order.  “The 
Hawaiʻi Constitution s ets a floor 
for privacy interests.  The Legislature can establish more 
protections by statute (such as UIPA) if it chooses to. . . .  
This court has now ruled that the legislative protections of UIPA do not apply to Plaintiff under the circumstances of this 
case.”  The circuit court stated that after in camera review, it 
would decide “whether any applicable constitutional privacy 
protections are outweighed by the public interest in disclosure 
under the applicable facts.”   11 
 4. 
Civil Beat’s Cross-Claim 
 
  Civil Beat moved for, and was granted, permission to 
file a cross-claim against the City as a requester “aggrieved by 
a denial of access to a government record” per HRS § 92F-15 
(2012).  Civil Beat asserted in the motion that “it appears that 
SHOPO is abandoning its constitutional privacy claims,” in which 
case, the circuit court may have been compelled to dismiss the 
case in its entirety.     Civil Beat’s cross-claim against the City alleged that 
the City denied their renewed UIPA request as a result of the 
HLRB’s order enjoining the release of the requested records.
9  
See supra note 3.  Thus, Civil Beat asked for the court to order 
the City to release “all information sought” by Civil Beat in 
its UIPA request – namely, the arbitration award, the closing 
report, and the full investigation.  The City’s answer to the 
cross-claim denied that it had violated UIPA, but admitted that 
“Civil Beat has a right to access the requested records” and that “it has been and remains the City’s intention to disclose 
the requested records.”   
5. January 3, 2019 Order 
 
  The circuit court sua sponte reexamined and vacated 
part of the September 28, 2018 Order (January 3, 2019 Order).  
                     
9  The cross- claim alleges that Civil Beat issued another request 
for the records on August 30, 2018 (while the instant litigation was well 
underway), which was denied by the City on the grounds of the HLRB order.  12 
 It recognized that while its prior rulings constituted the law 
of the case, “so long as a trial court retains jurisdiction, it 
‘always has the power to reexamine, modify, vacate, correct and 
reverse its prior rulings and orders,’” especially when it feels
a prior ruling was “probably erroneous.”  (Quoting Chun v. Board
of Trustees of the Emp. Ret. Sys., 92 Hawaiʻ i 432, 441, 992 P.2d 
127, 136 (2000).)
  The circuit court reasoned that the September
28, 2018 Order had conflated the question of whether SHOPO had a
statutory cause of action under UIPA with whether UIPA’s 
substantive, statutory privacy protections apply.  “[T]he court 
now recognizes that the UIPA cause of action issue is separate 
from and does not nullify the legislature’s ability to create orenlarge statutory privacy exceptions to the UIPA’s broad 
disclosure requirements.”  It determined that   
 
 
 
the statutory privacy interests granted by the legislature 
under the UIPA should be applied by this court whether or not the City/HPD chooses to disclose the information or 
records at issue.  Otherwise, an individual’s statutory 
privacy interests under the UIPA are ephemeral, and 
evaporate whenever the agency chooses to disclose, with no 
relief available from the court. 
  The circuit court reasoned this approach was more 
consistent “with the underlying purposes of the UIPA, which 
include making the ‘government accountable to individuals in the 
collection, use, and dissemination of information relating to 
them.’”  (Citing HRS § 92F-2(4).)  13 
 6. 
April 29, 2019 Order 
 
  On April 29, 2019, the circuit court issued an order 
after in camera review of the records (April 29, 2019 Order).  
The April 29, 2019 Order granted summary judgment against SHOPO 
and in favor of the City and Civil Beat as to the arbitration 
decision and closing report.  It dismissed without prejudice all 
claims regarding the investigative report, and dismissed all 
other claims.  The court ruled as follows: 
 1. The Court was asked to review three documents in 
camera: the arbitration award, the closing report, which is 
143 pages, and the investigative report, which is 767 
pages. 
 
 2.
 The more serious the misconduct, the more likely 
the public interest outweighs the individual privacy 
interest.  Here, the alleged misconduct was extremely 
serious: the use of unauthorized, unjustified, and potentially criminal physical force against another person, 
completely unrelated to any official law enforcement 
duties.  
 3. The proper performance of public duty is a public 
concern,
 and it is given great weight when balancing 
competing privacy interests. 
 This is true whether 
addressing off- duty acts that bear upon a police officer’ s 
fitness to perform duties, or whether the alleged actions involve official duties.  Here, the alleged acts are 
essentially personal and off- duty, but clearly can bear 
upon a police officer’ s fitness to perform duties. 
 
 4. There is a significant public interest in the 
public knowing how the Honolulu Police Department (HPD) supervises alleged misconduct, responds to misconduct 
allegations, and investigates alleged misconduct.  A large 
portion of the records reviewed in camera (which the 
City/HPD themselves decided to release) involve HPD’ s 
investigation and response to the misconduct allegations.
 
 
 5. Little of the conduct described in these records 
was of a truly personal, private, or intimate nature.  Much 
of the alleged conduct occurred in front of witnesses, in a restaurant, or in
 the public areas, and with third parties. 
  6. For the above reasons, the Court finds that as a 
matter of law, the public interest in disclosure far 
outweighs the privacy interests of the records directed to 14 
 be released in this order.  Put another way, consistent 
with the UIPA’ s general policy in favor of disclosure, the 
City/HPD’ s disclosure of these records is not clearly 
unwarranted. 
 
 7. Further, there is a separate and independent 
ground to release the arbitration award - the requirement 
to disclose adjudicative orders pursuant to HRS
 § 92F-
12(a)(2) [(2012)]. 
  8. Although the arbitration award, as the final 
adjudication award, is a mandatory disclosure under section 
92F-12(a)(2), it is still subject to privacy interests per 
section 92F- 13(1). 
 
 9.
 Disclosing the redacted portions of the 
arbitration award, to include the City/HPD’ s proposed 
redactions as well as any additional redactions necessary to protect “ personal information
” as defined by Hawaii 
Court Records Rules (HCRR) Rule 2.19,[10] is clearly 
unwarranted when weighed against the privacy interests of the civilians involved. 
 
 10. The closing report is not a criminal 
investigation file.  It is a disciplinary action file.  The 
Court understands the HPD and the City have voluntarily decided to release the closing report, with certain 
redactions.  This Court is tasked with ruling on the 
privacy issues presented by the release of the proposed redacted closing report. 
 
 11.
 In essence, the closing report contains more 
details than the arbitration award concerning the events and investigation that led to the officer’ s termination and 
subsequent reinstatement.  In addition to the information 
redacted in the arbitration award, the closing report redacts the names of various witnesses, and responding 
and/or investigating officers.
  Although these identities 
are redacted, the person’ s actions and inactions are 
disclosed.  In other words, with the redacted version, the 
reader will learn in detail what happened, and will see in 
detail how the investigation was conducted, but may not 
learn exactly which witness or exactly which responding or 
investigating officer did something specific. 
 
 12. The Court finds that the HPD/City’ s disclosure of 
the proposed redacted closing report is not clearly 
unwarranted.  HPD is plainly trying to be transparent 
regarding the disciplinary investigation of the officer who was discharged and then reinstated, while balancing the 
privacy interests of everyone else involved.  It is a fine 
                     
10  Hawaiʻi Court Records Rule (HCCR) Rule 2.19 defines “personal 
information.”  HCCR Rule 9 generally prohibits the inclusion of personal information in publicly accessible court filings. 
 15 
 line, and time- consuming, to weigh these issues page by 
page. 
 
 13. The bottom line is the Court finds the disclosure 
and redactions are legally justified.  The public’ s right 
to know under the UIPA is satisfied by learning the details regarding the discharged/reinstated officer, as well as the 
details of what the investigation revealed and how the 
investigation was conducted.  At the same time, the privacy 
of certain civilian witnesses, and certain information regarding the responding and investigating officers, is redacted.
  The Court does not believe the redactions 
materially detract from the voluminous information being 
disclosed by HPD/City.  The public’ s right to know should 
be met by seeing both the final adjudicative decision, and HPD’s response to the entire incident. 
 
 14. The Court respectfully disagrees with SHOPO’ s 
claim or inference that the City did not conduct any kind of balancing analysis and that therefore this Court is in 
essence conducting the first balancing test for these records.  The Court sees no evidence in the record to 
support this claim.  Just because the agency is not 
required to give a plaintiff a written/reasoned explanation 
for disclosure does not mean no balancing test was 
performed.  
 15.
 For the above reasons, the Court hereby orders 
release of the redacted arbitration award, subject to additional redactions wherever necessary to protect 
“personal information” as defined by HCRR Rule 2.19.
 
 
 16. The Court further orders the release of the 
redacted version of the closing report[.11] 
 
  The court also noted that it had only received the 
unredacted version of the 767-page investigative report; it 
understood the City to be working on redactions, but it declined to make those decisions itself.  It also “doubt[ed] that the 
full investigative file adds much to the discussion” as it was 
duplicative of the arbitration award and closing report; it 
accordingly did not order the disclosure of the report (except 
for 72 pages containing “HPD’s policies, procedures and rules 
                     
11  The court also ordered further redactions to the closing report.   16 
 applicable to the incident in question” that did not require 
redaction).  Claims related to the investigative report were 
dismissed without prejudice. 
 
 SHOPO moved for, and the circuit court granted, a stay 
of the judgment pending appeal.12 
B. Proceedings on Appeal 
  SHOPO and Civil Beat cross-appealed.  At issue on 
appeal are the August 13, 2018 Order; the September 28, 2018 Order; the January 3, 2019 Order; and the April 29, 2019 Order. 
  SHOPO’s appeal raises the following points of error.  
First, it contends that the circuit court erred by failing to 
address its request for declaratory relief (a declaration of 
“Defendant City’s duties and responsibilities under the UIPA” 
and “guidance on how an agency must apply the UIPA balancing 
test”) and injunctive relief (“prohibiting Defendant City [from] 
releasing the subject records until such time that it has 
complied with UIPA”).     In the alternative, SHOPO argues that the circuit 
court failed to properly interpret and apply the UIPA balancing 
                     
12  Civil Beat petitioned this court for a writ of mandamus, alleging 
that the circuit court failed to apply the proper test for a stay pending 
appeal.  See Honolulu Civil Beat Inc. v. Crabtree, SCPW-19-0000622, 2019 WL 
4678149 (Haw. Sept. 25, 2019) (Order Denying Petition for Writ of Mandamus).   
We denied the petition.  After this court accepted Civil Beat’s application 
for transfer, Civil Beat moved to lift the stay pursuant to Hawai‘ i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 8(a).  We initially denied the motion on 
January 24, 2020.  As explained below, however, we later lifted the stay upon 
Civil Beat’s renewed request.
 17 
 test as set forth in Peer News.  It specifically challenges the 
City and the circuit court’s application of the balancing test 
and the procedural integrity of the process, arguing: it was 
denied due process; the circuit court should have addressed the 
CBA, including the arbitrator’s decision to seal the arbitration 
decision pursuant to the CBA; the circuit court erred by 
conducting the balancing test de novo, as opposed to “the 
‘highly factual’ standard”; the circuit court erroneously limited its in camera review because it was too “time 
consuming”; the circuit court’s “separate and independent 
ground[s]” for releasing the records under HRS § 92F-12(a)(2) 
was erroneous; the circuit court erroneously concluded the City 
was not required to issue a written explanation justifying 
disclosure; and the circuit court should have “prohibit[ed] the 
disclosure of the full investigative report.”   
  Civil Beat’s appeal challenges the circuit court’s January 3, 2019 Order, which applied UIPA privacy standards despite reaffirming that SHOPO lacked a cause of action: “The 
circuit court’s recognition of an unspecified and amorphous 
implied cause of action based on the mere existence of the UIPA 
privacy standards directly contradicts the analysis for 
judicially implying a private right of action from a statute.”  
It also asks this court to review “[w]hether the constitutional 18 
 right of privacy standards are the same as the UIPA privacy 
standards.”  
 
  This court accepted transfer of the appeals on October 24, 2019.  While the appeals were pending, Act 47 became law.  
Act 47 amended, as relevant here, HRS § 92F-14 to remove the 
statutory “significant privacy interest” in the employment 
misconduct records of a county police officer.
13  The parties 
                     
13  More precisely, it removed the exception for county police 
officers from the exception for disciplinary records from the “personnel 
file” example on the list of examples of “information in which the individual 
has a significant privacy interest.”  Act 47 amended HRS § 92F-14 as follows 
(deleted text represented by strikethrough): 
 
(b) The following are examples of information in which the individual has a significant privacy interest: 
 . . . . 
 
(4) Information in an agency’s personnel file, .
 . . 
except: 
 
. . . . 
 
(B) The following information related to employment misconduct that results in an employee’s sus
pension 
or discharge:  
 (i) The name of the employee; 
(ii) The nature of the employment related misconduct; 
(iii) The agency’s summary of the allegations 
of misconduct; 
(iv) Findings of fact and conclusions of law; 
and (v) The disciplinary action taken by the 
agency; 
 
when the following has occurred: the highest nonjudicial grievance adjustment procedure timely invoked by the employee or the employee’s 
representative has concluded; a written decision 
sustaining the suspension or discharge has been 
issued after this procedure; and thirty calendar days 
have elapsed following the issuance of the decision or, for decisions involving county police department 
 19 
 requested, and we granted, the opportunity for supplemental 
briefing that addressed how Act 47 affected the instant case.   
 
 On December 16, 2020, after supplemental briefing and 
oral argument, we granted Civil Beat’s request to lift the stay of the judgment.  We explained that “[i]t is clear to us that 
UIPA mandates the disclosure of the documents at issue,” and 
“[w]e accordingly s[aw] no reason for further delay in 
effectuating the circuit court’s order[.]”  State of Hawai‘ i 
Organization of Police Officers v. City and County of Honolulu, 
SCAP-19-0000450 (Haw. Dec. 16, 2020) (Order Lifting Stay Pending 
Appeal).  As a result, the redacted arbitration award and 
closing report were released.  We retained jurisdiction to issue this opinion, and we now elaborate on our reasons for concluding 
that the records were subject to disclosure.  
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
On appeal, an order of summary judgment is reviewed under 
the same standard applied by the circuit courts.  Summary 
judgment is proper where the moving party demonstrates that 
there are no genuine issues of material fact and it is 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  In other words, 
summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party 
is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. 
 
SHOPO v. SPJ, 83 Hawaiʻ i at 389, 927 P.2d at 397. 
                     
officers, ninety days have elapsed following the 
issuance of the decision; [provided that subparagraph 
(B) shall not apply to a county police department 
officer except in a case which results in the 
discharge of the officer;]  
 2020 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 47, § 3 at 365- 66. 20 Whether a document is subject to disclosure under UIPA
is reviewed de novo, HRS § 92F-15(b), as are “constitutional 
questions.”  Doe v. Doe, 116 Hawai ʻi 323, 326, 172 P.3d 1067, 
1070 (2007).    
IV. DISCUSSION
UIPA requires disclosure of public records unless an 
exception applies; one of those exceptions lies where disclosure 
would constitute “a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy.”  HRS § 92F-13.  In turn, HRS § 92F-14(a) provides that 
“[d]isclosure of a government record shall not constitute a 
clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy if the public 
interest in disclosure outweighs the privacy interest of the 
individual.”  HRS § 92F-14(b) supplies a list of examples of 
information in which an individual has a “significant privacy 
interest.”  One of those examples is “[i]nformation in an 
agency’s personnel file.”  HRS § 92F-14(b)(4).  This interest in 
one’s personnel file, however, is subject to an important 
exception: particular information related to employee misconduct 
resulting in suspension or discharge does not enjoy a 
significant privacy interest.  HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B).   
Two cases interpreting these statutes are critical 
here.  First, in SHOPO v. SPJ, we held that “information 
regarding a police officer’s misconduct in the course of his or21 
 her duties as a police officer is not within the protection of 
Hawai
ʻi’s constitutional right to privacy.”  83 Hawaiʻ i at 397, 
927 P.2d at 405.  Absent a significant privacy interest rooted 
in statute or the constitution, “a scintilla of public interest 
in disclosure will preclude a finding of a clearly unwarranted 
invasion of personal privacy.”  Id. at 383–84, 927 P.2d at 391–
92 (quoting Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 112–88, in 1988 House Journal, 
at 817–18).  Said differently, under SHOPO v. SPJ, records in 
which there is no significant privacy interest – which, at the 
time SHOPO v. SPJ was decided, was true of police misconduct 
records – must be released under UIPA if there is at least a 
scintilla of public interest in disclosure.  
  Second, in Peer News, we recognized that the 
legislature had amended UIPA to carve out police misconduct records from the employment misconduct records in which an 
employee generally enjoys no right to privacy.  Said plainly, 
the legislature “recognized a ‘significant privacy interest’ in 
police officers’ disciplinary suspension records in HRS § 92F–
14(b).”  138 Hawai‘ i at 61, 376 P.3d at 9.  Accordingly, Peer 
News held that determining whether police misconduct records are 
subject to disclosure under UIPA requires “balancing that 
[significant] privacy interest against the public interest in 
disclosure of the records.”  Id. at 73, 376 P.3d at 21.   22 
  
 Accordingly, the following scheme applies when UIPA’s 
privacy exception is invoked: 
 The application of section 92F– 14 varies considerably 
depending on whether or not the privacy interest is 
considered “significant.”  [ SHOPO v. SPJ, 83 Hawaiʻ i] at 
383–84, 927 P.2d at 391– 92.  “[O]nce a significant privacy 
interest is found, the privacy interest will be balanced 
against the public interest in disclosure.  If the privacy 
interest is not ‘significant,’ a scintilla of public 
interest in disclosure will preclude a finding of a clearly 
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.”  Id. (quoting 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 112– 88, in 1988 House Journal, at 817–
18).   
 
Id. at 76, 376 P.3d at 24 (Pollack, J., concurring). 
 
  This case requires us to consider how UIPA, as 
interpreted by SHOPO v. SPJ and Peer News, applies to the sought 
records in this case: the redacted arbitration award and closing report.
14  It also requires us to determine whether and how Act 
47 changes the analysis insofar as the legislature has now 
rescinded its recognition of a “significant privacy interest” in 
police misconduct records.  But first, as a threshold matter, we 
must consider whether SHOPO had the right to bring this suit at 
all.   A. There Is No Private Right of Action Under UIPA for a Party 
to Sue to Prevent the Release of Records that an Agency Has 
Determined Are Subject to Disclosure 
 
  SHOPO’s complaint challenges the City’s decision to 
release documents pursuant to UIPA, seeking both declaratory and 
                     
14  Civil Beat has not appealed the circuit court’s decision not to 
order the release of the investigative report.  This opinion accordingly does 
not address whether UIPA requires the disclosure of that record.  However, we 
do address SHOPO’s contention that the circuit court should have prohibited 
the disclosure of the investigative report in Part IV.J below. 23 
 injunctive relief.  To do so, however, SHOPO must have a right 
of action.  We hold that there is no private right of action 
under UIPA for a party seeking to prevent the release of 
documents. 
 
 As a preliminary matter, SHOPO argues that HRS § 632-
1, which provides for declaratory relief in certain circumstances, itself creates a right of action.
15  It does not.  
An express or implied right of action must sound from some other 
law before a party may rely on HRS § 632-1’s remedies.  In 
Alakaʻi Na Keiki, Inc. v. Matayoshi, 127 Hawaiʻ i 263, 277 P.3d 
988 (2012), the plaintiff – a business that had submitted a 
proposal to the State to provide health and human services – sought a declaratory judgment that the State had violated HRS 
Chapter 103F, which establishes rules for health-related 
procurements by the State.  Id. at 266-67, 277 P.3d at 991-92.  
Although the plaintiff sought declaratory relief, we explained, 
                     
15  SHOPO also argues that “Civil Beat’s [right of action] argument 
here fails because it ignores . . . [SHOPO’s] clear standing to assert such 
claims.”  That SHOPO would have standing to seek declaratory relief under Tax 
Foundation of Hawaiʻi v. State, 144 Hawaiʻ i 175, 439 P.3d 127 (2019), is of no 
matter if it lacks a cause of action.  As we explained in County of Hawaiʻi v. 
Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 Hawaiʻi 391, 235 P.3d 1103 (2010):  
 
[O]ur cases make clear that the two inquiries [standing and 
private right of action] involve distinct policy 
considerations and distinct tests.  The private right of 
action inquiry focuses on the question of whether any 
private party can sue to enforce a statute, while the 
standing inquiry focuses on whether a particular private 
party is an appropriate plaintiff. 
 
Id. at 406 n.20, 235 P.3d at 1118 n.20 (citations omitted). 24 
 “In order for a party to sue for enforcement under HRS § 632–1, 
HRS chapter 103F must provide for an express or implied private 
right of action.”  Id. at 285, 277 P.3d at 1010.  Thus, the 
declaratory judgment statute provides a remedy but does not furnish a cause of action; the substantive law the plaintiff 
seeks to enforce by way of a declaratory judgment must itself do 
so.   
  In order to enforce UIPA, SHOPO’s cause of action must 
emanate from UIPA itself, the substantive law it seeks to 
enforce.  First, no express cause of action to prevent 
disclosure of government records exists under UIPA.  UIPA 
provides an express cause of action for a specific class of 
people: those aggrieved by nondisclosure.16  HRS § 92F-15(a) 
provides: “[a] person aggrieved by a denial of access to a 
government record may bring an action against the agency at any 
time within two years after the agency denial to compel 
disclosure.”  (Emphases added.)  Thus, UIPA provides for 
                     
16  Under federal law, some parties may sue to prevent the release of 
certain documents pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).  CNA 
Fin. Corp. v. Donovan, 830 F.2d 1132, 1133 n.1 (D.C. Cir. 1987).  While FOIA 
and related statutes furnish the substantive law in so- called “reverse- FOIA” 
lawsuits, “§ 10(a) of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 5 U.S.C. § 702 
(1982), supplies the cause of action.”  Id. (citing Chrysler Corp. v. Brown, 
441 U.S. 281, 317, 317 n.47 (1979)).  Section 10(a) of the APA provides in relevant part: “A person suffering legal wrong because of agency action, or 
adversely affected or aggrieved by agency action within the meaning of a 
relevant statute, is entitled to judicial review thereof.”  No party has 
argued that the judicial review provisions of Chapter 91, 
Hawaiʻi’s equivalent 
to the APA, provides a cause of action, and Chapter 91 is meaningfully 
different from the APA in any event.
 25 
 judicial enforcement by a requester who tried, but failed, to 
acquire government documents.  SHOPO is not “a person aggrieved 
by a denial of access”; SHOPO is aggrieved by the agency’s grant 
of access.  Moreover, SHOPO is not seeking to “compel 
disclosure” – quite the opposite.  Accordingly, SHOPO is not 
entitled to invoke Chapter 92F’s judicial enforcement mechanism, 
and UIPA furnishes no other express cause of action to sustain 
SHOPO’s suit.  
  Thus, if a right of action to prevent disclosure 
exists under Chapter 92F, it must be implied.  To determine 
whether a statute confers an implied private right of action, 
this court has adopted the United States Supreme Court’s 
analysis in Cort v. Ash, 422 U.S. 66 (1975).  See, e.g., 
Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd. v. Cole, 59 Haw. 503, 506–07, 
584 P.2d 107, 109 (1978); County of Hawaiʻi v. Ala Loop 
Homeowners, 123 Hawaiʻi 391, 407-08, 235 P.3d 1103, 1119-20 
(2010), abrogated on other grounds by Tax Found. of Hawaiʻi v. 
State, 144 Hawaiʻi 175, 439 P.3d 127 (2019); Hungate v. Law 
Office of David B. Rosen, 139 Hawaiʻi 394, 406, 391 P.3d 1, 13 
(2017).  Cort set forth “several factors” to determine “whether 
a private remedy is implicit in a statute not expressly providing one”:  
First, is the plaintiff ‘one of the class for whose 
especial benefit the statute was enacted[]’ . . . ?  
Second, is there any indication of legislative intent, 26 explicit or implicit, either to create such a remedy or to 
deny one? . . .   Third, is it consistent with the 
underlying purposes of the legislative scheme to imply such a remedy for the plaintiff? 
422 U.S. at 78 (citations omitted).17 
In the intervening years, the United States Supreme 
Court has refined the inquiry to emphasize legislative intent.  
See Gonzaga Univ. v. Doe, 536 U.S. 273, 283-84 (2002); Alexander 
v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275, 286 (2001).  This court has followed  
suit.  In Rees v. Carlisle, 113 Hawai ʻi 446, 153 P.3d 1131,
(2007), we explained that “we apply Cort’s first three factors  
in determining whether a statute provides a private right of  
action though understanding that legislative intent appears to  
be the determinative factor.”  Id. at 458, 153 P.3d at 1143
(quoting Whitey’s Boat Cruises, Inc. v. Napali-Kauai Boat  
Charters, Inc., 110 Hawai ʻi 302, 313 n.20, 132 P.3d 1213, 1224  
n.20 (2006)).
Based on this test, there is no implied cause of 
action under UIPA for SHOPO to sue to prevent the release of 
records.  Recognizing that UIPA grants county police officers a 
privacy interest in their personnel files, SHOPO, via its 
members, is arguably “a member of the class for whose special 
benefit the statute was enacted” (albeit this contention might
17The fourth factor in the Cort test is inapplicable here for 
obvious reasons: “And finally, is the cause of action one traditionally 
relegated to state law, in an area basically the concern of the States, so 
that it would be inappropriate to infer a cause of action based solely on 
federal law?”  422 U.S. at 78. 27 
 reasonably be called into doubt in light of Act 47).  Hungate, 
139 
Hawaiʻi at 406, 391 P.3d at 13.  But neither legislative 
intent nor the underlying purposes of the legislative scheme 
indicate that a party in SHOPO’s position is able to sue to 
prevent the disclosure of public records.  UIPA simply provides 
no right of nondisclosure. 
  Legislative intent is given the greatest weight.  In this case, there is a clear and obvious indicator of legislative 
intent: UIPA already provides for particular kinds of 
enforcement actions.  “A frequently stated principle of 
statutory construction is that when legislation expressly 
provides a particular remedy or remedies, courts should not expand the coverage of the statute to subsume other remedies.”  
Reliable Collection Agency, 59 Haw. at 510, 584 P.2d at 111 
(quoting Nat’l R.R. Passenger Corp. v. Nat’l Ass’n of R.R. 
Passengers, 414 U.S. 453, 458 (1974)).  The legislature chose to 
provide for judicial review and was quite specific that review is available when a party is aggrieved by an agency’s denial of 
access.  HRS § 92F-15; see Whitey’s Boat Cruises, 110 Hawaiʻ i at 
314, 132 P.3d at 1225 (reasoning that the existence of 
enumerated civil penalties weighed against implying a private 
right of action); cf. Travelers Ins. Co. v. Hawaii Roofing, 
Inc., 64 Haw. 380, 387, 641 P.2d 1333, 1338 (1982) (disallowing 
a lawsuit where suing appeared to be an “attempt at 28 circumvention of statutory dictates”).  And UIPA elsewhere 
penalizes wrongful disclosure, as HRS § 92F-17(a) (2012) makes 
it a misdemeanor to “intentionally disclose[] or provide[] a 
copy of a government record, or any confidential information 
explicitly described by specific confidentiality statutes, to 
any person or agency with actual knowledge that disclosure is 
prohibited[.]”  See Rees, 113 Hawai ʻi at 458–59, 153 P.3d at 
1143–44 (concluding that private enforcement would be  
inconsistent with an ordinance when the law explicitly provided 
for public enforcement); cf. Molfino v. Yuen, 134 Hawai ʻi 181, 
187, 339 P.3d 679, 685 (2014) (declining to impose tort 
liability under Chapter 92F because the fact that it “expressly 
imposes criminal penalties for intentional violations of 
confidentiality statutes” reflected countervailing legislative 
intent).   
The legislative scheme also points against implying a 
cause of action for SHOPO to sue to prevent disclosure because 
UIPA itself creates no right of nondisclosure.  SHOPO does not 
accurately characterize the law when it says that documents are 
“protected from disclosure” unless the public interest outweighs
the privacy interest.  In fact, HRS § 92F-13(1) provides that 
“[UIPA] shall not require disclosure  
of,” inter alia, “records 
which, if disclosed, would constitute a clearly unwarranted 
invasion of personal privacy[.]”  (Emphasis added.)  “The plain 29 language of a statute is ‘the fundamental starting point of 
statutory interpretation[.]’”  State v. Demello, 136 Hawai ʻi 193, 
195, 361 P.3d 420, 422 (2015) (citation omitted).  The statutory 
language here is not prohibitive: that is, HRS § 92F-13 does 
“not require disclosure” if an exemption applies, but it does 
not forbid it, either.  The statute does not, for instance, say 
that such records “shall not be disclosed,” language used in 
other statutes.   Indeed, UIPA itself uses more restrictive and   
unequivocal language prohibiting disclosure in other places 
within the statutory scheme: under HRS § 92F-19(a) (2012), “[n]o 
agency may disclose or authorize disclosure of government 
records to any other agency,” unless a defined exception 
applies.  And the fourth exemption in HRS § 92F-13 provides that 
an agency need not release “[g]overnment records which, pursuant 
to state or federal law including an order of any state or 
federal court, are protected from disclosure[.]”  HRS § 92F-
13(4) (emphasis added).  This provision recognizes that, unlike 
documents that are exempt from disclosure per HRS § 92F-13(1), 
(2), (3), and (5), some records are affirmatively “protected 
from disclosure” by state or federal law, and an agency does not 18
18See, e.g., HRS § 37-77.5(b) (2009) (attorney general’s report 
about claims against the State “shall not be disclosed pursuant to sections 
92F-13 and 92F- 19(b)”); HRS § 334-5 (Supp. 2014) (records maintained by 
health care providers “shall not be disclosed by any person”); HRS § 333F-8.7 
(Supp. 2014) (records identifying a person who received services because of a developmental disability “shall not be disclosed by any person”); HRS § 612-
13 (2016) (names of jurors “shall not be disclosed”).  30 violate UIPA, which would otherwise mandate disclosure, by 
abiding by a countervailing directive.  Reading the statute in 
pari materia, that the legislature could have, but did not, 
phrase HRS § 92F-13 to prohibit disclosure or protect from 
disclosure (rather than “not require disclosure”) suggests that
the difference was purposeful, and “this court must presume 
that the legislature meant what it said[.]”  Demello, 136 
Hawaiʻi at 195, 361 P.3d at 422.    
Civil Beat also points out that the Fair Information 
Practice law once codified in Chapter 92E, which was repealed 
and replaced with UIPA in the late 1980s, used to expressly 
prohibit agency disclosure of “personal record[s].”  HRS § 92E-4 
(1985).  The same chapter also provided that “[a]n individual 
may bring a civil [action] against an agency in a circuit court 
of the State whenever an agency fails to comply with any 
provision of this chapter[.]”  HRS § 92E-11(a) (1985) (emphasis 
added).  That these provisions were repealed and replaced by a 
statutory scheme with no analogues suggests that the legislature 
acted purposefully when it passed UIPA, both by limiting the 
scope of judicial review and by making the exceptions to 
disclosure discretionary. 
This conclusion also comports with the OIP’s 
understanding of UIPA, and OIP opinions “shall be considered as 
precedent” unless “palpably erroneous” under HRS § 92F-15(b).   31 
 When a requested record falls into one of these exceptions 
[under HRS § 92F-13], an agency is not required to disclose 
it, but an agency is not forbidden from waiving the exception and disclosing the record, unless exception [HRS 
§ 92F-13(4)] applies and the record is protected by a 
statute or court order. 
 
OIP Op. Ltr. No. 99-04, at 2 (Oct. 15, 1999); see also OIP Op. 
Ltr. No. 05-03, at 1 (Jan. 19, 2005) (“While the UIPA confers on 
an agency the discretion to withhold certain types of records 
(or certain types of information contained in records), it does 
not require an agency to deny access to those records.”); OIP Op. Ltr. No. 05-18, at 3 (Dec. 9, 2005) (“[G]enerally, the UIPA 
is a discretionary statute and does not require an agency to 
withhold a record.”); OIP Op. Ltr. No. 06-04, at 4 (June 14, 
2006) (“If disclosure ‘would constitute a clearly unwarranted 
invasion of personal privacy’ of that third party, it is our 
opinion that the agency may, and generally should, exercise its 
discretion to withhold that personal information under section 
92F-13(1).” (emphases added)); OIP Op. Ltr. No. 07-11, at 1 n.3 
(Sept. 25, 2007) (“OIP notes that the UIPA is not a ‘confidentiality statute’ that requires an agency to withhold 
records.  Rather, the UIPA allows an agency to withhold those 
records (or information contained in those records) if an exception to disclosure provided by statute applies.  An agency, 
therefore, has the discretion to publicly disclose records that 
could otherwise be withheld under the UIPA.”). 32 
   Peer News is not to the contrary.  In Peer News, Civil 
Beat had requested information regarding instances of misconduct 
from HPD and was denied.  138 Hawaiʻi at 55-57, 376 P.3d at 3-5.  
The procedural posture of Peer News, then, only gave us the 
opportunity to review when it is appropriate for the circuit 
court to order disclosure in a UIPA lawsuit brought by an 
aggrieved requestor; we did not have the occasion to consider 
when, if ever, the circuit court should enjoin disclosure, nor 
did we opine as to when disclosure by the agency is merely 
discretionary or prohibited outright.  In other words, our 
statement that “[d]isclosure of records is appropriate only when 
the public interest in access to the records outweighs [an officer’s] privacy interest,” id. at 55, 376 P.3d at 3, referred 
to court-mandated disclosure.   
  Accordingly, there are three classes of documents 
under UIPA: (1) documents that must be disclosed, (2) documents 
that may be disclosed, and (3) documents that may not be 
disclosed.19  Parties denied access to a record (as the Peer News 
                     
19  The same is true under FOIA.  FOIA’s exemption provision is also 
phrased permissively: “This section does not apply to matters that are [one 
of nine defined exemptions.]”  5 U.S.C. § 552(b).  “Subsection (b), 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552(b), which lists the exemptions, simply states that the specified 
material is not subject to the disclosure obligations set out in subsection (a).  By its terms, subsection (b) demarcates the agency’ s obligation to 
disclose; it does not foreclose disclosure.”  Chrysler Corp., 441 U.S. at 
292.  Accordingly, FOIA “does not afford [plaintiffs] any right to enjoin 
agency disclosure.”  Id. at 294.  The success of reverse- FOIA cases brought 
under the APA often depends on whether another law – in Chrysler Corp., for 
example, the Trade Secrets Act – independently prohibits disclosure, such 
 33 plaintiffs were) may sue using the judicial review provision, 
HRS § 92F-15, and the circuit court should order disclosure if 
the sought information falls under category (1).  Parties 
seeking to enjoin the release of information protected by the 
constitution (or another confidentiality statute if that statute
provides a cause of action) may sue to prevent disclosure for 
documents under category (3), and criminal penalties likewise 
provide a remedy for wrongful disclosure of category (3) 
documents.  But it would be inconsistent with the legislative 
scheme to allow suits to prevent disclosure of documents under 
category (2) – such as those that, as SHOPO alleges here, are 
exempted from disclosure under HRS § 92F-13(1) – because the 
statute gives agencies discretion to disclose notwithstanding 
the exception.  20 
 In sum, taking the Cort factors together, SHOPO has no
right of action to sue to demand nondisclosure.  Not only does 
UIPA already provide an express cause of action for particular 
groups, nondisclosure is only mandatory under UIPA where 
another law – for instance, a state or federal statute, the  
that the disclosure is “not in accordance with law” under § 10 of the APA.  
Id. at 318; C anadian Com. Corp. v. Dep’t of Air Force, 514 F.3d 37, 39 (D.C. 
Cir. 2008) (“[U]nless another statute or a regulation authorizes disclosure 
of the information, the Trade Secrets Act requires each agency to withhold 
any information it may withhold under Exemption 4 of the FOIA.”). 
20We do not opine on the outer bounds of an agency’s discretion to 
release documents that fall under the second category, but we note that the 
OIP advises agencies that they “generally should” utilize the privacy 
exemption when a document qualifies.  OIP Op. Ltr. No. 06- 04, at 4 .  34 
 constitution, or a court order – independently requires an 
agency to withhold the sought records.  There is no right of 
nondisclosure under UIPA, only agency discretion to utilize the 
enumerated exceptions.  Because there is no “‘right’ at issue in
order for the court to issue relief,” Rees, 113 Hawaiʻ i at 458, 
153 P.3d at 1143, the circuit court correctly dismissed all of 
 
SHOPO’s UIPA claims in the August 13, 2018 Order. 
B. The Legislature’s Adoption of Heightened Privacy 
Protections Under UIPA Does Not Affect What the 
Constitution’s Privacy Provision Protects 
 
  This brings us to Civil Beat’s second point of error: 
whether the circuit court erred by conflating the constitutional 
privacy standards with the UIPA privacy standards.  In its January 3, 2019 Order, the circuit court applied UIPA’s privacy 
provisions despite its prior determination, which remained 
intact, that SHOPO lacked a UIPA cause of action.  But because 
SHOPO lacked a UIPA cause of action, the circuit court’s review 
of the documents as related to SHOPO’s complaint should have 
been limited to whether disclosure would violate the Hawaiʻ i
 
Constitution’s privacy provision.  However, Civil Beat’s cross-
claim arose directly under HRS § 92F-15, as Civil Beat is an 
aggrieved requester, and so the circuit court ultimately did not 
err by evaluating the records under Peer News.  That said, Civil 
Beat is correct that Peer News and the constitutional privacy 
inquiry are not the same. 35 
   The constitutional right of privacy is not coextensive 
with the privacy interests protected by the legislature.  The 
plain language of the constitutional provision itself compels 
this conclusion.  Article I, section 6 provides: “The right of 
the people to privacy is recognized and shall not be infringed 
without the showing of a compelling state interest.  The 
legislature shall take affirmative steps to implement this 
right.”  SHOPO points to the last sentence of the constitutional privacy guarantee in support of its argument that UIPA and 
constitutional privacy protections are interrelated and that the 
legislature may define the scope of the right.  But requiring 
the legislature to “implement” the right does not mean the 
legislature is empowered to change its definition.  “To 
implement” means to “carry out” or to “accomplish.”  Implement, 
Merriam-Webster Dictionary, https://perma.cc/3M37-WU6M.  That 
the legislature is charged with “implement[ing]” the privacy 
protection, then, means that the legislature must take “affirmative steps” to “carry out” the constitution’s 
protections; this responsibility does not equate to authority to 
reformulate what it is, exactly, the constitution protects.
21   
                     
21  Contrast the right to privacy with the right to a clean and 
healthful environment protected by article XI, section 9 of the Hawaiʻ i 
Constitution.  The latter provides in relevant part: “Each person has the 
right to a clean and healthful environment, as defined by laws relating to 
environmental quality[.]”  Haw. Const. art. XI, § 9 (emphasis added).  
Because the constitution explicitly delegates to the legislature the 
 36 As in Peer News, SHOPO has pointed to statements made 
at the constitutional convention in support of the argument that 
the legislature may “broaden” what the constitution protects: 
We in the bill of rights committee could have gone through 
the process of listing all the different ways in which the 
right to privacy should be protected, but we felt that this 
was not our job as constitutional delegates, that we should 
merely state broad principles and then let the legislature 
balance all the different kinds of rights - the Freedom of 
Information Act, the right of the people to know (though 
not put in our Constitution, it still exists), the right of 
attorneys to discover information, the freedom of the 
press.  The legislature should balance all of these 
different competing rights and then have something which would implement the right of privacy. 
Peer News, 138  at 66 n.9, 376 P.3d at 14 n.9 (quoting 2 
Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawaiʻi of 1978,
at 639 (1980)).  Hawaiʻi
 
This language is consistent with the conclusion that 
the constitutional directive to “implement” the right to privacy 
meant that the legislature was tasked with determining “all the 
different 
ways in which the right to privacy should be 
protected.”  
Id. (emphases added).  In other words, the drafters 
envisioned that the legislature would craft laws that struck the 
right balance between open government and individual privacy, 
protecting the latter while ensuring the former.  UIPA is one  
responsibility of defining the right to a clean and healthful environment, 
the framers “len[t] flexibility to the definition of the right over 
time. . . .  [It] can be reshaped and redefined through statute, ordinance 
and administrative rule- making procedures and [is] not inflexibly fixed.”  In 
re Application of Maui Elec. Co., Ltd., 141 Hawai‘ i 249, 261 , 408 P.3d 1, 13 
(2017) (citation omitted) (formatting altered).  By contrast, the privacy right is to be implemented, not defined, by the legislature.  This difference 
is meaningful. 37 
 such law that “implements article I, section 6[.]”  SHOPO v. 
SPJ, 83 
Hawaiʻi at 396, 927 P.2d at 404; see also Painting Indus. 
of Hawaiʻ i Mkt. R
ecovery Fund v. Alm, 69 Haw. 449, 452, 746 P.2d 
79, 81 (1987).  But the plain language of the constitutional 
provision and the intent of the drafters do not support the 
contention that the legislature, while obligated to take steps 
to protect privacy, is empowered to reconstitute what the constitutional provision itself protects.   
  Indeed, any other conclusion would result in absurdity.  As Civil Beat points out, construing UIPA to be 
coextensive with the constitution results in the absurdity that, 
because UIPA bears only on government personnel records, public 
employees would seem to enjoy heightened constitutional 
protections relative to the rest of the citizenry.  In fact, 
because the statute as it existed until Act 47 carved out county 
police officers specifically, the constitution would offer even 
more protections to police than to other public employees.  
These are not tenable results.   
  Rather, the constitution “establishes a floor” upon which the legislature is free to impose additional privacy 
protections, and to extend those protections to different 
considered the legislature’s authority to impose heightened 
privacy protections in Peer News.  “[A]rticle I, section 6 groups.  Peer News, 138 Hawaiʻ i at 66, 376 P.3d at 14.  We ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
38 
 establishes a floor for protection of privacy rights, but does 
not preclude the legislature from providing greater protection.” 
Id.  Said differently, “the legislature is [not] powerless to 
amend the statutory right to privacy to provide protections 
beyond what was discussed in SHOPO v. SPJ.”  Id.  But those 
legislatively-created protections are, as we noted, statutory.  
We also went on to reject SHOPO’s contention that “it is the 
[l]egislature’s exclusive role to ‘define’ the constitutional privacy right.”  Id.  In short, while the content of what the 
constitutional privacy provision protects remains bedrock, the 
legislature is tasked with implementing those protections, and 
it may also heighten them as it deems appropriate.   It has done 
both in UIPA, first by protecting from disclosure documents “which, if disclosed, would constitute a clearly unwarranted 
invasion of personal privacy,” HRS § 92F-13(1), and (pre-Act 47) 
by widening the scope of what constitutes “significant privacy 22 
                     
22  SHOPO points to State v. Kam, 69 Haw. 483, 748 P.2d 372 (1988), 
as an example of this court “broadening [] the right of privacy protected by 
article I, section 6[.]”  Kam reversed the convictions of two booksellers who 
had been charged with “promoting pornography” because, “[s]ince a person has the right to view pornographic items at home, there necessarily follows a correlative right to purchase such materials for this personal use, or the 
underlying privacy right becomes meaningless.”  69 Haw. at 495, 748 P.2d at 
380.  Rather than representing a “broadening” of the privacy right, the Kam 
case indeed strikes to the very core of the right to privacy: “the right to control certain highly personal and intimate affairs of his own life,” including what one chooses to read in the sanctuary of the home.  Id. at 492, 
748 P.2d at 378 (quoting Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 69 in 1 Proceedings of the 
Constitutional Convention of Hawai‘ i of 1978 , at 674- 75 (1980)). ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
39 
 interest” beyond what the constitution mandates, HRS § 92F-
14(b)(4).  
  This leads to the question: what, exactly, does the constitution protect?  Civil Beat is correct that Peer News did 
not overrule SHOPO v. SPJ in its entirety.  Peer News concluded 
that SHOPO v. SPJ was not controlling under the circumstances 
because SHOPO v. SPJ’s conclusion that a government employee’s 
misconduct records were not protected by the constitutional privacy right did not bear on the issue of whether “disclosure 
would violate the police officers’ privacy interests under the 
UIPA, as amended by Act 242.”  138 Hawaiʻi at 65-66, 376 P.3d at 
13-14.  Thus, the Peer News court was clear that it was ruling 
on statutory grounds, and we have more recently cited SHOPO v. 
SPJ for its constitutional principles.  See Civil Beat Law Ctr. 
for the Pub. Interest, Inc. v. City and County of Honolulu, 144 
Hawaiʻi 466, 480, 445 P.3d 47, 61 (2019).  Indeed, we reaffirmed 
the vitality of SHOPO v. SPJ in Peer News itself, clarifying 
that information not endowed by a “significant privacy interest” 
per HRS § 92F-14 was subject to the “scintilla” test: 
“[p]ursuant to SHOPO v. SPJ, if a police officer is discharged 
rather than suspended as a result of a disciplinary action” – a carve-out under HRS § 92F-14 but inapplicable to the sought 
records in that case – “disclosure would be required upon showing a mere ‘scintilla’ of public interest in disclosure.”  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
 
40 
 Peer News, 138 Hawaiʻ i at 68 n.11, 376 P.3d at 16 n.11 (citation 
omitted).   
  Thus, SHOPO v. SPJ’s constitutional holding – that 
“information regarding a police officer’s misconduct in the 
course of his or her duties as a police officer is not within 
the protection of Hawaiʻi’s constitutional right to privacy” - 
remains good law.  83 Hawaiʻ i at 397, 927 P.3d at 405.  The SHOPO 
v. SPJ court arrived at this conclusion by considering “the 
history of article 1, section 6 . . . , our prior interpretation 
of that section, and the great weight of authority from other 
jurisdictions[.]”  Id.  The court noted that reports from the 
1978 Constitutional Convention indicate the drafters intended to prevent  
the possible abuses in the use of highly personal and 
intimate information in the hands of government or private 
parties but [privacy] is not intended to deter the 
government from the legitimate compilation and 
dissemination of data.  More importantly, this privacy 
concept encompasses the notion that in certain highly 
personal and intimate matters, the individual should be 
afforded freedom of choice absent a compelling state 
interest. 
 
Id. (citing Comm. Whole Rep. No. 15 in 1 Proceedings of the 
Constitutional Convention of Hawaiʻi of 1978, at 1024 
(1980)). 
  SHOPO v. SPJ analogized “highly personal and intimate 
information” to that protected by the tort of invasion of 
privacy: “Sexual relations, for example, are normally entirely 41 private matters, as are family quarrels, many unpleasant or 
disgraceful or humiliating illnesses, most intimate personal 
letters, most details of a man’s life in his home, and some of 
his past history that he would rather forget.”  Id. at 398, 927 
P.2d at 406 (alterations omitted) (citing Restatement (Second)  
of Torts § 652D cmt. B (Am. Law Inst. 1977)).  The court agreed  
with other jurisdictions that had concluded that “information  
regarding charges of misconduct by police officers, in their  
capacities as such, that have been sustained after investigation  
and that have resulted in suspension or discharge is not ‘highly  
personal and intimate information’ and, therefore, is not within  
the protection of Hawai ʻi’s constitutional right to privacy.”  Id. 
at 399, 927 P.2d at 407.  While public employees’ personnel  
records might 
contain “highly personal and intimate  
information,” the contents of those records that related to  
misconduct did not implicate the constitution.  Id. at 399-400,  
927 P.2d at 407-08.
Reading Peer News and SHOPO v. SPJ together, an agency
may (and “generally should” per OIP Op. Ltr. No. 06-04, at 4) 
withhold records when the information contained therein 
implicates a significant privacy interest per HRS § 92F-14 and 
the public’s interest does not outweigh the privacy interest.  
If a denied requester brings suit, the court must review whether
that determination was correct, applying Peer News.  But when an 
 
 42 
 agency has determined that it may or must disclose pursuant to 
UIPA, any recourse is to the constitution (or, if applicable, a 
different confidentiality statute).  The mere fact that the 
records relate to a statutory privacy interest recognized by HRS 
§ 92F-14 does not mean that the agency’s decision to disclose 
violates the constitution (and indeed, as discussed in Part 
IV.C.1 below, the statutory privacy interest invoked in this 
case no longer exists).  Rather, as we settled in SHOPO v. SPJ, 
the agency’s decision should only be reversed if the information 
in the records is of a “highly personal and intimate” character.  
Accordingly, the circuit court erred by applying UIPA’s 
substantive standards to SHOPO’s complaint after correctly 
concluding SHOPO lacked a cause of action to enforce UIPA. 
C. UIPA Compelled Disclosure of the Redacted Arbitration Award 
and Closing Report 
 
  Although the circuit court erred by applying the Peer 
News test – which is rooted solely in the statutory protections 
of UIPA – to SHOPO’s complaint when SHOPO lacked a cause of action to enforce UIPA, Civil Beat’s cross-claim squarely raised 
the issue of whether UIPA mandates the disclosure of the sought 
records.  On appeal, SHOPO challenges the circuit court’s application of the Peer News balancing test.  We agree with the 
circuit court and hold that UIPA requires the disclosure of the redacted arbitration award and closing report. 43 
 1.
 Act 47 governs this case 
 
  We first address what version of UIPA applies to this 
case in light of the legislature’s passage of Act 47 while the 
appeal was pending.  HRS § 92F-14(b)(4) recognizes a significant 
privacy interest in a personnel file, except for employment 
misconduct information resulting in suspension or discharge; 
while the misconduct information exception formerly did not 
apply to “county police department officers” (save those cases resulting in an officer’s discharge), Act 47 amended the law 
such that officers’ misconduct records are now treated the same 
as those of any other public employee.  Civil Beat and the City 
argue that there is now no longer a statutory “significant 
privacy interest” in police misconduct records, a provision that 
was the “linchpin” of SHOPO’s arguments throughout the 
litigation.
23  SHOPO responds that Act 47 does not apply to this 
                     
23  This issue has been framed by the parties as one of mootness.  
Civil Beat argues that SHOPO “no longer has an effective remedy” because 
“[i]t would be irrelevant if a court declared whether the public interest 
outweighed Sgt. Cachola’s privacy interests[.]”  The City agrees, urging us 
to draw from federal law.  In United States Department of Justice v. 
Provenzano, 469 U.S. 14 (1984), for instance, the Supreme Court accepted 
certiorari to resolve the discrete question of whether a certain statute was a “withholding statute” within the meaning of FOIA; when Congress changed the 
law to make unambiguously clear that the answer was “no,” the Court 
determined the case was moot.  Id. at 15; see also United States v. Microsoft 
Corp., 138 S. Ct. 1186, 1188 (2018); United States Dep’t of Treasury v. 
Galioto, 477 U.S. 556, 559- 60 (1986).  The City contends that, as in those 
cases, “SHOPO is asking this Court to interpret and apply a provision[] of 
the law no longer applicable to the records at issue,” and where a change in 
law “conclusively resolves any question” of the propriety of the challenged 
disclosure, the dispute is moot.   
 While we agree Act 47 affects the outcome of this case, we 
disagree that it moots the case.  “A case is moot if it has lost its 
 44 
 dispute because the request was made before Act 47 took effect,
and that applying Act 47 would constitute retroactive 
application of a new law, which is generally forbidden.    24 
  No one disputes that the records are not subject to the old law simply because they were created before Act 47 was 
passed.25  The parties disagree, however, about whether the 
timing of the request for the records should be dispositive.  
Per SHOPO, we must apply the law in effect at the time of the 
request (which, here, was pre-Act 47), and any other reading of 
the law would impose impermissible retroactive effect.  Civil 
Beat and the City argue the law as it exists now should govern 
because the legislature intended that “going forward, the public 
be able to access [these] records,” and applying a new law is 
only impermissible when a right has vested.   
                     
character as a present, live controversy of the kind that must exist if 
courts are to avoid advisory opinions on abstract propositions of law.”  
Kahoʻohanohano v. State, 114 Hawai‘ i 302, 332, 162 P.3d 696, 726 (2007).  As 
explained in this opinion, not all of the records fall outside the purview of 
Peer News, even applying Act 47, and SHOPO raises procedural arguments that 
require our attention separate and apart from Act 47.  In short, the dispute 
remains “live.”  Id.  
 
24  Act 47 took effect “upon its approval” – September 15, 2020.  Act 
47 § 7. 
 
25  This was settled in SHOPO v. SPJ.  In that case, two separate 
Acts threatened to affect the litigation, and regarding the first, this court addressed whether records that were created before amendments to UIPA were 
subject to the old or the new version of the law.  The court held that the relevant Act “affects only an agency’s prospective duty of disclosure” and 
that duty does not change depending on when the records came into existence.  
83 
Hawaiʻi at 389-90, 927 P.2d at 397 -98. 45 Although SHOPO is correct that retroactive application 
of a new law is disfavored and must be supported by clear 
legislative intent, applying Act 47 to this case would not be 
applying it retroactively.  “Every statute which takes away or 
impairs vested rights acquired under existing laws, or creates a 
new obligation, imposes a new duty or attaches a new disability 
in respect to transactions or considerations already past, must 
be deemed retrospective.”  Taniguchi v. Ass’n of Apartment 
Owners of King Manor, Inc., 114 Hawaiʻi 37, 47, 155 P.3d 1138, 
1148 (2007) (quoting Graham Const. Supply, Inc. v. Schrader 
Const., Inc., 63 Haw. 540, 545, 632 P.2d 649, 652 (1981)).  Act 
47 “imposes a new duty” of disclosure onto agencies, and that 
duty applies prospectively – which is why SHOPO is correct that 
the City is not obligated to review all past UIPA requests and 
ensure they complied with the Act.   
“However, a statute does not operate retroactively 
merely because it relates to antecedent events, or because part 
of the requisites of its action is drawn from time antecedent to 
its passing, but is retroactive only when it is applied to rights acquired prior to its enactment.”  Emps. Ret. Sys. of the 
Territory of Hawaii v. Wah Chew Chang, 42 Haw. 532, 536 (Haw. 
Terr. 1958) (citation omitted).  Although there are antecedent 
events at issue here – namely the initial UIPA request – no 
rights vested by virtue of the fact that the records request was 46 made while the old version of the law was in effect (even under 
the tenuous assumption that the records could have been withheld 
pre-Act 47).  In SHOPO v. SPJ, we cited approvingly to a Texas 
Supreme Court opinion that explained: “The Legislature has not, 
by determining that government information formerly kept 
confidential should be disclosed, impaired any vested right of 
a claimant to the confidentiality of the information.”   Indus.  
Found. of the S. v. Texas Indus. Acc. Bd., 540 S.W.2d 668, 677 
(Tex. 1976); SHOPO v. SPJ
, 83 Hawaiʻi at 390, 927 P.2d at 398 
(citing to Indus. Found.  for the principle that the “Open 
Records Act does not impair any vested right”).   26
Moreover, “[w]hen the intervening statute authorizes 
or affects the propriety of prospective relief, application of 
the new provision is not retroactive.”  Landgraf v. USI Film  
Prod., 511 U.S. 244, 273 (1994).  This litigation turns on 
relief that is equitable in nature: SHOPO seeks an injunction 
preventing, essentially, the disclosure of the records, and 
“relief by injunction operates in futuro[.]”  Id. at 274.  
Civil Beat seeks the opposite: an order mandating that the 
records be disclosed.  “Disclosure . . . takes place only in 
the present or the future.”  
Wisniewski v. Kownacki, 851 N.E.2d
1243, 1249 (Ill. 2006).    
26And indeed, as set forth above, there is simply no right of 
nondisclosure under UIPA, and no right would therefore be impaired by 
applying Act 47 to this case. 47 
   SHOPO v. SPJ arose under similar circumstances, and 
SHOPO argues we should follow the approach of that case.  Act 
242 was passed in 1995 during the pendency of the litigation.  
SHOPO v. SPJ, 83 Hawaiʻi at 384, 927 P.2d at 392.  As we later 
interpreted it in Peer News, Act 242 expanded the scope of HRS 
§ 92F-14’s privacy interest for police officers’ misconduct 
records to extend to all records except those resulting in the 
officer’s discharge.  We considered whether the change mooted 
the litigation insofar as it was then clear that at least some 
of the sought records – those relating to officer suspensions – 
would not be subject to disclosure after Act 242 took effect: 
The argument is without merit.  Section 4 of Act 242 
expressly provides that “[t]his Act does not affect rights 
and duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and 
proceedings that were begun, before its effective date.”  
1995 Haw. Sess. L. Act 242, § 4 at 643.  The instant 
proceedings were begun well before the July 6, 1995 
effective date and are, therefore, not affected by Act 242.  
Accordingly, we hold that Act 242 does not moot this 
litigation. 
 
Id. at 391, 927 P.2d at 399. 
  SHOPO v. SPJ’s mootness holding is distinguishable.  
Act 47 does not have a savings clause, and there is therefore no 
evidence the legislature intended ongoing litigation to be 
unaffected by the Act.  Courts generally apply the law in effect 
at the time they render their decision.  Gov’t Emps. Ins. Co. v. 
Hyman, 90 Hawaiʻi 1, 5, 975 P.2d 211, 215 (1999) (citing 
Landgraf, 511 U.S. at 273, for the principle that, although in 48 
 tension with the presumption against retroactivity, “in many 
situations, a court should ‘apply the law in effect at the time 
it renders its decision.’”).  Although “[t]hese judicial 
principles of construction . . . do not apply if the legislature 
expressly limits the temporal scope of the statute,” id., the 
legislature did not do so here. 
  SHOPO has pointed to HRS § 1-3 (2009) to suggest that 
Act 47 does not control here.  HRS § 1-3 provides: “No law has any retrospective operation, unless otherwise expressed or 
obviously intended.”  But this should not be read as a universal 
“limit[ation on] the temporal scope of the statute.”  Gov’t 
Emps. Ins., 90 Hawaiʻi at 5, 975 P.2d at 215.  Rather, HRS § 1-3 
codifies the common law presumption against retroactivity – of 
which, as explained above, application of Act 47 does not run 
afoul because it does not impair existing rights in relation to 
past events.27 
  Indeed, the legislature frequently includes savings clauses in legislation.  See, e.g., 1995 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 
                     
27  Contrast HRS § 1- 3 with a general savings statute, such as 5 Ill. 
Comp. Stat. Ann. 70/4 (West 2016).  Under Illinois law, the operation of that 
statute elides the need to analyze whether any existing rights are impaired 
by operation of a statute to the given case because the legislature has 
prescribed that substantive laws shall not be applied to pending cases, while 
procedural laws shall.  Perry v. Dep’t of Fin. & Pro. Regul., 106 N.E.3d 
1016, 1027 (Ill. 2018).  In Illinois, “after determining that a change is 
substantive, we need not reach the issue of whether application of the substantive change would have a retroactive impact or operation” because the 
legislature has explicitly set out the temporal applicability of substantive 
amendments.  Id. 
 49 
 242, § 4 at 643; 2004 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 44, § 29 at 227.  This 
suggests a savings clause operates differently from the 
retroactivity prohibition in HRS § 1-3, or else the former would 
always be redundant.  And Civil Beat correctly points out that 
the legislature included a savings clause in an earlier draft of 
Act 47, but ultimately removed it.  HB 285, H.D. 1, S.D.2, Proposed C.D.1 § 10, 30th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2020), available at 
https://perma.cc/HF5K-ZFCR.  Thus, the presumption that the law as it currently exists applies, unless doing so would give a law 
impermissible “retroactive operation” under HRS § 1-3 – that is, 
it would impair existing vested rights – or the legislature has 
spoken otherwise by, say, including a savings clause. 
  For the reasons above, the application of Act 47 would not impair existing vested rights, nor has the legislature 
indicated that Act 47 should not apply to pending cases.  
Accordingly, Act 47 applies to this case. 
2. To the extent the sought documents are not of the kind 
enumerated in HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B)(i)-(iv), those 
portions of the records remain subject to Peer News 
    That Act 47 applies does not end our analysis.  SHOPO 
rightly points out that the amendment to HRS § 92F-14 removed 
the county police officer carve-out but did not alter the 
general privacy interest in an employee’s personnel file.  That 
generally-applicable privacy interest is excepted for only five 
categories of information “related to employee misconduct”: “(i) 50 
 The name of the employee; (ii) The nature of the employment 
related misconduct; (iii) The agency’s summary of the 
allegations of misconduct; (iv) Findings of fact and conclusions 
of law; and (v) The disciplinary action taken by the agency[.]”  
HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B)(i)-(v).  To the extent information 
contained in the records does not fall within one of the above 
five categories, it remains part of the general “personnel file” 
in which an employee retains a significant privacy interest and, in turn, would be subject to the privacy/public interest 
balancing test expounded in Peer News.   
  We must therefore determine whether and which parts of the sought records fall within, and outside of, those five 
categories.  The arbitration award presents a straightforward 
question – that record is composed almost entirely of findings 
of fact and conclusions of law.
28  HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B)(iv).  
Act 47 has therefore altered the law to remove the arbitration award from the ambit of HRS § 92F-14’s “significant privacy interest[s],” and the lower standard set out in SHOPO v. SPJ, 
not the more stringent balancing test from Peer News, applies.  
                     
28  There is some prefatory language before the findings of fact and 
conclusions of law describing the arbitration procedure – for instance, the 
witnesses called and the names of the attorneys.  Disclosure of this 
information does not pose privacy concerns.  Additionally, the arbitration 
was redacted to remove, inter alia, the names of some witnesses and other 
private information. 
 51 But whether or not some or all of the closing report 
falls outside the enumerated categories of HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B) 
presents a closer question.  The closing report certainly 
contains information about the nature of the misconduct and 
HPD’s summary of the allegations of misconduct per HRS §§ 92F-
14(b)(4)(B)(ii)-(iii).  However, the closing report arguably 
goes beyond those statutory categories insofar as it provides a 
considerable amount of detail, including extensive interviews with those involved.  But we need not and do not engage in the 
kind of fine-tuned statutory interpretation of HRS § 92F-
14(b)(4)(B) that categorizing the closing report demands.  
Rather, we assume, without deciding, that the closing report in 
its entirety falls outside the scope of the enumerated 
categories in HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B) and, in turn, remains subject to Peer News.  This is because, as Part IV.C.3 sets 
forth, the records are subject to disclosure even under Peer 
News.   
3. Under SHOPO v. SPJ, more than a scintilla of public
interest weighs toward disclosure of the arbitration 
award 
The arbitration award must be disclosed.  Under SHOPO
v. SPJ, even a scintilla of public interest warrants disclosure  
of public records when there is no significant privacy interest  
on the other side of the ledger, which is true of findings of  
facts and conclusions of law related to police misconduct  52 resulting in suspension or discharge.  83
  
P.2d at 391–92; see also Peer News, 138 Hawai
ʻi at 69 n.11, 376
P.3d at 17 n.11.  Black’s Law Dictionary defines “scintilla” as
a mere “spark or trace.”  Scintilla, Black’s Law Dictionary
(11th ed. 2019).  The “scintilla” test is therefore a low hurdle
that the arbitration award clears easily.  The contents of that
document reveal why Sergeant Cachola – who was terminated aftera widely-circulated video portrayed him apparently assaulting a
woman – was reinstated to the force.  The public’s interest in
understanding “the proper performance of public duty” and “how
the police department supervises its employees and responds to
allegations of misconduct” far surpasses the required scintilla.
Peer News, 138 Hawaiʻ i at 73-74, 376 P.3d at 21-22.at 383–84, 927 Hawaiʻi
4. The Peer News balancing test weighs toward disclosing
the redacted closing report 
We assume without deciding that the redacted closing
report remains subject to Peer News for the reasons stated above 
in Part IV.C.2.  Applying the balancing test prescribed by that 
case, we hold that the records must be disclosed. 
Peer News evaluated the privacy exception codified in 
HRS §§ 92F-13 and 92F-14 and concluded that “for a ‘significant 
privacy interest,’” like that conferred to police officers in their disciplinary records, “to constitute a ‘clearly 
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy,’ the privacy interest 53 at stake must be balanced against the public interest in  
disclosure of the information.”  138 Hawai ʻi at 68, 376 P.3d at 
16.
 In other words, in order for records regarding police  
misconduct to be exempt from disclosure under UIPA, the public  
interest cannot outweigh the officer’s privacy interest.  If it  
does, disclosure would not be a “clearly unwarranted invasion of  
privacy,” and an agency would be required to release those non-
exempt records.
While we did not prescribe the particulars of the 
balancing test in Peer News, we provided some guiding 
principles.  We recognized in Peer News that while a police 
officer has a significant privacy interest in their misconduct 
records by statute, the public has an interest – often a 
“compelling” one – in public accountability for the police.  Id. 
at 74, 376 P.3d at 22.  We opined that based on legislative 
history, “[t]he more egregious the misconduct, the more likely 
the public interest would outweigh the individual privacy 
interest.”  Id. at 71, 376 P.3d at 19.  We also emphasized that 
records that furnish information to “gauge the police 
department’s responsiveness to specific instances of misconduct 
and assess whether the agency is accountable to itself 
internally” would be of public interest.  Id. at 74, 376 P.3d at 
22 (brackets omitted) (quoting Rutland Herald v. City of 
Rutland, 84 A.3d 821, 825 (Vt. 2013)).  The public’s interest 54 
 extends to those investigating misconduct and those accused of 
misconduct: “the public should be [as]sured that both the 
activity of public employees suspected of wrongdoing and the 
conduct of those public employees who investigate the suspects 
is open to public scrutiny.”  Id. (citation and brackets 
omitted).  And we noted: 
Police officers are entrusted with the right to use force - 
even deadly force in some circumstances - and this right 
can be subject to abuse.  Public oversight minimizes the 
possibility of abuse by ensuring that police departments 
and officers are held accountable for their actions.  The 
press’s access to records such as those at issue here is 
one of the primary channels through which such public 
oversight can operate. 
 
Id. 
 
  The circuit court correctly applied the Peer News 
balancing test when it concluded that UIPA mandates the City to 
disclose the redacted closing report.  The sought records are of 
significant public interest both for their value in shedding 
light on HPD’s responsiveness to misconduct and to show why 
Sergeant Cachola was found fit for public duty.  While Sergeant 
Cachola had a significant privacy interest in his disciplinary 
records, the circuit court correctly concluded that, as a matter 
of law, that interest is outweighed by the public’s interest. 
  On the public interest side of the ledger, “there is a significant public interest in knowing how the police department supervises its employees and responds to allegations of 
misconduct.”  Id. at 73–74, 376 P.3d at 21–22.  The redacted 55 closing report provides such information.  First, the closing 
report, especially viewed in tandem with the arbitration award, 
provides details worthy of public review about the information 
giving rise to the initial termination decision and the reasons 
for reinstatement.  Second, the closing report contains 
information about how officers immediately responding to the 911 
call investigated the incident.  The public’s interest in 
understanding HPD’s response to misconduct extends from the immediate response to the final disposition.  In short, the 
closing report is valuable to the public because its contents 
help “gauge the police department’s responsiveness to specific 
instances of misconduct and assess whether the agency is 
accountable to itself internally.”  Id. at 74, 376 P.3d at 22 
(brackets and citations omitted). 
The public also has an interest in understanding why 
Sergeant Cachola was ordered back on the force.  “[T]he appropriate concern of the public as to the proper performance of public duty is to be given great weight.”  Id. at 73, 376 
P.3d at 21 (quoting Cowles Publ’g Co. v. State Patrol, 748 P.2d
597, 605 (Wash. 1988)).  The closing report reveals the facts
giving rise to his termination and subsequent reinstatement.
The allegations against Sergeant Cachola – domestic violence –
were serious and have been in the public eye for years.  The
public’s ability to understand the conclusion that termination56 was unwarranted is key to establishing public confidence that 
Sergeant Cachola was deemed fit for the force. 
On the other hand, we assume without deciding that 
Sergeant Cachola has a “significant privacy interest” in his 
misconduct records pursuant to HRS § 92F-14.  But the public 
interest here is indeed overwhelming, and the underlying events 
giving rise to the misconduct allegations took place almost 
entirely in public.  And though the acts occurred while he was off-duty, if “the off duty acts of a police officer bear upon 
his or her fitness to perform public duty or if the activities 
reported in the records involve the performance of a public 
duty,” the public has an interest in disclosure.  Id. (citation 
omitted).  
Throughout the litigation, SHOPO has encouraged 
adopting the framework expounded by the concurrence in Peer News, but SHOPO has failed to articulate why the factors in the 
concurrence would point against disclosure.  Nor do we agree with any suggestion that the balancing test constitutes a 
checklist.  The concurrence identified the following factors 
based on an OIP opinion letter: officer rank, “degree of 
wrongdoing and strength of evidence,” other available means to 
acquire the information, “whether the information sought sheds 
light on a government activity,” and “whether the information 
sought is related to job function[.]”  Id. at 81–82, 376 P.3d at
 57 
 29–30 (Pollack, J., concurring) (citing OIP Op. Ltr. No. 10-03 
(Oct. 5, 2010)).  While many of the factors cited by the Peer 
News concurrence might be useful or relevant depending on the 
circumstances of the individual case, they are neither necessary 
nor dispositive.   The OIP opinion upon which the concurrence 
relied was clear that these factors are “nonexclusive.”  OIP Op. 29
Ltr. No. 10-03.  Accordingly, the circuit court need not apply 
each in turn to come to the correct legal conclusion.  And that the circuit court in this case did not address factors 
identified by a concurring opinion, to which it was not bound, 
is not grounds for reversal of a correct judgment.
30   
                     
 29  While these factors may sometimes aid an agency or court in 
evaluating whether UIPA requires disclosure, we offer three observations: 
First, when it comes to police misconduct, the rank of the officer is 
relevant insofar as a higher rank would weigh more heavily toward the public 
interest.  But the opposite is not true; that is, the public’s interest in 
misconduct by a lower- ranked officer is not diminished simply because of 
their rank.  Police officers of all ranks “are entrusted with the right to 
use force - even deadly force in some circumstances - and this right can be 
subject to abuse.”  Peer News, 138 Hawai‘ i at 74, 376 P.3d at 22.  Misconduct 
by the rank- and-file is not necessarily shielded from disclosure under UIPA. 
  Second, for the same reason, “whether the information sheds light 
on government activity” should not preclude disclosure under UIPA simply 
because the sought document does not relate to a department’s oversight of 
misconduct.  Given the unique role police play in the community and the other 
reasons stated in Peer News, the public has an interest understanding why a 
particular officer is on the force.  That a sought record can shed light on public oversight can heighten public interest, but that a record bears only 
on an individual officer should not necessarily diminish it.   
  Third, any consideration of alternative means of acquiring the 
sought information should take into consideration the quality and difficulty 
of obtaining these alternatives.  If all non- private information is already 
in the public domain, then this factor would counsel against disclosure.  But 
a requester should not be forced to settle for a poor or incomplete 
substitute, nor should it be required to incur significant delay or financial 
loss in seeking alternatives. 
 
30  But applying the relevant factors here de novo, we note that 
Cachola is a sergeant; he was accused of very serious wrongdoing; there are 
 58 In sum, the circuit court correctly concluded that the 
report must be disclosed because of the seriousness and public 
nature of the misconduct, and the public’s interest in 
evaluating “[t]he proper performance of public duty” and 
understanding how HPD “supervises its employees and responds to 
allegations of misconduct.”  Peer News, 138 
Hawai‘i at 73-74, 376 
P.3d at 21-22 (citation omitted).  UIPA requires the disclosure
of the redacted closing report.31
D. SHOPO Is Entitled Neither to Declaratory nor to Injunctive
Relief, and the City Was Not Required to Supply a Written
Explanation for Disclosure 
We next turn to the other arguments raised by SHOPO’s 
appeal.  First, SHOPO argues that the circuit court did not 
address its request for declaratory and injunctive relief, which 
it sought to “explain[] what Defendant City’s duties and 
responsibilities are under the UIPA following a public request 
for police suspension records, and to order Defendant City to 
no readily available alternative means to acquire the information; for the 
reasons above, the information sheds light on police oversight and response to misconduct; and while Sergeant Cachola was off- duty, the information bears 
on his suitability to be a police officer.  Contrary to SHOPO’s arguments, these factors weigh toward, not against, disclosure. 
31While the closing report as a whole is subject to disclosure, we 
ordered several additional redactions to protect personal, private information of little interest to the public.  Information like where those 
involved in the incident – particularly nongovernmental witnesses 
– lived or 
stayed and personal medical information fall in the ambit of “highly personal 
and intimate information” protected by the Hawai‘ i Constitut ion.  SHOPO v. 
SPJ, 83 Hawai‘ i at 3 98, 927 P.2d at 406.  If that information is unrelated to 
the public’s interest in disclosure – as is the case here – it must be 
redacted.  59 
 comply with those duties and responsibilities before releasing 
confidential information for public dissemination.”   
 
 In fact, in addition to summarily dismissing all 
remaining claims in the April 29, 2019 Order, the circuit court did issue a conclusion of law regarding this requested relief: 
 14. The Court respectfully disagrees with SHOPO’ s 
claim or inference that the City did not conduct any kind 
of balancing analysis and that therefore this Court is in 
essence conducting the first balancing test for these records.  The Court sees no evidence in the record to 
support this claim.  Just because the agency is not 
required to give a plaintiff a written/reasoned explanation 
for disclosure does not mean no balancing test was performed. 
 
  Nonetheless, SHOPO argues declaratory and injunctive 
relief is warranted because “[the] City cannot be allowed to 
circumvent its responsibilities and violate the undisputed 
privacy rights of its employee.”  Otherwise, “a flood of costly 
litigation wherein the courts, not the responsible agencies, will be forced to conduct the ‘highly factual’ initial balancing 
test to determine whether the release of private information is 
appropriate” will ensue.  It urges this court to hold that under 
UIPA, the agency must conduct the initial balancing inquiry, and 
“[i]f the public’s interest in disclosure does not outweigh the 
privacy interests of the individual police officers, such 
disclosure . . . must be denied.”  Here, SHOPO argues, it was 
error for the court, not the City, to itself conduct this 
balancing test. 60 The circuit court correctly dismissed the declaratory 
and injunctive relief claims because these claims for relief 
emanate from UIPA.  For the same reasons explained in Part IV.A, 
SHOPO lacks a cause of action to enforce UIPA here.   
Even if that were not the case, dismissal of the 
declaratory and injunctive relief claims would still be correct 
because there is no basis in the statutory scheme to order the 
relief for which SHOPO is asking.  The circuit court rightly concluded as a matter of law that “the agency is not required to 
give a plaintiff a written/reasoned explanation for disclosure.”  
And SHOPO’s argument that the City has failed to comply with 
UIPA is premised on an incorrect construction of the statute.  
As set forth above, UIPA does not forbid disclosure, so an 
agency’s “duties” under UIPA do not include performing a 
balancing test to determine whether it must withhold the 
records.  The opposite is true; the City was required to determine whether the public interest outweighs the private interest such that UIPA mandated that it release the records.  
The circuit court rightly declined to impose a procedural burden – written opinions by an agency to all affected parties upon
compliance with its UIPA duties – that nowhere exists in Chapter
92F.
SHOPO also claims it was denied the right to appeal to
the OIP.  This contention is also meritless as SHOPO never had a 
 61 right to appeal to the OIP.   The OIP has jurisdiction pursuant 
to HRS § 92F-42(1) to review  an agency’s granting of access, and 
we see no reason why SHOPO could not have requested such review 
here.  But an agency appeal  to the OIP may only be brought under 
HRS § 92F-15.5 (2012), which, like HRS § 92F-15, allows for 
agency appeals to those who have been denied  access.32
  This 
scheme is consistent with the analysis above: since UIPA 
exemptions do not require nondisclosure, SHOPO had no right to 
seek relief from the OIP based on a grant of access.   33
32For the same reason, the OIP’s regulations in the Hawai‘ i 
Administrative Rules (HAR) §
 2-73-15, which SHOPO argues “could have” been 
referred to by the circuit court in applying the Peer News test, are 
irrelevant.  For one, SHOPO was not entitled to appeal to the OIP; for 
another, that regulation sets forth the procedures for an OIP appeal, not the 
substantive standard the agency applies.   
33HRS § 92F-15.5, “Alternative method to appeal a denial of 
access,” provides: 
(a)When an agency denies a person access to a government
record, the person may appeal the denial to the office ofinformation practices in accordance with rules adopted
pursuant to section 92F- 42(12).  A decision to appeal to
the office of information practices for review of theagency denial shall not prejudice the person’s right to
appeal to the circuit court after a decision is made by the
office of information practices.
(b)If the decision is to disclose, the office of
information practices shall notify the person and the
agency, and the agency shall make the record available.  If
the denial of access is upheld, in whole or in part, the
office of information practices shall, in writing, notifythe person of the decision, the reasons for the decision,
and the right to bring a judicial action under section 92F-
15(a).62 E. SHOPO Was Not Denied Due Process
SHOPO’s claim that it was denied due process is also 
meritless.  SHOPO argues that it was denied “an opportunity to 
conduct discovery, to review the materials submitted to the 
Court including the City’s redactions to the subject records, 
and an opportunity to provide additional materials and 
information for the Circuit Court’s consideration.”  It contends
these actions constitute a violation of their due process right 
to notice and an opportunity to be heard in a meaningful time 
and in a meaningful manner.    
SHOPO’s right to due process was not violated, even 
assuming the circuit court’s actions implicate procedural due 
process.  “Due process is not a fixed concept requiring a 
specific procedural course in every situation.”  Bank of Hawaii 
v. Kunimoto, 91 Hawai ʻi 372, 388, 984 P.2d 1198, 1214 (1999)
(citing Sandy Beach Def. Fund v. City Council of the City and  
Cnty. of Honolulu, 70 Haw. 361, 378, 773 P.2d 250, 261 (1989))  
Rather, “due process is flexible and calls for such procedural  
protections as a particular situation demands.”  Id. (citing  
Sandy Beach Def. Fund, 70 Haw. at 378, 773 P.2d at 261).  In  
civil cases, the Hawai ‘i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) set  
forth procedures for discovery and summary judgment; pursuant to  
HRCP Rule 56(f), the circuit court may deny a motion for summary  
judgment if the opposing party establishes that additional  63 
 discovery is necessary.  In U.S. Bank National Association v. 
Castro, 131 Hawaiʻ i 28, 313 P.3d 717 (2013), the defendants 
argued that the circuit court erred by not granting them 
additional time for discovery prior to ruling on a motion for 
summary judgment.  Id. at 39, 313 P.3d at 728.  The defendant’s 
memorandum in opposition to the motion for summary judgment 
mentioned a desire for additional time for discovery related to 
the “underlying transaction”; specifically, the defendants hoped 
to find an expert on “problems inherent in the securitization, 
sale and transfer of notes and mortgages, such as predatory 
lending practices[.]”  Id. (quotation marks omitted).  However, 
this court noted that the motion for summary judgment was based on an absence of a genuine issue of material fact as to U.S. 
Bank’s entitlement to a judgment for possession and writ of 
possession, and that the defendants had not explained how 
discovery related to issues with mortgage lending as a whole 
would help them to establish a genuine issue of material fact 
related to the motion for summary judgment.  Id. at 39-40, 313 
P.3d at 728-29. 
  This case resembles U.S. Bank.  SHOPO stated its 
desire for an opportunity to review the unredacted version of 
the records submitted to the court and requested the opportunity
to submit additional information for the court’s review in an 
opposition brief, but it has not explained how being allowed to  64 
 do either of these things would enable it to demonstrate that 
there is a genuine issue of material fact about whether the 
documents should be disclosed.   In short, SHOPO has not 
sufficiently explained why additional process was due here.  SHOPO – which is not the custodian of these documents - has no 
more entitlement to review the in camera records than Civil Beat 
did.  It would eviscerate the purpose of in camera review to 
allow an opposing party to see the in camera record in order to frame its argument.  Ultimately, the only evidence required for 
the circuit court to conclude that UIPA mandated disclosure as a 
matter of law was the documents themselves, and it does not 
appear that the circuit court precluded SHOPO from submitting 
additional materials in any event.  Thus, the circuit court did 
not violate SHOPO’s due process rights by not providing SHOPO 
with the opportunity to conduct discovery, review the records, 
or submit additional materials.   34
F. The CBA Is Irrelevant 
  SHOPO contends that the circuit court erred by not 
considering the fact that “the requested information was 
confidential under Article 13 of the CBA between SHOPO and [the]
City.”  This court settled in SHOPO v. SPJ that an agency may  
                     
34  To the extent the briefs address why SHOPO needed discovery, it 
argues that it needed information on how the City conducted the balancing 
test because of the lack of written explanation.  But for the reasons 
explained above, SHOPO’s claim regarding this issue was properly dismissed.   65 
 not collectively bargain away its duties under UIPA – compliance 
with the statute is “non-negotiable.”  83 Hawaiʻ i at 404–05, 927 
P.2d at 412–13.  Nothing in Peer News altered this holding.  An 
agency must comply with UIPA, and if the CBA would prevent that, 
it is unenforceable.   Id.  Here, UIPA mandates disclosure, and 
the CBA is therefore irrelevant. 35
  
  SHOPO argues that the CBA was relevant insofar as it 
could have been considered under the Peer News balancing test; 
if the information could be ascertained in a way that does not run afoul of the CBA, SHOPO relies on Justice Pollack’s 
concurrence to argue that the “[a]vailability of other means to 
obtain the information” would weigh against disclosure.  Peer 
News, 138 Hawaiʻi at 81, 376 P.3d at 29 (Pollack, J., 
concurring).  Specifically, SHOPO argues that the disclosures required by HRS § 52D-3.5 (Supp. 2020), a provision that 
requires each county police chief to submit annual reports to 
the legislature describing misconduct incidents that resulted in 
the suspension or discharge of a police officer, would suffice 
to meet Civil Beat’s request without violating the CBA.
36   
                     
35  On the other hand, when it is in the agency’s discretion whether 
to disclose records to the public – i.e., records for which an exemption 
applies, but the agency is not forbidden from disclosing (what we described 
in Part IV.A as category (2) documents) – complying with a CBA’s 
confidentiality requirement would not violate UIPA.  However, this case does not present such a scenario. 
 
36  Act 47 also amended HRS § 52D-3.5 to add the identity of the 
disciplined officer to the yearly reports.  2020 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 47, § 2 
at 365. 66 
   As explained above, under Peer News, alternative means 
of acquiring the sought information may sometimes be relevant to 
the balancing test, but a requester must not be forced to settle 
for a poor substitute or required to undertake a more burdensome 
process to ascertain the information if UIPA would otherwise 
mandate its disclosure.  Either of these consequences would be 
anathema to the transparency purpose of UIPA.   
  The legislative disclosures pursuant to HRS § 52D-3.5 
are indeed a poor substitute for the arbitration award and 
closing report.  HRS § 52D-3.5 does not require detailed 
information about the misconduct incident – just a summary of 
“the facts and the nature of the misconduct,” HRS § 52D-
3.5(b)(1) – and the yearly disclosures reveal nothing about the 
justification for a particular disciplinary action or the 
investigative process, which ultimately form the core of the 
public interest in UIPA disclosure of police misconduct records.  
Peer News, 138 Hawaiʻ i at 73-74, 376 P.3d at 21-22.   
G. The De Novo Standard of Review Is Consistent with a “Highly 
Factual” Balancing Test 
 
  SHOPO claims that “[t]he [circuit c]ourt’s UIPA 
balancing test appears to have been conducted ‘as a matter of 
law’ and not based on the ‘highly factual’ standard required by
the Hawaii Supreme Court.”  It relies on the fact that in Peer 
News, we declined to ourselves apply the balancing test “given  67 
 the limited factual record,”  138 Hawaiʻ i at 55, 376 P.3d at 3,
as well as Justice Pollack’s concurrence, which described the 
analysis set forth in OIP opinions as “highly factual[.]”  Id.at 78, 376 P.3d at 26 (Pollack, J., concurring).   
 
  The circuit court did not err by determining that the records must be disclosed “as a matter of law,” nor is this in 
tension with a “highly factual” balancing test.  HRS § 92F-15(b) 
instructs that “[i]n an action to compel disclosure” – which 
Civil Beat’s counterclaim is – “the circuit court shall hear the 
matter de novo[.]”  The balancing test prescribed by Peer News 
requires careful consideration of the facts, to be sure, and the circuit court did so here in the course of in camera review, 
precisely as Peer News instructed.  138 
Hawaiʻi at 73, 376 P.3d 
at 21 (“As contemplated by HRS § 92F–15, the court should 
conduct an in camera review of the records and determine on a 
case-by-case basis whether disclosure is warranted.” (footnote 
omitted)).  The facts required to make that determination are, 
ultimately, the contents of the records.  The outcome of the 
test based on in camera review – the determination of whether 
disclosure is required – is a question of law. 
H. The Circuit Court’s Acknowledgment that the Process Is 
“Time-Consuming” Did Not Reflect a Lack of Careful Review 
 
  SHOPO faults the circuit court for noting that the 
process of reviewing the records in camera was “time-consuming.”   68 
 In context, the circuit court’s “time-consuming” comment was 
merely an acknowledgement of the difficulty in sifting through 
records to weigh the public interest against the privacy 
interest.   Noting this challenge is a far cry from “refusing to 
conduct a thorough and complete UIPA balancing test,” as SHOPO alleges.  The circuit court’s order reflects thoughtful 
consideration of the interests on either side of the Peer News 
balancing test, and as explained above, the court came to the correct conclusion.  The records are subject to disclosure. 37
I. The Circuit Court Did Not Err by Concluding that HRS  
§ 92F-12(a)(2) Requires Disclosure of the Arbitration Award 
 
  The circuit court determined that “there is a separate 
and independent ground to release the arbitration award – the 
requirement to disclose adjudicative orders pursuant to HRS § 92F-12(a)(2).”  That statute requires disclosure of “[f]inal 
opinions, including concurring and dissenting opinions, as well 
as orders made in the adjudication of cases[.]”  HRS § 92F-
12(a)(2).  SHOPO does not challenge whether the arbitration 
award falls into that category; rather, it argues that a 
                     
37  The full paragraph from the April 29, 2019 order reads:  
 
 The Court finds that the HPD/City’ s disclosure of the 
proposed redacted closing report is not clearly 
unwarranted.  HPD is plainly trying to be transparent 
regarding the disciplinary investigation of the officer who was discharged and then reinstated, while balancing the 
privacy interests of everyone else involved.  It is a fine 
line, and time- consuming, to weigh these issues page by 
page. 
 69 
 disclosure under HRS § 92F-12(a)(2) is not exempt from the 
exceptions of HRS § 92F-13, and the “[c]ircuit [c]ourt was wrong 
to conclude that it [was].” 
 
  SHOPO is mistaken; the circuit court did not conclude that the arbitration award was exempt from HRS § 92F-13.  The 
circuit court’s order stated: “Although the arbitration award, 
as a final adjudication award, is a mandatory disclosure under 
section 92F-12(a)(2), it is still subject to the privacy 
interests per section 92F-13(1).”  (Emphasis added.)  
J.  This Record Provides No Basis to Prohibit Disclosure of the 
Investigative Report 
 
  SHOPO is correct that the circuit court’s order does 
not prohibit the City from releasing the full investigative 
report.  The order also does not require it, and Civil Beat has not appealed that component of the court’s decision.  SHOPO’s 
request that we remand for the circuit court to enjoin the 
report’s disclosure is meritless because SHOPO does not have a 
cause of action to compel an agency to withhold a record under 
UIPA for the reasons explained in Part IV.A.  Nor does SHOPO 
contend on appeal that the investigative report violates the 
constitutional privacy right.  HRAP Rule 28 (“Points not argued may be deemed waived.”).  There is therefore no basis on this 
record to order the circuit court to enjoin the disclosure of 
the investigative report.  70 
 V. CONCLUSION 
 
 For the foregoing reasons, the circuit court erred by 
applying UIPA standards to SHOPO’s complaint when SHOPO lacked a 
cause of action to sue under UIPA, but it nonetheless correctly 
resolved Civil Beat’s counterclaim by application of the Peer 
News test and correctly concluded that UIPA mandated the 
disclosure of the redacted arbitration award and closing report.  
We accordingly (1) affirm the August 13, 2018 Order; (2) affirm the September 28, 2018 Order, except that to the extent that it 
conflates the constitutional and statutory balancing tests, that 
order is vacated; (3) vacate the January 3, Order; and (4)  
affirm the April 29, 2019 Order.  The circuit court’s May 24, 
2019 final judgment is affirmed. 
Keani Alapa (Vladimir 
Devens with him on the
briefs) for appellant    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
  /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
  /s/ Michael D. Wilson   /s/ Peter T. Cahill 
 
 
 
Robert Brian Black   
(Lisa Emily Engebretsen 
with him on the briefs) for cross-appellant  
 
  
    
Duane W. H. Pang 
(Paul S. Aoki and Molly A.Stebbins with him on the 
briefs) for appellee  
 