 
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
 LEAGUE OF WOMEN VOTERS OF HONOLULU and COMMON CAUSE, 
Plaintiffs -Appellants, 
  
vs. 
  
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI,  
Defendant- Appellee.  
 
 
SCAP-19-0000372 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-19-0000372; CASE NO. 1CC18- 1-001376) 
 
NOVEMBER 4, 2021 
 
NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND WILSON JJ., 
AND RECKTENWALD, C.J., DISSENTING,  WITH WHOM 
CIRCUIT JUDGE KAWAMURA, IN PLACE OF POLLACK, J. , RECUSED, JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J. 1
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Plaintiffs- Appellants  League of Women Voters of 
Honolulu and Common Cause (collectively,  “Plaintiffs ”) appeal 
                                                 
1  Associate Justice Richard W. Pollack retired on June 30, 2020.  Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-19-0000372
04-NOV-2021
07:53 AM
Dkt. 55 OP 
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
2 from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit’s (circuit court) 
final judgment, which granted Defendant-Appellee the State of 
Hawaiʻi’s (the State) motion for summary judgment.  
In the underlying proceeding,  Plaintiffs filed a 
complaint in the circuit court seeking a declaratory order that 
a recently enacted bill was adopted through an unconstitutional 
process and therefore is void as unconstitutional.  Plaintiffs 
challenged the adoption of a law re quiring hurricane shelter 
space in new public schools on the grounds that it violated 
article III, section 15 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution
 because the 
bill did not receive three readings in each house of the Hawai ʻi 
State Legislature (the Legislature) before it was passed and 
signed into law.  The bill that was signed into law was first 
introduced in the Senate as “A Bill for an Act Relating to 
Public Safety” and required annual reporting of recidivism 
statistics by the State.  The House of Representat ives (“the 
House”) amended the bill to require hurricane shelter space in 
new State buildings and deleted all reference to recidivism 
reporting.  The hurricane shelter version of the bill received 
one reading in the Senate before it passed and eventually b ecame 
law. 
The State filed a motion for summary judgment, arguing 
that the Legislature’s own rules of procedure permit a bill to  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
3 be read only by number and title and do not require the three 
readings to start again after a bill is amended, even if the 
bill’s contents are entirely deleted and a substituted bill is 
introduced.  Plaintiffs also filed a motion for summary 
judgment.  The circuit court granted the State’s motion for 
summary judgment and denied Plaintiffs’ cross -motion, holding 
that the process for enacting the law complied with the 
Legislature’s adopted rules of procedure, which do not require 
the three readings to start again in each legislative chamber 
after a bill is amended or replaced.   
On appeal, Plaintiffs again argue that the process for 
adopting the bill violated section 15 because, after the House 
made non-germane amendments to the recidivism reporting bill, 
the Senate did not hold the required three readings to consider 
the hurricane shelter bill.  
We agree.  The plain language of 
section 15 states that “ No bill shall become law unless it shall 
pass three readings in each house on separate days.”   Haw. 
Const. art. III, § 15.  Here, the bill received three readings 
in each house by title and number, but the substance of the bill 
changed when the House introduced the hurricane shelter 
substitution, which was unrelated to the original recidivism 
reporting bill.   
We conclude that article III
, section 15 of the Hawai ʻi  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
4 Constitution requires  that the three readings begin anew after a
non-germane amendment changes the purpose of a bill so that it 
is no longer related to the original bill as introduced.    
For the reasons stated herein, we determine that 
Senate Bill 2858, Senate Draft 2, House Draft 1, Conference 
Draft 1, 2018 Haw. Sess. L. Act 84  at 432 (“Act 84” or 
“S.B. 2858”) violated this  requirement.  Accordingly, we vacate
the circuit court’ s orders and judgment granting the State’s 
motion for summary judgment and denying Plaintiffs’ motion for 
summary judgment and remand to the circuit court with 
instructions to grant Plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment.  
II.  BACKGROUND  
A. Act 84  
Senate Bill No. 2858, “A Bill for an Act Relating to 
Public Safety,” was introduced in the Senate on January  24, 
2018.  As originally introduced,  S.B. 2858 would have added new 
sections to Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 353, to 
require the State Department of Public Safety (DPS) to prepare 
and submit an annual report to the Legislature that tracked the 
rehabilitation and re-entry performance indicators for 
individuals released from prison (“recidivism reporting bill”).  
With minor amendments
, the recidivism reporting bill passed three
readings in the Senate.  
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
5 On March 8, 2018, after crossover  from the Senate, the 
recidivism reporting bill passed its first reading in the House.  2
On March 15, 2018, the House Committee on Public 
Safety held a hearing on the recidivism reporting bill and 
received testimony from interested parties, including the DPS , 
the Office of Hawaiian Affairs, the Ho ʻomanapono Political Action
Committee, the Hawai ʻi Justice Coalition, the Community Alliance
on Prisons, Young Progressives Demanding Action, the ACLU of 
Hawaiʻi, and private citizens.   
 
Despite the fact that the interested parties largely 
supported the recidivism bill, the House Committee on Public 
Safety recommended amending S.B. 2858 “by deleting its contents 
and inserting the substantive provisions of House Bill No. 2452, 
H.D. 1,” (“H.B. 2452”) which would require that State buildings 
constructed after July 1, 2018 include hurricane shelter space 
(“hurricane shelter bill”).   H.R. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1255-18,3  
                                                 
2 “Crossover” occurs when a  bill is voted on three times in the 
originating legislative chamber and crosses over to the other chamber for 
consideration.  Legislative Reference Bureau, A Bill’s Journey, 
https://lrb.hawaii.gov/par/overview- of-the-legislative -process/a- bills-
journey. 
 
3 The House Committee on Public Safety offered no explanation as to why 
it recommended gutting the contents of the recidivism reporting bill and 
replacing it with the hurricane shelter bill and merely st ated:  “ Your 
Committee has amended this measure by deleting its  contents and inserting the
substantive provisions of House Bill  No. 2452, H.D. 1, which was heard by 
your Committee earlier this  session.”  H.R. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1255 -18, 
at 2.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
6 at 2 (2018).  On March 21, 2018, the House amended S.B. 2858 
according to the 
committee’s recommendation and S.B. 2858 — as
the hurricane shelter bill — passed its second reading in the 
House.  
On March 28, 2018, the House Committee on Finance held
a hearing on the hurricane shelter bill and accepted public 
testimony.  The Office of Hawaiian Affairs and Young 
Progressives Demanding Action offered testimony asking 
legislators to revert the bill to its original subject as the 
recidivism reporting bill.  While the House Committee on Finance
noted the objections of interested parties to the substituted 
bill, it nevertheless recommended passing the hurricane shelter 
bill unamended.  On April 6, 2018, S.B. 2858 passed its third 
reading in the House.  4 
 
On April 10, 2018,  S.B. 2858 was transmitted to the 
Senate.  The Senate disagreed with the House amendments and a 
conference committee of House and Senate members met to confer.   
                                                 
4 The Office of Hawaiian Affairs commented, inter alia, that hurricane 
preparedness is a “laudable goal,” but that the hurricane shelter draft of 
S.B. 2858 “would abandon the critically important purpose of previous drafts
to require the Department of Public Safety [DPS] to collect, aggregate, and 
publicly report data relating to key enumerated performance indicators [,]” 
which was critical to reforming the criminal justice system.   
 
 Young Progressives Demanding Action offered similar comments, stating 
that the group does “not oppose the construction of hurricane shelters ,” but 
was “nevertheless disappointed that the House  Public Safety committee decided
to gut an important bill that would have required the 
[DPS] to report on 
program outcomes.”    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
7 The conference committee recommended that S.B. 2858 be amended 
to delete the hurricane shelter space requirement and instead 
provide that the State must consider hurricane resistant 
criteria when designing and constructing new public schools .  
The Senate adopted the conference committee’s recommendation and
S.B. 2858 passed final reading in both chambers on May 1, 2018. 
S.B. 2858
 was signed by the Governor as Act 84 and became law on
June 29, 2018.
  
 
 
B. Proceedings in the Circuit Court  
On September 5, 2018, Plaintiffs filed a complaint in
the circuit court challenging the enactment of Act 84 as 
unconstitutional.  The complaint alleged that: (1) the title of
S.B. 2858 “Relating to Public Safety” does not satisfy the 
subject-in-title requirement of article III, section 14 of the 
Hawaiʻi
 Constitution (“section 14”) ; and (2) “the hurricane 
shelter version of S.B. 2858” did not “have the required three 
readings in the Senate[,]” in violation of  article III, section
15 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution (“section 15”) .  Plaintiffs 
sought a declaratory order that Act 84 was adopted through an 65 
 
 
                                                 
5 Section 14 provides in  relevant part that “[e] ach law shall embrace but
one subject, which shall be expressed in its title. ”  Haw. Const. art. III, 
§ 14.  
 
6 Section 15 provides in relevant part that “[n] o bill shall become law
unless it shall pass three readings in each house on separate days.”  Haw. 
Const. art. III, § 15.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
8 unconstitutional process and therefore is void as
unconstitutional.  
On October 9, 2018, the State filed a motion for 
summary judgment, arguing that Act 84 is constitutional and that
Plaintiffs’ claims presented a nonjusticiable political 
question.  
On October 25, 2018, Plaintiffs filed a cross- motion
for summary judgment.  The Legislature subsequently moved for 
and was granted leave to appear as amicus curiae in support of
the State’s motion for summary judgment.   
 
On January 24, 2019, the circuit court heard the 
cross-motions.  The circuit court orally granted the State’s 
motion for summary judgment and denied Plaintiffs
’ cross-motion,
holding that the process for adopting Act 84 complied with the 
circuit court’s interpretation of the three readings an d 
subject-in-title requirements of the Hawai ʻi Constitution.   The 
circuit court stated that its interpretation of the three 
readings requirement hinged on the L egislature’s own rule of 
procedure:  
[W]hat sways the Court on [the issue of three readings] is 
the fact that the Legislature adopted rules of procedure  
and, in the course of doing that, adopted as part of its 
procedures the Mason’s Manual.  And it is that Mason’s 
Manual provision, Section 722, and I also did rely on 
Section 617 that talks about the nature of the substituted 
bill to arrive at the conclusion that the procedure of the 
Legislature is such that if a replace and substituted bill 
is adopted, then under Section 722, the Legislature is not  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
9 required to conduct three more readings because they have
already had in each house the three readings .  
And that suffices to meet the constitutional mandate 
of three readings in each house one day apart so the Court 
is not able to find that there was any violation of the 
Constitution with respect to the three readings.  
 
(Emphasis added.)  
On April 3,  2019, the circuit court entered written
orders granting summary judgment in favor of the State and 
denying Plaintiffs ’ cross- motion.  As pertinent here, the 
circuit court made the following conclusions of law:   
1.  There was no violation of the Hawaiʻi Constitution
with respect to the three readings.  Based on sections 617 
and 722 of Mason’s Manual of Legislative Procedure  (2010 
rev. ed.), the procedure of the legislature is such that if
a replaced and substituted bill is adopted, then the 
legislature is not required to conduct three more readings 
because they have already had the three readings in each 
House and that suffices to meet the requirements of the 
constitutional mandate.   
 
 
. . . . 
 
3.  The court has no issue regarding Plaintiffs’ 
standing.  They are organizations that are dedicated to 
ensure integrity in the legislative process, and that is
what this case is about.   
 
4.  Defendant State of Hawaii’s separation of powers
argument is rejected.  The court has the power to 
adjudicate the constitutional validity of statutory 
enactments.   
 
Thus, the circuit court concluded that Act 84 was constitutional
and that the State was entitled to judgment as a matter of law 
and entered final judgment in favor of the State.   
C. ICA Proceedings and Subsequent Transfer  
On May 2, 2019, Plaintiffs  timely appealed the circuit
court’s decision to the ICA.  In their opening brief, Plaintiffs 
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
10 raised two points of error:  
1. Whether the three readings requirement — article III, 
section 15 — of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution requires that 
each chamber of the Legislature hold three new 
readings of proposed legislation after the 
Legislature removes a bill’s content and replaces it 
with a proposal that is not germane to the intent of 
the original bill.  
 
. . . . 
 
2. Whether legislation broadly titled as “relating to 
public safety” reasonably apprises the public of the 
interests that are or may be affected by the statute 
and otherwise complies with the subject in title 
requirement — article III, section 14 — of the Hawaiʻ i
Constitution.   
 
  After  the State filed its answering brief,  Plaintiffs
filed an application for transfer, which this court granted on 
December 18, 2019.  
  The Legislature submitted  an amicus brief echoing the
State’s arguments.  The Tax Foundation of Hawai ʻi and the 
Grassroot Institute of Hawai ʻi filed amicus briefs in support of
Plaintiffs.  
 
II.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW  
A. Summary Judgment  
 
  “An order granting summary judgment is reviewed de 
novo, using the same standard as that applied by the circuit 
court: whether there were any genuine issues of material fact 
and whether the movant was entitled to judgment as a matter of 
law.”  Blair v. Harris , 98 Hawai ʻi 176, 178, 45 P.3d 798, 800 
(2002).  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
11 B. Constitutional  Interpretation   
 “Issues of constitutional interpretation present 
questions of law that are reviewed de novo. ”  [Blair, 98
Hawaiʻi at 178, 45 P.3d at 800] (citation omitted).  In 
construing the constitution, this court observes the 
following basic principles:   
 
Because constitutions derive their power and 
authority from the people who draft and adopt them, 
we have long recognized that the Hawaiʻi Constitution 
must be construed with due regard to the intent of 
the framers and the people adopting it, and the 
fundamental principle in interpreting a  
constitutional provision is to give effect to that 
intent.  This intent is to be found in the instrument
itself.  
 
[T]he general rule is that, if the words used in a 
constitutional provision are clear and unambiguous,  
they are to be construed as they are written.   In 
this regard, the settled rule is that in the 
construction of a constitutional provision the words 
are presumed to be used in their natural sense unless
the context furnishes some ground to control, 
qualify, or enlarge them.  
 
Moreover, a constitutional provision must be 
construed in connection with other provisions of the
instrument, and also in the light of the  
circumstances under which it was adopted and the 
history which preceded it.   
 
Hanabusa v. Lingle, 105 Hawaiʻ i 28, 31–32, 93 P.3d 670, 
673-74 (2004) (brackets in original) (quoting [Blair, 98
Hawaiʻi at 178–79, 45 P.3d at 800–01]). 
  
Sierra Club v. Dep ’t of Transp., 120 Hawai ʻi 181, 196, 202 P.3d 
1226, 1241 (2009). 
III.  DISCUSSION  
Plaintiffs ask this court to decide whether section 15
requires the three readings to begin anew after a non- germane 
amendment fundamentally changes the purpose of a bill.  
Plaintiffs argue that the three readings requirement must be   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
12 interpreted in light of its purpose, which is to provide 
opportunity for a full and informed debate, prevent hasty and 
ill-considered legislation, and provide notice of proposed 
legislation to allow for meaningful participation by the public
in the legislative process.   
The State and Legislature argue that the plain 
language of section 15 does not require the three readings to 
begin anew after an amendment and that this court should not 
read in an intent where there is none.  The State maintains  that
the Legislature’s adopted rules of procedure permit a bill
 to be
read by its identifying title only, eliminating the need for 
readings to begin anew when a bill is amended.   
 
We conclude that Act 84 is invalid because it was not
enacted in conformance with the requirements set forth in the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution.  Namely, Act 84 did not receive three 
readings in each house of the Legislature after
 its contents 
were entirely gutted and replaced with the hurricane shelter 
bill.  7 
A. Plaintiffs h ave standing to challenge Act 84  
The State contends that Plaintiffs lack standing  
                                                 
7 Because it is clear that Act 84’s enactment did not comport with 
section 15’s three readings requirements and is invalid, we do not reach the 
issue of whether Act 84’s title “Relating to Public Safety” sati sfies section
14’s subject- in-title requirement.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
13 because they do not have a concrete interest in challenging 
the constitutionality of Act 84’s substance , but instead seek to
bring a general challenge to the Legislature’s practice of 
“gut[ting] and replac[ing]”  bills during the legislative 
process.8
 9 
We begin with the foundational premise that our 
democratic system of self-governance requires courts to limit 
judicial intervention “ to those questions capable of judicial 
resolution and presented in an adversary context.”   Life of the
Land v. Land Use Comm ’n, 63 Haw. 166, 172, 623 P.2d 431, 438 
(1981) (quoting Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd. v. Cole, 59 
Haw. 503, 510, 584 P.2d 107, 111 (1978)).   “[J]udicial 
intervention in a dispute is normally contingent upon the 
presence of a ‘justiciable ’ controversy. ”  Id. at 172, 623 P.2d
at 438.  A controversy is not justiciable unless “t he party 
seeking a forum . . . has ‘alleged such a personal stake in the 
 
 
                                                 
8 “Gut and replace” refers to the legislative practice of removing a 
bill’s original content and replacing it with a different topic that is 
unrelated to the original bill.  
 
9 We note that the State did not file a cross -appeal to challenge the 
circuit court’s decision that Plaintiffs have standing in this case.  
Generally, an appellee who fails to file a cross -appeal cannot raise points 
of error.  First Ins. Co. v. A&B Properties, 126 Hawaiʻi 406, 413 n.12, 271 
P.3d 1165, 1172 n.12 (2012) .  However, because standing is a prudential 
consideration related to concerns of judicial self -governance, “Hawai ʻi state
courts may consider standing even when not raised by the parties[.]”  Tax 
Found. of Hawai ʻi v. State, 144 Hawaiʻ i 175, 192, 439 P.3d 127, 144 
(2019),
 reconsideration denied , No. SCAP- 16-0000462, 2019 WL 1858284 (Haw. 
Apr. 25, 2019).   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
14 outcome of the controversy’ as to warrant his invocation 
of . . . (the court ’s) jurisdiction and to justify exercise of 
the court’s remedial powers on his behalf.”  Id. at 172, 623 
P.2d at 438 (quoting Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490, 498-99 
(1975).  “
[T]he issue of standing is reviewed de novo on 
appeal.”  Tax Found., 144 Hawai
ʻi at 185 , 439 P.3d at 137 
(quoting Mottl v. Miyahira, 95 Hawaiʻ i 381, 388, 23 P.3d 716, 723
(2001) (internal citation omitted)).    
  Plaintiffs filed suit seeking a declaration that the 
process for adopting Act 84 violated the Hawai ʻi Constitution.  
Accordingly, Plaintiffs ’ suit for declaratory relief is governed
by HRS § 632-1 (2016).   See Ching v. Case, 145 Hawaiʻ i 148, 173
n.41, 449 P.3d 1146, 1171 n.41 (2019)) (observing that “suits 
seeking retrospective declaratory relief based on an alleged 
constitutional violation that has already occurred are governed 10 
 
                                                 
10 HRS § 632-1 provides  in relevant part:  
 
 (b) Relief by declaratory judgment may be granted in 
civil cases . . . where the court is satisfied that 
antagonistic claims are present between the parties 
involved which indicate imminent and inevitable litigation, 
or where in any such case the court is satisfied that a 
party asserts a legal relation, status, right, or  privilege 
in which the party has a concrete interest and that there 
is a challenge or denial of the asserted relation, status, 
right, or privilege by an adversary party who also has or 
asserts a concrete interest therein, and the court is 
satisfied also that a declaratory judgment will serve to 
terminate the uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the 
proceeding.  
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
15 by HRS § 632-1”).  In Tax Found. , this court held that a party 
seeking declaratory relief under HRS § 632-1 need not satisfy 
the common law three- part injury -in-fact test to have standing.
144 Hawaiʻ i at 189, 439 P.3d at 141.  Instead, we adopted the 
following test for HRS § 632- 1 standing: 11  
[A] party has standing to seek declaratory relief in a 
civil case brought pursuant to HRS § 632-1 (1) where 
antagonistic claims exist between the parties (a)  that 
indicate imminent and inevitable litigation, or (b)  where 
the party seeking declaratory relief has a concrete 
interest in a legal relation, status, right, or privilege 
that is challenged or denied by the other party, who has or
asserts a concrete interest in the same legal relation, 
status, right, or privilege; and (2) a declaratory judgment
will serve to terminate the uncertainty or controversy 
giving rise to the proceeding.   
 
 
Id. at 202, 439 P.3d at 154.  Applying this test, we found that
the plaintiff in Tax Found. had HRS § 632-1  standing “based on 
its historical purpose as a government financial accountability
watchdog.”  Id. at 202-03 , 439 P.3d at 1 54-55.    
 
  Here, t he circuit court held that Plaintiffs  had 
standing to challenge Act 84 as “ organizations that are 
dedicated to ensur[ing] integrity in the legislative process,
and that is what this case is about. ”  Applying the standing  
                                                 
11 As stated in Tax Found. , 
 
the common law three -part “injury in fact ” test for 
standing . . .  requires a showing that (1) the plaintiff 
has suffered an actual or threatened injury as a result of 
the defendant ’s conduct, (2) the injury is fairly traceable
to the defendant's actions, and (3) a favorable decision 
would likely provide relief for the plaintiff's injury.    
 
144 Hawaiʻ i at 188, 439 P.3d at 140.  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
16 requirements delineated in Tax Found. to the facts of this case,
we hold that Plaintiffs have HRS § 632
-1 standing because: 
(1) antagonistic claims exist between Plaintiffs and the State 
with respect to whether the process used to adopt Act 84 
violated the Hawai ʻi
 Constitution  and Plaintiffs  have a concrete
interest in ensuring that the Legislature adheres  to 
constitutionally-mandated procedures when enacting new 
legislation, which is an alleged right challenged or denied by 
the State;  and (2) “a declaratory judgment will serve to 
terminate the . . . controversy giving rise to the proceeding. ” 
See id. at 202, 439 P.3d at 154.  Accordingly, the circuit court
did not err in finding that Plaintiffs have standing to 
challenge the constitutionality of Act 84. 12 
 
 
 
  
                                                 
12 The State cites no authority for its claim that Plaintiffs’ interest in 
ensuring that the Legislature comply with constitutionally -mandated 
procedures when enacting new laws is not sufficiently concrete to warrant 
HRS § 632-1 standing.  Plaintiffs are community  groups who are interested in 
increasing public participation in government, have a documented interest in 
legislative procedure and  governance, and have consistently communicated 
their concerns about the Legislature ’s compliance with constitutionally -
mandated procedures for enacting legislation.  
 The plain language of HRS § 632 -1(b) provides that a court may grant a 
declaratory judgment where antagonistic claims exist between the parties, 
specifically where “a party asserts a legal relation, status, right, or 
privilege in which the party has a concrete interest and that there is a 
challenge or denial of the asserted relation, status, right, or privilege by 
an adversary party.”  Consequently, Plaintiffs need not disagree with the 
subject of Act 84 in order to assert their right to be governed by laws which
have complied with constitutionally -mandated procedures for enacting 
legislation —  a right which the Legislature allegedly denied.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
17 B. Whether the Legislature complied with constitutional 
limitations  on the legislative process is justiciable  
 
Both the State and the Legislature argue that this 
case raises nonjusticiable political questions.  The State 
concedes that whether the process of enacting Act 84 complied 
with constitutional requirements for the legislative process is 
justiciable, but contends that this court may not comment on the
legislative practice of “gut and replace” or provide any 
guideline for what constitutes a permissibly germane amendment 
without violating the separation of powers.    
In its amicus brief, the Legislature argues that if 
this court invalidates Act 84, it will intrude upon the 
Legislature’s constitutional mandate to “determine the rules of 
its own proceedings[.]”  Haw. Const. art.  III, § 12 
(“section 12”).   The Legislature maintains that this court may 
look no further than determining whether the Legislature 
followed its own procedural rules to ascertain whether the three
readings requirement is satisfied
 without violating the 
separation of powers doctrine.   See Hussey v. Say, 139 Hawai ʻi 
181, 188-89, 384 P.3d 1282, 1289-90 (2016) (holding that whether
a legislator is qualified to hold office is nonjusticiable 13
 
 
                                                 
13 Section 12 provides in relevant part: “ Each house shall choose its own
officers, determine the rules of its proceedings and keep a journal. ”  Haw. 
Const. art. III, § 12.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
18 because section 12 grants the Legislature the exclusive 
authority to judge the qualifications of its members) .  The 
Legislature insists that there is no judicially discoverable or
manageable standard, aside from the Legislature’s own rules of 
procedure, for this court to decide whether the three readings 
requirement was satisfied and th erefore the question is 
nonjusticiable.  
As this court ha s previously noted,  
The separation of powers doctrine is embodied in the 
Guarantee Clause, article IV, section 4 of the United 
States Constitution, which reads:  
 
The United States shall guarantee to every State in 
this Union a Republican Form of Government, and shall
protect each of them against Invasion; and on 
Application of the Legislature, or of the Executive 
(when the Legislature cannot be convened) against 
domestic Violence.   
 
Questions arising under the Guarantee Clause are 
nonjusticiable because they are “political, not judicial,
in character, and thus are for the consideration of the 
Congress and not the courts. ”  Ohio v. Akron Metro. Park 
Dist. for Summit County, 281 U.S. 74, 79 -80 (1930) 
(citations omitted).   
 
Taomae v. Lingle, 108 Hawai ʻi 245, 256 –57, 118 P.3d 1188, 
1199-1200 (2005) .  Like the federal government, ours is a 
tripartite government in which the sovereign power is equally
divided among the branches.  Trustees of Office of Hawaiian 
Affairs v. Yamasaki, 69 Haw. 154, 17 0-71, 737 P.2d 446 , 456 
(1987).    
“The [political question]  doctrine is the result of   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
19 the balance courts must strike in preserving separation of 
powers yet providing a check upon the other two branches of 
government.”  Nelson v. Hawaiian Homes Comm ’n, 127 Hawai ʻi 185, 
194, 277 P.3d 279, 288 (2012).   Arguably, the political question 
doctrine is “the most amorphous aspect of justiciability.”  Id. 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted).  As the Supreme 
Court of the United States observed,  
Deciding whether a matter has in any measure been committed
by the Constitution to another branch of government, or 
whether the action of that branch exceeds whatever 
authority has been committed, is itself a delicate exercise
in constitutional interpretation, and is a responsibility 
of [the] Court as ultimate interpreter of the Constitution. 
 
 
   
Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. 186, 211 (1962).  P olitical questions
are presented in specific formulations:    
Prominent on the surface of any case held to involve a 
political question is found a textually demonstrable 
constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate 
political department; or a lack of judicially discoverable 
and manageable standards for resolving it; or the 
impossibility of deciding without an initial policy 
determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion;
or the impossibility of a court ’s undertaking independent 
resolution without expressing lack of the respect due 
coordinate branches of government; or an unusual need for 
unquestioning adherence to a political decision already 
made; or the potentiality of embarrassment from 
multifarious pronouncements by various departments on one 
question.  
  
 Unless one of these formulations is inextricable from
the case at bar, there should be no dismissal for non -
justiciability  on the ground of a political question’ s 
presence.  
 
Id. at 217 (emphasis added).  
Despite the Legislature’s protestations, the clai m 
that this case presents a nonjusticiable political question is   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
20 groundless.  This court has consistently rejected the argument 
that alleged violations of constitutional mandates concerning 
the legislative process are nonjusticiable political questions.  
See, e.g., Taomae, 108 Hawai ʻi at 256-57, 118 P.3d at 1199-1200 
(addressing whether a constitutional amendment satisfied the 
constitutional three readings requirement
); Schwab, 58 Haw. 25, 
30-39, 564 P.2d 135,
 139-44 (1977) (addressing whether a bill 
satisfied the constitutional three readings and subject- in-title 
requirements).  At bottom, it is the responsibility of this 
court to interpret the Hawai ʻi Constitution.  See  Marbury v. 
Madison, 5 U.S. 137, 177 (1803) (“[A] n act of the legislature, 
repugnant to the constitution, is void. . . .  It is 
emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to 
say what the law is. ”); Sierra Club , 120 Hawai ʻi at 196, 202 P.3d 
at 1241 (noting that “ judicial review of legislative enactments 
is appropriate” because “[o] ur ultimate 
authority is the 
Constitution; and the courts, not the legislature, are the 
ultimate interpreters of the Constitution. ”) (internal quotation 
marks and citations omitted). 
While the Legislature is empowered by section 12 to 
enact its own rules of procedure, that power is not without 
limits.  The Legislature’s “power shall extend to all rightful
subjects of legislation not inconsistent with this   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
21 constitution[.]”  Haw. Const. art. III , § 1 (emphasis added).  
Put simply, the Legislature’s rules of procedure do not trump 
constitutional provisions.   Instead, constitutional provisions 
control over any provision of adopted rules.  See  Nat’l 
Conference of State Legislatures, Mason’s Manual  of Legislative
Procedure (2010 ed.) §§ 4, 6, 10, and 12) (“Mason’s Manual”).  
Accord Norman J. Singer & Shambie Singer, 1 Sutherland on 
Statutes and Statutory Construction
 § 7:4 (7th ed. 2014) 
(“Sutherland”) (“The constitution empowers each house to 
determine its rules of proceedings.  It may not by its rules 
ignore constitutional restraints[.]” (quoting United States v. 
Ballin, 144 U.S. 1, 5 (1892)).  Accepting the Legislature’s 
contrary proposition would violate the separation of powers 
doctrine, effectively leaving the Legislature’s power 14 
 
                                                 
14 Mason’s Manual, which the Legislature adopted , provides in relevant
part:  
 
§ 4 ¶ 4.  [W]here the constitution requires three readings
of bills, this provision controls over any provision  of 
adopted rules, statutes, adopted manual or parliamentary 
law.   
 
§ 6 ¶ 2.  A constitutional provision regulating procedure
controls over all other rules of  procedure.   
 
§ 10 ¶ 3.  The power of each house of a state legislature 
to make its own rules  is subordinate to the rules contained
in the constitution.   
 
§ 12 ¶ 1.  A legislative body cannot make a rule that 
evades or avoids the effect of a rule prescribed by the  
constitution governing it, and  it cannot do by indirection
what it cannot directly do.   
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
22 unchecked.15  
While Section 12 empowers the Legislature to adopt its 
own rules of procedure, it contains  no “textually demonstrable 
constitutional commitment” to the Legislature to interpret other 
constitutional mandates, such that determining whether Act 84 
complied with those mandates is a nonjusticiable political 
question.  See Baker, 369 U.S. at 217 (noting that where there 
is “a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the 
issue to a coordinate political department [,]” the case raises a 
political question).  The Legislature’s reliance on Hussey, 139 
Hawaiʻi at 188-89
, 384 P.3d at 1289 -90, is misplaced because that
case concerned a challenge to a state legislator ’s 
qualifications for office and section 12 provides that “‘[e] ach 
house shall be the judge of the . . . qualifications of its own 
members.’”  However, sections 14 and 15 contain no similar 
language vesting the Legislature with the responsibility to  
judge its own compliance with the constitutional requirements  
                                                 
15 As we observed in Morita v. Gorak:  
 
 Under longstanding  canons of statutory construction, 
“if one construction would make it possible for a  branch of 
government substantially to enhance its power in relation 
to another, while  the opposite construction would not have 
such an effect, the principle of checks and  balances would 
be better served by a choice of the latter interpretation. ” 
 
145 Hawaiʻ i 385, 395, 453 P.3d 205, 215 (2019)  (quoting Staebler v. Carter, 
464 F.Supp. 585, 599- 600 (D.D.C. 1979) ).  
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
23 for the legislative process.    
Accordingly, we conclude that this court may determine
whether the process used to enact Act 84 complied with the 
constitutional mandates concerning the legislative process 
without the violating separation of powers doctrine.  16 
C. The process used to enact Act 84 d id not comply with
section 15   
 
Having determined that Plaintiffs have standing to 
bring suit and that this court can decide the issue without 
violating the separation of powers doctrine, we 
now consider the
merits of Plaintiffs ’ challenge .    
“No bill shall become law unless it shall pass three 
readings in each house on separate days.”  Haw. Const. art. III,
§ 15.  Constitutional provisions regarding the enactment of 
legislation are “mandatory and a violation thereof would render  
                                                 
16 Other jurisdictions have similarly rejected the claim that a court 
cannot review the constitutionality of a law’s enactment without violating 
the separation of powers.  See, e.g., Magee v. Boyd, 175 So.3d 79, 106 (Ala. 
2015) (holding that whether the legislature satisfied constitutionally 
mandated procedural requirements for enacting new laws is justiciable); 
Bevin v. Commonwealth ex rel. Beshear, 563 S.W.3d 74, 86 (Ky. 2018)  (“We are 
satisfied that judicial review of the meaning of any provision of the 
Kentucky Constitution is well within the separate powers assigned the 
judicial branch and that the question before us is not a non -justiciable 
political question.”); Pennsylvania Sch. Boards Ass ’n, Inc. v. Commonwealth 
Ass’n of Sch. Adm’ rs, Teamsters Local 502, 805 A.2d 476, 48 5 (Pa. 2002) 
(holding that whether a bill complied with the state constitution’s three 
readings requirement was justiciable); Brewer v. Burns, 213 P.3d 671, 675 
(Ariz. 2009) (rejecting the argument that a constitutional provision 
requiring the legislature to determine its own rules of procedure limited the
court’s ability to determine whether the legislature complied with other 
constitutional mandates concerning the legislative process).   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
24 an enactment nugatory. ”  Schwab, 58 Haw. at 31, 564 P.2d at 139.
Plaintiffs argue that Act 84 did not satisfy the three readings 
requirement because the hurricane shelter version of S.B. 2858 
only received one reading in the Senate before it was signed 
into law.   
We begin with the presumption that every enactment of 
the Legislature was adopted in accordance with the Constitution.
See id. at 31, 564 P.2d at 139.
  Plaintiffs, as challengers of 
Act 84, bear the 
“burden of showing unconstitutionality beyond a
reasonable doubt.”   See id.  Thus, Act 84 will not be 
invalidated unless the Plaintiffs demonstrate that it was 
enacted in violation of section 15’s three -readings requirement 
and the violation is “ plain, clear, manifest, and unmistakable. ”
See id.    
 
  
When interpreting constitutional provisions,   
the general rule is that, if the words used in a 
constitutional provision are clear and unambiguous, they 
are to be construed as they are written.  In this regard, 
the settled rule is that in the construction of a 
constitutional provision the words are presumed to be used
in their natural sense unless the context furnishes some 
ground to control, qualify, or enlarge them.   
 
Sierra Club, 120 Hawai ʻi at 196, 202 P.3d at  1241 (cleaned up). 
Section 15 states that “[n]o bill shall become law unless it 
shall pass three readings in each house on separate days.”  Haw.
Const. art. III, § 15 (emphasis added).
  The ordinary meaning of
the word “read” is “ to receive or take in the sense of [ letters  
 
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
25 or symbols] . . . by sight” or “to utter aloud the printed or 
written words of” something.   Merriam Webster ’s Collegiate 
Dictionary 972 (10th ed. 1994 ).  Thus, before a bill can become
a law, it must be read, meaning that its contents must be 
“take[n] in” or “utter[ed] aloud” three times in each house on 
separate days.  See Haw. Const. art. III, § 15.    
  The State argues that the process used to enact Act 84
complied with the plain language of section 15 because the bill 
number and title were  read three times in each house on three 
separate days.  Every bill consists of a number, title, and the 
substance of the bill which is contained in its body and divided
into sections.   However, b ecause the Legislature’s rules of 
procedure permit a bill to be “read” by title  only, we must 
consider whether a bill is the same bill for purposes of the 
three readings requirement, once the bill is amended so that it 
addresses an entirely new subject.   1817 
 
We conclude that the words in section 15 are clear and  
                                                 
17 Legislative Reference Bureau, Anatomy of a Bill, 
https://lrb.hawaii.gov/par/overview -of-the-legislative -process/types -of-
measures- bills-resolutions -messages/anatomy- of-a-bill. 
 
18 Pursuant to the Rules of the House of Representatives  (2017-18), Rules 
34-36, all three readings of a bill  may be by “title only.”   Pursuant to the 
Rules of the Senate (2017-18), Rules 48- 50, the first Senate reading of a 
bill is “ for information, ” with the second and third readings permissibly 
being by “ title only.”   See also Mason’s Manual, supra, at § 720 ¶ 4 (“A 
reading of a bill by title is considered a reading of the bill, unless it is 
specifically required by the constitution that  the bill be read at length or 
in full.”).  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
26 unambiguous.  For the reasons stated herein, we conclude that 
Act 84 is invalid because the hurricane shelter version of S.B.
2858 did not receive three readings in the Senate before the 
bill was signed into law.    
1. The purpose of t he three readings requirement  
 
A fundamental principle of constitutional
interpretation is that   
the Hawaiʻ i Constitution must be construed with due regard 
to the intent of the framers and the people adopting it, 
and the fundamental principle in interpreting a  
constitutional provision is to give effect to that intent.    
 
Sierra Club, 120 Hawai ʻi at 196, 202 P.3d at  1241.  Accordingly,
we consider the purpose of the three readings requirement in 
order to effectuate the intent of the framers and the people.    
In Hawai ʻi, the three readings  requirement dates back 
to the 1894 Constitution of the Republic of Hawai ʻi.  Haw. Const.
art. 64 (Rep. 1894).  In 1950, the three readings requirement 
was reworded to the current language: “ No bill shall become law 
unless it shall pass three readings in each house,  on separate 
days.” 
 Haw. Const. art. III, §  16 (1950).    19 
At the Constitutional Convention of 1950, the 
Committee on Revision, Amendments, Initiative, Referendum and 
Recall (“the Committee ”) issued a report which discussed, among  
                                                 
19 The Constitutional Convention  of 1968 deleted the comma preceding “on
separate days” and renumbered this section to section 15.  Haw. Const. art.
III, § 15.  
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
27 other things, the merits of the legislative process in a 
representative form of government.  Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 47 in 
1 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawaii 1950,  
at 182 (1960) (“ Proceedings of 1950 ”).  The Committee  observed 
that laws should not be enacted in response to “ storms of hasty,
temporary and changeable public emotion .”  Id. at 183.  Rather, 
“[e]xcept in time of war and equally urgent disaster or crisis, 
laws should be drawn . . . with deliberation and careful 
consideration of long- range needs [.]”  Id.  
The Committee also made this observation about the 
role of the three readings requirement in the legislative 
process:  
 One of the necessary features of laws adopted by the 
legislature is the necessity for  three readings and the 
opportunity for full debate in the open  before committees 
and in each House,  during the course of which the purposes 
of the measures, and their meaning, scope and probable 
effect, and the validity of the alleged facts and arguments
given in their support can be fully examined  and, if false 
or unsound, can be exposed, before any action of 
consequence is taken thereon.   
 
Id. at 184 (emphasis added).  Once a full and informed debate 
uncovers a bill’s “weaknesses, or opposition forces compromise 
to meet objections raised to its form or substance[,]” the bill
“may be amended any number of times[.]”  Id.  Thus, as we have 
previously observed, a historical purpose of the three readings 
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
28 requirement is to “provide [] the opportunity for full debate .”
Taomae, 108 Hawaiʻ i at 255, 118 P.3d at 1198 . 2120  
As we have previously observed, the three readings 
requirement “also ensures that each house of the legislature has
given sufficient consideration
 to the effect of the bill.”   Id.;  
see also Schwegmann Bros. v. Calvert Distillers Corp., 341 U.S. 
384, 396 (1951) (Jackson, J. concurring) (concluding that the 
three-readings requirement in the United States Constitution is 
“
intended . . . to make sure that each House knows what it is 
passing and passes what it wants ”).  Additionally, the 
constitutional requirement that the three readings must occur on
three separate days is generally intended “to prevent hasty and 
ill-considered legislation, surprise or fraud, and to inform the
legislators . . . of the contents of the bill.”  Mason’s Manual , 
 
 
 
                                                 
20 This is also in accordance with the common law understanding of reading
requirements.  “Reading requirements are supposed to f acilitate informed and 
meaningful deliberation on legislative proposals, and refinement and 
modification of the text of a proposal is the natural and desirable product 
of deliberation.”  Sutherland, supra, § 10:4.   
 
21 This court previously addressed the three readings requirement as it 
relates to constitutional amendments in Taomae, 108 Hawaiʻ i at 254, 118 P.3d 
at 1197.  At issue in Taomae was a bill that was originally introduced as “ A 
Bill for an Act Relating to Sexual Assault ” and was later amended to add  a 
“constitutional amendment  to allow the Legislature to define what behavior 
constitutes a continuing course of conduct in sexual assault crimes [.]”  Id. 
at 248-49, 118 P.3d at 1191 -92.  This court held that the proposed 
constitutional amendment violated 
section 15 because the bill did not receive
the required three readings in each house after the constitutional amendment 
provision was added.  
Id. at 255, 118 P.3d at 1198.  Therefore, Taomae  is 
distinguishable from this case because constitutional amendments must comply 
not only with article III, but also with article XVII.  See id. at 251, 118 
P.3d at 1194.     
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
29 supra, at § 720 ¶ 2.  Accord 1 Thomas Cooley, A Treatise on the 
Constitutional Limitations Which Rest upon the Legislative Power
of the States of the American Union 288 n.1 (Walter Carrington 
ed., 8th ed. 1927) (noting that the purpose of the three 
readings requirement is “to prevent hasty and improvident 
legislation”).   
Another key purpose of the three readings requirement 
is that it provides  the public notice of proposed legislation 
and an opportunity to comment.  See  Alaska Legislative Council 
v. Knowles, 21 P.3d 367, 377 (Alaska 2001) (observing that the 
three readings requirement provides “an opportunity for 
the 
expression of public opinion and due deliberation.”);  Mason’s 
Manual, supra, § 720 ¶ 2 (noting that the three readings 
requirement is also intended “ to inform . . .  the public of the 
contents of the bill” ); 1 Sutherland , supra, § 10:4 (“The 
practice of having bills read on three different days also 
serves to provide notice that a measure is progressing through 
the enacting process, enabling interested parties to prepare 
their positions.”).  See also  Cooley, supra , at 288 n.1 (noting 
that the three readings requirement is “not a mere rule of 
order, but one of protection to the public interests and to the 
citizens at large”) . 
Thus, the three readings requirement serves three   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
30 important purposes: it (1) provides the opportunity for full 
debate on proposed legislation; (2) ensures that members of each
legislative house are familiar with a bill’s contents and have 
time to give sufficient consideration to its effects; and 
(3) provides the public 
with notice and an opportunity to 
comment on proposed legislation.    
Despite the fact that the history of the 
Constitutional Convention of 1950 characterizes the three 
readings requirement as a “necessity” which provides “the 
opportunity for full debate in the open . . . during the course 
of which the purposes of the measures, and their meaning, scope 
and probable effect, and the validity of the alleged facts and 
arguments given in their support can be 
fully examined” before a
bill is voted on, 1 Proceedings of 1950,  supra, at 184 (emphasis
added), the State contends that the “history of the 1950 
Constitution does not provide any particular insight [.]”  
 
Instead, the State argues that the history  of the 
Constitutional Convention of 1968 “is more informative.”  In 
1968, the framers inserte d a “final printing requirement ” 
directly after the three readings requirement: “ No bill shall 
pass third or final reading in either house unless in the form 
to be passed it shall have been printed and made available to  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
31 the members of that house for at least twenty- four hours. ”  
Haw. Const. art. III,  § 16 (1968)  (emphasis added).  The State 
argues that by adding the final printing requirement in 1968, 
the framers implicitly acknowledged that bills would be amended 
during the legislative process and that even significant 
amendments would not require the three readings to begin anew.  22
 
On the contrary, the constitutional history of the 
final printing requirement demonstrates that it was intended to
further the same purposes as the three readings requirement.  
According to the Committee on Legislative Powers and Functions,
the purpose of the final printing requirement  
 
is to assure members of the legislature an opportunity to 
take informed action on the final contents of proposed 
legislation.  . . .  “Form to be passed ” means the form in
which a bill is passed on third reading in  each house,  
                                                 
22 In 1978, the section which contains the three readings requirement was
amended to its current form.  The twenty -four-hour period was increased to 
forty-eight hours, the printing requirement was slightly reworded, and the 
sections were renumbered.  Thus, section 15 now states:   
 
 No bill shall become law unless it shall pass three 
readings in each house on separate days.  No bill shall 
pass third or final reading in either house unless printed 
copies of the bill in the form to be passed shall have been 
made available to the members of that house for at least 
forty-eight hours.  
 Every bill when passed by the house in which it 
originated, or in which amendments thereto shall have 
originated, shall immediately be certified by the presiding 
officer and clerk and sent to the other house for 
consideration.  
 Any bill pending at the final adjournment of a 
regular session in an odd -numbered year shall carry over  
with the same status to the next regular session.  Before
the carried -over bill is enacted, it shall pass at least 
one reading in the house in which the bill originated.   
 
Haw. Const. art. III, § 15.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
32 concurrence of one house to amendments made by the other, 
and the form in which a bill is passed by both houses after
conference on a bill.  The [final printing requirement]  not
only aids the legislator but also gives the public 
additional time and opportunity to inform itself of bills  
facing imminent  passage.  
 
 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 46 in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional 
Convention of Hawaii 1968,  at 216 (1973) (“ Proceedings of 1968 ”) 
(emphasis added).  The final printing requirement was adopted to 
provide additional notice to legislators and the public in the 
face of increasingly complex legislation. 
The complexity of modern legislation, particularly with the
development of omnibus bills in such broad fields as the 
budget, tax reform, administrative organization, workmen’s 
compensation . . . frequently causes amendments to such 
bills to be highly technical in nature yet far -reaching in 
effect.
 
  
Id.   
Nothing in the history from the Constitutional 
Convention of 1968 evidences an intent by the framers for the 
final printing requirement to alter the three readings 
requirement or diminish its importance.  Rather, the framers 
considered the final printing requirement to be a “substantial
contribution” which would “ increase[e] awareness and 
understanding of proposed legislation[.]”   Id.  The framers 
envisioned that the final printing requirement would allow 23 
                                                 
23 In considering whether to adopt the final printing requirement, the 
1968 Committee on Revision, Amendment and Other Provisions noted that it “was
guided by the belief that any change in procedure must be evaluated in terms 
of its contribution to the two principal legislative functions of 
representing people, groups and communities and of rendering decisions which 
can be accepted as carefully weighed and fairly made.”  Id.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
33 legislators to consult with others, both inside and outside of 
the Legislature, when the subject matter of a bill “proves too 
technical to be understood just by reading[.]”  Id.  “The 
importance of interest groups and their representatives to the 
legislative process as sources of information and barometers of 
public support for proposed legislation is unquestioned. . . . 
[T]he [final printing requirement] enhances the functions served
by these groups.”  Id. (emphasis added.)    
  The State relies heavily on floor remarks made by 
delegates at the Constitutional Convention of 1968 in support of
its claim that the addition of the final printing requirement 
was intended to ensure that legislators had  “sufficient time to 
review amended legislation without any need for an additional 
three readings.”  First, the State cites to remarks made by 
Delegate Hung Wo Ching:  
The original intent of a bill having passed one house can 
be substantially  changed in legislative conferences.  A 
bill in final form can then pas s third reading in both 
houses without a reasonable opportunity for members of the  
legislature and the public for review in its final form.  
To correct this situation,  our proposed bill will require 
that a bill be printed in its final form and be  made 
available to the legislators and to the public for a least 
24 hours before  final passage. 
 
Comm. of the Whole Debates in 2 Proceedings of the 
Constitutional Convention of Hawaii of 1968 , at 145 (1972) .  
  Second, t he State cites Delegate Donald Ching’s answer
when asked if a conference substituted bill would have to pass   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
34 three readings:  
The proposed amendment will not change  the manner in which 
a bill is handled  . . . the only change that will be 
brought about is  — that after the conference committee has 
deliberated and come up  with its conference draft, that 
draft will have to be printed and lay on the  table for 24 
hours or be made available to the members and the public 
for 24 hours before either house can act on it.   . . .  As 
to what is  substituted or what will happen in there, there 
will be no change as from the  present procedure.  
 
Id. at 146.  
  Finally, the State cites remarks by Delegate Charles
E. Kauhane (Delegate Kauhane):  
When the bill comes out of the committee, we send an 
elephant into the committee in the first  instance. . . . 
The committee recommends that the bill pass third reading 
in its amended form.  You may have intended to request 
consideration of the matter of  the caring of elephants.  
This bill comes out with the caring of the elephants, dogs,
pigeons and what not and then we are voting on third 
reading for the passage of a  completely new bill.   
 
Id. at 169 (emphasis added).  Delegate Kauhane described the 
final printing requirement as an attempt to ensure that 
legislators had the opportunity to offer amendments to the 
amended bill before its third reading and “ to prevent  any 
citizen from going into court to test the constitutionality of 
the legality of the passage of this  bill on third reading in 
this disguised form. ”  Id.  “[I]n order to plug that loophole 
and to make sure that all of these actions undertaken by the 
legislature are legal and
 beyond any question of doubt have met
the conditions under which those are  to be considered, first, 
second and third reading. ”  Id.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
35   The State’s reliance on these floor remarks is 
misplaced.  First, nothing in the cited floor remarks indicates 
an intent to change the meaning of the three readings 
requirement as adopted by the Constitutional Convention of 1950.  
Second, the understanding of subsequent delegates does not 
change the meaning of an existing constitutional provision, 
absent a substantive amendment to the law.  See  Peer News LLC v. 
City & County of Honolulu, 138 Hawai ʻi 53, 73, 376 P.3d 1, 21 
(2016) (noting that courts
 “should be wary of bootstrapping” the 
intent of a latter legislature onto a previous legislature) 
(internal quotation marks and brackets omitted); 2A 
Sutherland, 
supra, §  48:20 (“[C]ourts  generally give little or no weight to 
the views of members of subsequent legislatures about the 
meaning of acts passed by previous legislatures.”)  (footnote 
omitted).  Finally, even if floor remarks by individual 
delegates at the 1968 Convention did expre ss an intent to change 
the meaning of the three readings requirement by adopting the 
final printing requirement , “remarks by individual legislators 
are not attributable to the full legislature that voted for the 
bill, and as such are less reliable indicators of legislative 
intent.”  Peer News, 138 Hawaiʻ i at 71, 376 P.3d at 19.   
  Moreover, the State’s claim that floor remarks by 
delegates at the Constitutional Convention of 1968 evidenced an   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
36 intent to change the three readings requirement is directly 
contradicted by the committee report explaining the purpose of 
the final printing requirement.  The final printing requirement 
was added to “assure members of the legislature an opportunity  
to take informed action on the final contents of proposed 
legislation[,
]” which increasingly included highly technical and 
complicated amendments.  1 Proceedings of 1968,  supra, at 216 .  
“The [final printing requirement] not only aids the legislator 
but also gives the public additional time and opportunity to
 
inform itself of bills facing imminent passage. ”  Id.  
Logically, in order to serve their twin functions of providing 
legislators with information about complicated amendments and 
acting as “barometers of public support,” both the public and 
interest groups must be able to track proposed legislation 
through all three required readings.   See  id.  Indeed, the 
final printing requirement was aimed squarely at providing both 
legislators and the public with notice of amendments between the 
second and third reading.   
  The State’s argument is further undercut by the 
reasons stated by framers at the Constitutional Convention of 
1978 for increasing the time that a bill must be made available 
in printed form prior to voting to forty
-eight hours .  The final
printing requirement waiting period was enlarg ed to address “the 
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
37 increasing numbers of bills being introduced in the legislature 
and the public concern expressed on the difficulty of following 
the many bills through the legislature in the closing days of 
the session[.]”  Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 46 in 1 Proceedings of 
the Constitutional Convention of Hawaii
 of 1978, at 603 (1980) 
(“Proceedings of 1978 ”) (emphasis added).  The framing delegates 
believed that allowing an additional twenty-four hours “during 
which a legislator or a constituent could review a bill before 
third or final reading, would help both legislator and 
constituent to avoid hasty decisions and surprises regarding the 
bill.”  
Id. (emphasis added).  Thus, the final printing 
requirement presupposes a robust three readings rule and was 
intended to enhance the rule, rather than to diminish the 
importance of the first two readings.
 
As to the State’s claim that section 15 merely 
requires that a bill be read by number and title in each house 
on three separate days, this “ plain language” argument ignores 
the principle that constitutional provisions must be construed 
“with due regard to the intent of the framers and the people 
adopting it.”  See Sierra Club, 120 Hawai ʻi at 196,
 202 P.3d at
1241 (cleaned up).  The State’s assertion that the three 
readings requirement is satisfied merely by a perfunctory 
reading three times in each house, with the final reading after 
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
38 forty-eight hours’  notice, seems to ignore the framers’ intent
in adopting the provision.    
This court has previously observed that “[t] he three-
reading requirement not only provides the opportunity for full 
debate; it also ensures that each house of the legislature has 
given sufficient consideration to the effect of the bill. ”  
Taomae, 108 Hawai ʻi at 255, 118 P.3d at  1198.  The framers at the
1950 Convention envisioned that, during the course of debate, a 
bill’s “purposes[,] . . . meaning, scope and probable effect ” 
would be “fully examined [.]”  1 Proceedings of 1950,  supra, at 
184.  The framers considered the ability to amend a bill “any 
number of times after debate discloses its weaknesses, or 
opposition forces compromise to meet objections raised to its 
form or substance[]”  one of the key benefits of the legislative 
process.  Id.  Thus, the constitutional history of the three 
readings requirement demonstrates that the framers intended it 
to further the aim of a deliberative legislative process, 
wherein legislators would receive input from an informed publi
c, 
debate a bill’s merits and weaknesses , and amend bills to 
address those uncovered weaknesses.  
In sum, the constitutional history of the three 
readings requirement indicates that the framers intended the 
rule to provide notice of a bill ’s  contents, facilitate informed   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
39 debate, prevent hasty legislation, and provide the public with 
notice and an opportunity to comment on proposed legislation.   
In order to effectuate this intent, a bill must retain some 
common attributes between readings.  Thus, we are convinced that
in order to satisfy the three readings requirement, a bill at 
each subsequent reading must bear some resemblance to the 
previous versions read beyond merely having the same title and 
number.   
2. We adopt the same germaneness standard  for section 15
that applies to section 14   
 
Having decided that the three readings requirement 
necessitates that the substance of a bill must bear some 
resemblance to earlier versions in order to constitutionally 
pass the third and final reading, we next consider what level of
similarity section 15 requires.  Plaintiffs argue that, in order
to effectuate the purpose of the three readings requirement and 
satisfy section 15,  this court should adopt a germaneness 
standard for bill amendments.  Plaintiffs propose that the “test
[for germaneness] is whether the amendments are germane to the 
bill as previously read.”  Under Plaintiffs’ proposed standard, 
a reviewing court should consider whether the amendments and the
original bill constitute a unifying scheme to accomplish a  
 
 
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
40 single purpose.   Plaintiffs contend that the three readings
must begin anew when the Legislature makes non- germane 
amendments to a proposed bill. 24  
There is a long tradition in Hawai ʻi law of applying a 
germaneness standard to constitutional requirements for 
legislating.  The Territorial Supreme Court applied a 
germaneness standard to the single subject rule  in Territory v.
Kua, 22 Haw. 307 (1914).   The Kua court noted  that germane 
literally means “akin, closely allied [,]” and “united by the 
common tie of blood or marriage .”  Id. at 313 (internal citation25  
 
                                                 
24 Plaintiffs cite the germaneness test applied to the constitutional 
three readings requirement by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court in Washington v.
Dep’t of Public Welfare, 188 A.3d 1135 (Pa. 2018).  As the Pennsylvania 
Supreme Court explained,   
 
 Amendments are germane to the original general 
subject matter of a bill if both the subject of the 
amendments and the subject of the original contents of the 
bill have a nexus to a common purpose.  In other words, the 
subject of the amendments and the subject of the original 
bill language must constitute a unifying scheme to 
accomplish a single purpose.  In making this determination, 
a reviewing court may hypothesize a reasonably broad 
unifying subject; however, such a hypothetical subject 
cannot be unduly expansive, lest the purpose of the 
constitutional provision be defeated.  
 
Id. at 1151- 52 (internal citations and quotation marks omitted).  
 Notably, Pennsylvania is one of a minority of states whose 
constitutions contain an explicit provision that “ no bill shall be so altered 
or amended, on its passage through either House, as to  change its original  
purpose.”  Pa. Const. art. III, §  1.  Pennsylvania’s “original purpose” 
requirement is in addition to its connotational three readings requirement 
contained in article III, § 4.  We note that the Hawaiʻ i Constitution contains 
no “original purpose” provisi on.  
  
25 “That each law shall embrace but one subject, which shall be expressed 
in its title.”  Organic Act  § 45 (1900) (emphasis added).   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
41 and quotation marks omitted).  In applying this personified 
definition of germaneness to legislative provision
s, “the common 
tie is found in the tendency of the provision to promote the 
object and purpose of the act to which it belongs. ”  
Id.  
(internal citation and quotation marks omitted).   At issue in 
Kua was whether a  law preconditioning the issuance of an 
occupational license on the payment of all of the applicant’s 
taxes was germane to a  law which was titled, in part, “Relating 
to the Issuance of Licenses” that regulated wh ich government 
authority would issue those same licenses.  Id. at 308-09.  The 
Kua court concluded that there was “no close alliance ” between  
the tax provision and the issuing authority provision  and that 
requiring occupational license applicants to pay all  taxes “is a 
new and independent matter, disconnected from the question as to 
who shall issue the license, and, therefore, is not germane to 
the subject of the act.”   Id. at 313 (emphasis added) .  Thus, 
the Kua court held that the tax provision was void because it 
violated the single subject provision.  
Id. at 317. 
The State maintains  that nothing in the plain language
of section 15 or its constitutional history requires bill 
amendments to be germane to a bill’s  original language.  The 
State argues that the Legislature’s own procedural rules, which 
are entitled to deference, explicitly state that the three   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
42 readings need not restart after an amendment or substitution.  
The State maintains that germaneness is measur ed solely in 
relation to the single subject and subject-in-title 
requirements.  The State insists that 
applying a germaneness 
standard to the three readings requirement is unworkable because
“establishing a universal definition of ‘germane’ is a futile 
endeavor” and would consequently violate the separation of 
powers doctrine as courts set “arbitrary limits on ‘how much ’ a 
bill can be amended. ”  Finally, the State argues that other 
important policy considerations counsel against applying a 
germaneness standard to the three readings requirement, claiming
that it would hinder the Legislature’s ability to make laws and 
respond swiftly to extraordinary and sudden events and open the 
floodgates to new litigation.   
 
For the following reasons, we agree with Plaintiffs
that applying a germaneness standard to the three readings 
requirement best effectuates the plain meaning and purpose of
this constitutional mandate.   
 
First, applying a germaneness standard will effectuate
both the plain language of the three readings requirement and 
the purposes for which it was adopted.  Section 15 states that 
“[n]o bill shall become law unless it shall pass three readings 
in each house on separate days.”  Haw. Const. art. III, § 15   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
43 (emphasis added).  A bill consists of the number, title, and 
body.  Because the plain language of section 15 states that a 
bill must be read three times on separate days, it follows that 
if the body of the bill is so changed as to constitute a 
different bill, then 
it is no longer the same bill and the three
readings begin anew.   
Second, the germaneness standard is an established and
enforceable standard and one which courts in Hawai ʻi have ably 
applied to the single subject and subject-in-title requirement 
for over a century.  See, e.g., Schwab, 58 Haw. at 33-34, 564 
P.2d at 140-41 (applying the germaneness standard to the single 
subject requirement); Kua, 22 Haw. at 313 (applying the 
germaneness standard to the single subject requirement)
; 
Territory v. Dondero, 21 Haw. 19, 25 (1912) ( considering whether
the title of a city ordinance violated the city charter’s 
subject-in-title provision and applying a germaneness standard).
Accordingly, the State’s claim that it will  be impossible for 
courts to apply a germaneness standard is without merit.  26 
 
  
Third, the purpose behind the single subject and  
                                                 
26 We note that the State offers no viable explanation for why germanenes
applies to section 14 of article III, but not to section 15, or why 
germaneness is a workable standard for courts to apply to the former but not
the latter.  We disagree with the State’s assertion that a reviewing court 
would be unable to recognize when an amendment to a challenged bill is not 
germane to the bill’s original subject, just as they recognize when a 
non-germane amendment violates the single subject or subject -in-title 
requirements.    s 
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
44 subject-in-title requirements is similar to the purpose of the 
three readings requirement  in that both are directed at 
providing notice to legislators and the public.  Compare Schwab,
58 Haw. at 30–31, 564 P.2d at 139 (observing that the purpose of
the single subject requirement is, inter alia, “to prevent 
surprise or fraud upon the Legislature [,]” and to provide notice
to the public of proposed legislation) (quoting Jensen v. 
Turner, 40 Haw. 604, 607-08 (1954) ), with Taomae, 108 Hawai ʻi at 
255, 118 P.3d at 1198 (noting that one purpose of the three 
readings requirement is to “ensure [] that each house of the 
legislature has given sufficient consideration to the effect of 
the bill.”).  See also Mason’s Manual , supra, § 720 ¶ 2 (noting 
that the three readings requirement is intended “to prevent 
hasty and ill-considered legislation, surprise or fraud, and to 
inform the legislators 
and the public of the contents of the 
bill.”).  Thus, it is sensible to apply the same germaneness 
standard to the three readings requirement as 
we do to the 
single subject and subject-in -title requirements because the 
germaneness standard is a safeguard against the same legislative
pitfalls.  
 
 
 
Nor are we alone in applying a germaneness standard to
the constitutional three readings requirement.  Numerous other 
jurisdictions also measure compliance with their constitutional   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
45 three readings requirements according to germaneness.   This 
includes states that, like us, do not include an “original 
purpose” provision in their constitution.  See, e.g. , Van Brunt 
v. State, 653 P.2d 343, 345-46 (Alaska App. 1982) (holding that 
the three readings requirement need not restart after a 
substantial amendment, so long as the amendment is germane to 
the bill); People ex rel. Cty. Collector of Cook Cty. v. Jeri, 
Ltd., 239 N.E.2d 777, 779 (Ill. 1968) (“It is the rule in this 
State, however, that amendments which are ‘germane’ to the 
general subject of the bill as originally introduced may be made 
without the proposed Act, as amended, having to be read on three 
different days in each house.”); Bevin, 563 S.W.3d at 90- 91 
(holding that a bill which was read by title only did not 
satisfy the three readings requirement after a non- germane 
amendment because the title did not convey any information about 
the bill’s contents); Hoover v. Bd. of County Comm’rs , 482 
N.E.2d 575, 579-80 (Ohio 1985) (“[A]mendments which do not 
vitally alter the substance of a bill do not trigger a 27
                                                 
27 The only jurisdiction cited by the State which has a three readings 
requirement and does not yet apply a germaneness standard is Tennessee.  In 
D.M.C. Corp. v. Shriver, 461 S.W.2d 389, 392 (Tenn. 1970), the Tennessee 
Supreme Court stated that “ on third and final reading a bill can be amended 
to any extent, even to striking the body of the  bill and substituting the 
amendment therefore so long as the amendment is germane to and within  the 
scope of the title.”  (Emphasis added.)  However, the Tennessee Supreme Court
held that the challenged bill was invalid because on the first two readings, 
it contained no substance and consisted of only a title and number.  Id.     
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
46 requirement for three considerations anew . . . [b]ut, [w]hen 
the subject or proposition of the bill is thereby wholly 
changed, it would seem to be proper to read the amended bill 
three times, and on different days[.]”) (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted); Hood v. City of Wheeling, 102 S.E. 
259, 263 (W. Va. 1920) (“ a substitute bill or amendment, if so 
germane to the original bill as to be a proper substitute or 
amendment, does not have to go back and be read three times, but 
may include as part of its required readings those had before 
the substitution or amendment was made.”).   It also includes 
minority states with an “original purpose” provision.  See, 
e.g., Magee v. Boyd, 175 So.3d 79, 114 (Ala. 2015) (holding that 
“an amended bill or a substitute bill, if germane to and not 
inconsistent with the general purpose of the original bill
, does 
not have to be read three times on three different days to 
comply with [the three readings requirement]” ) (emphasis added);  28
                                                 
28  The Dissent attempts to minimize these states’ use of a germaneness 
standard to measure compliance with their three readings requirements by 
asserting that the standard is mean t to “focus on whether the amendments are 
within the scope of the bill’s original title.”  Dissent at 24.   This is, of 
course, a logical first step to determining whether an amendment is germane 
to the original bill’s subject matter insofar as constitutiona l single 
subject requirements mandate that bills pertain to a single subject.  See, 
e.g., Haw. Const. art. III, §  14.  However, that is not the end of the 
inquiry, as our sister courts go on to analyze whether the amended bill would
accomplish a similar purpose.  See, e.g., Hood, 102 S.E. at 263 (explaining 
the three readings requirement is not violated when “[p]rovisions wholly 
discordant from the text [are] inserted by way of amendment, provided the 
main purpose and essential character of the original are  not necessarily 
impaired or modified.”) (emphasis added).    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
47 U.S. Gypsum Co. v. State Dep ’t of Revenue, 110 N.W.2d 698, 702 
(Mich. 1961) (holding that a substituted bill was sufficiently 
germane for purposes of the three readings requirement because 
the “major purposes ” of the substitute  “were all within the 
original objectives of the bill as first introduced ”); 
Washington, 188 A.3d at 1153-54 (holding that a gutted and 
replaced bill violated the three readings requirement because 
“amendments to such enfeebled legislation are not germane as a 
matter of law.”). 
Fourth, applying the germaneness standard to the three 
readings requirement is consistent with other constitutional 
limitations on the legislative process which are predicated on a 
meaningful interpretation of the three readings requirement.  
Notably, the mid-session recess,  the bill introduction 
deadline,  and the final printing requirement  all depend on the 31 3029
                                                 
29 Article III, section 10 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution provides in relevant 
part: “Each regular session shall be recessed  for not less than five days at 
some period between the twentieth and fortieth days of the regular session. 
The legislature shall determine the dates of the mandatory recess by  
concurrent resolution. ”  
 
 
30 Article III, section 12 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution provides in relevant
part: “By rule of its proceedings,  applicable to both houses, each house 
shall provide for the date by which all bills to be  
considered in a regular 
session shall be introduced. ”  
 
31 Article III, section 15 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution provides in relevant 
part: “No bill shall pass third or final reading in either house unless 
printed copies of the bill in the form to  be passed  shall have been made 
available to the members of that house for at least  forty-eight hours. ”  
(Emphasis added.)  
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
48 public’s ability to monitor the progress of bills through the 
legislative process.  These interdependent constitutional 
restrictions, which are meant to ensure public participation in 
the legislative process, would all be rendered meaningless under
the State’s interpretation of the three readings requirement.   32 
 
The requirement of a five -day mid-session recess was 
added to the Hawai ʻi Constitution in 1978 “to 
provide both 
legislators and the public an opportunity to review during the 
recess all bills that have been introduced in both houses, and 
an opportunity for both legislators and constituents to 
communicate on matters” pending.  1 Proceedings of 1978
, supra, 
at 603 (emphasis added).  The framers believed that the recess 
                                                 
32 In adopting the State’s “plain language” argument, the dissent places 
great reliance on the subject -in-title requirement and on a bill’s title to 
provide notice to the public.  Dissent at 24 -25.  However, as Plaintiffs 
observed, the title “Related to P ublic Safety” has been used in past 
legislative sessions for a plethora of subjects, including:  
 
shipping container inspections for fireworks (H.B. 7, 
2017); establishing a medical marijuana  commission to make 
recommendations about dispensaries (H.B. 2534, 2016); 
installation  of residential fire protection sprinkler 
systems (S.B. 2170, 2016); prohibiting general  contractors 
from performing the work of a specialty contractor without 
a license (H.B.  130, 2015); appropriating funds for the 
repair of a Waik īkī seawall (H.B. 84, 2011);  imposing a tort
duty on private landowners to inspect and mitigate where 
there is a  potential danger of falling rocks (H.B. 1261, 
2003).  
 
Thus, we disagree that the subject -in-title requirement alone is sufficient 
to ensure that new legislation is not introduced after the bill introduction 
deadline in order to allow the public and legislators to use the mid -session 
recess to read all of the bills that will be introduced in the legislative 
session.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
49 would allow the public to “become acquainted with and follow the
bills through the legislature more intelligently. ”  Id.    
The bill introduction deadline was also added in 1978 
to “allow the public the use of the mandatory 5 -day recess to 
review every bill that will ever be introduced in that 
legislative session. ”  Id. (emphasis added).  In 1984, the bill 
introduction deadline was amended to allow the Legislature to 
set an earlier deadline and prefile bills before session started 
to afford the public more time to familiarize itself with 
proposed legislation, conduct research, and “prepare more 
thoughtful and detailed testimony.”  Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 417-
84, in 1984 House Journal at 1031.   Logically, it would be 
futile for the public to use the mid-session recess to read 
every bill that would be introduced in the session in both 
houses and prepare to offer testimony if the Legislature may 
then gut and replace the bill 
with an entirely new one.  Such an 
interpretation of the three readings requirement would not only 
defeat its purpose, it would render the mid-session recess and 
the bill introduction deadline meaningless and reduce them to 
empty formalism.  
As previously discussed, the final printing 
requirement was first added to the Hawai ʻi Constitu
tion in 1968
and required a bill to be printed and made available for final   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
50 review at least twenty-four hours before a bill could pass third
or final reading.  1 Proceedings of 1968,  supra, at 216.  The 
final printing requirement was added to assure legislators had 
“an opportunity to take informed action on the final contents of
proposed legislatio n[]” and to give “ the public additional time 
and opportunity to inform itself of bills facing imminent 
passage.”  Id.  In particular, the final printing requirement 
was added to address increasingly complex legislation and 
“highly technical” amendments .  Id.  The framing delegates 
believed that the final printing requirement and accompanying 
twenty-four-hour period would “enhance[] the functions served 
by” interest groups and the public in the legislative process.  
Id.    
 
In 1978, the final printing requirement waiting period
was increased to forty-eight hours in response to “the 
increasing numbers of bills being introduced in the legislature 
and the public concern expressed on the difficulty of following 
the many bills through the legislature in the closing days of 
the session[.]”   1 Proceedings of 1978, supra, at 603 (emphasis 
added).  The waiting period was increased to “ help both 
legislator and constituent to 
avoid hasty decisions and 
surprises regarding the bill. ”  Id. (emphasis added).   In sum, 
the final printing requirement was added — and the time period   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
51 subsequently increased — to allow legislators,  interest groups, 
and the public the opportunity to inform themselves of a bill’s 
contents in its final form.  The final printing requirement 
presumes that interested persons have been following a bill to 
see all of the amendments that have been made and raise concerns 
before the final vote.  Consequently , we reject the State’s 
argument that the Legislature may make non- germane amendments or 
introduce a substituted bill after first or second reading 
without violating the three readings requirement, so long as the 
bill passes third and final reading forty- eight hours later.   
This sequence of events excludes interested persons from the 
legislative process and deprives  them of the opportunity to 
provide input to legislators.  Moreover, a substituted bill 
passed in such a manner would be unlikely “to avoid hasty 
decisions” by legislators and “surprises” to constituents.  See 
id.  
The constitutional framers designed the legislative 
process with interdependent requirements of mid -session recess, 
bill introduction deadline, and final printing in order to allow
the public to identify bills of interest, familiarize themselves
with a bill’s contents during the mid -session recess , provide 
meaningful input, and monitor their progress through enactment. 
These inter-dependent constitutional requirements all depend  
 
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
52 upon a meaningful interpretation of the three readings 
requirement in order to effectuate their stated purposes.  
Next, we address the State’s remaining arguments 
against applying a germaneness standard to the three readings 
requirement.  The State argues that Mason’s Manual , which was 
adopted as the parliamentary authority by both houses , does not
require the three readings to restart after a non-germane 
amendment to a bill.  The State selectively cites Mason’s 
Manual, supra, § 722, which provides:  33  
1. The constitutional requirement that bills be read 
three times is not generally  interpreted to apply to 
amendments, so that bills are required to be read the 
specified number of  times after amendment, . . . 
 
2. When a bill that has been passed by  one house has 
been materially amended in the other, and there passed as 
amended, it has been  held that the constitutional provision 
with reference to reading three times does not require  the 
bill as amended to be read three times in the house of 
origin before concurring in the  amendments of the other 
house. 
 
The State also cites  Mason’s Manual , supra, § 617 ¶ 1, which
seemingly does not require the three readings to restart for
substituted bills:   
 
A committee may recommend that every clause in a bill be 
changed and that  entirely new matter be substituted as long
as the new matter is relevant to the  title and subject of 
the original bill.  A substitute bill is considered as an  
amendment and not as a new bill.   
 
                                                 
33 See Rules of the House of Representatives (2017 -18), Rule 59; Rules of
the Senate (2017- 2018), Rule 88.    
 While both chambers adopted Mason’s Manual , they seem to overlook 
§ 4 ¶ 4, which provides that “where the constitution requires three readings
of bills, this provision controls over any provision  of adopted rules, 
statutes, adopted manual or parliamentary law. ”  (Emphasis added.)    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
53   However, the State ignores other relevant sections of 
Mason’s Manual which explicitly require that amendments are 
germane to a bill’s original purpose.  See Mason’s Manual , 
supra, § 616  ¶ 3 (“There is no limit to the number of amendments 
that may be proposed to a bill as long as the amendments are 
germane to the original purpose of the bill.  Amendments may be 
so numerous as to amount to a substitute version of the bill.” ) 
(emphasis added); § 617 (“A committee may recommend that every 
clause in a bill be changed and that entirely new matter be 
substituted as long as the new matter is relevant to the
 title 
and subject of the original bill .”) (emphasis added) ; § 722 ¶ 3 
(“Where a substituted bill may be considered as an amendment, 
the rule with reference to reading a bill on three separate days 
does not require the bill to be read three times after 
substitution.”) ( emphasis added) ; § 415 ¶ 2 (“Substitution is 
only a form of amendment and may be used, as long as germane, 
whenever amendments are in order.”) (emphasis added) . 
  In other words, Mason’s Manual  does not require the 
three readings to restart after a germane amendment, even if the
amendment actually amounts to a substituted bill.  However, 
Mason’s Manual
 §§ 616 and 617 limit proposed committee 
amendments to those that are germane to the original purpose and
subject of the bill and § 415 similarly limits non- germane floor 
 
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
54 amendments.   Additionally,  Mason’s Manual  § 722 limits the 
exemption from restarting the three readings for a substituted 
bill to instances when the “ substituted bill may be considered 
as an amendment[.] ”
  Thus, while Mason’s Manual  contains merely
procedural rules that do not define the scope of Hawai ʻi’s 
constitutional three readings requirement, even the 
Legislature’s adopted rules of procedure do not support the 
State and Legislature’s  interpretation of the three readings 
requirement. 34
 
The State’s hypothetical flood of litigation — as well
as legitimate separation of powers concerns — are protected by 
the standard of review for voiding legislation, which shifts the 
 
                                                 
34 In this case, the non -germane hurricane shelter amendment was 
recommended by a committee.  H.R. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1255 -18, at 2.  
However, we note that the Senate’s own rules of procedure require that “the 
fundamental purpose of any amendment shall be germane to the fundamental 
purpose of the bill.”  Rules of the Senate (2017 -18), Rule 54(2) (emphasis 
added).  Similarly, the  House’s rules require than any committee’s substitute 
bill “shall be consistent with the subject of the bill or bills referred to 
the committee.”  Rules of the House of Representatives (2017 -18), Rule 
11.7(4). 
Contrary to the dissent’s reading that Senate  “Rule 54(2) appears to 
address only amendments proposed on the Senate floor,” Dissent at 8 n.4, 
Senate Rule 54(2)’s use of “ any amendment” is notable in light of Senate Rule 
54(4) and (5)’s specification that those provisions apply to “ floor 
amendment[s].”   (Emphasis added.)  “Where [the legislature] includes 
particular language in one section .  . . but omits it in another 
section . . . , it is presumed that [the legislature] acts intentionally and 
purposely in the disparate inclusion or exclusion.”  Russello v. United 
States, 464 U.S. 16, 23, 104 S. Ct. 296, 300 (1983).  Thus, in the absence of 
evidence to the contrary, we must presume that the Senate acted intentionally 
in articulating that Rule 54(2) applied to “ any” amendment and in limiting 
Rule 54(4) and (5) to “floor” amendments.  See also  United States v. 
Gonzales, 520 U.S. 1, 5, 117 S. Ct. 1032, 1035 (1997) (“Read naturally, the 
word ‘any’ has an expansive meaning[.]”).  
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
55 burden to a challenger to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that a
law is unconstitutional.  See Schwab, 58 Haw. at 31, 564 P.2d at
139) (“[E]very enactment of the legislature is presumptively 
constitutional, and a party challenging the statute has the 
burden of showing unconstitutionality beyond a reasonable 
doubt.”).  
 
  While the Legislature might view gut and replace 
legislation as an effective and expedient bill amendment tool,35
the constitutional history of the three readings requirement 
expresses a clear preference for deliberate and careful 
consideration of legislation
 and a process in which legislators 
have the opportunity for a full and open debate and interested 
persons have notice of proposed legislation and are able to 
provide input.  See 1 Proceedings of 1950, supra, at 183 -84; 1 
Proceedings of 1968,  supra, at 216.    
  Rather than encouraging public participation in the
legislative process, gut and replace discourages public 
confidence and participation.  The process used to enact  
                                                 
35 We note that the State argues on appeal that the Legislature used gut 
and replace in this instance to the “secure the timely  passage of critically 
important public safety legislation. ”  However, the State represented to the 
circuit court that no exigency necessitated gutting the recidivism reporting 
bill and replacing it with the hurricane shelter bill.  In any event, even if 
an exigency did exist, the plain language of section 15 contains no emergency 
exception.  If there is an urgent need to pass legislation, “ the legislature 
maintains the option of holding a special session[.]”  See Morita, 145 Hawaiʻi 
at 396, 453 P.3d at  216.  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
56 S.B. 2858 demonstrates how public participation diminishes when 
bills wind their way through the process and are drastically 
changed.  Here, numerous interested parties offered testimony 
largely in support of the recidivism reporting bill when it was 
in committee at the House, including the DPS, the Office of 
Hawaiian Affairs, the Ho ʻomanapono  Political Action Committee, 
the 
Hawaiʻi Justice Coalition, the Community Alliance on Prisons, 
Young Progressives Demanding Action, the ACLU of Hawai ʻi, and 
private citizens.  However, after the bill was gutted and 
replaced with the hurricane shelter bill, just two of those 
parties — the Office of Hawaiian Affairs and Young Progressives 
Demanding Action —  offered testimony asking legislators to 
revert the bill to its original subject as the recidivism 
reporting bill, to no avail.  The logical inference is that many 
of the other parties who had supported the recidivism reporting 
bill were not aware that it was gutted and replaced.   
Alternately, persons who might have been interested in H.B. 
2452, the hurricane shelter bill originally introduced in the 
House, also were likely unaware that the bill was inserted into  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
57 S.B. 2858 and consequently unable to provide input.   Thus, gut
and replace deprives the public of notice and an opportunity to 
submit testimony and is antithetical to the intent of the three 
readings requirement. 36  
Understandably, the Legislature values its ability to
be flexible and amend bills quickly to enact legislation.  
However, none of their proffered policy arguments change the 
fact that we must construe section 15 in the manner that the 
framers intended —  so as to allow for meaningful public 
participation in the legislative process.    
Accordingly, we conclude that a meaningful 
interpretation of the constitutional three readings provision 
requires that the three readings begin anew after a non- germane
amendment changes the object or subject of a bill so that it is
no longer related to the original bill as introduced.     
 
3. Act 84 did not receive three readings in each house 
 
Having concluded that a meaningful interpretation of
section 15 requires the three readings to begin anew after a  
                                                 
36 Interested person can request to follow certain bills by subscribing to 
the Legislature’s Really Simple Syndication (RSS) feed.  Hawaiʻi State 
Legislature, RSS, https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/rss.aspx.   The RSS feed will 
send the subscriber a notification when new content is available on a 
particular bill of interest.  Id.   However, the RSS feed will only notify 
subscribers if there is new content available for the bill of interest.  Id.  
If the bill does not progress and  another bill is later gutted to include the 
subject that the subscriber was interested in, the subscriber is not notified 
and thus loses the opportunity to provide input.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
58 non-germane amendment, we next consider whether the process used
to enact Act 84 complied with section 15.    
The original subject of S.B. 2858 was recidivism 
reporting and the recidivism reporting bill passed three 
readings in the Senate.  
Next, the recidivism reporting bill 
passed its first reading in the House.  Prior to the second 
reading, the House amended the bill by deleting its contents and
inserting provisions which would require that newly constructed 
State buildings include hurricane shelter space.  Thus, as a 
hurricane shelter bill, S.B. 2858 passed its second reading in 
the House.  Based on  the recommendation of a conference 
committee, S.B. 2858 was  amended to instead require  the State to
consider hurricane resistant criteria when designing and 
constructing new schools .  In this final form,  S.B. 2858 passed 
final reading in both chambers and  was signed into law as Act 
84.  
 
Applying the germaneness standard adopted by this 
court in Kua, we must consider whether the hurricane shelter 
amendment was germane to the original recidivism reporting
 bill.
We conclude that there is no “common tie” or “close alliance” 
between the recidivism reporting bill and the hurricane shelter 
bill.  See Kua, 22 Haw. at 313 (defining germaneness in the 
context of legislative provisions as a “common tie” or “close    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
59 alliance”).  By amending the recidivism reporting bill to 
introduce the subject of hurricane shelters, “a new and 
independent matter, disconnected from the question ” of 
recidivism reporting, the House made a non -germane amendment to 
S.B. 2858.  See id. at 313.  As a result, section 15 requires 
that the three readings 
restart after the hurricane shelter 
amendment.  Because the hurricane shelter version of the bill 
only received one reading in the Senate before it passed, the 
process used to enact Act 84 violated section 15 and the 
violation was “plain, clear, manifest, and unmistakable. ”  See 
Schwab, 58 Haw. at 31, 564 P.2d at 139.  For that reason, Act 84 
is void.   See id. (noting that a violation of a constitutional 
provision regarding the enactment of legislation “ would render 
an enactment nugatory. ”).  37
When considering whether the process used to enact 
Act 84 complied with the three readings requirement, the circuit
court based its decision on the Legislature’s own rule of 
procedure.  The circuit court concluded that, because S.B. 2858  
                                                 
37 However, applying the germaneness standard to the conference committee 
amendment, we conclude that there is a “common tie” and “close alliance” 
between hurricane shelters in newly constructed State buildings and hurricane 
resistant material for new schools.  See Kua, 22 Haw. at 3 13.  By amending 
the hurricane shelter bill to introduce the subject of hurricane resistant 
material for new schools, the conference committee did not introduce “a new 
and independent matter[.]”  See id. at 313.  Thus, the hurricane  resistant 
material amendment was germane to the previous version of the hurricane 
shelter bill.  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
60 had three readings according to sections 617 and 722 of Mason’s
Manual, it also satisfied the constitutional three readings 
requirement.  
The Legislature is empowered by section 12 to enact  
its own rules of procedure, which are entitled to deference.  
However, the authority to adopt its own procedural rules does 
not authorize the Legislature to redefine the constitutional 
three readings requirement.  See Peer News, 138 Hawai ʻi at 66-67,
376 P.3d at 14- 15 (holding that the constitutional mandate 
directing the Legislature to “take affirmative steps to 
implement” the constitutional privacy right does not mean that 
it is the Legislature ’s  “exclusive  role to define ” that right) 
(internal quotation marks omitted).  The power to interpret the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution still lies with the judiciary.  Sierra Club,
120 Hawaiʻ i at 196, 202 P.3d at 1241 (“[T]he courts, not the 
legislature, are the ultimate interpreters of the 
Constitution.”) (internal quotation marks and citations 
omitted).  Moreover, if the Legislature could alter the meaning 
of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution through its own rules of procedure, 
theoretically, there would be no need to go through the 
formality of amending the Hawai ʻi Constitution.  See  Mason’s 
Manual, supra, § 12 ¶ 1 (“A legislative body cannot make a rule 
which evades or avoids the effect of a rule prescribed by the  
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
61 constitution governing it, and it cannot do by indirection what
it cannot directly do. ”).    
Thus, we conclude that the circuit court erred by 
relying on the Legislature’s own rules of procedure  to 
determine whether the Legislature complied with section 15’s
three readings requirement.   38
 
4. The new rule we announce here applies only to this
case and prospectively   
  
“The question of prospective application arises when 
this court announces a new rule. ”  State v. Jess, 117 Hawai ʻi 
381, 400, 184 P.3d 133, 152 (2008).   “Although judicial 
decisions are assumed to apply retroactively, . . . ‘[t]he 
Constitution neither prohibits nor requires retrospective 
effect.’”  State v. Ikezawa, 75 Haw. 210, 220, 857 P.2d 593, 597 
(1993) (quoting State v. Santiago, 53 Haw. 254, 268, 492 P.2d 
657, 665 (1971)).  When a judicial decision announces a new 
rule, this court may, in the exercise of its discretion, 
determine that the interests of fairness preclude 
retroactive 
application.  Santiago, 53 Haw. at 268, 492 P.2d at  665.  Today, 
this court for the first time holds that section 15 requires the 
                                                 
38 As previously noted, sections 415, 617, and 722 of Mason’s Manual , see 
supra pp. 51-53 , do not permit non -germane amendments for purposes of the 
three readings requirement.  Thus, even if the Legislature’s own rules of 
procedure could define compliance with the three readings requirement, the 
Legislature did not comply with sections 415, 617, and 722 in this case 
because the hurricane shelter amendment was not  germane to the original 
subject of S.B. 2858, which was recidivism reporting.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
62 three readings to begin anew after a non- germane amendment, 
which constitutes a new rule.  Accordingly, we must determine
whether the germaneness standard should be given retroactive 
effect and to what degree.  39 
In deciding whether to give a new rule retroactive
effect, this court must  
weigh the merits and demerits of retroactive application of 
the particular rule, in light of (a) the purpose of the 
newly announced rule, (b) the extent of reliance . . .  on 
the old standards, and (c) the effect on the administration 
of justice of a retroactive application of the new 
standards[.]   
 
                                                 
39 In Lewi v. State, 145 Hawaiʻ i at 349, 452 P.3d at 346 (2019), we 
restated four alternatives for what degree of retroactive effect to give a
new rule:  
   
First, this court may give a new rule “purely prospective 
effect, which means that the rule is applied neither to the 
parties in the law -making decision nor to those others 
against or by whom it might be applied to conduct or events 
occurring before that decision.”   [Jess, 117 Hawaiʻ i at 401, 
184 P.3d at 153. ]  Second, this court may give a new rule 
“limited or ‘pipeline’  retroactive effect, under which the 
rule applies to the parties in the decision and all cases 
that are on direct review or not yet final 
as of the date 
of the decision. ”  Id.  Third, this court may give a new 
rule “full retroactive effect, under which the rule applies 
both to the parties before the court and to all others by 
and against whom claims may be pressed. ” 
 Id.  Lastly, this 
court has recognized a fourth alternative, in which a new 
rule is given “selective retroactive effect, ” meaning the 
court applies the new rule “in the case in which it is 
pronounced, then return[s] to the old [rule] with respect 
to all [other cases] arising on f
acts predating the 
pronouncement. ”  117 Hawaiʻ i at 401 n.19, 184 P.3d at 153 
n.19.   
 
(Cleaned up.)  We have declined to apply selective retroactive effect in 
criminal cases because “ selective application of new rules violates the 
principles of treating similarly situated defendants the same .”  Jess, 117 
Hawaiʻi at 401 n.19, 184 P.3d at 153 n.19 (internal quotation marks and 
citations omitted).  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
63 Jess, 117 Hawai ʻi at 401-02, 184 P.3d at 153 -54 (cleaned up).  
The purpose of weighing these factors is to evaluate whether 
according retrospective application to a new rule would result 
in substantial prejudice.  Id.  at 403, 184 P.3d at 155.  “Where 
substantial prejudice results from the retrospective application
of new legal principles to a given set of facts, the inequity 
may be avoided by giving the guiding principles prospective 
application only.”  Catron v. Tokio Marine Mgmt., Inc., 90 
Hawaiʻi 407, 411, 978 P.2d 845, 849  (1999) (quoting State v. 
Ikezawa, 75 Haw. 210, 220 –21, 857 P.2d 593, 598 (1993) (footnote
omitted)).  
 
  Regarding the first factor to be weighed, the purpose 
of the newly announced rule, retrospective application is most 
appropriate when the new rule is aimed at protecting the 
integrity of the factfinding process, particularly in criminal 
proceedings.  Jess, 117 Hawai ʻi at
 402, 184 P.3d at 154.  In this
case, the germaneness standard we announce today is intended to 
effectuate the purpose of the three readings requirement – 
ensuring public participation in the legislative process, rather 
than protecting the integrity of factfinding in judicial 
proceedings.  Consequently, the purpose of the new rule does not 
weigh in favor of according it retrospective effect.  
  The second factor to be weighed is the extent of the   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
64 Legislature’s reliance on its previously accepted practice.  See
id. at 401-02, 184 P.3d at  153-54.  The Legislature has long 
relied on its own rules of procedure, which do not require the 
three readings to begin anew after a non -germane amendment.  
Obviously, the Legislature has relied on these same procedural 
rules to pass other bills which similarly would not have had 
three readings in each house after a non
-germane amendment.  
Accordingly, the extent of the Legislature’s reliance on its 
previously accepted practice of permitting non- germane 
amendments without requiring the three readings to begin anew 
weighs in favor of limiting our decision to purely prospective 
application.  
  Finally, we must consider the effect that 
retrospective application of the new rule would have.  See id. 
at 402, 184 P.3d at 154.   While the appropriate consideration in
this case is not the effect on the administration of justice, 
see id., we instead must consider whether the State and the 
Legislature would suffer substantial prejudice if the 
germaneness standard was given retroactive effect.  See Catron, 
90 Hawai
ʻi at 411, 978 P.2d at 849.   In this case, the 
retrospective application of the germaneness standard to the 
three readings requirement could render i nvalid other laws 
enacted in the 2019 and 2020 legislative terms if they are   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
65 challenged.  As a result, the State and the Legislature would 
suffer substantial prejudice from the retrospective application
of the germaneness standard that we announce today.
  
  In sum, the extent of the Legislature’s reliance on 
its previously accepted practice and the substantial prejudice 
which the State and the Legislature would suffer counsel against
according the germaneness standard full or pipeline retroactive 
effect.  Based on these two factors, we determine that the 
fourth alternative 
— selective retroactive effect — is most 
appropriate.  Thus, the new rule is applied to 
Petitioners in 
this case and prospectively, but not to other cases challenging 
laws enacted prior to this pronouncement.    
IV.  CONCLUSION  
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the circuit 
court’s orders and judgment granting the State’s motion for 
summary judgment.  Because we conclude that article III, 
section 15 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution requires that a bill 
receive three readings after the Legislature introduces a non-
germane amendment and because the hurricane shelter provisions
of Act 84 violated section 15, we vacate the summary judgment 
granted to the State and remand this case to the circuit court
with instructions to grant Plaintiffs ’ motion for summary 
judgment.  
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
66 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
Robert Brian Black 
(Lisa Emily Engebretsen 
with him on the briefs) 
for plaintiffs-appellants 
League of Women Voters 
of Honolulu and Common Cause 
 
Clare E. Connors 
(Kimberly Tsumoto Guidry on the
briefs) for defendant-appellee 
State of Hawai ʻi  
 
Colleen Hanabusa for amicus 
curiae Hawai ʻi State Legislature  
 
Robert H. Thomas for amicus 
curiae Grassroot Institute of 
Hawaii /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  