     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***      
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAP-12-0000361 26-SEP-2013 
09:06 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
MICHAEL SIOPES and LACEY SIOPES,
Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellants,
 
vs.
 
KAISER FOUNDATION HEALTH PLAN, INC.; HAWAI' I PERMANENTE 
MEDICAL GROUP, INC.; KAISER FOUNDATION HOSPITALS, INC.,
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees.
 
SCAP-12-0000361 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CAAP-12-0000361; CIV. NO. 11-1-2732-11)
 
September 26, 2013
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, AND POLLACK, JJ.,
WITH ACOBA, J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY, AND
MCKENNA, J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.
 
Petitioners Michael Siopes and Lacey Siopes
 
(collectively, “Siopeses”) appeal from the Circuit Court of the
          
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
First Circuit’s (circuit court) March 5, 2012 orders granting the 
Motion to Compel Arbitration (Motion to Compel Arbitration) and the Motion to Stay Discovery and Other Pretrial Proceedings Pending a Ruling on the Motion to Compel Arbitration (Motion to Stay Discovery), filed by Respondents Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc., Hawai' i Permanente Medical Group, Inc., and Kaiser 
Foundation Hospitals, Inc. (collectively, “Kaiser”). 
For the reasons set forth herein, we hold that the
 
arbitration provision contained in the relevant contract is
 unenforceable based on the lack of an underlying agreement
 between Kaiser and Michael to arbitrate. Accordingly, Lacey is
 also not bound to arbitrate her claims in this case. The circuit
 
court’s orders are vacated and the case is remanded for further
 
proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
I.
 
A.
 
In 1998, Michael began working as a full-time teacher
 
at a public school on Maui. Michael was presented with options
 
for health insurance coverage through the Department of Education
 
and the Hawai' i State Teachers Association. The Hawai' i Employer-
Union Health Benefits Trust Fund (EUTF) “was established to 
provide a single health benefits delivery system for State and 
2
          
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
county employees, retirees, and their dependents.”1 Awakuni v.
 
Awana, 115 Hawai' i 126, 129, 165 P.3d 1027, 1030 (2007). See 
Hawai'i Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 87A. 
On May 26, 2003, Michael signed a one-page enrollment
 
form entitled “EUTF Enrollment/Change Form for Active Employees”
 
(Enrollment Form), enrolling in a Kaiser health plan offered
 through the EUTF. 
In a section entitled “Premium Conversion Plan
 
Elections,” Michael  selected a box providing: 
ENROLL me in the Premium Conversion Plan (PCP) so that my
monthly contribution for my health insurance benefit plans
premiums will be paid using pre-tax payroll deducted monies,
to the extent permitted.  I have read and understand the PCP
 information provided in the instruction sheet .
 
(Emphasis added). The record does not include an instruction
 
sheet or any evidence that an instruction sheet was provided to
 Michael. 
Michael indicated that he was “Single” on the
 
Enrollment Form and did not provide any information in the
 dependent coverage section of the form with respect to dependents
 
1 The EUTF replaced the Hawai 'i Public Employees Health Fund on July 
1, 2003.  Awakuni, 115 Hawai 'i at 130, 165 P.3d at 1031.  The EUTF is 
administered by a board of ten trustees, all appointed by the governor, five
of whom represent the employee-beneficiaries and five who represent the publicemployers.  HRS § 87A-5 (2012).  
HRS § 87A-16 (2012) provides that “[t]he board shall establish the
health benefits plan or plans” and “may contract for health benefits plans orprovide health benefits through a noninsured schedule of benefits.”  “Health benefits plan” is defined to include “[a] group insurance contract or serviceagreement that may include medical, hospital, surgical, prescribed drugs,vision, and dental services, in which a carrier agrees to provide, pay for,arrange for, or reimburse the cost of the services as determined by theboard[.]”  HRS § 87A-1 (2012). 
3
          
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
to include in his selected plan. Lacey, who is presently married
 
to Michael, has never been a Kaiser member. She did not sign the
 Enrollment Form. 
At the bottom of the Enrollment Form, a signature box
 
provides that the enrollee, by signing the Enrollment Form, makes
 
2
the following certifications and affirmations : 
Certification: I certify that the information provided in
this application is true and complete.  I agree to abide by
the terms and conditions of the benefit plans I selected.  I
 authorize my employer or finance officer to set my effective
dates of coverage and to make the pre-tax or after-tax
deductions, adjustments or cancellations from my salary,
wages, pension or other compensation for my monthly employee
contribution in accordance with applicable laws, rules or
regulations.  
I affirm that any listed dependent child, aged 19 through
23, is attending a college, university or technical school
as a full-time student. 
I affirm that I have non-EUTF plan benefits for each Dual
Coverage Plan I selected.
 
The Enrollment Form does not provide any other
 
description or identification of what is referred to as the
 
“terms and conditions of the benefit plans I selected”; nor does
 the Enrollment Form provide that the “terms and conditions” are
 stated in a separate document. 
According to Kaiser, a 2003 Group Medical and Hospital
 
Service Agreement (Group Agreement) entered into between Kaiser
 and the EUTF was applicable to Michael when he signed the
 Enrollment Form. However, the 2003 Group Agreement was not
 attached to the Enrollment Form or given to Michael prior to his
 
2
 The affirmations appear to have no applicability to Michael.
 
4
          
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
signing the Enrollment Form. There is also no indication in the
 
record that the agreement was subsequently provided to Michael. 
Additionally, the Enrollment Form itself contains no reference by
 name to a “Group Medical and Hospital Service Agreement” or to
 any agreement between Kaiser and the EUTF. The form also does
 
not provide a space for the enrollee to acknowledge whether he or
  
she has read and understood the Group Agreement, including the
 
“terms and conditions” of the applicable benefit plan. 
The 2003 Group Agreement that Kaiser states was
 
applicable does not contain a section specifically titled “Terms
 and Conditions.” In addition, the Group Agreement does not
 contain a signature line for a prospective or current Kaiser
 member to acknowledge that it was read or received prior to or
 after enrollment in the Kaiser plan. 
Under a section entitled “Relations Among Parties
 
Affected by Service Agreement,” the Group Agreement provides that
 Kaiser members “authorize” the EUTF “for purposes of entering
 
into this Service Agreement and for all other purposes in regards
 
to this Service Agreement,” although the provision does not
 
explain what is meant by “all other purposes.” Additionally,
 this section provides that “[a]ny notice to Group by Health Plan
 is deemed notice to the Members.”
3
 
3
 The section provides in its entirety:
 
B. Group as Agent for Members.   By requesting and
accepting membership under the Group’s Service Agreement
(continued...)
 
5
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
A section entitled “Miscellaneous Provisions” includes
 
a subsection titled “Service Agreement Binding on Members.” The
 
subsection provides: “By electing medical and hospital coverage
 pursuant to this Service Agreement, or accepting benefits
 hereunder, all Members legally capable of contracting, and the
 legal representatives of all Members incapable of contracting,
 agree to all terms, conditions and provisions of this Service
 Agreement.” 
Section 8 of the 2003 Group Agreement is entitled
 
“Appeal and Arbitration Procedures” and begins on page 10 of the
 agreement. The arbitration section is titled and set forth in
 
the same font as all other provisions in the agreement and is not
 
otherwise distinguished from the other provisions. The
 
arbitration provision states that it governs all claims “arising
 from an alleged violation of a legal duty incident to this
 
(...continued)
with Health Plan, Members authorize Group for purposes of
enter
ing into this Service Agreement and for all other
purposes in regards to this  Service Agreement.  
Any notice to Group by Health Plan is deemed notice to
the Members.
 
The Group Agreement provides in a separate section that “Member” means “Any
Subscriber or Family Dependent.”  “Group” is defined as “[t]he organization
identified as the Group on the Face Sheet of this Service Agreement, including
all Subscribers and Family Dependents who are part of Group’s Service
Agreement with Health Plan.”  Kaiser states that the EUTF is the “Group.” 
“Health Plan” means “Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc., Hawaii Region, a
California nonprofit corporation.” 
  
6
          
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Service Agreement” that are brought by a Kaiser member or
 
representative against a Kaiser entity.4
 
This section on the scope of the arbitration clause
 
also provides that “[b]enefit-related claims subject to Chapter
 502(a)(1)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act
 (ERISA) are covered by this binding arbitration requirement,”
 unless exempted by satisfying two conditions.
5
   
4 The arbitration provision provides in relevant part: 
B. Binding Arbitration.   Any claim arising from an alleged
violation of a legal duty incident to this Service Agreement
shall be submitted by the Member to binding arbitration if
the claim is asserted:
 
(1) By a Member . . . or by any other person entitled to
bring an action for damages for harm to the Member as
permitted by Hawaii state law existing at the time the claim
is filed . . . ; 
(2) On account of death, bodily injury, physical ailment,
mental disturbance, or economic loss arising out of the
rendering or failure to render services or the provision or
failure to provide benefits under this Service Agreement, or
arising out of any other claim, irrespective of the legal
theory upon which the claim is asserted;
(3) For monetary damages exceeding the jurisdictional
limit of the Small Claims Division of the District Court of
 the State of Hawaii for claims . . . ; and 
(4) Against one or more of the following entities or
their employees, officers or directors (“Respondent”): 
(i) Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc., 
(ii) Kaiser Foundation Hospitals,
(iii)Hawaii Permanente Medical Group, Inc., 
(iv) The Permanente Federation, LLC, 
(v) The Permanente Company, LLC, 
(vi) Any individual or organization that contracts
with an organization named in (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) or (v)
above to provide services to Health Plan Members, when such
contract includes a provision requiring arbitration of a
claim of a Health Plan Member.
 
(Emphases added).
 
5
 The conditions for exemption provide that the above claims are
 
covered by the arbitration clause unless: “(a) the U.S. Department of Labor
Regulation in 29 C.F.R. Chapter 2560.503-1(c)(4) applies to prohibit mandatory
binding arbitration of the category of claim presented; and (b) that
Regulation has not been modified, amended, repealed, superceded, or otherwise
found to be invalid or inapplicable to such claims.”  
7
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
The arbitration provision limits the scope of civil
 
discovery to “relevant” documents, “brief depositions,” and
 
“independent medical evaluations,” with the arbitrator designated
 to resolve any disputes: 
Limited civil discovery shall be permitted for (1)
production of relevant documents, (2) taking of brief
depositions of parties and expert witnesses,  and (3)
 independent medical evaluations.  The  arbitrator(s) shall
resolve any discovery dispute submitted by any party.
 
In regard to arbitration fees, the arbitration provision requires
 
that “fees and expenses of the arbitration service and the
 arbitrator(s) shall be borne equally by the two parties.” Each
 party is required to “bear their own attorney fees.” 
In regard to confidentiality, the arbitration provision
 
prohibits the disclosure of the terms or substance of the
 arbitration award except in limited circumstances: 
F. Confidentiality . Neither party nor the arbitrator(s) may
disclose the terms or substance of the arbitration award,
except as required by law or as necessary to file a motion
to confirm the award, and in that event, the parties shall
take all appropriate action to request that the records of
the arbitration be submitted to the court under seal.
 
The arbitration provision also states that the
 
arbitration decision is “final and binding,” that Kaiser members
 
“waive their rights to jury or court trial,” and that “[w]ith
 respect to any matter not expressly provided for herein, the
 arbitration shall be governed by [HRS] Chapter 658.” 
According to Kaiser, it “provides copies of the current
 
Group Service Agreement to employers annually and they are
 responsible for making it available to their Kaiser member­
8
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
employees for review. In addition, Kaiser employee-members may
 
request a copy of the Group Service Agreement that is applicable
 to them by contacting Kaiser’s Customer Service Department.” 
Kaiser also states that its Group Agreements are
 
“reviewed and renegotiated with employers on an annual basis, as
 necessary.” Kaiser attached a copy of its 2009 Group Agreement
 with its Motion to Compel Arbitration and argues that the 2009
 Agreement governed the “rights and responsibilities” of Kaiser
 and Michael in 2009, “when the events at issue in this case
 occurred.” As with the 2003 Group Agreement, there is no
 evidence in the record that the 2009 agreement was provided to
 Michael, other than Kaiser’s assertion that it provides copies of
 the Group Agreement to employers. 
The 2009 Group Agreement reflects several changes to
 
the arbitration provisions as compared to the 2003 Group
 Agreement.
6 The general provision providing that all claims are
 
6
 The 2009 Group Agreement provides that “[t]he arbitration
 
provisions in this Service Agreement shall supercede those in any prior
Service Agreement.”
 
9
          
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
7
subject to binding arbitration  and the confidentiality provision
remained substantively unchanged.
 
However, the provision on ERISA was changed to provide
 
that claims for benefits brought by members of private employer
 
groups under ERISA § 502(a)(1)(B) are not subject to mandatory
 
binding arbitration. 
The discovery provision was also changed to
  
further limit discovery, permitting brief depositions of only
 
three “critical witnesses” in addition to medical personnel.8
   
7 Section 8(A) of the 2009 Group Service Agreement provides: 
A. Binding Arbitration.  Except as provided below, any and
all claims, disputes, or causes of action arising out of or
related to this Service Agreement, its performance or
alleged breach, or the relationship or conduct of the
parties, including but not limited to any and all claims,
disputes, or causes of action based on contract, tort,
statutory law, or actions in equity, shall be resolved by
binding arbitration as set forth in this Service Agreement.
  (1) This includes but is not limited to any claim
asserted:
 
(a) By or against a Member, a patient, the heirs or
the personal representative of the estate of the Member or
patient, or any other person entitled to bring an action for
damages for harm to the Member or patient as permitted by
applicable federal or Hawaii state law existing at the time
the claim is filed ("Member Parties");
(b) On account of death, bodily injury, physical
ailment, mental disturbance, or economic loss arising out of
the rendering or failure to render medical services or the
provision or failure to provide benefits under this Service
Agreement, premises liability, or arising out of any other
claim of any nature, irrespective of the legal theory upon
which the claim is asserted; and
(c) By or against one or more of the following
entities or their employees, officers or directors (“Kaiser
Permanente Parties”)[.]
 
8 The discovery provision in the 2009 Group Agreement provides: 
(3) Limited civil discovery shall be permitted only
 
for
 
(a) production of documents that are relevant and
 
material, 
(b) taking of brief depositions of treating
physicians, expert witnesses and parties . . . and a maximum
of three other critical witnesses for each side (i.e.,
(continued...)
 
10
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
The parties’ responsibility for arbitration expenses
 
was altered as well, to lessen the member’s share to a third of
 
the costs for the arbitration service and the arbitrator, while
 responsibility for other fees remained unchanged, so that each
 party bears their own attorney’s fees, witness fees, and
 discovery costs. In addition, the provision on the applicable
 law for “any matter not expressly provided for herein” was
 changed to provide that such matters would be governed by the
 Federal Arbitration Act (FAA), 9 U.S.C. § 1 et seq., rather than
 HRS Chapter 658. 
Although the first page of the 2009 Group Agreement
 
provides a “2009 Summary of Important Changes for Kaiser
 Permanente Group HMO Plans Contract Renewals,” none of the
 changes detailed above are listed in the summary. 
B.
 
The facts alleged in the Siopeses’ Complaint were as
 
follows. In October 2009, Michael contacted his Kaiser primary
 care physician on Maui regarding a persistent upper abdominal
 pain. He was prescribed medication, and blood tests were ordered
 for him. 
(...continued)
respo
ndents or claimants), and
(c)
 independent medical evaluations.  
The arbitrator(s) shall resolve any discovery disputes
submitted by any party, including entry of protective orders
or other discovery orders as appropriate to protect a
party’s rights under this paragraph.  
11
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
On January 11, 2010, Michael again contacted his
 
physician because he continued to experience persistent abdominal
 
pains. After several tests were conducted over the next month,
 an upper endoscopy and biopsy conducted on February 16, 2010
 revealed an ulcerated cancer tumor at the junction of Michael’s
 esophagus and stomach. 
The following day, Michael requested an outside
 
referral from Kaiser for the purpose of seeking a second medical
 opinion, but was advised to wait until after he had consulted a
 Kaiser surgeon. 
An appointment was scheduled for February 19,
 
2010, with a general surgeon at Kaiser’s Moanalua facility on
 
O'ahu. 
The Siopeses flew to O' ahu to meet with the general 
surgeon, who informed them that Michael had been diagnosed with 
“small cell” neuroendocrine carcinoma of the gastroesophageal junction, a very rare, aggressive and fatal form of cancer. The general surgeon explained that Kaiser would develop a course of treatment based on this diagnosis. He informed the Siopeses that he had never seen or treated this form of cancer at the juncture of the esophagus and stomach and did not know of anyone within the Kaiser Hawai' i network with expertise in this area. He 
indicated that he would need to do “internet research” in order to formulate a proper treatment plan. Nevertheless, the surgeon informed the Siopeses that the cancer could become fatal within a 
12
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
month and required urgent treatment. He therefore wanted to
 
immediately perform a complete surgical resection of Michael’s
 stomach and esophagus. 
Two days later, the general surgeon informed Michael
 
that the surgery was scheduled to take place in nine days. The
 surgeon acknowledged that he was still completing his research. 
The Siopeses decided to seek a second opinion at Duke
 
University Medical Center (Duke) in North Carolina, a high volume
 cancer center specializing in treating esophageal and stomach
 cancers. Upon learning that Duke was willing to immediately
 evaluate him, Michael contacted the Kaiser general surgeon in
 order to have his pathology slides sent to Duke. When Michael
 spoke to the surgeon later that day, the surgeon stated that
 after conducting additional internet research and speaking with
 an oncologist, he had concluded that his initial treatment plan
 may have been inappropriate. The surgeon suggested that Michael
 have additional imaging studies done and possibly undergo some
 radiation and chemotherapy before the surgery. The surgeon
 further stated that he had emailed a Kaiser oncologist to request
 a consultation but that no appointment had yet been scheduled. 
The next day, February 23, 2010, the Siopeses flew to
 
North Carolina so that Michael could be examined by the medical
 team at Duke. On February 24, the Kaiser oncologist contacted
 Michael and scheduled an appointment for March 8, 2010. 
13
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
On February 25, 2010, Michael arrived at Duke. A
 
multidisciplinary cancer treatment team determined that Kaiser’s
 
diagnosis of “small cell” neuroendocrine carcinoma was erroneous,
 
and Michael actually had a “high grade” neuroendocrine tumor. 
The Duke team explained that this was a serious error, as these
 
types of cancer require different treatment courses. The Duke
 team recommended a treatment plan that combined measured
 chemotherapy and targeted radiation to shrink the cancer tumor,
 followed by surgical removal of the tumor. 
The Siopeses elected to remain at Duke so that Michael
 
could immediately begin the recommended course of treatment. On
 March 3, 2010, a Kaiser physician agreed to provide a referral
 for Michael’s evaluation and treatment at Duke and routed the
 request to Michael’s primary care physician, the Kaiser
 oncologist, and the Kaiser general surgeon. On March 22, 2010,
 Michael’s primary care physician, after reviewing the Duke
 medical records, made a referral to Duke for treatment and
 requested that the treatment be covered by the Kaiser Group Plan. 
Michael underwent radiation and chemotherapy treatment
 
at Duke between March 8 and April 20, 2010. On March 29, Michael
 received a letter from Kaiser denying his request for Kaiser to
 cover the costs of his treatment at Duke. Kaiser’s reasoning was
 that Kaiser had the capacity to perform radiation and
 chemotherapy treatment, although Kaiser had not ordered or
 
14
          
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
prescribed either treatment for Michael. 
On June 3, 2010, Michael’s primary care physician made
 
another referral request for Kaiser to cover the cost of
 
Michael’s surgery at Duke. On June 4, Michael underwent thoracic
 
surgery at Duke. On June 9, he received a letter from Kaiser
 
again denying his request for coverage. 
Duke’s treatment was successful and resulted in
 
eliminating the cancer while preserving intact the majority of
 
Michael’s stomach and esophagus. On July 1, 2010, Michael was
 
cleared by Duke to return to Maui. 
Between July and December 2010, Michael filed two
 
appeals with the Kaiser Permanente Appeals Coordinator,
 
requesting that Kaiser provide coverage for the testing and
 treatment at Duke. Kaiser denied both appeals based on its
 assertion that the Duke treatment constituted “elective, non-
emergency, non-urgent care” that was not directed or authorized
 by Kaiser. 
In total, the Siopeses estimate that they incurred over
 
$250,000 in medical expenses at Duke. 
15
          
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
C.
 
On November 9, 2011, the Siopeses filed suit against
 
Kaiser in circuit court.9 The Siopeses asserted claims for
 
breach of contract, medical negligence, insurance bad faith,
 
violations of Hawaii’s consumer protection law (HRS Chapter 480),
 breach of fiduciary duty, negligent infliction of emotional
 distress, declaratory and injunctive relief, and punitive
 damages. 
The Siopeses sought a declaration that the mandatory 
arbitration requirement in the Kaiser Group Agreement was void and unenforceable because “it denies Members rights guaranteed by Hawai'i law, makes it impossible for a Member who is wrongfully 
denied benefits to be made whole, and provides an adjudicatory process that is unconscionable and heavily biased in Kaiser’s favor.” The Complaint cited the arbitration provision’s prohibition of the recovery of attorneys’ fees and costs, limitations on discovery, exemption for members of private employer Groups bringing ERISA claims, and inclusion of a confidentiality provision, as reasons why the provision should be declared void and unenforceable.
10 The Siopeses also claimed in 
9 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided. 
10
 The Complaint specifically alleged that the arbitration clause
 
prevents a Kaiser member “from recovering attorneys’ fees and costs incurred
in connection with a breach of contract claim, an insurance coverage claim, or
a claim for unfair and deceptive business practices and/or unfair competition
under [HRS] Chapter 480,” thereby “mak[ing] it impossible for a Plan Member to
recover his full loss or be made whole.”  With respect to discovery, the
Complaint alleged that the arbitration provision’s “limited civil discovery”
(continued...)
 
16
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
this regard that the arbitration provision is a provision of
 
adhesion for which Michael had neither choice nor bargaining
  
power to challenge. 
The Siopeses also contended that the arbitration
 
provision was inapplicable to Lacey’s claims “because she has
 
never been a Plan Member or otherwise agreed to be bound by the
 arbitration provision[.]” 
The Siopeses sought declaratory and injunctive relief
 
to permanently enjoin Kaiser from enforcing the arbitration
 provision. 
On January 10, 2012, Kaiser filed its Motion to Compel
 
Arbitration and Motion to Stay Discovery pending the ruling on
 the motion to compel. 
Kaiser argued in its Motion to Compel Arbitration that
 
the Siopeses’ claims were governed by the 2009 Group Agreement
 between Kaiser and the EUTF. Kaiser contended that the
 arbitration provision was valid and enforceable because the
 
(...continued)
unfairly advantages Kaiser, “which has ready access to records, physicians,
nurses, administrators, claims personnel, appeal officers, and others who were
involved in the events that gave rise to a party’s claims.” 
In regard to the ERISA provision, the Complaint alleged that the
arbitration provision requires public employee Group Plan Members, but not
private employee members, to arbitrate their claims.  The Complaint asserted
that this practice “constitutes unfair discrimination between insureds having
substantially like insuring, risk, and exposure factors and expense elements,
and constitutes an unfair method of competition and an unfair and deceptive
act or practice under HRS § 431:13-103(a).”  
Finally, the Complaint alleged that the confidentiality provision,
which prohibits Kaiser members “from disclosing ‘the substance of the
arbitration proceedings or award,’” has the effect of concealing “adverse
adjudicatory findings” and “denies . . . consumers information that is
essential to the decision of whether to purchase and maintain health insurance
through Kaiser.”  
17
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
provision was in writing, unambiguous as to the parties’ intent
 
to submit disputes to arbitration, and supported by bilateral
 consideration. Additionally, Kaiser contended that the
 arbitration provision was not an unenforceable contract of
 adhesion, but was substantively similar to the arbitration
 agreement upheld by this court in Leong v. Kaiser Found. Hosps.,
 71 Haw. 240, 788 P.2d 164 (1990), which involved a group
 agreement negotiated between Kaiser and the Public Employees
 Health Fund. 
In the Siopeses’ response in opposition to the Motion
 
to Compel Arbitration, they argued that a valid agreement to
 arbitrate was not formed between Kaiser and Michael because
 Michael did not assent to the arbitration provision by signing
 the Enrollment Form.
11 They noted that the Enrollment Form did
 
not contain an arbitration agreement or suggest that one existed,
 the Group Agreement containing the arbitration provision was not
 signed by Michael, and there was no indication that the Siopeses
 reviewed and understood its contents. 
Kaiser responded by arguing that while the Enrollment
 
Form did not itself contain a reference to the arbitration
 agreement, the form’s statement that the enrollee “agree[s] to
 abide by the terms and conditions of the benefit plans I
 selected” was sufficient to alert Michael to the arbitration
 
11
 The Siopeses had no opposition to the Motion to Stay Discovery.  
18
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
provision contained in the Group Agreement. 
Following a hearing, the circuit court granted Kaiser’s
 
motions. Regarding the Motion to Compel Arbitration, the circuit
 
court stated that the scope of its review on a motion to compel
 arbitration was “narrow and circumscribed” and consisted of
 inquiring first, whether there was a valid agreement to
 arbitrate, and second, whether the agreement encompasses the
 dispute at issue. The court concluded that the decision in
 Leong, 71 Haw. 240, 788 P.2d 164 was “directly on point and
 controlling.” The court found that the facts in this case were
 similar to those in Leong, “where the Supreme Court held that the
 plaintiffs’ mere averment that they did not receive the [Kaiser]
 booklet containing the arbitration reference . . . without more,
 was insufficient to negate the requirement of binding arbitration
 contained in the contract.” Thus, the court found that the two-
step inquiry for compelling arbitration was satisfied. 
The court also found that Lacey’s claims were “within
 
the scope of the broad arbitration provisions contained [in the
 Group Agreement].” The court did not review the Siopeses’ claims
 of unconscionability based on its conclusion that the claim was a
 “separate issue from what the court has to review here, which is
 a very narrow scope, whether there’s a valid agreement to
 arbitrate.”
 
19
          
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
II. APPEAL 
The Siopeses timely appealed the circuit court’s
 
orders,12 and petitioned to transfer their appeal from the
 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) to this court.13 On August
 
29, 2012, this court issued an order granting the transfer. 
The Siopeses raise three points of error on this appeal: 
A. The Circuit Court erred by failing to find the
arbitration provision unenforceable as to Michael Siopes and
by failing to examine the specific issues raised by Michael
Siopes as to mutual assent and bilateral consideration.
 
B. The Circuit Court erred by compelling Lacey Siopes to
arbitrate her distinct claims for injury, since she was not
a Kaiser member and had never agreed to be bound by any
provisions of the Kaiser plan.
 
C. The Circuit Court erred by failing to review the terms
of Kaiser’s arbitration provision, which are unconscionable
and therefore unenforceable.
 
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A petition to compel arbitration is reviewed de novo.  The
 
standard is the same as that which would be applicable to a
motion for summary judgment, and the trial court's decision
is reviewed “using the same standard employed by the trial
court and based upon the same evidentiary materials as were
before [it] in determination of the motion.” 
Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai' i 226, 231, 921 P.2d 146, 
151 (1996) (citations omitted) (brackets in original).
 
12 HRS § 641-1(a) (Supp. 2012) provides that “[a]ppeals shall be
 
allowed in civil matters from all final judgments, orders, or decrees of
circuit and district courts . . . to the intermediate appellate court, subject
to chapter 602.”  Orders compelling arbitration are appealable final orders
within the contemplation of HRS § 641-1.   Cnty. of Haw. v. Unidev, LLC , 129
 
Hawai'i 378, 392, 301 P.3d 588, 602 (2013) [hereinafter Unidev II]. 
13
 HRS § 602-58 (Supp. 2012) and Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
Rule 40.2 (2012) set forth the requirements for this court to grant anapplication for transfer of a case within the jurisdiction of the ICA to thiscourt. 
20
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
IV. DISCUSSION
 
A.
 
“‘When presented with a motion to compel arbitration,
 
the court is limited to answering two questions: 1) whether an
 
arbitration agreement exists between the parties; and 2) if so,
 whether the subject matter of the dispute is arbitrable under
 
such agreement.’” Douglass v. Pflueger Haw., Inc., 110 Hawai' i 
520, 530, 135 P.3d 129, 139 (2006) (quoting Koolau Radiology, 
Inc. v. Queen’s Med. Ctr., 73 Haw. 433, 445, 834 P.2d 1294, 1300 (1992)) (brackets omitted). The party seeking to compel arbitration carries the initial burden of establishing that an arbitration agreement exists between the parties. Cnty. of Haw. 
v. Unidev, LLC, 128 Hawai' i 378, 387, 289 P.3d 1014, 1023 (App. 
2012) [hereinafter Unidev I], vacated in part, aff’d in part on 
other grounds, Unidev II, 129 Hawai' i 378, 301 P.3d 588 (2013). 
If this initial burden is met, the burden shifts to the opposing 
party to “present evidence on its defenses to the arbitration 
agreement.” Unidev I, 128 Hawai' i at 387, 289 P.3d at 1023. See 
4 Am. Jur. 2d Alternative Dispute Resolution § 98 (2007). 
“Even though arbitration has a favored place, there
 
still must be an underlying agreement between the parties to
 
arbitrate. Without an agreement to arbitrate, a court may not
 force parties to engage in arbitration.” Luke v. Gentry Realty,
 
Ltd., 105 Hawai' i 241, 247, 96 P.3d 261, 267 (2004) (citations 
21
          
 
 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
and quotation marks omitted). Accordingly, “[a]lthough their
 
terms are not identical, both the FAA[14] and HRS ch. [658A][15]
 
interpose a written and otherwise valid contract to arbitrate as
 a precondition to enforcement.” Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82
 
Hawai'i 226, 238, 921 P.2d 146, 158 (1996). 
14 Section 2 of the FAA provides in relevant part that “[a] written
 
provision in . . . a contract evidencing a transaction involving commerce to
settle by arbitration a controversy thereafter arising out of such contract or
transaction . . . shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, save upon such
grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract.”  9
 U.S.C. § 2 (2012).  
Under Section 2 of the FAA, “[s]tates may regulate contracts,
including arbitration clauses, under general contract law principles and they
may invalidate an arbitration clause ‘upon such grounds as exist at law or in
equity for the revocation of any contract.’”  Allied-Bruce Terminix Cos. v.
 
Dobson, 513 U.S. 265, 281 (1995) (quoting 9 U.S.C. § 2).  “Thus, generally
applicable contract defenses, such as fraud, duress, or unconscionability, may
be applied to invalidate arbitration agreements without contravening § 2.” 
Doctor’s Assocs., Inc. v. Casarotto , 517 U.S. 681, 687 (1996).  See First
 
Options of Chicago, Inc. v. Kaplan, 514 U.S. 938, 944 (1995) (“When deciding
whether the parties agreed to arbitrate a certain matter (including
arbitrability), courts generally . . . should apply ordinary state-law
principles that govern the formation of contracts.”). 
15 In 2001, Hawai 'i adopted the Revised Uniform Arbitration Act, 
codified in HRS chapter 658A, and repealed HRS chapter 658.  2001 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 265, § 5 at 820 (repealing HRS chapter 658); 2001 Haw. Sess. Laws Act
65, § 1 et seq. at 810-20 (enacting HRS chapter 658A).  HRS chapter 658A
governs arbitration agreements “made on or after July 1, 2002,” unless the
parties otherwise agree, but “[a]fter June 30, 2004, this chapter governs anagreement to arbitrate whenever made.”  HRS § 658A-3 (Supp. 2012). 
Prior to 2001, HRS § 658-1 (1993) provided,
 
A provision in a written contract to settle by arbitration a
controversy thereafter arising out of the contract or the
refusal to perform the whole or any part thereof, or an
agreement in writing to submit an existing controversy to
arbitration pursuant to section 658-2, shall be valid,
enforceable, and irrevocable, save only upon such grounds as
exist for the revocation of any contract.
 
Currently, HRS § 658A-6(a) (Supp. 2012) provides, “An agreement contained in a
record to submit to arbitration any existing or subsequent controversy arising
between the parties to the agreement is valid, enforceable, and irrevocable
except upon a ground that exists at law or in equity for the revocation of a
contract.”
 
22
          
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
We have held that “in order to be valid and
 
enforceable, an arbitration agreement must have the following
 
three elements: (1) it must be in writing; (2) it must be
 unambiguous as to the intent to submit disputes or controversies
 to arbitration; and (3) there must be bilateral consideration.” 
Douglass , 110 Hawai' i at 531, 135 P.3d at 140 (citing Brown, 82 
Hawai'i at 238-40, 921 P.2d at 158-60). 
With respect to the second requirement, “
there must be
 
a mutual assent or a meeting of the minds on all essential
 elements or terms to create a binding contract.” Douglass, 110
 
Hawai'i at 531, 135 P.3d at 140 (quoting Earl M. Jorgensen Co. v. 
Mark Constr., Inc., 56 Haw. 466, 470, 540 P.2d 978, 982 (1975))
 (brackets, ellipses and quotation marks omitted) (emphasis
 added). “The existence of mutual assent or intent to accept is
 determined by an objective standard . . . . Unexpressed
 intentions are nugatory when the problem is to ascertain the
 legal relations, if any, between two parties.” Douglass, 110
 
Hawai'i at 531, 135 P.3d at 140 (quotation marks omitted). 
The Siopeses’ primary contention is that the second
 
requirement of mutual intent to submit to arbitration is not
 present in this case because Michael did not assent to the
 arbitration agreement when he enrolled in the Kaiser plan.
16
 
16
 The parties do not dispute that the arbitration provision
 
constitutes a writing.  Although the parties dispute the issue of bilateral
consideration, we resolve the enforceability of the arbitration agreement on
(continued...)
 
23
          
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Michael does not dispute that he entered into a contractual
 
relationship with Kaiser for health services, which he financed
 through deductions from his pay. However, Michael disputes that
 a valid agreement to arbitrate was formed between he and Kaiser,
 given that he had no knowledge of the existence of the
 arbitration provision at the time of his enrollment.
17
 
Kaiser takes the position that Michael’s assent to the
 
arbitration agreement is irrelevant because the arbitration
 agreement is “binding on him and those claiming through him by
 virtue of the agreement between Kaiser and the EUTF.” For this
 proposition, Kaiser relies on this court’s decision in Leong v.
 Kaiser Found. Hosps., 71 Haw. 240, 788 P.2d 164 (1990), holding
 that an arbitration provision contained in a Kaiser health plan,
 which was negotiated between Kaiser and the Public Employees
 
18
 was enforceable against
 Health Fund, the EUTF’s predecessor,  
Kaiser members who enrolled through the Health Fund. 
Kaiser’s reliance on Leong
, however, is misplaced for
 
the following reasons. First, the Leong court’s analysis is not
 
(...continued)
the basis of the mutual assent requirement and therefore do not reach the
question of bilateral consideration. 
17 “Challenges to the validity of arbitration agreements ‘upon such
 
grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract’ can
be divided into two types.  One type challenges specifically the validity of
 the agreement to arbitrate.  The other challenges the contract as a whole . .
 . .”  Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v. Cardegna , 546 U.S. 440, 444 (2006)
(citations omitted).  Michael’s claim in this case is of the first type, as he
specifically challenges the enforceability of the arbitration provision rather
than the validity of the Group Agreement as a whole. 
18
 See supra note 1. 
24
          
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
applicable here because in that case, the parties did not dispute
 
the validity of the formation of the arbitration agreement
 between Kaiser and the plaintiffs. In Leong, it was undisputed
 that the arbitration provision, upon being added to the health
 plan contract, was summarized in a booklet that was distributed
 to public employees covered by the Health Fund. Id. at 246, 788
 
P.2d at 168. Despite such evidence, the plaintiffs “insist[ed]
 that they failed to receive a copy of the booklet” and argued
 
that they were not bound by the arbitration term because “they
 
had no actual knowledge of this provision in the contract.” Id.
 
The plaintiffs did not argue that an agreement to arbitrate was
 
not formed due to a lack of mutual assent. Accordingly, the
 Leong court did not analyze the issue of contract formation,
 including the element of mutual assent, in response to the
 plaintiffs’ claim that the arbitration agreement was
 unenforceable. Instead, the Leong court proceeded with its
 analysis on the basis that the plaintiffs had validly assented to
 the contract and its terms: “The general rule of contract law is
 that one who assents to a contract is bound by it and cannot
 complain that he has not read it or did not know what it
 contained.” Id. at 245, 788 P.2d at 168 (emphasis added). 
There is a significant distinction between the issue of
 
lack of knowledge as to a contract provision and lack of mutual
 assent to a contract provision; the former issue assumes the
 
25
          
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
existence of a valid agreement while the latter questions whether
 
an agreement to arbitrate was actually formed. In this case, the
 
issue is whether Michael assented to the arbitration provision in
 
the first instance, when he enrolled in the Kaiser plan by
 signing the Enrollment Form. 
Therefore, the focus of the inquiry
 
is one of contract  
formation, which the Leong plaintiffs did not
 
raise and which the Leong court did not address. 
This court made the same distinction between lack of
 
knowledge and lack of mutual assent to a contract provision in
 
Douglass, 110 Hawai' i 520, 135 P.3d 129. The issue in Douglass 
was whether an employee who signed an acknowledgment form located
 
at the end of the employer’s Employee Handbook was bound by the
 arbitration provision set forth in the handbook. Id. at 522-24,
 
135 P.3d at 131-33. Unlike Leong, the parties “raised issues
 regarding the validity and enforceability of the alleged
 arbitration agreement[.]” Id. at 525, 135 P.3d at 134. 
In its analysis of whether the arbitration agreement
 
met the traditional requirements for contract formation, the
 Douglass court noted the differences between its inquiry and the
 court’s inquiry in Leong:
 
We do not suggest, however, that one who is aware that he or
she is entering into a contract may avoid its effect by
failing to read it.  Such a rule would undermine reliance on
 written instruments.  Indeed, we have stated that “the
general rule of contract law is that one who assents to a
contract is bound by it and cannot complain that he has not
read it or did not know what it contained.”  In Leong, the
plaintiffs did not dispute the existence of a contract,
which contained an arbitration provision.  Rather, they
argued that “they should not be bound by the agreement to
 
26
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
arbitrate because they had no knowledge of this provision in
the contract.”  Here, however, the arbitration “agreement”
does not meet the traditional requirements necessary to the
formation of a contract.
 
Id. at 534 n.12, 135 P.3d at 143 n.12 (citations and brackets
 
omitted) (emphases added). 
Thus the court distinguished Leong on the basis that
 
the Leong plaintiffs did not dispute whether the arbitration
 agreement met the traditional requirements necessary for the
 formation of a contract, but argued only that they should not be
 bound by the agreement because they had no knowledge of it. In
 this case, as in Douglass, the Siopeses dispute the formation of
 an arbitration agreement based on the absence of mutual assent. 
Therefore, Leong is not applicable to this case and lends no
 support to Kaiser’s assertion that Michael’s assent to the
 arbitration agreement is irrelevant to the court’s analysis. 
Second, even if it was applicable, Leong is factually
 
distinguishable from the instant case. In Leong, it was
 “undisputed that Kaiser prepared a booklet summarizing the
 essential terms of the Plan for distribution for public employees
 covered by the Health Fund,” and that the booklet included notice
 of the arbitration provision. 71 Haw. at 246, 788 P.2d at 168. 
“Affidavits were submitted attesting to the usual manner of
 distributing such information to all public employees and
 averring that the routine was adhered to at all times pertinent
 to this case.” Id. In this context, the Leong court held that
 
27
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
the plaintiffs’ “averment that they did not receive the booklet,
 
without more, is insufficient to negate a provision for binding
 arbitration contained in the contract.” Id. 
In this case, on the other hand, it is far from
 
“undisputed” that the 2003 or 2009 Group Agreement containing the
 arbitration provision was distributed to Michael. Kaiser
 submitted a single declaration with its Motion to Compel
 Arbitration, by a Kaiser Manager of Contract and Benefit
 Administration, stating that “Kaiser provides copies of the
 current Group Service Agreement to employers annually and they
 are responsible for making it available to their Kaiser member-
employees for review.” The declaration also provided that
 “Kaiser employee-members may request a copy of the Group Service
 Agreement that is applicable to them by contacting Kaiser’s
 Customer Service Department.” However, the record does not
 
contain any evidence that Michael received a copy of the Group
 
Agreement, and no evidence was submitted pertaining to the usual
 
manner in which the Group Agreement is annually distributed to
 the Kaiser member-employers. 
Furthermore, inasmuch as this case centers on the
 
formation of the arbitration agreement and Michael’s assent to
 the arbitration provision at the time he entered into the
 agreement with Kaiser through the EUTF, the critical question is
 whether Michael had notice of and assented to the arbitration
 
28
          
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
agreement at the time he signed the Enrollment Form. Michael’s
 
declaration provides: “Prior to signing the Enrollment Form, I do
 not recall being provided a copy of the Group Service Agreement
 or any other documentation.” The burden was on Kaiser, as the
 party moving to compel arbitration, to demonstrate that Michael
 mutually assented to the arbitration agreement. Although Kaiser
 acknowledges that it has the burden of satisfying the statutory
 requirements for disclosure of the enrollee’s rights,
 responsibilities, and obligations and information on complaints
 
and appeals procedures to the enrollee at the time of enrollment,
 
Kaiser does not claim that it had a policy of requiring employers
 
to provide prospective members with a copy of the applicable
 Group Agreement prior to or contemporaneously with the execution
 of the Enrollment Form.
19
   
19 HRS § 432E-7(a) (Supp. 2003) requires a managed care plan to
 
provide certain information, including a “statement on enrollee’s rights,
responsibilities, and obligations” and “[i]nformation on complaints and
appeals procedures,” to the enrollee upon enrollment in the plan:
 
The managed care plan shall provide to its enrollees upon
enrollment and thereafter upon request the following
information:
 
(1) A list of participating providers which shall be
updated on a regular basis indicating, at a minimum, their
specialty and whether the provider is accepting new
patients;
(2) A complete description of benefits, services, and
copayments;
(3) A statement on enrollee's rights, responsibilities,
and obligations ;
(4) An explanation of the referral process, if any;
(5) Where services or benefits may be obtained;
(6) Information on complaints and appeals procedures; and
(7) The telephone number of the insurance division.
This information shall be provided to prospective
enrollees upon request. 
(continued...)
 
29
          
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Third, Kaiser relies primarily on the Leong court’s
 
statement that the Kaiser Plan was a product of negotiations
 
between two parties of equal bargaining power, the Health Fund
 and Kaiser, in order to argue that Michael’s assent to
 arbitration is irrelevant. 
However, the Leong court made its
 
observation of equal bargaining power in the context of
 determining whether the Kaiser Plan was a contract of adhesion,
 and not in the context of determining whether an arbitration
 agreement was validly formed through mutual assent. 71 Haw. at
 247-48, 788 P.2d at 168-69. The asserted equal bargaining power
 of the EUTF and Kaiser is irrelevant for the purposes of
 determining whether an agreement to arbitrate was formed between
 Kaiser and Michael. 
(...continued)
(Emph
ases added).  A “managed care plan” means “any plan, regardless of form,
offered or administered by any person or entity, including but not limited to
. . . a health maintenance organization governed by chapter 432D, . . . and
any other mixed model, that provides for the financing or delivery of health
care services or benefits to enrollees . . . .”  HRS § 432E-1 (Supp. 2003).
Likew
ise, HRS § 432D-25 (Supp. 2003) requires all health
maintenance organizations to “provide current and prospective enrollees with
written disclosure of coverages and benefits, including information on
coverage principles and any exclusions or restrictions on coverage,” for the
purpose of “ensur[ing] that all individuals understand their health care
options and are able to make informed decisions.”  (Emphasis added).  “Health
 maintenance organization” means “any person that undertakes to provide or
arrange for the delivery of basic health care services to enrollees on a
prepaid basis, except for enrollee responsibility for copayments, deductibles,
or both.”  HRS § 432D-1 (Supp. 2003). 
At oral argument, Kaiser argued that it satisfied its obligation
to disclose to enrollees the terms and conditions of the Kaiser group health
plan by contractually requiring the EUTF to provide this information. Oral
 Argument at 30:17 (May 16, 2013), Siopes v. Kaiser Found. Health Plan, Inc.,
No. SCAP-12-0000361, available at
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/courts/oral_arguments/archive/oasc12361.html.
Kaiser noted in this regard that the Group Agreement provides that all
information Kaiser provides to the Group will in turn be communicated to all
enrollees.  While Kaiser is not precluded from delegating its duty to disclose
to another entity such as the EUTF, Kaiser remains ultimately responsible for
ensuring that its statutory obligations are satisfied.
 
30
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Finally, this court has held in cases decided
 
subsequent to  Leong that in order to be valid and enforceable, an 
arbitration agreement must be unambiguous as to the intent of the 
parties to submit disputes or controversies to arbitration. Brown, 82 Hawai' i 226, 921 P.2d 146; Douglass, 110 Hawai' i 520, 
135 P.3d 129. 
In 
Brown, the court held that an arbitration agreement 
set forth in an employment application constituted a valid agreement binding the plaintiff-employee to arbitrate employment-related disputes.
20 82 Hawai' i at 237-40, 921 P.2d at 157-60. 
The arbitration provision was contained in a section of the application entitled “Agreement,” and a subsection styled “Arbitration Of Employee Rights.” Id. at 229, 921 P.2d at 149. 
The signature line for the applicant appeared just below the arbitration agreement. Id. at 229, 245, 921 P.2d at 149, 165. 
As stated, the Brown court determined that in order to
 
be valid and enforceable, an arbitration agreement must be in
 writing, reflect mutual assent, and be supported by bilateral
 consideration. Id. at 237-40, 921 P.2d at 157-60. In regard to
 
the mutual assent requirement, the court found that the
 arbitration agreement at issue reflected mutual assent and
 
20
 The arbitration agreement provided in relevant part, “Because of
 
the delay and expense which results from the use of the federal and state
court systems, KFC and I agree to submit to binding arbitration any
controversies concerning my compensation, employment, or termination of
employment, rather than to use such court systems.”  Id. at 230, 921 P.2d at
 150 (brackets omitted). 
31
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
consideration for that mutual assent “on its face,” based on the
 
language used in the provision. Id. at 240, 921 P.2d at 160. 
Later in the opinion, the court discussed the
 
“arbitration agreement within the greater context of the document
 in which it is located in order to determine whether any party to
 it could reasonably have failed to understand that it was
 intended to govern the entire galaxy of employment-related
 controversies.” Id. at 245, 921 P.2d at 165. In particular, the
 
court looked at the effect of a disclaimer in the application
 providing that “nothing contained in this application . . . shall
 constitute an implied or expressed contract of employment.” Id.
 
(quotation marks omitted). The court emphasized the manner in
 which the arbitration agreement was set off from other provisions
 in the application, thus “highlight[ing]—rather than
 camouflag[ing]—its general purpose,” and concluded that given
 this context, the disclaimer could not reasonably be construed to
 negate the arbitration provision. Id. 
Subsequently in Douglass, the court applied the three 
elements of the Brown test in determining whether a valid arbitration agreement was formed and specifically distinguished the case from Leong based on the contract formation issues raised 
by the parties. 110 Hawai' i 520, 135 P.3d 129. 
In Douglass, the plaintiff was hired by the employer
 
and received the employer’s Employee Handbook, which contained
 
32
          
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
the employer’s policies and procedures as well as an arbitration
 
provision. Id. at 523, 135 P.3d at 132. The arbitration
 
provision provided that “[a]ny and all claims arising out of the
 employee’s employment with the Company and his/her termination
 shall be settled by final binding arbitration” in accordance with
 the FAA. Id. The plaintiff signed an acknowledgment form
 
located towards the end of the Handbook, separated by
 approximately forty pages from the arbitration provision. Id. at
 
523-24, 135 P.3d at 132-33. By signing the form, the plaintiff
 acknowledged that he received a copy of the Handbook and “read
 and underst[ood] the information outlined in the handbook.” Id.
 
at 523, 135 P.3d at 132. The acknowledgment form also provided
 that the provisions in the Handbook were “presented as a matter
 of information only and do not constitute an employment
 contract.” Id. A “disclaimer” preceding the acknowledgment form
 
further stated that the policies in the Handbook “are intended as
 guidelines” and are “not intended to and do not create a contract
 between you and the company.” Id. at 532, 135 P.3d at 141. 
On appeal, this court held that the arbitration
 
provision was not valid and enforceable, concluding that the
 parties had not mutually assented to arbitration.
21 Id. at 531­
34, 135 P.3d at 140-43. The court found that the language used
 
21
 The Douglass court additionally held that the arbitration
 
agreement failed for lack of bilateral consideration because the employer
reserved the right to change the Employee Handbook “at any time and without
advance notice.”  Id. at 534-36, 135 P.3d at 143-45 (quotation marks omitted). 
33
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
in the arbitration provision reflected mutual assent “on its
 
face,” as was the case in Brown. Id. at 532, 135 P.3d at 141. 
Nevertheless, the court looked beyond the language of the
 
arbitration provision to the “surrounding circumstances
 
presented” in the case and concluded that it could not find
 
mutual assent between the parties to arbitrate their disputes. 
Id. 
In considering the surrounding circumstances, the court
 
held that the plaintiff “merely acknowledged his receipt and
 understanding of the items presented to him,” but “never
 expressed assent to the terms contained in those items, except
 for those terms expressly stating that the policies in the
 Handbook did ‘not create a contract,’ were to be treated as
 ‘guidelines,’ and were presented for ‘information only.’” Id. at
 
533, 135 P.3d at 142. The court noted that the acknowledgment
 form “makes no mention of the arbitration provision contained in
 the Handbook, nor sufficiently informs him that the Handbook
 contains terms to which he is contractually obligating himself. 
Nothing in the acknowledgment form that [the plaintiff] signed
 suggests to us that he was entering into an arbitration
 agreement.” Id. 
The Douglass court distinguished the case from Brown,
 
explaining that the arbitration provision in Douglass was “not
 
‘boxed off’ or otherwise set apart from the other provisions in
 
34
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
the Handbook or on the acknowledgment form.” Id. The court
 
further elaborated: 
In fact, the arbitration provision, like all the other
provisions in the Employee Handbook, is (1) introduced by
its own bold faced heading and (2) in the same font size as
the rest of the Handbook.  Moreover, the agreement, unlike
 
the agreement in Brown that was set off and on the same page
as the signature line, is located on page 20 of the sixty-
page Handbook, and [the plaintiff’s] signature is not found
until forty pages later on the acknowledgment page, which .
. . makes no mention of the arbitration provision.
 
Id. 
The court reiterated that the Acknowledgment form was
 
“uninformative” and failed to call attention to the arbitration
 
clause. Id. Although the record showed that the employer’s
 
human resources administrator reviewed the Handbook with the
 plaintiff as part of his orientation, the record did not reveal
 whether she specifically mentioned the arbitration provision. 
Id. at 533-34, 135 P.3d at 142-43. The court concluded, “The
 record before us . . . does not indicate that [the plaintiff] was
 informed of the existence of the arbitration provision, let alone
 that he would be bound by it.” Id. at 533, 135 P.3d at 142. 
Therefore, the court held that the mutual assent requirement was
 not satisfied and the plaintiff could not be compelled to
 arbitrate his claims against the employer. Id. at 534, 135 P.3d
 
at 143. 
In comparison to Douglass, the facts of this case are
 
far less indicative of the parties’ mutual assent to arbitration. 
In Douglass, the arbitration provision was at least contained
 
35
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
within a document that was made available to the employee at the
 
time he signed the acknowledgment form. Nevertheless, the court
 concluded, after considering the “surrounding circumstances,”
 that the record did not demonstrate that the employee was “put on
 notice regarding the existence of the arbitration provision and
 the binding effect thereof.” Id. In this case, the arbitration
 
provision was not contained in a document that was made available
 to Michael at the time of his enrollment, and nothing in the
 “surrounding circumstances” suggests that Michael was otherwise
 on notice of the arbitration provision. 
The only document Michael signed to enroll in the
 
Kaiser plan was the Enrollment Form. The arbitration provision
 was contained in a separate document altogether, the Group
 Agreement. The Enrollment Form itself contains no reference to
 the Group Agreement or to an arbitration agreement. Unlike the
 
acknowledgment form in Douglass, there is no provision on the
 
Enrollment Form providing that the enrollee has read and
 
understood the Group Agreement or any separate document further
 detailing his or her rights. The Enrollment Form does not
 indicate that a separate document affecting the enrollee’s rights
 exists at all. Additionally, the certification on the Enrollment
 Form providing that the enrollee agrees to abide by the “terms
 and conditions” of the selected benefit plans does not contain a
 
36
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
provision stating that the terms and conditions are detailed in
 
the Group Agreement or in any other document. 
In Douglass, the court considered the acknowledgment
 
form to be “uninformative” and held that the employee was
 otherwise uninformed of the existence of the arbitration
 provision, despite the plaintiff’s admission that the employer’s
 human resources administrator “showed him the whole handbook.” 
110 Hawai' i at 533-34, 135 P.3d at 142-43 (brackets and quotation 
marks omitted). Here, there was no evidence that Michael was
 
even shown the Group Agreement prior to signing the Enrollment
 Form, let alone that a Kaiser or EUTF representative reviewed the
 Group Agreement with him. In fact, there is no evidence in the
 record that Michael was told that the Group Agreement existed and
 contained the “terms and conditions” of his benefit plans.
22 For
 
its part, Kaiser produced a single declaration averring that it
 provides the Group Agreement to the employers, who are then
 responsible for distributing the agreement to the member-
employees. However, Kaiser has not claimed that Michael was
 
22 According to Kaiser, “[n]o reasonable consumer of health care
 
coverage could possibly believe that the one-page Enrollment Form represented
the entire agreement between Kaiser and the EUTF,” or that “there were no
other terms or conditions governing a relationship as complex as the purchase
of health care services.”  However, as noted supra at note 19, HRS § 432E­
7(a)(3) requires a managed care plan to provide the enrollee with a “statement
on enrollee’s rights, responsibilities and obligations” upon enrollment, and
HRS § 432D-25 requires health maintenance organizations to “provide current
and prospective enrollees with written disclosure of coverages and benefits,”
for the purpose of ensuring that such enrollees “understand their health care
options and are able to make informed decisions.”  Clearly, then, the
statutory scheme governing health care plans lacks any assumptions regarding
the knowledge that a “reasonable consumer” is expected to possess.  
37
          
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
aware of the Group Agreement or the arbitration provision when he
 
signed the Enrollment Form, as Kaiser’s position is that
 
Michael’s awareness and assent are irrelevant.  
Kaiser argues that Douglass and Brown are inapplicable
 
to the circumstances of this case because the Group Agreement was
 
negotiated and agreed to between Kaiser and the EUTF. Kaiser’s
 
argument misstates the issue. Although the Group Agreement was
 
negotiated and completed between the EUTF and Kaiser, Michael was
 
required to assent to the Group Agreement in order to have formed
 
a valid and enforceable contract with Kaiser. The Siopeses do
 not argue, as Kaiser suggests, that “every individual employee-
beneficiary had the right to assent to or reject the individual
 terms of the agreement between the EUTF and [Kaiser].” Rather,
 the relevant issue is whether an agreement to arbitrate was
 
formed between Michael and Kaiser when Michael signed the
 
Enrollment Form. This issue implicates the contract formation
 
requirements discussed in Brown and Douglass. We have never
 suggested that contracts for health services fall within an
 exception to these formation requirements. 
“It is an elementary rule of contract law that there
 
must be mutual assent or a meeting of the minds on all essential
 elements or terms in order to create a binding contract.” Malani
 
v. Clapp, 56 Haw. 507, 510, 542 P.2d 1265, 1267 (1975).  The
 
record in this case does not indicate that Michael “was informed
 
38
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
of the existence of the arbitration provision, let alone that he 
would be bound by it.” Douglass, 110 Hawai' i at 533, 135 P.3d at 
142. Accordingly, it cannot be said that the requirement of
 
mutual assent to arbitration is satisfied, and Michael cannot be
 
compelled to arbitrate his claims against Kaiser, barring any
 alternative basis for requiring arbitration. 
B.
 
Here, Kaiser alternatively relies on various contract
 
and agency principles to argue that Michael is bound by the terms
 and conditions of the Group Agreement, including the arbitration
 clause, regardless of his personal assent.
 
As stated, generally, “[w]ithout an agreement to 
arbitrate, a court may not force parties to engage in 
arbitration.” Luke v. Gentry Realty, Ltd., 105 Hawai' i 241, 247, 
96 P.3d 261, 267 (2004). See Sher v. Cella, 114 Hawai' i 263, 
267, 160 P.3d 1250, 1254 (App. 2007) (“Arbitration is a matter of 
contract; so a party cannot be required to submit to arbitration any dispute which he has not agreed so to submit.”) (quotation marks omitted). However, courts have recognized that “[w]ell­established common law principles dictate that in an appropriate case a nonsignatory can enforce, or be bound by, an arbitration provision within a contract executed by other parties.” Int’l 
Paper Co. v. Schwabedissen Maschinen & Anlagen GMBH, 206 F.3d 411, 416-17 (4th Cir. 2000) (emphasis added). See Michael A. 
39
          
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Rosenhouse, Annotation, Application of Equitable Estoppel to
 
Compel Arbitration By or Against Nonsignatory-State Cases, 22
 A.L.R.6th 387, 403 (2007) (“[T]he courts, led by the federal
 courts, have developed a body of case law on the subject of
 whether a nonsignatory, that is a person or entity that has not
 signed an agreement containing an arbitration clause: (a) can
 compel arbitration against one who has; or (b) can be required to
 arbitrate by one who has signed the document.”) (footnote
 
omitted). These common law principles include incorporation by
 
reference, assumption, agency, veil-piercing/alter ego, estoppel,
 
and third-party beneficiary theories. Id. at 403 n.8.  See
 
Thomson-CSF, S.A. v. Am. Arbitration Ass’n, 64 F.3d 773, 776-80
 
(2d Cir. 1995); Comer v. Micor, Inc., 436 F.3d 1098, 1101 (9th
 Cir. 2006); Arthur Andersen LLP v. Carlisle, 556 U.S. 624, 631
 (2009). In this case, Kaiser argues alternatively that Michael
 is bound by the arbitration provision under the theories of
 agency, estoppel, and third-party beneficiary. However, none of
 these theories are applicable, as Michael is a signatory
23 to the
 
Group Agreement, and this case does not involve a nonsignatory’s
 
standing to enforce an arbitration provision or a nonsignatory’s
 
23 “Signatory” is defined as “[a] person or entity that signs a
 
document, personally or through an agent, and thereby becomes a party to an
agreement.”  Black’s Law Dictionary  1507 (9th ed. 2009).  As noted, “[i]t is
an elementary rule of contract law that there must be mutual assent or a
meeting of the minds on all essential elements or terms in order to create a
binding contract.”  Malani v. Clapp , 56 Haw. 507, 510, 542 P.2d 1265, 1267
 
(1975).  Accordingly, in order for an arbitration agreement to be valid and
enforceable, the parties must have mutually assented to arbitrate their
disputes.  Douglass, 110 Hawai 'i at 531, 135 P.3d at 140.  
40
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
attempt to avoid enforcement of an arbitration provision against
 
it. 
1. Agency
 
Kaiser argues that Michael is bound by the arbitration
 
provision because the EUTF acted as Michael’s agent in agreeing
  
to the Group Agreement with Kaiser. Kaiser relies on a provision
 in the 2003 and 2009 Group Agreement, entitled “Group As Agent
 for Members,” which states, “By requesting and accepting
 membership under the Group’s Service Agreement with Health Plan,
 Members authorize Group for purposes of entering into this
 Service Agreement and for all other purposes in regards to this
 Service Agreement.” 
It is hornbook law that an agent can commit its
(nonsignatory) principal to an arbitration agreement.  But
 the requirements for such vicarious responsibility are
exacting: not only must an agency arrangement exist so that
one party acts on behalf of the other and within usual
agency principles, but the arrangement must be relevant to
the legal obligation in dispute. 
InterGen N.V. v. Grina , 344 F.3d 134, 147-48 (1st Cir. 2003)
 
(citations, quotation marks, brackets and ellipses omitted). 
According to the terms of the Group Agreement, the
 
agency relationship between the EUTF and the EUTF employee  is
 
entered into only upon the employee’s enrollment in the Kaiser
 
plan: “By requesting and accepting  membership . . . Members
 
authorize Group . . . .” (Emphasis added). The EUTF could not
 agree on behalf of the individual to request and accept Kaiser
 membership; the EUTF could only agree to the terms of the Group
 
41
          
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Agreement. Whether the individual validly assented to the terms
 
of the Group Agreement upon enrollment is a separate question
 entirely. Thus the agency arrangement referred to in the Group
 Agreement could not have existed at the time that the EUTF and
 Kaiser entered into the contract, and in any event would be
 irrelevant for the purpose of determining whether Michael
 assented to all of the terms of the Group Agreement.
24
   
Although the EUTF was clearly empowered by statute to
 
enter into the Group Agreement with Kaiser on behalf of EUTF
 
employees, this authority does not eliminate the requirement that
  
a valid agreement to arbitrate be formed between EUTF employees
 
and Kaiser.25 The EUTF employee has the option of choosing to
 
receive health care coverage pursuant to the Kaiser plan. Thus
 the relevant agreement is not the one between Kaiser and the
 EUTF, but the agreement of the EUTF employee to enroll in the
 Kaiser plan. Because the EUTF employee must independently agree
 
24 For the same reason, an agency relationship is not created by the
 
provision in the 2009 Group Agreement providing:  “Group is contracting on
behalf of the Members (Members are not contracting with Health Plan), but by
electing medical and hospital coverage pursuant to this Service Agreement, or
accepting benefits hereunder, Members agree to all terms, conditions and
provisions of this Service Agreement.”  
25 In Leong, the court did not examine or mention the theory of
 
agency in reaching its determination that the plaintiffs were bound by the
arbitration provision.  Rather, the court relied on the “undisputed” fact that
Kaiser distributed a booklet including notice of the arbitration provision and
held that “an averment [by the Leongs] that they did not receive the booklet,
without more, is insufficient to negate a provision for binding arbitration
contained in the contract.”  71 Haw. 240, 246, 788 P.2d 164, 168 (1990).  Such
 an observation would be unnecessary for an agency theory analysis, as all
Kaiser members would be bound by the arbitration provision based on their
agent’s agreement to the provision.
 
42
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
to enroll in the Kaiser plan, the EUTF’s authority to negotiate
 
the Kaiser plan is not relevant for the purposes of determining
 whether the employee actually agreed to arbitrate any disputes
 with Kaiser. 
Furthermore, in Luke, the court held that a
 
nonsignatory agent’s standing to invoke an arbitration agreement
 under certain circumstances
26 is distinct from the question of
 
whether the arbitration agreement is enforceable. 105 Hawai' i at 
249, 96 P.3d at 269. The court explained that while the
 nonsignatory agent “was entitled to ask the circuit court to
 enforce the arbitration agreement, . . . the circuit court could
 grant this request only if the Plaintiffs had actually agreed to
 arbitrate their claims.” Id. The court noted that “it is
 
axiomatic that there must be an agreement to arbitrate in the
 
first instance.” Id. at 249 n.12, 96 P.3d at 269 n.12. In
 
determining whether the plaintiffs actually agreed to arbitrate
 
their claims, the court examined the language of the arbitration
 agreement and found that the language left the scope of the
 
26 A nonsignatory agent has standing to invoke an arbitration
 
agreement if one of the following two conditions is met: 
First, when the signatory to a written agreement containing
an arbitration clause must rely on the terms of the written
agreement in asserting its claims against the nonsignatory.
Second, when the signatory to the contract containing an
arbitration clause raises allegations of substantially
interdependent and concerted misconduct by both the
nonsignatory and one or more of the signatories to the
contract.
 
105 Hawai 'i at 248, 96 P.3d at 268 (quoting Westmoreland v. Sadoux, 299 F.3d
462, 467 (5th Cir. 2002)).  
43
          
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
arbitration agreement “unclear,” such that a reasonable person
 
“entering into this contract would not know whether she or he
 maintained the right to judicial redress or whether she or he had
 
agreed to arbitrate any potential dispute.” Id. Resolving this
 
ambiguity in favor of the plaintiffs, the court held that the
 
plaintiffs did not agree to submit their claims to arbitration
 and the circuit court erred in granting the defendants’ request
 to enforce the arbitration agreement. Id.
 
In this case, there is no dispute that Kaiser has
 
standing to seek to invoke the arbitration agreement against the
 Siopeses. Thus, the only relevant question is whether the
 Siopeses agreed to the arbitration clause contained in the Group
 Agreement. Pursuant to Luke, this question of enforceability is
 distinct from the issue of standing and is not governed by the
 alternative theory of agency. 
2. Estoppel
 
Kaiser argues that Michael is equitably estopped from
 
denying the arbitration agreement because he has “accept[ed] all
 the benefits of the Group Agreement.” Kaiser further contends
 that “[b]y bringing a breach of contract action against Kaiser,
 the Siopes[es] are equitably estopped from arguing that [Michael]
 did not agree to the arbitration provisions contained in that
 very contract.” Kaiser reasons that the Siopeses “cannot present
 claims for damages based upon alleged violations of certain
 
44
          
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
portions of the Group Agreement, and then claim other portions of
 
the same agreement are not binding and enforceable.” 
Generally, “estoppel precludes a party from claiming
 
the benefits of a contract while simultaneously attempting to
 avoid the burdens that contract imposes.” Comer v. Micor, Inc.,
 
436 F.3d 1098, 1101 (9th Cir. 2006) (quotation marks omitted). 
In the context of arbitration, estoppel theory has generated
 several lines of cases.
27 However, as with the alternative
 
theory of agency, pursuant to Luke, estoppel theory is only
 relevant to determining whether a party has standing to invoke an
 arbitration agreement. The enforceability of the arbitration
 agreement is a separate issue determined through the application
 
of general contract law principles. Luke, 105 Hawai' i at 249, 96 
P.3d at 269. See Rosenhouse, supra, at 409 (noting that the
 
doctrine of equitable estoppel “cannot be invoked where the
 
agreement containing the arbitration clause is itself
 
unenforceable”). Given that there is no issue as to whether
 
27 See Rosenhouse, supra, at 387, explaining:
 
The federal courts have initiated and many state courts have
recognized and adopted a unique body of "equitable estoppel"
law that is peculiarly applicable to cases in which a
nonsignatory to an arbitration agreement either seeks to
compel arbitration of a claim against itself brought by a
signatory party to the arbitration agreement, or asserts a
claim against such a signatory, who then seeks to compel the
nonsignatory to arbitrate that claim. The doctrine differs
from traditional equitable estoppel in that it contains no
requirement of justifiable reliance, and it has not been
accepted by all state courts.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
45
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Kaiser has standing to invoke the arbitration agreement, Kaiser
 
must demonstrate that Michael actually agreed to arbitrate his
 claims pursuant to the traditional requirements of contract
 
formation.
 
3. Third-party beneficiary
 
Kaiser also argues that Michael is bound by the
 
arbitration provision because he is a third-party beneficiary of
 
the Group Agreement between Kaiser and the EUTF. [AB at 10-11]
 
“A third party beneficiary is one for whose benefit a
 
promise is made in a contract but who is not a party to the
 contract.” Ass’n of Apartment Owners of Newtown Meadows ex rel.
 
Bd. of Directors v. Venture 15, Inc., 115 Hawai' i 232, 270, 167 
P.3d 225, 263 (2007) (quoting Pancakes of Haw., Inc. v. Pomare
 
Props. Corp., 85 Hawai' i 300, 309, 944 P.2d 97, 106 (App. 1997)) 
(quotation marks omitted) (emphasis added). “Ordinarily, third-
party beneficiary status is a question of fact . . . .” Jou v.
 
Dai-Tokyo Royal State Ins. Co., 116 Hawai' i 159, 168, 172 P.3d 
471, 480 (2007). 
Kaiser argues that the facts of this case demonstrate
 
that Michael was a third-party beneficiary of a contract between
 Kaiser and the EUTF: 
It is clear that the EUTF intended for Mr. Siopes to benefit
from the Group Agreement with Kaiser, that the health
benefits to be provided under the Group Agreement were in
satisfaction of the EUTF’s pre-existing obligation to Siopes
to provide his health benefits, and that a material part of
the parties’ purpose in entering into the Group Agreement
 
46
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
was to provide health benefits to Mr. Siopes under the
Kaiser Plan. 
(Quotation marks omitted). 
However, it is not the case that all State and county
 
employees and retirees, for whom the EUTF manages health care
 
plans, are third-party beneficiaries of all contracts the EUTF
 negotiates for the purpose of fulfilling its statutory
 obligation. The employee must select between the different plans
 presented by the EUTF, and it is only upon enrollment that the
 employee receives any benefit from the plan negotiated by the
 EUTF. Thus there is no relationship between the employee and
 Kaiser until the employee enrolls in a Kaiser plan by signing the
 Enrollment Form. Once enrollment is completed, the employee and
 Kaiser are in privity of contract. See Hunt v. First Ins. Co. of
 
Haw., Ltd., 82 Hawai' i 363, 367, 922 P.2d 976, 980 (App. 1996) 
(“Privity of contract is ‘that connection or relationship which exists between two or more contracting parties.’”) (brackets omitted) (quoting Black’s Law Dictionary 1199 (6th ed. 1990)). Therefore, it would be inaccurate to characterize Michael, an enrollee of the Kaiser plan, as a third-party beneficiary of the Group Agreement, given that a third-party beneficiary is by definition not a party to the contract. See Venture 15, 115 
Hawai'i at 270, 167 P.3d at 263. 
47
          
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Based on the foregoing, the arbitration provision is
 
not binding on Michael based on the theories of agency, estoppel
 
and third-party beneficiary, as those theories are not applicable
 
to the circumstances of this case. In order to enforce the
 arbitration agreement against the Siopeses, Kaiser must
 demonstrate that Michael actually agreed to arbitrate his claims
 with Kaiser when he enrolled in the Kaiser plan. 
C.
 
As repeatedly emphasized by this court, “[a]rbitration 
is a matter of contract and a party cannot be required to submit to arbitration any dispute which he [or she] has not agreed so to 
submit.” Brown, 82 Hawai' i at 244, 921 P.2d at 164 (quotation 
marks and brackets omitted). Thus in order for any arbitration
 
provision to be enforceable, it must meet the requirements of
 contract formation as articulated in Douglass. The parties to
 the agreement must mutually assent to arbitration, as determined
 by the terms of the agreement and the surrounding circumstances. 
See Douglass, 110 Hawai' i at 532, 135 P.3d at 141 (“we cannot 
conclude that, in combination with the surrounding circumstances 
presented in this case, there is mutual assent”). In this case, the Enrollment Form that Michael signed did not reference the arbitration agreement and the record does not establish that Michael was otherwise informed of the existence of the arbitration agreement, much less that he assented to it. Thus, 
48
          
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Kaiser has failed to demonstrate “unambiguous intent to submit to
 
arbitration,” and the arbitration provision is unenforceable as
 between Kaiser and Michael.
28
 
V.
 
Given our conclusion that the arbitration provision
 
contained in the Group Agreement is unenforceable as between
 Michael and Kaiser, we accordingly hold that Lacey is not bound
 to arbitrate her claims.
29
 
However, we note that even if the arbitration agreement
 
was enforceable in this case, Lacey, who is not a Kaiser member
 and not a party to the Group Agreement, would not be
 automatically required to submit all of her claims to binding
 arbitration. As stated, generally only parties to an arbitration
 agreement may be required to arbitrate their claims. In this
 case, Lacey did not agree to arbitrate her claims with Kaiser. 
In 
Brown, this court undertook an extensive analysis of
 
whether a spouse who was not a signatory to the arbitration
 
28 In Brown, this court recognized that “[f]or almost forty years, 
arbitration agreements have been regarded, as a matter of federal law, as
severable and distinct from the underlying agreement.”  82 Hawai 'i at 245, 921 
P.2d at 165.  The court held that generally, “an arbitration agreement is
severable from the writing in which it is embedded.”  Id. at 246, 921 P.2d at 166.  See Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v. Cardegna, 546 U.S. 440, 445 (2006)
(“as a matter of substantive federal arbitration law, an arbitration provision
is severable from the remainder of the contract”); Richard A. Lord, 21
Williston on Contracts 245 (4th ed. 2001) (“Ordinarily, an arbitration clause
will be treated as a separate contract, and severable from the main body of
the contract.  Thus, whenever possible, an arbitration clause will be held
severable . . . .”) (footnote omitted).
 
29
 Lacey joins in Michael’s claims for damages due to breach of
 
contract, medical negligence, insurance bad faith, violations of HRS Chapter
480, and punitive or exemplary damages.  Lacey pleads an individual claim for
negligent infliction of emotional distress.  
49
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
agreement could be bound to arbitrate her claims for loss of
 
consortium and negligent and intentional infliction of emotional
 
distress. 82 Hawai' i at 240-43, 921 P.2d at 160-63. In 
resolving this issue, the court distinguished between a 
nonsignatory co-plaintiff “asserting contract claims as the agent or functional equivalent of a primary plaintiff who is a party to 
the contract containing an arbitration agreement,” and a 
nonsignatory co-plaintiff “asserting claims that are distinct and 
separable from those of a primary plaintiff who is a party to an 
arbitration agreement[.]” Id. at 242, 921 P.2d at 162. 
In the former situation, “[b]ecause recovery as an
 
agent would necessarily be limited to that amount recoverable by
 
the principal, the claimant . . . [would] understandably [be]
 bound by the arbitration agreement that had been signed by the
 principal.” Id. at 243, 921 P.2d at 163 (quotation marks
 
omitted). In the latter situation, however, although the claims
 derive from the same injury, the bases for damages are “totally
 separate” from the damages that the injured spouse would assert
 
for a claim such as breach of contract.  Id. 
For example, claims for loss of consortium are
 
“derivative in the sense that they do not arise unless one’s
 
spouse has sustained a personal injury,” but they are
 “independent and separate” claims for damages. Id. at 241, 921
 
P.2d at 161 (brackets and quotation marks omitted). 
50
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Thus, while these types of derivative claims are barred when
the victim’s initial claim of injury cannot be maintained,
and are subject to defenses premised on the injured spouse’s
contributory or comparative negligence, it does not
inevitably follow that they must be adjudicated in the same
forum as the claims for injury to which they relate or that
they are not otherwise separable.
 
Id. (citations omitted). Accordingly, the Brown court held that
 
the nonsignatory spouse’s claims for loss of consortium and
 negligent and intentional infliction of emotional distress were
 derivative but separable from the signatory’s claims, as the
 claims were asserted “neither as an agent for her husband nor
 pursuant to a ‘derivative’ and contract-based theory of recovery,
 such as that of a third party beneficiary.” Id. at 243, 921 P.2d
 
at 163. Thus the court held, “to the extent that she is not
 pursuing claims as [her husband’s] agent or under a breach of
 contract theory (pursuant to which she stands in [her husband’s]
 shoes), [the nonsignatory spouse] is not bound by the arbitration
 agreement between [the signatory husband] and [his employer].” 
Id.
 
In this case, the circuit court held that all of
 
Lacey’s claims, including her claim for negligent infliction of
 emotional distress, were subject to arbitration because the Group
 Agreement “specifically contained language that would
 specifically encompass claims by non members for harm to
 members.” The circuit court’s determination that Lacey was
 required to arbitrate all of her claims is inconsistent with
 Brown, which considered the derivative and separable nature of
 
51
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
the nonsignatory spouse’s claims in determining whether the
 
claims were subject to the arbitration agreement.30 Thus the
 
circuit court erred in not considering the nature of Lacey’s
 claims in determining whether she was bound by the arbitration
 agreement.
 
VI.
 
The Siopeses also argue that the circuit court was
 
required to consider their claims of unconscionability prior to
 compelling arbitration. 
Unconscionability has generally been recognized to include
an absence of meaningful choice on the part of one of the
parties together with contract terms which are unreasonably
favorable to the other party.  Whether a meaningful choice
is present in a particular case can only be determined by
consideration of all the circumstances surrounding the
transaction.  
City & Cnty. of Honolulu v. Midkiff, 62 Haw. 411, 418, 616 P.2d
 
213, 218 (1980) (quoting Williams v. Walker-Thomas Furniture Co.,
 350 F.2d 445, 449 (D.C. Cir. 1965)). See Lewis v. Lewis, 69 Haw.
 
497, 502, 748 P.2d 1362, 1366 (1988) (stating “[i]t is apparent
 that two basic principles are encompassed within the concept of
 unconscionability, one-sidedness and unfair surprise,” and
 describing “one-sidedness” in the context of premarital
 agreements to “mean that the agreement leaves a post-divorce
 economic situation that is unjustly disproportionate”);
 
30
 The arbitration clause in Brown required binding arbitration for 
“any controversies concerning my compensation, employment[,] or termination of
employment . . . .”  82 Hawai 'i at 230, 921 P.2d at 150.  In this case, the
arbitration provision in the 2009 Group Agreement specifically provides that
it applies to “any other person entitled to bring an action for damages forharm to the member . . . .”  
52
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 208 cmt. a (1981) (“The
 
determination that a contract or term is or is not unconscionable
 is made in the light of its setting, purpose and effect.”). 
In the context of adhesion contracts, “form contract[s]
 
created by the stronger of the contracting parties” and “offered
 on a ‘take this or nothing’ basis,” this court has held that such
 contracts are “unenforceable if two conditions are present: (1)
 the contract is the result of coercive bargaining between parties
 
of unequal bargaining strength; and (2) the contract unfairly
 limits the obligations and liabilities of, or otherwise unfairly
 
advantages, the stronger party.” Brown, 82 Hawai' i at 247, 921 
P.2d at 167 (citations omitted). 
As stated, the circuit court is limited to answering
 
two questions in deciding a motion to compel arbitration: “1)
 
whether an arbitration agreement exists between the parties; and
 2) if so, whether the subject matter of the dispute is arbitrable
 under such agreement.” Koolau Radiology, Inc. v. Queen’s Med.
 
Ctr., 73 Haw. 433, 445, 834 P.2d 1294, 1300 (1992). Pursuant to
 HRS § 658A-6(a), an agreement to arbitrate is “valid,
 enforceable, and irrevocable except upon a ground that exists at
 law or in equity for the revocation of a contract.” 
Unconscionability is a generally applicable contract
 
defense and is within the scope of the circuit court’s review on
 the question of whether a valid and enforceable agreement to
 
53
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
arbitrate exists. See Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 208
 
(1981) (“If a contract or term thereof is unconscionable at the
 
time the contract is made a court may refuse to enforce the
 contract, or may enforce the remainder of the contract without
 
the unconscionable term . . . .”). See also Brown, 82 Hawai' i at 
247, 921 P.2d at 167 (“a contract that is ‘adhesive’ . . . is 
unenforceable if two conditions are present”). In this case, the circuit court granted Kaiser’s Motion to Compel Arbitration without addressing whether the arbitration provision in the Group Agreement was unconscionable, based on its determination that the issue was beyond the scope of the court’s review. 
The Siopeses raised several grounds supporting their
 
claim that the arbitration provision was unconscionable. The
 Siopeses specifically cited the arbitration agreement’s
 provisions governing fees, discovery, confidentiality and ERISA
 members as evidence that the arbitration agreement impermissibly
 advantages Kaiser and limits Kaiser’s obligations and potential
 liabilities.
31 In particular, the Siopeses argued that the
 
arbitration provision’s various limitations on civil discovery,
 including the taking of “brief” depositions of three “critical
 witnesses,” unfairly advantages Kaiser, which has unlimited
 access to medical records and personnel. Considering that
 unconscionability is a defense to the enforceability of a
 
31
 See supra note 10. 
54
          
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
contract or contract provision, the Siopeses raised issues
 
related to the question of whether a valid and enforceable
 agreement to arbitrate existed in the Group Agreement. 
Thus, even if the arbitration provision had met the
 
requirements of contract formation as articulated in Douglass,
 the circuit court should have also addressed whether the
 provision was unconscionable.
32 The circuit court therefore
 
erred in determining that the Siopeses’ claims of
 unconscionability were beyond the scope of its review in deciding
 the Motion to Compel Arbitration.
33
 
32 The 2009 Group Agreement provides, “If the [FAA] or other law
 
applicable to these arbitration terms is deemed to prohibit any term in this
Service Agreement in any particular case, then such term(s) shall be severable
in that case and the remainder of this Service Agreement shall not be affected
thereby.”  The 2003 Group Agreement provides more generally, “If any term(s)
in this Service Agreement is found invalid under applicable law, the validity
of the remaining portions . . . shall not be affected and the rights and
duties hereunder shall be construed and enforced as if this Service Agreement
did not contain the term(s) held to be invalid.”  In light of our disposition
of this case, it is unnecessary to address the merits of the unconscionability
claims or to resolve whether any provision deemed unconscionable would be
severable.
 
33
 Given our determination that the arbitration provision is
 
unenforceable against Michael due to the lack of mutual assent, the circuit
court is not required to address the issue of unconscionability on remand. 
55
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
VII.
 
Based on the foregoing, we hold that the circuit court
 
erred in ordering the Siopeses to arbitrate their claims against
 
Kaiser. The circuit court’s March 5, 2012 orders granting the
 Motion to Compel Arbitration and Motion to Stay Discovery are
 therefore vacated, and the case is remanded for proceedings
 consistent with this opinion.
 
Mark Davis 
Michael K. Livingston
Matthew C. Winter Clare E. Connors
 for petitioners /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 William S. Hunt 
Dianne Winter Brookins
 Jan M. Vernon
 David A. Abadir
 for respondents
 
56
 