                                                                
                                                                ***              FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER             *** 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---oOo--­
JAMES DANNENBERG, BILLY SOUTHWOOD, VALERIE YAMADA SOUTHWOOD,
DUANE PREBLE, and SARAH PREBLE, individually
and on behalf of all others similarly situated,
Respondents/Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
 
vs.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, HAWAI 'I EMPLOYER-UNION
 
HEALTH TRUST FUND, BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
HAWAI'I EMPLOYER-UNION HEALTH BENEFITS TRUST FUND,
Petitioners/Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
 
and
 
COUNTY OF KAUA 'I, CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU,
COUNTY OF MAUI, COUNTY OF HAWAI 'I,
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees.
 
SCAP-15-0000084
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CAAP-15-0000084; CIV. NO. 06-1-1141)

 
OCTOBER 21, 2016
 
INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS ASSOCIATE JUDGE LEONARD,
ACTING C.J., CIRCUIT COURT JUDGES HARA, CAHILL, KURIYAMA, AND
CRABTREE IN PLACE OF NAKAYAMA, MCKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.,
RECUSED, AND CIRCUIT COURT JUDGE ALM, RECUSED, PREVIOUSLY
ASSIGNED IN PLACE OF RECKTENWALD, C.J., RECUSED
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, ACTING C.J.
 
This class action suit concerns the health benefits
 
provided by the State of Hawai 'i, the City and County of 
Honolulu, and the Counties of Kaua 'i, Maui, and Hawai 'i, to the 
following class members:
 
All employees (and their dependent-beneficiaries) who began
working for the Territory of Hawai' i, the State of Hawai' i or 
the political subdivisions thereof, before July 1, 2003, andwho have accrued or will accrue a right to post-retirementhealth benefits as a retiree or dependent-beneficiary ofsuch a retiree. This includes: (a) those who have not yetreceived any post-retirement health benefits from Defendantsas a retiree or dependent beneficiary of such a retiree; and(b) those who have received any post-retirement health
benefits from Defendants since July 1, 2003 as a retiree or
dependent-beneficiary of such a retiree. For purposes of
damages only, if any, the class shall also include the
estates and heirs of any deceased retiree or deceased
dependent-beneficiary of a retiree who is or was a member of
1
 the class.
As the parties submit, the central issue in this case
 
is whether the State and Counties have impaired the appellants'
 
accrued retirement health benefits in violation of article XVI,
 section 2 of the Hawai
'i Constitution, which provides: 
Membership in any employees' retirement system of the State
or any political subdivision thereof shall be a contractual
relationship, the accrued benefits of which shall not be
diminished or impaired. 
Individually and on behalf of all others similarly
 
situated, Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees James Dannenberg,
 
Billy Southwood, Valerie Yamada Southwood, Duane Preble, and
 Sarah Preble (Appellants) appeal, and Defendants-Appellees/Cross­
1
 This class was certified, pursuant to Appellants' December 17,
2010 motion, which was heard on March 8, 2011, by the Honorable Patrick W.
Border. The written order granting class certification, which is quoted
above, was entered by the Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti on August 29,
2013.
 
2
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Appellants State of Hawai 'i, the Employer-Union Health Benefits 
Trust Fund (EUTF), and the Board of Trustees of the EUTF (EUTF 
2
Board) (together, the State)  cross-appeal, from the January 30,
2015 Final Judgment (Judgment), filed in the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit (Circuit Court),3
 as well as challenge, in whole or
in part, the Circuit Court's: (1) October 16, 2014 Order Denying

 
Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment and Order
 Granting State Defendants' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
 (Summary Judgment Order); and (2) December 16, 2014 Order Denying
 Plaintiffs' Motion for Reconsideration or, in the Alternative,
 Leave to Pursue an Immediate Interlocutory Appeal of the Summary
 Judgment Order (Order Denying Reconsideration).
 
We hold, inter alia, that: (1) pursuant to article 
XVI, section 2 of the Hawai
'i Constitution, benefits arising from 
membership in the Hawai 'i employees' retirement system (ERS), 
including retiree health benefits, accrue upon an employee's enrollment in the ERS, subject to any conditions precedent in place at the time of enrollment that must be satisfied before receiving the benefits; (2) notwithstanding a repealed statutory provision that required "substantial equality of benefits" to all State and County "Employees" who were entitled to receive them, article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai
'i Constitution protects 
accrued retiree health benefits, not parity of health benefits between active employees and retirees; (3) the starting place for 
2
 Defendants-Appellees County of Kaua' i, City and County of
Honolulu, County of Maui, and County of Hawai' i (the Counties) did not join in
the cross-appeal. 
3
 The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided.
 
3
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a determination of Appellants' accrued retirement health benefits
 
is the retirement health benefits that were promised to
 Appellants at the time of their enrollment in the ERS, as these
 are the benefits that, in the first instance, arise from their
 membership in the ERS; (4) Appellants' constitutionally protected
 retirement health benefits are not an exact package of health
 benefits, fixed as of a certain date, unchanged and unchangeable
 over time, and such benefits remain subject to legislative
 changes, so long as those changes do not result in a diminishment
 or impairment of the benefits that have been accrued; and (5)
 there are genuine issues of material fact as to whether
 Appellants' accrued retirement health benefits have been
 diminished or impaired in violation of article XVI, section 2.
 I. LEGISLATIVE BACKGROUND
 
In 1961, the Hawai
'i Legislature passed Act 146, which 
created the Hawai 'i Public Employees Health Fund (Health Fund or 
PEHF) as a vehicle to provide active and retired government employees and their dependents with a health benefits plan. 1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 146. The Health Fund Act established a Board of Trustees to administer and carry out the purpose of the Health Fund. Revised Laws of Hawaii (RLH) § 5A–12 (Supp. 1961); 1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 146, § 1(13) at 194. The Board's duties included determining the health services to be provided by health benefit plans, entering into contracts for health benefit plans, selecting the carrier to provide indemnity-type health benefit plans, and establishing eligibility requirements for employees 
4
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and their dependents. RLH §§ 5A–13 to –15 (Supp. 1961); 1961
 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 146, § 1 (13)-(15) at 194. 
The Health Fund was terminated with the repeal of
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 87, effective June 30,
 2003. 2001 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 88, §§ 1–10 at 138–52. The
 Health Fund was replaced with the EUTF, through the passage of
 Act 88, which is now codified as HRS Chapter 87A. In enacting
 Act 88, the Legislative Conference Committee stated:
 
If nothing is done now, the spiraling cost of the
Health Fund will create significant financial hardships for
 
state taxpayers. Recognizing the urgency of this matter,
your Committee on Conference finds that reforming the Health
Fund is the responsible thing to do.
This bill will ensure that the Health Fund, and the
 
succeeding Trust Fund, will remain solvent. Consolidating
the health benefits programs under the existing system will
ensure the solvency of the State, as well as benefit all
public employees and retirees today and in the future.
It is not the intention of your Committee on
Conference that public employees and retirees suffer a
diminishment of existing health benefits. This bill will
 
give the governing boards of the Trust Fund and the Health
Fund, during the transition period, complete discretion,
authority, and flexibility to devise and maximize the levels
and types of benefits available for public employees and
retirees.
 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 124, in 2001 House Journal, at 1098
 
(emphasis added). To this purpose, the EUTF was to take charge
 of the various health benefits programs and "establish a single
 health benefits delivery system for State and county employees,
 retirees, and their dependents." 
Id. at 1097. 
Some of the issues raised in this case concern the
 
language and applicability of the now-repealed HRS Chapter 87. 
With the enactment of Chapter 87, more specifically HRS § 87­22(b), the Legislature authorized the Health Fund Board to
 determine the health services offered in a health benefits plan
 
5
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and to contract for a health benefits plan "provided that
 
benefits under any respective plan shall be equally available to
 all employees and their dependents selecting such plan regardless
 of age[.]" 1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 146, § 1(13) at 194. 
Members of the House Finance Committee had expressed concern that
 "[h]ealth benefits under the federal medicare program for the
 aged may be inferior to health benefits under the state health
 benefits plans and retirees or old employees should not be
 discriminated against, but should have the plan offering the
 better benefits." Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 978, in 1961 House
 Journal, at 1048. The Finance Committee amended a previous draft
 of the bill, adding the section 87-22(b) clause, in part to
 "prevent possible discrimination regarding the availability of
 benefits against older persons." Id. From the Health Fund's
 
inception in 1961 until 2001, HRS § 87-22(b) maintained this
 language, with some minor amendments. HRS § 87-22(b) (Supp.
 2000), repealed by 2001 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 88, § 3 at 50.
4 In
 
addition, however, from its inception, the Health Fund Act also
 provided that the meaning of the term "employee" included "a
 retired member of the employees' retirement system, the county
 pension system or the police, firemen or bandsmen pension
 systems. . .," thus equating active employees and retirees for
 the purpose of the Act. See 1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 146,
 
§ 1(1)(e)(9) at 192.
 
4
 For the purpose of brevity, in some instances, "(repealed)" may be
used herein in lieu of the full citation to Act 88 of 2001.
 
6
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In 2001, the Legislature amended HRS § 87-22(b),
 
removing the language that "benefits . . . shall be equally
 
available to all employee-beneficiaries and dependent-
beneficiaries selecting the plan regardless of age[.]" HRS § 87­22(b) (Supp. 2001) (repealed). This amendment to HRS § 87-22(b)
 was effective from July 1, 2001, until July 1, 2003, when Chapter
 87 was repealed and replaced with Chapter 87A, and the Health
 Fund was replaced with the EUTF. 2001 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 88,
 §§ 3-10 at 150-52. 
The EUTF is administered by the EUTF Board, which is
 
charged with procuring health benefit plans for employees (and
 their dependents), including retirees. HRS § 87A-5 (2012); see
 also Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 124, in 2001 House Journal at 1098. 
The EUTF Board has awarded contracts for various health plans
 including, inter alia, a "new" Hawaii Medical Service Association
 (HMSA) Preferred Provider medical plan, a Kaiser Health
 Maintenance Organization (Kaiser) medical and prescription drug
 plan, a Vision Service Plan (VSP), and a Hawaii Dental Service
 (HDS) plan. Although HRS Chapter 87A includes retirees within
 its definition of employees, it does not include language
 requiring benefits to be equally available to all employees. See
 
HRS §§ 87A-1 & 87A-23 (2012).
 
According to Appellants' health benefits expert, Paul
 
A. Tom, in 2001 and 2002, retirees received the same health
 benefits, including the same coverage, deductibles, maximums, and
 co-pays, as active employees under the Health Fund; however,
 since July 1, 2003, the benefits for retirees and active
 
7
 ***              FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER             ***
5The court below noted, and Appellants agree, that the Kaiser, HDS,
and VSP plans do not appear to be at issue in this case.
6Although Marion Everson was a party at that time, according to
Appellants' October 5, 2007 notice of appeal to the Circuit Court in the
related case, Everson v. State, 122 Hawai# i 402, 405, 228 P.3d 282, 285
(2010), Ms. Everson died before the resolution of that appeal and before the
filing of the Second Amended Complaint in the instant case.
8employees in HMSA plans changed in the form of coverage,
deductibles, maximums, and co-pays.5
II.PROCEDURAL HISTORY
A.The Class Action Suit
On June 30, 2006, Appellants (retired state employees)
Marion Everson,6 James Dannenberg, Billy Southwood, Valerie
Yamada Southwood, Duane Preble, and Sarah Preble, individually
and on behalf of others similarly situated, filed a Complaint for
Declaratory Relief, Injunctive Relief, and Damages, claiming that
the State and Counties violated their statutory rights under HRS
Chapter 87 and/or 87A by not providing retirees and their
dependents with dental and medical benefits that were
substantially equal to those provided to active workers and their
dependents.  On August 9, 2006, the State filed a motion to
dismiss claiming, inter alia, that primary jurisdiction over
Appellants' claims resided with the EUTF Board.  On August 16,
2006, the Counties also filed a motion to dismiss and joined in
the State's motion to dismiss.
On November 13, 2006, Appellants filed a First Amended
Complaint in the Circuit Court, reasserting the claims of the
original complaint, and adding a claim of negligence and a claim
of violation of article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai #i
Constitution.                        ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
After a December 15, 2006 hearing, on June 26 and 29,
 
2007, the Circuit Court granted in part the defendants' motions
 
to dismiss, on the grounds that the plaintiffs' claims "require
 the resolution of issues that have been placed within the special
 competence of the EUTF . . . [and] the EUTF board of trustees is
 charged with administering and carrying out the purposes of the
 [EUTF] including the provision of health benefits plans under HRS
 Sections 87A-15 and 87A-31[.]" Thus, the court concluded that
 the EUTF had primary jurisdiction over the plaintiffs' claims.
7
 
The Circuit Court ordered a stay of all proceedings pending
 resolution of the issues involved in the referral of the
 plaintiffs' claims to the EUTF, and otherwise held in abeyance
 any further ruling on the defendants' requests for dismissal of
 the action. 
B.	 The Agency Action
 In a May 15, 2007 petition for declaratory relief to
 
the EUTF Board, and a June 15, 2007 amendment to the petition
 (collectively, the EUTF Petition), Appellants sought a
 declaratory ruling as to the following four questions:
 
A.	 Is the EUTF permitted, notwithstanding Article XVI,
Section 2 of the Hawai' i Constitution and the 
requirements of HRS Chapter 87A, to provide healthcare benefits to State and County retirees and theirdependents which are inferior to the health carebenefits provided to active State and County workersand their dependents? 
B. 	If your answer to question A is "yes," what is the
minimal array of the health care benefits that must be
provided to retirees and their dependents?
 
7
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
 
9
                         
  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C. 	Did the EUTF health benefits plans in effect from July
1, 2003 to the present comply with the requirements ofthe Hawai' i Constitution and HRS Chapter 87A? 
D. 	If your answer to Question C is "no," are retirees
and/or their dependents entitled to either monetary
compensation/damages or any other form of relief
(legal or equitable)? If so, how is it to be
 calculated and for what period of time?
 
See Everson v. State, 122 Hawai 'i 402, 405, 228 P.3d 282, 285 
(2010). 
On September 7, 2007, after briefings, evidentiary
 
submissions, other filings, and an August 3, 2007 hearing, the
 
EUTF Board issued its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
 Order, concluding, inter alia, that: (1) it did not have
 jurisdiction to rule on the constitutional issue presented in
 Question A, but as to the statutory issue, HRS Chapter 87A
 permits the EUTF to provide health benefits to State and County
 retirees and their dependents that are different from and/or
 inferior to those provided to State and County active employees
 and their dependents; (2) in order to answer Question B, the EUTF
 Board would have to engage in speculation, consider theoretical
 or hypothetical situations, and render an advisory opinion, so
 the EUTF Board refused to answer Question B; and (3) the EUTF
 health benefits plan satisfies HRS Chapter 87A's statutory
 requirements (again declining to address the question of
 constitutionality). 
On October 5, 2007, Appellants appealed the EUTF
 
Board's decision to the Circuit Court.
8 After briefing and oral
 
argument, on July 23, 2008, the Circuit Court entered a Decision
 
8
 The Honorable Eden E. Hifo presided. 
10
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and Order Reversing the Decision of the [EUTF Board], concluding, 
inter alia, that: (1) article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai 'i 
Constitution (the Non-Impairment Clause) "protects the accrued benefits but by so doing does not and has not prohibited the State legislature from changing the benefits for prospective employees;" (2) the phrase "similarly situated beneficiary" in HRS § 87A-23 "invokes comparison between retirees and active employees, not [just between] Medicare eligible retirees and early retirees who by age do not yet qualify for Medicare," thus, health benefits that are provided to retirees must "reasonably approximate" the benefits provided to active employees; and (3) some of the retiree health benefits included in the plan did not "reasonably approximate" the benefits provided to active employees, in violation of state law. The Circuit Court entered a Final Judgment on August 18, 2008. See Everson, 122 Hawai
'i at 
406, 228 P.3d at 286. 
On September 15, 2008, the State and Counties appealed 
the Circuit Court's decision to the Hawai 'i Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (ICA). Id. On May 21, 2009, the State filed an 
application to transfer the appeal to the Hawai 'i Supreme Court, 
which was granted on June 10, 2009. Id. On March 25, 2010, the 
supreme court issued an Opinion, affirming in part and reversing in part the Circuit Court's decision and holding, inter alia, that: 
[T]he circuit court did not err in concluding that a retired
state and county government employee's health benefits areprotected by article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution as "accrued benefits" arising from a retiree'smembership in the employees' retirement system; and (2) thecircuit court erred by concluding that HRS Chapter 87A 
11
                         
   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
requires that retiree health benefits reasonably approximate
those of active workers.
 
Everson, 122 Hawai 'i at 404, 228 P.3d at 284. 
C. Resumption of the Class Action
 
After the supreme court's decision in Everson, the stay
 
in the instant case was lifted, and the proceedings resumed
 before the Circuit Court. Following class certification, and the
 
9
filing of a Second Amended Complaint,  the parties filed cross-
motions for partial summary judgment on the merits. 
Appellants' motion, filed on December 10, 2012, argued 
primarily that: 
(1) as held in Everson, retirees' accrued health 
benefits are constitutionally protected benefits under article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai
'i Constitution; (2) the benefits 
provided by the EUTF for retirees are not "substantially equivalent," but rather are inferior as a matter of law, to those provided to active employees; and (3) the retirees' loss of parity with active employees on health care benefits constitutes a diminishment and impairment of the retirees' accrued benefits in violation of article XVI, section 2. 
9 The Second Amended Complaint, which was filed on December 15,
2010, includes four counts, seeks declaratory and injunctive relief, as well
as damages, and alleges, inter alia, that: 
47. Defendants have violated the constitutional,
contractual and statutory rights of Plaintiffs under Article
XVI and HRS Chapters [sic] 87 by not providing health care
benefits to Retirees and their dependents that are
equivalent to those provided to Active Workers and their
dependents.
 
48. Defendants have violated Retirees' constitutional
 
rights under Article XVI and their contractual rights under
HRS Chapters [sic] 87 and other agreements by not providing
health care benefits to Retirees and their dependents that
are equivalent to other employee-beneficiaries and dependent
beneficiaries, regardless of age. 
12
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In opposition, the State argued that: (1) retirees did
 
not have parity with active employees prior to July 1, 2003, as
 
the majority of active employees were in different plans operated
 by the unions; (2) the EUTF has not impaired retiree health
 benefits, as retirees are provided with the same or better health
 benefits as they had prior to July 1, 2003; (3) retirees are not
 entitled to the same benefits as active employees, by statute, by
 contract, or by the Constitution; (4) overall, retirees are
 receiving substantially equivalent health benefits as active
 employees; (5) providing retirees with benefits identical to
 those offered to active employees would diminish the retirees'
 benefits, as providing identical benefits would likely result in
 the loss of the full integration method of Medicare coordination
 and the favorable prescription drug plan; (6) the base monthly
 contribution caps in HRS Chapter 87A do not diminish accrued
 
10 11 
retiree health benefits  and do not violate HRS § 87-6(c);  and
 
(7)
 accrued retiree health benefits may be reasonably modified,
 
provided that any disadvantageous changes are balanced by
 advantageous changes. 
The State's cross-motion, filed on July 25, 2013,
 
argued that: (1) the State has not violated Appellants'
 constitutional or contractual rights because the EUTF's retiree
 health benefit plans since 2003 have provided coverage that is
 
10
 The "contribution caps" in HRS Chapter 87A provide, inter alia,
that health fund contributions from the State or counties shall not exceed the
 
actual cost of health benefit plans for retirees, and that plans are not
required to cover increased benefits for retirees above those initially
contracted for. HRS § 87A-33 (2012).
 
11
 HRS § 87-6(c) indicated that "subject retirees" would not have to
contribute to the Health Fund for their health benefits plans.
 
13
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
substantially the same, if not better, than what retirees had
 
before then; (2) the State has not violated Appellants' statutory
 rights as there was no intent to create vested rights under HRS
 Chapter 87 and/or the State has not violated the provisions of
 HRS Chapter 87; (3) the State is not liable for negligence
 because the State has not breached any constitutional, statutory,
 or contractual duty; (4) Appellants' claim that retirees must
 have the same health benefits as active employees is wrong; and
 (5) res judicata and collateral estoppel do not preclude granting
 the State's motion. 
In opposition, Appellants argued: 
(1) res judicata and
 
collateral estoppel bar the State from re-litigating whether
 there was parity between active employees' and retirees' health
 benefits and that this lack of parity violated article XVI,
 section 2; (2) Judge Border determined, in conjunction with class
 certification, that constitutionally protected health benefits
 accrue at the time of vesting, which is during employment rather
 than at pre-enrollment in the retiree health plan, and that Judge
 Border's determination is binding law of the case; (3) class
 members' accrued health benefits were diminished because prior to
 July 1, 2003, retirees enjoyed parity with respect to active
 employees' health benefits, which was mandated by Chapter 87, and
 they no longer have such parity; (4) the relevant comparison is
 whether the retirees receive the same health benefits as the
 active employees, not whether they receive the same health
 benefits as had been provided through the Health Fund; and (5)
 even if the EUTF and Health Fund retiree health benefits are
 
14
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
compared, the retirees' EUTF plans are inferior to those offered
 
by the Health Fund.
 
The four Counties each filed joinders in the State's
 
opposition to Appellants' motion for partial summary judgment, as
 well as joinders in the State's motion for partial summary
 judgment. Appellants filed a reply memorandum in support of
 their partial summary judgment motion. The State also filed a
 reply memorandum in support of its partial summary judgment
 motion, which the Counties joined. On October 30, 2013, a
 hearing was held on the cross-motions and the matter was taken
 under advisement.
 
On October 16, 2014, the Circuit Court entered the
 
Summary Judgment Order. The Circuit Court concluded, inter alia,
 as follows: 
The dispositive question for this court is whether
Plaintiffs' health benefits have been diminished or impaired
in light of the 2001 legislative amendment that no longer
required health benefits to be equally available to all
employee-beneficiaries. As discussed below, the court
 concludes that although the EUTF is not required to provide
retirees with the same or equivalent health benefits as
active employees, retirees' health benefits have not been
impermissibly reduced because state and county retirees
receive the same or substantially the same health benefits
under the EUTF that they received under the PEHF. As such,
 there has been no diminishment or impairment of retirees'
accrued health benefits.
 
. . . .
 Under the PEHF, the law required that health benefits
had to be "equally available to all employee-beneficiaries
and dependent-beneficiaries selecting the [health] plan,
regardless of age." HRS § 87-22(b). The term "employee­beneficiary" included active and retired employees. Thus,
 on its face and by definition, HRS § 87-22(b) required that
the same health benefits had to be equally available to all
employees, active and retired alike.
In 2001, when the legislature removed the longstanding
requirement that health benefits had to be equally available
to all employee-beneficiaries and replaced the PEHF with the
EUTF to "establish a single health benefits delivery system
 
15

                         
 
 ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for State and county employees, retirees, and their
dependents," the legislature did not intend for public
employees or retirees "to suffer any diminishment or
impairment of their existing health benefits." See Conf.
 
Com. Rep. 124 on S.B. 1044 at 1097-1098.
Under the EUTF, it is undisputed that retirees do not
receive the same health benefits as active employees
receive. Instead, retired employees are enrolled in
separate health plans, some of which contain different
services and inferior levels of coverage, co-pays, maximums
and deductibles than active employees receive under their
selected health plans. . . . . 
While [] there are differences in the levels of
coverage between the PEHF and EUTF HMSA plans for retirees,
accrued health benefits for retirees have not been reduced,
 diminished or impaired since implementation of the EUTF.
The differences in the levels of coverage between the EUTF
and PEHF for retirees have remained the same or are
 substantially the same and, therefore, do not amount to a
diminishment or impairment of health benefits for retirees.
As the Alaska Supreme Court noted in Duncan v. Retired
Public Employees of Alaska, Inc., constitutionally protected
"[h]ealth benefits must be allowed to change as health care
evolves." "Health benefits can be modified so long as the
modifications are reasonable, and one condition of
 reasonableness is that disadvantageous changes must be
offset by comparable new beneficial changes."
The court concludes that the differences in the levels
 
of coverage as between the PEHF and the EUTF HMSA plans for
[12]
retirees, as illustrated above,  are reasonable. In
 
addition, there is no evidence that the differences in the

 
levels of coverage are disadvantageous to retirees on a
group-wide basis. Rather, many of the benefits under the
EUTF plans are the same or substantially the same than what
retirees received under the PEHF plans.
 
. . . .

 
To reiterate, the dispositive issue here is whether
Plaintiffs' accrued benefits, defined under Everson as
 health benefits in a health benefits plan for retirees, have
been diminished or impaired because the EUTF is not required
to provide the same health benefits to active and retired
employees. The court concludes that the 2001 legislative
amendment to the PEHF and the EUTF that removed the
 requirement that benefits had to be equally available to all
employee-beneficiaries did not amount to a reduction in
health benefits for retirees. Retirees receive the same or
 substantially the same health benefits under the EUTF that 
12
 The court's Summary Judgment Order contains examples, charts, and
descriptions of specific health benefits and health plan coverage comparisons
that are omitted here. 
16
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
they received under the PEHF. Accordingly, Plaintiffs'
accrued health benefits have not been diminished or impaired.
 
. . . .
 
Finally, the court is not persuaded by Plaintiffs'
argument that res judicata and collateral estoppel preclude
Defendants from litigating the issue of lack of parity and
whether there has been a violation of Article XVI, section
 2.
 
. . . .
 
The claims and issues raised by Plaintiffs before the
EUTF and appealed to Judge Hifo involved questions
concerning chapter 87A and Article XVI, section 2. The
 Supreme Court in Everson  did not address the question of
parity of benefits under chapter 87 and specifically noted
in its decision that Plaintiffs did not assert that any of
the pertinent 2001 amendments to the HRS (e.g. HRS § 87­22(b)) were unconstitutional in light of Article XVI,
section 2. The claims and the issues presented by
Plaintiffs in the agency appeal that led to the Supreme
Court's decision in Everson  simply did not involve
Plaintiffs' entitlement to parity of benefits under chapter
87 and whether Plaintiffs' benefits have been diminished or
 impaired under Article XVI, section 2. 
(Citations and original footnotes omitted.) 
On November 3, 2014, Appellants moved for
 
reconsideration or, in the alternative, leave to file an
 
interlocutory appeal, which the State and Counties opposed. On
 December 16, 2014, the Circuit Court entered the Order Denying
 Reconsideration, which also denied Appellants' request for
 certification of an interlocutory appeal. On December 29, 2014,
 the parties stipulated to dismiss without prejudice the remaining
 claims in Appellants' Second Amended Complaint, which were based
 on HRS §§ 87A-33 through 87A-36. On January 30, 2015, final
 judgment was entered in favor of the State and against
 Appellants, pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 
58.13 
13
 The Judgment collectively disposes of all four claims for relief
set forth in the Second Amended Complaint by: resolving what the Judgment
(continued...)
 
17

                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On February 23, 2015, Appellants filed a notice of 
appeal, and, on March 5, 2015, the State timely cross-appealed. 
On April 23, 2015, the State filed an application seeking a mandatory transfer from the ICA to the Hawai
'i Supreme Court, 
pursuant to HRS § 602-58(a)(1) (Supp. 2015) (question of fundamental public importance) and a discretionary transfer, pursuant to HRS § 602-58(b)(1) (Supp. 2015) (question of first impression). Appellants joined in the transfer request, which was granted on May 20, 2015. III. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Appellants raise three points of error on appeal,
 
contending that the Circuit Court erred in:
 
(1) denying Appellants' motion for partial summary
 
judgment and granting the State's motion for partial summary
 judgment, and determining that the accrued health benefits
 protected under Everson are only those that the Health Fund
 provided to retirees and their beneficiaries before the EUTF
 began operating and not the health benefits that Appellants
 received while employed, which the State and Counties committed
 to continuing to provide Appellants upon retirement; 
(2) granting the State's motion for partial summary
 
judgment, because there were genuine issues of material fact as
 to whether the health benefits that retirees receive under the
 
13(...continued)
describes as Appellants' "Parity" allegations and "Regardless of Age"

allegations (by entering judgment in favor of the State and against
Appellants); reciting the dismissal without prejudice of Appellants'
"Contribution Cap" allegations; and expressly ordering that "[t]here are no
remaining claims, parties or issues in this case but to the extent any do
remain, they are hereby dismissed."
 
18
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
EUTF are the same or substantially the same as the health
 
benefits retirees received under the Health Fund; and
 
(3) ruling that res judicata and collateral estoppel do
 
not preclude the State from relitigating (a) whether there is a
 lack of parity between active workers and retirees, and (b)
 whether the EUTF has impaired Appellants' accrued benefits in
 violation of the Non-Impairment Clause by providing benefits that
 are inferior to those the Appellants received (in both the
 union-sponsored plans and the HMSA "general" PEHF plan) prior to
 retirement.
 
The State raises the following points of error on
 
cross-appeal; however, the State submits that it is necessary to
 reach these issues only if the Court rules in Appellants' favor
 on Appellants' appeal. The State contends that the Circuit Court
 erred in:
 
(1) interpreting HRS § 87-22(b), which stated that
 
"any respective plan shall be equally available to all
 employee-beneficiaries and dependent-beneficiaries selecting the
 plan regardless of age," as "requir[ing] that the same health
 benefits had to be equally available to all employees, active and
 retired alike;" and
 
(2) concluding that "retired employees are enrolled in
 
separate health plans, some of which contain different services
 and inferior levels of coverage, co-pays, maximums and
 deductibles than active employees receive."
 
19
                          
 ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"Statutory interpretation is a question of law
 
reviewable de novo." State v. Wheeler , 121 Hawai 'i 383, 390, 219 
P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when
 there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an
ambiguity exists.
 
Id. (quoting Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of 
Appeals of the City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 114 Hawai 'i 184, 193, 
159 P.3d 143, 152-53 (2007)). 
"On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is 
reviewed de novo." Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cty. of 
Honolulu, 119 Hawai 'i 90, 96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008) (citations 
omitted). 
"Issues of constitutional interpretation present 
questions of law that are reviewed de novo." Blair v. Harris, 98 
Hawai'i 176, 178, 45 P.3d 798, 800 (2002). 
Claim preclusion and issue preclusion are separate 
doctrines that involve distinct questions of law which are reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard. E. Sav. Bank, 
FSB v. Esteban, 129 Hawai
'i 154, 157-58, 296 P.3d 1062, 1065-66 
(2013). 
20
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
V. DISCUSSION
 
A. Everson, Parity, & Constitutionally-Protected Benefits
 Appellants contend, inter alia, that in granting the 
State's motion for partial summary judgment, the Circuit Court misread Everson because the Circuit Court concluded that a lack of parity between retiree health benefits and those of active workers was immaterial to the issue of whether Appellants' accrued health benefits were diminished or impaired in violation of article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai
'i Constitution. 
Appellants suggest that, because the Circuit Court compared the benefits that retirees receive under the EUTF with the benefits that retirees had received under the Health Fund, the Circuit Court must have assumed that the retiree health benefits accrue only at the time of retirement. The State disagrees with Appellants' suggestion, arguing that the Circuit Court properly construed Everson and made no decision about when retiree health benefits accrue, and that there was and is no need to decide when retiree health benefits accrue because there has been no diminishment of retiree health benefits. To properly address these conflicting views, this court must examine: (1) what was and was not decided in Everson; and (2) what health benefits are protected by the Non-Impairment Clause. Although we do not agree entirely with Appellants' explanation of the Circuit Court's analysis, we also reject the State's argument that it is unnecessary to consider when retiree health benefits accrue, and by implication what retiree health benefits have been accrued, based on the proposition that there has been no diminishment of 
21
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
retiree health benefits. It is necessary to identify what health
 
benefits are protected in order to answer the question of whether
 or not those benefits have been diminished or impaired in
 violation of article XVI, section 2.
 
1. Everson
 
As a preliminary matter, we note that the questions 
posed in the EUTF Petition underlying Everson sought declaratory rulings with respect to HRS Chapter 87A and article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai
'i Constitution. Not surprisingly, as the EUTF 
Board was created to administer health benefits under HRS Chapter 87A, the EUTF Petition did not seek a ruling regarding retirees' rights under or compliance with HRS Chapter 87. Declining to answer any question requiring an interpretation of the Hawai
'i 
Constitution, the EUTF Board concluded that: (1) HRS Chapter 87A does not require parity between retiree health benefits and active worker health benefits; and (2) the subject EUTF health benefit plans complied with the requirements of HRS Chapter 87A. 
The Circuit Court in Everson took up the constitutional 
issue and concluded that Hawai
'i's Non-Impairment Clause protects 
accrued health benefits, as well as accrued financial benefits such as pension payments. Commenting that the constitutional protection of accrued benefits does not prohibit legislative changes to benefits for prospective employees, the Circuit Court determined that "retirement benefits including those health benefits that became established by the enactment of Chapters 87 and 87A and amendments thereto are protected or vested once accrued." The Circuit Court then turned to the EUTF Board's 
22
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
interpretation of HRS Chapter 87A, reversed the Board's ruling on
 
the issue of parity between retirees and active workers, and
 concluded that the reference in HRS § 87A-23 to "similarly
 situated beneficiary" "invokes comparison between retirees and
 active employees, not Medicare eligible retirees and early
 retirees who by age do not yet qualify for Medicare." The
 Circuit Court in Everson further concluded that, contrary to the
 EUTF Board's interpretation, pursuant to HRS § 87A-23, health
 benefits provided to retirees must "reasonably approximate"
 benefits provided to active employees and some of the benefits
 provided to retirees did not reasonably approximate those
 provided to active employees.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court in Everson – after examining 
the relevant statutory history of the Hawai 'i ERS, the framers' 
intent in adopting the Non-Impairment Clause, the history of the Health Fund and the transition to the EUTF, and the plain language of article XVI, section 2 – rejected the State's argument that the Non-Impairment Clause only applies to financial benefits such as pensions. Everson, 122 Hawai
'i at 407-15, 228 
P.3d at 287-95. More specifically, this court held that "it is those 'accrued benefits' arising from membership in an ERS, and not simply those benefits provided by an ERS, that is protected by article XVI, section 2." Id. at 416, 228 P.3d at 296. The 
court made clear, however, that: 
As we observed in Kaho' ohanohano, the framers of article 
XVI, section 2 intended to provide the legislature with
flexibility to make changes to the system so long as thechanges neither diminished nor impaired a member's accruedbenefits. Accordingly, although article XVI, section 2provides protection for any additional benefits that the 
23
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
legislature may decide to provide to state and county
government employees as members of an ERS, consistent with
the framers' intent, the legislature may also reduce
benefits as to persons already in the system in so far as
their future services were concerned, but it could not,
 
however, reduce the benefits attributable to past services.
 
Id. (citations, quotation marks, ellipsis, and brackets omitted).
 
Regarding the constitutional protection of a retiree's
 
health benefits, the court stated:
 
[W]e hold that a retired employee's health benefits that are
included in a health benefits plan falls within the
constitutional protection contemplated by article XVI,
section 2 inasmuch as HRS § 87A–21(b) clearly and
unambiguously conditions a retired state or county
government employee's eligibility for health benefits on,
inter alia, being a retired member of the employees'
retirement system.
 
Id. at 417, 228 P.3d at 297 (citations, quotation marks, and
 
brackets omitted).
 
In addition, the court explained: "[T]he issue in this
 
case is whether the health benefits that are provided by a
 'carrier' and included in a health benefits plan are protected
 from diminishment or impairment once 'accrued' by article XVI,
 section 2 of the Hawai
'i constitution." Id. at 418, 228 P.3d at 
298. The court rejected the State's contention that retiree
 health benefits are not constitutionally protected "accrued
 benefits," which the State based in part on the assertion that
 "neither the level nor type of retiree health benefits accumulate
 or grow based on the number of years that an employee works." 
Id. at 418, 228 P.3d at 298. The court emphasized that:
 
[A]rticle XVI, section 2 was intended in part to provide the
legislature with flexibility to make future changes to the
retirement system, which included changing the benefits that
are provided to members of an ERS, as long as the changes
did not reduce an employee's benefits attributable to past
services. There is also nothing to suggest that any
 
24
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
additional benefits, once "accrued," cannot be provided
protection from diminishment or impairment pursuant to
article XVI, section 2 if the government desires to maintain
the system in good faith with the employees of the
 government. Therefore, [the State's] interpretation of the
word "accrued" is unpersuasive.
Instead, . . . the word "accrued" was added before
 
"benefits" to refer to a particular point in time in order
to ensure that any future change to the benefits provided to
a retired state or county employee would not diminish or
impair those benefits that have already "accrued." As such,
 with regard to future changes, the legislature could reduce
benefits as to (1) new entrants into a retirement system, or
(2) as to persons already in the system in so far as their
future services were concerned. It could not, however,
 
reduce the benefits attributable to past services. 
Therefore, [the State's] assertions are unpersuasive, and wehold that health benefits for retired state and countyemployees constitute "accrued benefits" pursuant to articleXVI, section 2 of the Hawai' i Constitution. 
Id. at 419, 228 P.3d at 299 (citations, footnotes, some quotation
 
marks, and brackets omitted). Although stressing that the State
 
could not reduce protected benefits, including accrued health
 benefits attributable to past services, the court declined to
 specifically address when retirement health benefits are accrued
 and what retiree health benefits must be deemed as accrued
 benefits. Compare id. at n.15, 228 P.3d at 299 n.15, with id. at
 
422-23, 228 P.3d 302-03 (Acoba, J., concurring).
 
The supreme court in Everson then turned to the Circuit
 
Court's conclusion that HRS Chapter 87A requires that retiree
 health benefits reasonably approximate those of active workers
 and firmly rejected it. 
Id. at 419-21, 228 P.3d at 299-301. The
 
court looked to the 2001 amendments to the HRS, which omitted or
 changed the prior statutory language that had required the Health
 Fund to provide retirees with "reasonably approximate" benefits
 as active employees. Id. at 420-21, 228 P.3d at 300-01
 
(comparing the pre-2001 language of HRS § 87-22(b) with the 2001
 
25
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
amended version of HRS § 87-22(b), and HRS Chapter 87A, including
 
HRS § 87A-23). The court concluded:
 
[W]e hold that the words "similarly situated beneficiary not
eligible for medicare," as those words are used in HRS
§ 87A–23(1), or "similarly situated employee-beneficiary not
eligible for medicare," as those words are used in HRS
§ 87A–23(3), invoke a comparison between Medicare eligible
retirees and retirees who do not qualify for Medicare.
Because we hold as such, HRS Chapter 87A does not require
the Board of the EUTF to provide health benefits plans to
retirees whose benefits "reasonably approximate" those
benefits provided to active employees.
 
Id. at 421, 228 P.3d at 301 (citations and footnote omitted).
 
2. The Accrual of Constitutionally Protected Benefits
 
Article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai 'i Constitution 
provides: 
Membership in any employees' retirement system of the State
or any political subdivision thereof shall be a contractual
relationship, the accrued benefits of which shall not be
diminished or impaired. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
As noted above, in order to determine whether 
constitutionally protected benefits have been diminished or 
impaired, there must be a comparison between the "accrued benefits" that an employee is entitled to and the benefits that the employee has received. In Everson, the supreme court explained that the Non-Impairment Clause "clearly and unambiguously" provides that "accrued benefits" arise from a State or county employee's membership in an ERS. 122 Hawai
'i at 
415, 228 P.3d at 295. The court observed that this membership is mandatory for all such employees upon their entry or re-entry into the service of the State or a county. Id. (citing 2 
Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai
'i of 1950, 
26
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
at 495; HRS § 88-42 (Supp. 2008)).14 It is with this entry into
 
service, and this mandatory membership in an ERS, that an
 
employee becomes eligible to receive the benefits arising from
 ERS membership, provided that the employee satisfies the
 condition(s) precedent to receive them.
 
As this court observed in Kaho
'ohanohano v. State, 114 
Hawai'i 302, 347, 162 P.3d 696, 741 (2007), Alaska's constitution 
contains a provision that is "nearly identical in wording and substance" to article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai
'i 
Constitution.15 Accordingly, the court in Kaho 'ohanohano cited 
Alaska's case law as "instructive in interpreting our own clause." Id. Although the issue of when an employee's 
constitutionally protected benefits accrue was not squarely before the court in Kaho
'ohanohano, the court twice referenced 
that the Supreme Court of Alaska has determined that such benefits vest or accrue upon the employee's employment and enrollment in an ERS, rather than when the employee becomes eligible to receive the benefits. Id. at 347-48, 162 P.3d at 
741-42 (citing, e.g., Hammond v. Hoffbeck, 627 P.2d 1052, 1057 (Alaska 1981) (holding that benefits under Alaska's ERS "are in the nature of deferred compensation and that the right to such 
14
 The Everson court's discussion of the adoption of article XVI, 
section 2 at the 1950 Constitutional Convention, 122 Hawai' i at 408-13, 228
P.3d at 288-93, which is largely taken from this court's earlier examination
of those convention proceedings in Kaho' ohanohano v. State, 114 Hawai' i 302,
162 P.3d 696 (2007), fleshes out the considerations and concerns that led tothe final version of the constitutional amendment. 
15
 Article XII, section 7 of the Alaska Constitution provides:
"Membership in employee retirement systems of the State or its politicalsubdivisions shall constitute a contractual relationship. Accrued benefits shall not be diminished or impaired." See Kaho' ohanohano, 114 Hawai' i at 347,
162 P.3d at 741. 
27
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
benefits vests immediately upon an employee's enrollment in that 
system"); Municipality of Anchorage v. Gallion, 944 P.2d 436, 440-41 (Alaska 1997) (affirming that the right to benefits vests when the employee enrolls in an ERS, rather than when he or she becomes eligible to receive benefits)); see also Duncan v. Retired Pub. Emps. of Alaska, Inc., 71 P.3d 882, 886 (Alaska 2003). As the Alaska court determined, that conclusion is most consistent with the plain meaning of the constitutional provision, as well as the purpose for its adoption. Hammond, 627 
P.2d at 1056. Moreover, pursuant to the constitutional mandate, "these benefits are regarded as an element of the bargained-for consideration given in exchange for an employee's assumption and performance of the duties of his employment." Id. The same 
rationale applies to Hawai
'i's Non-Impairment Clause and the 
intent and purpose of its framers. We therefore hold that benefits arising from membership in a Hawai
'i ERS, including 
retiree health benefits, accrue upon an employee's enrollment in the ERS, subject to any conditions precedent in place at the time of enrollment that must be satisfied before receiving the benefits.
16 
16 As the delegates to Hawai' i's 1950 Constitutional Convention 
"clearly manifested the intent to adopt and follow the then New York system,"
the Hawai' i Supreme Court has also looked to New York's interpretation of its
seminal constitution. Everson, 122 Hawai' i at 410, 228 P.3d at 290 (citation
omitted). Although not initially faced with the challenge of a system-widebenefit modifications during an employee's continued course of employment, NewYork's highest court has adopted an interpretation of New York's non-impairment clause, which is that it protects the benefits promised at the timeof the employee's entry or re-entry into New York's ERS. Mutterperl v.
Levitt, 393 N.Y.S.2d 837, 839 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1975) aff'd, 363 N.E.2d 587 (N.Y.1977) (citations omitted); see also, e.g., Civil Serv. Emps. Ass'n Inc., Local1000 v. Regan, 525 N.E.2d 1 (N.Y. 1988). We note, however, that New Yorkcourts and Hawai' i courts have diverged on the issue of whether health
benefits are constitutionally protected. See Everson, 122 Hawai' i at 417-18,
(continued...)
 
28
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
However, as the Alaska court and others have pointed 
out, rigid application of a concept such as "accrued benefits" 
and "vested rights" is inconsistent with and inadequate to provide the flexibility that legislatures need to deal with changing economic and social realities. Hammond, 627 P.2d at 
1057-58 (citing Betts v. Bd. of Admin. of the Pub. Emps.' Ret. Sys., 582 P.2d 614, 617 (Cal. 1978); Allen v. City of Long Beach, 287 P.2d 765, 767 (Cal. 1955); Spina v. Consol. Police & Firemen's Pension Fund Comm'n, 197 A.2d 169, 174 (N.J. 1964); R. Cohn, Public Employee Retirement Plans: The Nature of the Employees' Rights, 1968 U. Ill. L. Forum 32, 40-51 (1968)). Indeed, as this court has repeatedly noted, such flexibility is also part of the intent and purpose of Hawai
'i's Non-Impairment 
Clause: 
[A]rticle XVI, section 2 was intended in part to provide the
legislature with flexibility to make future changes to the
retirement system, which included changing the benefits that
are provided to members of an ERS, as long as the changes
did not reduce an employee's benefits attributable to past
services. There is also nothing to suggest that any
additional benefits, once "accrued," cannot be provided
protection from diminishment or impairment pursuant to
article XVI, section 2 if the government desires to maintain
the system in good faith with the employees of the
 government.
 
Everson, 122 Hawai 'i at 419, 228 P.3d at 299 (citations, 
quotation marks and brackets omitted) (citing Kaho 'ohanohano, 114 
Hawai'i at 341, 162 P.3d at 734; 2 Proceedings of the 
Constitutional Convention of Hawai 'i of 1950, at 495); see also 
16(...continued)
228 P.3d at 297-98 (discussing 
Lippman v. Bd. of Educ., 487 N.E. 897 (N.Y.
1985)). We decline to address the effects of re-entry into service, and re-
enrollment in the ERS, on a Hawai' i employee's "accrued benefits," as those
issues have not been argued in this case. 
29
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Chun v. Emps.' Ret. Sys.,  61 Haw. 596, 605-06, 607 P.2d 415, 421
 
(1980) (adopting a 1950 Constitutional Convention Committee of
 
the Whole Report, which states that the Non-Impairment Clause
 "would not limit the legislature in making general changes in a
 system, applicable to past members, so long as the changes did
 not necessarily reduce the benefits attributable to past service"
 (citation omitted; emphasis added)).
 
In light of these competing imperatives, the Alaska
 
court adopted the following analysis in
 Hammond :
 
An employee's vested contractual pension rights may be
modified prior to retirement for the purpose of keeping a
pension system flexible to permit adjustments in accord with
changing conditions and at the same time maintain the
integrity of the system. Such modifications must be
 reasonable, and it is for the courts to determine upon the
facts of each case what constitutes a permissible change.
To be sustained as reasonable, alterations of employees'
pension rights must bear some material relation to the
theory of a pension system and its successful operation, and
changes in a pension plan which result in disadvantage to
employees should be accompanied by comparable new
advantages.
 
. . . .

 
The comparative analysis of disadvantages and
compensating advantages must focus on the particular
employee whose own vested pension rights are involved. It
 has been said that the offsetting improvement must also
relate generally to the benefit that has been diminished. 
Hammond,  627 P.2d at 1057 (citations and quotation marks
omitted). Accordingly, the Alaska court held: "[T]he fact that
 
rights in [the Alaska ERS] vest on employment does not preclude
 modifications of the system; that fact does, however, require
 that any changes in the system that operate to a given employee's
 disadvantage must be offset by comparable new advantages to that
 employee." Id. (footnote omitted).
 
 
30
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
More recently, in a case dealing directly with the 
issue of retiree "health insurance benefits," the Alaska Supreme 
Court reiterated the principles stated in Hammond and quoted the above, except that it overruled its prior statement that the comparative analysis of advantages and disadvantages is made on an individual basis, as opposed to focusing on a group of employees. Duncan, 71 P.3d at 886, 891-92. The Duncan court 
wrestled with the question of how to identify what benefits are protected against diminishment. The State of Alaska argued, based on practical considerations (i.e., the escalating cost of health care), that "retirees should be limited to whatever the dollar contribution in force at the time of his/her retirement can purchase," in essence that "the accrued benefit that is constitutionally protected is the highest monthly premium paid by the public employer during the employee's employment, rather than the coverage provided." Id. at 888 (quotation marks and brackets 
omitted). The State of Hawai
'i makes a parallel argument here, 
contending that Appellants may be entitled to "actuarial equivalence" with the health benefits available to them under the Health Fund. 
Although the State cites the Duncan court to support
 
this contention, its argument cleaves off an essential part of
 the Duncan court's holding, which is that the "equivalent value"
 referenced by the Alaska court requires a comparison of benefits
 provided to employees, not merely a comparison of the costs to
 the State. Relying in part on a Michigan court's analysis,
 Duncan laid out the constitutional parameters as follows:
 
31
 ***              FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER             ***
17The Duncan court here references, in a footnote, its earlier
discussion in which the court specifically rejected the State's argument that
the non-impairment clause merely protected against the diminishment of the
premium payments made on behalf of the retirees, as opposed to the health
(continued...)
32In view of the ever changing nature of medical care,
the Michigan court observed that the idea of a specific
bundle of medical benefits, unchanging over time, is
probably illusory.  Yet the court held that the state was
not free to radically change the nature of health benefits
that had vested in the employee group in question.  The
court concluded:
The rights which have vested in Plaintiffs are
not rights to receive exactly the same package of
health benefits which were offered at vesting but
rather a right to a reasonable health benefit package,
one which is in keeping with the mainstream of such
packages, as they are negotiated and implemented for
similarly situated active employees over time.
This—not a "frozen" package of benefits and cost
containment measures—is the meaning of "hospital,
medical-surgical, and sick care benefits" mandated by
the Legislature. This is the "central undertaking" to
which Plaintiffs could reasonably believe they have
entitlement, based on the State's promise.
Like the Michigan circuit court, we believe that
health insurance benefits must be allowed to change as
health care evolves.  We also believe that the economic
realities of administering health care coverage would
prevent making such changes if an individualized equivalency
analysis were used.  We reach this conclusion reluctantly in
light of Hoffbeck 's holding that changes in other retirement
benefits must be analyzed on an individual basis, a result
that is implied by article XII, section 7, which equates
retirement benefits with contract rights.  Recognizing that
analysis of health insurance changes from a group standpoint
is necessary, but in some degree inconsistent with analogous
constitutionally based precedent, we believe that it is
advisable to express a number of cautions that may help to
guide any equivalency analysis of health coverage changes.
At the outset, we reiterate Hoffbeck 's admonition that
equivalent value must be proven by reliable evidence.  Just
as with an individual comparative analysis, offsetting
advantages and disadvantages should be established under the
group approach by solid, statistical data drawn from actual
experience—including accepted actuarial sources—rather than
by unsupported hypothetical projections.  We also believe
that, apart from the individualized approach, the other
guidelines concerning equivalency analysis set out in
Hoffbeck should continue to be generally applicable. 
Further, we reiterate that equivalent value must be proven 
by a comparison of benefits provided—merely comparing old and new 
premium costs does not establish equivalency.[17]                        ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
. . . .
 
[O]ur opinion in this case should not be interpreted as

approving major deletions in the types of coverage offered
during an employee's term. Coverage of a particular disease
or condition should not be deleted, even though other
coverage might be improved, if the deletion would result in
serious hardship to those who suffer from the disease or
condition in question. . . . [W]e believe that the coverage
that is offered should generally be "in keeping with the
mainstream" of health insurance packages offered to active
public employees in terms of scope and balance.
 
Duncan, 71 P.3d at 891-92 (citations, original footnotes,
 
quotation marks, ellipsis and brackets omitted; format altered;
 emphasis added).
18
 
This flexible approach is broadly congruent with the 
intent and purpose of article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai 'i 
Constitution and the prior decisions of this court. It does not, however, fully address Appellants' contention that the accrued retiree health benefits protected under the Non-Impairment Clause necessarily include "the right to continue to receive a [health benefits] package comparable to their still-active former co­workers for free or at a reduced cost," depending on their years of service. 
17(...continued)
benefits provided to the employees. Duncan
, 71 P.3d at 892 n. 43; see also
 
id. at 888-89.
 
18
 Perhaps due to its departure from the individualized approach it
had espoused in Hammond, the Duncan court also addressed various potential
scenarios in which either an individual might show that changes in health
benefits result in a "serious hardship that is not offset by comparable
advantages" or changes might "predictably cause hardship to a significant
number of beneficiaries who cannot at the time of the change be specifically
identified." Duncan, 71 P.3d at 892 (distinguishing these scenarios from the
evidence in that case amounting to a detriment of several hundreds of dollars
per year). Those issues are not before this court and we express no opinion
on the Duncan court's suggested handling of such circumstances.
 
33
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
It is undisputed that, prior to July 1, 2003, pursuant
 
to HRS Chapter 87-1 (repealed), both active and retired State and
 
County employees were defined as "Employees," and included as
 "Employee-Beneficiaries" for the purposes of the Health Fund law. 
Additionally, pursuant to HRS § 87–21 (repealed), the Health Fund
 Board was directed to "administer and carry out the purpose of
 the fund," which included, pursuant to HRS § 87–3(a) (repealed),
 "providing employee-beneficiaries and dependant beneficiaries
 with a health benefits plan." As such, the Board was permitted
 to contract for certain health benefits plans, "provided that
 benefits provided under any respective plan shall be equally
 available to all employee-beneficiaries . . . selecting the plan
 regardless of age." HRS § 87–22(b) (emphasis added) (repealed). 
In addition, when a supplemental health benefits plan was
 established to complement rather than duplicate Medicare
 benefits, the Health Fund law included the following condition:
 
The benefits available under the plan, when taken together
with the benefits available under the federal Medicare plan,
as nearly as is possible, shall approximate the benefits
available under the plans set forth in section 87–22. If,
 for any reason, a situation develops where the benefits
available under the supplemental plan and the federal
Medicare plan substantially differ from those that would
otherwise be available, the board may correct this inequity
to assure substantial equality of benefits[.]
 
HRS § 87–27(3) (emphasis added) (repealed).
 
Thus, it appears that, prior to its amendment and
 
repeal, HRS Chapter 87 provided "substantial equality of
 
benefits" to all State and County "Employees" who were entitled
 to receive them, whether they were active workers or retirees,
 
34
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
which has been described during the course of this litigation as 
"parity of benefits." We nevertheless hold that article XVI, section 2 of the Hawai
'i Constitution protects accrued retiree 
health benefits, not parity of health benefits. To conclude otherwise would be wholly inconsistent with the language of the Non-Impairment Clause and the dual purpose of its framers who sought to protect government workers' accrued benefits, while providing future legislatures "with flexibility to make changes to the system so long as the changes neither diminished nor impaired a member's accrued benefits." Everson, 122 Hawai
'i at 
416, 228 P.3d at 296. 
Clearly, the Legislature's intent in replacing the
 
Health Fund with the EUTF was to both fully protect retirees'
 accrued health benefits and deal with the spiraling costs
 associated with the Health Fund. Id. at 416-17, 228 P.3d at 296­
97.
19 We cannot conclude that this legislative action violates
 
article XVI, section 2, solely because of a lack of parity with
 active workers, even if Appellants' accrued health benefits were
 not otherwise diminished or impaired. Accordingly, the Circuit
 Court did not err in concluding that the EUTF is not required, as
 a matter of law, to provide Appellants with the same benefits as
 active employees.
 
In construing HRS Chapter 87A, Everson noted that, in enacting 
that statute, the Legislature eliminated the parity requirement that had been
included in HRS Chapter 87. Everson, 122 Hawai' i at 421, 228 P.3d at 301.
The supreme court further noted that the constitutionality of the statutoryamendments set forth in HRS Chapter 87A was not before the court. Id. at 421 
n.17, 228 P.3d at 301 n.17. 
35
 19                         
 ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
However, we decline to adopt the Circuit Court's
 
analysis that Appellants' accrued retirement health benefits have
 
not been diminished or impaired in violation of article XVI,
 section 2, as a matter of law,
20 based on a summary adjudication
 
that the health benefits that retirees receive under the EUTF are
 the same or substantially the same as the health benefits
 retirees received under the Health Fund. Even assuming,
 arguendo, that the health benefits that Appellants receive under
 the EUTF are the same or substantially the same as the health
 benefits that earlier retirees received under the Health Fund, as
 the Alaska court observed, the idea that "accrued health
 benefits" refers to "a specific bundle of medical benefits,
 unchanging over time, is probably illusory." Duncan, 71 P.3d at
 
891. 
Instead, we hold that the starting place for a 
determination of Appellants' accrued health benefits is the retiree health benefits, included in a Health Fund benefits plan, that were promised to Appellants at the time of their enrollment in the ERS, as these are the benefits that, in the first instance, arise from their membership in the ERS. See, e.g., 
Hammond, 627 P.2d at 1056. As stated at the 1950 Constitutional Convention, the report of which was adopted in Chun, and reaffirmed in Kaho
'ohanohano and Everson, although the 
20
 As addressed in Section V.B. below, we conclude that, inter alia,
the Declaration of Appellants' expert witness and the accompanying analysis
raised a genuine issue of material fact and, therefore, the State was not
entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
 
36
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Legislature can reduce benefits as to new entrants into the ERS, 
as well as for persons already in the ERS system to the extent that those benefits are attributable to their future services, benefits that are attributable to past services cannot be reduced. Everson, 122 Hawai
'i at 409, 228 P.3d at 299; 
Kaho'ohanohano, 114 Hawai 'i at 342, 162 P.3d at 736; Chun , 61 Haw. 
at 605-06, 607 P.2d at 421; Comm. of the Whole Rep. No. 18 in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai
'i of 1950, 
at 330 (1960). We hold that the health benefits identified above – i.e., the retiree health benefits, included in a Health Fund
 benefits plan, that were promised at the time of enrollment in
 the ERS – are attributable to past services and shall not be
 diminished or impaired.
 
We further hold, however, that Appellants' 
constitutionally protected accrued retiree health benefits are not an exact package of health benefits which were offered in a Health Fund health benefits plan, fixed as of a certain date, unchanged and unchangeable over time. See Duncan
, 71 P.3d at 
891; see also, e.g., Everson, 122 Hawai 'i at 409, 228 P.3d at 
289. The EUTF is not free to change, to Appellants'
 
disadvantage, the nature and/or core undertakings of the health
 benefits that were promised to retirees under the Health Fund. 
The benefits provided should generally be "in keeping with the
 mainstream" of health insurance packages offered to active public
 employees in terms of scope and balance. See Duncan, 71 P.3d at
 
891-92. Appellants' accrued retirement health benefits
 
37
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
constitute a reasonable health benefits package that Appellants 
could reasonably believe they were entitled to, based on the State's promises at the time of enrollment in the ERS, and based on promises of additional retirement health benefits made by the State and Counties,
21 if any, during their course of employment. 
See, e.g., Everson, 122 Hawai 'i at 419, 228 P.3d at 299. 
Offsetting advantages and disadvantages must take into
 
account how changes to health benefits impact retirees, as well
 as the government fisc. See Duncan, 71 P.3d at 891-92. In other
 
words, considering the health benefits included in the health
 benefits plan offered by the Health Fund as the starting place,
 the "equivalent value" of accrued retirement health benefits must
 be viewed from the beneficiaries' viewpoint, and not simply in
 consideration of the cost to the State. As explained in Duncan,
 "equivalent value must be proven by a comparison of benefits
 provided–merely comparing old and new premium costs does not
 establish equivalency." Duncan, 71 P.3d at 892. 
We agree with the Duncan court that this flexible
 
standard should not be interpreted as approving major deletions
 in the types of coverage offered during an employee's term. 
Coverage of a particular disease or condition should not be
 deleted, even though other coverage might be improved, if the
 
21
 We reject Appellants' argument that accrued health benefits
include enhanced or improved benefits that may have been received by employees
enrolled in union-sponsored plans. Such benefits were never available to
 retirees, not promised by the State to future retirees, and made available
through the unions' contributions to and particularized negotiations for the
health benefits coverage. 
38
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
deletion would result in serious hardship to those who suffer
 
from the disease or condition in question. Nor should barriers
 to timely delivery of an evolving standard of care be erected in
 the name of efficiency or cost-savings. 
Although we have held that article XVI, section 2
 
protects accrued retirement health benefits, not parity of health
 benefits, a comparison to the health benefits offered to active
 employees is not irrelevant or wholly immaterial, as a measure of
 the reasonableness of any changes made to retirement health
 benefits over time. Finally, unreasonable changes to the
 retirement health benefits provided to Appellants by the Health
 Fund, e.g., disadvantages not offset by comparable advantages,
 may be considered a diminishment or impairment of their accrued
 retirement health benefits; but it is for the trier-of-fact to
 determine, in the first instance, whether Appellants have
 demonstrated that particular changes are unreasonable and
 constitute a diminishment or impairment of their accrued
 retirement health benefits.
 
B.	 The Summary Judgment Order
 The standard for summary judgment is well-established:
 
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
reviewed de novo. Summary judgment is appropriate if the
pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any,
show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law. A fact is material if proof of that fact
would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the
essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted
 by the parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other words, we
 
39
                         
 ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
must view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom
 
in the light most favorable to the party opposing the
motion. 
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n, 119 Hawaii at 96, 194 P.3d at 537 
(brackets and citations omitted).
 '
In addition, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has often held: 
Inasmuch as the term "reasonableness" is subject to
differing interpretations, it is inherently ambiguous.
Where ambiguity exists, summary judgment is usually
inappropriate because the determination of someone's state
of mind usually entails the drawing of factual inferences as
to which reasonable minds might differ. Reasonableness can
 only constitute a question of law suitable for summary
judgment "when the facts are undisputed and not fairly
susceptible of divergent inferences because where, upon all
the evidence, but one inference may reasonably be drawn,
there is no issue for the [trier of fact]." "A question of
interpretation is not left to the trier of fact where
evidence is so clear that no reasonable person would
determine the issue in any way but one." Id. (quoting
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 212 cmt. e (1981). See
 
also Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 212(2) (1981 and
Supp. 2005) ("A question of interpretation of an integrated
agreement is to be determined by the trier of fact if it
depends on the credibility of extrinsic evidence or on a
choice among reasonable inferences to be drawn from
extrinsic evidence.").
 
Courbat v. Dahana Ranch, Inc. , 111 Hawaii 254, 263, 141 P.3d 
427, 436 (2006) (some citations, internal quotation marks,
 
original brackets, and ellipsis omitted).
 '
Here, even with respect to the limited scope of the
 
Circuit Court's analysis, i.e., whether the retiree health
 benefits under the EUTF plans were the same or substantially the
 same as what retirees received under the Health Fund plans, the
 Circuit Court concluded that: (1) Appellants receive health
 benefits under the EUTF plans that are the same or substantially
 the same as what they received under the Health Fund plans; and
 
40
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(2) although there were numerous differences, the differences
 
were "reasonable." In doing so, the Circuit Court appears to
 have disfavored or disregarded the particularized evidence
 submitted through and with Appellants' expert's declarations, and
 favored that of the State's experts' opinions. 
On appeal, the State focuses narrowly on the "actuarial 
equivalence" and cost-effectiveness of the EUTF retiree health plans as compared to the Health Fund retiree plans. The State cites its expert's opinion that it is not "proper or useful to compare two health benefits plans by selectively focusing on certain favorable or unfavorable aspects of each plan," and submits that the differences highlighted by Appellants are immaterial and, therefore, summary judgment was proper. In addition, the State argues that the Circuit Court "was conducting the analysis from Duncan: considering the offset of advantageous changes against disadvantageous ones" and "it is the similarity and the reasonableness of the changes between the two retiree plans that serves as the basis for the circuit court's legal conclusion that no diminishment had occurred . . . [and that Appellants] have failed to show any genuine issue of material fact." This analysis, however, involves a weighing of evidence that is susceptible to divergent inferences as to the reasonableness of the changes and, thus, is inappropriate for summary judgment. See Courbat, 111 Hawai
'i at 263, 141 P.3d at 
436. 
41
                         
 ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Viewing all of the evidence and inferences therefrom in
 
the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, as we must do,
 
we conclude that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to
 whether the retirement health benefits that Appellants' receive
 or may be eligible to receive under the EUTF are the same or
 substantially the same as the health benefits retirees received
 under the Health Fund. In addition, on the evidence presented,
 we cannot conclude that the differences identified in the health
 benefits plans were reasonable as a matter of law, as the Summary
 Judgment Order appears to conclude.
22 More importantly, as
 
discussed above, Appellants' constitutionally protected
 retirement health benefits accrued upon their entry into the ERS,
 but were subject to legislative changes, so long as those changes
 do not necessarily reduce the benefits that have been accrued, as
 measured by the flexible standard articulated above. Because
 genuine issues of material fact remain in dispute, and the State
 was not entitled to judgment as a matter of law, the grant of
 partial summary judgment in favor of the State was erroneous.
23
 
22 As set forth above, the Summary Judgment Order includes the
following: "The court concludes that the differences in the level of coverage
as between the PEHF and the EUTF HMSA plans for retirees, as illustrated
above, are reasonable."
 
23
 On remand, it remains Appellants' burden, of course, to
demonstrate that the State diminished or impaired their accrued retirement
health benefits in violation of the Non-Impairment Clause, in light of the
principles articulated here. Although we have held that the reasonably
equivalent value of the EUTF retirement health benefits, as compared to the
retirement health benefits Appellants accrued at the time of their enrollment
in the ERS (and additional accrued retirement health benefits, if any) must be
compared in light of these principles, the trial court is best situated, in
the first instance, to determine the method of such comparison, in light of
evidence and arguments before it.
 
42
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C. Appellants' Res Judicata/Collateral Estoppel Argument
 
Appellants present a rather convoluted argument that,
 
based on certain parts of the Circuit Court's rulings in Everson, 
res judicata and collateral estoppel barred the Circuit Court's 
"re-litigation" of "(1) whether there was parity between EUTF
 health benefits to Active Workers and Retirees; and (2) whether
 the EUTF Board decision that it can provide inferior health
 benefits to Retirees violates Section 2." The Circuit Court in
 this case correctly rejected Appellants' argument, which was
 primarily presented in Appellants' Motion for Reconsideration. 
Appellants refer to these two preclusive doctrines 
interchangeably. However, res judicata prohibits a party from relitigating a previously adjudicated claim or cause of action. Res judicata is applicable when: (1) the claim or cause of action in the present action is identical to the one decided in the prior adjudication; (2) there was a final judgment on the merits in the prior adjudication; and (3) the parties to the present action are the same or in privity with the parties in the prior action. See, e.g., Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai
'i 43, 53-54, 
85 P.3d 150, 160-61 (2004). Res judicata prohibits the 
relitigation of all grounds and defenses which might have been properly litigated in the prior action, even if the issues were not litigated or decided in the earlier adjudication of the subject claim or cause of action. Id. at 53, 85 P.3d at 160 
(citations omitted). 
43
                         
 ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
24
Collateral estoppel  may preclude the relitigation of
a fact or issue
 that was previously determined in a prior action 
on a different claim or cause of action between the same parties 
or their privies. Collateral estoppel only applies, however, if the particular issue in question was actually litigated, finally decided, and essential to the earlier valid and final judgment. See Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui, 116 Hawai
'i 239, 264, 172 P.3d 
983, 1008 (2007) (citing Dorrance v. Lee, 90 Hawai 'i 143, 149, 
976 P.2d 904, 910 (1999)). Thus, the test for collateral estoppel has four elements: (1) the fact or issue in the present action is identical to the one decided in the prior adjudication; (2) there was a final judgment on the merits in the prior
 adjudication; (3) the parties to the present action are the same
 or in privity with the parties in the prior action; and (4) the
 fact or issue decided in the prior action was actually litigated,
 finally decided, and essential to the earlier valid and final
 judgment. Id.
 
The party asserting either res judicata or collateral 
estoppel has the burden of establishing each of the applicable elements. Bremer, 104 Hawai
'i at 54, 85 P.3d at 161. 
Therefore, with respect to res judicata, we must first
 
determine whether the claim or cause of action in the present
 case is identical to the one decided in the prior adjudication. 
24
 Collateral estoppel is frequently, and perhaps confusingly,
referred to as an aspect of res judicata. See, e.g., Omerod, 116 Hawai' i at 
263-64, 172 P.3d at 1007-08; Keahole Def. Coal., Inc. v. Bd. of Land & Nat.
Res., 110 Hawai' i 419, 429, 134 P.3d 585, 595 (2006) (citations omitted). 
44
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As previously described, the Everson case was an agency action
 
initiated with the EUTF Petition, which sought a declaratory
 ruling as to the four questions quoted in Section II.B. above. 
Appellants, in essence, request that this court disregard the
 scope of those claims for declaratory relief, and instead rely on
 their expansive "Statement of the Case" presented on appeal to
 the Everson Circuit Court. As the Circuit Court below concluded,
 the claims raised before the EUTF concerned HRS Chapter 87A and
 article XVI, section 2, and did not address the question of
 parity of benefits under HRS Chapter 87.
 
Although somewhat unclear, it appears that the 
Appellants contend that res judicata applies to their second point, i.e., that the Circuit Court's ruling in Everson precludes relitigation of whether the EUTF Board's decision that it can provide inferior health benefits to retirees violates the Non-Impairment Clause. The "constitutional ruling" by the Circuit Court in Everson, with which this court agreed, was that Hawai
'i's Non-Impairment Clause applies to retirees' accrued 
health benefits. See Everson, 122 Hawai 'i at 405, 417, 228 P.3d 
at 285, 297. The "statutory ruling" by the Circuit Court in Everson, which this court rejected on appeal, was that HRS § 87A­23 requires parity of benefits between active workers and retirees. Id. at 405-06, 421, 228 P.3d at 285-86, 301. 
Notwithstanding a couple of extraneous references to HRS Chapter 87, we decline to read the Circuit Court's ruling in Everson more broadly than that. Res judicata does not apply. 
45
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
It also appears that Appellants contend that collateral
 
estoppel precludes a determination in this case of "whether there
 
was parity between EUTF health benefits to Active Workers and
 Retirees." The entirety of the Everson Circuit Court's factual
 determination on this issue is contained in the fifth paragraph
 of its July 23, 2008 Decision and Order, which states:
 
5. Having rejected the Board's legal analysis,
this Court is left to consider whether the differences in
 
retiree benefits nonetheless reasonably approximate those of
active workers. The following exemplify benefits that are
not reasonably approximate in violation of state law:
 
$2,000 maximum dental benefit versus $1,000
 80% versus 60% coverage for endodontic treatment
90% radiation therapy coverage versus 80% outpatient
therapy after paying annual deductible
 
Although the three examples of differences between
 
retiree benefits and active employee benefits, which were also
 
noted by the Circuit Court in this case, do not appear to be
 disputed, we reject Appellants' contention that, pursuant to the
 doctrine of collateral estoppel, they have any material
 preclusive effect in this case.
 
D. The State's Cross-Appeal
 1. HRS § 87-22(b) (repealed)
 
As noted above, the State raises two issues on cross-
appeal, the first of which contends that the Circuit Court erred
 in concluding: 
Under the PEHF, the law required that health benefits had to
be "equally available to all employee-beneficiaries and
dependent-beneficiaries selecting the [health] plan
regardless of age.["] HRS § 87-22(b) [(Supp. 2000)]. The
 term "employee-beneficiary" included active and retired
employees. Thus, on its face and by definition, HRS
 
46
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
§ 87-22(b) required that the same health benefits had to be
equally available to all employees, active and retired
alike.
 
In a footnote, the Circuit Court added that:
 
The term "employee-beneficiary" was defined to include "an
employee" and the term "employee" was defined as "an
employee or officer of the state or county government or the
legislature," including, "a retired member of the employees
retirement system[.]" HRS § 87-1(5)(A)(v) and (6). Thus,
 an "employee-beneficiary" included active and retired
government employees.
 
We reject the State's exclusive focus on the
 
"regardless of age" clause, which ignores the inclusion of "all
 
employee-beneficiaries" and the plain language of HRS § 87-1,
 which defined employees and employee-beneficiaries to include
 active workers and retirees alike. 
See also Everson , 122 Hawai 'i 
at 420-21, 228 P.3d at 300-01 (noting that the 2001 amendments to
 the HRS included removal of the language that "required the Board
 of the EUTF to provide health benefits to retirees that are
 'reasonably approximate' to those benefits provided to active
 employees").
 
This conclusion appears to be consistent with the
 
Legislature's understanding of HRS § 87-22, as evidenced by the
 conference committee report discussing the 2001 amendment
 removing the "equally available" language from HRS § 87-22(b): 
[Y]our Committee intends to address the issue of spiraling
costs by . . . allowing the Public Employees Health Fund to
craft health benefits plans within the employer's fiscal
limitations. This amended measure expressly provides the
Public Employees Health Fund with greater flexibility to,
among other things, determine the types of plans, the design
of plans, and the delivery of plan services.
Upon further consideration and based on this intent,
your Committee on Conference has amended the measure by
 
47
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
. . . [a]mend[ing] section 87-22,[25] Hawaii Revised Statutes,
 
relating to the determination of health benefits plans, by
providing the Health Fund with the authority to design
health benefits plans for all beneficiaries of the Health
Fund. . . .
 
. . . .
 Your Committee on Conference believes that the amended
 
measure will . . . result in better, more well-suited,
 health benefits plans for each beneficiary of the Public
Employees Health Fund.
 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 139, in 2001 House Journal, at 1105. Thus,
 
the committee posits that removing the "equally available"
 language would permit the Health Fund to design plans that are
 "well-suited" to "each beneficiary." Id. This supports the
 
interpretation that the pre-amendment language was removed
 because it barred the Health Fund from offering different health
 benefits plans to active employees and retirees.
 
Accordingly, we hold that the Circuit Court did not err
 
in interpreting HRS § 87-22(b), prior to the 2001 amendment. The
 State's argument, that HRS § 87-22(b)'s "all employee-
beneficiaries . . . regardless of age" provision should be read
 solely to protect against age discrimination, is inconsistent
 with this conclusion.
 
2. The Circuit Court's Factual Determinations
 
Finally, the State argues that it established that
 
active employee and retiree health plans offer substantially
 equivalent health benefits, or at least there was a genuine issue
 of material fact on this issue. As stated above, we agree with
 
25
 HRS § 87-22 is just one of several sections amended here. Conf.
 
Comm. Rep. No. 139, S.B. No. 1046.
 
48
                         ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the latter proposition. The parties each presented substantial
 
evidence in the form of expert opinions and supporting exhibits
 sufficient to create genuine issues of material fact, such that
 it is necessary to vacate the Circuit Court's factual findings
 and remand this case for further proceedings.
 VI. CONCLUSION

 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's January 30, 2015
 
Judgment is affirmed in part, vacated in part, and this case is
 remanded for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
 Deirdre Marie-Iha and
 
Donna H. Kalama
 for petitioners
 
Paul Alston
 
Maren L. Calvert
 John Rhee and
 Charles K.Y. Khim
 for respondents
 
Mauna Kea Trask and 
Adam P. Roversi for respondentCounty of Kaua
'i 
Donna Y.L. Leong and
John S. Mukai
 for respondent
City and County of Honolulu
 
Patrick K. Wong and
Richard B. Rost
 for respondent
County of Maui
 
Molly A. Stebbins
Melody Parker andLaureen L. Martin for respondentCounty of Hawai
'i 
49
 