*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
HONOLULU CIVIL BEAT INC., 
Plaintiff-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL,
Defendant-Appellee.  
 
 
SCAP-21-0000057 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-21-0000057; CASE NO. 1CC161001743) 
 
APRIL 26, 2022 
 
WILSON AND EDDINS, JJ., AND CIRCUIT JUDGE WONG, IN PLACE OF 
NAKAYAMA, J., RECUSED; AND RECKTENWALD, C.J., CONCURRING IN PART 
AND DISSENTING IN PART, WITH WHOM McKENNA, J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY EDDINS, J. 
 
In 2016, the Department of the Attorney General produced an 
explosive 555-page report1 documenting incompetence, deceptive 
                         
1  The Report itself contains 555 substantive pages and one blank page; 
the Department of the Attorney General also prepared a seven page follow up 
report. Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-21-0000057
26-APR-2022
09:03 AM
Dkt. 17 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2 
 practices, and workplace bullying in the Office of the Auditor 
(the Report). 
Honolulu Civil Beat, an investigative news organization, 
has been trying to get its hands on a copy of that report for 
over five years.   
We decide whether Hawai‘ i’s public information law - the 
Uniform Information Practices Act (UIPA) - requires the State AG 
to release the Report to Civil Beat.   
By and large, it does.  Though there are significant 
privacy interests in the Report as a “personnel-related” record, 
these interests are mostly outweighed by the public’s 
overwhelming interest in the Report’s disclosure.  There are summaries of formal personnel records, discussions of minor 
policy infractions, and remarks about medical information in the 
Report that are exempt from the UIPA’s disclosure requirements.  
They may be redacted.  The names of rank-and-file employees of 
the Office of the Auditor and other interviewees may also be 
redacted.  But everything else is fair game for Civil Beat: a 
smattering of redactions within a government record cannot shield the entire thing from the UIPA’s disclosure requirements. 
I. BACKGROUND 
In April 2015, the  Legislature asked the Department Hawai
 ‘i
of the Attorney General (the AG or State AG) to investigate the Office of the Auditor.  The legislature made this request after *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3 
 receiving complaints about three high-ranking officials in the 
Office of the Auditor: Acting Auditor Jan Yamane, Deputy Auditor 
Rachel Hibbard, and General Counsel and Human Resources Manager 
Kathleen Racuya-Markrich (collectively the Subjects). 
The State AG investigated.  And it compiled a record of its 
investigation (the Investigation). 
On April 27, 2016, a Civil Beat reporter emailed the State 
AG.  He referenced the UIPA and asked for “access to or copies of all final investigative reports related to the state 
auditor’s office from Jan. 1, 2015 to present.” 
The UIPA provides that “[a]ll government records are open 
to public inspection unless access is restricted or closed by 
law.”  Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 92F-11(a) (2012).  It 
also exempts several categories of records from this disclosure 
mandate.  See HRS § 92F-13 (2012).  
The State AG denied Civil Beat’s request.  It said the 
Report was exempt from the UIPA’s disclosure requirement. 
Civil Beat sued. The parties cross-moved for summary judgment. The circuit court granted the State AG’s motion for summary 
judgment and denied Civil Beat’s.  The court said the Report was exempt from the UIPA because it was a confidential communication *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
4 between counsel (the State AG) and client (the legislature).   
Civil Beat appealed.  On appeal, we reversed the circuit court. 
See Honolulu Civil Beat Inc. v. Dep’t of Attorney Gen. (Civil 
Beat I), 146 Hawai‘ i 285, 463 P.3d 942 (2020).  The Report might 
have been prepared at the legislature’s request.  But the State 
AG hadn’t shown it prepared the Report in the context of an 
attorney-client relationship.  And, as a result, the Report was 
not exempt from the UIPA’s disclosure requirements.  Id. at 298,
463 P.3d at 955. 2
 
 
The State AG’s motion for summary judgment had raised two 
additional bases for the Report’s nondisclosure that were left 
unaddressed by the circuit court’s order.  They were: 
(1) HRS § 92F-13(3) (the Frustration Exemption) (exempting
from disclosure “[g]overnment records that, by their
nature, must be confidential in order for the
government to avoid the frustration of a legitimate
government function”); and
(2) HRS § 92F-13(1) (the Privacy Exemption) (exempting
from disclosure “[g]overnment records which, if
disclosed, would constitute a clearly unwarranted
2The court reasoned that since the Report was covered by the statutory 
attorney- client privilege, see Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence Rule 503, it would be 
shielded from the UIPA’s disclosure requirements by HRS § 92F-13(4), which 
exempts from UIPA disclosure government records that “pursuant to state or 
federal law . . . are protected from disclosure. ”  See also HRS § 626-1 
(2016) (enacting the Hawaiʻ i Rules of Evidence). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
5 
 invasion of personal privacy”). 
We remanded the case.  We instructed the circuit court to 
consider whether the Report was shielded from the UIPA’s 
disclosure requirements by the Frustration or Privacy 
Exemptions.  Id. at 299, 463 P.3d at 956. 
On remand, the circuit court again granted summary judgment 
to the State AG.  It held that the Report fell within both the 
Frustration and the Privacy Exemptions and was therefore exempt from the UIPA’s disclosure requirements. 
The court said the Report fell within the Frustration 
Exception because its disclosure would frustrate the State AG’s 
“legitimate government function” of providing legal services to 
state agencies. 
The court said the Report fell within the Privacy Exemption 
because its disclosure would “constitute a clearly unwarranted 
invasion of personal privacy.”  In reaching this conclusion, the circuit court found there were significant privacy interests in the Report because it was both “[i]nformation comprising a 
personal recommendation or evaluation,” see HRS § 92F-14(b)(8) 
(2012 & Supp. 2015), and “[i]nformation in an agency’s personnel file,”
3 see HRS § 92F-14(b)(4). 
                         
3  The court said that: (1) the Subjects had a significant privacy 
interest in the Report as a personal recommendation or evaluation under HRS 
§ 92F-14(b)(8); and (2) everyone named in the Report had a significant 
privacy interest in it as information in a personnel file under HRS § 92F-
14(b)(4).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
6 
 The circuit court also concluded that the Report should be 
totally withheld, rather than redacted, because the Report could 
not be “redacted in a fair manner which would give accurate 
meaning” to its contents. 
Now, in this second appeal, Civil Beat says the circuit 
court got it wrong again.  Civil Beat asks us to consider 
whether the circuit court erred by holding that the Report may 
be withheld from the public under (1) the Frustration Exemption; and (2) the Privacy Exemption.  Civil Beat also asks us to 
consider (3) “[w]hether the circuit court erred by holding that 
the AG investigation report could not be disclosed in redacted 
form.” 
II. DISCUSSION 
Under the UIPA, “[a]ll government records are open to 
public inspection unless access is restricted or closed by law.”  HRS § 92F-11(a).  But there are several statutory exemptions.  
See HRS § 92F-13.  And if a record falls within one of these 
exemptions, the government doesn’t have to disclose it.  Id. 
Two exemptions are at issue in this case: the Frustration 
Exemption (HRS § 92F-13(3)) and the Privacy Exemption (HRS 
§ 92F-13(1)). 
The UIPA “contains a strong presumption in favor of public 
disclosure of government records.”  Civil Beat I, 146 Hawai‘ i at 
293, 463 P.3d at 950 (citing  HRS §§ 92F-2 (2012), 92F-11(a)).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
7 
 And its exemptions are “narrowly construed with all doubts 
resolved in favor of disclosure.”  OIP Op. Ltr. No. 95-12 at 8 
(May 8, 1995).   
An agency relying on a UIPA exemption has the burden of 
showing that nondisclosure is justified.  HRS § 92F-15(c) (2012) 
(“The agency has the burden of proof to establish justification 
for nondisclosure.”). 
Here, the State AG has not met its burden of showing that 
the Report’s nondisclosure is justified under either the Frustration Exemption or the Privacy Exemption. 
A. The Frustration Exemption 
The analysis under the Frustration Exemption – which 
exempts records “that, by their nature, must be confidential in order for the government to avoid the frustration of a 
legitimate government function” - is straightforward.  Both the 
trial court’s post-remand order and the State AG’s opening brief 
assert that the AG’s ability 
to provide legal services will be 
frustrated by the Report’s disclosure.  This assertion is 
at 295, 463 P.3d at 952 (holding, on the same record before us 
now, that the AG “failed to prove that it was acting in a 
lawyer-client relationship with the legislature with regard to 
[the Report]”).  The record contains no explanation of how the 
Report’s disclosure could possibly frustrate the State AG’s incompatible with our holding in Civil Beat I.  See 146  Hawai‘i*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
8 
 ability to provide legal services given that, per Civil Beat I, 
the Attorney General wasn’t providing the State “legal services”
when it investigated the Office of the Auditor or prepared the 
Report.4 
 
The State AG has not advanced any other arguments about why 
the Report’s release would frustrate a legitimate government 
function.  The AG’s burden of showing how the Report’s release 
would frustrate a legitimate government function, see HRS § 92F-
15(c), has not been met.5  The Frustration Exemption, then, 
cannot justify the Report’s nondisclosure. B. The Privacy Exemption 
The Privacy Exemption analysis is more complicated. 
The Privacy Exemption applies to “[g]overnment records 
which, if disclosed, would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.”  HRS § 92F-13(1).  Under HRS 
                         
4  Our ruling will have no impact on the protections afforded to records 
the State AG can show are confidential lawyer- client communications.  The 
Attorney General contends that its ability to provide state agencies legal 
services would be handicapped by the Report’s disclosure.  But this 
contention is nonsensical.  Anytime the State AG conducts an investigation 
while providing legal services to a state agency, it may accurately tell its 
interlocutors that their responses would be confidential.  Government 
agencies, likewise, may continue to request legal services from the State AG with full confidence that confidential attorney- client communications will be 
shielded from UIPA disclosure.  See Civil Beat I , 146 Hawai‘ i at 293
 -95, 463 
P.3d at 950- 52.  
 
5  See Peer News LLC v. City & County of Honolulu ( Peer News II), 143 
Hawai ‘i 472, 487, 431 P.3d 1245, 1260 (2018) (stating that an agency seeking 
to withhold a record under the Frustration Exemption must “demonstrate a connection between disclosure of the specific record and the likely 
frustration of a legitimate government function, including by clearly 
describing the particular frustration and providing concrete information 
indicating that the identified outcome is the likely result of disclosure”). 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
9 
 § 92F-14(a), “[d]isclosure of a government record shall not 
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy if 
the public interest in disclosure outweighs the privacy interest 
of the individual.” 
A two-part test governs our determination of whether a 
given record’s disclosure would “constitute a clearly 
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.” 
First, the court decides whether there is a “significant 
privacy interest rooted in statute or the constitution.”  See 
Org. of Police Officers v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 149 Hawai‘ i 
492, 504, 494 P.3d 1225, 1237 (2021). 
If the court finds a constitutionally or statutorily 
“significant” privacy interest, it balances that interest against the public’s interest in disclosure.  If the significant 
privacy interest is stronger than the public’s interest in 
disclosure, the record’s disclosure constitutes “a clearly 
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy” and the record falls 
within the Privacy Exemption.  If, however, the public’s 
interest in disclosure is stronger than the privacy interests at issue, the record is not exempt and must be disclosed.  See id. 
at 516, 494 P.3d at 1249. 
The analysis is easier if there’s no “significant privacy 
interest rooted in statute or the constitution;” in that case, even “a scintilla of public interest in disclosure will preclude *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
10 
 a finding of a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy.”  Id. at 504, 494 P.3d at 1237 (cleaned up). 
1. The Report, as a whole, does not fall within the 
Privacy Exemption 
 
The circuit court held that everyone named in the Report 
has a significant privacy interest in it under HRS § 92F-
14(b)(4), which recognizes a significant privacy interest in 
“[i]nformation in an agency’s personnel file.”6  It also held 
that those privacy interests outweigh the public’s interest in the Report’s disclosure and that, therefore, the Report is 
covered by the Privacy Exemption. 
We agree with the circuit court that there are significant 
privacy interests in the Report under HRS § 92F-14(b)(4): the 
Report, as a whole, is a “personnel-related” record in which its Subjects have significant privacy interests under HRS § 92F-
14(b)(4).  But, we hold that because the Subjects’ significant 
privacy interests in the Report as personnel-related information 
are outweighed by the public’s interest in disclosure, the 
                         
6  The circuit court also found that Yamane and her managerial staff had 
significant privacy interests in the Report under HRS § 92F-14(b)(8), which 
recognizes a significant privacy interest in “[i]nformation comprising a 
personal recommendation or evaluation. ”  We disagree.  The State AG prepared 
the Report to document its investigation into the veracity of a particular set of personnel- related allegations.  This provenance is way different than 
that of most workplace “personal evaluations” or performance reviews.  And the Report explores themes and subject matter that would be out of place in an individual “personal evaluation.”  Because the Report is not a “personal 
recommendation or evaluation,” there are no significant privacy interests in 
it under HRS § 9 2F-14(b)(8). 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
11 
 Report, as a whole, is not covered by the Privacy Exemption.   
a. Defining the Scope of the Significant Privacy 
Interest Recognized by HRS § 92F-14(b)(4) 
 
HRS § 92F-14(b)(4) creates a “significant privacy interest” 
in “[i]nformation in an agency’s personnel file.”7 
This privacy interest extends to information that, though 
not physically located in any agency’s personnel files, is, in 
essence, a personnel record.  See OIP Op. Ltr. No. 98-05 at 20 
(Nov. 24, 1998) (concluding that an administrative investigation 
                         
7  The significant privacy interest in personnel- related information found 
in HRS § 92F- 14(b)(4) is one of ten examples of significant privacy interests 
enumerated in HRS § 92F- 14(b).  But this list of examples is not exhaustive. 
   
The UIPA implements article I, section 6 of the Hawai‘ i Constitution.  
See Org. of Police Officers, 149 Hawaii at 510, 494 P.3d at 1243 (describing 
UIPA as a law implementing article I, section 6).  Under article I, section 
6, “[t]he right of the people to privacy is recognized and shall not be 
infringed without the showing of a compelling state interest.”   We have held 
that “the privacy right protected by the ‘informational privacy’ prong of 
article I, section 6 is the right to keep confidential information which is 
‘highly personal and intimate.’”  State of Hawai‘ i Org. of Police Officers 
(SHOPO) v. Soc’y of Prof’l Journalists- Univ. of Hawai‘ i Chapter, 83 Hawai‘i 
378, 398, 927 P.2d 386, 406 (1996)).  As the court in SHOPO recognized,  
“highly personal and intimate information” is analogous to that implicated by 
the invasion of privacy tort, which encompasses information about “[s]exual relations,” “family quarrels, many unpleasant or disgraceful or humiliating 
illnesses, most intimate personal letters, most details of a [person’s] life 
in [their] home, and some of [their] past history that [they] would rather 
forget.”  Id. (citing Restatement (Second) of Torts § 652D cmt. B (Am. 
Law Inst. 1977)). 
 Because of the constitutionally significant privacy interest in “highly 
intimate and personal” information, HRS § 92F- 14(b)’s list of “examples” of 
significant privacy interests is not exhaustive.  HRS § 92F- 14(b) does not 
recognize information about, for example, family quarrels, as a category in 
which individuals have a significant privacy interest.  But individuals 
nonetheless have a significant privacy interest in information about their 
family quarrels because of article I, section 6’s protections.  The fact that 
HRS § 92F- 14(b) contains “examples” of information in which  a person has a 
“significant” privacy interest thus does not imply that a court may 
create 
statutorily significant privacy interests beyond those recognized by HRS 
§ 92F-14(b).  It merely reflects the legislature’s recognition that it is 
this court’s job to determine the scope of the constitutional right to informational privacy. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
12 
 report kept outside an employee’s personnel file is “akin to the 
information maintained in a personnel file” in part because 
“[a]n administrative investigation report often is the only 
investigation with regard to personnel action and discipline, 
and it provides the basis for any personnel action taken”); OIP 
Op. Ltr. No. 95-7 (March 28, 1995).  Thus, in the UIPA context, 
the term “personnel-related information” refers to information 
that, regardless of its physical location, is akin to that maintained by an agency in its personnel files. 
In considering the proper scope of the significant privacy 
interest created by HRS § 92F-14(b)(4), it is helpful to keep in 
mind that the noun “personnel” has two meanings.  It means 
“[t]he department of human resources in an organization;” and it 
may also refer to “[t]he people employed by or active in an 
organization, business, or service.”  See Personnel, The 
American Heritage Dictionary (5th ed. 2015).   
When HRS § 92F-14(b)(4) refers to “information in an 
agency’s personnel file,” it is talking about information in 
files maintained by the agency’s human resources department,  and 
not about all information in any way related to “[t]he people employed by or active in an organization, business, or service.”  
By extension, when we recognize a significant privacy interest 
in “personnel-related information,” we are describing a 
significant privacy interest in information related, or similar, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
13 
 to that you would find in the files of a human resources 
department.  8
                         
8  The dissent, in contrast, advocates a definition of “information in an 
agency’s personnel file
” that operationalizes personnel’s 
other meaning.  In 
the dissent’s account, if information has any connection to the “everyday 
work activities” of State employees, then those employees have a significant 
privacy interest in it.  See dissent at 9 (“UIPA’s text recognizes that State 
employees retain a significant privacy interest in their everyday work 
activities . . . .”) 
 
 There are major problems with this approach. 
  First, and most fundamentally, it is at odds with the plain text of HRS 
§
 92F-14(b)(4), which uses “personnel” to refer to an agency’s human 
resources department and not as a synonym for “employees.”  HRS § 92F-14(b)(4) recognizes a significant privacy interest in “ [i]nformation in an 
agency’s personnel file, or applications, nominations, recommendations, or 
proposals for public employment or appointment to a governmental 
position.”   Personnel files, job applications, nominations, and proposals for 
public employment are all things you would find in an agency’ s HR 
files.  Nothing in the plain text of this provision suggests the legislature 
is using “ information in an agency’ s personnel file” to refer to all 
information about the day- to-day work of an agency’s personnel. 
  Second, it makes no sense given the common understanding of the term 
“personnel file,” which refers to a file that both: (1) is specific to a particular person; and (2) contains a relatively narrow range of documents 
that are used to identify, and make employment decisions about, the 
particular employee they describe.  See Dep’t of Air Force
  v. Rose, 425 U.S. 
352, 377 (1976) (describing personnel files as containing personal data 
about, for example where someone was born, the names of their parents, their address history, and their educational records)
; see also Elkin Tribune, Inc. 
v. Yadkin Cty. Bd. of Cty. Comm’rs, 417 S.E.2d 465, 466 (N.C. 1992) 
(observing that statutory definition of personnel file as “consist[ing] of any information in any form gathered by the [employer] with respect to that 
employee and, by way of illustration but not limitation, relating to his [or 
her] application, selection or nonselection, performance, promotions, 
demotions, transfers, suspension and other disciplinary actions, evaluation 
forms, leave, salary, and termination of employment” comports with common understanding of term “personnel file” (emphases added)); Oregonian Publ’g 
Co. v. Portland Sch. Dist. No. 1J, 987 P.2d 480, 484 (Or. 1999) (en banc) 
(observing that “‘ personnel files’ would usually include information about 
[an employee’s] education and qualifications for employment, job performance, evaluations, disciplinary matters or other information useful in making employment decisions regarding an employee”).  
  Third, it is difficult to square with other  examples in HRS §
 92F-
14(b), which recognize significant privacy interests in discrete and 
relatively narrow categories of information like “[i]nformation comprising a personal recommendation or evaluation” and “[i]nformation relating to 
eligibility for social services or welfare benefits or to the determination 
of benefit levels.”  These are not sweeping genres akin to information about 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
14 
  
b. The Report is “personnel-related information” in 
which the Subjects alone have a significant 
privacy interest under HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)  
The circuit court held that everyone named in the Report 
has a significant privacy in it under HRS § 92F-14(b)(4).  We 
disagree.  Only the Subjects have a significant privacy interest 
in the Report as a whole. 
The analysis as to whether any particular individual has a 
“significant” privacy interest in a record requires more than a 
finding that the person is referenced in the record and that the 
record, as a whole, contains information covered by article I, 
section 6 or one of HRS § 92F-14(b)’s examples.  A record 
implicates a person’s significant privacy interests when it 
contains particular types of information about them.  A person’s 
privacy interest does not turn on the nature of the record as a 
whole.  Cf. Rose, 425 U.S. at 374 (recognizing that courts 
deciding FOIA challenges must “look beneath the label on a file 
or record when the withholding of information is challenged” 
(cleaned up)).  It turns, rather,  on whether a record’s 
information about them  implicates their personal significant 
privacy interests. 
                         
government employees’ “ everyday work activities.”  See dissent at 9.   There 
is no reason to think that the legislature - in recognizing a significant 
privacy interest in “[i]information in an agency’s personnel file” - intended 
to bestow information about state workers’ lunchtime habits and collegial 
dynamics with the same level of protection afforded to social security 
numbers and medical records. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
15 
 This analysis makes intuitive sense in the context of 
personnel files, which, by their nature, concern a particular 
person.  See Milner v. Dep’t of Navy, 562 U.S. 562, 570 (2011) 
(explaining that “the common and congressional meaning of ‘personnel file’ is the file showing, for example, where an 
employee was born, the names of his parents, where he has lived 
from time to time, his school records, results of examinations, 
and evaluations of his work performance” (cleaned up) (citing Rose, 425 U.S., at 377)); see also Rose, 425 U.S. at 376 (citing 
a House Report that describes FOIA’s exemption for personnel files as “intended to cover detailed Government records on an 
individual which can be identified as applying to that 
individual” (emphases added) (cleaned up)). 
Here, the Report is a personnel-related record in which not 
just one person, but three people (the Subjects), have a 
significant privacy interest under HRS § 92F-14(b)(4). 
As a preliminary matter, there are two reasons why the 
Report is “personnel-related information,” by which we mean the type of information you would expect to find in files maintained 
by an agency’s personnel department. 
First, the Report documents an investigation launched in 
response to complaints from Office of the Auditor employees 
concerning, among other things, harassment and a hostile work 
environment at the Office of the Auditor.  These are classic *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
16 
 human resources concerns.  And the Investigation – with its 
employee interviews, three Subjects, and review of personnel 
policies and procedures, training records, and staff assignments 
– is a classic HR investigation. 
Second, the State AG initiated the Investigation at the 
request of the legislature, which can hire and fire the auditor.  
And following the Investigation, the AG gave the Report to the 
legislature so that it could determine “what action needed to be taken if any” in response to the Report’s findings.  The 
relationship between the legislature and the auditor isn’t that 
of a typical “employer” and “employee.”  See Civil Beat I, 146 
Hawai‘i at 297, 463 P.3d at 954 (describing the auditor’s 
constitutional role in relationship to the legislature).  But 
the fact that a unit of government with power over the auditor 
requested and directed the Investigation weighs in favor of 
treating the Report as “personnel-related information” in which 
there may be significant privacy interests under HRS § 92F-
14(b)(4). 
So the Report is a personnel-related record.  But whose? 
The Investigation was launched in response to complaints 
about the Subjects, in particular.  And the Report’s scope and contents foreground the Subjects, in particular.  Though there’s 
no evidence the Office of the Auditor maintained the Report in 
Yamane, Hibbard, or Racuya-Markrich’s personnel files, the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
17 
 Report would not be out of place there.  It is, as a whole, a 
document of the sort an employer might use in making employment 
decisions about the Subjects.  Cf. Wakefield Teachers Ass’n v. 
Sch. Comm. of Wakefield, 731 N.E.2d 63, 67 (Mass. 2000) 
(describing the “core categories of personnel information” as 
“useful in making employment decisions” about a particular 
employee (cleaned up)).  Thus, with respect to each of the three
Subjects, the Report, as a whole, is personnel-related information.  So all three of the Subjects (who, as their 
moniker implies, are the Report’s subjects) have a significant 
privacy interest in the Report under HRS § 92F-14(b)(4).  
The Report does mention Office of the Auditor workers other 
than the Subjects.9  But these folks are not its focus.  The 
Report was not drafted because of them; it does not focus on them; and, with limited exceptions, see infra sections 
                         
9  Some of the Office of the Auditor employees mentioned in the Report 
received assurance of confidentiality from the State AG.  But this fact does 
not impact our analysis of whether these interviewees have significant 
privacy interests in the Report.  The State AG cannot o verride the UIPA’s 
disclosure requirements by promising interviewees confidentiality.  As we 
explained in SHOPO, “the virtually unanimous weight of authority holds that 
an agreement of confidentiality cannot take precedence over a statute 
mandating disclosure.”  SHOPO, 83 Hawai‘ i at 405– 06, 927 P.2d at 413– 14.  See 
also Washington Post Co. v. U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Servs., 690 F.2d 
252, 263 (D.C. Cir. 1982) (“[T]o allow the government to make documents 
exempt by the simple means of promising confidentiality would subvert FOIA’s 
disclosure mandate. ”); OIP Op. Ltr. No. 01- 04 at 7 (Oct. 29, 2001) 
(“[A]gencies should not make blanket assurances of confidentiality.  Investigators should always ensure that any such promises they make are appropriate, because if they are made in violation of the UIPA, witness 
identities and their statements would be subject to disclosure.”). 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
18 
  II(B)(2)(a) & (b), it does not contain information of the sort 
the Office of the Auditor would use in employment-related 
decisions about them.  The Report, with its hundreds of pages 
about the Subjects, would be out of place in any one of the non-
Subjects’ personnel files.  So the Report is not these 
employees’ personnel-related information.   And, by extension, 
they do not have a significant privacy interest in the Report 10
                         
10  Nothing in HRS § 92F- 14(b)(4)(B) suggests that all information 
concerning workplace investigations is necessarily the “personnel- related 
information” of every single participant in those investigations.  The 
dissent’s contention to the contrary rests on a misreading of HRS § 92F-
14(b)(4)(B). 
 
HRS § 92F- 14(b)(4) recognizes a significant privacy interest in 
“[i]nformation in an agency’s personnel file.”  Subsection (B) contains an 
exception to that general rule.  It outlines limited circumstances in which 
there is no significant privacy interest in five types of information 
concerning “employment misconduct that results in an employee’ s suspension or 
discharge.” 
 
 The dissent takes this very narrow exception and argues that it stands 
for the general propositions that: (1) the UIPA “specifically provides for 
individual privacy interests” in employment- misconduct investigations ; and 
(2) every employee named in a document describing a workplace misconduct 
investigation has a significant privacy interest in that document.  
See 
dissent at 13 (discussing HRS § 92F- 14(b)(4)(B) and claiming that “in 
addition to protecting personnel- related information in general, UIPA 
specifically provides for individual privacy interests in employment-
misconduct investigations” and that through HRS § 92F- 14(b)(4)(B) the 
legislature “recognized within UIPA’s text that employment investigations 
touch on sensitive areas implicating significant privacy interests for both 
subjects and witnesses”). 
  Neither of these contentions has any merit.  And neither draws any 
support from HRS § 92F- 14(b)(4)(B).  HRS § 92F- 14(b)(4)(B) indicates that, 
unsurprisingly, the legislature anticipated that government agencies’ personnel files would sometimes contain information about employee 
misconduct.  But that doesn’t mean all information in any way connected to a 
workplace misconduct investigation is automatically “personnel- related 
information.”  And it definitely doesn’t support the conclusion that everyone 
named in a report describing workplace misconduct has a significant privacy 
interest in it. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
19 
 under HRS § 92F-14(b)(4).,,131211 
                         
11  The dissent justifies its conclusion that the Report is the non-
Subjects’ personnel- related information by arguing that these interviewees 
ought to have a significant privacy interest in the Report.  The dissent says 
it’s not fair the UIPA gives the Subjects — who were accused of misconduct — 
a “significant” privacy interest in the Report while denying the same to the 
non-Subjects, who did nothing wrong.  See dissent at 12.   This argument is 
intuitively appealing, but the dissent’s engagement with this normative 
question is not appropriate: it is the legislature’s job, not ours, to weigh 
policy considerations and determine the scope of the Privacy Exemption.  See 
Peer News II, 143 Hawai‘ i at 489, 431 P.3d at 1262; State v. Smith, 103 
Hawaii‘ 228, 233, 81 P.3d 408, 413 (2003). 
 
12  The dissent says that OIP Opinion L etter Number 98-05 supports its 
contention that everyone named in the Report has a significant privacy 
interest in it as a personnel- related record.  It does not.  That opinion 
letter – which dealt with an administrative investigation, not a criminal one 
— did not consider at all the issue before us now: whether the witnesses in 
an administrative investigation have a significant privacy interest in that 
investigation as personnel- related information.  In fact, Opinion Letter 
Number 98-05 directly undermines the dissent’s claim that witnesses in an 
administrative investigation have a significant privacy interest in it under HRS § 92F- 14(b)(4).  In Opinion Letter Number 98-05, the OIP presumed that 
only the subject of an administrative investigation could have a significant privacy interest in it as personnel 
-related information.  See OIP Op. Ltr. 
No. 98-05 at 20-21 (separately analyzing whether the subject employee of an 
investigative report has a significant privacy interest in it as personnel-related information and concluding that “[w]hen there is no discharge 
resulting from employee misconduct, the subject employee has a significant 
privacy interest in the information contained in [an investigative affairs report about the misconduct]” (emphasis added)).  OIP Opinion Letter Number 98-05 addressed the question of whether the subject of an administrative 
investigation report could have a significant privacy interest in it as personnel- related information.  But it didn’t bother with the question of 
whether complainants and witnesses could have a “personnel- information” 
significant privacy interest in the same report.  Because it was obvious they could not. 
 
 Opinion Letter Number 98- 05 did find that witnesses in administrative 
investigation s
 have a significant privacy interest in information about their 
identity within internal affairs reports.  See id. at 19.  But nothing about 
that limited conclusion supports the dissent’s contention that the non-
Subjects have significant privacy interest in everything within the Report. 
 
13  Our holding that the non- Subjects named in the Report do not have a 
significant privacy interest in it under HRS § 92F-14(b)(4) is limited and 
technical.  We are not holding that the non- Subjects’ privacy interests in 
the Report are unimportant, insignificant, or trivial.  We are simply holding 
that those privacy interests are not the sort of privacy interests recognized 
by HRS § 92F-14(b)(4) as “significant.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
20 
 c. The public has a strong interest in the Report’s 
full disclosure  
 
The Report’s full disclosure would advance three distinct 
public interests. 
First, the public’s interest in assessing how the Office of 
the Auditor carries out its official duties.  See OIP Op. Ltr. 
No. 90–17, at 7 (April 24, 1990) (Recognizing that the UIPA 
reflects citizens’ right to know “what their government is up 
to” (quoting U.S. Dep’t of Justice v. Reporters Comm. for 
Freedom of Press, 489 U.S. 749, 773 (1989))).  The Report’s 
release would advance this public interest by “shed[ding] light 
upon the workings of government.”  See OIP Op. Ltr. No. 04-07 at 
7 (Mar. 25, 2004). 
Second, the public’s interest – distinct from its general 
interest in oversight of government operations - in “monitoring 
the conduct of individual government employees or officials.”  
Peer News LLC v. City & County of Honolulu (Peer News I), 138 
Hawai‘i 53, 79, 376 P.3d 1, 27 (2016) (Pollack, J., concurring).  
The Report’s release would advance this interest by allowing the 
public to assess whether the Subjects conscientiously and 
ethically carried out their respective duties while working in 
the Office of the Auditor. 
Third, the public’s interest in assessing the manner in 
which the government investigates complaints and allegations of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
21 
 wrongdoing.  As we explained in Organization of Police Officers: 
The public’s interest extends to those investigating 
misconduct and those accused of misconduct: the public should be assured that both the activity of public 
employees suspected of wrongdoing and the conduct of those 
public employees who investigate the suspects is open to 
public scrutiny.
 
 
149 Hawai‘ i at 516, 494 P.3d at 1249 (cleaned up).  The Report’s 
release would advance this interest by allowing the public to 
understand how the State AG conceptualized and executed the 
Investigation.  
d. The public’s interest in the Report’s disclosure 
outweighs the Subjects’ and non-Subjects’ privacy 
interests in the Report as a whole 
 
Because the Subjects have significant privacy interests in 
the Report as a whole under HRS Section 92F-14(b)(4), our 
determination as to whether the State AG may withhold the whole 
Report under the Privacy Exemption hinges on whether the public’s interest in the Report’s disclosure outweighs those 
interests.  See HRS § 92F-14(a).  (Since the non-Subjects’ 
privacy interests in the Report as a whole are not statutorily or constitutionally significant, they are not subject to HRS 
Section 92F-14(a) balancing.) 
The HRS Section 92F-14(a) balancing test is context-
specific; no multi-factor test could anticipate every potentially-relevant consideration.  That said, certain dynamics 
are routinely at issue when a government employee’s significant 
privacy interests in a record are balanced against the public’s *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
22 
 interest in the same record’s disclosure.  The OIP has 
identified five factors relevant to HRS Section 92F-14(a) 
balancing.  They are: 
(1) the government employee’s rank; 
 (2) the “[d]egree of wrongdoing and strength of 
evidence against the employee”; 
 (3) whether there are other ways to obtain the information; 
 
(4) “[w]hether the information sought sheds light on a government activity”; and 
 
(5) “[w]hether the information is related to job function, or is of a personal nature.”  
See OIP Op. Ltr. No. 10-03 at 6-7 (Oct. 5, 2010). 
 These non-exclusive factors are a nice starting point for 
HRS Section 92F-14(a) balancing.14  And here, each factor 
supports the Report’s disclosure.  The Subjects - Acting Auditor Jan Yamane, Deputy Auditor 
Rachel Hibbard, and General Counsel and HR Manager Kathleen 
Racuya-Markrich - were the Office of the Auditor’s top brass, not line auditors or administrative staff. 
And the Report is damning: it provides strong evidence of 
unethical and unprofessional conduct in the Office of the 
Auditor.  The Report contains information about: (1) the Office 
                         
14  As we explained in Organization of Police Officers, these factors 
“might be useful or relevant depending on the circumstances of the individual 
case” but “they are neither necessary nor dispositive.”  149 Hawai‘ i at 517, 
494 P.3d at 1250.
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
23 
 of the Auditor’s exaggeration and sensationalizing of its 
findings; (2) the Office of the Auditor’s fabrication of 
findings about auditee agencies; (3) the inexperience and 
incompetence of the Office of the Auditor’s leadership; (4) the 
Office of the Auditor’s alleged failure to complete an audit it 
was required, by law, to complete; (5) the Office of the 
Auditor’s efforts to artificially inflate the number of audit 
reports it produced; and (6) the toxic workplace at the Office of the Auditor. 
 The third factor examines “whether the government is the 
only means for obtaining the desired information.”  OIP Op. Ltr. 
No. 10-03 at 7.  The government is Civil Beat’s only option for 
getting the Report.  This factor supports disclosure. 
 The fourth factor also favors the Report’s disclosure.  The 
Report spotlights the workings of the Office of the Auditor.  In 
Peer News I, we recognized that “‘the appropriate concern of the 
public as to the proper performance of public duty is to be 
given great weight’ when balanced against competing privacy 
interests.”  138 Hawai‘ i at 73, 376 P.3d at 21 (quoting SHOPO, 83 
Hawai‘i at 399, 927 P.2d at 407). 
 Fifth, none of the information in the Report concerns the 
Subjects’ personal affairs.  All of it in some way connects to 
their official work in the Office of the Auditor.  The Report contains some colorful descriptions of the work environment at *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
24 
 the Office of the Auditor.  But this is largely a function of 
the manner in which the State AG conducted the Investigation.  
The AG’s investigator would ask interviewees if they had heard 
about various incidents of harassment within the Office of the 
Auditor.  It is unsurprising that some of the responses he got 
contained commentary on colleagues’ interpersonal dynamics.  
Nothing in the Report is purely personal, though: there’s no 
“gossip” about the Subjects’ (or anyone else’s) personal lives, just candid descriptions of a toxic workplace environment. 
Because the information in the Report relates to the Subjects’ 
job functions, not their personal affairs, this factor favors 
the public’s interest in disclosure. 
The datedness of the record is also relevant to HRS § 92F-
14(a) balancing.  Here, the Report dates to spring 2016 and it 
describes an investigation that happened about six years ago, in 
2015 and early 2016.  The record’s age cuts both ways.  The 
Subjects’ “significant privacy interests” in the Report have waned over time.  See McDonnell v. United States, 4 F.3d 1227, 
1256 (3d Cir. 1993) (recognizing that individuals’ privacy interests may become “diluted by the passage of time”).  At the 
same time, the public’s interest in the Report’s disclosure – 
though still substantial - is lower than it would be if Yamane 
were still Acting Auditor.  Cf. Peer News I, 138 Hawai‘ i at 82, 
376 P.3d at 30 (Pollack, J., concurring) (recognizing that *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
25 
 public interest in holding a police officer accountable for his 
conduct “may be significantly diminished if the officer is 
retired, was subsequently acquitted of the conduct, or is no 
longer serving as an armed officer”).  On balance, the Report’s 
age supports disclosure. 
A final factor that informs our analysis is the Office of 
the Auditor’s importance: this highly-visible and 
constitutionally-established office is a first line of defense against government inefficiency - or worse.  See Hawaii 
Constitutional Convention Studies, Article VI: Taxation and 
Finance, Legislative Reference Bureau, at 70-78 (June 1978).  
The critical role the Office of the Auditor plays in promoting 
trust and confidence in government enhances the public’s 
interest in the Report. 
We conclude that the State AG has not met its burden of 
showing that the Privacy Exemption wholesale shields the Report 
from disclosure: the public’s interests in the Report’s disclosure outweigh the Subjects’ significant privacy interests 
in the Report as a personnel-related record.  And because there 
is more than a “scintilla” of public interest in the Report’s 
disclosure, the non-Subjects’ non-significant privacy interests 
in information within the Report are also eclipsed. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
26 
 2. Four categories of information within the Report come 
within the Privacy Exemption 
 
The fact that the Report is not wholesale shielded from 
disclosure by the Privacy Exemption, does not mean that none of 
the information within it is covered by the Privacy Exemption.  We must consider each subset of information within the Report to 
determine whether its release would result in a clearly 
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.  Cf. Mead Data Cent., 
Inc. v. U.S. Dep’t of the Air Force, 566 F.2d 242, 261 n.55 
(D.C. Cir. 1977) (observing that “the focus of the FOIA is 
information, not documents as a whole”). 
There are four categories of information in the Report 
that, if disclosed, would “constitute a clearly unwarranted 
invasion of personal privacy.”  They are: (1) summaries of the Office of the Auditor’s personnel records; (2) findings and 
discussions concerning minor policy infractions committed by 
non-Subjects; (3) the names of interviewees and Office of the 
Auditor employees mentioned in the Report; and (4) information 
about individuals’ medical conditions.  These four categories of 
information fall within the Privacy Exemption and may be 
redacted from the Report.  
a. Summaries of the Office of the Auditor’s 
personnel files fall within the Privacy Exemption 
 
As part of the Investigation, the State AG reviewed records 
maintained in the Office of the Auditor’s personnel files.  The *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
27 
 Report summarizes some of these records.  For example, it 
describes in depth a demotion letter and several formal 
performance appraisals.  
HRS § 92F-14(b)(4) does not confer a significant privacy 
interest in every offhanded reference to a personnel record or 
matter.  Yet those whose personnel records are reviewed in 
detail by the Report do have a significant privacy interest in 
those summaries, just as they would in the records themselves. 
The public’s interest in these summaries is, in contrast, 
low.  They may shed light on certain government workers’ performance, but they add little to the Report’s description of 
the Office of the Auditor, at large. 
The public’s minimal interest in the Report’s summaries of 
personnel records is outweighed by the Office of the Auditor 
employees’ significant privacy interests in those discussions.  
The Report’s summaries of formal personnel records are therefore 
exempt from the UIPA’s disclosure requirements under HRS § 92F-13(1). 
b. Findings and discussions exclusively concerned 
with minor misconduct by non-Subjects 
 
The Report contains two findings concerning minor 
misconduct by a non-Subject.  And there are scattered sentences
within the Report that exclusively concern non-Subjects’ 
compliance, or lack thereof, with various Office of the Auditor 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
28 
 polices.  (For example, the leave and computer use policies.)  
These lines are diffuse throughout the Report.  But collectively 
they, and the two findings referenced above, are, “akin to the 
information maintained in a personnel file.”   See OIP Op. Ltr. 
No. 98-05 at 20.  So the non-Subjects whose compliance or non-compliance with workplace policies is addressed in the Report 
have a significant privacy interest in those discussions and 
findings under HRS § 92F-14(b)(4).
1615
 
The public’s interest in learning about minor policy 
violations committed by low-ranking Office of the Auditor employees over six years ago is low.  So even though this 
information does concern public employees’ performance of their 
official duties, the public’s interest in its disclosure does 
not outweigh the non-Subjects’ significant privacy interests in 
the information.  Thus, to the limited extent the Report 
contains findings and discussions that are exclusively concerned 
with non-Subjects’ policy infractions, that information is exempt from the UIPA’s disclosure requirements under HRS § 92F-
                         
15  Formal summaries describing an employee’ s compliance or non- compliance 
with written workplace policies – unlike lengthy qualitative accounts of 
office grudges or written descriptions of employees’ routine interactions and 
relative popularity – are the type of documents one would expect to find in 
the files of an agency’s personnel department.  
 
16  This privacy interest encompasses only information directly and 
exclusively concerned with the issue of an individual’s compliance or non-
compliance with an established workplace policy.  Non- Subjects do not have 
significant privacy interests in, for example, discussions about the Subjects’ uneven or unfair implementation of those policies. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
29 
 13(1). 
c. Interviewees’ names – but not Subjects’ - fall 
within the Privacy Exemption 
 
The public does not gain better insight into the workings 
of the Office of the Auditor by learning the identities of those 
interviewed or mentioned in the Report: it lacks even a trace of 
interest in this information.  See OIP Op. Ltr. No. 98-05 at 18 
(“[T]here is little or no public interest in the disclosure of the information which identifies witnesses and complainants.”); 
OIP Op. Ltr. No. 10-03 at 5 (“[T]he public interest in shedding 
light on the agency’s operations is generally served by 
disclosure of the nature of alleged misconduct and how the 
agency responded to it, without the name of the concerned 
employee and other details that could reasonably lead to the employee’s identification.”);  Cf. Albuquerque Publ’g Co. v. 
U.S. Dep’t of Justice, 726 F.Supp. 851, 856 (D.D.C. 1989) 
(observing that the names of third parties associated with Drug 
Enforcement Administration investigation are “irrelevant” to 
question of how DEA conducts its investigations). 
The public has no interest in knowing the identities of 
those interviewed and mentioned in the Report.  So even though the non-Subjects do not have a significant privacy interest in *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
30 
 the Report as a whole, the disclosure of their names  would be a 
clearly unwarranted invasion of privacy.1817
 
The same is not true with respect to the Subjects’ names: 
the public’s interest in monitoring the conduct of the Office of 
the Auditor’s managerial staff outweighs any privacy interests 
the Subjects may have in the non-disclosure of their identities.  
See Peer News I, 138 Hawai‘ i
 at 80, 376 P.3d at 28 (Pollack, J., 
concurring) (quoting OIP Op. Ltr. No. 98-05 at 21 for the 
proposition that “[c]ourts have identified the public interest 
in disclosure of the identities of employees as one which lies 
in holding those public officials accountable for their 
conduct”).  The Subjects’ names, then, are not shielded from 
                         
17  The Report also contains information such as job titles and references 
to individuals’ professional history that – though not as directly 
identifying as a name – might still enable those intimately familiar with the 
inner workings of the Office of the Auditor in the mid- 2010s to connect the 
dots on who’s who even with the redactions.  This information is “identifying 
information.”  See Rose, 425 U.S. at 380 (stating that “what constitutes 
identifying information . . . must be weighed . . . from the vantage of those 
who would have been familiar” with the matter).  And in many cases involving 
“significant” privacy interests, its disclosure could “constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.”  But that is not the case here.  
While the public has no interest in knowing interviewees’ identities, it does 
have a cognizable interest in helpful contextualizing information about 
interviewees’ positions.  Because of this public interest in the identifying 
information and the non- Subject employees’ lack of a significant privacy 
right in it, the disclosure of this information would not constitute a 
clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy. 
 
18    Because there is not a trace of public interest in knowing the non-
Subjects’ names, our conclusion that these names should be redacted is fully 
consistent with our holding that the non- Subjects do not have a significant 
privacy interest in the Report.  See Org. of Police Officers, 149 Hawai‘i at 
504, 494 P.3d at 1237 ( explaining that information in which there is zero 
public interest may fall within the Privacy Exemption even if there are no 
significant privacy interests in it).  The dissent’s contention to the 
contrary, see dissent at 18 n.7, is puzzling.  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
31 
 UIPA disclosure by the Privacy Exemption. 
d. The Report’s discussions of individuals’ medical 
conditions, disabilities, and bodies fall within the Privacy Exemption 
 
The Report documents several allegations of harassment or 
adverse treatment based on perceived disability or sickness.  
These references are information “relating to [a] medical . . . 
condition.”  See HRS § 92F-14(b)(1).  Under HRS Section 92F-
14(b)(1), this category of information is one in which 
individuals may have a significant privacy interest.   
An individual’s privacy interest in, for example, a 
colleague’s vague reference to “medical issues” may be lower 
than their interest in more clinical health information.  But 
the individuals whose disabilities, health, and bodies are 
discussed – even in passing – by the Report have a “significant 
privacy interest” in those discussions. 
The public interest in learning about the few allegations 
in the Report concerning medical conditions is very low.  This information doesn’t shed light on a government activity.  And it 
implicates personal, rather than professional concerns. 
Given these considerations, significant privacy interests 
outweigh the public’s interest in the disclosure of information 
concerning health, disability, and body size.  Disclosing this 
information would be a “clearly unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy.”  See HRS § 92F-13(1).  This small subset of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
32 
 information in the Report that relates to individuals’ medical 
conditions is thus exempt from the UIPA’s disclosure 
requirements.  See id.  
C. The Report should be redacted, not withheld The Attorney General contends that because it would be 
impossible to segregate disclosable from non-disclosable information in the Report, redaction will not do.  The entire 
Report must be withheld. 
The redactions allowed by this opinion are narrow.  But 
even if they were far more widespread, they would not justify the Report’s nondisclosure.   
The UIPA is intended to, among other things, “[p]rovide for 
accurate, relevant, timely, and complete government records” and 
“[e]nhance governmental accountability through a general policy 
of access to government records.”  HRS §§ 92F-2(2), (3).  These 
aims would be undercut if the presence of redactable information 
within a record could justify its total nondisclosure.  When some, but not all, of a record is exempt from UIPA disclosure, 
the record may be entirely withheld only if the permissible 
redactions are so extensive that what’s left is an 
incomprehensible mishmash of blacked-out paragraphs, scattered 
words, and punctuation.  If the unredactable material within a 
given record conveys information, it must be disclosed. 
Here, the information within the Report concerning *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
33 
 individuals’ names, personnel records, and medical conditions 
can be “readily detected and redacted from the [Report] without 
rendering the remaining [Report] information meaningless.”  See 
OIP Op. Ltr. No. 09-02 at 5 (Sept. 9, 2009).  These redactions 
thus do not provide any basis for withholding everything else in 
the Report.  See OIP Op. Ltr. No. F17-02 at 9 (Dec. 8, 2016) 
(“An agency cannot use the presence of some protected 
information . . . to justify a wholesale redaction of all information.”). 
III. CONCLUSION 
The State AG has not met its burden of showing that the 
Report, by and large, comes within a UIPA exemption.  So regarding the vast majority of the Report, the UIPA’s 
presumption favoring disclosure has not been overcome. 
We vacate the circuit court’s final judgment and remand to 
the circuit court. 
Within 60 days of the entry of our judgment the State AG 
shall present the circuit court with proposed redactions to the Report. 
Descriptions of documents retrieved from Office of the 
Auditor’s personnel files and relating to individual employees 
may be redacted.  Information exclusively about policy 
infractions by non-Subject employees may also be redacted.  
Any sentences concerning the physical health, disability-*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
34 
 status, mental illness, or body size of an Office of the Auditor 
employee may also be redacted. 
Finally, the names of interviewees and non-Subjects 
employed by the Office of the Auditor and discussed in the 
Report may be redacted. 
The circuit court shall review the State AG’s proposed 
redactions and shall disallow any that are inconsistent with 
this opinion. 
Within 90 days of the entry of our judgment the State AG 
shall give a copy of the Report - with only the redactions 
allowed by this opinion – to Civil Beat. 
Robert Brian Black,
for appellant  
 Stella M.L. Kam, 
(Patricia Ohara on the briefs)
for appellee  /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins 
/s/ Paul B.K. Wong 
 