*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
---o0o--- 
STATE OF HAWAII, Plaintiff
-Appellant,  
vs. 
RAVEN S. MORTENSEN- YOUNG, Defendant- Appellee.
(CAAP-22-0000045; CASE NO. 1DTA -21-01297)   
---------------------------------------------------------------- 
STATE OF HAWAII, Plaintiff
-Appellant,  
vs. 
LANCE M. OSHIMA, Defendant- Appellee.  
(CAAP-22-0000046; CASE NO. 1DTA- 21-01719)  
---------------------------------------------------------------- 
STATE OF HAWAII, Plaintiff
-Appellant,  
vs. 
MARLIN TORNQUIST TUCKER, Defendant- Appellee. 
(CAAP-22-0000047; CASE NO. 1DTA- 21-01463)  
---------------------------------------------------------------- 
STATE OF HAWAII, Plaintiff
-Appellant,  
vs. 
RYAN D. WOOD, Defendant-Appellee.  
(CAAP-22-0000048; CASE NO. 1DTA- 21-01472)  
SCAP-22-0000045 Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-22-0000045
15-MAR-2023
07:52 AM
 Dkt. 23 OP
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
2  
APPEALS FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
 
MARCH 15, 2023 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND EDDINS, JJ. ,
AND WILSON, J.,  DISSENTING  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
This case concerns  whether Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 805 -1 and this court’s holding in State v. Thompson , 150 
Hawaiʻi 262, 500 P.3d 447 (2021), apply to a complaint used to 
charge a defendant with Operatin g a Vehicle Under the In fluence 
of an Intoxicant (OVUII)  after the defendant was properly 
arrested without a warrant.  
In July, August, and October of 2021,  Plaintiff -
Appellant the State of Hawaiʻi (the State)  charged Defendant -
Appellee Raven S. Mortensen -Young (Mortensen -Young), Defendant -
Appellee Marlin Tornquist Tucker (Tucker), Defendant -Appellee 
Ryan D. Wood (Wood), and Defendant -Appellee Lance M. Oshima 
(Oshima) by complaint with  OVUII in the  District Court of the 
First Circuit  (district court ).  On December 28, 2021, 
Mortensen -Young, Tucker, Wood, and Oshima (collectively, 
Appellees ) each filed a “Motion to Dismiss for Defective 
Complaint and Improper Arraignment” (Motions to Dismiss), 
arguing that “the complaint  . . . is not supported by:” (1)  “The 
complainant’s signature; or” (2)  “A declaration submitted in *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
3 lieu of affidavit,” as required by this court’s decision in 
Thompson .  The State filed memoranda and supplemental memoranda 
in opposition to the Motions to Dismiss.  After holding a 
hearing, the district court orally granted Appellees ’ Motions to 
Dismiss.  
On January 12, 2022, the district court issued a 
“Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment” 
(Notice of Entry of Judgment ) granting Appellees ’ Motions to 
Dismiss.  The district court issued its “Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Defendant’s Motion to 
Dismiss for Defective Complaint and Improper Arraignment” ( Order 
Granting Motions to Dismiss ) on January 19, 2022.  The district 
court granted Appellees ’ Motions to Dismiss without prejudice.  
The State filed a notice of appeal in the Intermediate 
Court of Appeals (ICA).  On April 19, 2022, the State timely 
filed an application for transfer, which this court granted on 
May 6, 2022.   In its opening brief, the St ate contends , inter 
alia, that “[t]he district court erred in concluding that the 
charging instruments in these cases were required to comply with 
HRS § 805-1 and thus erred in dismissing these charging 
instruments on the grounds that they did not comply w ith that 
statute.”  Appellees  filed an answering brief disagreeing with 
the State’s arguments , and the State filed a reply brief . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
4 The State’s argument  that the complaints in Appellees ’ 
cases were not required to comply with HRS § 805 -1 has merit .  
First, t his court’s holding in Thompson  and the plain language 
of HRS §  805-1 establish that HRS §  805-1 applies only to 
complaints for a penal summons or an arrest warrant.  Second, 
case law interpreting previous versions of HRS §  805-1 confirm 
that the statute a pplies only to complaint s for a penal summons 
or an arrest warrant.  In addition , the State properly initiated 
the criminal proceedings against Appellees  pursuant to Hawaiʻi 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 7.  
Accordingly, we hold that the complaints in Appellees ’ 
cases did not have to comply with HRS §  805-1, and the State 
properly initiated the criminal proceedings against Appellees .  
Thus, the district court erroneously dismissed without prejudice 
the complai nts in Appellees ’ cases.  
II. BACKGROUND  
A. Factual Background  
Appellees  were all arrested for OVUII  and Appellees  
all posted bail .  Appellees  were examined and released after 
posting bail before 48 hours passed.1   
                     
1  It appears that this information only appears in the parties’ 
briefings, but Appellees  do not contest that Appellees  were arrested, 
examined, and released after posting bail before 48 hours had passed.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
5  B. District  Court Proceedings2 
On July 23, 2021, th e State charged Mortensen -Young by 
complaint with the offense of OVUII in violation of HRS §  291E-
61(a)(1).   On August 17, 2021, the State charged Tucker by 
complaint with the offense of OVUII in violation of HRS §  291E-
61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3).  On August  19, 2021, the State charged 
Wood by complaint with the offense of OVUII in violation of HRS 
§ 291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3).  On October 11, 2021, the State 
charged Oshima by complaint with the offense of OVUII in 
violation of HRS §  291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(4).   
The complaint s, which largely contained the same 
language, provided:  
COMPLAINT  
 The undersigned Deputy Prosecuting Attorney of the 
City and County of Honolu lu, State of Hawaiʻi charges:  
 On or about [date of offense], in the City and County 
of Honolulu, State of Hawaiʻi, [defendant’s name], did 
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly operate or assume 
actual physical control of a vehicle upon a public way, 
street, road, or highway while under the influence of 
alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair his normal mental 
faculties or ability to care for himself and guard against 
casualty , thereby committing the offense of Operating a 
Vehicle Under the Influence o f an Intoxicant, in violation 
of Section 291E -61(a)(1) [and/or (a)(3) or (a)(4)] of the 
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes.  [Defendant’s name], is subject to 
sentencing in accordance with [Section 291E -61(b)(1) or 
(b)(2)] of the Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes as a [first  or 
second] offender.  [Definition of “prior conviction” in 
Oshima’s case].  
 I [deputy prosecuting attorney], declare under 
penalty of law that the foregoing is true and correct to 
the best of my knowledge and belief.  
 Dated at Honolulu, Hawaiʻi: [Date of complaint].  
                     
2  The Honorable William M. Domingo presided.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
6    Appellees  filed Motions to Dismiss on December 28, 
2021.  Appellees  all argued that “the complaint  . . . is not 
supported by:” (1)  “The complainant’s signature; or” (2)  “A 
declaration submitted in lieu of affidavit,” as required by this 
court’s decision in Thompson .   
  The State  filed memoranda in opposition to Appellees ’ 
Motions to Dismiss on January 3, 2022.  The State maintained  
that the complaints in Appellees ’ cases were “made by 
declaration” as required by HRPP Rule 47(d) and HRS §  805-1.3   
                     
3  HRS § 805-1 (2014) provided:  
 
 Complaint; form of warrant.   When a complaint is made 
to any prosecuting officer of the commission of any 
offense, the prosecuting officer shall examine the 
complainant, shall reduce the substance of the complaint to 
writing, and shall cause the complaint to be subscribed by 
the complainant under oath, which the prosecuting officer 
is hereby authorized to administer, or the complaint shall 
be made by declaration in accordance with the rules of 
court.  If the original complaint results from the issuance 
of a traffic summons or a citat ion in lieu of an arrest 
pursuant to section 803 -6, by a police officer, the oath 
may be administered by any police officer whose name has 
been submitted to the prosecuting officer and who has been 
designated by the chief of police to administer the oath, 
or the complaint may be submitted by declaration in 
accordance with the rules of court.  Upon presentation of 
the written complaint to the judge in whose circuit the 
offense allegedly has been committed, the judge shall issue 
a warrant, reciting the compla int and requiring the 
sheriff, or other officer to whom it is directed, except as 
provided in section 805 -3, to arrest the accused and to 
bring the accused before the judge to be dealt with 
according to law; and in the same warrant the judge may 
require th e officer to summon such witnesses as are named 
in the warrant to appear and give evidence at trial.  The 
warrant may be in the form established by the usage and 
practice of the issuing court.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
7   On January 10 and 11, 2022, the State filed 
supplemental memoranda in opposition to Appellees ’ Motions to 
Dismiss.4  According to the State,  
 The premise for the motion to dismiss the complaint 
pursuant to  [Thompson ] relies on the proposition that  
[Thompson ] applies to all complaints.  It does not.  It 
only applies to penal summons cases.  The language used by 
the Supreme Court makes it clear that the Court did not 
intend to bring about a “sea change” as to how criminal 
complaints are filed when it held in Thompson  that the 
State may not request a penal summons using a complaint 
that does not comply with [HRS] §  805-1. 
The State maintained that  
 [HRS] § 805-1 deals with arrest warrants.  The 
Thompson court extended this section to penal summons cases 
which is reasonable given the reference in [HRS §]  805-1 to 
[HRS §] 805-3 which allows the district judge, in the 
district judge’s discretion, to iss ue a penal summons.  It 
would be absurd to interpret [HRS §]  805-1 which is 
entitled, “Complaint; form of warrant” to a case, such as 
the instant case, in which the defendant had been arrested; 
bail was set; defendant posted bail and was released.  In 
these cases, there is no need for the State to request that 
the Court issue an arrest warrant.  
 These warrantless OVUII arrests are authorized by 
[HRS] §§  803-1; 803-5; 803-6(a) and HRPP 5(a)(2).  These 
cases do not come under [HRS] §  805-1 which is captioned,  
“Complaint; form of [warrant] .”  In OVUII cases, the arrest 
has already occurred and the [S]tate is not requesting an 
arrest warrant (which would be absurd).  
  The district court held a hearing on Appellees ’ 
Motions to Dismiss on January 12, 2022.  Counse l for the State 
and counsel for Appellees  made arguments and the district court  
orally granted Appellees’ Motion s to Dismiss : 
 THE COURT:  All right.  [The State], as far as the 
Thompson  case though, wasn’t it unequivocal that they 
stated that the -- the complaint was defective because it 
was not compliant with [HRS §]  805-1, is that correct?  So 
how can you argue -- at this point if a complaint is 
                     
4  The State acknowledged that it did not file a supplemental memorandum 
in opposition in Tucker’s case but orally submitted the supplemental argument 
during the January 12, 2022 hearing without objection from Tucker’s counsel.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
8  defective, then I don’t think anything can, if you want to 
use fruit of the poisonous tree kind of analogy, yo u can’t 
go further from that if you have a defective complaint.  
  
[THE STATE]:  Our response to that, your honor, would 
be the complaint in Thompson , they asked the State -- they 
asked the court to issue a penal summons, asked for -- 
court to -- for some s ort of process and that process is 
pursuant to [HRS §]  805-1, and we’re saying the process 
that was used in these cases do not come under [HRS §]  805-
1.  They come under the other statutes that we set forth in 
our supplemental memo.  
  
. . . . 
  
THE COURT:  Okay.  All right.  Ready to rule on these 
matters.  
 Court finds that all of these cases have the same 
issue regarding the request to dismiss.  Based on the 
Thompson  case the court finds that all of these cases, the 
complaints are defective as they were no t made pursuant to 
[HRS §] 805-1.  There is no specific affidavit by the 
complainant in this matter or also a declaration by 
officer.  Court also finds that the police officer is not 
someone who can make that complaint effective at this 
point, so they are defective complaints and those cases 
will be dismissed.  
Also on January 12, 2022, the district court filed its  Notice of 
Entry of Judgment . 
On January 19, 2022, the district court issued its  
Order Granting Motions to Dismiss .  The district court made the 
following relevant finding of fact:  
4. Review of the Hawaii State Judiciary Information 
Management System (JIMS) reveals that no document 
containing the complainant’s signature, or declaration in 
lieu of affidavit, or any other type of Judicial 
Determinatio n of Probable Cause was filed in this matter.  
The district court made the following conclusions of law:  
1. On December 10, 2021, in State v. Thompson  (SCWC-17-
0000361), the Hawaii Supreme Court held that the failure of 
the prosecution to submit and file a complaint or 
declaration in lieu of affidavit containing the 
complainant’s signature was fatal and required dismissal of 
the action.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
9 2. In Thompson , the supreme court found that the 
prosecution violated HRS §  805-1 when it failed to comply 
with its statut ory obligation to perfect its complaint by 
filing a complaint that was neither signed by a complainant 
nor supported by declaration signed by the complainant.  
 
3. The Court further stated, “The requirements of HRS 
§ 805-1 therefore apply to all criminal co mplaints, 
regardless of whether the State uses the complaint to seek 
a penal summons or an arrest warrant.”  “Thus in order to 
comply with HRS §  805-1, the underlying complaint should 
have been subscribed under oath by the complainant or made 
by declaratio n in lieu of an affidavit in conformity with 
HRPP Rule 47(d).”  
 
4. The complaint filed in the instant case does not comport 
with the mandates of the holding in Thompson  and HRS §  805-
1. 
Thus, the district court granted Appellees ’ Motions to Dismiss 
without prejudice.   
C. The Appeal and Application for Transfer  
On February 10, 2022, the State timely appealed the 
district court’s decision to the ICA.5  On April 19, 2022, the 
State timely filed an application for transfer, which this court 
granted on May 6, 2022.  
1. Opening Brief 
The State filed an opening brief on June 16, 2022 , 
challenging the district court’s FOF 4 and COLs 1, 2, 3, and 4 .  
As relevant here,6 the State contends that  the district court 
                     
5  Appellees ’ appeals were consolidated on April 1, 2022.  
 
6  The State also argues “[a]ssuming arguendo  that the charging 
instruments in these cases were required to comply with HRS §  805-1, the 
district court erred in concluding that HRS §  805-1, as interpreted by 
Thompson , requires a ‘declaration in lieu of affida vit containing the 
complainant’s signature. ’”  Because HRS §  805-1 does not apply to the 
complaints in Appellees ’ cases, this opinion does not address the State’s 
argument that the complaints in Appellees ’ cases satisfied the requirements 
of HRS §  805-1. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
10 mistakenly  concluded that the charging instruments against 
Appellees  “were required to comply with HRS §  805-1 and thus 
erred in dismissing these charging instruments on the grounds 
that they did not comply  with that statute.”  Citing to 
Thompson , 150 Hawaiʻi at 267, 500 P.3d at 452, the State notes  
that HRS §  805-1’s requirements  “apply regardless of whether the 
State uses the complaint to seek a penal summons or an arrest 
warrant.”  The State asserts tha t the charging instruments 
against Appellees  did not seek a penal summons or an arrest 
warrant and thus  the charging instruments here are 
distinguishable from those in Thompson .   
The State maintains “[i]t appears that the import of 
HRS § 805-1 has been subs tantially unchanged since 1892 when it 
was enacted as Chapter LVII, An Act to Reorganize the Judiciary 
Department.”  The State further maintains that “[t]he earliest 
codified iteration of HRS  § 805-1 appears to be Chapter 53 Part 
I § 606 of The Penal Law of the Hawaiian Islands, 1897.”  Citing 
to Territory v. Sing Kee , 14 Haw. 586, 587 -88 (1903), the State 
contends  there is a difference “between a ‘charge’ which 
initiates a criminal trial and a  ‘complaint’ in order ‘to enable 
the magistrate to determine whether or not there is probable 
cause to believe that an offense has been committed by the 
accused so as to justify his apprehension.’”  The State asserts 
that Sing Kee  makes clear  a “complaint”  under HRS §  805-1 is *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
11 different from a “complaint” under HRPP Rule 7(d), which 
“regulates the ‘Nature and Contents’ of a ‘Charge.’”7  The State 
maintains that “[a] more accurate title for HRS §  805-1, in 
modern parlance would be ‘application for a misdemea nor arrest 
warrant.’”  The State contends  that a misdemeanor charging 
instrument, which does not ask for a penal summons or an arrest 
warrant, does not need to comply with HRS §  805-1 pursuant to 
Thompson . 
The State maintains that the charging instruments in 
these cases need not comply with HRS §  805-1 because Appellees  
were all properly arrested without a warrant pursuant  to 
                     
7  HRPP Rule 7 (201 2) provides in relevant part:  
 
(a) Use of Indictment, Information, or Complaint.   
The charge against a defendant is an indictment, a 
superseding indictment, an information, or a complaint 
filed in court. . . .  
 
. . . . 
 
(d) Nature and Con tents.  The charge shall be a 
plain, concise and definite statement of the essential 
facts constituting the offense charged.  . . . A complaint 
shall be signed by the prosecutor.  . . . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
12 HRS §§ 803-58 and 803-6(a).9  According  to the State, Appellees  
were examined and released “after posting bail before 48 hours 
had passed and before the requirement for a probable cause 
determination was triggered.”  The State therefore contends that 
“the process used in these cases is separate and distinct from 
the procedure required in HRS §  805-1.”   
  The State argues that the gener al rule for charges in 
HRPP Rule 7(d), and not HRS §  805-1, applies in Appellees ’ 
cases.  The State thus argues that the district court 
erroneously dismissed the charging instruments, which complied 
                     
8  HRS § 803-5 (2014) provides:  
 
By police officer without warrant.   (a) A police 
officer or other office r of justice, may, without warrant, 
arrest and detain for examination any person when the 
officer has probable cause to believe that such person has 
committed any offense, whether in the officer’s presence or 
otherwise.  
 (b) For purposes of this section, a police officer 
has probable cause to make an arrest when the facts and 
circumstances within the officer’s knowledge and of which 
the officer has reasonably trustworthy information are 
sufficient in themselves to warrant a person of reasonable 
caution in the belief that a crime has been or is being 
committed.  
9  HRS § 803-6(a) (2014) provides:  
 
 Arrest, how made.   (a) At or before the time of 
making an arrest, the person shall declare that the person 
is an officer of justice , if such is the case.  If the 
person has a warrant the person should show it; or if the 
person makes the arrest without warrant in any of the cases 
in which it is authorized by law, the person should give 
the party arrested clearly to understand for what cause the 
person undertakes to make the arrest, and shall require the 
party arrested to submit to be taken to the police station 
or judge.  This done, the arrest is complete.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
13 with the requirements to initiate a prosecution in these cases 
under HRPP  Rule 7(d). 
2. Answering Brief  
Appellees  filed an answering brief on August 24, 2022.  
As relevant here , Appellees  argue that , pursuant to Thompson , 
the district court correctly applied HRS  § 805-1 to the 
complaints against Appellees .  According to Appellees , “[t]he 
issue of whether the complaint complies with the requirements of 
HRS § 805-1 is distinct from whether a penal summons can be 
issued on a defective complaint.”10 
Appellees  maintain that the specific issue before this 
court in Thompson “was whether the ICA had gravely erred in 
holding that compliance with HRPP Rule 7(d) satisfied the 
‘declaration in accordance with the rules of court’ requirement 
of HRS §  805-1.”  Appellees  argue that the State mistakenly 
contends that the holdin g in Thompson  “only requires compliance 
with HRS §  805-1 in cases where the State seeks a penal summons 
or arrest warrant.”  According to Appellees , this court 
concluded that HRS §  805-1 requires that a complaint be 
subscribed by the complainant or support ed by declaration in 
lieu of affidavit “to protect the accused’s right to challenge 
the veracity of the complainant.”  Appellees  note that this 
                     
10  In support of their argument, Appellees  discuss the proceedings before 
the ICA and the family court in Thompson . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
14 court “went on to hold that a complaint which does not meet the 
requirements of HRS §  805-1 is a ‘fatally defect ive’ complaint.”  
Appellees  point out that “[b]ecause the complaint was fatally 
defective, the supreme court held that it could not support the 
issuance of a penal summons.”  
Appellees  maintain that this court’s holding in 
Thompson  was not limited “to only those instances where the 
State seeks a penal summons or arrest warrant.”  Citing to 
Thompson , 150 Hawaiʻi at 269, 500 P.3d at 454,  Appellees  argue 
that this court “specifically stated that, ‘HRS §  805-1 
unambiguously requires the State to ensure that complaints are 
either subscribed under oath by a complainant or accompanied by 
a declaration in lieu of an affidavit.’”  Appellees  maintain 
that this court  did not state HRS  § 805-1 only applies to a 
complaint seeking a penal summons or an arrest warrant.  
Appellees  contend that “a complaint which is ‘fatally defective’ 
is not fatally defective only because the State uses such a 
complaint to seek an arrest warrant or penal summons.”  In 
addition, Appellees  argue that since the underlying purpose of 
HRS § 805-1 is to protect the accused’s right to challenge the 
veracity of the accuser, “it would be nonsensical to allow the 
State to choose the situations when this significant right was 
protected and when it was not.”  Appellees  assert that would 
lead to an absu rd result and must be rejected.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
15 3. Reply Brief  
The State filed a reply brief on August 25, 2022.  The 
State argues that  the enactment of HRS § 805-6 in 1949 further 
demonstrates  “that HRS §  805-1 does not regulate all district 
court charging instruments .”   According to the State, the 
language of HRS §  805-6 is a recognition by the Hawaiʻi 
legislature of the district court’s practices as noted in Sing 
Kee and the holding of “ Sing Kee  that the ‘complaint’ referred 
to in HRS §  805-1 is not a charging instrumen t.”  The State 
maintains that “nothing in HRS §  805-6 or any other statute, 
court rule or case holding  . . . require[s] a charging 
instrument that is not a ‘written complaint upon which the 
warrant of arrest or summons has been issued’ to be governed in 
any way by the requirements of HRS §  805-1.”11 
III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW  
A. Statutory Interpretation  
“The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
which this court reviews de novo.”  Thompson , 150 Hawaiʻi at 266, 
500 P.3d at 451 (citing State v. Ruggiero , 114 Hawaiʻi 227, 231, 
160 P.3d 703, 707 (2007)).  
                     
11  The State also reiterates that HRPP Rule 7(d)  is applicable to the 
charging instruments in Appellees ’ cases and notes that Appellees  did not 
argue the charging instruments failed to comply with HRPP Rule 7(d).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
16 B. Interpretation of Court Rules  
“When interpreting rules promulgated by the court, 
principles of statutory construction apply.”  Id. at 266, 500 
P.3d at 451 (quoting State v. Baron , 80 Hawaiʻi 107, 113, 905 
P.2d 613, 619 (1995)).  
C. Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law  
[A] trial court’s findings of fact are subject to the 
clearly erroneous standard of review.  A finding of fact is 
clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to support the 
finding, the appellate court  is left with a definite and 
firm conviction that a mistake has been committed.  
A conclusion of law is not binding upon an appellate 
court and is freely reviewable for its correctness.  This 
court ordinarily reviews conclusions of law under the 
right/wrong  standard.  Thus, a conclusion of law that is 
supported by the trial court’s findings of fact and that 
reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not 
be overturned.  However, a conclusion of law that presents 
mixed questions of fact and law is  reviewed under the 
clearly erroneous standard because the court’s conclusions 
are dependent upon the facts and circumstances of each 
individual case.  
State v. Rapozo , 123 Hawaiʻi 329, 336, 235 P.3d 325, 332 (2010) 
(quoting State v. Gabalis , 83 Hawaiʻi 40, 46, 924 P.2d 534, 540 
(1996) (brackets in original )). 
D. Motion to Dismiss  
“A [trial] court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss [a 
charge] is review ed for an abuse of discretion.”  Thompson , 150 
Hawaiʻi at 266, 500 P.3d at 451 (quoting State v. Akau , 118 
Hawaiʻi 44, 51, 185 P.3d 229, 236 (2008) ) (brackets in original) . 
The trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly 
exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment 
of a party litigant.  The burden  of establishing abuse of 
discretion is on appellant, and a strong showing is 
required to establish it.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
17 Id. at 266, 500 P.3d at 451 (quoting State v. Wong , 97 Hawaiʻi 
512, 517, 40 P.3d 914, 919 (2002)).  
IV. DISCUSSION  
A. HRS § 805-1 does not apply to the complaints in Appellees ’ 
cases. 
The State first argues that  the district court 
erroneously dismissed the charging instruments against Appellees  
based on its incorrect conclusion that those charging 
instruments were require d to comply with HRS §  805-1.  According 
to the State,  the charging instruments in Appellees ’ cases are 
distinguishable from Thompson  because the State did not seek a 
penal summons or an arrest warrant in Appellees ’ cases.    
The State’s argument has merit  for the following 
reasons.  First, Appellees ’ cases are distinguishable from 
Thompson , where the State used a complaint to obtain a penal 
summons.  Second, the plain language of HRS §  805-1 demonstrates 
that the statute applies only to complaints that seek  a penal 
summons or an arrest warrant.  Third, case law interpreting 
previous versions of HRS §  805-1 demonstrate that the statute 
applies only to complaints that seek a penal summons or an 
arrest warrant.   Thus, as discussed below, there is a difference 
between a complaint used to obtain a penal summons or an arrest 
warrant and a complaint used to charge a defendant with a *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
18  criminal offense, and HRS §  805-1 applies only to a complaint 
used to obtained a penal summons or an arrest warrant.  
1. The complaints in Appellees ’ cases are distinguishable 
from the complaint in  Thompson . 
The State maintains  that Appellees ’ cases are 
distinguishable from Thompson  because the State did not seek a 
penal summons or an arrest warrant in Appellees ’ cases.   In 
Thompson ,12 the State charged Corey Thompson by complaint with 
the offense of abuse of family or household member.  150 Hawaiʻi 
at 264, 500 P.3d at 449.  The complaint was a single page signed 
only by a deputy prosecuting attorney  and did not include  a 
declaration or  an affidavit.   Id.  “Based on the complaint, the 
clerk of the Family Court of the Third Circuit (family court) 
issued a penal summons compelling Thompson to appear  in the Kona 
district court. ”  Id.  In response to the penal summons, 
Thompson appeared in f amily court and  filed a motion to dismiss.   
Id.  Thompson argued  
that the family court should dismiss the case for three 
reasons.  First, the complaint was deficient because it was 
“not by declaration, and it does not contain the required 
sworn affidavit,”  as required by HRS §  805-1.  Second, 
because the complaint was deficient, the family court 
lacked probable cause to issue the penal summons under 
HRS § 805-3.  Third, in the absence of a supporting 
affidavit or declaration, the State could not arraign 
Thompson in compliance with Hawaiʻi Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP) Rule 5(b)(1), which requires the State to give 
Thompson “[a] copy of the complaint, including any 
affidavits in support thereof[.]” (Emphasis omitted).  
                     
12  As the State pointed out in its application for transfer, this case 
presents “the first opportunity for an appellate court to interpret” 
Thompson .  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
19 Id. at 264-65, 500 P.3d at 449 -50 (brackets in original) .  The 
family court concluded that because the complaint was “fatally 
defective due to a lack of supporting affidavit as required by 
HRS § 805-1, the penal summons was issued upon a faulty 
complaint, and the arraignment was improper for fa ilure to 
provide Defendant with the supporting affidavit, this case must 
be dismissed without prejudice.”  Id. at 265, 500 P.3d at 450.  
  On appeal, the State contended , inter alia , “that the 
complaint was not defective because it complied with the 
requirements identified in HRPP Rule 7(d).”  Id.  The ICA agreed 
with Thompson, holding “that ‘Section 805 -1 required the 
Complaint to be signed by the complainant under oath or made by 
declaration in lieu of an affidavit consistent with HRPP Rule 
47(d)’” and thu s “determined that the complaint against Thompson 
did not comply with HRS §  805-1.”  Id. at 266, 500 P.3d at 451.  
However, “the ICA decided that a non -compliant complaint could 
still be used to initiate and maintain a prosecution by penal 
summons.”  Id. 
  On certiorari, this court agreed with Thompson’s 
argument “that the ICA erred in holding that a complaint used to 
seek a penal summons need not satisfy the requirements of HRS 
§ 805-1.”  Id. at 267, 500 P.3d at 452.  Looking at the plain 
language of HRS §  805-1, this court noted that “ Hawaiʻi law 
provides for only a single type of criminal complaint regardless *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
20 of whether the complaint is used to initiate proceedings through 
an arrest warrant or a penal summons ” and determined that HRS 
§ 805-1’s “statutory obligations apply regardless of  whether the 
State uses the complaint to seek a penal summons or an arrest 
warrant.”  Id. (emphasis added).   This court further determined 
that “once the State provides the district court with a 
complaint that complies with HRS §  805-1, only then may the 
district court choose to issue a penal summons if certain 
requirements are met. ”  Id. (citing HRS §§  805-1, 805-3).  This 
court reiterated that “[t]he requirements of HRS §  805-1 
therefore apply to all criminal complaints, regardless of 
whether the State uses the complaint to seek a penal summons or 
an arrest warrant .”  Id. (emphasis added).  
  This court noted t hat “HRS § 805-1 unambiguously 
obligates the State to either have a complaint subscribed under 
oath by a complainant or make the complaint by declaration in 
accordance with the rules of court, ” but “the phrase ‘made by 
declaration in accordance with the ru les of court’ is ambiguous”  
because HRS §  805-1 “does not identify the ‘rules of court’ to 
which the declaration must conform.”   Id. (citing HRS §  805-1).  
This court determined that  
 The legislative history of HRS §  805-1 establishes 
that the legislature intended for complaints “made by 
declaration in accordance with the rules of court” to be 
complaints made or accompanied by declarations in lieu of 
affidavits.  When the legislature amended HRS §  805-1 to 
provide prosecutors with the option to make complai nts by *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
21 declaration, the Senate Committee on Judiciary and Labor 
explained that “allowing the use of declarations in lieu of 
affidavits  for arrest citations and traffic crime 
complaints is consistent with current rules of court, and 
would not harm the offen der’s right to challenge the 
veracity of the officer.”  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1194, 
in 2007 Senate Journal, at 1557 -58 (emphasis added).  
Similarly, the judiciary submitted testimony that the 
amendment “would also authorize an alternative form for 
verification of arrest citations and traffic crime 
complaints by allowing the issuing or complaining officer 
to verify the citation or complaint by declaration.  
Declarations in lieu of affidavits  are authorized by court 
rules.”  Judiciary, Testimony to the Sen ate Committee on 
Judiciary and Labor on H.B. 1204, 24th Leg., Reg. Sess. 
(Mar. 9, 2007) (Hon. Russel Nagata, District Court, First 
Circuit) (emphasis added); see also  Judiciary, Testimony to 
the Senate Committee on Judiciary and Labor on S.B. 1520, 
24th Leg., Reg. Sess. (Feb. 26, 2007) (Hon. Corinne 
Watanabe, ICA).  Thus, this elaboration that declarations 
in lieu of affidavits were allowed by court rules 
demonstrates that the legislature intended to allow for 
complaints made or accompanied by “declarations  in lieu of 
affidavits.”  
Id. at 268, 500 P.3d at 453.  This court concluded that “HRPP 
Rule 47(d) is the applicable rule of court pertaining to 
declarations in lieu of affidavits” and “the underlying 
complaint should have been subscribed under oath by the  
complainant or made by declaration in lieu of affidavit in 
conformity with HRPP Rule 47(d)”  to satisfy the requirements of 
HRS § 805-1.  Id. 
  This court noted that “the ICA acknowledged that the 
underlying complaint did not comply with HRS §  805-1’s 
requirements” but “held that the district court may issue a 
summons on a non -compliant complaint,” reasoning “that the State 
did not need to establish probable cause to request a penal 
summons.”  Id.  However, this court determined that “by focusing *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
22 on the iss ue of probable cause, the ICA overlooked the 
preliminary question of whether a district court may issue a 
penal summons upon a complaint that does not comply with HRS 
§ 805-1.  It may not.”  Id.  This court stated  
 The courts must give effect to the State’ s statutory 
obligations.  As previously discussed, when the text of a 
statute is clear, “the court is bound by the plain, clear 
and unambiguous language of the statute.”  [State v. Sylva, 
61 Haw. 385, 387-88, 605 P.2d 496, 498 (1980)].  Again, 
HRS § 805-1 unambiguously requires the State to ensure that 
complaints are either subscribed under oath by a 
complainant or accompanied by a declaration in lieu of an 
affidavit.  Supra at 150 Hawaiʻi at 267-68, 500 P.3d at 452 -
53.  Given that the legislature recognized the need to 
protect “the offender’s right to challenge the veracity of 
the [accuser],” we cannot say that the State’s failure to 
comply with HRS §  805-1’s requirements constitutes a mer e 
formal defect for which dismissal is not warranted under 
HRPP Rule 7(d).  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1194, in 2007 
Senate Journal, at 1557 -58.  Thus, the courts must hold the 
State to its obligations under HRS §  805-1 before granting 
the State a penal summ ons.  Sylva, 61 Haw. at 387 -88, 605 
P.2d at 498.  
Id. at 269, 500 P.3d at 454 (footnote omitted)  (second brackets 
in original) .  This court concluded that “the ICA erred in 
holding sub silentio  that the State need not comply with its 
statutory duties.  In t urn, the ICA also erred in concluding 
that ‘the Comp laint was not defective and the penal summons was 
properly issued.’”  Id. 
  This court further concluded that “ HRS § 805-1 does 
not distinguish between complaint s for penal summons and 
complaints for arre st warrants ” and the ICA erroneously held  
“that the State need not comply with its statutory obligations *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
23 simply because it sought a penal summons.”  Id. at 270, 500 P.3d 
at 455 (emphasis added).  
Appellees ’ cases are distinguishable from Thompson , 
where the  State sought a penal summons by complaint .  Id. at 
264, 500 P.3d at 449.  Here, in contrast, the State  only used 
the complaints in Appellees ’ cases to charge Appellees  with the 
offense of OVUII.  In other words, the State did not use the 
complaints in Appellees’ cases to seek a penal summons or an 
arrest warrant because Appellees  were already arrested and had 
posted bail when the State filed the complaints  charging 
Appellees  with OVUII .  Thus, the complaints in Appellees ’ cases 
are distinguishable from the complaint in Thompson  because there 
is a difference between a complaint used to charge a defendant 
with a criminal offense and a complaint used to obtain a penal 
summons or an arrest warrant.  
Appellees  contend this “cou rt specifically stated 
that, ‘HRS §  805-1 unambiguously requires the State to ensure 
that complaints  are either subscribed under oath by a 
complainant or accompanied by a declaration in lieu of an 
affidavit.’”  However,  when this court stated that “HRS  § 805-1 
unambiguously requires the State to ensure that complaints are 
either subscribed under oath by a complainant or accompanied by 
a declaration in lieu of an affidavit,”  Thompson , 150 Hawaiʻi at 
269, 500 P.3d at 454  (citing Thompson , 150 Hawaiʻi at 267-68, 500 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
24 P.3d at 452 -53), this court cited to an earlier section of the 
Thompson  opinion, which states that “[t]he requirements of HRS 
§ 805-1 therefore apply to all criminal complaints, regardless 
of whether the State uses the complaint to seek a penal summ ons 
or an arrest warrant .”  Id. at 267, 500 P.3d at 452 (emphasis 
added).  The issue in Thompson  specifically  involved  a complaint 
that sought a penal summons .  Moreover , this court did not hold 
that all complaints must satisfy the requirements of HRS §  805-
1.  Thus, this court’s holding in Thompson  was limited to 
complaints seeking a penal summons or an arrest warrant.  
Appellees  also maintain  that HRS § 805-1 requires “a 
complaint be either subscribed by the complainant or support[ed] 
by declaration in lieu of affidavit” in order “to protect the 
accused’s right to challenge the veracity of the complainant.”  
Appellees  contend that : 
The bottom line is a complaint which is “fatally defective” 
is not fatally defective only because the State uses such a 
complaint to seek an arrest warrant or penal summons.  
Under such reasoning, the State would be given the 
unwarranted discretion to decide when a compla int would 
require to be subscribed to by the complainant or supported 
by declaration.  As the Legislature had decided that the 
underlying purpose of imposing the requirements of HRS 
§ 805-1 was to protect the accused right to challenge the 
veracity of the accuser ( [Thompson , 150 Hawaiʻi] at 269, 500 
P.3d at 454 (citing S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No 1194, in 2007 
Senate Journal at 1557 -58)), it would be nonsensical to 
allow the State to choose the situations when this 
significant right was protected and when it wa s not.  Such 
an interpretation which leads to an absurd result must be 
rejected.  See e.g.  Moranz v. Harbor Mall, LLC , 150 Hawaiʻi 
387, 398, 502 P.3d 488, 499 (2022) (citing Alvarado v. 
Kiewit Pacific Co. , 92 Hawaiʻi [515], 517, 993 P.2d 549, 551 
(2000)[)] (quoting Frank v. Hawaii Planning Mill Found. , 88 
Hawaiʻi 140, 144, 963 P.2d 349, 353 (1998) (holding that the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
25 appellate court is bound to construe statutes to avoid 
absurd results and a statutory interpretation that is 
“‘rational, sensible[,] and practic able . . . is preferred 
to one which is unreasonable[,] impracticable  . . . 
inconsisten[t], contradict[ory], and illogical[].’”)  
(First brackets added .). 
Appellees  mistakenly contend that limiting Thompson  to 
only complaints for a  penal summons or an arrest warrant  would 
lead to an absurd result.   As an initial matter, Appellees  
erroneously argue that this court “concluded that the 
requirement that a complaint be either subscribed by the 
complainant or support[ed] by declaration in  lieu of affidavit 
was to protect the accused’s right to challenge the veracity of 
the complainant.”  Rather, this court stated:  
When the legislature amended HRS §  805-1 to provide 
prosecutors with the option to make complaints by 
declaration, the Senate C ommittee on Judiciary and Labor 
explained that “allowing the use of declarations in lieu of 
affidavits  for arrest citations and traffic crime  
complaints is consistent with current rules of court, and 
would not harm the offender’s right to challenge the 
veracity of the officer .”  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1194, 
in 2007 Senate Journal, at 1557 -58 (emphasis added).  
Thompson , 150 Hawaiʻi at 268, 500 P.3 d at 453 (emphasis added).   
As stated in Thompson , this court did not  conclude that the 
purpose of HRS §  805-1’s requirement that a complaint be 
subscribed by the complainant or supported by declaration in 
lieu of affidavit was to protect the accused’s right to 
challenge the veracity of the complainant.  Instead, this court  
noted that “allowing the use of declarations in lieu of 
affidavits for arrest citations and traffic crime *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
26 complaints  . . . , would not harm  the offender’s right to 
challenge the veracity of the officer.”  Id. (emphasis added).  
While this court stated tha t HRS § 805-1’s requirements “would 
not harm” a defendant’s right to challenge the veracity of the 
complainant, that does not mean the purpose of HRS §  805-1 is to 
protect that same right.   Thus, Appellees ’ arguments regarding 
their ability to challenge th e veracity of the complainant lacks 
merit. 
2. The plain language of HRS §  805-1 demonstrates that 
the statute does not apply to the complaints in 
Appellees ’ cases.  
The plain language of HRS §  805-1 demonstrates that 
the statute applies only to complaints seek ing a penal summons 
or an arrest warrant.   “It is well -established that ‘when [a 
statute’s] language is plain and unmistakable[,] the court is 
bound by the plain, clear and unambiguous language of the 
statute.’”  Id. at 267, 500 P.3d at 452 (quoting Sylva, 61 Haw. 
at 387-88, 605 P.2d at 498) (brackets in original) .  As applied 
to Appellees ’ cases,  HRS § 805-1 provided:  
Complaint; form of warrant.   When a complaint is made 
to any prosecuting officer of the commission of any 
offense, the prosecuting officer shall examine the 
complainant, shall reduce the substance of the complaint to 
writing, and shall cause the complaint to be subscribed by 
the complainant under oath, which the prosecuting officer 
is hereby authorized to administer, or the complaint shall 
be made by declaration in accordance with the rules of 
court.  If the original complaint results from the issuance 
of a traffic summons or a citation in lieu of an arrest 
pursuant to section 803 -6, by a police officer, the oath 
may be administered by any pol ice officer whose name has 
been submitted to the prosecuting officer and who has been *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
27 designated by the chief of police to administer the oath, 
or the complaint may be submitted by declaration in 
accordance with the rules of court.  Upon presentation of 
the written complaint to the judge in whose circuit the 
offense allegedly has been committed, the judge shall issue 
a warrant, reciting the complaint and requiring the 
sheriff, or other officer to whom it is directed, except as 
provided in section 805 -3, to arrest the accused and to 
bring the accused before the judge to be dealt with 
according to law ; and in the same warrant the judge may 
require the officer to summon such witnesses as are named 
in the warrant to appear and give evidence at trial.  The 
warrant may be in the form established by the usage and 
practice of the issuing court.  
(Emphasis added.)  
  The first sentence of HRS §  805-1 discusses the 
requirements of a complaint and states:  
When a complaint is made to any prosecuting officer of the 
commissi on of any offense, the prosecuting officer shall 
examine the complainant, shall reduce the substance of the 
complaint to writing, and shall cause the complaint to be 
subscribed by the complainant under oath, which the 
prosecuting officer is hereby authoriz ed to administer, or 
the complaint shall be made by declaration in accordance 
with the rules of court.  
Although the first sentence of HRS §  805-1 does not state the 
statute applies  only to complaints for a penal summons or an 
arrest warrant,  the third sent ence of HRS §  805-1 states:  
Upon presentation  of the written complaint to the judge in 
whose circuit the offense allegedly has been committed, the 
judge shall issue a warrant, reciting the complaint and 
requiring the sheriff, or other officer to whom it is  
directed, except as provided in section 805 -3, to arrest 
the accused and to bring the accused before the judge to be 
dealt with according to law  . . . . 
The third sentence of HRS §  805-1 makes clear that the statute 
applies to complaints for an arrest war rant, and Thompson  makes 
clear that the statute also applies to complaints for a penal 
summons.  However, based on  the plain language of HRS §  805-1 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
28 and Thompson , the requirements of HRS §  805-1 do not apply to  
complaints used to charge a defendant  who has already been 
arrested .  Thus, the plain language of HRS §  805-1 establishes 
that the complaints in Appellees ’ cases did not have to satisfy 
the requirements of HRS §  805-1. 
3. Case law interpreting past versions of HRS §  805-1 
demonstrate that HRS § 805-1 applies only to 
complaints for a penal summons or an arrest warrant.  
This court’s precedent  confirms what Thompson  and the 
plain language of HRS §  805-1 demonstrate:  HRS §  805-1 applies 
only to complaints for a penal summons or an arrest warrant.   In 
other words, there is a difference between a complaint for a 
penal summons or an arrest warrant, and a complaint used to 
charge a defendant  who has already been arrested.  
As the State points out, “[i]t appears that the import 
of HRS §  805-1 has been substanti ally unchanged since 1892 when 
it was enacted as Chapter LVII, An Act to Reorganize the 
Judiciary Department.”  The State also points out that  “[t]he 
earliest codified iteration of HRS §  805-1 appears to be Chapter 
53 Part I §  606 of The Penal Laws of the Hawaiian Islands, 
1897.”   Citing to Sing Kee , 14 Haw. at 586-88, the State 
maintains there is a difference “between a ‘charge’ which 
initiates a criminal trial and a ‘complaint’ in order ‘to enable 
the magistrate to determine whether or not there is proba ble *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
29 cause to believe that an offense has been committed by the 
accused so as to justify his apprehension.’”   
The State correctly asserts that Sing Kee  demonstrates 
there is a difference between a complaint for a penal summons or 
an arrest warrant and a co mplaint used to initiate a criminal 
trial.  In Sing Kee , the defendant was convicted “of the offense 
of selling spirituous liquor without a license."  14 Haw. at 
586.  The defendant filed a motion to dismiss  the proceedings 
because (1)  the District Magistr ate lacked jurisdiction, (2) the 
complaint upon which defendant was arrested and tried did not 
sufficiently state any cause, and (3)  contrary to law, the 
complaint did not state a direct and positive offense, but was 
sworn to on information and belief.   Id. at 586-87.  The Supreme 
Court of the Territory of Hawaiʻi stated:  
 These objections to the affidavit, so far as they 
bear upon the question of the jurisdiction of the District 
Court, need not be passed upon, for even if the warrant was 
improperly or ille gally issued by reason of its being based 
upon an affidavit insufficient in form or in substance, the 
District Court nevertheless had jurisdiction.  The evidence 
shows that when the offense was committed police officers 
were present, about fifty feet away from the spot, in a 
store, where the liquor was handed over, and saw such 
delivery, and that they immediately rushed in and arrested 
the defendant.  Under these circumstances an arrest without 
a warrant was legal .  See section 545 and 547, Penal Laws.  
 The contention that the “complaint upon which the 
defendant *** was tried does not sufficiently state any 
cause,” would seem to be based upon a misconception of the 
true function of the affidavit or so -called complaint.  The 
sole function of the complaint, as provided for by section 
606 of the Penal Laws, is to support the issuance of the 
warrant or, in other words, to enable the magistrate to 
determine whether or not there is probable cause to believe 
that an offense has b een committed by the accused so as to 
justify his apprehension.  The complaint referred to in 
that section is not the charge upon which the defendant is *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
30 tried, although it is a statement in substance, and may 
also be in exact language, of the offense to be  set forth 
in the charge subsequently entered against the defendant in 
Court.  The charge itself is, under the practice prevailing 
in the District Courts, entered orally by the prosecuting 
officer upon the defendant’s appearance and noted by the 
magistrate  in his record, and it is upon the charge as thus 
entered that the trial is had .  The precise form of the 
charge entered against this defendant in the District Court 
of Koloa, is not disclosed by the record before us, nor 
does it appear that any objection was made on the ground of 
its insufficiency, although the defendant was present and 
represented by counsel.  We cannot assume, under these 
circumstances, that the charge as entered did not state an 
offense.  
Id. at 587-88 (emphasis added).  
  The Sing Kee  court thus distinguished between a 
complaint against a defendant “to enable the magistrate to 
determine whether or not there is probable cause to believe that 
an offense has been committed by the accused so as to justify 
his apprehension” and a complaint whe re the defendant is charged 
with a criminal offense.   Similar to the complaint referred to 
“by section 606 of the Penal Laws,” the complaint referred to in 
HRS § 805-1 “is not the charge upon which the defendant is 
tried.”  Sing Kee , 14 Haw. at 587 -88.  Instead, under HRS §  805-
1, “[t]he sole function of the complaint  . . . , is to support 
the issuance of the warrant[.]”.  Id. 
In addition, h ere, it appears that police officers 
witnessed Appellees  committing the offense of OVUII given that 
Appellees  were all arrested  for OVUII .  Appellees  do not contend 
that they were improperly arrested.   Thus, as in Sing Kee , 
Appellees  were properly arrested  without a warrant  and the State *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
31 did not use a complaint to request a penal summons or an arrest 
warrant.  
Furthermore, in Territory v. Mix , the Supreme Court of 
the Territory of Hawaiʻi interpreted “Section 10770, Revised Laws 
of Hawaii 1945,” which “prescribes the manner in which a 
defendant shall be brought within the jurisdiction of the trial 
court.”  41 Haw. 163, 164 (1955).  Because HRS §  805-1 largely 
retains Section 10770’s language,13 HRS § 805-1 likely follows 
its predecessor  to address how a defendant is “brought within 
the jurisdiction of the trial court.”  Id. at 164.  The Supreme 
Court of the Territ ory of Hawaiʻi noted that Section 10770, 
Revised Laws of Hawaii 1945 “mandates two prerequisites to the 
issuance of a valid warrant of arrest [.]”  Id. at 165 (emphasis 
added).  Similarly, in Territory v. Williams , 41 Haw. 348, 355 
(1956), the Supreme Court  of the Territory of Hawaiʻi stated that 
                     
13  Section 10770, Revised Laws of Hawaii 1945 provided:  
 
 “***Complaint; form of warrant.   Upon complaint m ade 
to any prosecuting officer of the commission of any 
offense, he shall examine the complainant, shall reduce the 
substance of the complaint to writing and cause the same to 
be subscribed by the complainant under oath, which he is 
hereby authorized to ad minister.  Upon presentation of the 
written complaint to the magistrate within whose district 
the offense is alleged to have been committed such 
magistrate shall issue his warrant, reciting the complaint 
and requiring the high sheriff, or other officer to whom it 
is directed (except as provided in the next succeeding 
section), forthwith to arrest the accused and bring him 
before the magistrate to be dealt with according to 
law***.”  
Mix, 41 Haw. at 164-65. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
32 “section 10770, Revised Laws of Hawaii 1945, provides only for 
the issuance of a complaint as the basis of a warrant of 
arrest.”  (Emphasis added.)   Thus, as in Sing Kee , the 
predecessor to HRS §  805-1 as interprete d by the Mix court and 
the Williams  court was limited to complaints for an arrest 
warrant.  
B. The State properly initiated the criminal proceedings 
against Appellees . 
1. Appellees  were properly arrested and released  after 
posting bail . 
The State maintains that , pursuant to HRS §§  803-5 and 
803-6, Appellees  were all  properly arrested without a warrant.  
HRS § 803-5 (2014) provides:  
 By police officer without warrant.   (a) A police 
officer or other officer of justice, may, without warrant, 
arrest and detain for exam ination any person when the 
officer has probable cause to believe that such person has 
committed any offense, whether in the officer’s presence or 
otherwise.  
 (b) For purposes of this section, a police officer 
has probable cause to make an arrest when the facts and 
circumstances within the officer’s knowledge and of which 
the officer has reasonably trustworthy information are 
sufficient in themselves to warrant a person of reasonable 
caution in the belief that a crime has been or is being 
committed.  
HRS § 803-6(a) (2014) provides:  
 Arrest, how made.   (a) At or before the time of 
making an arrest, the person shall declare that the person 
is an officer of justice, if such is the case.  If the 
person has a warrant the person should show it; or if the 
person mak es the arrest without warrant in any of the cases 
in which it is authorized by law, the person should give 
the party arrested clearly to understand for what cause the 
person undertakes to make the arrest, and shall require the 
party arrested to submit to b e taken to the police station 
or judge.  This done, the arrest is complete.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
33 Here, according to the State, Appellees  were all 
examined and “released after posting bail before 48 hours had 
passed and before the requirement for a probable cause 
determination was triggered.”  Appellees  do not contest that 
they were arrested, examined, and released after posting bail 
before 48 hours passed.   Appellees  also do not argue that they 
were improperly arrested.   Thus, it appears that Appellees  were 
properly arrested wi thout a warrant.  
Although Appellees  were properly arrested pursuant to 
HRS §§ 803-5 and 803 -6(a), the issue remains whether the State 
properly initiated the criminal proceedings  against Appellees  by 
charging Appellees  via complaint . 
2. The State properly init iated the criminal proceedings  
against Appellees  under HRPP Rule 7.  
Given that the State did not use the complaints 
against Appellees  to seek a penal summons or an arrest warrant, 
the State correctly asserts that “the general rule for charges 
in HRPP Rule 7(d) applies” to Appellees  cases.  As relevant 
here, HRPP Rule 7  (2012) provides:  
 (a) Use of Indictment, Information, or Complaint.   
The charge against a defendant is an indictment, a 
superseding indictment, an information, or a complaint 
filed in court.  . . . 
  
. . . . 
  
(d) Nature and Contents.   The charge shall be a 
plain, concise and definite statement of the essential 
facts constituting the offense charged.  . . . A complaint 
shall be signed by the prosecutor.  . . . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
34   Here, the State charged Appellees  by complaint with 
the offense of OVUII pur suant to HRPP Rule 7 (d).  As the State 
points out : 
 The charging instruments in these cases are signed by 
the deputy prosecuting attorney and comply in every respect 
with HRPP Rule 7(d).  Nothing in HRPP Rule 7(d) requires 
that a charging instrument in a m isdemeanor case be signed 
by anyone other than a prosecutor.  Nor does HRPP Rule 7(d) 
require that anything should have been subscribed under 
oath or made by declaration in lieu of an affidavit by 
anyone.  Nor does any constitutional provision, statute or 
rule of court require that any misdemeanor charging 
instrument by itself be subject to a probable cause 
determination.  Consequently, under HRPP Rule 7(d) these 
charging instruments fulfill the necessary requirements to 
initiate a prosecution for the offen ses named within them 
and the district court erred in dismissing these charging 
instruments.  
The State correctly notes that the charging instruments in 
Appellees ’ cases comply with HRPP Rule 7 (d).  Moreover, 
Appellees  do not contend the charging instrument s failed to 
comply with HRPP Rule 7 (d).  Thus, the charging instruments in 
Appellees ’ cases were sufficient to initiate a prosecution under 
HRPP Rule 7 (d).  In turn, the district court erroneously 
dismissed without prejudice the charging instruments in 
Appellees’ cases.  
V. CONCLUSION  
For the foregoing reasons, we hold that HRS §  805-1 
applies only to complaints for a penal summons or an arrest 
warrant, and the district court improperly dismissed without 
prejudice the complaints charging Appellees  with OVUII.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
35 Accordingly, the district court’s  January 12, 2022 Notice of 
Entry of Judgment is reversed . 
 
Brian Vincent 
for appellant 
 
Alen M. Kaneshiro 
for appellees 
 
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Todd W. Eddins  
 
