 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAP-22-0000368 05-MAR-2024 07:49 AM Dkt. 35 OP 
SCAP-22-0000368  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI  
SONIA DAVIS, JESSICA LAU, LAURALEE B. RIEDELL,  
and ADAM M. WALTON, Plaintiffs-Appellees,  
 
vs.  
 
RICHARD T. BISSEN, JR., County of Maui Office of the Mayor,  
SCOTT TERUYA, County of Maui Department of Finance,  
and COUNTY OF MAUI, Defendants-Appellants.  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT  
(CAAP-22-0000368; 2CCV-21-0000305)  
 
MARCH 5, 2024  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA AND EDDINS, JJ.,  
CIRCUIT JUDGE PARK AND CIRCUIT JUDGE KAWASHIMA,  
ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCIES  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.
 I. Introduction  
This appeal concerns a sweep of a large encampment of 
houseless individuals that occurred in Maui County in September 
2021. Before the sweep, Sonia Davis, Jessica Lau, Lauralee 
Riedell, and Adam Walton (“ plaintiffs ”) made written requests  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for a contested case hearing, but those requests went ignored. 
The sweep occurred as planned, and Davis and Lau ’s personal 
property was seized. 
The plaintiffs filed a Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 
91-14 agency appeal with the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit 
(“circuit court ”).1 They asserted they were denied procedural due 
process under the state and federal constitutions when the 
county seized their personal property without proper notice or 
an opportunity to be heard. The County of Maui, Mayor Michael 
Victorino,2 and Director of Finance Scott Teruya (collectively, 
“the County”) filed a motion to dismiss, arguing the circuit 
court lacked jurisdiction over the appeal because the plaintiffs 
did not have a protected property interest in continuing to 
store their belongings on County land. The circuit court 
granted the motion as to Riedell and Walton, who had not lost 
property during the sweep, but denied the motion as to Davis and 
Lau, who had. The circuit court then granted the County leave 
to file an interlocutory appeal. 
1   The Honorable Kirstin M. Hamman presided.  
2   Pursuant to Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure (“HRAP”) Rule 43(c)  
(2010), Mayor Richard Bissen was substituted as a party in place of Mayor 
Michael Victorino upon the latter’s election to the office of Maui County 
Mayor. See  HRAP Rule 43(c) (“When a public officer is a party to an appeal . 
. . in his . . . official capacity and during its pendency . . . ceases to 
hold office, the action does not abate and his . . . successor is 
automatically substituted as a party. Proceedings following the substitution 
shall be in the name of the substituted party. . . .”).  
2  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
This court accepted transfer of this case from the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”). T he County raises the 
following points of error:  
1) Was it proper for the Court to make findings on the 
issues of finality, the following of applicable agency 
rules and standing when those issues were not raised by any 
party in either briefing or hearings on the County’s Motion 
to Dismiss?  
. . . . 
2) Did the Court err in making substantive findings on the merits of Plaintiffs’ allegations and issuing Findings of 
Fact in its Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part 
Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss Notice of Appeal?  
3) Did the Court err in determining that Constitutional 
Due Process required a contested case hearing before 
Defendants could remove houseless plaintiffs and their 
belongings from County property?  . . . . 
. . . . 
4) Did the Court err in Denying the County’s Motion to 
Dismiss as to the claims of Plaintiffs SONIA DAVIS and 
JESSICA LAU?  
3  We  affirm  the circuit court  and hold as follows. First, 
the circuit court properly ruled on all of the factors pertinent 
to its jurisdiction over the plaintiffs ’ agency appeal. Second, 
plaintiffs  undeniably possessed a property interest in their 
chattels  (personal property)  protected by Article I, Section 5 
of the Constitution of the State of Hawaiʻi.  Thus,  the due 
process clause  of the Hawai ʻi Constitution required a hearing 
before the County could seize the  plaintiffs’  chattels. The 
circuit court properly granted the County’s motion to dismiss 
Riedell and Walton ’s claims because they  did not lose property 
during the sweep and properly denied the County’s motion to 
dismiss as to Davis and Lau, who did.   
 
 
  
  II. Background 
A. The County’s Kanahā Sweep 
 On September 1, 2021, the County issued a press release 
announcing its plans to clear out a large encampment of 
houseless individuals on County property on Amala Place near 
Kanahā  Pond and the Wailuku -Kahului Wastewater Treatment Plant.    
The County had been working with the  houseless individuals to 
relocate them.   Mayor Victorino was concerned about the upcoming 
rainy season and believed it was not compassionate to allow people to continue living among mounds of rubbish, human waste, 
and used syringes.   He stated, “Once the u nsheltered residents 
have settled into new accommodations, we will start the clean-up. . . .”   Scott Fretz, the Maui Branch Manager for the 
Department of Land and Natural Resources’ (“DLNR”) Division of Forestry and Wildlife stated that Kanahā Pond was an important 
breeding site for numerous species of endangered waterbirds.   
The fence around the pond had been vandalized, syringes and 
other hazardous waste littered the area, and his staff had been 
harassed and threatened.   Eric Nakagawa, the director of the  
County of Maui Department of Environmental Management, stated 
that his staff had reported individuals blocking the roadway 
entrance to the Kahului wastewater treatment plant on Amala 
Place, starting verbal arguments, and jumping on a truck during 
an incident in which police were called.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
4  
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
   
  
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On September 14, 2021, the County distributed notices to 
houseless persons on Amala Place and posted notices to vacate 
county property by September 20, 2021. The notice to vacate 
stated, “Habitation in vehicles, camping and/or the storage of 
personal property on County of Maui properties located in the 
vicinity of: Amala Place and Keoneone Street, along with the 
portion known as the Kahului Wastewater Treatment Plant, is 
prohibited.” The notice announced that the “premises will be 
cleared of personal prop erty and vehicular access will be 
restricted between: Monday, September 20, 2021 at 6:00 am -
Wednesday[,] September 22, 2021 at 4:30 pm.” It further advised 
that “[a]ll campsites, personal property, and vehicles must be 
removed from these Premises by or before” those dates and times, 
or else “[a]ny person who remains on the ‘Premises’ during this 
time may be cited for Trespassing under Hawai i Revised Statutes 
section 708 -815.” 
The notice to vacate contained no information on who to 
contact to challenge the sweep. It also contained no 
information as to what would happen to the personal property 
cleared from the premises. The notice, however, did contain 
contact information and a list of services offered to houseless 
individuals by Mental Health Kokua, Ka Hale I Ke Ola, Family 
Life Center, and the Salvation Army. 
5  
 
 
  
  
 
   
    
  
  
  
 
  
 
   
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On September 17, 2021, the County issued another press 
release, indicating the cleanup would begin on September 19, 
2021 and end on September 24, 2021. The press release noted 
that many of the houseless individuals had received or were in 
the process of receiving shelter, but it also acknowledged 14 
individuals remained on site. Later press releases also 
mentioned that eight to ten individuals still remained on the 
site in the days preceding the planned sweep. 
The sweep took place on September 20 -24, 2021. There were 
no notices issued to houseless individuals as to where their 
personal property was taken, if it was stored, how to reclaim 
the property, or if the property was going to be destroyed. The 
County, however, did follow certain statutory procedures with 
respect to vehicles removed from the site. The County posted 
notices stating that abandoned vehicles towed from the Kanahā 
area would be stored for 30 days then disposed of and that 
derelict vehicles to wed from the Kanahā area may be disposed of 
before 30 days . The County provided a phone number to call for 
individuals to claim their vehicles or remove belongings from 
those vehicles . 
B. Circuit court proceedings 
On October 20, 2021, plaintiffs Davis, Lau, Riedell, and 
Walton filed a notice of appeal to the circuit court from the 
September 20 -22, 2021 “final decision” of the County “to execute 
6  
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the forced eviction and vacatur of people and their belongings 
from putative County of Maui property .” They declared each had 
sent the County written requests for contested case hearings 
before the sweep, but the County did not act upon the requests . 
The plaintiffs alleged the County violated their state and 
federal constitutional procedural due process rights by seizing 
their property without proper notice or an opportunity to be 
heard. They sought “a declaratory judgment that County 
Appellees violated H ouseless Appellants’ constitutional rights, 
an order remanding the matter for a contested case . . . , and 
an order requiring County Appellees . . . to comply with the 
Hawaiʻi and U.S. constitutions in conducting any future evictions 
or vacaturs of Houseless Appellants and other houseless people 
from County of Maui property (including by providing a pre-
deprivation contested case hearing) .” 
In her declaration appended to the notice of appeal , Davis 
averred she had been living in the Kanahā area before and during 
the Kanahā sweep. She had been incarcerated for three weeks in 
fall 2021 for missing a phone call from her probation officer. 
When she was released in mid -September, she learned of the 
impending sweep from others living in the area. A police 
officer had also handed Davis a notice of the sweep. Davis had 
just a few days to move her items before the sweep began. Davis 
had filed a c ontested case request with the county on September 
7  
 
 
   
  
     
 
   
   
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
20, 2021. Before the sweep began, she met with Mayor Victorino 
in person. He told her he could not change the date of the 
sweep but he would help get people into shelters before the 
sweep. On the day of the sweep, Davis vacated the Kanah ā area. 
She was unable to move all of her property, so she lost pots and 
pans, tents, a canopy, folding tables, diapers, a stroller, a 
playpen, a baby’s car seat, her sister’s two vehicles, and her 
niece’s two vehicles. 
Plaintiff Lau declared she had been living in the Kanahā 
area before and during the Kanahā sweep. Lau had filed a 
contested case request with the county on September 6, 2021. 
Lau met with Mayor Victorino in person before the sweep. He 
told her the sweep would not be postponed but if houseless 
residents used duct tape or caution tape to mark their 
belongings, the County would not touch that property. He also 
told her nothing would happen until all residents were settled 
into new accommodations. On the day of the sweep, Lau was still 
unsheltered and she observed the sweep as it happened. She was 
able to move most of her belongings before the sweep, but she 
did lose a portable water tank, fishing poles, and her Bluetooth 
speakers to the sweep. 
Plaintiffs Riedell and Walton, a couple living together in 
the Kanahā area before and during the sweep, alleged they did 
not receive notice of the sweep because both were working when 
8  
 
 
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
 
     
 
   
  
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the notices were distributed by the police. Each had filed a 
contested case request with the county on September 16, 2023. 
Neither Riedell nor Walton were able to meet in person with 
Mayor Victorino because both were working. On the day of the 
sweep, Riedell and Walton were still living at the Kanahā site 
and told police they were going to stay and contest the sweep. 
Neither Riedell nor Walton lost any property during the sweep. 
None of the plaintiffs received contested case hearings or 
responses to their contested case hearing requests. None of the 
plaintiffs were given pre -deprivation or post -deprivation 
hearings. 
On November 9, 2021, the County filed a motion to dismiss 
the appeal for lack of jurisdiction under Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil 
Procedure (“HRCP”) Rule 12(b)(1) (2000). The County argued it 
did not need to conduct a contested case hearing because such a 
hearing was not required by administrative rule, by statute, or 
by constitutional due process. With respect to constitutional 
due process, the County argued, “While [the plaintiffs ] may have 
a property interest in their chattels, those rights do not exist 
in a vacuum,” because they have no legitimate entitlement to 
“illegally occupy public lands and store their property thereon. 
. . .” Therefore, the county argue d, no contested case was 
required, and no circuit court appeal from a contested case 
would lie. 
9  
 
 
  In their memorandum in opposition to the County’s motion to 
dismiss, the plaintiffs  pointed out there were four requirements 
for the circuit court to have jurisdiction over their case under 
HRS § 91-14: “(1) a contested case hearing that was ‘required 
by law’; (2) finality; (3) the following of applicable agency 
rules; and (4) standing, ” citing Public Access Shoreline Hawai ʻi 
v. Hawaiʻ i County Planning Comm’n , 79 Hawaiʻi 425, 431, 903 P.2d 
1246, 1252  (1995)  (“
PASH”).   The plaintiffs  noted the County 
“d[id] not contest the latter three elements[, n]or could they,” 
because the elements were plainly met.   As to “finality,” the 
plaintiffs  argued the final decision was the County’s decision 
to conduct the sweep.   As to “the following of applicable agency 
rules,” the plaintiffs  argued they submitted  contested case 
requests.   As to “standing,” the plaintiffs  argued they were 
injured by the agency action when their  chattels were 
unconstitutionally seized.     
  
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As to the County’s argument that the circuit court did not 
have jurisdiction over the case because there was no contested 
case hearing held, the plaintiffs counter-argued that a court 
has jurisdiction to review the denial of a contested case 
hearing prior to an agency action, citing Kaleikini v. Thielen , 
124 Hawaiʻi 1, 26, 237 P.3d 1067, 1092 (2010). The plaintiffs 
argued the County effectively denied the requests by ignoring 
them, citing Kilakila ʻO Haleakala v. Bd. of Land and Nat. Res. , 
10  
 
 
   
 
          
   
  
 
    
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
131 Hawaiʻi 193, 203, 317 P.3d 27, 37 (2013). As to the County’s 
argument that contested case hearings were not required by 
statute, administrative rule, or by constitutional due process, 
the plaintiffs asserted contested case hearings were required by 
constitutional due process because their property interest in 
chattels was at stake. 
The County replied that the plaintiffs had no right to 
continue storing their property on County grounds after actually 
receiving the notice to vacate, and they had ample time to 
remove themselves and their belongings. Further, even if there 
were a protected property interest at stake, the County argued a 
contested case hearing was not necessarily required when 
alternative processes were available , for example, a petition 
for writ of mandamus or a request for an injunction. 
The circuit court held a hearing on the County’s motion to 
dismiss on December 7, 2021. The circuit court requested 
supplemental briefing from the parties as to whether a contested 
case hearing was required by constitutional due process. The 
court asked the parties to brief the three Flores factors: (1) 
the private interest that will be affected; (2) the risk of an 
erroneous deprivation of such interest through the procedures 
actually used, and the probable value , if any, of additional or 
alternative procedural safeguards; and (3) the government al 
interest, including the burden that additional safeguards would 
11  
 
 
    
 
  
  
     
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
entail, referring to Flores v. Bd. of  Land and Nat. Res.,  143 
Hawaiʻi 114, 424 P.3d 469 (2018).   
The parties submitted their supplemental briefs. As to the 
first Flores factor (the private interest affected), the 
plaintiffs maintained there can be no dispute they had a 
protected property interest in their chattels, which were vital 
to their survival. The County stated that it had addressed the 
chattels argument in its prior briefing. 
As to the second Flores factor (the risk of erroneous 
deprivation through the procedures actually used and the 
probable value of additional or alternative procedural 
safeguards), the plaintiffs argued their chattels were likely 
destroyed, which is a decision the County cannot reverse. They 
argued additional safeguards could have been provided, such as 
more time, notice that included procedures available for 
challenging the sweep, and a hearing. The County counter -argued 
it engaged in outreach efforts for months prior to the sweep. 
Further, it asserted the plaintiffs received actual notice, as 
each knew to request a contested case hearing, and two of them 
(Davis and Lau) were able to meet in person with Mayor 
Victorino. The County’s position was that the plaintiffs had 
more than enough time, once they had received notice, to vacate 
the Kanahā area. Further, the County noted that Riedell and 
Walton admitted neither had lost any property to the sweep . 
12  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
  
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As to the third Flores factor (the governmental interests 
and the burdens that additional safeguards would create), the 
plaintiffs argued the County overstated its governmental 
interests in public health and safety, and that the plaintiffs ’ 
survival interest outweighed those interests. Further, the 
plaintiffs argued the burden on the County to provide sufficient 
notice and a hearing was not great. For example, a consolidated 
hearing could have sufficed to address all of the ir concerns. 
The County counter -argued it had a substantial and compelling 
interest in keeping the Kanahā property clean and safe to avoid 
liability for failure to police its property. It also asserted 
its interests in accessing the wastewater treatment facility and 
bird sanctuary on the property. The County claimed holding 
contested case hearings for the plaintiffs would have been too 
administratively burdensome on it, citing statutory notice, 
service, and trial -type hearing requirements in HRS chapter 91 . 
13  After a further hearing,  the circuit court granted in part, 
and denied in part, the County’s motion to dismiss  (“circuit 
court’s order”).   The motion was granted as to plaintiffs  
Riedell and Walton, who had not lost  any property during the 
sweep.   The motion was denied as to plaintiffs  Davis and Lau, 
who had lost property.   In its findings of fact, the circuit 
court noted, “The record does not show that Defendants had any 
procedures in place to hold, store, or return personal property  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(other than vehicles) seized by Defendants during the Kanahā 
Sweep.”   The circuit court also noted, “The record does not show 
that Defendants held, stored, or returned personal property (other than vehicles) seized by Defendants during the 
Kanahā 
Sweep.”   Instead, the circuit court found, “the record suggests 
that . . . Defendants proceeded to destroy the personal property 
[(other than vehicles)] left behind in the Kanahā Area, and that 
Defendants had seized, during the Kanahā Sweep.”   No party 
challenges these (or any) findings of fact; therefore, we accept 
them as true. Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 
Hawaiʻi 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81  (2002) (“Findings of fact . . . 
that are not challenged on appeal are binding on the appellate 
court.”).  
 The circuit court made the following conclusions of law 
relevant to this appeal:  
13. The court applies a two -step analysis in deciding 
whether a constitutional due process right to a hearing 
exists: 
(1) whether “the particular interest which 
claimant seeks  to protect by a hearing [is] ‘property’ 
within the meaning of the due process clauses of the federal and state constitutions,” and (2) if, so, “what 
specific procedures are required to protect it,” Flores, 
143 
Hawaiʻi at 125, 424 P.3d at 480 (quoting Sandy Beach 
Def. Fund v. City Council of City & Cty. of Honolulu, 70 
Haw. 361, 377,  773 P.2d 250, 260 (1989)).  
14. The Court finds that Plaintiffs’ personal property and 
vehicles are property within the meaning of the due process 
clauses of the U.S. and Hawaiʻi constitutions. See  Brown v. 
Thompson, 91 Hawai ʻi 1, 9, 979 P.2d 586, 594 (1999), as 
amended (July 13, 1999) (holding that a derelict boat was 
“unquestionably” property protected by due process under the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and article I, 
section 5 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution); In re Application of 
Maui Elec. Co., Ltd., 141 Hawaiʻ i 249, 260, 408 P.3d 1, 12 
14  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(2017) (confirming that procedural due process protects 
“chattels”); Lavan v. City of Los Angeles, 693 F.3d 1022, 
1031 (9th Cir. 2012) (describing houseless individuals’ 
“interest in the continued ownership of their personal 
possessions” as “the most basic of property interests 
encompassed by the due process clause”).  
15. The Court does not agree with Defendants’ contrary argument that Plaintiffs’ personal property loses 
protections under constitutional due process by virtue of 
being maintained on public property allegedly “in violation of criminal statutes.”  
16. Due process also protected the vehicles that were in 
Plaintiffs’ possession, regardless of who were the 
registered owners, since Plaintiffs were in possession of 
those vehicles and were using those vehicles both to store 
other personal property and for shelter.  
. . . . 
19. The Court concludes that constitutional due process 
required a contested case hearing before Defendants 
deprived Plaintiffs SONIA DAVIS and JESSICA LAU of their 
constitutionally protected interests in their personal 
property. 
With respect to the three Flores  considerations, the court made 
the following conclusions of law:  
22. The Court finds that the private interests at stake 
here are significant. The private interests are chattels, 
which are core property interests under the Hawaiʻi and U.S. 
constitutions. And they are not just any chattels, but 
chattels used as shelter and life -sustenance for Plaintiffs 
SONIA DAVIS and JESSICA LAU. See  De-Occupy Honolulu v. 
City & Cty. of Honolulu, No. CIV 12- 00668 JMS, 2013 WL 
2285100, at *6 (D. Haw. May 21, 2013) (recognizing that “a 
strong private interest exists in Plaintiffs’ continued 
ownership of their possessions, especially given that the possessions . . . may be everything that a homeless 
individual owns”); Mitchell v. City of Los Angeles, No. 
CV1601750SJO GJSX, 2016 WL 11519288, at *5 (C.D. Cal. Apr. 
13, 2016) (finding that the private interest was 
“significant” because it “touches on the basic survival of 
homeless individuals”).  
23. The Court finds that there was a high risk of 
erroneous deprivation of Plaintiffs SONIA DAVIS and JESSICA 
LAU’s property interest through the procedures used by Defendants. The method for providing notice and procedures 
Defendants used did not afford  Plaintiffs with the ability 
to meaningfully challenge the 
Kanahā  Sweep and the taking 
and destruction of their property. Among other things, the 
Notice to Vacate did not provide for procedures available 
15  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to challenge the agency action, no r  did it provide 
information on how to retrieve items post -seizure. See  
Brown v. Thompson, 91 Hawaiʻi  at 10, 979 P.2d at 595. 
Further, as noted, the record does not show that Defendants 
had any process in place to store Plaintiffs’ personal property. Instead, it appears that Defendants seized and 
destroyed personal property taken during the Kanah ā  Sweep. 
The absence of such procedures significantly increased the risk of erroneous deprivation. See  Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, 
136 Hawaiʻ i at 412, 363 P.3d at 260  (stating that “the fact 
that the Board’s administrative rules do not appear to 
provide a procedural vehicle for the Board to reverse its 
grant of a permit, if it were later found that the permit 
was improperly granted, elevated the risk of erroneous deprivation”).  
24. The Court also finds that the procedures actually used 
by Defendants were materially different from those used by 
the municipalities in the decisions cited by Defendants in their briefing. See  Dkt. 97 at 8- 9 (citing cases in which 
municipalities had a “policy of storing personal property that is taken after an encampment is removed” and “items 
were stored and inventorie d, and the City had procedures 
for people to retrieve their property”). For example, in 
De-Occupy Honolulu v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, the City and 
County of Honolulu was required to announce its intentions at every step, pre -seizure, post- seizure, and pre -
destruction. No. CIV. 12 -00668 JMS, 2013 WL 2285100, at *6 
(D. Haw. May 21, 2013). Here, by contrast, Defendants did not announce their intentions at every step, and there were 
no alternative procedures in place, thus increasing the 
risk of erroneous deprivation of  Plaintiffs’ property.  
25. Under these circumstances, more or alternative 
procedural safeguards — including the holding of a 
contested case hearing – would have reduced the risk of 
erroneous deprivation. 
26. The Court acknowledges that Defendants may have 
important interest s  in public health, safety, and the 
maintenance of its public spaces, but on balance they do not outweigh the significant private interest s  at stake, 
especially in light of the high risk of erroneous deprivation created by the procedures Defendants actually used. See  Mitchell, 2016 WL 11519288, at *6 (acknowledging 
“significant” governmental interest and “heavy costs,” but 
stating that “these costs do not justify infringing the 
basic constitutional rights of homeless individuals” and 
that, “[g]iven the scope of the property interest at stake,” the city’s interest did not “outweigh[] the 
individual interests of homeless people”).  
The County moved for leave to take an interlocutory appeal 
of the circuit court’s order, which the circuit court granted. 
16  
 
 
     
 
  
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The County timely filed its notice of appeal, and this court 
accepted transfer of the appeal. 
III. Standards of Review
 A. Motions to dismiss  
A trial court’s grant or denial of a motion to dismiss for 
“lack of subject matter jurisdiction is a question of law, 
reviewable de novo .” Norris v. Hawaiian Airlines, Inc., 74 Haw.
235, 239, 842 P.2d 634, 637 (1992), aff’d, Hawaiian Airlines, 
Inc. v. Norris, 512 U.S. 246, 114 S. Ct. 2239 (1994). In 
Norris, the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court adopted the view of the Ninth 
Circuit Court of Appeals in Love v. United States, 871 F.2d 
1488, 1491 (9th Cir. 1989), opinion amended on other grounds andsuperseded by Love v. United States, 915 F.2d 1242 (9th Cir. 
1989), that:   
 
review of a motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter 
jurisdiction is based on the contents of the complaint, the allegations of which we accept as true and construe in the 
light most favorable to the plaintiff. Dismissal is 
improper unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff 
can prove no set of facts in support of his claim which 
would entitle him to relief.  
Norris, 74 Haw. at 240, 842 P.2d at 637 ( cleaned up). “However, 
when considering a motion to dismiss pursuant to HRCP Rule 
12(b)(1) the trial court is not restricted to the face of the 
pleadings, but may review any evidence, such as affidavits and 
testimony, to resolve factual disputes concerning the existence 
of jurisdiction.” Id. (cleaned up) . 
17  
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Constitutional law 
 This court answers questions of constitutional law by 
exercising its own independent judgment based on the facts of 
the case. State v. Trainor, 83 Hawai ʻi 250, 255, 925 P.2d 818, 
823 (1996). Questions of constitutional law are reviewed under the right/wrong standard. State v. Toyomura, 80 
Hawaiʻi 8, 15, 
904 P.2d 893, 900 (1995).  
C. Findings of fact and conclusions of law 
This court reviews findings of fact for clear error. 
Furukawa v. Honolulu Zoological Soc ’y, 85 Hawaiʻi 7, 12, 936 P.2d 
643, 648 (1997). A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when, 
despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is 
left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been 
made. State v. Kane , 87 Hawaiʻi 71, 74, 951 P.2d 934, 937 
(1998). This court reviews a trial court’s conclusions of law 
de novo under the right/wrong standard. State v. Medeiros , 89 
Hawaiʻi 361, 364, 973 P.2d 736, 739 (1999). A conclusion of law 
is not binding upon the appellate court and is freel y reviewable 
for its correctness. Id. 
IV. The Parties’ Arguments on Appeal 
A. The County’s arguments 
On appeal, the County raises the following points of error: 
(1) Was it proper for the Court to make findings on the 
issues of finality, the following of applicable agency 
rules and standing when those issues were not raised by any 
18  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
party in either briefing or hearings on the County’s Motion 
to Dismiss? 
(2) Did the Court err in making substantive findings on the 
merits of Plaintiffs’ allegations and issuing Findings of 
Fact in its Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part 
Defendants’ Motion to Dismiss Notice of Appeal?  . . . . 
(3) Did the Court err in determining that Constitutional 
Due Process required a contested case hearing before 
Defendants could remove houseless plaintiffs and their 
belongings from County property? 
(4) Did the Court err in Denying the County’s Motion to  . . . . 
Dismiss as to the claims of Plaintiffs SONIA DAVIS and 
JESSICA LAU?  
 
Stated differently, the County first argues that the circuit 
court should not have made full findings as to whether it 
possessed jurisdiction over the plaintiffs’ agency appeal. The County next argues that the plaintiffs did not have a 
constitutionally protected property interest in storing their 
chattels on County property and, even if they did, the process 
due would not  be a contested case hearing. The County thus 
argues that the circuit court should have granted its motion to 
dismiss as to plaintiffs Davis and Lau.  
At oral argument, the County chose not to focus on the 
first point of error, and rightfully so. The circuit court did 
not err in fully analyzing all of the factors necessary to its 
jurisdiction over th e plaintiffs’ agency appeal. The focus of 
this appeal, then, is whether the plaintiffs had a 
constitutionally protected property interes t, and, if so, 
whether a contested case hearing was the process due. 
19  . . . .  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
At oral argument, the County ultimately conceded that the 
plaintiffs possess a constitutionally protected interest in 
their chattels . Nevertheless, the County maintains that a 
contested case hearing was not necessary in order to protect 
that property interest. The County argues courts must consider 
“the specific procedures required to comply with constitutional 
due process” by balancing the Flores factors: 
(1) the private interest which will be affected; (2) the 
risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest through 
the procedures actually used, and the probable value, if 
any, of additional or alternative procedural safeguards; 
and (3) the governmental interest, including the burden 
that additional procedural safeguards would entail. 
143 Hawaiʻi at 126-27, 424 P.3d 469 at 482 . 
With respect to the first factor (the private interest that 
will be affected), the County argues the plaintiffs have no 
right to indefinitely store personal items on public land after 
receiving notice that the County intended to clear its property. 
Further, the County argues none of the plaintiffs are registered 
owners of any of the vehicles impounded and, to date, have not 
indicated any property interest in any of the vehicles. 
20  The second factor is “the risk of erroneous deprivation of 
a property interest through the procedures actually used, and 
the probable value, if any, of additional or alternative 
procedural safeguards.” The County points out the following 
procedures were  actually used: outreach efforts, posted written 
notice of the sweep, Davis and Lau’s in -person meeting with  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Mayor Victorino prior to the sweep, and notice mailed to 
registered owners of impounded vehicles.   The County argues 
these procedures provided plaintiffs  with enough time to remove 
their belongings to avoid a deprivation of their property 
interests.   The County states plaintiffs  Riedell and Walton did 
remove their property and did not suffer any losses during the sweep.   The County maintains Davis had two weeks to remove her 
property after receiving notice, and Lau had five days to remove 
her property, in order to avoid a deprivation of their property 
interests, but they chose not to act.   The County states courts 
have held there was sufficient notice in cases where houseless individuals received 24-hours’ notice of a sweep, citing De-
Occupy Honolulu v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, No. CIV. 12-00668 
JMS, 2013 WL 2285100,  at *6 (D. Haw. May 21, 2013), and 72-
hours’ notice of a sweep, citing Sullivan v. City of Berkeley, 
No. C 17-06051 WHA,  2017 WL 4922614,  at *6 (N.D. Cal. Oct. 31,  
2017),  and Hooper v. City of Seattle, No. C17-0077RSM,  2017 WL 
591112,  at *5 (W.D. Wash. Feb. 14, 2017).   The County  also 
asserts the plaintiffs  could have sought preliminary injunctive 
relief from the courts but did not.     
The County next asserts a contested case hearing was not 
necessary because the plaintiffs would not have been able to 
prove that they “owned the property, that the County had no 
interest in protecting its property to assure public access, 
21  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that the State Wildlife Sanctuary should be abandoned, or that 
its Wailuku-Kahului Wastewater Treatment Plant should be shut 
down.”   Further, the County cites to De-Occupy Honolulu  and 
James  for the proposition that a contested case hearing is not 
required where the government has provided pre-seizure notice of 
the government action, post-seizure notice of the property 
seized, and information as to where the property seized would be 
held. De-Occupy Honolulu, No. CIV. 12-00668 JMS, 2013 WL 
2285100,  at *5; James v. City &  Cnty.  of Honolulu, 125 F. Supp. 
3d 1080, 1094 (D. Haw. 2015).   The County also cited to Sullivan  
and Hooper  for the proposition that no pre-seizure hearing is 
necessary where the government has provided notice of the seized property’s location and the procedure for retrieving it. 
Sullivan, No. C 17-06051 WHA, 2017 WL 4922614,  at *6; Hooper, 
No. C17-0077RSM, 2017 WL 591112,  at *5.   The County states, 
“These ‘alternative procedures’ have been determined to decrease 
the likelihood of erroneous deprivation of property interests while being substantially less onerous than providing 
individualized contested case hearings to any person who  chooses 
to store their personal belonging[s] on public land prior to 
being able to undertake clean-up efforts”; therefore, a 
contested case hearing prior to clean-up efforts was not 
necessary.  
22  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
With respect to the third factor (the governmental 
interest, including the burden that additional procedural 
safeguards would entail), the County argues it had a substantial 
and compelling interest in being able to keep its property clean 
and safe without excessive and duplicative administrative 
hurdles. The County points out that, had it not undertaken the 
sweep, it could have exposed itself to potential liability for 
failing to police the activity taking place on its property. 
The County also argued it needed to clear out the encampment so 
it could fix fencing around the Kanahā Pond Sanctuary in order 
to protect rare native water birds from predators. The County 
argued it should not have been required to hold about 40 
contested case hearings for the approximately 40 houseless 
individuals who were encamped on its property. Such a process, 
the County argues, would have taken weeks or months to complete, 
under the procedures set forth in HRS chapter 91 for contested 
case hearings. The procedures include drafting a notice under 
HRS § 91 -9 (2012 & Supp. 2021) ; providing notice via registered 
or certified mail or via publication under HRS § 91 -9.5 (2012); 
holding a trial -type hearing; and rendering findings of fact, 
conclusions of law, and a decision and order, pursuant to HRS § 
91-12 (2012). The County also points out that, if t he contested 
case hearing is presided over by a hearings officer, under HRS § 
91-11 (2012), the parties would be afforded an additional 
23  
 
 
  
   
 
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
opportunity to file exceptions and present arguments regarding 
the hearings officer’s proposed decision.    
The County therefore asks this court to rev erse the circuit 
court’s order. 
B. Plaintiffs ’ arguments 
As to the County’s argument that a contested case hearing 
was not necessary, the plaintiffs counter -argue that protection 
of their chattels automatically required a contested case ; 
moreover, the plaintiffs had submitted written requests for 
contested case hearings. 
 The plaintiffs  also argue that, even assuming a contested 
case hearing was not automatically required, the circumstances of this case warranted holding one.   They  agree with the County 
that the test for the “precise procedures” the government is required to follow to comply with constitutional due process 
involve the balancing of the following three Flores  factors: 
(1) the private interest that will be affected; (2) the risk of 
an erroneous deprivation of such interest through the procedures 
actually used, and the probable value, if any, of additional or 
alternative procedural safeguards; and (3) the governmental 
interest, including the burden that additional procedural 
safeguards would entail.  
The plaintiffs argue the private interest affected is 
significant and weighty: the chattels they use for shelter and 
24  
 
 
  
  
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
survival. The y next argue the procedures the County used 
presented a serious risk of erroneous deprivation. There was a 
serious risk that their belongings would be erroneously seized 
as abandoned property . They also assert their property was 
destroyed so that the County could not feasibly reverse its 
decision if it was found to be in error. The plaintiffs note 
the cases the County relies on ( Sullivan and De-Occupy Honolulu ) 
involved situations in which the government entities actually 
stored belongings and provided notice of procedures to retrieve 
belongings. No similar safeguards were in place for plaintiffs’ 
non-vehicle chattels. 
The plaintiffs further argue additional safeguards could 
have prevented an erroneous deprivation. They argue they should 
have received written notice reasonably calculated to more 
precisely apprise them of the pending sweep and that such notice 
should have informed them of procedures available for 
challenging the government’s planned action. The press release, 
they argue, did not precisely describe the area subject to the 
sweep and did not inform the houseless community of the manner 
in which the sweep could be challenged. The “community 
outreach” efforts, the plaintiffs argue, were oral and not 
written; thus, they too failed to provide adequate notice. The 
Notice to Vacate also failed to provide adequate notice, because 
it was distributed by police officers on a single day to 
25  
 
 
   
 
  
   
 
  
   
     
 
   
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
houseless individuals residing along Amala Place. The 
plaintiffs point out that the sweep encompassed a broader area 
than just one street. Moreover, the Notice to Vacate contained 
no information as to how houseless individuals might challenge 
the sweep. 
The plaintiffs also argue they could have been given more 
time. For example, there were only five days between the date 
Davis received notice of the sweep and the commencement of the 
sweep. The ultimate safeguard, plaintiffs argue, would have 
been a hearing so that they could have explained their 
individual circumstances, agreed to be relocated without the 
threat of criminal prosecution, asked for more time or other 
accommodations, challenged the legality of the sweep, reques ted 
assistance from the County, or simply have had the opportunity 
to be heard. 
Lastly, the plaintiffs argue the County overstates the 
strength of its governmental interest and the burdens that 
additional safeguards would create. They argue the County’s 
health and safety interests should be placed in proper 
perspective and balanced against the ir need for survival. They 
also point out the County’s interests are only vaguely asserted 
and appear to scapegoat the houseless community for damaging 
County infrastructure, interrupting wastewater operations, 
degrading the environment, vandali zing County fencing, and 
26  
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
jeopardizing endangered water bird habitat. A contested case 
hearing, plaintiffs argue, would have afforded both sides a 
chance to examine and probe each other’s interests. The 
plaintiffs lastly point out the burden on the County would have 
been slight to (1) add a line on the Notice to Vacate informing 
them who to contact to challenge the sweep or request an 
accommodation; and (2) hold a contested case hearing, which is 
“not identical to a full -blown trial in court.” 
The plaintiffs ask this court to affirm the circuit court’s 
order. 
V. Discussion 
 Plaintiffs argue deprivation of their due process rights 
under both the state and federal constitutions. In State v. 
Wilson, __ Hawaiʻ i __, __ P.3d __, SCAP-22-0000561,  2024 WL 
466105 (Feb. 7, 2024), we adopted the “state -constitution first 
approach” to constitutional interpretation, under which we 
interpret the 
Hawaiʻi constitutional provision before its federal 
analogue. Wilson, SCAP-22-0000561, 2024 WL 466105,  at *4. 
“Only if the Hawai ʻi Constitution does not reach the minimum 
protection provided by a parallel federal constitutional right 
should this court construe the federal analogue.” Id.      
Hence, at the outset, we address Article I, Section 5 of 
the Hawaiʻi State Constitution , which states, “No person shall be 
deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of 
27  
 
 
  The plaintiffs’  chattels are a classic form of property 
over which they have a constitutionally protected interest. 
See, e.g.,  In re Application of Maui Elec. Co.,  141 Hawaiʻi 249,  
260, 408 P.3d 2,  12  (2017)  (“These interests –  property 
interests –  may take many forms” because courts have long 
recognized that “property interests protected by procedural due 
process extend well beyond actual ownership of real estate, 
chattels, or money.”) ( citation omitted, emphasis added)).   
“Chattels” are undoubtedly property interests under the Hawaiʻi 
Constitution Article I, Section 5’s due process clause. See  
Kekoa v. Sup.  Ct.  of Hawaiʻ i, 55 Haw. 104, 108, 516 P.2d 1239, 
1243 (1973)  (per curiam), citing Fuentes v. Shevin, 407 U.S. 67 
(1971).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
law.  . . .” The Fifth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution similarly states, “No person shall be . . . deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of 
law. . . .” A claim of due process requires a two-step inquiry: 
“(1) is the particular interest which the claimant seeks to protect by a hearing ‘property’ within the meaning of the due 
process clauses of the federal and state constitutions, and (2) 
if the interest is ‘property,’ what specific procedures are 
required to protect it.” Aguiar  v. Hawaii Hous. Auth., 55 Haw. 
478,  495, 522 P.2d 1255,  1266.    
28  
 
 
  For example, this court in Brown  v. Thompson  held that the 
vessel an  individual was living aboard in Ke ʻehi Harbor was 
“property” under the due process clause. Brown, 91 Hawai ʻi 1, 
979 P.2d 586  (1999)
. In that case, while the individual (Duncan 
Brown) was absent from the state, the vessel began sinking and 
coming apart. 91 Hawai ʻi at  4-5, 979 P.2d at  589-90. The harbor 
authority therefore impounded it.   91 Hawai ʻi at 5, 979 P.2d at 
590.   At issue in Brown  was whether the vessel was “property” 
under the state (and federal) constitutions, thereby entitling 
the vessel’s owner to the due process protections of notice and 
an opportunity to be heard regarding his boat’s impoundment.   91 
Hawaiʻi at 3, 979 P.2d at 588.   This court held the vessel was 
“unquestionably” property under the state (and federal)  
constitutions. 91 Hawai ʻi at 10-11, 979 P.2d at 595-96. In this 
case, the tents and vehicles in which the plaintiffs lived were 
similarly constitutionally protected property. Their chattels 
were as well.  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Although we are not bound by federal court interpretations 
of federal constitutional analogs when interpreting our state 
constitution, we can consider federal interpretations of similar 
language “with reference to the wisdom of adopting those 
interpretatio ns for our state.” State v. Texeira , 50 Haw. 138, 
142 n.2, 433 P.2d 593, 597 n.2 (1967). We note that multiple 
courts within the United States Court of Appeal s for the Ninth 
29  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Circuit’s geographical jurisdiction have specifically held that, 
where chattels are vital to the survival of houseless 
individuals, they are undoubtedly “property” within the meaning 
of the federal due process clause. The plaintiffs cite to 
Lavan, a factually similar case involving  sweeps of houseless 
individuals’  encampments.   Lavan v. City of Los Angeles, 693 
F.3d 1022 (9th Cir. 2012).   At issue in Lavan  was a City of Los 
Angeles Municipal Code section (section 56.11) providing, “No 
person shall leave or permit to remain any merchandise, baggage 
or any article of personal property upon any parkway or 
sidewalk.” Lavan, 693 F.3d at 1026. Nine houseless individuals 
sued the City under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 alleging that the City’s practice of summarily seizing and destroying the unabandoned 
property of houseless persons living on Skid Row violated the 
Fourth, Fifth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States 
Constitution. Id.   The houseless individuals filed an ex parte 
application for a temporary restraining order to enjoin the City 
from seizing and destroying their property without notice. Id.   
The United States District Court for the Central District of California granted the application and later issued a 
preliminary injunction barring the City from (1) seizing 
property on Skid Row absent an objectively reasonable belief 
that it is abandoned or presents an immediate threat to public 
health or safety, or is evidence of a crime, or contraband; (2) 
30  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
destroying said property without maintaining it in a secure 
location for 90 days first. Id.   The City was also ordered to 
leave a notice in a prominent place for any property taken, advising where the property is being kept and when it may be 
claimed by the rightful owner. Id.    
The City appealed, arguing the seizure and destruction of 
houseless individuals’ property does not implicate the 
Fourteenth Amendment.   693 F.3d at 1027.   The Ninth Circuit 
Court of Appeals disagreed and affirmed the district court. Id.   
It held, “Because homeless persons’ unabandoned possessions are 
‘property’ within the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment, the 
City must comport with the requirements of the Fourteenth 
Amendment’s due process clause if it wishes to take and destroy 
them.” 693 F.3d at 1032. The court went on to state the appeal 
did not “concern any purported right to use public sidewalks as 
personal storage facilities.”   693 F.3d at 1033.   Rather, the 
Ninth Circuit characterized the City’s appeal as asking it “to 
declare  that the unattended property of homeless persons is 
uniquely beyond the reach of the Constitution, so that the government may seize and destroy with impunity the worldly 
possessions of a vulnerable group in our society.”   Id.   The 
Lavan  court stated , “[T]he government may not take property like 
a thief in the night; rather, it must announce its intentions 
31  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 3 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and give the property owner a chance to argue against the 
taking.” 693 F.3d at 1032.   3 
Today, we hold that unabandoned possessions of houseless 
persons constitute property protected by the due process clause 
of Article I, Section 5 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution . 
 Once a constitutionally protected property interest  has 
been established, the next question becomes, “what specific 
procedures are required to protect it.” Aguiar, 55 Haw. at  495, 
522 P.2d at  1266.   This court has stated due  process is “not a 
fixed concept requiring a specific procedural course in every 
situation.” Sandy Beach Def. Fund v. City Council of the City 
&  Cnty.  of Honolulu, 70 Haw. 361, 378, 773 P.2d 250, 261 (1989). 
Rather, due process “calls for such procedural protections as 
the particular situation demands,” but its basic elements are 
Post-Lavan, various federal district courts within the Ninth Circuit 
have held that the chattels houseless individuals rely on for their survival 
constitute “property interests” within the federal due process clause. See 
Mitchell v. City of Los Angeles , No. CV 16 -01750 SJO (GJSx), 2016 WL 
11519288 , at *5 (“After the decision in Lavan, several district courts in 
this Circuit have echoed its reasoning, concluding that homeless individuals 
have a property interest in possessions, such as tents, ta rps, blankets, and 
medications, even when these possessions are kept in a public space. See, 
e.g., Sanchez v. City of Fresno , 914 F. Supp. 2d 1079, 1103 (E.D. Cal. 2012) 
(“If there has ever been any doubt in this Circuit that a homeless person’s 
unabandoned possessions are ‘property’ within the meaning of the Fourteenth 
Amendment, that doubt was put to rest by the Ninth Circuit ’s September 2021 
Decision in Lavan v. City of Los Angeles . . . .”); Carr v. Oregon Dep’t of 
Transp., No. 3:13 -CV-02218-MO, 2014 WL 3741934 , at *4 (D. Or. July 29, 2014) 
(“Within this most basic scope of the due process guarantee is a homeless 
person’s ownership interest in property that she has left unattended but not 
abandoned.”)). 
32  
 
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and 
in a meaningful manner. Id. 
First, with respect to notice, “Adequate notice under the 
Due Process Clause has two components. It must inform affected 
parties of the action about to be taken against them as well as 
of procedures available for challenging that action.” Brown, 91 
Hawaiʻi at 10, 979 P.2d at 595.  The Brown  case is instructive on 
the point of adequate notice. As stated earlier, in Brown, the 
owner of a boat (a merchant marine) was absent from the state 
when the boat began breaking apart and sinking where it was 
moored at  Keʻehi Harbor. Brown, 91 Hawaiʻi at 4-5, 979 P.2d at 
589-90. Pursuant to statute, the harbormaster and harbor 
manager declared the vessel derelict and impounded it. 91 
Hawaiʻi at 5, 979 P.2d at 590. The boat owner was orally 
informed of the boat’s impoundment upon his return but went out 
to sea again for another month. Id.   In the meantime, and also 
pursuant to statute, the harbor manager mailed notice of the impoundment to the boat’s owner via certified mail (which was returned unclaimed), posted a notice on the vessel, and 
published notice in the Honolulu Star-Bulletin. Id.   When the 
boat’s owner returned again, he examined the boat in the impound 
area and found it had already been cut in half. 91 Hawai ʻi at 6, 
979 P.2d at 591. The harbor authority later gave the remnants 
33  
 
 
    
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of the vessel, free of charge, to the company producing the 
movie Waterworld . Id. 
Brown filed a complaint requesting, inter alia, a 
declaration that his boat  had been impounded in violation of his 
procedural due process rights. 91 Hawaiʻi at 7, 979 P.2d at 592. 
This court agreed, holding that the letter informing Brown of 
his boat’s impoundment “made no mention of ‘procedures available 
for challenging that action,’ administrative or otherwise.” 91 
Hawaiʻi at 10, 979 P.2d at 595.  Accordingly, this court held 
that Brown “did not receive adequate notice regarding the 
impoundment” of his vessel. Id.   Similarly, in this case, the 
Notice to Vacate contained no information as to how its recipients could challenge the proposed action. Therefore, the 
plaintiffs received deficient notice.  
Further, this court held that Brown “was never provided 
with an opportunity to be heard on the matter of [his] vessel’s 
impoundment.” Id. This court thus vacated the circuit court’s 
judgment and remanded the case to the circuit court for entry of 
a judgment in Brown’s favor and against the defendants, as well 
as a declaration that Brown’s right to procedural due process 
was violated with respect to the impoundment and disposal of his 
vessel. 91 Hawaiʻi at 18-19, 979 P.2d at 603 -04. 
Similarly, in this case, the plaintiffs were never provided 
with an opportunity to be heard on the matter of the seizure of 
34  
 
 
  
 
  
 
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
their chattels. Their contested case requests went completely 
ignored. Even though some plaintiffs were able to meet with 
Mayor Victorino in person before the sweep, the y were unable to 
stop or postpone the sweep . This was despite the mayor’s 
publicly (and privately) conveyed promises that the sweep would 
not occur until all individuals were relocated. They were not. 
This was also despite the mayor’s privately conveyed reassurance 
to Lau that property wrapped in duct tape or caution tape would 
not be seized by police.   It was.   The  plaintiffs were not given 
a meaningful opportunity to be heard prior to the seizure and disposal of their property. Therefore, their right to 
procedural due process was violated.  
With respect to whether a contested case hearing was 
required in order for the plaintiffs to be heard, the applicable 
test is the following: 
[In] determining the specific procedures required to comply 
with constitutional due process we consider and balance 
three factors: (1) the private interest which will be 
affected; (2) the risk of an erroneous deprivation o f such 
interest through the procedures actually used, and the 
probable value, if any, of additional or alternative 
procedural safeguards; and (3) the governmental interest, 
including the burden that additional procedural safeguards 
would entail. 
Flores, 143 Hawaiʻi at 126-27, 424 P.3d at 4 81-82 (quoting Sandy 
Beach Def. Fund , 70 Haw. at 378, 773 P.2d at 261 ). 
Brown is instructive on these factors as well. In that 
case, after this court determined that Brown possessed a 
property interest in his live -aboard vessel, we then weighed the 
35  
 
 
    
 
 
   
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
other three factors to determine that Brown was entitled to at 
least a post -impoundment hearing before losing his vessel . 
Brown, 91 Hawaiʻi at 11, 979 P.2d at 596. 
First, Brown noted that the private interest at stake was 
“significant” because Brown’s boat was his home, and “an 
individual’s ‘right to maintain control over his home, and to be 
free from governmental interference, is a private interest of 
historic and continuing importance.’” Id. Similarly, in this 
case, there is a “significant” privacy interest in the 
plaintiffs’ right to maintain control over the tents and 
vehicles that serve d as their homes. 
Second, in Brown, we held that “the risk created by 
erroneous deprivation of property through ex parte impoundment 
cannot be ignored.” Id. The impoundment statutes required only 
that the vessel be determined to be unattended for 24 hours or 
more, and sinking or in immediate danger of sinking in a manner 
that obstructs a waterway or endangers life or property. Id. 
We noted the government was not required to adduce the evidence 
it had in making that determination, nor was it required to 
examine any potent ial defenses the vessel’s owner may have had. 
Id. Similarly, in this case, the County’s unchecked decision to 
seize and destroy the plaintiffs’ personal property posed a high 
risk of erroneous deprivation of property. 
36  
 
 
  
    
 
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Third, Brown acknowledged that the government had a “great 
interest in keeping state waters open for public use.” Id. 
Nevertheless, we pointed out, “What may have constituted an 
emergency at the time the vessel was sinking in state waters 
simply becomes a matter of temporary storage once the vessel has 
been impounded.” 91 Hawaiʻi at 12, 979 P.2d at 597.  We did not 
consider post -impoundment hearings as posing significant fiscal 
or administrative burdens upon the state. Id. Therefore, Brown 
was entitled to the addi tional safeguard of a hearing. Id. 
Similarly, in this case, once the vehicles and chattel were 
removed from the Kanahā area, they posed no further danger to 
public health or safety, the work of the wastewater treatment employees, or the endangered birds at Kanahā pond. Thus, a 
post-seizure  hearing would not have significantly burdened the 
County. The problem, however, was that the County appears to 
have destroyed the personal property seized; unlike the vehicles 
(which were stored then disposed of), the personal property does 
not appear to  have been stored for any time.  
In fact, the circuit court made specific  and unchallenged  
factual findings that the plaintiffs’ chattels appear to have 
been  summarily  destroyed.   The fact of destruction is 
significant in this case. In order to counter the plaintiffs’ 
argument that their due process rights were violated, the County 
relies on cases that are readily distinguishable because they 
37  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
involved notice and an opportunity to be heard concerning seized 
property that was later stored, not destroyed. For example, in 
Sullivan,  the United States District Court for the Northern 
District of California denied houseless plaintiffs ’ motion for a 
preliminary injunction against the City of San Francisco and its 
Bay Area Rapid Transit (“BART”) District. 2017 WL 4922614 ,  at 
*1. BART police distributed notices to houseless individuals 
encamped on BART property. 2017 WL 4922614,  at *2. The first 
notice informed houseless individuals they were trespassing on 
BART property in violation of the California Penal Code and gave 
them 72 hours’ notice to permanently vacate the property with 
their belongings. Id.   A second notice posted days later 
informed the houseless individuals they were trespassing, 
ordered them to leave immediately, and provided contact 
information for two city programs that assist the homeless and 
provide free meals. Id.   Once houseless individuals were 
removed from the property, a third notice explained where their  
property was stored and how to contact the storage facility  to 
retrieve it. Id.    
The district court denied the houseless plaintiffs ’ motion 
for a preliminary injunction, stating that there was “no 
likelihood of success or serious questions going to the merits” 
of their claim that BART’s actions deprived them of due process 
of law under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States 
38  
 
 
  
   
 
  
  
    
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Constitution. 2017 WL 4922614,  at *5. The district court noted 
“the right to be free from trespass is one of the oldest, and 
most universally recognized features of the law.”   2017 WL 
4922614,  at *4.   It characterized the relief houseless 
plaintiffs  sought as “court approval to settle indefinitely on 
the land of a municipal transportation district.” 2017 WL 4922614,  at *5.  
The district court distinguished the Lavan case, upon which 
the houseless plaintiffs had extensively relied. Id. It 
explained that Lavan involved police seizure and immediate 
destruction of the personal property of houseless individuals 
without notice to them or an opportunity to object. Id. By 
contrast, the district court explained, BART police had given 
the affected houseless individuals notice that their property 
would be seized, 72 hours to make arrangements to move their 
property, and notice of the whereabouts and manner of retrieving 
property the BART police had seized and stored. 2017 WL 
4922614, at *6. In balancing the equities, the district court 
further concluded, “To force BART to host the encampment would 
open BART to potential liability for failing to police the 
activities in the encampment.” Id. 
39  The County cites approvingly to Sullivan  for the 
proposition that 72 hours’ notice prior to a sweep was 
sufficient.   The County completely ignores, however, that the  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
property seized in Sullivan  was later stored, and the houseless 
individuals affected were given information on the property’s 
whereabouts and how to retrieve it. Id.  
By contrast, t he plaintiffs’ property in this case was 
destroyed.   In this case, if the County’s plan was to destroy 
(instead of store ) seized property, then the due process clause 4
40 4   The County cites to De- Occupy Honolulu  for the proposition that 24 
hours’ notice prior to a sweep was sufficient. 2013 WL 2285100.   De-Occupy 
Honolulu, however, also involved seized chattels that were later stored, with 
procedures in place for the affected houseless individuals to retrieve their 
property.  
 In that case, the United States District Court for the District of 
Hawaiʻi addressed whether a Revised Ordinance of Honolulu was facially 
unconstitutional under, inter alia, the due process clauses of the United States Constitution. 2013 WL 2285100 ,  at *1. The ordinance prohibited the 
storage of personal property on public land. Id.   It allowed the City and 
County of Honolulu to impound personal property 24 hours after serving 
written notice on the person storing the property or posting notice conspicuously upon the property. 2013 WL 2285100 ,  at *2. The notice had to 
include the location where the removed property would be stored, as well as a 
statement that the impounded property would be sold or otherwise disposed of 
if not claimed within 30 days of impoundment, with the property owner 
responsible for all costs of removal, storage, and disposal. Id.     
The district court noted “there is no dispute” the personal property of 
the houseless individuals constituted a protected property interest. 2013 WL 2285100,  at *6. The court recognized “that a strong private interest exists 
in Plaintiffs’ continued ownership of their possessions, especially given that the possessions impounded under Article 19 may be everything that a homeless individual owns.”   Id.   Nevertheless, the court determined the 
houseless plaintiffs were not entitled to a pre -deprivation or post -
deprivation hearing because there were safeguards in place to prevent the 
erroneous deprivation of their property. Id.   Among those safeguards were 
(1) the pre- seizure written notice provided 24 hours in advance; (2) the 
post-seizure notice informing houseless individuals of the property taken and 
the location where it may be retrieved, and (3) storage of the items for at  
least 30 days before destruction. Id.   The district court continued that a 
hearing would not have added any additional value to prevent the erroneous 
deprivation of personal property. Id.   Further, the district court noted the 
City and County’s “substantial interest” in ensuring that public property was 
clean, safe, and accessible for use by everyone. Id.    
 
As the issue is not before us, we do not decide whether a contested 
case hearing is necessary under the due process clause of Article I, Section 
5 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution where there are procedures in place to (1) 
notify houseless individuals of an upcoming sweep and whom to contact to 
challenge such a sweep; (2) inventory and temporarily store the houseless 
individuals’ personal property seized during a swee p; and (3) notify  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
      
       
       
 
      
 
        
        Bradley Sova /s/ Mark E. Recktenwal
for defendants-appellants 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
Jongwook Kim 
for plaintiffs-appellees /s/ Todd W. Eddins 
/s/ James S. Kawashima/s/ Shanlyn A. Park    
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of the Hawaiʻi Constitution required a pre-deprivation hearing of 
some sort for Davis and Lau, who lost property in the sweep . 
Under the circumstances of this case, a pre -deprivation 
contested case hearing would have provided the process due. 
Thus, the circuit court properly denied the County’s motion to 
dismiss as to Davis and Lau . 
VI. Conclusion 
We therefore affirm the circuit court’s order . 
d 
 
 
houseless individuals of where their personal property is stored and how to 
reclaim their property. 
41 