*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU and HONOLULU BOARD OF WATER SUPPLY, 
Plaintiffs-Appellees, 
 
vs. 
 
SUNOCO LP; ALOHA PETROLEUM, LTD.; ALOHA PETROLEUM LLC; 
EXXON MOBIL CORPORATION; EXXONMOBIL OIL CORPORATION; 
ROYAL DUTCH SHELL PLC; SHELL OIL COMPANY; SHELL OIL PRODUCTS 
COMPANY LLC; CHEVRON CORPORATION; CHEVRON U.S.A. INC.; 
BHP HAWAII INC.; BP PLC; BP AMERICA INC.; MARATHON PETROLEUM 
CORPORATION; CONOCOPHILLIPS; CONOCOPHILLIPS COMPANY; 
PHILLIPS 66; and PHILLIPS 66 COMPANY, 
Defendants-Appellants, 
 
and 
 
BHP GROUP LIMITED and BHP GROUP PLC, 
Defendants-Appellees. 
 
 
SCAP-22-0000429 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-22-0000429; CASE NO. 1CCV-20-0000380) 
October 31, 2023 
  
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, AND EDDINS, JJ.,  
CIRCUIT JUDGE JOHNSON AND CIRCUIT JUDGE TONAKI, 
ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCIES, 
AND EDDINS, J., CONCURRING  Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-22-0000429
31-OCT-2023
08:57 AM
Dkt. 74 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2 OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The City and County of Honolulu and the Honolulu Board 
of Water Supply (collectively, Plaintiffs) brought suit against 
a number of oil and gas producers1 (collectively, Defendants) 
alleging five counts: public nuisance, private nuisance, strict liability failure to warn, negligent failure to warn, and 
trespass.  Defendants appeal the circuit court’s denial of their motions to dismiss for both lack of jurisdiction and failure to 
state a claim.  We conclude that the circuit court properly 
denied both motions, and accordingly, this lawsuit can proceed.   
Plaintiffs argue this is a traditional tort case 
alleging that Defendants engaged in a deceptive promotion 
campaign and misled the public about the dangers of using their 
oil and gas products.  Plaintiffs claim their theory of 
liability is simple: Defendants knew of the dangers of using 
their fossil fuel products, “knowingly concealed and misrepresented the climate impacts of their fossil fuel 
products,” and engaged in “sophisticated disinformation 
campaigns to cast doubt on the science, causes, and effects of 
 
1  Defendants are: Sunoco LP, Aloha Petroleum, Ltd., Aloha Petroleum 
LLC, Exxon Mobil Corporation, ExxonMobil Oil Corporation, Shell plc (f/k/a 
Royal Dutch Shell plc), Shell U.S.A. Inc. (f/k/a Shell Oil Company), Shell 
Oil Products Company LLC, Chevron Corporation, Chevron U.S.A. Inc., Woodside 
Energy Hawaii Inc. (f/k/a BHP Hawaii Inc.), BP plc, BP America Inc., Marathon 
Petroleum Corporation, ConocoPhillips, ConocoPhillips Company, Phillips 66, and Phillips 66 Company.  The circuit court dismissed BHP Group Limited and 
BHP Group plc – that dismissal was not appealed and is not before this court. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3 global warming,” causing increased fossil fuel consumption and 
greenhouse gas emissions, which then caused property and 
infrastructure damage in Honolulu.  Simply put, Plaintiffs say 
the issue is whether Defendants misled the public about fossil 
fuels’ dangers and environmental impact.    
Defendants disagree.  They say this is another in a 
long line of lawsuits seeking to regulate interstate and 
international greenhouse gas emissions, all of which have been rejected.  Greenhouse gas emissions and global warming are 
caused by “billions of daily choices, over more than a century, 
by governments, companies, and individuals,” and Plaintiffs 
“seek to recover from a handful of Defendants for the cumulative 
effect of worldwide emissions leading to global climate change 
and Plaintiffs’ alleged injuries.”  They argue: (1) the circuit 
court lacked specific jurisdiction over the Defendants; (2) 
Plaintiffs’ claims are preempted by federal common law, which in 
turn, was displaced by the Clean Air Act (CAA); and (3) alternatively, Plaintiffs’ claims are preempted by the CAA. 
We agree with Plaintiffs.  This suit does not seek to 
regulate emissions and does not seek damages for interstate 
emissions.  Rather, Plaintiffs’ complaint “clearly seeks to 
challenge the promotion and sale of fossil-fuel products without 
warning and abetted by a sophisticated disinformation campaign.”  
Mayor & City Council of Baltimore v. BP P.L.C., 31 F.4th 178, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
4 233 (4th Cir. 2022), cert. denied, 143 S. Ct. 1795 (2023) 
(characterizing a complaint brought against many of the same 
Defendants in this case alleging broadly the same counts, theory 
of liability, and injuries).  This case concerns torts committed 
in  that caused alleged injuries in .   Hawai
ʻi Hawaiʻi
Thus, Defendants’ arguments on appeal fail.  First, 
Defendants are subject to specific jurisdiction in Hawaiʻ i 
because: (1) Plaintiffs’ allegations that Defendants misled 
consumers about fossil fuels products’ dangers “arise out of” 
and “relate to” Defendants’ contacts with 
Hawaiʻi, i.e., 
Defendants’ sale and marketing of those fossil fuel products in Hawaiʻi, Ford Motor Co. v. Montana Eighth Judicial District 
Court, 141 S. Ct. 1017, 1025 (2021); (2) it is reasonable for 
Hawai iʻ courts to  exercise specific jurisdiction over Defendants, 
and doing so does not conflict with interstate federalism principles because 
Hawaiʻi has a “significant interest[] . . . 
[in] ‘providing [its] residents with a convenient forum for 
redressing injuries inflicted by out-of-state actors,’” see id. 
at 1030 (quoting Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462, 
473 (1985)); and (3) the Supreme Court has never imposed a “clear notice” requirement, see id. at 1025. 
Second, the CAA displaced federal common law governing 
interstate pollution damages suits; after displacement, federal 
common law does not preempt state law.  See Am. Elec. Power Co. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
5 v. Connecticut, 564 U.S. 410, 423-24 (2011) (“AEP”); Bd. of 
Cnty. Comm’rs of Boulder Cnty. v. Suncor Energy (U.S.A.) Inc., 
25 F.4th 1238, 1260 (10th Cir. 2022), cert. denied, 143 S. Ct. 
1795 (2023) (“[T]he federal common law of nuisance that formerly 
governed transboundary pollution suits no longer exists due to 
Congress’s displacement of that law through the CAA.”).  We must only consider whether the CAA preempts state law.  AEP, 564 U.S. 
at 429 (“[T]he availability vel non of a state lawsuit depends 
inter alia on the preemptive effect of the [CAA].”).   
Third, the CAA does not preempt Plaintiffs’ claims.  
The CAA does not occupy the entire field of emissions regulation.  See Merrick v. Diageo Ams. Supply, Inc., 805 F.3d 
685, 695 (6th Cir. 2015) (determining that there is “no evidence that Congress intended that all emissions regulation occur 
through the [CAA’s] framework”).  There is no “actual conflict” 
between Plaintiffs’ state tort law claims and the CAA’s 
overriding federal purpose or objective.  See In re Methyl 
Tertiary Butyl Ether (MTBE) Prod. Liab. Litig. (MTBE), 725 F.3d 
65, 101 (2d Cir. 2013) (concluding that CAA did not preempt state tort law claims relating to a gasoline additive where it 
was possible to comply with both state and federal law). 
Therefore, we affirm the circuit court’s orders 
denying Defendants’ motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction 
and motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
6 II. BACKGROUND 
A. Circuit Court Proceedings 
1. Original complaint, removal, and remand 
In March 2020, Plaintiffs filed their original 
complaint in the Circuit Court for the First Circuit alleging 
that for decades, Defendants knew their fossil fuel products 
caused greenhouse gas emissions and global warming, but they 
failed to warn consumers of the threat, and actively worked to 
discredit scientific evidence that supported the existence of 
global warming.  In April 2020, Defendants removed the case to 
federal court.  Defendants argued that removal jurisdiction was 
appropriate because federal common law governed, and the CAA and 
other federal statutes preempted Plaintiffs’ claims.2 
On Plaintiffs’ motion, the federal district court 
remanded the case to state circuit court.  The federal court explained that the Ninth Circuit, in City of Oakland v. BP PLC, 
969 F.3d 895, 906-08 (9th Cir. 2020), recently rejected 
 
2  Defendants asserted eight grounds for federal jurisdiction: (1) 
the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (OCSLA) because “[a] significant 
portion of oil and gas exploration and production” occurs on the shelf; (2) 
the federal officer removal statute, see 28 U.S.C. § 1442(a)(1), because oil 
and gas production “took place under the direction of a federal officer to 
support critical national security, military, and other core federal 
government operations;” (3) federal enclave jurisdiction because some oil 
production occurred on federal enclaves like the Outer Continental Shelf; (4) 
federal common law, which defendants argue governs Plaintiffs’ claims; (5) federal question jurisdiction because Plaintiffs’ claims “necessarily raise[] federal questions under the [CAA], EPA and other federal regulations and 
international treaties on climate change to which the United States is a 
party;” (6) federal preemption by the CAA and other related statutes; (7) 
bankruptcy jurisdiction; and (8) admiralty jurisdiction. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
7 Defendants’ federal-common-law, federal-preemption, and federal-
question-jurisdiction arguments.  City & Cnty. of Honolulu v. 
Sunoco LP, No. 20-CV-00163-DKW-RT, 2021 WL 531237, at *2 n.8 (D. Haw. Feb. 12, 2021).  The court explained that the “principal 
problem with Defendants’ arguments is that they misconstrue 
Plaintiffs’ claims.”  Id. at *1.  “More specifically, contrary 
to Defendants’ contentions, Plaintiffs have chosen to pursue claims that target Defendants’ alleged concealment of the dangers of fossil fuels, rather than the acts of extracting, 
processing, and delivering those fuels.”  Id.  Further, 
Plaintiffs’ nuisance claims arise “not through [Defendants’] ‘fossil fuel production activities,’ . . . but through their 
alleged failure to warn about the hazards of using their fossil 
fuel products and disseminating misleading information about the 
same.”  Id. at *3.    
On appeal, the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district 
court’s order remanding the case to state circuit court.  City & 
Cnty. of Honolulu v. Sunoco LP, 39 F.4th 1101, 1113 (9th Cir. 
2022).  Defendants filed an application for writ of certiorari to the U.S. Supreme Court, which was denied.  Sunoco LP v. City 
& Cnty. of Honolulu, 143 S. Ct. 1795 (2023) (denying application 
for certiorari).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
8 2. First Amended Complaint 
In its First Amended Complaint (Complaint), Plaintiffs 
added the Board of Water Supply (BWS) as a plaintiff and amended 
certain allegations to incorporate damages specific to BWS.  
Plaintiffs also added an allegation that the wrongful conduct giving rise to the second cause of action (private nuisance) was 
committed with actual malice, permitting punitive damages.   
First, Plaintiffs allege that human activity is 
causing the atmosphere and oceans to warm, sea levels to rise, 
snow cover to diminish, oceans to acidify, and hydrologic 
systems to change.  Greenhouse gas emissions, which are largely 
a byproduct of combustion of fossil fuels, are the chief cause 
of this warming.  The accumulation of greenhouse gases in the 
atmosphere has adverse impacts on the earth, including: warming of the average surface temperature, resulting in increasingly 
frequent heatwaves; sea level rise; flooding of land and 
infrastructure; changes to the global climate, including longer 
periods of drought; ocean acidification; increased frequency of 
extreme weather; changes to ecosystems; and impacts on human 
health associated with extreme weather, decreased air quality, 
and vector-borne illnesses. 
Next, Plaintiffs allege that Defendants knew about the 
dangers associated with their products because they, or their predecessors in interest, were members of the American Petroleum *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
9 Institute (API).  Beginning in the 1950s, scientists warned the 
API that fossil fuels were causing atmospheric carbon dioxide 
levels to increase.  In 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson’s 
Scientific Advisory Committee warned of global warming and the 
catastrophic impacts that could result.  The API President 
related these findings to industry leaders at the association’s 
annual meeting that year.  Plaintiffs allege that by 1965, 
industry leaders were aware of the global warming phenomenon 
caused by their products.  Defendants continued to gather 
information on the climate change impacts of their products 
throughout the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s.   
During the 1980s, many of the defendants in the 
present case formed their own research units focused on climate 
modeling.  API provided a forum where Defendants shared research 
efforts and corroborated each other’s findings.  Plaintiffs 
allege that by 1988, Defendants “had amassed a compelling body 
of knowledge about the role of anthropogenic greenhouse gases, and specifically those emitted from the normal use of 
Defendants’ fossil fuel products, in causing global warming and 
its cascading impacts[.]” 
Plaintiffs allege that around 1990, public discussion 
shifted from gathering information on climate change to 
international efforts to curb emissions.  At this point, 
Defendants – rather than collaborating with the international *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
10 community to help curb emissions - “embarked on a decades-long 
campaign designed to maximize continued dependence on their 
products and undermine national and international efforts to 
rein in greenhouse gas emissions.”  Defendants began a public 
relations campaign to cast doubt on the science connecting 
global climate change to their products.  Defendants promoted 
their products through misleading advertisements and funding 
“climate change denialist organizations.” 
According to Plaintiffs, Defendants’ efforts to cast 
doubt on climate science continued throughout the 1990s and 2000s.  Defendants “bankroll[ed]” scientists with “fringe 
opinions” in order to create a false sense of disagreement in 
the scientific community.  Defendants’ own scientists, experts, 
and managers had previously acknowledged climate change’s 
effects.  At the same time, Defendants worked to change public 
opinion over climate change’s existence and avoid regulation.  
Defendants funded dozens of think tanks, front groups, and dark money foundations pushing climate change denial, with ExxonMobil 
alone spending almost $31 million. 
Plaintiffs allege that, while Defendants publicly cast 
doubt on climate change, they simultaneously invested in 
operational changes to prepare for its adverse consequences.  
For example, Defendants allegedly raised offshore oil platforms 
to protect against rising sea levels, reinforced them against *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
11 storms, and developed new technologies for extracting oil in 
places previously blocked by polar sea ice.   
Defendants now claim they are investing in renewable 
energy, but Plaintiffs claim these statements are a pretense.  
Defendants’ advertisements and promotional materials do not 
disclose the risks of their products, and they continue to ramp 
up fossil fuel production, including new fossil fuel 
development. 
Plaintiffs allege that they have sustained damages 
caused by Defendants’ failure to warn and deceptive promotion of dangerous products.  Defendants’ conduct “is a substantial 
factor in causing global warming,” which has had adverse effects 
on Plaintiffs.  These effects include sea level rise (causing 
flooding, erosion, and beach loss); more extreme weather events; 
ocean warming (causing destruction of coral reefs); loss of 
endemic species; and diminished availability of fresh water.  
Because of Defendants’ conduct, Plaintiffs suffered damage to their facilities and property, incurred increased planning and 
preparation costs to adapt communities to global warming’s 
effects, collected less tax revenue due to impacts on tourism, 
and suffered the cost of public health impacts such as an 
increase in heat-related illnesses.  Plaintiffs have already 
suffered damage to beach parks, roads, and drain way 
infrastructure from flooding and sea level rise. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
12 Plaintiffs bring five counts under state law: public 
nuisance, private nuisance, strict-liability failure to warn, 
negligent failure to warn, and trespass.  All counts rely on the 
same theory of liability: Defendants knew about the dangers of 
using their fossil fuel products, failed to warn consumers about 
those known dangers, and engaged in a sophisticated 
disinformation campaign to increase fossil fuel consumption, all 
of which exacerbated the impacts of climate change in Honolulu. 
3. Defendants’ joint motions to dismiss 
Defendants filed two motions to dismiss, the first for 
lack of jurisdiction and the second for failure to state a claim.  In their first motion to dismiss, Defendants argued the 
circuit court did not have specific jurisdiction because  
“(1) the Complaint avers, as it must, that Plaintiffs’ 
alleged injuries arise out of and relate to worldwide 
conduct by countless actors, not Defendants’ alleged 
contacts with Ha wai‘i; (2) Defendants did not have ‘clear 
notice’ that as a result of their activities in Ha wai‘i they 
could be sued here for activity occurring around the world; and (3) exercising jurisdiction would be constitutionally 
unreasonable.”   
In their second motion to dismiss, Defendants argued: 
(1) Plaintiffs’ claims are interstate pollution claims, which 
must be brought under federal common law, not state common law, 
and that the CAA preempts interstate pollution federal common 
law claims; or alternatively, (2) Plaintiffs’ state common law 
claims are preempted by the CAA.  Plaintiffs opposed. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
13 At the motion hearing, Plaintiffs summarized their 
theory of liability, which is central to the jurisdictional and 
preemption issues on appeal.  Plaintiffs explained that 
defendants “concealed and misrepresented the climate impacts of 
their products, using sophisticated disinformation campaigns to 
discredit the science of global warming.”  Defendants also 
allegedly misled “consumers and the rest of the world about the 
dangers of using their products as intended in a profligate manner.”  Thus, “these deceptive commercial activities . . . 
inflated the overall consumption of fossil fuels, which 
increased greenhouse gas emissions, which exacerbated climate 
change, which created the hazardous environmental conditions” 
that have allegedly injured Plaintiffs.   
4. The circuit denied Defendants’ motions to dismiss 
The circuit court subsequently denied both motions.
3   
The circuit court denied Defendants’ motion to dismiss 
for lack of jurisdiction, concluding that it had specific 
jurisdiction because Plaintiffs’ claims arose out of and related 
to Defendants’ sales and marketing contacts in .  See, Hawai
ʻi
e.g., Ford Motor, 141 S. Ct. at 1025.  The circuit court also 
determined it would be reasonable to exercise specific 
 
3  The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
14 jurisdiction over Defendants.  See Hawaii Forest & Trial Ltd. v. 
Davey, 556 F. Supp. 2d 1162, 1168-72 (D. Haw. 2008). 
The circuit court also denied Defendants’ joint motion 
to dismiss for failure to state a claim.  The court explained 
that the standard for the review of a motion to dismiss “is 
generally limited to the allegations in the complaint, which 
must be deemed true for purposes of the motion,” Kahala Royal 
Corp. v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 113 Hawai‘ i 251, 266, 
151 P.3d 732, 747 (2007), but courts are “not required to accept 
conclusory allegations,” Civ. Beat L. Ctr. for the Pub. Int., 
Inc. v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 144 Hawai‘i 466, 474, 445 P.3d 
47, 55 (2019).  And “the issue is not solely whether the 
allegations as currently pled are adequate.”  Rather, “[a] 
complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state a claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no 
set of facts in support of his or her claim that would entitle him or her to relief under any set of facts or any alternative 
theory.”  (Citations omitted). 
  The circuit court first concluded that City of New 
York v. Chevron Corp., 993 F.3d 81 (2d Cir. 2021), cited by 
Defendants, “has limited application to this case, because the 
claims in the instant case are both different from and were not 
squarely addressed in [that] opinion.”  The circuit court then determined that federal common law did not govern Plaintiffs’ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
15 state law claims.  The circuit court also determined that 
Plaintiffs’ claims were not preempted by the CAA. 
The circuit court also rejected Defendants’ argument 
that a large damages award in this case could act as a de facto 
emissions regulation because an unfavorable judgment would “not 
prevent Defendants from producing and selling as much fossil 
fuels as they are able, as long as Defendants make the 
disclosures allegedly required, and do not engage in misinformation.”  The circuit court concluded: 
A broad doctrine that damages awards in tort cases 
impermissibly regulate conduct and are thereby preempted 
would intrude on the historic powers of state courts.  Such 
a broad “damages = regulation = preemption” doctrine could 
preempt many cases common in state court, including much 
class action litigation, products liability litigation, claims against pharmaceutical companies, and consumer 
protection litigation.  
Last, the circuit court concluded that it was 
appropriate for state common law to govern Plaintiffs’ claims: 
 Defendants argue (and the City of New York opinion 
expresses) that climate change cases are based on “artful 
pleading.”  Respectfully, we often see “artful pleading” in 
the trial courts, where new conduct and new harms often arise:  
The argument that recognizing the tort will 
result in a vast amount of litigation has accompanied virtually every innovation in the law.  Assuming that 
it is true, that fact is unpersuasive unless the litigation largely will be spurious and harassing.  Undoubtedly, when a court recognizes a new cause of 
action, there will be many cases based on it.  Many 
will be soundly based and the plaintiffs in those cases will have their rights vindicated.  In other 
cases, plaintiffs will abuse the law for some 
unworthy end, but the possibility of abuse cannot 
obscure the need to provide an appropriate remedy.  
Fergerstrom v. Hawaiian Ocean View Estates, 50 Haw. 374, 
377 (1968) (opinion by Levinson, J.)[.]  Here, the causes *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
16 of action may seem new, but in fact are common.  They just 
seem new due to the unprecedented allegations involving 
causes and effects of fossil fuels and climate change.  
Common law historically tries to adapt to such new 
circumstances. 
The circuit court then granted Defendants leave to 
file an interlocutory appeal. 
B. Appellate Proceedings 
Defendants timely filed their joint notice of 
interlocutory appeal from the circuit court’s Order Denying 
Defendants’ Joint Motion to Dismiss for Failure to State a Claim 
and its Order Denying Defendants’ Joint Motion to Dismiss for 
Lack of Personal Jurisdiction.  This court subsequently granted Plaintiffs’ application for transfer from the Intermediate Court 
of Appeals. 
On appeal, Defendants frame this case as one where 
Plaintiffs “seek[] to hold Defendants liable under Hawai‘ i tort 
law for harms allegedly attributable to global climate change.”  This case should be dismissed because “these emissions flow from 
billions of daily choices, over more than a century, by 
governments, companies, and individuals about what types of 
fuels to use, and how to use them.”  Plaintiffs “seek to recover 
from a handful of Defendants for the cumulative effect of 
worldwide emissions leading to global climate change and Plaintiffs’ alleged injuries.”  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
17 Plaintiffs dispute Defendants’ characterization of the 
Complaint.  Plaintiffs argue that the Complaint does “not ask 
for damages for all effects of climate change; rather, [it] 
seek[s] damages only for the effects of climate change allegedly 
caused by Defendants’ breach of Hawai‘ i law regarding failure to 
disclose, failures to warn, and deceptive promotion.”  
Plaintiffs contend their Complaint is “straightforward”: 
“Defendants knowingly concealed and misrepresented the climate 
impacts of their fossil fuel products” and that “deception 
inflated global consumption of fossil fuels, which increased 
greenhouse gas emissions, exacerbated climate change, and 
created hazardous conditions in Hawai‘ i.”  Despite Defendants’ 
contention that this suit seeks to regulate fossil fuel 
production, “so long as Defendants start warning of their products’ climate impacts and stop spreading climate 
disinformation, they can sell as much fossil fuel as they wish 
without fear of incurring further liability.”   
Defendants raise three points of error: (1) the 
circuit court lacked specific jurisdiction over the Defendants; 
(2) Plaintiffs’ claims are preempted by federal common law, 
which in turn, was displaced by the CAA; and (3) alternatively, 
Plaintiffs’ claims are preempted by the CAA.
 
First, Defendants argue that specific jurisdiction 
does not attach because: (1) Plaintiffs cannot show that their *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
18 claims “arise out of or relate to,” Ford Motor, 141 S. Ct. at 
1025, Defendants’ contacts with  because Plaintiffs’ 
alleged injuries did not “occur in-state as a result of the use 
of the product in-state;” (2) Defendants’ in-state conduct “did 
not reasonably place them on clear notice” they would be subject 
to specific jurisdiction in  as required by the federal 
Due Process Clause; and (3) the exercise of “personal 
jurisdiction here would conflict with federalism principles” 
limiting state jurisdiction in areas of national interest. Hawai‘iHawai‘i
Plaintiffs dispute Defendants’ arguments, contending: 
(1) the U.S. Supreme Court explained in Ford Motor that it had 
“never framed the specific jurisdiction inquiry as always requiring proof of causation — i.e., proof that the plaintiff’s 
claim came about because of the defendant’s in-state conduct,” 
id. at 1026; (2) Defendants had fair warning they could be haled 
into Hawaiʻ i courts, and Ford Motor did not create a “clear 
notice” requirement, id. at 1027; and (3) Plaintiffs’ suit does 
not interfere with national energy policy because Defendants can continue to produce as much oil as they want as long as they 
stop their tortious marketing conduct. 
Second, Defendants argue that Plaintiffs’ state law 
claims are governed by federal common law “because they seek 
redress for harms allegedly caused by interstate and 
international emissions.”  Relying on City of New York, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
19 Defendants say that federal common law preempts Plaintiffs’ 
state common law tort claims, and in turn, the CAA preempts the 
federal common law.  See City of New York, 993 F.3d at 93-96.  
Defendants contend that “[o]nce this court correctly concludes that Plaintiffs’ claims are necessarily governed by federal law, 
it follows that Plaintiffs also have no remedy under federal 
law.” 
Plaintiffs counter that the CAA displaced federal 
common law governing interstate 
pollution, and that law “no 
longer exists.”  Boulder, 25 F.4th at 1260; see also AEP, 564 
U.S. at 423.  Plaintiffs claim that “once federal common law disappears, the question of state law preemption is answered 
solely by reference to federal statutes, not the ghost of some 
judge-made federal law.”  See AEP, 564 U.S. at 429 (“[T]he 
availability . . . of a state lawsuit depends . . . on the preemptive effect of the [CAA].”).  According to Plaintiffs, the 
proper preemption analysis requires examining only whether the CAA preempts their state law claims.  The court need not 
consider first whether displaced federal common law preempts 
Plaintiffs’ state claims, and second whether displaced federal 
common law is preempted by the CAA.   
Third and finally, Defendants alternatively argue that 
the CAA preempts Plaintiffs’ claims.  Defendants say Plaintiffs 
seek damages for injuries allegedly caused by out-of-state *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
20 sources’ emissions.  Relying on N. Carolina ex rel. Cooper v. 
Tenn. Valley Auth., 615 F.3d 291, 303, 306 (4th Cir. 2010), 
Defendants contend that the “CAA preempts state-law claims 
concerning out-of-state emissions.”  Plaintiffs counter that the 
“CAA does not concern itself in any way with the acts that 
trigger liability under [its] Complaint, namely: the use of 
deception to promote the consumption of fossil fuel products.”  
They say the CAA regulates “pollution-generating emissions from both stationary sources, such as factories and powerplants, and 
moving sources, such as cars, trucks, and aircraft,”  Util. Air 
Regul. Grp. v. EPA, 573 U.S. 302, 308 (2014), not the 
traditional state tort claims for failure to warn and deceptive 
promotion. 
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
A. Motion to Dismiss 
A trial court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss is 
reviewed de novo.  The court must accept plaintiff's 
allegations as true and view them in the light most 
favorable to the plaintiff; dismissal is proper only if it 
appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of his or her claim that would entitle him 
or her to relief. 
Delapinia v. Nationstar Mortg. LLC, 150 Hawai‘ i 91, 97–98, 497 
P.3d 106, 112–13 (2021) (quoting Goran Pleho, LLC v. Lacy, 144 
Hawai‘i 224, 236, 439 P.3d 176, 188 (2019)). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
21 B. Jurisdiction 
“A trial court’s determination to exercise personal 
jurisdiction is a question of law reviewable de novo when the 
underlying facts are undisputed.”  Shaw v. N. Am. Title Co., 76 
Hawai‘i 323, 326, 876 P.2d 1291, 1294 (1994) (citing Bourassa v. 
Desrochers, 938 F.2d 1056, 1057 (9th Cir. 1991)).  Plaintiffs 
“need make only a prima facie showing that: (1) [defendant’s] 
activities in Hawai‘ i fall into a category specified by Hawai‘ i's 
long-arm statute, [Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (HRS)] § 634–35; and 
(2) the application of HRS § 634–35 comports with due process.”  
Id. at 327, 876 P.3d at 1295 (citing Cowan v. First Ins. Co. of 
Hawai‘i, 61 Haw. 644, 649, 608 P.2d 394, 399 (1980)).  When the 
circuit court relies on pleadings and affidavits, without 
conducting an “‘full-blown evidentiary hearing,’” the 
plaintiff’s “‘allegations are presumed true and all factual 
disputes are decided in [plaintiff’s] favor.’”  Id. (citations 
omitted).    C. Preemption 
Questions of federal preemption “are questions of law 
reviewable de novo under the right/wrong standard.”  Rodrigues 
v. United Pub. Workers, AFSCME Loc. 646, AFL-CIO, 135 Hawai‘ i 
316, 320, 349 P.3d 1171, 1175 (2015). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
22 IV. DISCUSSION 
We affirm the circuit court’s orders denying 
Defendant’s motions to dismiss.  Similar to Baltimore, 
Plaintiffs’ Complaint “clearly seeks to challenge the promotion 
and sale of fossil-fuel products without warning and abetted by 
a sophisticated disinformation campaign.”  31 F.4th at 233.  
While Plaintiffs’ Complaint does reference global emissions 
repeatedly, “these references only serve to tell a broader story about how the unrestrained production and use of Defendants’ 
fossil-fuel products contribute to greenhouse gas pollution.”  
Id.  Plaintiffs do “not merely allege that Defendants 
contributed to climate change and its attendant harms by producing and selling fossil-fuel products; it is the 
concealment and misrepresentation of the products’ known dangers 
- and the simultaneous promotion of their unrestrained use - 
that allegedly drove consumption, and thus greenhouse gas 
pollution, and thus climate change.”  Id. at 233-34. 
As the circuit court explained: 
The court recognizes that nuisance, trespass, and 
failure to warn vary somewhat in terms of their specific 
elements.  All of these claims, however, share the same 
basic structure of requiring that a defendant engage in 
tortious conduct that causes injury to a plaintiff.  
Moreover, as the court understands it, Plaintiffs are 
relying on the same basic theory of liability to prove each 
of their claims, namely: that Defendants’ failures to disclose and deceptive promotion increased fossil fuel 
consumption, which – in turn – exacerbated the local 
impacts of climate change in Hawaiʻ i. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
23 Because this is a traditional tort case alleging 
Defendants misled consumers and should have warned them about 
the dangers of using their products, Defendants’ arguments fail.  
Defendants’ contacts with Hawaiʻ i (selling oil and gas here) 
arise from and relate to Plaintiffs’ claims (deceptive promotion 
and failure to warn about the dangers of using the oil and gas 
sold here).  Defendants are alleged to have engaged in tortious 
acts in Hawai
ʻi and have extensive contacts in Hawaiʻ i, and it is 
therefore reasonable for Defendants to be haled into court here.  
Further, neither displaced federal common law nor the CAA 
preempts Plaintiffs’ state-law tort claims. 
A. Defendants Are Subject to Specific Jurisdiction in Hawaiʻ i 
Specific jurisdiction attaches where (1) Defendants’ 
activity falls under the State’s long-arm statute, and (2) the 
exercise of jurisdiction comports with due process.  See Shaw, 
76 Hawai‘ i at 327, 876 P.2d at 1295.  As we recently explained, 
“the two-step inquiry may in fact be redundant” because ’s 
long-arm statute “was adopted to expand the jurisdiction of the 
State’s courts to the extent permitted by the due process clause 
of the Fourteenth Amendment.”  Yamashita v. LG Chem, Ltd., 152 Hawaiʻi
Hawai‘i 19, 21-22 , 518 P.3d 1169, 1171-72 (2022), opinion after 
certified question answered, 62 F.4th 496 (9th Cir. 2023) 
(quoting Cowan, 61 Haw. at 649, 608 P.2d at 399).  But while 
“this collapsed inquiry yields the same practical result as the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
24 two-step test” and is “not improper,” “there is value in 
remembering that personal jurisdiction rests on both negative 
federal limits and positive state assertions of jurisdiction.”  
Id. at 22, 518 P.3d at 1172.  Accordingly, we engage in the two-
step test outlined in Yamashita. 
First, Defendants’ activity in Hawai‘ i falls under the 
long-arm statute.  Plaintiffs’ Complaint alleges that Defendants 
conducted fossil fuel business in Hawaiʻ i, committed torts in 
Hawaiʻi, and caused injury in 
Hawaiʻi.  See HRS § 634-35(a) 
(1)-(2)(2016)4 (persons subject to Hawaiʻ i’s personal 
jurisdiction when transact business or commit tort within 
state).  Further, Defendants did not dispute below and do not 
dispute on appeal that their in-state activity falls under the long-arm statute. 
Second, exercising specific jurisdiction over 
Defendants comports with due process.  Specific jurisdiction 
 
4  HRS § 634- 35, Hawai‘i’s long- arm statute, provides: 
 
Acts submitting to jurisdiction.  (a) Any person, whether or not 
a citizen or resident of this State, who in person or through an 
agent does any of the acts hereinafter enumerated, thereby 
submits such person, and, if an individual, the person's personal 
representative, to the jurisdiction
 of the courts of this State 
as to any cause of action arising from the doing of any of the 
acts: 
(1) The transaction of any business within this State; (2) The commission of a tortious act within this State; 
(3) The ownership, use, or possession of any real estate 
situated in this State; 
(4) Contracting to insure any person, property, or risk 
located within this State at the time of contracting. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
25 comports with due process where: (1) defendants “purposefully 
avail[ed] [themselves] of the privilege of conducting activities 
in the forum, thereby invoking the benefits and protections of 
its laws”; (2) plaintiffs’ claim “arises out of or relates to 
the defendant[s’] forum-related activities”; and (3) exercising 
specific jurisdiction “comport[s] with fair play and substantial 
justice, i.e. it must be reasonable.”  Int. of Doe, 83 
 Hawai‘i
367, 374, 926 P.2d 1290, 1297 (1996).  This three-part test is 
“commonly referred to as the minimum contacts test.”  Greys Ave. 
Partners, LLC v. Theyers, 431 F. Supp. 3d 1121, 1128 (D. Haw. 
2020).  “The minimum contacts test ‘ensures that a defendant 
will not be haled into a jurisdiction solely as a result of random, fortuitous, or attenuated contacts[.]’”  Freestream 
Aircraft (Bermuda) Ltd. v. Aero L. Grp., 905 F.3d 597, 603 (9th 
Cir. 2018) (quoting Burger King, 471 U.S. at 475). 
Defendants do not contest the first prong of the 
minimum contacts test - that they “purposefully avail[ed]” 
themselves of the forum.  See id.  Therefore, at issue is 
whether Plaintiffs’ claims “arise out of or relate to” 
Defendants’  contacts and whether the exercise of specific 
jurisdiction is reasonable.  Ford Motor, 141 S. Ct. at 1025.  Hawaiʻi
Defendants further argue that, under Ford Motor, they did not 
have “clear notice” they could be subject to specific *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
26 jurisdiction in Hawaiʻ i.  Id. at 1030 (quoting World-Wide 
Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 297 (1980).   
As set forth below, Defendants are subject to specific 
jurisdiction in Hawaiʻ i because: (1) Plaintiffs’ allegations that 
Defendants misled consumers about the dangers of using their 
products “arise out of” and “relate to” Defendants’ contacts 
with Hawaiʻ i, here Defendants’ sale and promotion of oil and gas 
in Hawai
ʻi, id. at 1025 (quoting Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. v. 
Superior Ct. of Cal., 137 S. Ct. 1773, 1786 (2017)); (2) it is 
reasonable for Hawaiʻ i courts to exercise specific jurisdiction 
over Defendants and doing so does not conflict with interstate 
federalism principles because Hawai
ʻi has a “significant 
interest[] [in] ‘providing [its] residents with a convenient 
forum for redressing injuries inflicted by out-of-state 
actors,’” see id. at 1030 (quoting Burger King, 471 U.S. at 
473); and (3) the U.S. Supreme Court has never imposed a “clear notice” requirement, despite having the opportunity to do so, 
see id. at 1025.   
Courts typically analyze jurisdictional contacts on a 
claim-by-claim basis.  See, e.g., Seiferth v. Helicopteros 
Atuneros, Inc., 472 F.3d 266, 274–75 (5th Cir. 2006).  But 
courts “need not assess contacts on a claim-by-claim basis if all claims arise from the same forum contacts.”  See, e.g., 
Moncrief Oil Int’l Inc. v. OAO Gazprom, 414 S.W.3d 142, 150-51 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
27 (Tex. 2013).  Plaintiffs bring five claims: public nuisance, 
private nuisance, strict liability failure to warn, negligent 
failure to warn, and trespass.  Plaintiffs’ claims all arise 
from the same alleged forum contacts for all Defendants – here, 
Defendants’ products were transported, traded, distributed, 
promoted, marketed, refined, manufactured, sold, and/or consumed 
in Hawai
ʻi.  Plaintiffs’ claims also all arise from the same 
alleged acts – here, Defendants’ deceptive promotion of and 
failure to warn about the dangers of using oil and gas.  
Accordingly, we examine all claims against all Defendants 
together.  See id. 
1. Plaintiffs’ claims “arise out of or relate to” 
Defendants’ in-state conduct 
Quoting Ford Motor, Defendants argue that when 
personal jurisdiction is based on “‘advertising, selling, and 
servicing,’” the alleged injuries must be “caused by the use and 
malfunction of the defendant’s products within the forum State” 
for specific jurisdiction to attach.  141 S. Ct. at 1022.  In 
short, Defendants say “the injury must occur in-state as a 
result of the use of the product in-state” for specific jurisdiction to attach.  In this case, Defendants contend that 
Hawaiʻi is a small state, with only 0.02% of the world’s 
population, that accounts for only 0.06% of the world’s carbon 
dioxide emissions per year.  Quoting Native Vill. of Kivalina v. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
28 ExxonMobil Corp., Defendants argue that “‘the undifferentiated 
nature of greenhouse gas emissions from all global sources and 
their world-wide accumulation over long periods of time’ mean 
that ‘there is no realistic possibility of tracing any 
particular alleged effect of global warming to any particular 
emissions by any specific person, entity, [or] group at any 
particular point in time.’”5  663 F. Supp. 2d 863, 876 (N.D. Cal. 
2009) (“Kivalina I”), aff’d, 696 F.3d 849 (9th Cir. 2012).  
Given the “undifferentiated nature of greenhouse gas emissions,” Defendants argue the circuit court erred in asserting specific 
jurisdiction. 
 
5  In Kivalina I, the Village of Kivalina brought a federal common 
law nuisance claim for damages against 24 oil, energy, and utility companies.  
663 F. Supp. 2d at 868.  Defendants’ Kivalina I quotations are taken from the 
court’s Article III standing analysis, not from an analysis of whether the 
court had specific jurisdiction under the minimum contacts test.  See i d. at 
881.  The court concluded that because Kivalina sought damages for greenhouse 
gas emissions, which come from “ global sources and their worldwide 
accumulation”, the “multitude of alternative culprits” meant Kivalina could 
not establish its injury was fairly traceable to Defendants.  Id. at 880-81 
(quotation marks omitted).  Accordingly, the court dismissed the case for lack of standing.  Id. at 882.  Kivalina I involved different claims than 
those before us in this case, and was disposed of on standing, not minimum 
contacts grounds – it is inapposite with respect to Defendants’ 
jurisdictional arguments.  See id. at 868, 882. 
 
But Native Vill. of Kivalina v. ExxonMobil Corp., 696 F.3d 849 
(9th Cir. 2012) (“Kivalina II”) is relevant to Defendants’ federal common law 
arguments.  There, the Ninth Circuit affirmed the trial court’s dismissal for 
lack of jurisdiction in Kivalina I, but not because Kivalina lacked standing.  
Id. at 856–58.  Instead, the Ninth Circuit determined that “ AEP extinguished 
Kivalina’ s federal common law public nuisance damage action, along with the 
federal common law public nuisance abatement actions.”  696 F.3d at 858.  Accordingly, Kivalina could not bring its federal common law nuisance claim, 
and dismissal was proper.  Id. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
29 We agree with Plaintiffs that “Defendants’ arguments 
for reversal flow[] from a single, fatally flawed premise: they 
say, in various formulations, that they can only be subject to 
personal jurisdiction if the climate change injuries Plaintiffs 
allege were caused by Defendants’ fossil fuels being burned in 
Hawaiʻi.”6  Indeed, the U.S. Supreme Court rejected an argument 
similar to Defendants’ causation argument in Ford Motor, holding 
that the “causation-only approach finds no support in this Court’s requirement of a ‘connection’ between a plaintiff’s suit 
and a defendant’s activities.”  141 S. Ct. at 1026. 
In Ford Motor, the U.S. Supreme Court consolidated two 
cases with the same underlying facts: in both, there was a car accident in the forum state involving an allegedly 
malfunctioning Ford vehicle designed, manufactured, and sold outside of the forum state.  Id. at 1023.  Ford moved to dismiss 
both cases, arguing that “the state court . . . had jurisdiction only if the company’s conduct in the State had given rise to the 
plaintiff’s claims.”  Id.  Ford argued that a “causal link” was 
required: it was only subject to specific jurisdiction in the 
forum state “if the company had designed, manufactured, or – 
 
6  Defendants’ causation arguments are better saved for the merits 
stage of this litigation where Plaintiffs must prove causation with respect 
to all of its tort claims.  Of course, we express no opinion as to the 
validity of those arguments. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
30 most likely – sold in the State the particular vehicle involved 
in the accident.”  Id.   
The Supreme Court held that for specific jurisdiction 
to attach, a defendant “must take ‘some act by which [it] 
purposefully avails itself of the privilege of conducting 
activities within the forum State.’”  Id. at 1024 (quoting 
Hanson v. Denckla, 357 U.S. 235, 253 (1958)).  “The contacts 
must be the defendant’s own choice and not ‘random, isolated, or fortuitous.’”  Id. at 1025 (quoting Keeton v. Hustler Mag., 
Inc., 465 U.S. 770, 774 (1984)).  The contacts “must show that 
the defendant deliberately ‘reached out beyond’ its home — by, 
for example, ‘exploi[ting] a market’ in the forum State or 
entering a contractual relationship centered there.”  Id. 
(quoting Walden v. Fiore, 571 U.S. 277, 285 (2014)).   
Accordingly, for specific jurisdiction to attach, a 
plaintiff’s claims “‘must arise out of or relate to defendant’s contacts’ with the forum.”  Id. (quoting Bristol-Myers, 137 S. 
Ct. at 1786).  “The first half of that standard asks about 
causation; but the back half, after the ‘or,’ contemplates that 
some relationships will support jurisdiction without a causal 
showing.”  Id. at 1026.  Ford Motor thus requires only “a 
‘connection’ between a plaintiff’s suit and a defendant’s activities” for specific jurisdiction to attach.  Id. at 1026 
(quoting Bristol-Myers, 137 S. Ct. at 1776).  “Or put just a bit *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
31 differently, there must be an affiliation between the forum and 
the underlying controversy, principally, [an] activity or an 
occurrence that takes place in the forum State and is therefore 
subject to the State’s regulation.”  Id. at 1025 (quoting 
Bristol-Myers, 137 S. Ct. at 1779) (quotation marks omitted). 
Similar to Defendants’ arguments here, the Ford Motor 
defendants contended that the link between their forum contacts and plaintiffs’ claims “must be causal in nature: Jurisdiction attaches ‘only if the defendant’s forum conduct gave rise to the 
plaintiff’s claims.’”  Id. at 1026.  But the Supreme Court made 
clear that it has “never framed the specific jurisdiction 
inquiry as always requiring proof of causation — i.e., proof 
that the plaintiff’s claim came about because of the defendant’s 
in-state conduct.”  Id.   
The Court relied on World-Wide Volkswagen, 444 U.S. at 
295, which “held that an Oklahoma court could not assert 
jurisdiction over a New York car dealer just because a car it sold later caught fire in Oklahoma.”  Ford Motor, 141 S. Ct. at 
1027.  The World-Wide Volkswagen court “contrasted the dealer’s 
position to that of two other defendants — Audi, the car’s 
manufacturer, and Volkswagen, the car’s nationwide importer 
(neither of which contested jurisdiction).”  Id.  “[I]f Audi and 
Volkswagen’s business deliberately extended into Oklahoma (among other States), then Oklahoma’s courts could hold the companies *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
32 accountable for a car’s catching fire there — even though the 
vehicle had been designed and made overseas and sold in New 
York.”  Id.  And while “technically ‘dicta,’” the 
Audi/Volkswagen scenario from World-Wide Volkswagen has become 
the “paradigm case of specific jurisdiction” and has been 
“reaffirmed” in other cases.  Id. at 1027-28.  This paradigm 
case appeared again in Daimler, where the court again “did not 
limit jurisdiction to where the car was designed, manufactured, or first sold.”  Id. at 1028. 
Turning back to the facts in Ford Motor, the Court 
explained that “[b]y every means imaginable - among them, 
billboards, TV and radio spots, print ads, and direct mail - 
Ford urges [people in the forum states] to buy its vehicles.”  
Id.  Ford dealers regularly maintained and repaired Ford cars, 
and Ford distributed replacement parts throughout both states.  Id.  Ford “systematically served a market in [the forum states] 
for the very vehicles that the plaintiffs allege malfunctioned 
and injured them in those States.”  Id.  Accordingly, “there is 
a strong ‘relationship among the defendant, the forum, and the litigation’ – the ‘essential foundation’ of specific 
jurisdiction.”  Id.  (quoting Helicopteros Nacionales de 
Colombia, S.A. v. Hall, 466 U.S. 408, 414 (1984)).   
The same is true here.  Defendants do not contest that 
they purposefully availed themselves of the rights and *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
33 privileges of conducting extensive business in Hawaiʻ i.  Indeed, 
the Complaint alleges that each Defendant conducted substantial 
business in Hawaiʻ i.  Each defendant is alleged to have 
transported, traded, distributed, promoted, marketed, refined, manufactured, sold, and/or consumed oil and gas in Hawai
ʻi.  
Plaintiffs also allege that Defendants failed to warn consumers in Hawaiʻ i about the dangers of using the oil and gas Defendants 
sold in the state and that Defendants engaged in a deceptive 
marketing campaign to conceal, deny, and discredit efforts to 
make those dangers known to the public.  Plaintiffs further 
allege that Defendants’ tortious failure to warn and deceptive 
promotion caused extensive injuries in Hawaiʻ i, including:  
injury or destruction of City - or [Honolulu Board of Water 
Supply] - owned or operated facilities and property deemed 
critical for operations, utility services, and risk 
management, as well as other assets that are essential to community health, safety, and well- being; increased 
planning and preparation costs for community adaptation and resiliency to global warming’s effects; decreased tax 
revenue due to impacts on the local tourism - and ocean-
based economy; increased costs associated with public 
health impacts; and others. 
Just as in Ford Motor, “there is a strong 
‘relationship among the defendant, the forum, and the 
litigation’ – the ‘essential foundation’ of specific jurisdiction.”  See id.  (quoting Helicopteros, 466 U.S. at 
414).  Defendants sold and marketed oil and gas in , 
availed themselves of Hawaiʻ i markets and laws, and the at-issue 
litigation alleges tortious acts and damages in  that HawaiʻiHawaiʻi*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
34 “arise out of” or “relate to” Defendants Hawaiʻ i contacts, i.e., 
oil and gas business conducted in the state.  See id. at 1026.  
Indeed, the connection between Defendants, , and this 
litigation is more closely intertwined than that of Ford Motor.    Hawaiʻi
See id. at 1028.  Unlike in Ford Motor, here, the alleged 
injury-causing products (oil and gas) were marketed and sold in 
the forum state.  See id.  Therefore, Defendants are subject to 
specific jurisdiction because there is a clear and unambiguous 
“affiliation between the forum and the underlying controversy.”  
See id. (quoting Bristol-Myers, 137 S. Ct. at 1779) (quotation 
marks omitted). 
Defendants rely on Martins v. Bridgestone Am. Tire 
Ops., LLC, 266 A.3d 753, 759, 761 (R.I. 2022).  Martins is 
inapposite.  In Martins, a Rhode Island resident drove a truck 
from Massachusetts to Connecticut, and struck a tree in 
Connecticut when an allegedly defective tire made in and 
installed in Tennessee failed.  Id. at 756.  The Rhode Island 
resident was severely injured and was taken to and later died in Rhode Island.  Id.  The only connection between Rhode Island 
(the forum state) and the litigation was that the decedent was a Rhode Island resident who passed away in Rhode Island.  Id. at 
761.  The Rhode Island Supreme Court did not endorse the 
causation test put forth by Defendants here – the court instead *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
35 determined that the plaintiffs’ claims did not arise out of or 
relate to the tire companies’ Rhode Island contacts.  Id. 
The Supreme Court has “endorse[d] an ‘effects’ test of 
jurisdiction in situations involving tortious acts.”  Shaw, 76 
Hawaiʻi at 330, 876 P.2d at 1298 (quoting Calder v. Jones, 465 
U.S. 783, 789 (1984)).  “Under this theory, asserting 
jurisdiction against nonresident defendants who commit torts 
directed at a forum state with the intention of causing in-state 
‘effects’ satisfies due process.”  Id.  The effects test inquiry 
“focuses on conduct that takes place outside the forum state and 
that has effects inside the forum state.”  Freestream Aircraft, 
905 F.3d at 604.  Generally, “[t]he commission of an intentional 
tort in a state is a purposeful act that will satisfy the first 
two requirements [of the minimum contacts test].”  Id. at 603 
(quoting Paccar Int’l, Inc. v. Com. Bank of Kuwait, S.A.K., 757 
F.2d 1058, 1064 (9th Cir. 1985)).  Therefore, where a 
nonresident defendant is alleged to have committed a tort 
directed at the forum state, the effects test is an alternate 
due process theory capable of establishing that: (1) the defendant purposefully availed themselves of the forum; and (2) 
the plaintiff’s claim arises out of or relates to the 
defendant’s forum contacts.  Id. at 1062.   
Plaintiffs argues that “the effects test . . . is 
satisfied here” because “the Complaint alleges that the targets *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
36 of Defendants’ deceptive marketing and failure to warn included 
audiences and consumers in Hawaiʻ i, and those misrepresentations 
and omissions, directed at least in part to Hawaiʻ i, contributed 
to Plaintiff’s injuries.”  Defendants counter that Plaintiffs 
failed to identify in their Complaint “a single deceptive 
message that Defendants allegedly made in or directed at 
Hawaiʻi,” which “defeats personal jurisdiction under the effects 
test.” 
The circuit court did not engage in an “effects” test 
analysis, and the parties’ briefs almost exclusively address the 
traditional “minimum contacts” test.  Because Defendants are 
subject to specific jurisdiction under the minimum contacts 
test, see infra Section IV(A)(1), it is not necessary to engage 
in an effects test analysis as to the first two prongs of the due process inquiry.  See Louis Vuitton Malletier, S.A. v. 
Mosseri, 736 F.3d 1339, 1357 (11th Cir. 2013) (determining that 
because the plaintiff had met the “purposeful availment” prong 
of the “minimum contacts” test, the court “need not analyze the ‘effects test’ here”). 
Relatedly, Defendants argue that, under Shaw, 
Plaintiffs’ claims “bear at most an ‘incidental’ . . . 
relationship to Defendants’ in-state activities and thus lack 
the requisite close connection found in Ford Motor that 
permitted exercise of specific jurisdiction.”  In Shaw, the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
37 court held that for the purposes of the long-arm statute’s 
“transacting business” subsection, see HRS § 634-35(a)(1), the 
alleged Hawaiʻ i business conduct (the signing of escrow 
documents) was “merely incidental” to business at the crux of 
the case (the escrow transaction, which happened in California).  
Shaw, 76 Hawaiʻ i at 328, 876 P.2d at 1296.  Thus, the plaintiff 
failed to sufficiently allege, for the purposes of the long-arm statute, that the defendant “transact[ed] business” in .  
Id.   Hawaiʻi
The Court in Shaw held that the plaintiff sufficiently 
alleged under another subsection of the long-arm statute that 
the defendant committed a “tortious act” in Hawaiʻ i, see HRS 
§ 634-35(a)(2), and that due process was satisfied under the “effects” test.  Shaw, 76 Hawaiʻ i at 329-330, 332, 876 P.2d at 
1297-98, 1300.  Notably, Shaw’s “merely incidental” holding did 
not affect the court’s due process analysis – the defendant was 
still subject to specific jurisdiction.  See Shaw, 76 Hawaiʻ i at 
328, 876 P.2d at 1296.  Here, Defendants’ in-state conduct is 
anything but “merely incidental” to Plaintiffs’ claims.  See id.   
2. Exercising specific jurisdiction is reasonable and 
does not “conflict with federalism principles” 
The exercise of specific jurisdiction must “comport 
with fair play and substantial justice, i.e. it must be 
reasonable.”  Doe, 83 Hawai‘ i at 374, 926 P.2d at 1297.  In Doe, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
38 this court adopted the Ninth Circuit’s seven-factor test for 
determining whether the exercise of jurisdiction is reasonable, 
which is as follows: 
(1) the extent of the defendants’ purposeful 
interjection into the forum state's affairs; (2) the burden 
on the defendant of defending in the forum; (3) the extent 
of any conflict with the sovereignty of the defendants’ 
state; (4) the forum state’ s interest in adjudicating the 
dispute; (5) concerns of judicial efficiency; (6) the significance of the forum to the plaintiff's interest in relief; and (7) the existence of alternative fora. 
Id. (citing Caruth v. Int’l Psychoanalytical Ass’n, 59 F.3d 126, 
127 (9th Cir. 1995)).  
“None of the factors is solely dispositive; all seven 
are weighed in the factual circumstances in which they arise.
”  
Id. (citation omitted).  And, as here, “where a defendant who 
purposefully has directed [their] activities at forum residents 
seeks to defeat jurisdiction, [they] must present a compelling 
case that the presence of some other considerations would render 
jurisdiction unreasonable.”  Burger King, 471 U.S. at 477 
(emphasis added).  Therefore, “we begin with a presumption of 
reasonableness.”  Caruth, 59 F.3d at 128.   
Defendants do not engage with the Doe factors, but 
appear to argue that factors three and four weigh against 
determining that the exercise of jurisdiction over Defendants is 
“reasonable.”  Doe, 83 Hawai‘ i at 374, 926 P.2d at 1297.  
Defendants say that “exercising personal jurisdiction here would 
be ‘[un]reasonable, in the context of our federal system of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
39 government.’”  Quoting Ford Motor, 141 S. Ct. at 1024)(brackets 
in original).  According to Defendants, permitting specific 
jurisdiction in this context would subject companies to climate 
change suits in every court in the country.  And if Plaintiffs’ 
theory were adopted abroad, “American companies could be sued on 
climate change-related claims in courts around the world.”  
According to Defendants, “[d]ue process does not countenance 
that result.”  We review each of the Doe factors in turn, and 
conclude that they weigh in favor of exercising specific 
jurisdiction over Defendants because doing so is “reasonable.”  
Id.  Defendants have not “present[ed] a compelling case” that 
the exercise of specific jurisdiction here would be unreasonable.  See Burger King, 471 U.S. at 477. 
The first factor examines “the extent of the 
defendants’ purposeful interjection into the forum state’s 
affairs.”  Doe, 83 Hawai‘ i at 374, 926 P.2d at 1297.  Defendants 
are alleged to have engaged in repeated, purposeful business in Hawaiʻi.  Their products were transported, traded, distributed, 
promoted, marketed, refined, manufactured, sold, and/or consumed in Hawaiʻ i. 
The second factor examines “the burden on the 
defendant of defending in the forum.”  Doe, 83 
Hawai‘i at 374, 
926 P.2d at 1297.  Defendants are multi-national oil and gas 
corporations with billions in annual revenues.  The burden on *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
40 Defendants in defending a suit in a state where Defendants 
conduct extensive oil and gas business is slight. 
The third factor examines “the extent of any conflict 
with the sovereignty of the defendants’ [home] state.”  Id.  
Defendants’ primary argument is that Plaintiffs’ “claims [] implicate the interests of numerous other States and nations, 
many of which do not share the ‘substantive social policies’ 
Plaintiffs seek to advance - such as curbing energy production and the use of fossil fuels or allocating the downstream costs 
of consumer use to the energy companies to bear directly.”  But 
this lawsuit does not seek to regulate emissions or curb energy 
production – it seeks to hold Defendants accountable for 
allegedly (1) failing to warn about the dangers of their fossil 
fuel products and (2) deceptively promoting those products.  
Holding Defendants accountable for their Hawaiʻ i torts implicates 
the sovereignty of no state other than 
Hawaiʻi.  And, even if 
this case did involve “substantive social policies” not advanced 
by other states, “the ‘fundamental substantive social policies’ 
of another State may be accommodated through application of the 
forum’s choice-of-law rules.”  Burger King, 471 U.S. at 477.   
Relying on Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. v. Superior Ct. of 
Cal., 137 S. Ct. at 1780, Defendants further contend that 
“asserting personal jurisdiction over these out-of-state 
Defendants for global climate change would impermissibly *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
41 interfere with the power of Defendants’ home States (or nations) 
over their own corporate citizens and could punish commercial 
conduct that occurred beyond the forum State’s borders.”  
However, 
Defendants’ reliance on Bristol-Myers is misplaced.   
The U.S. Supreme Court in Bristol-Myers addressed 
whether a claim arises out of or relates to a defendant’s 
contacts – the second prong of the minimum contacts test.  Id. 
at 1781.  The Court did not hold that specific jurisdiction was 
lacking because doing so would be unreasonable.  See id.  
Instead, the Court determined that specific jurisdiction was 
improper because there was no “connection between the forum and 
the specific claims at issue.”  See id.   
The fourth factor examines “the forum state’s interest 
in adjudicating the dispute.”  Doe, 83 Hawai‘ i at 374, 926 P.2d 
at 1297.  Defendants argue that “Hawaiʻ i’s interests in this suit 
. . . are no greater than other States,’” and later state that 
Hawai
ʻi’s interest is “slight.”  However, we agree with 
Plaintiffs that Hawaiʻ i “has a strong interest in remedying local 
harms related to corporate misconduct.” 
The fifth factor examines the “concerns of judicial 
efficiency.”  Id.  Because this factor is not relevant here, and 
Defendants make no arguments to the contrary, we do not address 
it. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
42 The sixth factor examines “the significance of the 
forum to the plaintiff’s interest in relief.”  Id.  Again, 
Plaintiffs seeks monetary damages for injuries allegedly 
suffered in Hawaiʻ i as a result of Defendants’ alleged tortious 
conduct in Hawaiʻ i. 
The seventh factor examines the “existence of 
alternate fora.”  Id.  Defendants have not shown that there is 
an alternate forum that is better situated than Hawaiʻ i to decide 
this dispute. 
In sum, the Doe factors weigh heavily in favor of 
determining it is reasonable to exercise specific jurisdiction 
over Defendants.  See id.  Further, given that Defendants 
purposefully availed themselves of Hawaiʻ i markets, Defendants 
have failed to overcome the presumption that the exercise of 
specific jurisdiction is reasonable.  See Burger King, 471 U.S. 
at 477, Caruth, 59 F.3d at 128. 
3. The Due Process Clause does not require that 
Defendants have “clear notice” they could be subject 
to specific jurisdiction in Hawaiʻ i 
The exercise of specific jurisdiction is governed by 
the three-part minimum contacts test: jurisdiction is proper 
where: (1) the defendant purposefully avails itself of the 
forum; (2) the defendant’s contacts “arise out of or relate to” 
the plaintiff’s claim; and (3) the exercise of specific 
jurisdiction is reasonable.  Doe, 83 Hawai‘ i at 374, 926 P.2d at *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
43 1297.  Where the minimum contacts test is met, the exercise of 
specific jurisdiction comports with due process.  Id.   
Defendants argue that in addition to the minimum 
contacts test, the Fourteenth Amendment’s “Due Process Clause 
requires a defendant’s activities in the forum to place it on 
‘clear notice’ that it is susceptible to a lawsuit in that State 
for the claims asserted by a plaintiff,” Ford Motor, 141 S. Ct. 
at 1025, 1030.  (Emphasis added.)  This is wrong.  The minimum 
contacts test “provides defendants with ‘fair warning’” or, as 
the Supreme Court explained, “knowledge that ‘a particular activity may subject [it] to the jurisdiction of a foreign 
sovereign.”  Id. at 1025 (emphasis added) (quoting Burger King, 
471 U.S. at 472) (brackets in original).  “[F]air warning” is not an additional requirement for the exercise of specific 
jurisdiction.  Rather, “fair warning” is what due process 
“provides.”  If the minimum contacts test is met, a defendant 
has fair warning; and if it has fair warning, then due process is satisfied. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has not held that “clear 
notice” is a separate requirement (on top of the minimum 
contacts test) necessary for the exercise of specific 
jurisdiction.  In Ford Motor, the Court used the phrase “clear 
notice” three times, once in a parenthetical and twice when summarizing the holdings in World-Wide Volkswagen.  Id. at 1025, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
44 1027, 1030.  At no point did the Court in Ford Motor hold that 
“clear notice” was required for the exercise of specific 
jurisdiction.  Id.  Rather, the Supreme Court used the phrase 
“clear notice” in Ford Motor and other cases like World-Wide 
Volkswagen to describe situations where a defendant’s contacts 
were so pervasive that the defendant had more than “fair 
warning” they could be subject to specific jurisdiction in a 
forum.  Id. at 1025, 1030; see also World-Wide Volkswagen, 444 
U.S. at 297. 
In sum, if a defendant has purposefully availed 
themselves of a forum, the claim arises from or relates to those 
contacts with the forum, and the exercise of jurisdiction is 
reasonable, the defendant has “fair warning” they could be 
subject to specific jurisdiction in that forum.  See id. at 
1025.  The minimum contacts test (and the “fair warning” it provides) allows a defendant to “‘structure [its] primary 
conduct’ to lessen or avoid exposure to a given State’s courts.”  Id. (quoting World-Wide Volkswagen, 444 U.S. at 297 (brackets in 
original)).  Here, the exercise of specific jurisdiction comports with due process because: (1) Defendants purposefully 
availed themselves of the benefits and protections of Hawaiʻ i 
laws; (2) Plaintiffs’ claims “arise out of or relate to” Defendants’ Hawaiʻ i contacts; and (3) the exercise of specific *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
45 jurisdiction is reasonable.  Defendants had – at a minimum – 
“fair warning” they could be subject to suit in Hawaiʻ i.  See id.   
B. Federal Common Law Does Not Preempt Plaintiffs’ Claims 
Defendants next argue that “[f]ederal law exclusively 
governs claims seeking relief for injuries allegedly caused by 
interstate and international emissions.”  They say that the 
“basic scheme of the [federal] Constitution . . . demands that 
federal common law,” AEP, 564 U.S. at 421 (quotation marks 
omitted), govern any dispute involving “air and water in their ambient or interstate aspects,” Illinois v. City of Milwaukee, 
406 U.S. 91, 103 (1972) (“Milwaukee I”).  Defendants’ argument 
ignores well-settled law that “the federal common law of nuisance that formerly governed transboundary pollution suits no 
longer exists due to Congress’s displacement of that law through 
the CAA.”  Boulder, 25 F.4th at 1260; see also AEP, 564 U.S. at 
421.   
And despite its displacement, Defendants also argue 
that federal common law plays a role in our preemption analysis.  They say that we should first look to whether displaced federal common law preempts Plaintiffs’ claims, and then to whether the 
CAA displaced federal common law.  We disagree.  “When a federal 
statute displaces federal common law, the federal common law 
ceases to exist.”  Baltimore, 31 F.4th at 205.  And as the 
Supreme Court explained in AEP, once federal common law is *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
46 displaced, “the availability vel non of a state lawsuit 
depends inter alia on the preemptive effect of the federal Act,” 
not displaced federal common law.  564 U.S. at 429.  
Accordingly, our preemption analysis requires analyzing the 
preemptive effect of only the CAA – and, it has none in this 
context.  See supra Section IV(C).  
Defendants’ federal common law preemption arguments 
also fail because Plaintiffs’ claims do not seek to regulate 
emissions.  The federal common law cited by Defendants formerly 
governed transboundary pollution abatement and damages suits, 
not the tortious marketing and failure to warn claims brought by 
Plaintiffs.  We agree with the circuit court: 
Plaintiffs’ framing of their claims in this case is more 
accurate.  The tort causes of action are well recognized.  
They are tethered to existing well- known elements including 
duty, breach of duty, causation, and limits on actual 
damages caused by the alleged wrongs.  As this court 
understands it, Plaintiffs do not ask for damages for all 
effects of climate change; rather, they seek damages only for the effects of climate change allegedly caused by 
Defendants’ breach of Hawaiʻ i law regarding failures to 
disclose, failures to warn, and deceptive promotion 
(without deciding the issue, presumably by applying 
Hawaiʻi’s substantial factor test, see, e.g., Estate of Frey 
v. Mastroianni, 146 Hawaiʻ i 540, 550 (2020)).  Plaintiffs do 
not ask this court to limit, cap, or enjoin the production 
and sale of fossil fuels.  Defendants’ liability in this 
case, if any, results from alleged tortious conduct, and not from lawful conduct in producing and selling fossil 
fuels. 
Simply put, Plaintiffs’ claims do not seek to regulate 
emissions.  Instead, Plaintiffs’ Complaint “clearly seeks to 
challenge the promotion and sale of fossil-fuel products without 
warning and abetted by a sophisticated disinformation campaign.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
47 Baltimore, 31 F.4th at 233.  Plaintiffs’ references to emissions 
in its Complaint “only serve to tell a broader story about how 
the unrestrained production and use of Defendants’ fossil-fuel 
products contribute to greenhouse gas pollution.”  Id. 
1. The federal common law governing interstate pollution 
abatement and damages suits was displaced by the CAA   
Because the CAA displaced federal common law, we 
cannot accept Defendants' argument that the federal common law 
governs here.  First, “AEP extinguished [] federal common law 
public nuisance damage action[s], along with the federal common 
law public nuisance abatement actions.”  Native Vill. of 
Kivalina v. ExxonMobil Corp., 696 F.3d 849, 857 (9th Cir. 2012) 
(“Kivalina II”).  Federal appellate courts have recently 
reaffirmed that the federal common law once governing interstate pollution damages and abatement suits was displaced.
7  In Rhode 
Island v. Shell Oil Prod. Co., 35 F.4th 44 (1st Cir. 2022), 
cert. denied sub nom. Shell Oil Prod. Co. v. Rhode Island, 143 
S. Ct. 1796 (2023), the First Circuit held that “[t]he Clean 
Water Act and the [CAA] . . . have statutorily displaced any 
federal common law that previously existed,” and as such, the 
 
7  These courts did so in the context of removal jurisdiction.  All 
held that federal common law did not govern the plaintiffs’ claims, and as 
such, federal courts did not have jurisdiction over the at- issue state law 
claims.  But, regardless of context, all three cases directly addressed 
whether federal common law governs state common law claims based on failure 
to warn and deceptive promotion theories.  And all three courts determined 
that federal common law had been displaced. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
48 court could not “rule that any federal common law controls Rhode 
Island’s claims.”  Id. at 55 (quotation marks omitted).   
In Baltimore, the Fourth Circuit held that federal 
common law did not control the city of “Baltimore’s state-law 
claims because federal common law in this area cease[d] to exist 
due to statutory displacement, Baltimore [did] not invoke[] the 
federal statute displacing federal common law, and . . . the CAA 
does not completely preempt Baltimore’s claims.”  31 F.4th at 204.  And in Boulder, the Tenth Circuit held that “the federal 
common law of nuisance that formerly governed transboundary pollution suits no longer exists due to Congress’s displacement 
of that law through the CAA.”  25 F.4th at 1260.  Indeed, Defendants even concede that “[t]he Supreme Court, the Ninth 
Circuit, and the Second Circuit have all held that a tort-law 
claim for greenhouse gas emissions arising under federal common 
law fails as a matter of law under [Federal Rules of Civil 
Procedure Rule] 12(b)(6) because Congress displaced such claims when it established a comprehensive regulatory scheme for 
emissions via the CAA.”  (Emphasis added.) 
Nonetheless, Defendants cite to three cases (Milwaukee 
I, Oakland I, and City of New York) that they argue support the 
proposition that federal common law governs Plaintiffs’ claims.  These cases have either been overturned (Milwaukee I and Oakland 
I) or rely on flawed reasoning (City of New York). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
49 In Milwaukee I, the state of Illinois brought an 
original action against the state of Wisconsin in the Supreme 
Court for Wisconsin’s “pollution . . . of Lake Michigan, a body 
of interstate water.”8  Milwaukee I, 406 U.S. at 93.  Illinois 
alleged Wisconsin discharged “200 million gallons of raw or inadequately treated sewage and other waste materials” daily 
into Lake Michigan.  Id.  The Supreme Court explained that 
“where there is an overriding federal interest in the need for a 
uniform rule of decision or where the controversy touches basic 
interests of federalism, we have fashioned federal common law.”  
Id. at 105 n.6.  The Court concluded that “[c]ertainly these 
same demands for applying federal law are present in the pollution of a body of water such as Lake Michigan,” and that 
federal law governs disputes involving “air and water in their 
ambient or interstate aspects.”  Id. at 103, 105 n.6.   
Accordingly, the Court held that the “question of 
apportionment of interstate waters is a question of ‘federal common law’ upon which state statutes or decisions are not 
conclusive.”  Id. at 105.  Notably, the Court acknowledged that 
the federal common law it created might one day be superseded by statute, explaining: “new federal laws and new federal 
 
8  The Court ultimately determined that “original jurisdiction [was] 
not mandatory, ” declined to exercise original jurisdiction, and remitted the 
case to the “appropriate district court whose powers are adequate to resolve 
the issues.”  Milwaukee I, 406 U.S. at 98, 108. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
50 regulations may in time preempt the field of federal common law 
of nuisance.”  Id. at 107. 
After the Court remitted Milwaukee I to the district 
court to determine the outcome of the case under federal common 
law, Congress “enacted the Federal Water Pollution Control 
Amendments of 1972 [(1972 FWPCA)].”  City of Milwaukee v. 
Illinois, 451 U.S. 304, 307 (1981) (“Milwaukee II”).  On appeal 
in Milwaukee II, the Court held that in enacting the 1972 FWPCA, 
which governed sewage discharges into interstate bodies of 
water, Congress displaced the federal common law created in 
Milwaukee I.  The Court concluded: 
Congress has not left the formulation of appropriate 
federal standards to the courts through application of 
often vague and indeterminate nuisance concepts and maxims of equity jurisprudence, but rather has occupied the field 
through the establishment of a comprehensive regulatory 
program supervised by an expert administrative agency. 
[ . . . ] 
The establishment of such a self- consciously 
comprehensive program by Congress, which certainly did not 
exist when [ Milwaukee I] was decided, strongly suggests 
that there is no room for courts to attempt to improve on that program with federal common law. 
Milwaukee II, 451 U.S. at 317, 319. 
Accordingly, the Court determined that “no federal 
common-law remedy was available,” thus overruling Milwaukee I.  
Id. at 332.  That holding was reaffirmed in AEP when the Supreme *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
51 Court determined that the federal common law claims permitted by 
Milwaukee I were displaced by the CAA.9  AEP, 546 U.S. at 424.   
Defendants also rely on City of Oakland v. BP PLC, 325 
F. Supp. 3d 1017, 1021–22 (N.D. Cal. 2018) (“Oakland I”), 
vacated and remanded sub nom. City of Oakland v. BP PLC, 960 
F.3d 570 (9th Cir. 2020), opinion amended and superseded on 
denial of reh’g, 969 F.3d 895 (9th Cir. 2020).  In Oakland I, 
the cities of Oakland and San Francisco brought suit against five large oil and gas companies
10 in state court alleging one 
count of nuisance on the same theory that Plaintiffs raises 
 
9  Defendants also cite to Illinois v. City of Milwaukee, 731 F.2d 
403, 411 (7th Cir. 1984) (“Milwaukee III”) for the proposition that the 
displacement of “one form of federal law (common law) by another (federal 
statute) does not somehow breathe life into nonexistent state law.”  On 
remand from Milwaukee II, Illinois argued that “Illinois common law 
controlled this case until Milwaukee I judicially promulgated federal common 
law, and that since the 1972 FWPCA dissipated federal common law, Illinois law must again control.”  Id. at 406.  The Seventh Circuit disagreed, and 
held that, “[g]iven the logic of Milwaukee I and Milwaukee II, we think 
federal law must govern in this situation except to the extent that the 1972 
FWPCA (the governing federal law created by Congress) authorizes resort to state law.”  Id. at 411.  Respectfully, the Seventh Circuit’s approach in 
Milwaukee III ignores the presumption that state laws and claims are not 
preempted absent “ a clear and manifest purpose of Congress” to do so.  See 
Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., 331 U.S. 218, 230 (1947) (“[W]e start with 
the assumption that the historic police powers of the States were not to be superseded by the Federal Act unless that was the clear and manifest purpose 
of Congress.”). 
 
Not surprisingly, the Supreme Court implicitly overruled the 
Seventh Circuit’s Milwaukee III  decision in 
AEP when the Court held that, 
after federal common is displaced, “the availability vel non of a state 
lawsuit depends inter alia on the preemptive effect of the federal Act.”  564 
U.S. at 429.  Thus, contrary to Milwaukee III and Defendants’ argument, state 
law that was previously preempted by federal common law does have new life 
when the federal common law is displaced.  See id. 
 
10  The five defendants in Oakland I (Chevron Corporation, Exxon 
Mobil Corporation, BP p.l.c., Royal Dutch Shell plc, and ConocoPhillips) are 
also defendants in this case.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
52 here.  Id. at 1021-22.  The case was removed to federal court, 
and Oakland and San Francisco then amended their complaint to 
add a “separate claim for public nuisance under federal common 
law.”  Id.  The district court determined that AEP and Kivalina 
II held that the CAA displaced federal common law claims for 
emissions abatement and damages.  Id. at 1024.  Accordingly, the 
district court dismissed Oakland and San Francisco’s federal common law claim and the state law nuisance claim because “nuisance claims must stand or fall under federal common law.”  
Id. at 1028.   
On appeal, the Ninth Circuit reversed the federal 
district court, determining that Oakland and San Francisco only 
added the federal common law claim “to conform” to an earlier 
district court ruling.  City of Oakland v. BP PLC, 969 F.3d 895, 
909 (9th Cir. 2020) (“Oakland II”).  The Ninth Circuit also 
determined that the state law nuisance claim should not have 
been dismissed because “it is not clear that the claim requires an interpretation or application of federal law at all, because 
the Supreme Court has not yet determined [(since AEP displaced 
the old federal common law)] that there is a [new] federal common law of public nuisance relating to interstate pollution.”  
Id. at 906.  Indeed, in Kivalina II, the Ninth Circuit held just 
that – concluding that federal common law suits (not state common law suits) “aimed at imposing liability on energy *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
53 producers for ‘acting in concert to create, contribute to, and 
maintain global warming’ and ‘conspiring to mislead the public 
about the science of global warming,’ [were] displaced by the 
[CCA].”  Id. (quoting Kivalina II, 696 F.3d at 854) (emphasis 
added).  Therefore, the trial court was incorrect when it 
determined that displaced federal common law required the 
dismissal of Oakland and San Francisco’s state common law claim 
because it was preempted.  Id.  Since displaced federal common 
law did not provide a federal jurisdictional hook, the Ninth 
Circuit remanded the case to the federal district court to 
determine whether there was an alternate basis for federal 
jurisdiction with respect to only the state common law claim.  
Id. at 911. 
Further, the Second Circuit in City of New York also 
held that the “[CAA] displace[d] federal common law claims 
concerned with domestic greenhouse gas emissions.”  993 F.3d at 
95.  Thus, Defendants’ best case – City of New York – goes 
against them in part by holding that the very federal common law 
they rely on is no longer good law.  Indeed, City of New York is 
consistent with AEP, Rhode Island, Baltimore, Boulder, Kivalina 
II, and Oakland II in holding that the federal common law once 
governing interstate pollution suits was displaced by the CAA.  Accordingly, Defendants’ argument that federal common law 
preempts Plaintiffs’ claims fails, because Defendants do not *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
54 point to any case recognizing a federal common law action for 
interstate pollution suits that has not been displaced by the 
CAA. 
2. Federal common law does not retain preemptive effect 
after it is displaced 
Defendants acknowledge that the federal common law 
that once governed interstate pollution damages and abatement 
suits was displaced by the CAA.  Nonetheless, Defendants argue 
that despite displacement, federal common law still lives.
  
Defendants say that federal common law still lives but only with 
enough power to preempt state common law claims “involving 
interstate air pollution.”  According to Defendants, federal common law is both dead and alive – it is dead in that the CAA 
has displaced it, but alive in that it still operates with 
enough force to preempt Plaintiffs’ state law claims. 
Under Defendants’ preemption theory, this court should 
first look to whether the federal common law governing 
interstate pollution damages and abatement claims preempts Plaintiffs’ state common law claims.  After determining that 
federal common law does in fact preempt Plaintiffs’ state common 
law claims, Defendants say this court should then look to 
whether the CAA displaced federal common law claims (and 
Defendants say it did).  Indeed, were this court to adopt 
Defendants’ two-step approach, Plaintiffs would have no viable *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
55 cause of action under state or federal law.  Federal common law 
would preempt state common law, and in turn, the CAA would 
displace federal common law.  No common law cause of action 
would be available.  Further, no federal statutory cause of 
action would be available because the CAA does not contain one 
available to Plaintiffs, see 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq., and any 
state statutory cause of action would be preempted by federal common law, which, in turn, would be displaced by the CAA.   
We decline to follow Defendants’ two-step approach 
because 
it engages in backwards reasoning.  This court would 
first need to determine whether the federal common law governing 
interstate pollution suits is still good law before determining 
whether it can preempt state law claims.  And, as we have explained above, the federal common law governing interstate 
pollution suits was displaced by the CAA and “no longer exists.”  
Boulder, 25 F.4th at 1260; see also Milwaukee II, 451 U.S. at 
314 (“[W]hen Congress addresses a question previously governed 
by a decision rested on federal common law the need for such an 
unusual exercise of lawmaking by federal courts disappears.”).   
Defendants’ approach cannot be reconciled with AEP.  
In AEP, two groups of plaintiffs, including eight States, 
brought suit against the Tennessee Valley Authority and four private companies who were allegedly responsible for 10% of 
global emissions.  564 U.S. at 418.  The plaintiffs brought *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
56 federal common law and state law nuisance claims, and “sought 
injunctive relief requiring each defendant to cap its carbon 
dioxide emissions and then reduce them by a specified percentage 
each year for at least a decade.”  564 U.S. at 419 (quotation 
marks omitted).  The Supreme Court held that the CAA displaced 
only federal common law governing interstate emissions.  Id. at 
428-29.  Having determined that federal common law was displaced, the Court concluded that “the availability vel non of 
a state lawsuit depends inter alia on the preemptive effect of 
the [CAA].”  Id. at 429.  And since the parties had not briefed 
whether the CAA preempted “the availability of a claim under 
state nuisance law,” the Court left “the matter open for 
consideration on remand.”  Id. 
In AEP, with regard to the plaintiffs’ state common 
law nuisance claims, the relevant inquiry was not: (1) whether 
federal common law preempted the remaining state law claims, and if so, (2) whether the CAA displaced the federal common law.  Id.  Instead, AEP made clear that whether the state law nuisance 
claims were preempted depended only on an analysis of the CAA 
because “‘when Congress addresses a question previously governed 
by a decision rested on federal common law, . . . the need for 
such an unusual exercise of law-making by federal courts 
disappears.’”  AEP, 564 U.S. at 423 (quoting Milwaukee II, 451 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
57 U.S. at 314). 11  The Supreme Court did not analyze the federal 
common law’s preemptive effect because it was displaced by the 
CAA.  See id.  And if federal common law retained preemptive 
effect after displacement, the Court would have instructed the trial court on remand to examine whether displaced federal 
common law preempted the state law claims.  See id. 
Simply put, displaced federal common law plays no part 
in this court’s preemption analysis.  Once federal common law is displaced, the federal courts’ task is to “interpret and apply 
statutory law[.]”  Nw. Airlines, Inc. v. Transp. Workers Union 
of Am., AFL-CIO, 451 U.S. 77, 95 n.34 (1981) (emphasis added).  
Therefore, “[a]s instructed in AEP and supported by [Kivalina 
II], we look to the federal act that displaced the federal 
common law to determine whether the state claims are preempted.”  
Boulder, 25 F.4th at 1261.  The correct preemption analysis 
requires an examination only of the CAA’s preemptive effect 
because “AEP extinguished [] federal common law public nuisance 
damage action[s], along with the federal common law public 
 
11 There is a “significant distinction between the statutory 
displacement of federal common law and the ordinary preemption of a state 
law.”  Baltimore, 31 F.4th at 205.  Federal common law is disfavored because 
“it is primarily the office of Congress, not the federal courts, to prescribe 
national policy in areas of special federal interest.”  AEP, 564 U.S. at 423-
24.  Thus, “[l]egislative displacement of federal common law does not require the ‘same sort of evidence of a clear and manifest [congressional] purpose’ 
demanded for preemption of state law.”  Id. at 423.  Instead, “[t]he test for 
whether congressional legislation excludes the declaration of federal common law is simply whether the statute ‘speak[s] directly to [the] question’ at 
issue.”  Id. at 424.  When federal common law is displaced, it “no longer 
exists.”  Boulder, 25 F.4th at 1260. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
58 nuisance abatement actions.”  Kivalina II, 696 F.3d at 857; see 
also id. at 866 (Pro, J., concurring) (“Once federal common law 
is displaced, state nuisance law becomes an available option to 
the extent it is not preempted by federal law.”). 
Defendants primarily rely on City of New York to argue 
that their two-step preemption analysis is the correct one.  In 
that case, New York City filed a state-law tort suit in federal 
court “against five oil companies to recover damages caused by those companies’ admittedly legal commercial conduct in 
producing and selling fossil fuels around the world.”  993 F.3d 
at 86.  At issue was whether New York City’s claims were 
preempted by either federal common law or the CAA.  Id. at 89.  
The Second Circuit first looked to whether federal common law governing interstate pollution damages and abatement suits 
preempted New York City’s state law claims, holding that it did.  
Id. at 95 (determining that New York City’s “claims must be 
brought under federal common law”).  Next, the court examined 
whether the federal common law was displaced by the CAA, holding 
again that it was.  Id. at 98 (determining that “federal common 
law claims concerning domestic greenhouse gas emissions are displaced by statute.”).  Thus, the Second Circuit held that 
displaced federal common law preempted New York City’s state law 
claims.  Id. at 95-98. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
59 We agree with the Fourth Circuit’s analysis in 
Baltimore, which explained why City of New York is not 
persuasive in that respect: 
[A]fter recognizing federalism and the need for a 
uniform rule of decision as federal interests, City of New 
York confusingly concludes that federal common law is “most 
needed in this area” because New York's state- law claims 
touch upon the federal government’ s relations with foreign 
nations.  [993 F.3d] at 91–92.  But it never details what 
those foreign relations are and how they conflict with New 
York’s state- law claims.  See id. at 92.  The same is true 
when City of New York declares that state law would 
“upset[] the careful balance” between global warming’ s 
prevention and energy production, economic growth, foreign policy, and national security.  Id. at 93.  Besides 
referencing statutes acknowledging policy goals, the decision does not mention any obligatory statutes or regulations explaining the specifics of energy production, 
economic growth, foreign policy, or national security, and 
how New York law conflicts therewith.  See id.  It also 
does not detail how those statutory goals conflict with New York law.  See id.  [Critically,] City of New York 
essentially evades the careful analysis that the Supreme 
Court requires during a significant- conflict analysis.   
Id. (emphasis added) (footnote omitted).   
3. Even were federal common law to control, it would not 
govern Plaintiffs’ claims 
Even if federal common law governing interstate 
pollution claims had not been displaced, Plaintiffs’ claims 
would not be preempted by it.  The claims permitted by federal 
common law in this area were brought against polluting entities 
and sought to enjoin further pollution.12  See, e.g., Milwaukee 
 
12  Defendants cite to no cases recognizing federal common law claims 
for interstate pollution damages.  But this is neither here nor there.  
Damages claims are no longer available under federal common law.  In Kivalina 
II, Kivalina sought “damages for harm caused by past emissions.”  696 F.3d at 
857.  The Ninth Circuit determined that “displacement of a federal common law 
right of action means displacement of remedies.”  Id.  Therefore, “AEP 
extinguished Kivalina’ s federal common law public nuisance damage action, 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
60 I, 406 U.S. at 93 (requesting court enjoin “pollution by the 
defendants of Lake Michigan”).  Indeed, in AEP, the plaintiffs 
sued the Tennessee Valley Authority and other powerplant owners 
and sought injunctive relief to prevent future emissions.  564 
U.S. at 418.  As the Supreme Court explained in AEP, this 
“specialized federal common law” governed “suits brought by one 
State to abate pollution emanating from another State.”  Id. at 
421.  Thus, the source of the injury in federal common law 
claims is pollution traveling from one state to another.  That 
is not what Plaintiffs allege here.   
Rather, as the Ninth Circuit explained in earlier 
proceedings in this case, Plaintiffs “allege that oil and gas 
companies knew about climate change, understood the harms energy 
exploration and extraction inflicted on the environment, and 
concealed those harms from the public.”  Sunoco LP, 39 F.4th at 
1106 (emphasis added).  As Plaintiffs allege, “Defendants’ liability is causally tethered to their failure to warn and deceptive promotion,” and “nothing in this lawsuit incentivizes 
— much less compels — Defendants to curb their fossil fuel 
production or greenhouse gas emissions.”  Simply put, the source 
of Plaintiffs’ alleged injury is Defendants’ allegedly tortious 
 
along with the federal common law public nuisance abatement actions.”  Id.  
We agree.  Therefore, even though it appears that no court has recognized a 
federal common law claim for interstate pollution damages, such claims were 
displaced by the CAA.  See id. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
61 marketing conduct, not pollution traveling from one state to 
another. 
Numerous courts have rejected similar attempts by oil 
and gas companies to reframe complaints alleging those companies 
knew about the dangers of their products and failed to warn the 
public or misled the public about those dangers.  The Ninth 
Circuit did so in this case.  See id. at 1113.  And in other 
cases alleging similar deceptive promotion and failure to warn 
torts, the Fourth Circuit, Tenth Circuit, and the Districts of 
Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Minnesota have also rejected 
attempts to characterize those claims as being about emissions 
and pollution.  See Boulder, 25 F.4th at 1264 (Boulder’s claims 
“are premised on the Energy Companies’ activities of ‘knowingly producing, promoting, refining, marketing and selling a 
substantial amount of fossil fuels used at levels sufficient to 
alter the climate, and misrepresenting the dangers.’”); 
Baltimore, 31 F.4th at 217 (“None of Baltimore's claims concern 
emission standards, federal regulations about those standards, 
or pollution permits.  Their Complaint is about Defendants' 
fossil-fuel products and extravagant misinformation campaign 
that contributed to its injuries.”); Connecticut v. Exxon Mobil 
Corp., No. 3:20-CV-1555 (JCH), 2021 WL 2389739, at *13 (D. Conn. 
June 2, 2021) (“ExxonMobil’s argument on this issue fails 
because the claims Connecticut has chosen to bring in this case *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
62 seek redress for deceptive and unfair practices relating to 
ExxonMobil’s interactions with consumers in Connecticut - not 
for harms that might result from the manufacture or use of 
fossil fuels[.]”); Minnesota v. Am. Petroleum Inst., No. CV 20-
1636 (JRT/HB), 2021 WL 1215656, at *13 (D. Minn. Mar. 31, 2021) (“[T]he State’s action here is far more modest than the 
caricature Defendants present.”); Massachusetts v. Exxon Mobil 
Corp., 462 F. Supp. 3d 31, 44 (D. Mass. 2020) (“Contrary to 
ExxonMobil’s caricature of the complaint, the Commonwealth’s allegations do not require any forays into foreign relations or 
national energy policy. It alleges only corporate fraud.”). 
The source of Plaintiffs’ alleged injury is 
Defendants’ 
alleged failure to warn and deceptive promotion.  
See Sunoco LP, 39 F.4th at 1113 (“[t]his case is about whether 
oil and gas companies misled the public about dangers from 
fossil fuels.”).  Even were this court to determine that federal 
common law retains preemptive effect after displacement, the federal common law cited to by Defendants would not preempt 
Plaintiffs’ claims in this case.  The source of Plaintiffs’ 
injury is not pollution, nor emissions.  Instead, the source of 
Plaintiffs’ alleged injury is Defendants’ alleged failure to 
warn and deceptive promotion.  Therefore, even if federal common 
law had not been displaced, Plaintiffs’ claims would not be 
preempted by it. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
63 4. We decline to expand federal common law, and, in any 
event, Defendants waived such an argument 
In their opening brief, Defendants say they “do not 
seek to expand federal common law to a new sphere” and instead 
“rely on extensive Supreme Court precedent establishing that 
federal law already governs in this area.”  Defendants have 
waived any argument to expand federal common law to cover Plaintiffs’ claims here.  Second, Defendants fail to point to 
any case recognizing new federal common law decided after AEP 
and Kivalina II displaced the old federal common law that once 
governed suits for interstate pollution damages or abatement.  We reiterate that the sources of Plaintiffs’ alleged injury are 
Defendants’ alleged tortious marketing and failure to warn.  
Defendants also fail to point to any case recognizing federal 
common law governing tortious marketing suits.   
Even if Defendants had argued federal common law 
should be expanded to cover tortious marketing, that argument 
would fail because the “cases in which federal courts may engage in common lawmaking are few and far between.”  
Rodriguez v. 
FDIC, 140 S. Ct. 713, 716 (2020).  We see no “uniquely federal 
interests” in regulating marketing conduct, an area 
traditionally governed by state law.  See id. at 717.     
We also decline to create new federal common law 
governing suits that “involv[e] . . . interstate air pollution.” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
64 (Emphasis in original.)  Congress has enacted a comprehensive 
legislative scheme to address interstate air pollution, and 
“once Congress addresses a subject, even a subject previously 
governed by federal common law, the justification for lawmaking 
by the federal courts is greatly diminished.”  Nw. Airlines, 451 
U.S. at 95 n.34 (emphasis added).  “[I]t is primarily the office 
of Congress, not the federal courts, to prescribe national 
policy in areas of special federal interest.”  AEP, 564 U.S. at 
423-24.  And “[c]ases justifying judicial creation of preemptive 
federal rules are extremely limited: [w]hether latent federal 
power should be exercised to displace state law is primarily a 
decision for Congress, not the federal courts.”  In re Nat’l 
Sec. Agency Telecomms. Recs. Order Litig., 483 F. Supp. 2d 934, 
940 (N.D. Cal. 2007) (quoting Atherton, 519 U.S. at 218) 
(quotation marks omitted).  “Our commitment to the separation of powers is too fundamental to continue to rely on federal common 
law by judicially decreeing what accords with common sense and the public weal when Congress has addressed the problem.”  
Milwaukee II, 451 U.S. at 315 (internal quotation marks 
omitted). C. The CAA Does Not Preempt Plaintiffs’ Claims 
Having determined that displaced federal common law 
plays no part in this court’s preemption analysis, we now turn 
to whether the CAA preempts Plaintiffs’ state claims.  See *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
65 Boulder, 25 F.4th at 1261 (“As instructed in AEP and supported 
by [Kivalina II], we look to the federal act that displaced the 
federal common law to determine whether the state claims are 
preempted.”).  Defendants say that federal law must govern all 
suits that “involve[] interstate and international emissions.”  
(Emphasis added).  They say that a large damage award in effect could regulate air pollution,
13 and that air pollution is an area 
governed exclusively by “federal law.”  But the question before 
the court is not whether a potential damages award in this case 
could regulate air pollution.  If that were true, then any case 
with a potentially large damage award must be dismissed because 
it might regulate a field – the mere possibility of regulation, 
standing alone, is not enough to dismiss Plaintiffs’ claims.  A suit does not “regulate” a matter simply because it might have 
“an impact” on that matter.  Pilot Life Ins. Co. v. Dedeaux, 481 
U.S. 41, 50 (1987).  Rather, the operative question is whether Plaintiffs’ state law claims are preempted by federal law.  To prevail, Defendants need to show not only that Plaintiffs’ 
claims could lead to a large damages award that effectively acts 
 
13  Defendants cite to Kurns v. R.R. Friction Prod. Corp., 565 U.S. 
625, 637 (2012), a products liability cases involving a railroad worker 
exposed to asbestos, to argue that damages awards can effectively act as 
regulation.  This is accurate, but incomplete.  The Court did not ask only 
whether such a large damages award could operate as a regulation.  The Court further engaged in a preemption analysis, and asked whether such an award was preempted by federal law.  Id.  Based on prior precedent, the Court concluded 
that Congress had occupied the entire field of locomotive equipment regulation and that the worker’s claims were therefore preempted.  Id. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
66 as a regulation, but critically, that such a large damages award 
is preempted by federal law.  Defendants do not do so. 
The doctrine of preemption is rooted in the federal 
Constitution’s Supremacy Clause, which provides that federal law 
“shall be the supreme Law of the Land; . . . any Thing in the 
Constitution or Laws of any state to the Contrary 
notwithstanding.”  U.S. Const. art. VI, cl. 2.  Courts begin 
with the presumption that state laws and claims are not preempted.  Wyeth v. Levine, 555 U.S. 555, 565 (2009).  This is 
because the “historic police powers of the States [are] not to be superseded . . . unless that was the clear and manifest 
purpose of Congress.”  Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., 331 U.S. 
218, 230 (1947) (citing Napier v. Atlantic Coast Line R. Co., 
272 U.S. 605, 611 (1926) and Allen-Bradley Local v. Wisconsin 
Employment Relations Board, 315 U.S. 740, 749 (1942)).14  
Therefore, when determining whether a statute is preempted 
through any preemption doctrine, courts primarily evaluate whether Congress intended to preempt state law.  Id. 
 
14  The Supreme Court has applied this presumption against preemption 
of historic police powers broadly.  Cipollone v. Liggett Grp., Inc., 505 U.S. 
504, 528- 29 (1992) (requiring a showing of congressional intent to supersede 
state common law duties not to make false statements or conceal facts and 
holding that Congress expressed no such intent in the Federal Cigarette 
Labeling and Advertising Act); CTS Corp v. Waldburger, 573 U.S. 1, 19 (2014) 
(quoting Wos v. E.M.A., 568 U.S. 627, 639- 40 (2013)) (“[i]n our federal 
system, there is no question that States possess the ‘traditional authority to provide tort remedies to their citizens’ as they see fit”). 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
67 There are two types of preemption: complete and 
substantive (or ordinary) preemption.  City of Hoboken v. 
Chevron Corp., 45 F.4th 699, 707 (3d Cir. 2022).  Complete 
preemption applies only in the context of federal removal 
jurisdiction, which is not at issue here.15  Id.  Defendants 
argue that the CAA substantively preempts Plaintiffs’ state tort law claims.   
In general, there are three types of substantive 
preemption: 
(1) express preemption, where Congress has expressly 
preempted local law; (2) field preemption, “where Congress 
has legislated so comprehensively that federal law occupies 
an entire field of regulation and leaves no room for state 
law”; and (3) conflict preemption, where local law 
conflicts with federal law such that it is impossible for a 
party to comply with both or the local law is an obstacle 
to the achievement of federal objectives. 
New York SMSA Ltd. P’ship v. Town of Clarkstown, 612 F.3d 97, 
104 (2d Cir. 2010) (emphases added) (citing English v. General 
Elec. Co., 496 U.S. 72, 78-79 (1990)).   
Defendants do not specify which substantive preemption 
theory they rely on.  We address each preemption theory in turn. 
First, express preemption does not apply.  Federal law 
expressly preempts state law where the federal statute contains 
an express preemption clause barring state law claims in 
 
15  The Supreme Court has only recognized three federal statutes that 
completely preempt state laws: “ERISA, the National Bank Act, and the Labor-
Management Relations Act.” City of Hoboken, 45 F.4th at 707 (citing 
Beneficial Nat’l Bank v. Anderson, 539 U.S. 1, 6- 8, 10-11 (2003)). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
68 enumerated areas.  Oneok, Inc. v. Learjet, Inc., 575 U.S. 373, 
376 (2015) (holding that Congress may “pre-empt . . . a state 
law through . . . express language in a statute”).  Simply put, 
the CAA contains no “express language” preempting state common 
law tort claims.  See id.  Rather, the CAA explicitly preserves 
“any right which any person (or class of persons) may have under any statute or common law to seek enforcement of any emission 
standard or limitation or to seek any other relief[.]”  42 U.S.C. § 7604(e) (2018). 
Second, field preemption does not apply because the 
CAA does not completely occupy the field of emissions.  Field 
preemption applies where (1) the “scheme of federal regulation 
[is] so pervasive as to make reasonable the inference that 
Congress left no room for the States to supplement” the 
regulation, or (2) the “federal interest is so dominant” in a 
field “that the federal system will be assumed to preclude 
enforcement of state laws on the same subject.”  Rice, 331 U.S. 
at 230.  Field preemption “reflects a congressional decision to 
foreclose any state regulation in the area, even if it is 
parallel to federal standards,” so “even complementary state 
regulation is impermissible” when Congress has occupied an 
entire field.  Arizona v. United States, 567 U.S. 387, 401 
(2012).   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
69 The CAA simply does not occupy the entire field of 
emissions regulation, as noted above.  Merrick, 805 F.3d at 694 
(holding that CAA does not bar state common law claims against 
in-state emitters because “environmental regulation is a field 
that the states have traditionally occupied”).  “There is no 
evidence that Congress intended that all emissions regulation 
occur through the [CAA’s] framework, such that any state law 
approach to emissions regulation would stand as an obstacle to Congress’s objectives.”  Id. at 695.  Indeed, under the CAA, 
each state retains regulatory power through their State Implementation Plan (SIP), which provides for state-level 
implementation, maintenance, and enforcement of CAA emissions 
standards with federal oversight.  42 U.S.C. § 7410(a)(1) 
(2018).  While the federal government has primary authority over 
emissions legislation, states are responsible for implementation 
through their SIP.  See id.  And the CAA’s “Retention of State 
authority” section expressly protects a state’s right to adopt 
or enforce any standard or limitation respecting emissions 
unless the state policy in question would be less stringent than 
the CAA.  42 U.S.C. § 7416 (2018).16  Congress encouraged states 
 
16  42 U.S.C. § 7416 (2018) provides: 
 
Except as otherwise provided in sections 1857c- 10(c), 
(e), and (f) (as in effect before August 7, 1977), 7543, 
7545(c)(4), and 7573 of this title (preempting certain State regulation of moving sources) nothing in this chapter 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
70 to participate through SIPs and provided for state regulation of 
any emissions standard or limitation as stringent as or more 
stringent than the CAA.  See 42 U.S.C. § 7410(a)(1) (2018). 
Accordingly, the CAA does not occupy the field of 
emissions regulation such that state law is preempted – it does 
not “reflect[] a congressional decision to foreclose any state 
regulation in the area.”  Arizona, 567 U.S. at 401.  And, even 
if it did, the City’s claims do not seek to regulate emissions, 
and so a claim of field preemption in the field of emissions 
regulation is inapposite. 
Third, conflict preemption does not apply.  Conflict 
preemption takes two forms.  The first form is obstacle 
preemption, where state law claims “stand[] as an obstacle to 
the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and 
objectives of Congress,” Arizona, 567 U.S. at 399 (quoting Hines 
v. Davidowitz, 312 U.S. 52, 67 (1941)).  The second form is 
impossibility preemption, which is a “demanding defense”, Wyeth, 
555 U.S. at 573, that succeeds where state law claims are shown 
 
shall preclude or deny the right of any State or political 
subdivision thereof to adopt or enforce (1) any standard or limitation respecting emissions of air pollutants or (2) 
any requirement respecting control or abatement of air 
pollution; except that if an emission standard or 
limitation is in effect under an applicable implementation plan or under section 7411 or section 7412 of this title, such State or political subdivision may not adopt or 
enforce any emission standard or limitation which is less 
stringent than the standard or limitation under such plan 
or section. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
71 to directly conflict with federal law or penalize behavior that 
federal law requires.  AT&T Co. v. Cent. Off. Tel., Inc., 524 
U.S. 214, 227 (1998) (holding that federal statute preempts state law when state law claims directly conflict with federal 
law); Geier v. Am. Honda Motor Co., 529 U.S. 864, 873 (2000) 
(holding that federal statute preempts state law where state law penalizes what federal law requires).  Neither obstacle 
preemption nor impossibility preemption applies here. 
1. Obstacle preemption does not apply 
The CAA does not preempt Plaintiffs’ claims through 
obstacle preemption because their claims arise from Defendants’ alleged failure to warn and deceptive marketing conduct, not 
emissions-producing activities regulated by the CAA.  Obstacle 
preemption applies only where there is an “actual conflict” between state law and a statute’s overriding federal purpose and 
objective.  Mary Jo C. v. N.Y. State & Loc. Ret. Sys., 707 F.3d 
144, 162 (2d Cir. 2013).  “[T]he conflict between state law and federal policy must be a sharp one.”  Marsh v. Rosenbloom, 499 
F.3d 165, 178 (2d Cir. 2006) (quotation marks omitted).  The operative federal purpose or policy is defined by “examining the 
federal statute as a whole and identifying its purpose and intended effects,” and “[w]hat is a sufficient obstacle is a 
matter of judgment.”  Arizona, 567 U.S. at 400 (quoting Crosby, 
530 U.S. at 363). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
72 The U.S. Supreme Court has applied this standard 
sparingly, finding obstacle preemption in only two scenarios: 
(1) where a federal legislation involved a uniquely federal area 
of regulation and state law directly conflicted with the federal 
program’s operation, and (2) where Congress has clearly chosen 
to preclude state regulation because the federal legislation 
struck a delicate balance of interests at risk of disturbance by 
state regulation.17  In re Volkswagen “Clean Diesel” Mktg., Sales 
Pracs., & Prod. Liab. Litig., 959 F.3d 1201, 1212 (9th Cir. 
2020).  But this is a “high threshold.”  Chamber of Com. of U.S. 
v. Whiting, 563 U.S. 582, 607 (2011). 
Here, the CAA’s identified purposes are to protect the 
country’s air resources, public health, and welfare; prevent and 
control air pollution; and support state, local, and regional 
air pollution prevention and control efforts.  See 42 U.S.C. § 
7401(b) (2018); Bunker Hill Co. Lead & Zinc Smelter v. EPA, 658 
F.2d 1280, 1284 (9th Cir. 1981) (“[The CAA] was intended 
 
17  The first category historically includes areas such as foreign 
affairs powers and regulating maritime vessels.  Crosby, 530 U.S. at 373- 74 
(holding that the federal foreign affairs power is a uniquely federal area of 
regulation); United States v. Locke, 529 U.S. 89, 97 (2000) (holding that 
maritime vessel regulation is a uniquely federal area).  The second category historically includes criminal immigration penalties, vehicle safety device implementation, and interstate pollution under the Clean Water Act.  Arizona, 
567 U.S. at 405 (holding that the federal government struck a balance in immigration penalties that would be disturbed by an additional state law 
criminal penalty); Geier, 529 U.S. at 879- 81 (holding that the federal 
government struck a balance in gradual airbag phase- in that would be 
undermined by a state law immediate implementation requirement); Int’l Paper 
Co. v. Ouellette, 479 U.S. 481, 494, 497 (1987) (holding that affected- state 
claims against out- of-state polluters stand as an obstacle to the balance 
struck by the Clean Water Act). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
73 comprehensively to regulate, through guidelines and controls, 
the complexities of restraining and curtailing modern day air 
pollution.”).  The CAA achieves these purposes primarily by 
“regulat[ing] pollution-generating emissions from both 
stationary sources, such as factories and powerplants, and 
moving sources, such as cars, trucks, and aircraft.”  Util. Air 
Regul. Grp. v. EPA, 573 U.S. 302, 308 (2014). 
Plaintiffs’ state tort law claims do not seek to 
regulate emissions, and there is thus no “actual conflict” 
between Hawaiʻ i tort law and the CAA.  See Mary Jo, 707 F.3d at 
162.  These claims potentially regulate marketing conduct while 
the CAA regulates pollution.  We agree with Plaintiffs that the “CAA does not concern itself in any way with the acts that 
trigger liability under Plaintiffs’ Complaint, namely: the use 
of deception to promote the consumption of fossil fuel 
products.”  The CAA expresses no policy preference and does not 
even mention marketing regulations. 
Defendants argue that the CAA preempts Plaintiffs’ 
claims because Congress preempted affected-state common law claims regarding emissions through the CAA, and Plaintiffs’ 
claims seek to regulate out-of-state emissions.  Affected-state 
claims are state law actions where the injury occurred in a 
different state from the state where the emission was released; 
courts have held that the CAA preempts these claims.  See Int’l *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
74 Paper Co. v. Ouellette, 479 U.S. 481, 500 (1987).  Source-state 
claims are state law actions where the injury was suffered in 
the same state as the emitting conduct; courts have held that 
the CAA does not preempt these claims.  See id.  
Relying on Ouellette, Defendants say “[e]very federal 
court of appeals to consider this issue has recognized that the 
CAA does not permit States to use their state tort law to 
address harms caused by emissions occurring in other States.”  Defendants are correct, but their analysis is incomplete.  In 
Ouellette, the Supreme Court examined whether the Clean Water 
Act (CWA) preempted “a common-law nuisance suit filed in a Vermont court under Vermont law, when the source of the alleged 
injury [was] located in New York.”  Id. at 483.  The Supreme 
Court held that affected-state common law claims arising from polluting activity located outside the affected-state are 
preempted by the CWA because “[t]he application of affected-state laws would be incompatible with the [CWA’s] delegation of authority and its comprehensive regulation of water pollution.”  
Id. at 500.  Applying affected-state common law could 
potentially subject a defendant-polluter to “an indeterminate number of potential regulations” depending on how far the 
emission traveled.
18  Id. at 499; see also Merrick, 805 F.3d at 
 
18  Defendants also cite to N. Carolina, ex rel. Cooper v. Tennessee 
Valley Auth., 615 F.3d 291, 297 (4th Cir. 2010), arguing that Ouellette’s 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
75 693 (explaining that “claims based on the common law of the 
source state . . . are not preempted by the [CAA,]” but “claims 
based on the common law of a non-source state . . . are 
preempted by the [CAA]”).  
But the rationale motivating the Ouellette court in 
preempting affected-state common law claims does not apply to 
Plaintiffs’ state tort claims.  This is because Plaintiffs’ 
claims require “additional tortious conduct” to succeed.  MTBE, 
725 F.3d at 104.  Here, that additional tortious conduct is 
Defendants’ alleged deceptive marketing and failure to warn 
about the dangers of using their products – the source of 
Plaintiffs’ alleged injury is not emissions but the additional 
alleged torts.    
In this case, as in MTBE, Defendants’ alleged tortious 
conduct is not production of emissions and therefore, obstacle 
preemption does not apply.  In MTBE, the defendant gasoline 
producer used MTBE, a fuel additive that reduced emissions, to 
 
rationale in determining the CWA preempted affected- state common law claims 
should be applied to the CAA.  In Cooper, the Fourth Circuit determined that 
North Carolina’s nuisance action seeking an injunction against fixed 
powerplants from emitting sulfur dioxides and nitrous oxides was preempted by 
the CAA because the “EPA has promulgated [National Ambient Air Quality Standards] for a number of emissions, including standards for all the 
emissions involved in this case.”  Id. at 299.  Critically, the CAA, and the 
agency it empowers (the EPA), had already expressly regulated the very 
emissions (sulfur dioxides and nitrous oxides) alleged to have caused the 
nuisance.  Id. at 299-303.  But the Cooper court refused to “hold flatly that 
Congress has entirely preempted the field of emissions regulation.”  Id. at 
302.  And it acknowledged that the “Ouellette Court itself explicitly 
refrained from categorically preempting every nuisance action brought under 
source state law.”  Id. at 303. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
76 bring its gasoline into compliance with the CAA’s minimum oxygen 
content requirement.  Id. at 129.  The CAA identified a number 
of substances, including MTBE, that could have been added to 
gasoline to help bring it into compliance with the oxygen 
content requirement.  Id. at 81.  New York City and its agencies 
brought ten causes of action, including strict liability failure to warn, negligence, public nuisance, private nuisance, and 
trespass, arguing that the defendant oil producer’s use of MTBE caused detrimental contamination of groundwater.  Id. at 80-83.  
The defendant argued that the plaintiff’s tort claims “conflict[ed] with and are therefore preempted by . . . the 
[CAA] Amendments of 1990[.]”  Id. at 95.   
The Second Circuit held that New York City’s claims 
were not preempted under either obstacle or impossibility 
preemption.  Id. at 97-103.  The court held that where a party 
participates in a non-polluting emissions-related activity (i.e., choosing gasoline additives), the fact that it complied with relevant CAA provisions did not absolve the party of any 
state common law or statutory duties to warn of public hazards 
or comply with an additional standard of care.  Id. at 65.  In 
short, the Second Circuit determined that state tort law claims are not preempted by the CAA where the alleged tortious behavior 
does not produce emissions.  Id. at 104-05. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
77 Plaintiffs’ claims simply do not risk subjecting 
Defendants to “an indeterminate number of potential regulations” 
because the claims do not subject Defendants to any additional 
emissions regulation at all.  See Ouellette, 479 U.S. at 499.  
Plaintiffs are correct that where the emissions originate is 
irrelevant because emissions are at most a link in the causal 
chain connecting Plaintiffs’ alleged injuries and Defendants’ 
unrelated liability-incurring behavior.  [AB at 33, ICA Dkt. 65:43]  Simply put, this means obstacle preemption does not 
apply. 
2. Impossibility preemption does not apply 
At its most demanding, the impossibility doctrine 
historically required it to be a “physical impossibility” to 
comply with both state and federal requirements for federal law to preempt state law.  Florida Lime & Avocado Growers v. Paul, 
373 U.S. 132, 143 (1963).19  The modern impossibility doctrine is 
broader and now includes instances where state law penalizes 
what federal law requires, Geier, 529 U.S. at 873, or where 
state law claims directly conflict with federal law, AT&T Co., 
 
19  Under the Florida Lime & Avocado Growers standard, some scenarios 
would yield different results than preemption doctrine’s intended effect: 
“[f]or example, if federal law gives an individual the right to engage in 
certain behavior that state law prohibits, the laws would give contradictory 
commands notwithstanding the fact that an individual could comply with both 
by electing to refrain from the covered behavior.”  Wyeth, 555 U.S. at 590 
(2009) (Thomas, J., concurring).  In that scenario, it is not a physical 
impossibility to comply with both requirements, but modern doctrine would 
find a sufficient conflict between federal and state law to preempt state law 
through impossibility preemption. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
78 524 U.S. at 227.  But impossibility preemption is still a 
“demanding defense.”  Wyeth, 555 U.S. at 573.  Defendants do not 
raise impossibility preemption, and it does not apply regardless. 
MTBE is instructive again.  There, the Second Circuit 
declined to preempt state tort claims through impossibility 
preemption where: (1) it was possible to comply with the CAA and 
avoid tort liability; (2) state and federal law did not directly conflict; and (3) the CAA did not require the alleged conduct.  
MBTE, 725 F.3d at 97.  The oil producer defendant could have 
complied with both state and federal law if it had used other additives (like ethanol) that did not pose the same health risk 
as MTBE but would bring the fuel into CAA oxygen content 
compliance without incurring prohibitively high costs.  Id. at 
99-101.  Though the CAA identified MTBE as one additive that would sufficiently boost oxygen content, at no point did it 
require the specific use of MTBE in gasoline – it was one of many options.  Id. at 98.  
The same is true here.  The CAA does not bar 
Defendants from warning consumers about the dangers of using 
their fossil fuel products.  See id.  Defendants could simply 
avoid federal and state liability by adhering to the CAA and separately issuing warnings and refraining from deceptive 
conduct as required by  law; it is not a “physical Hawaiʻi*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
79 impossibility” to do both concurrently.  See Florida Lime & 
Avocado Growers, 373 U.S. at 143; State ex rel. Shikada v. 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., 152  418, 438, 526 P.3d 395, 415 Hawaiʻi
(2023) (rejecting a pharmaceutical company’s argument that 
“there was no way [it] could have updated [a drug’s] label to 
provide the warning that [state law] require[d] and at the same 
time comply with federal law” regarding drug labeling). 
V. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we hold that Defendants are 
subject to specific jurisdiction in Hawaiʻ i and that neither 
federal common law nor the Clean Air Act preempt Plaintiffs’ 
claims.  We reiterate that federal common law retains no 
preemptive effect after it is displaced.  Were we to adopt 
Defendants’ argument that displaced federal common law preempts Plaintiffs’ state law claims, Plaintiffs could not recover under 
Hawai‘i tort law, even where the state specifically permits 
lawsuits to hold companies responsible for allegedly deceptive marketing claims about any product, including oil and gas 
products.  We decline to unduly limit Hawai‘ i’s ability to use 
its police powers to protect its citizens from alleged deceptive marketing.   
Accordingly, the circuit court’s Order Denying 
Defendants’ Motion to Dismiss for Failure to State a Claim, 
filed March 29, 2022, and Order Denying Defendants’ Joint Motion *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
80 to Dismiss for Lack of Personal Jurisdiction, filed March 31, 
2022, are affirmed. 
Theodore J. Boutrous, Jr.,*  
Joshua D. Dick,* 
Melvyn M. Miyagi,  Ross T. Shinyama,  Summer H. Kaiawe, 
Andrea E. Neuman,* and 
Erica W. Harris,* for appellants Chevron 
Corporation and Chevron 
U.S.A., Inc.  
C. Michael Heihre,  
Michi Momose,  
J. Scott Janoe,*  Megan Berge,* and  
Sterling Marchand,* 
for appellants Sunoco LP, Aloha 
Petroleum, Ltd., and Aloha Petroleum LLC 
 
Paul Alston, 
John-Anderson L. Meyer,   Claire Wong Black,  
Glenn T. Melchinger,  
Theodore V. Wells, Jr.,* Daniel J. Toal,* and  
Yahonnes Cleary,* 
for appellants Exxon Mobil 
Corporation and ExxonMobil Oil Corporation 
 Joachim P. Cox,  Randall C. Whattoff,  
David C. Frederick,* 
James M. Webster III,* and  Daniel S. Severson,* for appellants Shell plc (f/k/a 
Royal Dutch Shell plc), Shell U.S.A. Inc. (f/k/a Shell Oil Company), and Shell Oil 
Products Company LLC 
 
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins 
/s/ Ronald G. Johnson /s/ John M. Tonaki  
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
81 Margery S. Bronster,  
Lanson K. Kupau,  
Kelly A. Higa Brown,  
Victor L. Hou,* and  Boaz S. Morag,* 
for appellants Woodside 
Energy Hawaii Inc. (f/k/a BHP Hawaii Inc.) and appellee BHP Group Limited 
 
Lisa A. Bail,  David J. Hoftiezer,  
Jonathan W. Hughes,*  
Matthew T. Heartney,* and  John D. Lombardo,* for appellants BP plc and 
BP America Inc. 
 
Ted N. Pettit,  
Shannon S. Broome,*  
Shawn Patrick Regan,* and  Anne Marie Mortimer,* For appellants Marathon 
Petroleum Corporation 
 Crystal K. Rose, Adrian L. Lavarias,  
Sharon Paris,   
Jameson R. Jones,* Daniel R. Brody,* 
Steven M. Bauer,*  
Margaret A. Tough,* and Katherine A. Rouse,* for appellants ConocoPhillips, 
ConocoPhillips Company 
 Crystal K. Rose, 
Adrian L. Lavarias,  
Sharon Paris,   Steven M. Bauer,*  Margaret A. Tough,* and 
Katherine A. Rouse,* 
for appellants Phillips 66 and 
Phillips 66 Company 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
82  
Victor M. Sher,* 
Dana M.O. Viola,  
Robert M. Kohn,  Nicolette Winter,  
Jeff A. Lau,  
Matthew K. Edling,* Corrie J. Yackulic,* and  Stephanie D. Biehl,* 
for appellees City and County 
of Honolulu and Honolulu Board 
of Water Supply 
 
*pro hac vice  Anne E. Lopez 
Ewan C. Rayner 
for amicus curiae Department of Attorney General 
 
Tara A. Buckley for amicus curiae Hawai͑i
 State Association of 
Counties 
 Chase H. Livingston for amicus curiae 
Legal Scholars 
 Mark M. Murakami 
for amicus curiae  
Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America  
 
 