 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAP-23-0000416 09-JUN-2025 09:53 AM Dkt. 14 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAII 
---o0o---
ANN GIMA, 
Plaintiff-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU, 
Defendant-Appellee. 
SCAP-23-0000416 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-23-0000416; CASE NO. 1CC181001745) 
 
JUNE 9, 2025 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, EDDINS, GINOZA, AND DEVENS, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY DEVENS, J. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This transfer case from the Intermediate Court of Appeals 
(ICA) is an appeal involving disability discrimination, failure 
to provide a reasonable accommodation, and retaliation claims. 
Plaintiff-Appellant Ann Gima (Gima) appeals the circuit court’s 
May 22, 2023 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order 
Granting Defendant-Appellee City and County of Honolulu’s (City)  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Motion for Judgment on the Pleadings and/or Summary Judgment 
(Order) and the Judgment entered on June 5, 2023. 
Gima was employed with the City’s Department of Budget and 
Fiscal Services’ (BFS) Real Property Assessment Division for 
over twenty years. After she was promoted to Real Property 
Technical Officer (RPTO) in 2012, Gima contends that her direct 
supervisor, Robert Magota (Magota), began to verbally harass and 
abuse her, which resulted in her being diagnosed with major depressive disorder and anxiety disorder. The City placed Gima 
on workers’ compensation leave after she was medically 
restricted from working with Magota. Gima was on leave 
intermittently from 2014 to February 2018. 
In November 2017, Gima requested a reasonable accommodation 
to work with a supervisor other than Magota due to her medical 
condition and related work restriction. The City denied her 
request. At the time, Gima was enrolled in the City’s workers’ 
compensation Priority Placement Program to find her an alternate position in another City department. However, at the end of 
2017, Magota retired from BFS. In February 2018, Gima returned 
to work at BFS as she was no longer subject to Magota’s 
supervision. On April 27, 2018, less than three months after 
returning from leave, Gima’s new supervisor, Steven Takara 
(Takara), issued her a substandard performance evaluation and 
Gima was subsequently demoted to Real Property Appraiser IV. 
2  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
BFS Director, Nelson Koyanagi, Jr. (Koyanagi), issued the 
written notification of Gima’s demotion and directed her to 
address her questions and concerns with Takara. At the time of 
the substandard evaluation and demotion, Takara was purportedly 
aware of Gima’s prior issues with Magota, Gima’s medical 
diagnoses, and Gima’s workers’ compensation leave taken from 
September 2017 through January 2018. 
Gima filed claims with the Hawai‘i Civil Rights Commission 
(HCRC) asserting disability discrimination and retaliation, and 
subsequently filed a timely lawsuit in the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit (circuit court). Her suit claimed that the City 
discriminated against her because of her disability, denied her a reasonable accommodation, and retaliated against her based on 
two prior HCRC complaints she filed in 2016 and the reasonable 
accommodation request she submitted in November 2017. The City 
moved for summary judgment on all claims, which the circuit 
court granted. 
Gima contends the circuit court erred in finding that she 
failed to establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination or retaliation and further contends the City’s 
purported reasons for her demotion were pretextual. 
She also 
asserts the circuit court erred in concluding that her request for an alternate supervisor was unreasonable as a matter of law, 
and further contends that the City failed to provide a 
3  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reasonable accommodation when she requested a different 
supervisor. 
Viewing the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in 
the light most favorable to Gima, we hold that Gima established 
a prima facie case of disability discrimination, and, therefore, 
the court erred in granting summary judgment on that claim. 
Gima met her summary judgment burden of establishing that she 
had a disability, was qualified for her position, and was issued a substandard performance evaluation and demoted because of her 
disability. There is also a genuine issue of material fact that 
the City’s proffered reasons for Gima’s negative evaluation 
issued in April 2018 and subsequent demotion were pretextual. 
We further hold that Gima’s request for an alternate 
supervisor was not, as a matter of law, an unreasonable 
accommodation, and that Gima established a genuine issue of 
material fact as to whether the City could have assigned her to 
a different direct supervisor. However, the City was only required to provide a reasonable accommodation rather than 
Gima’s specific request, and, even when viewing the evidence in 
the light most favorable to Gima, the record demonstrates that 
the City engaged in an interactive process to accommodate Gima. 
It is uncontested that the City offered Gima a position in the 
Department of Transportation Services as part of its Priority 
Placement Program before Magota retired in 2017. However, while 
4  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the City was in the process of transferring Gima to the 
Department of Transportation Services, Magota retired and Gima 
elected to return to her original position at BFS. At the time, 
Gima’s only medical restriction was working with Magota. Under 
these facts and circumstances, Gima failed to establish a 
genuine issue of material fact that the City failed to engage in 
a good faith interactive process to accommodate her. 
We further hold that the circuit court erred in granting 
the City’s motion for summary judgment with respect to Gima’s retaliation claim. Gima engaged in protected activities when 
she filed two complaints with the HCRC in 2016 and requested a 
reasonable accommodation in 2017. Gima suffered an adverse 
employment action when the City issued her a substandard 
performance evaluation and demoted her in 2018. And Gima met 
her burden establishing a causal connection between the 
protected activities and the subsequent adverse employment acts. 
As stated, Gima established a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the City’s proffered reasons for her negative 
performance evaluation and demotion were pretextual. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm in part and 
vacate in part the circuit court’s May 22, 2023 Order and 
June 5, 2023 Judgment. We remand this case for further 
5  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
II. BACKGROUND 
Gima was first employed with BFS from 1987 to 1992. After 
a brief hiatus, she returned to her employment at BFS in 1995. 
In 2000, Gima was promoted to Real Property Appraiser VI. In 
2012, she was promoted to the position of RPTO which is when 
Magota became her direct supervisor. From 2013 through 2017, 
Gima made multiple complaints that Magota had subjected her to verbal harassment and abuse. This harassment, Gima contends, 
led to her being medically diagnosed with a “disabling anxiety 
disorder” and major depressive disorder. Based on her anxiety 
and depression, Gima filed a workers’ compensation stress claim 
and was placed on workers’ compensation leave intermittently 
from 2014 to 2018. 
A. Gima’s Workers’ Compensation Claims 2014 to 2016 
Gima asserts that beginning in December 2012 “Mr. Magota 
began a campaign of intensely abusive behavior, hostility, 
personal attacks, harassment, discrimination, and retaliation 
against [her] resulting in unbearable working conditions.” Gima 
filed a workplace violence complaint with the City against 
Magota on October 29, 2013. In February 2014, Gima informed BFS 
Deputy Director Gary Kurokawa (Kurokawa) and BFS Director 
Koyanagi “that Mr. Magota was making derogatory remarks about 
[her].” Gima reported Magota to the City’s Equal Opportunity 
6  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Office on June 23, 2014. In December 2014, Gima was diagnosed 
with an anxiety disorder “as a result of Mr. Magota’s relentless 
treatment against [her].” 
In December 2014, Gima submitted a workers’ compensation 
injury claim with the City and was placed on workers’ 
compensation leave for her anxiety disorder. From December 2014 
to February 2016, Gima remained on leave.1 During that time 
period, Gima requested a reasonable accommodation to be assigned 
to a supervisor other than Magota, which the City denied.2 In 
February 2016, Gima returned to work. The evidence from Gima’s physician, Raymond Davidson, M.D. (Dr. Davidson), showed that 
Gima was diagnosed with major depressive disorder in January 
2016. The City’s own independent doctor also diagnosed Gima 
with an anxiety disorder. 
B. Gima’s Harassment Allegations Against Magota 2013 to 2016 
The evidence indicates that from 2013 to 2016, the Equal 
Opportunity Office investigated Gima’s workplace violence 
complaint filed against Magota and issued findings that “did not 
support a determination of workplace violence or harassment as 
alleged”; however, the “investigative panel did find that stress 
1 Gima’s declaration stated that she was out on leave from December 2014 
to early March 2015, and later from March 2015 to February 11, 2016. 
2 Gima attested that her request for a reasonable accommodation was 
denied on or about October 14, 2015. 
7  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in the workplace is escalating and may reach detrimental levels 
if not address[ed] and diffused.” On April 18, 2016, BFS 
Director Koyanagi sent Magota a letter as a “follow-up to the 
meeting that Gary Kurokawa and [Koyanagi] had with [Magota] on 
April 13, 2016 regarding the [Equal Opportunity Office] 
complaint filed by Ann Gima on June 23, 2014.” Koyanagi’s 
letter stated that “the cumulative consequence of [Magota’s] 
actions and inactions culminated in harassment, although not related to [Gima’s] gender, and that [Magota] exercised [his] 
authority in a manner that accelerated rather than quelled 
further dispute with [Gima].” 
C. Gima’s HCRC Charges 2016 
On March 14, 2016, Gima filed an HCRC complaint alleging 
discrimination by the City on the basis of her sex and disability. The HCRC charge notified BFS Director Koyanagi of 
Gima’s charges, which included assertions that she had been 
harassed by Magota and was “denied a reasonable accommodation for [her] disability (mental).” Gima’s March 2016 HCRC 
complaint also alleged that in 2015, she was denied her 
reasonable accommodation request “to work under the direction of 
someone other than Mr. Magota.” Gima did not file a lawsuit 
within the statutory period after receiving her right to sue 
letter from the HCRC for her March 2016 HCRC complaint. 
On November 2, 2016, Gima filed a second HCRC complaint 
8  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
asserting sex discrimination and retaliation. Gima asserted 
that she was “subjected to harassment due to [her] sex (female) 
and/or in retaliation for [her] opposition to discrimination.” 
A notice of the charge was addressed to BFS Director Koyanagi. 
Again, Gima did not file a lawsuit within the statutory period 
after receiving her right to sue letter from the HCRC. 
D. Gima’s Negative Reviews 2017 
In January 2017, Gima received a substandard performance 
evaluation from Magota for the January 23, 2016 to January 22, 
2017 rating period. Gima attested that she “did not receive 
negative performance evaluations until after Mr. Magota received 
the letter from the [Equal Opportunity Office] in 2016.” The 
evidentiary record confirms that the first negative evaluation 
Gima received was on January 23, 2017, after she filed her 2016 
HCRC complaints. The other evaluations were dated June 2017, 
September 2017, and April 2018. The January 2017 review stated 
that Gima did “very little work” on an annual report from 2016; did not properly train and support her staff; and that Magota 
“found Gima to be difficult to work with, argumentative, 
uncooperative and defiant.” In response, Gima submitted a 
written rebuttal asserting, inter alia, that the issues 
proffered by Magota were either never raised formally or the 
projects were not assigned to her; she adequately led trainings 
for her staff; and “Magota’s personal bias is the determinate 
9  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
factor in this rating.” 
On May 16, 2017, Takara was promoted to Real Property 
Assessment Administrator, a position senior to Gima’s. Magota 
remained as the Assistant Real Property Assessment Administrator 
and Gima’s direct supervisor. 
Gima was placed on a special three-month performance 
evaluation from June 19, 2017 to September 18, 2017, “due to the 
substandard performance evaluation” from the prior rating period. On September 14, 2017, Magota gave Gima another 
substandard evaluation and extended her special performance 
evaluation period an additional three months. Takara signed off 
on the September 2017 substandard evaluation. The performance 
evaluation stated that Gima had met several times with both 
Takara and Magota during the rating period to discuss her work 
performance. In the evaluation, Magota asserted that Gima made 
errors in the quarterly budget; failed to make progress on the 
implementation of a “New Home Exemption Review Program”; did not accept responsibility for her assignments; demonstrated 
“disrespect” when she “became argumentative with her superior, 
Takara”; and “lack[ed] job knowledge.” Gima submitted a 
rebuttal to the evaluation asserting, among other things, that 
the issues with the budget were also due to the lack of review 
by the administration, lack of communication, and a “formula 
error”; the New Home Exemption Review Program was initiated by 
10  
 
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Magota and assigned to Takara, and the project was partially 
stalled due to delays on Takara’s part; Magota unreasonably 
faulted her for a problem that a vendor and Takara had been 
unable to solve for years; and the other incidents cited by 
Magota were “clouded” by Magota’s bias. 
E. Gima’s Workers’ Compensation Leave 2017 to 2018 
On September 15, 2017, Gima was again placed on workers’ 
compensation leave due to her medical condition (anxiety and 
major depressive disorders) and remained on leave through 
January 31, 2018. 
On November 15, 2017, Gima submitted another request for a 
reasonable accommodation asking that she be supervised by 
someone other than Magota as he exacerbated her anxiety 
disorder. Gima’s request for a different supervisor was 
pursuant to “the advice of [her] physician as well as the City’s 
own IPE doctor, Dr. Joseph Rogers.” Gima attested that “a 
change in personnel,” after Takara was promoted to RPA Administrator, allowed her to “be supervised by a higher-level 
Administrator,” and that Mr. Takara, Mr. Kurokawa, or 
Mr. Koyanagi could have supervised her at that time. On 
December 5, 2017, BFS denied Gima’s reasonable accommodation 
request. 
Gima was enrolled in the City’s Priority Placement Program 
from October 11, 2017 to February 1, 2018. The City was in the 
11  
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
process of placing Gima in a position with the Department of 
Transportation Services when Magota retired from BFS. Magota 
retired on December 30, 2017, and, as a result, Takara became 
Gima’s new BFS supervisor. The City informed Gima that she 
could return to work at her BFS position subject to her doctor’s 
approval. 
F. Gima’s Negative Review and Demotion 2018 
On February 1, 2018, with Takara serving as Gima’s new 
direct supervisor, Gima returned to work at BFS with her 
doctor’s approval. There is no evidence in the record that 
Gima’s previously diagnosed medical conditions of anxiety and 
major depressive disorder had resolved before or after she 
returned from leave. 
Within a few weeks after returning to work, Gima asserted 
that she met with Takara who “criticized [her] for many very 
small issues, such as typographical errors, and other issues 
that occurred while [she] was out on worker[s’] compensation leave.” BFS informed Gima that her special performance 
evaluation period that was interrupted by her prior leave would 
resume on February 1, 2018 through April 30, 2018. 
On April 27, 2018, Takara met with Gima and gave her a 
substandard performance evaluation. That same day, the City 
issued Gima a letter demoting her to Real Property Appraiser IV. 
BFS Director Koyanagi signed off on the demotion letter and 
12  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
copied Takara. Gima’s demotion was effective May 7, 2018.  
Takara’s April 2018 substandard evaluation stated: (1) Gima 
made careless errors in a report published in September 2017; 
(2) her finalized testimony for a bill contained an incorrect 
date on the second page header and a data table that did not fit 
on the page; (3) she “critique[ed]” Takara’s comments in 
response to one of her assignments; (4) she failed to give 
feedback on her outstanding assignments; and (5) she “push[ed] work onto others” and “continued her pattern of poor 
communication.” The evaluation also described an incident where 
Gima purportedly failed to communicate the location of a meeting 
with a vendor.   
Gima submitted a five-page written rebuttal of the 
evaluation, asserting, inter alia: (1) she regularly gave 
feedback on outstanding assignments at weekly branch meetings; 
(2) Takara failed to give her clear direction on her 
assignments; and (3) Takara refused to assist her or her subordinates. Gima disputed that the typographical error 
impacted operations in a manner warranting a substandard 
performance review, and asserted that she never received 
feedback on the bill testimony. As to the claim that she failed 
to communicate the location of a vendor meeting, Gima asserted 
that this was a mix-up because “[e]very meeting” took place at 
BFS’s office, but in this instance the vendor scheduled the 
13  
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
meeting at the vendor’s facility. Gima also claimed that she 
did not timely learn of the change in meeting location. 
G. Gima’s HCRC Complaints 2018 and Subsequent Workers’ 
Compensation Leave 
On April 30, 2018, Gima filed a third HCRC complaint 
asserting disability discrimination and retaliation by the City. 
In her HCRC complaint, Gima asserted that she was “denied a 
reasonable accommodation based upon [her] disability” when the 
City denied her request for a supervisor other than Magota on 
December 5, 2017. She claimed that the City “failed to engage 
in the proper interactive process to accommodate [her] 
disability” and violated her rights in denying her a reasonable 
accommodation. Gima also asserted that she continued to be 
“over-scrutinized and subjected to unfair negative performance evaluations based upon [her] disability and in retaliation for 
filing discrimination complaints with the [HCRC] on March 14, 
2016 and on November 2, 2016.” 
Gima’s physician, Dr. Davidson, signed a “disability 
determination form” dated May 29, 2018, stating that Gima had 
been suffering from major depressive disorder from January 2016 
through at least May 29, 2018, which caused her to experience “anxiety,” “fear,” “fatigue,” and “poor concentration.” 
Dr. Davidson further stated that Gima’s major depressive 
disorder (“depressed mood, anxiety, insomnia, fatigue, no 
14  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
energy, loss of appetite, fear, unable to think, poor 
concentration”) substantially affected her “[r]eading, working, 
socializing, speaking, [and] interpersonal relationships.” 
On June 7, 2018, Gima was placed on workers’ compensation 
leave due to her medical conditions and was excused from work 
from April 30, 2018 to October 1, 2018. Gima was unable to 
return to BFS because of her medical restriction. 
On June 14, 2018, Gima filed a fourth HCRC complaint 
asserting that she “was demoted in retaliation for filing discrimination complaints with the [HCRC] on March 14, 2016 and 
November 2, 2016.” Gima asserted that her 2018 substandard 
performance evaluation and demotion were retaliatory acts, and 
denied that her work performance was “below standard.” 
Gima was issued right to sue letters for her HCRC 
complaints on August 3, 2018 and September 5, 2018. 
III. CIRCUIT COURT PROCEEDINGS 
Gima timely filed suit in the circuit court asserting 
claims for disability discrimination, failure to provide a 
reasonable accommodation, and retaliation in violation of Hawaiʻ i 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 378-2. The City filed a motion for 
summary judgment on March 3, 2023. Following a hearing, the 
circuit court granted the City’s motion for summary judgment on 
Gima’s disability discrimination, reasonable accommodation, and 
15  
 
    
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
retaliation claims.3 
As to Gima’s disability discrimination claim, the circuit 
court concluded that Gima had not established a prima facie case 
of disability discrimination because: (1) she was not disabled 
as a matter of law since she was not “substantially limited in a 
major life activity”; (2) she was not qualified for her position 
as an RPTO; and (3) her April 2018 substandard evaluation and 
subsequent demotion were not based on her disability because she “was no longer disabled” at the time the evaluation and demotion 
were issued. Even if Gima had established a prima facie case of 
disability discrimination, the court found that the City offered 
“legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons” for not accommodating 
Gima’s request for a different supervisor and for giving Gima a 
substandard performance evaluation, which were not “pretextual.” 
The court also found that the City did not deny Gima a 
reasonable accommodation. The court determined as a matter of 
law that Gima’s request for a supervisor other than Magota was not a reasonable accommodation. Even if Gima’s request had been 
reasonable on its face, the court concluded that the City 
adequately engaged in an interactive process with Gima when she 
was enrolled in the City’s Priority Placement Program and 
offered a position in a different department. 
3 The Honorable Kevin T. Morikone presided. 
16  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As to Gima’s retaliation claim, the court concluded that 
Gima could not pursue her claim that the City retaliated against 
her for requesting a reasonable accommodation in November 2017. 
The court determined that Gima “failed to exhaust her 
administrative remedies” because she did not raise this 
particular claim in her 2018 HCRC charges, which were the bases 
for her circuit court complaint. The court also determined that 
Gima failed to allege this claim in her civil complaint. The court then considered Gima’s claim that the City retaliated 
against her after she filed her two 2016 HCRC charges, and 
concluded that pursuing charges with the HCRC was a protected 
activity which met the first prong of her retaliation claim. 
The court also found that Gima had satisfied the second 
prong of her retaliation claim because “adverse actions include 
demotions and negative performance evaluations if accompanied 
with removal from the position,” and the “denial of a request 
for reasonable accommodation can arguably be viewed as an adverse act.” 
However, the court determined that Gima “failed to raise a 
genuine issue of material fact as to whether there is a causal 
link” between the 2016 HCRC charges and the adverse actions (the 
denial of her request for a reasonable accommodation in December 
2017 and the negative evaluation and demotion in April 2018). 
The court based this conclusion on the “lack [of] temporal 
17  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
proximity” since more than a year had passed between the 
protected activities and adverse acts. The court also based the 
lack of causation on the absence of evidence in the record 
establishing that supervisor Takara, who issued Gima’s negative 
performance review, was aware of the 2016 HCRC complaints. 
Gima appealed the circuit court’s order granting the City’s 
motion for summary judgment, and subsequently applied for 
transfer to this court, which we granted. 
IV. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
We review a circuit court’s award of summary judgment de 
novo under the same standard applied by the circuit court. 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. 
A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non- moving party. 
Adams v. CDM Media USA, Inc. , 135 Hawai‘i 1, 12, 346 P.3d 70, 81 
(2015) (citing 
Shoppe v. Gucci Am., Inc.
, 94 Hawai‘i 368, 376, 14 
P.3d 1049, 1057 (2000)) (cleaned up); Hawai‘ i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(c) (eff. 2000) (“The judgment sought 
shall be rendered forthwith if the pleadings, depositions, 
answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together 
with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to 
a judgment as a matter of law.”). 
18  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“This court may affirm a grant of summary judgment on any 
ground appearing in the record, even if the circuit court did 
not rely on it.” Reyes v. Kuboyama, 76 Hawai‘ i 137, 140, 870 
P.2d 1281, 1284 (1994). 
V. DISCUSSION 
A. Disability Discrimination 
Gima established a prima facie case of disability 
discrimination. She met her summary judgment burden of establishing a genuine issue of material fact that her major 
depressive disorder and anxiety disorder constituted a 
disability under HRS Chapter 378, she was qualified for her 
position with a reasonable accommodation, and she was issued a negative evaluation and demoted because of her disability. 
HRS § 378-2(a) provides in relevant part, that “[i]t shall 
be an unlawful discriminatory practice” for any employer “to 
refuse to hire or employ or to bar or discharge from employment, 
or otherwise to discriminate against any individual in 
compensation or in the terms, conditions, or privileges of 
employment” because of a person’s “disability.” HRS § 378-
2(a)(1)(A) (2015). In line with HRS § 378-2(a), Hawaiʻi 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 12-46-181 “prohibits any employer 
or other covered entity from discriminating in employment 
against individuals or persons because of a disability.” HAR § 
19  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
12-46-181 (eff. 2012). 
To establish a prima facie case of disability 
discrimination, Gima must demonstrate: (1) she is an individual 
with a “disability” within the meaning of HRS Chapter 378; (2) 
she is “qualified to perform the essential duties of . . . her 
job with or without reasonable accommodation”; and (3) she 
suffered an adverse employment decision because of her 
disability. French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, 105 Hawai‘ i 462, 467, 99 
P.3d 1046, 1051 (2004) (citation omitted). 
1. There are genuine issues of material fact as to 
whether Gima was disabled within the meaning of HRS § 378-1. 
HRS § 378-1 defines disability as “the state of having a 
physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or 
more major life activities, having a record of such an 
impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment.” 
HRS § 378-1 (2015); see HAR § 12-46-182 (eff. 2012). 
First, Gima established she suffered a “mental impairment” 
within the meaning of HRS § 378-1. HAR § 12-46-182 defines a 
“physical or mental impairment” as including “[a]ny mental or psychological disorder, such as an . . . emotional or mental 
illness” including “major depression.” HAR § 12-46-182. The 
record shows that Gima’s physician, Dr. Davidson, diagnosed her 
with anxiety in 2014 and “major depressive disorder” in 2016. 
Gima attested that the City’s independent examiner, Dr. Joseph 
20  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Rogers (Dr. Rogers), concurred and also diagnosed her with an 
anxiety disorder. 
Second, there is a genuine issue of material fact that 
Gima’s anxiety and major depressive disorders “substantially 
limited” her major life activities. HAR § 12-46-182 defines 
“[m]ajor life activities” as “[b]asic activities that most 
people in the general population can perform with little or no 
difficulty,” and includes reading, concentrating, thinking, interacting with others, and working. HAR § 12-46-182; see also
Bitney v. Honolulu Police Dep’t, 96 Hawai‘ i 243, 252, 30 P.3d 
257, 266 (2001) (“The phrase ‘major life activities’ is defined 
as functions such as caring for one’s self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, 
and working. Reading, writing, learning, thinking, and 
concentrating have all been held to be ‘major life activities’ 
under the ADA.”) (internal citations and quotations omitted). 
“An impairment need not prevent, or severely or 
significantly restrict, a person from performing a major life 
activity in order to be considered substantially limiting.” HAR § 12-46-182. 
“Certain impairments such as . . . major 
depressive disorder . . . should easily be concluded to be substantially limiting.” Id.Determining whether an employee’s 
impairment “substantially limits” a major life activity “requires a case-by-case analysis looking at the effect the 
21  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
impairment has on the life of the individual.” French, 105 
Hawai‘i at 469, 99 P.3d at 1053 (quotations and citations 
omitted); see also Bitney, 96 Hawai‘ i at 253, 30 P.3d at 267 
(“[W]hether a person has a disability under the ADA is an 
individualized inquiry.”). 
Gima asserts, and her doctor’s report confirms, that from 
January 2016 through at least May 29, 2018, her major depressive disorder caused “depressed mood, anxiety, insomnia, fatigue, no 
energy, loss of appetite, fear, unable to think [sic], [and] 
poor concentration” which substantially affected her major life 
activities of “[r]eading, working, socializing, speaking, [and] 
interpersonal relationships.” Viewed in the light most 
favorable to Gima, a trier of fact could reasonably infer from 
this evidence that Gima began suffering from an anxiety disorder and major depressive disorder in 2014 and 2016 respectively, 
which substantially limited her major life activities, and that 
she continued to suffer from these impairments when she was 
issued the negative evaluation and demoted in 2018. 
The City does not dispute that Gima suffered from anxiety 
or depression. Rather, the City takes the position that Gima 
was not disabled as a matter of law when she returned to work in 
February 2018 because: (1) her medical condition was caused by 
her supervisor, Magota; (2) her sole work restriction was 
22  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
working with Magota; and (3) she was able to return to work in 
February 2018 after Magota retired, thus, the City contends, her 
impairment had completely resolved when she returned to work. 
In other words, it was presumed that Gima’s medical conditions 
fully resolved by virtue of Magota’s retirement and her return 
to work. 
Based on the evidence, and contrary to the City’s 
interpretation, the circuit court erred in finding that Gima “no longer suffered a disability” as of February 1, 2018 when she 
returned to work. There is no indication in the record that 
Gima’s anxiety or depression abruptly ended when Magota retired 
or when she returned to BFS in 2018. To the contrary, 
Dr. Davidson’s medical report indicates that Gima continued to 
suffer from her medical conditions, including major depressive 
disorder, through at least May 29, 2018. While Gima returned to 
work in February 2018, a reasonable fact-finder could infer that 
she was able to return to work solely because Magota retired and was no longer supervising her, which was the reasonable 
accommodation she had requested of the City on the advice of 
Dr. Davidson and Dr. Rogers prior to Magota’s retirement. 
The circuit court erroneously conflated Gima’s ability to 
return to work under a new direct supervisor with the 
termination of her disability. A change in work restrictions 
and the ability to return to work does not necessarily indicate 
23  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a person is free from their disability. While the City 
correctly notes that “[t]he inability to perform a single, 
particular job does not constitute a substantial limitation in 
the major life activity of working,” Gima asserts substantial 
limitations in multiple areas of her life other than her 
inability to work at BFS which is supported by Dr. Davidson’s 
medical report. See HAR § 12-46-182; Bitney, 96 Hawai‘i at 254, 
30 P.3d at 268. This evidence establishes a genuine issue of 
material fact. 
Even if Gima’s impairment could be construed as “episodic” 
or in remission at certain points between 2014 to 2018, Gima has 
met her burden of establishing that she suffered an active disability that substantially limited her major life activities 
in April 2018, when she was issued her substandard performance 
evaluation and subsequently demoted. 
HAR § 12-46-182 (“An 
impairment that is episodic or in remission is a disability if it would substantially limit a major life activity when active. 
Examples of impairments that may be episodic or in remission 
include . . . major depressive disorder.”) Further, both parties submitted exhibits showing that from September 2017 
through January 2018 Gima was on approved workers’ compensation 
leave because of her medical conditions, which indicates that 
Gima’s medical conditions continued after Magota retired at the 
24  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
end of 2017. 
Because a reasonable fact-finder could infer that Gima was 
suffering from a disability that substantially limited her major 
life activities in April 2018, Gima raised a genuine issue of 
material fact as to whether she was disabled under HRS § 378-1, 
and the court erred in concluding otherwise. 
2. There is a genuine issue of material fact that Gima 
was qualified for her position with a reasonable 
accommodation. 
In addition to being disabled, Gima established a genuine 
issue of material fact that she was “qualified to perform the 
essential duties of . . . her job with or without reasonable 
accommodation.” French
, 105 Hawai‘i at 467, 99 P.3d at 1051.  
HAR § 12-46-182 defines “qualified” as: 
“Qualified” with respect to a person with a disability 
means a person with a disability who satisfies:  
(1) The requisite skill, experience, education, and other 
job
-related qualification standards of the employment 
position such person holds or desires; and 
(2) Who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can 
perform the essential functions of such position.  
HAR § 12-46-182 (emphasis added). 
Whether Gima was qualified for her position as an RPTO 
poses two questions: (1) did Gima have the requisite 
qualifications, and could she perform the “essential functions” 
of an RPTO; and (2) if Gima needed an accommodation to perform 
the essential functions of an RPTO, was the accommodation 
25  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reasonable? 
There is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether 
Gima had the “requisite skill, experience, [and] education” and 
could perform the “essential functions” of an RPTO. “Essential 
functions” refers to the “fundamental job duties of the 
employment position[.]” HAR § 12-46-182. Whether a “particular 
function is essential should reflect the actual functioning and 
circumstances of the particular job.” Id.In this case, the 
circuit court erred in finding that Gima “cannot do the 
essential functions of her job based on multiple substandard 
ratings by two different supervisors over a period of time[.]” 
In opposing the City’s motion for summary judgment, Gima 
submitted the rebuttals she provided to the City in response to 
her negative performance reviews, and asserted that the reviews 
were based on “discriminatory animus.” 
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Gima, 
it can be reasonably inferred that Gima was adequately performing the “essential functions” of her job despite the 
substandard reviews issued in 2017 and 2018. First, the 
substandard performance reviews issued in 2017 were both 
completed by Magota, who Gima asserts retaliated and 
discriminated against her. The City did not include a counter 
declaration from Magota in support of its motion for summary 
judgment
. Second, the City does not contest that Gima did not 
26  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
receive any negative reviews prior to 2016. Based on the 
evidence presented, Magota issued Gima’s first negative review 
in January 2017 after Gima lodged several charges against him 
with the City and submitted two HCRC complaints asserting that 
Magota had engaged in disability discrimination, sex 
discrimination, and retaliation against her. 
Gima also met her summary judgment burden in countering the 
City’s assertion that she did not complete her work with adequate quality. In her declaration, Gima stated that she was 
either not assigned certain work or she was not given proper 
guidance. Further, while the 2017 reviews asserted that Gima 
struggled to timely complete long-term projects, evidence 
presented by both parties indicates Gima was consistently absent 
from the office because she was out on authorized workers’ 
compensation leave for almost all of 2015 and part of 2017. 
Gima also disputes the evaluation she received from Takara 
in 2018 after he became her direct supervisor. In Gima’s declaration, she attested that the tasks she was accused of not 
adequately performing in 2018 were either joint projects, and 
therefore not her sole responsibility, or she was unaware of 
those assignments because Takara failed to inform her of her 
responsibilities when she returned to BFS. Gima further stated 
that when she returned to work in February 2018, Takara met with 
her within a few weeks to “criticiz[e] [her] for many very small 
27  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
issues, such as typographical errors, and other issues that 
occurred while [she] was out on worker[s’] compensation leave.” 
Gima presents sufficient evidence controverting the City’s 
claim that she was inadequately performing at BFS, and, 
therefore, viewed in the light most favorable to Gima, there is 
a genuine issue of material fact as to her qualifications 
serving in her role as an RPTO. See Nationstar Mortg. LLC v.
Kanahele
, 144 Hawaiʻi 394, 401–02, 443 P.3d 86, 93–94 (2019) 
(“[A] party moving for summary judgment is not entitled to a 
judgment merely because the facts he offers appear more 
plausible than those tendered in opposition or because it 
appears that the adversary is unlikely to prevail at trial . . . if the evidence presented on the motion is subject to 
conflicting interpretations, or reasonable men might differ as 
to its significance, summary judgment is improper.”) (citation 
omitted). 
The circuit court further erred in finding that Gima was 
unqualified for her position simply because she was medically 
restricted from working with Magota. 
To determine whether Gima 
was qualified to work as an RPTO in BFS, with or without 
reasonable accommodation, we must first address whether Gima’s 
request for a supervisor other than Magota was a reasonable 
accommodation request. 
Whether an employee’s request for an alternate supervisor 
28  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
can be construed to be a reasonable accommodation request is an 
issue of first impression for this court. We hold that 
requesting an alternate supervisor is not unreasonable as a 
matter of law. Whether such a request is reasonable must be 
determined on a case-by-case basis by conducting an 
individualized inquiry into whether the employer can reasonably 
accommodate such a request. See Hamilton v. GlaxoSmithKline,
LLC, 414 F.Supp.3d 1286, 1294-95 (D. Mont. 2019) (declining to 
adopt a per se rule that assigning a new supervisor is not a 
reasonable accommodation), aff’d, 835 Fed. Appx. 936 (9th Cir. 
2021); see also Kennedy v. Dresser Rand Co., 193 F.3d 120, 122-
23 (2d Cir. 1999). 
HAR § 12-46-182 defines “reasonable accommodation,” in 
relevant part, as “[m]odifications or adjustments to the work 
environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the 
position held or desired is customarily performed, that enable a 
person with a disability to perform the essential functions of that position[.]” HAR § 12-46-182. This includes modifications 
such as “[j]ob restructuring,” “part-time or modified work 
schedules,” or “reassignment to a vacant position[.]” Id.
Neither French nor Bitney considered whether requesting an 
alternate supervisor can be a reasonable accommodation; however, 
in both cases we emphasized that an “individualized” approach is 
necessary in assessing disability discrimination claims. 
29  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
French, 105 Hawaiʻi at 469-70, 99 P.3d at 1053-54; Bitney , 96 
Hawaiʻi at 253, 30 P.3d at 267.  Applying a similar 
“individualized” approach to a reasonable accommodation request, 
i.e., considering whether the request is reasonable in the 
context of an employee’s workplace, is consistent with both our 
disability discrimination caselaw and statutory framework. 
While there are certainly situations where requesting 
another supervisor would be untenable for a business or would be excessively disruptive and pose an undue hardship, we do not 
find it persuasive that it is unreasonable, as a matter of law, 
to request another supervisor as a reasonable accommodation. 
We 
find the Montana District Court’s reasoning in Hamilton v. GlaxoSmithKline, LLC persuasive. 
If a court were to hold that, under the facts and 
circumstances of a particular case, assignment to another 
supervisor was a reasonable accommodation, its decision 
would not necessarily force a dramatic restructuring of an 
organizational chart. For example, imagine that a large 
business employs forty customer service representatives, twenty of whom are randomly assigned to one supervisor, and 
twenty to another. Assuming that one of the 
representatives has a disability which means that she can 
successfully work under one supervisor but not the other, 
reassignment would carry with it minimal expense and disruption. 
Hamilton, 414 F.Supp.3d at 1294. 
Because this case was decided by summary judgment, Gima’s 
burden was to establish a genuine issue of material fact as to 
whether it was reasonable to have an alternate supervisor 
assigned to her. The record reveals conflicting evidence that 
30  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
gives rise to a genuine issue of material fact as to whether 
someone at BFS other than Magota could have supervised Gima. 
Gima worked for many years at BFS and in her declaration stated 
that either “Mr. Takara, Mr. Kurokawa, or Mr. Koyanagi could 
have been directed to supervise [her].” Gima added that the 
“change in personnel” that occurred at BFS would have allowed 
her to change supervisors in 2017. 
The City primarily argued that Gima’s declaration did not 
establish that she had “personal knowledge” to attest that someone else could have supervised her. Additionally, Takara 
stated in his declaration that it “would not be possible” for 
someone other than Magota to have supervised Gima because, as of 
May 2017, Takara was “newly promoted” and the division was 
“short staffed.” The City did not proffer a specific reason as 
to why Koyanagi or Kurokawa would have been unable to supervise 
Gima. 
The City’s argument that Gima did not have the requisite 
knowledge to attest that Takara, Kurokawa, or Koyanagi could have supervised her is unavailing. Gima’s declaration was made 
“upon [her] personal knowledge and belief,” and recited that she 
had worked continuously at BFS since 1995. When Gima was 
promoted to RPTO in July 2012, she had over twenty years of 
experience working in the City’s Real Property Assessment 
Division and twelve years of supervisory experience. Gima 
31  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
further stated that her direct supervisor Magota lacked the 
knowledge and understanding involved with the functioning of the 
City’s Real Property Assessment Division and recalled Kurokawa 
performing some of Magota’s job duties and conducting weekly 
meetings in 2017. Gima’s declaration demonstrates her personal 
knowledge of the inner workings and operations of BFS, and 
Takara, Kurokawa, and Koyanagi’s roles in the Real Property 
Assessment Division. Viewed in the light most favorable to Gima, there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether 
Takara, Kurokawa, or Koyanagi could have supervised Gima when 
she submitted her reasonable accommodation request in November 
2017. See Nozawa v. Operating Eng’rs Loc. Union No. 3
, 142 
Hawai‘i 331, 333, 418 P.3d 1187, 1189 (2018) (“[HRCP Rule 56(e)] 
does not preclude an affidavit from being self-serving, nor does 
it require an affidavit to be corroborated by independent 
evidence.”). 
In sum, the evidence presented by the parties raised a 
genuine issue of material fact as to whether the City could have 
had Takara, Kurokawa, or Koyanagi supervise Gima without incurring excessive disruptions or imposing an undue hardship. 
Gima also met her burden of establishing that she was qualified 
for her BFS position with the reasonable accommodation of a 
different supervisor. See
 HAR § 12-46-187(a) (“It is unlawful 
for an employer or other covered entity not to make reasonable 
32  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
accommodation to the known physical or mental limitations of an 
applicant or employee with a disability who is otherwise 
qualified, unless such employer or entity can demonstrate that 
the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the 
operation of its business”) (eff. 2012). 
3. There is a genuine issue of material fact that Gima 
was issued a negative performance evaluation and demoted because of her disability. 
Gima has also demonstrated a genuine issue of material fact 
that she was discriminated against “because” of her disability. 
See French
, 105 Hawai‘i at 467, 99 P.3d at 1051. 
The circuit court determined that Gima did not meet the 
third prong of her prima facie disability discrimination claim 
because: (1) Gima was “no longer disabled” at the time of her 
2018 evaluation; (2) Gima did not establish that Takara knew of 
her disability; and (3) even if Takara knew of her disability, 
Gima did not establish evidence that her negative review and 
demotion were because of her disability. 
First, as previously stated, the circuit court erred in 
determining that Gima was no longer disabled at the time of her 2018 evaluation and demotion. 
Second, there is a genuine issue of material fact that 
Takara, who issued Gima’s substandard evaluation in 2018, and 
Koyanagi, who issued Gima’s 2018 demotion and copied Takara, 
were both aware of Gima’s disability. 
“An employer has notice 
33  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of the employee’s disability when the employee tells the 
employer that [s]he is disabled.” King v. Steward Trumbull
Mem’l Hosp., Inc., 30 F.4th 551, 563 (6th Cir. 2022) (citations omitted). An employee need not explicitly use the word 
“disabled” or “disability” to put an employer on notice of their 
condition; however, an employer must have “enough information 
about the employee’s condition to conclude that [an employee] is 
disabled.” Id.(citations omitted). “Relevant information 
could include, among other things, a diagnosis, a treatment 
plan, apparent severe symptoms, and physician-imposed work 
restrictions.” Id. at 564 (citations omitted). 
Gima has met her burden of establishing a genuine issue of 
material fact that her supervisors, including Takara and 
Koyanagi, had knowledge of her condition. Takara claimed that 
he did not know Gima had a disability. However, Takara also 
attested that: (1) he was aware of Gima’s complaints against 
Magota (one of which included a disability discrimination complaint); (2) he knew of Gima’s “pattern of claiming stress 
when needing to interact with Magota”; (3) he knew Gima was on 
workers’ compensation leave from September 15, 2017 to January 
31, 2018; and (4) he was aware that Gima had made an 
accommodation request for “someone other than Magota [to] 
supervise her[.]” 
As to BFS Director Koyanagi, he previously received notice 
34  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
   
 
   4 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of Gima’s March 14, 2016 HCRC complaint in which she alleged 
that the City had discriminated against her on the basis of her 
disability. 
Gima further attested that “[a]ll of [her] supervisor[s] 
and other administrators were aware of [her] leave and the . . . 
reasons for [her] leave.” Gima also attested, 
Many of my colleagues were aware of the symptoms of my 
condition as I shared my state of mind and anxiety/stress 
with them. I even sent an email asking them not to be 
alarmed that my office door would be mostly closed as 
hearing Magota in his office next to mine provoked my anxiety. 
Viewed in the light most favorable to Gima, a reasonable 
fact-finder could infer from the evidence that supervisors 
Magota, Takara, and Koyanagi were aware of her medical 
condition.4 
Third, there is a genuine issue of material fact that 
Gima’s substandard review and demotion were because of her 
disability rather than her actual performance. See French
, 105 
Hawai‘i at 467, 99 P.3d at 1051.  The close proximity between 
Gima’s return from workers’ compensation leave and the 
At oral argument, the City asserted it had no knowledge of 
Dr. Davidson’s May 29, 2018 report noting the substantial effect Gima’s major 
depressive order had on various life activities until Gima filed the instant 
case. Oral Argument at 46:40- 48:56, http://oaoa.hawaii.gov/jud/oa/24/SCOA-
103124-SCAP-23-0000416.mp3 [https://perma.cc/WMV5- BSE2]. Even assuming the 
City was not aware of Dr. Davidson’s report, the record presents sufficient 
evidence that a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Gima’s supervisors knew of her disability. See King, 30 F.4th at 564 (concluding 
that an employer’s awareness of a medical condition coupled with the employee’s notification of such condition presents a factual issue as to 
whether the employer knew of the employee’s disability). 
35  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
substandard performance evaluation and demotion support a 
reasonable inference that the substandard review and demotion 
were based on her disability. See Butler v. City of Prairie
Vill., Kan., 172 F.3d 736, 749 (10th Cir. 1999) (“The temporal proximity of Plaintiff’s request for an accommodation to the 
decline in his work evaluations and his supervisors’ complaints 
about his work performance contributes to an inference that 
Plaintiff’s position was eliminated because of his disability.”). 
The record reflects that Gima was on workers’ compensation 
leave because of her anxiety and depression from September 2017 
to February 2018. Shortly after she returned from leave in 
February 2018, Gima received a negative review from her new 
supervisor, Takara. Gima’s declaration stated that she met with 
Takara on February 23, 2018, a few weeks after she returned to 
work, at which time Takara “criticized” her for “very small 
issues, such as typographical errors” and “other issues that occurred while [she] was out on worker[s’] compensation leave.” 
Two months later, Takara gave Gima a substandard evaluation and 
Gima was demoted. Gima attested that the evaluation was 
unfounded, “undeserved,” and “reflect[ed] a discriminatory 
animus against [her].” A reasonable fact-finder could infer 
that Takara and Koyanagi knew of Gima’s disability, Takara 
issued a substandard review because of Gima’s disability, and 
36  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Gima’s disability was a factor in her demotion. 
Thus, Gima has met her burden of establishing a genuine 
issue of material fact that there was a causal connection 
between her medical condition and leave and her 2018 performance 
review and subsequent demotion. See Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway
Hotel, Inc., 69 Haw. 376, 389, 742 P.2d 377, 385 (1987) (“Inasmuch as causal relation is one of fact, ‘[i]t is [a 
question] for the jury, except when the facts are such that they will support only one reasonable inference.’”) (quoting L. 
Green, Rationale of Proximate Cause 132 (1927) (emphasis 
original). 
4. There is a genuine issue of material fact that the 
City’s proffered reasons for Gima’s negative 
performance evaluation and demotion were pretextual. 
As Gima has established a prima facie case of disability 
discrimination, the burden shifts to the City “to provide a 
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment 
action[.]” Lales v. Wholesale Motors Co.
, 133 Hawaiʻi 332, 356, 
328 P.3d 341, 365 (2014) (quoting 
Schefke v. Reliable Collection 
Agency, Ltd.
, 96 Hawaiʻi 408, 426, 32 P.3d 52, 70 (2001)). “[I]f 
the defendant articulates such a reason, the burden shifts back 
to the plaintiff to show evidence demonstrating that the reason 
given by the defendant is pretextual.” Id.
 at 356-57, 328 P.3d 
37  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
at 365-66 (quoting Schefke , 96 Hawaiʻi at 426, 32 P.3d at 70).   
A “legitimate” reason is defined as “lawful,” or “genuine.” 
Adams
, 135 Hawai‘i at 15, 346 P.3d at 84 (citing 
Black’s Law 
Dictionary 984 (9th ed. 2009)). A “legitimate reason must be 
one that is justifiable in view of the purposes of the statute,” 
and the explanation “must be in the form of admissible evidence 
and must clearly set forth reasons that, if believed by the trier of fact, would support a finding that unlawful 
discrimination was not the cause of the challenged employment 
action.” Id. (citations, quotations, and brackets omitted). 
To rebut Gima’s prima facie case, the City proffered Gima’s 
alleged poor work performance as the reason for Gima’s 
substandard review in 2018 and subsequent demotion. The City 
pointed to Gima’s evaluations from 2017 and 2018 that detailed issues with her work, including her purported unwillingness to 
do certain tasks and a tendency to make errors. Takara and 
Kurokawa also attested to Gima’s performance issues. 
“[T]he nondiscriminatory reason articulated by the employer 
for the adverse employment action must be related to the ability 
of the individual to perform the work in question.” Adams
, 135 
Hawai‘i at 22, 346 P.3d at 91.  In this case, the City’s 
proffered reason could be found to be a legitimate, non
-
discriminatory reason relating to Gima’s “ability . . . to 
38  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
perform the work in question.” See id.
Because the City’s evidence could be construed as 
adequately demonstrating a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason 
for Gima’s substandard evaluation and demotion, the burden 
shifts back to Gima to establish that the City’s reason was 
“pretextual.” Lales, 133 Hawaiʻ i at 356-57, 328 P.3d at 365-66. 
Gima may establish pretext “either directly by persuading the 
court that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the 
employer or indirectly by showing that the employer’s proffered 
explanation is unworthy of credence.” Id. at 358, 328 P.3d at 
367 (quoting Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affs. v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981)). 
The plaintiff can discredit the proffered reasons by 
demonstrating such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the 
defendant’ s proffered legitimate reasons for its action 
that a reasonable factfinder could rationally find them unworthy of credence, and hence infer that the defendant 
did not act for the asserted nondiscriminatory reasons. 
Adams, 135 Hawai‘i at 45, 346 P.3d at 114 (Recktenwald, C.J., 
concurring and dissenting) (quoting 
Anderson v. Wachovia Mortg. 
Corp., 621 F.3d 261, 277 (3d Cir. 2010)). 
Gima has presented sufficient evidence to establish a 
genuine issue of material fact that the City’s proffered reasons 
for her demotion were pretextual. See Lales
, 133 Hawai‘i at 358
-
62, 328 P.3d at 367-71. 
Gima presented evidence that contradicts and discredits the 
39  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
substandard reviews issued in 2017 and 2018, and she disputes 
underperforming at her job. In her declaration, Gima attested 
that she was not given adequate supervision while working with 
Magota and that many of her supposed inadequacies reflected 
assignments that were not solely under her purview. In her 
rebuttal to the 2018 performance evaluation, Gima asserted that 
Takara blamed her for oversights that were not her 
responsibility and that his representations of her performance were “incomplete.” 
The “temporal proximity” of Gima’s return from workers’ 
compensation leave and the negative review and demotion further 
supports her pretext contention. See Lales
, 133 Hawaiʻi at 358, 
328 P.3d at 367 (concluding that temporal proximity supported 
plaintiff’s claim that his termination was pretext for a 
discriminatory motive). 
Gima’s substandard evaluations began after she filed 
complaints against Magota in 2016 and after she filed her 
workers’ compensation claim. 
As to Takara, Gima asserted that 
he met with her within a few weeks after she returned from 
workers’ compensation leave in 2018 to “criticiz[e]” her for 
“issues that occurred while [she] was out on worker[s’] 
compensation leave.” The April 2018 review was issued less than 
three months after Gima returned from leave and approximately 
five months after she requested a reasonable accommodation to 
40  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
have an alternate supervisor. 
There is also sufficient evidence in the record for a fact-
finder to infer that Magota’s purported discriminatory animus 
was imputed to Takara’s 2018 evaluation of Gima under a “cat’s 
paw” theory. See Adams, 135 Hawai‘ i at 47, 346 P.3d at 116 
(Recktenwald, C.J., concurring and dissenting). 
“[U]nder a 
‘cat's paw’ theory an employer may be liable where the plaintiff 
can show that an employee with discriminatory animus provided 
factual information or other input that may have affected the 
adverse employment action.” Id.(quotations and citation 
omitted). Gima’s declaration, which attested to Magota’s “bias” against her, and the 2017 substandard performance reviews, which Magota issued after Gima returned from workers’ compensation 
leave related to her anxiety and major depressive disorders, 
create a genuine issue of material fact that Magota exhibited 
animosity towards Gima because of her disability. 
As stated, 
the City did not submit a declaration from Magota. 
While Magota retired prior to Gima’s April 2018 evaluation 
and demotion, there is a genuine issue of material fact as to 
whether his purported discriminatory animus could be imputed to 
Takara, who issued Gima’s 2018 performance evaluation. Takara 
attested that he and Magota had discussed Gima’s complaints 
against Magota and her performance while Magota supervised her. 
Takara’s 2018 evaluation of Gima also referenced Gima’s 
41  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
performance while Magota supervised her. Under these 
circumstances, a reasonable fact-finder could infer that 
Magota’s evaluations and purported discriminatory animus 
affected the April 2018 evaluation issued by Takara, and Gima’s 
subsequent demotion. 
Based on the evidence adduced, there is a genuine issue of 
material fact that Gima’s BFS supervisors knew of her 
disability, Gima was subject to an adverse action, and the adverse employment actions were based on her disability. Gima 
has further established a genuine issue of material fact that 
the City’s purported reasons for her 2018 review and demotion 
were pretextual. Therefore, the court erred in granting the 
City’s motion for summary judgment as to Gima’s disability 
discrimination claim. 
B. Failure to Accommodate 
Gima also asserts that the City failed to accommodate her 
request for a reasonable accommodation to be supervised by 
someone other than Magota, thus violating HAR § 12-46-187(a). 
We disagree. Even when viewing the evidence in a light most 
favorable to Gima, the record reflects that after she requested 
a reasonable accommodation, the City engaged in an interactive 
process with Gima that resulted in finding an alternate position 
in a different department. Gima does not dispute that the City 
42  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was in the process of transferring her when Magota retired. 
The City was not required to provide the exact 
accommodation Gima had requested. Therefore, we hold that the 
City did not fail to provide a reasonable accommodation and the 
circuit court did not err in granting the City’s motion for 
summary judgment as to Gima’s reasonable accommodation claim. 
Under HAR § 12-46-187(a), 
It is unlawful for an employer or other covered entity not 
to make reasonable accommodation to the known physical or 
mental limitations of an applicant or employee with a 
disability who is otherwise qualified, unless such employer 
or entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would 
impose an undue hardship on the operation of its business. An employee does not have to specifically 
request a “reasonable accommodation”, but must only let the employer know that some adjustment or change is needed to 
do a job because of limitations caused by a disability. 
To be entitled to a reasonable accommodation, an employee 
must demonstrate they have a disability and are “qualified” for 
the position. HAR § 12-46-187(a). A reasonable accommodation 
can include “[j]ob restructuring” or “reassignment to a vacant 
position.” HAR § 12-46-182; see also Suzuki v. State, 119 
Hawai‘i 288, 300, 196 P.3d 290, 302 (App. 2008). 
The City argues that even if Gima was entitled to a 
reasonable accommodation, the City was not required to 
accommodate Gima’s exact request to be assigned a new 
supervisor. 
Further, at the time of Gima’s request, the City 
asserts, and Gima does not dispute, that she was enrolled in the City’s workers’ compensation Priority Placement Program which 
43  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was working on having Gima transferred to a different 
department, which would have placed Gima outside of Magota’s 
supervision. In response, Gima argues that the City did not 
engage in any “interactive process,” as required under HAR § 
12-46-187(b), and that the Priority Placement Program was not a 
substitute for the required process. 
HAR § 12-46-187(b) provides, 
To determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation, it 
shall be necessary for an employer or other covered entity 
to initiate an interactive process, after a request for an 
accommodation, with the person with a disability in need of the accommodation.   This process shall identify the precise 
limitations resulting from the disability and potential 
reasonable accommodations that could overcome those 
limitations.  
HAR § 12-46-187(b) (eff. 2012) (emphasis added). 
As discussed, Gima’s request for an alternate supervisor 
was not unreasonable as a matter of law, and there is a genuine 
issue of material fact as to whether the City could have 
reasonably accommodated Gima with another supervisor. However, 
an “employer is not obligated to provide an employee the 
accommodation [s]he requests or prefers, the employer need only 
provide some reasonable accommodation.” Zivkovic v. S. Cal.
Edison Co., 302 F.3d 1080, 1089 (9th Cir. 2002) (citation omitted). 
While the City was not required to provide the specific 
accommodation Gima requested, the City was required to engage in 
a good faith interactive process when she requested a reasonable 
44  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
accommodation. HAR § 12-46-187(b). Here, the City fulfilled 
its obligation. The Ninth Circuit has held that the interactive 
process requires: (1) “direct communication between the employer 
and employee to explore in good faith the possible 
accommodations”; (2) “consideration of the employee’s request”; 
and (3) “offering an accommodation that is reasonable and 
effective.” Zivkovic, 302 F.3d at 1089 (citation omitted). 
In this case, Gima does not establish a genuine issue of 
material fact as to whether the City adequately engaged in a good faith interactive process after she requested a reasonable 
accommodation. The evidence presented by both parties shows 
that on November 15, 2017, Gima requested a reasonable 
accommodation for a different supervisor because she was 
medically restricted from working with Magota. The City’s 
Department of Human Resources forwarded the request to BFS the 
same day. BFS denied Gima’s request on December 5, 2017. 
During this time, Gima was enrolled in the City’s workers’ 
compensation Priority Placement Program, and the City was working with her in their efforts to find her a position in 
another department where she would not be supervised by Magota. 
The record demonstrates, and Gima does not dispute, that in 
December 2017 the City found Gima a position in the Department 
of Transportation Services and that she was in the process of 
transferring to that position when Magota retired from BFS. 
45  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Although the Priority Placement Program may have been related to 
the City’s workers’ compensation process, it was nonetheless a 
substantive interactive process that served the purpose of 
finding Gima an alternative and suitable position. At the time, 
not being supervised by Magota was Gima’s sole medical work 
restriction. After Magota retired, Gima was able to return to 
work with Takara as her new supervisor, which accommodated her 
work restriction, and therefore Gima did not go forward with the transfer to the Department of Transportation Services. 
In sum, Gima did not demonstrate any genuine issue of 
material fact that supports a finding of a breakdown of the 
interactive process. Cf. Humphrey v. Mem’l Hosp. Ass’n, 239 
F.3d 1128, 1137–39 (9th Cir. 2001) (concluding that plaintiff sufficiently demonstrated a breakdown in the interactive 
process, and, thus the employer failed to provide a reasonable 
accommodation). Instead, the record demonstrates that when Gima 
requested a reasonable accommodation to work with a supervisor other than Magota, the City responded and provided her with an 
alternate position outside of Magota’s supervision. When Magota 
retired, the impetus for Gima’s request for a reasonable 
accommodation dissipated and Gima elected to return to her BFS 
position under Takara’s supervision. Therefore, the circuit 
court did not err in granting the City’s motion for summary 
46  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
judgment on Gima’s reasonable accommodation claim. 
C. Retaliation 
1. Gima sufficiently raised that the City retaliated 
against her for requesting a reasonable accommodation 
on November 15, 2017. 
Gima contends the City retaliated against her in violation 
of HRS § 378-2(a)(2) after she filed two separate HCRC 
complaints in 2016 and requested a reasonable accommodation in 
November 2017. The circuit court determined that Gima could not pursue her retaliation claim based on her request for a 
reasonable accommodation because Gima failed to raise this claim 
and exhaust her administrative remedies with the HCRC and failed 
to assert this allegation in her civil complaint. We disagree 
and hold that Gima properly raised this claim in her April 2018 
HCRC charge and in her civil suit. 
Prior to filing her circuit court complaint, Gima was first 
required to file her charges for retaliation with the HCRC, 
which has jurisdiction over claims brought under HRS Chapter 378. HRS §§ 368-11, 368-12 (2015); see Kellberg v. Yuen, 131 
Hawaiʻi 513, 531, 319 P.3d 432, 450 (2014) (“the doctrine of 
exhaustion of remedies requires an aggrieved party to exhaust 
administrative remedies before seeking judicial review”).  Gima 
filed two separate charges with the HCRC in 2018.   In Gima’s 
HCRC complaint filed on April 30, 2018, she asserted both disability discrimination and retaliation claims stating that 
47  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“[o]n November 15, 2017 [she] requested another accommodation 
not to be supervised by Robert Magota” and she was targeted 
because of the “harassment and disability discrimination” 
complaints and “was subjected to over-scrutinization of [her] 
work[.]” In Gima’s HCRC complaint filed on June 14, 2018, she 
asserted that she was demoted by the City in retaliation for 
filing HCRC charges in March 2016 and November 2016. After the 
HCRC issued right to sue letters related to her 2018 HCRC complaints, Gima timely filed her civil complaint in the circuit 
court pursuant to HRS § 368-12. 
Employee HCRC complaints are to be construed liberally and 
a plaintiff’s civil claims should be considered as reasonably 
related to the allegations in the HCRC charges “to the extent 
that those claims are consistent with the plaintiff’s original 
theory of the case.” French, 105 Hawaiʻi at 476, 99 P.3d at 1060 
(quoting B.K.B. v. Maui Police Dep’t, 276 F.3d 1091, 1100 (9th 
Cir. 2002) abrogated on other grounds by Fort Bend Cnty., Tex.
v. Davis, 587 U.S. 541 (2019)). Applying the liberal 
construction standards set by this court in French, and, contrary to the circuit court’s determination, we conclude that 
Gima’s April 30, 2018 HCRC complaint, in which she checked the 
box for both disability discrimination and retaliation and 
raised her November 15, 2017 request for a reasonable 
accommodation, adequately raised her claim that the City 
48  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
retaliated against her for requesting a reasonable 
accommodation. Gima also alleged in her civil suit that the 
City retaliated against her after she requested a new supervisor 
as a reasonable accommodation in November 2017. Because Gima’s 
April 2018 HCRC charge is sufficiently “consistent” with the 
“theory of the case” laid out in her civil complaint, the court 
erred in finding that Gima failed to exhaust her administrative 
remedies with the HCRC. Cf. French, 105 Hawaiʻ i at 477, 99 P.3d 
at 1061 (holding that plaintiff’s gender discrimination claim 
was not consistent with her HCRC complaint, which solely 
indicated disability and age discrimination). 
The circuit court also erred in its determination that Gima 
failed to properly plead that the City retaliated against her for requesting a reasonable accommodation in her civil 
complaint. This court has expressly reaffirmed a “liberal” 
notice pleading standard. Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo
, 
143 Hawaiʻi 249, 263, 428 P.3d 761, 775 (2018) 
overruled on other 
grounds by Wilmington Sav. Fund Soc’y, FSB v. Domingo
, 155 
Hawaiʻi 1, 556 P.3d 347 (2024).  Gima’s circuit court complaint 
alleged her request for a reasonable accommodation in her 
statement of facts, which she incorporated into her claim for 
retaliation. Applying our liberal notice pleading standard, 
Gima’s circuit court complaint sufficiently alleged that the 
49  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
City retaliated against her for requesting a reasonable 
accommodation, and the court erred in finding that Gima could 
not pursue this claim. HRCP Rule 8(f) (“All pleadings shall be 
so construed as to do substantial justice.”) (eff. 2000). 
2. There is a genuine issue of material fact as to Gima’s 
retaliation claim. 
We further hold that the circuit court erred in granting 
the City’s motion for summary judgment as to Gima’s retaliation 
claim based on her two HCRC complaints filed in 2016 and her 
request for a reasonable accommodation submitted on November 15, 
2017. Gima established a prima facie retaliation claim and 
raised a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the City’s 
proffered reasons for her negative evaluation and demotion were 
pretextual. See Lales
, 133 Hawai‘i at 356-58, 328 P.3d at 365
-
67. 
HRS § 378-2(a)(2) provides “[i]t shall be an unlawful 
discriminatory practice” for an employer “to discharge, expel, 
or otherwise discriminate against any individual because the 
individual has opposed any practice forbidden by this part or 
has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding 
respecting the discriminatory practices prohibited under this 
part[.]” HRS § 378-2(a)(2) (emphasis added). 
In order to establish a prima facie retaliation claim, a 
50  
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
plaintiff must demonstrate, 
(a) the plaintiff (i) “has opposed any practice forbidden 
by HRS chapter 378, Employment Practices, Part I, Discriminatory Practices or (ii) has filed a complaint, 
testified, or assisted in any proceeding respecting the 
discriminatory practices prohibited under this part,” (b) 
his or her “employer, labor organization, or employment 
agency has . . . discharged, expelled, or otherwise 
discriminated against the plaintiff,” and (c) “a causal 
link has existed between the protected activity and the 
adverse action[.]” 
Lales, 133 Hawaiʻ i at 356, 328 P.3d at 365 (quoting Schefke, 96 
Hawai‘i at 426, 32 P.3d at 70). 
If a plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of 
retaliation, “the burden shifts to the defendant to provide a 
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment 
action,” and “if the defendant articulates such a reason, the 
burden shifts back to the plaintiff to show evidence 
demonstrating that the reason given by the defendant is 
pretextual.” Id. at 356-57, 328 P.3d at 365–66 (quoting 
Schefke
, 96 Hawai‘i at 426, 32 P.3d at 70).  
Gima’s two complaints to the HCRC in 2016 qualify as 
protected activities under HRS § 378-2(a)(2) as does Gima’s November 15, 2017 request for a reasonable accommodation. 
HRS § 
378-2(a)(2); see e.g., Coons v. Sec’y of U.S. Dep’t of Treasury, 
383 F.3d 879, 887 (9th Cir. 2004) (“[Plaintiff] was engaged in a 
protected activity when he requested that [the employer] make 
reasonable accommodations for his alleged disability.”). Gima 
filed a charge with the HCRC in March 2016 and a second charge 
51  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in November 2016. She requested a reasonable accommodation on 
November 15, 2017. 
There is no dispute that the trial court correctly 
concluded that Gima’s April 2018 substandard performance 
evaluation and subsequent demotion qualified as adverse acts. 
See HRS § 378-2(a)(2); HAR § 12-46-189(a) (“[i]t is unlawful to 
. . . take an adverse action against any person because that 
person has . . . made a charge . . . to enforce any provision contained in this subchapter.”). 
Here, Gima established a genuine issue of material fact as 
to her superiors’ knowledge of the 2016 HCRC charges and 
November 2017 request for a reasonable accommodation. Takara’s 
declaration attested that “Magota shared with [him] that Gima 
. . . launched a number of complaints and grievances against 
[Magota]” and Magota “was advised by his superiors and human 
resources to be careful if he submitted substandard performance 
rating[s] of . . . Gima[.]” Additionally, the 2016 HCRC charges were sent to BFS with notice to BFS Director Koyanagi, who 
issued Gima’s 2018 demotion letter. As for Gima’s reasonable 
accommodation request, Takara attested that he was “aware that 
Gima had requested that someone other than Magota supervise 
her[.]” Further, the City filed a declaration from BFS employee 
Jennifer Bishop attesting that the Department of Human Resources 
sent a memo to BFS asking whether BFS could accommodate Gima’s 
52  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
request for an alternate supervisor, which BFS denied. 
There is sufficient evidence in the record to infer a 
causal connection between Gima’s protected activities and the 
City’s adverse employment acts taken in 2018 that occurred after 
Gima filed her complaints in 2016 and after she submitted her 
reasonable accommodation request in 2017. There is no per se 
rule as to a specific required time period to infer causation 
based on temporal proximity. See Coszalter v. City of Salem, 
320 F.3d 968, 977–78 (9th Cir. 2003). We find the Ninth 
Circuit’s reasoning persuasive and reject a “bright-line rule 
about the timing of retaliation” because “[a] rule that any 
period over a certain time is per se too long (or, conversely, a 
rule that any period under a certain time is per se short 
enough) would be unrealistically simplistic.” Id.“Retaliation 
often follows quickly upon the act that offended the retaliator,” Coszalter explained, “but this is not always so. 
For a variety of reasons, some retaliators prefer to take their time[.]” Id. at 978. Sometimes “[t]hey may wait until they 
think the lapse of time disguises their true motivation. Id.
“We should be particularly sensitive to this last point, for if 
we establish a per se rule that a specified time period is too 
long to support an inference of retaliation, well-advised 
retaliators will simply wait until that period has passed” and 
then “retaliate with impunity.” Id.Therefore, we look to the 
53  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“totality of the facts” to determine whether Gima established a 
prima facie case of retaliation. See id.
While the adverse employment acts occurred approximately 
two years after Gima filed her March 2016 HCRC complaint and 
approximately fifteen months after Gima filed her November 2016 
complaint, there is sufficient evidence in the record viewed in 
the light most favorable to Gima to establish a causal 
connection between the HCRC complaints and the adverse employment acts. Gima’s first substandard review in the record 
was issued in January 2017, which is two months after Gima filed 
her November 2016 HCRC charge, and ten months after she filed 
her March 2016 HCRC charge. 
Further, it can be inferred from Gima’s September 2017 
review, which was issued by Magota, that Takara, who issued the 
April 2018 substandard review, had worked closely with both 
Magota and Gima prior to Gima’s 2017 leave. The September 2017 
evaluation referred to Takara as the “superior” with whom Gima “became argumentative” and noted Gima’s accusations against 
Takara asserting he was “being inappropriate” and “critical of 
[her].” Gima was placed on workers’ compensation leave shortly 
after receiving the September 2017 performance evaluation. Less 
than three months after Gima returned to work, Takara issued 
Gima’s 2018 substandard performance evaluation and her demotion 
54  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
followed. 
Similarly, with respect to Gima’s request for a reasonable 
accommodation in November 2017, a fact-finder could reasonably 
infer that Gima’s November 2017 request and the April 2018 
negative evaluation and subsequent demotion were causally 
connected. Gima requested to be supervised by someone other 
than Magota on November 15, 2017. Less than six months after 
making her request, Gima was issued a substandard evaluation and was subsequently demoted. This occurred within the wider 
context of Gima having filed her prior complaints of 
discrimination with the HCRC. Further, her substandard review 
and demotion were issued within three months after her return 
from workers’ compensation leave. Based on the totality of the 
circumstances and presented evidence, a reasonable fact-finder 
could infer that Gima’s request for a new supervisor, which 
Takara attested he had knowledge of, was causally connected to 
her 2018 substandard review and subsequent demotion. 
The City asserts that even if Gima established a prima 
facie retaliation case, there is no genuine issue of material fact as to whether the City’s non-discriminatory reasons for the 
adverse employment acts were pretextual. An employee’s job 
performance is considered a legitimate, non-discriminatory 
reason for an adverse employment action. Adams
, 135 Hawai‘i at 
16, 346 P.3d at 85. The City contends Gima was demoted based on 
55  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
her poor work performance citing to her substandard performance 
reviews issued in 2017 and 2018. The City’s demotion letter 
asserted that Gima did not take “responsibility” or “ownership” 
of her tasks as a branch leader, and asserted that Gima’s 
planning, supervision, job knowledge, quality and quantity of 
work, and reliability and initiative were substandard. 
Because the City’s proffered reasons for the adverse 
employment actions were purportedly related to Gima’s performance at work, it can be construed that the City 
adequately met its burden of demonstrating a legitimate, non-
discriminatory reason for Gima’s 2018 substandard evaluation and 
subsequent demotion. The relevant question is whether Gima met 
her burden of demonstrating that the City’s reasons for the 
adverse employment actions were pretextual. We hold that Gima 
has adequately demonstrated a genuine issue of material fact 
that the City’s reasons for her substandard review and 
subsequent demotion were pretextual. 
Similar to proving pretext in a discrimination claim, if an 
employer meets its burden of providing a “legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason” for the adverse employment action, the 
burden shifts to the employee to demonstrate that the employer’s 
reasons were pretextual. Lales
, 133 Hawaiʻi at 356-57, 328 P.3d 
at 365-66. In a retaliation claim, an employee can demonstrate 
pretext “either directly by persuading the court that a 
56  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
discriminatory reason more likely motivated the employer or 
indirectly by showing that the employer’s proffered explanation 
is unworthy of credence.” Id. at 358, 328 P.3d at 367 (quoting 
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256). 
Gima established a genuine issue of material fact as to 
whether the performance reviews cited by the City were reliable and an accurate reflection of her actual performance at BFS. 
Gima’s rebuttals to the individual performance reviews asserted that those reviews were “fabricated,” she “lack[ed] proper 
oversight,” the reviews “assign[ed] responsibility and blame” to 
her for her administrator’s actions, and when she returned from 
leave in February 2018, “Takara did not make any effort to 
update [her] as to the status of any ongoing assignments or 
projects.” 
Further, there is sufficient evidence in the record for a 
fact-finder to infer that Magota’s purported retaliatory animus 
was imputed to Takara based on a “cat’s paw” theory with Takara acting as a conduit for Magota’s retaliatory animus. See Adams, 
135 Hawai‘ i at 47, 346 P.3d at 116 (Recktenwald, C.J., concurring 
and dissenting). A fact-finder could reasonably infer that 
Magota exhibited retaliatory animus towards Gima. Gima’s 2016 
HCRC charges alleged that Magota engaged in disability 
discrimination, retaliation, and sex discrimination against her, 
and all of the substandard performance reviews in the record 
57  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
were issued after Gima filed these two 2016 HCRC charges, with 
Magota giving Gima three substandard reviews in 2017. In 
Takara’s declaration, he attested that he discussed Gima’s 
performance with Magota and was aware of her complaints against 
Magota. Takara also attested that Magota had “verbally 
explained to [him] that Gima’s substandard performance was fully 
justified and felt her possible claims of retaliation or 
harassment held little weight[.]” Under these circumstances, a fact-finder could reasonably infer that Magota’s purported 
retaliatory animus was imputed to Gima’s April 2018 performance 
review given by Takara. Gima has demonstrated a genuine issue 
of material fact as to whether the reviews cited by the City as 
evidence of her performance at BFS were pretextual. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the circuit court’s May 22, 2023 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Defendant City and County of Honolulu’s Motion for Judgment on the Pleadings and/or Summary Judgment and June 5, 2023 Judgment 
are affirmed in part, and vacated in part. We affirm the 
court’s granting of the City’s motion for summary judgment on 
Gima’s reasonable accommodation claim to the extent the court 
determined that the City engaged in an interactive process and 
provided Gima with a reasonable accommodation. We vacate as to 
Gima’s disability discrimination and retaliation claims, and 
58  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
remand the case to the circuit court for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion. 
Joseph T. Rosenbaum,   /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
(Elizabeth Jubin Fujiwara, 
and Marcos R. Bendaña also  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
on the briefs) for 
for plaintiff-appellant   /s/ Todd W. Eddins 
 Maria C. Cook     /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
(Nicolette Winter and    
William K. Awong also   /s/ Vladimir P. Devens 
on the briefs) for defendant-appellee 
59 