 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAP-25-0000531 10-FEB-2026 12:56 PM Dkt. 69 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
---o0o---
NOVA BURNES, et al., 
Plaintiffs-Appellees, 
 
vs. 
 
HAWAIIAN ELECTRIC COMPANY, INC. dba HAWAIIAN ELECTRIC, et al., 
Defendants-Appellees, 
 
and 
 
ACE AMERICAN INSURANCE COMPANY, et al., 
Intervenor Subrogation Plaintiffs-Appellants. 
SCAP-25-0000531 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-25-0000531; CASE NO. 2CCV-24-0000964) 
 
FEBRUARY 10, 2026 
 
McKENNA, ACTING C.J., EDDINS, AND GINOZA, JJ., 
CIRCUIT JUDGE MORIKONE, IN PLACE OF DEVENS, J., RECUSED, 
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE TOMASA, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY EDDINS, J. 
I. 
On August 8, 2023, fire devastated Lahaina, the former 
capital of the Hawaiian Kingdom. Over one hundred people lost  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 their lives. Hundreds suffered physical and emotional injuries. 
Properties and historic sites were destroyed. Businesses and 
livelihoods impacted by the fires paused as Lahaina worked to 
rebuild. 
The lasting physical and mental health toll, and 
social, cultural, and economic impacts of this catastrophe 
continue to resonate in Hawaiʻ i and beyond.   
Following the Lahaina fire and other same-day fires in Kula 
and Olinda, individually represented plaintiffs (Individual 
Plaintiffs) sued Hawaiian Electric Company, Kamehameha Schools, 
the State of Hawaiʻi, the County of Maui, and others 
(Defendants). Meanwhile, class actions were filed in state 
court, then removed to federal court. Later those lawsuits were 
consolidated and refiled in state court as a single class 
action. That consolidated class action is now before us. 
The class action nears finality in the Circuit Court of the 
Second Circuit. 
Sophisticated court-ordered mediation led to a 
“global settlement” in August 2024. This settlement’s initial 
terms were reduced to a global settlement term sheet that 
resolved all claims against Defendants for an aggregate 
settlement amount. On November 1, 2024, Individual Plaintiffs 
executed an individual settlement agreement with Defendants. 
That same day, the class action plaintiffs (Class Plaintiffs) 
signed a class action settlement agreement with Defendants. These complementary settlement agreements constitute the “global 
2
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
   
 
  settlement.” At that time, the $4.037 billion aggregate 
settlement amount was not yet allocated between the class and 
individual settlements. 
This appeal involves Class Plaintiffs’ insurers’ 
(Subrogating Insurers) effort to intervene in the class action 
settlement proceedings. Subrogating Insurers believe they have 
an interest in the proceedings that justifies intervention by 
right under Hawaiʻ i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 24(a)(2) 
and permissive intervention under HRCP Rule 24(b)(2). 
We hold that Subrogating Insurers do not have a protectable 
interest that allows them to intervene. Based on applicable Hawaiʻi statutes,  In re Maui Fire Cases held that when insureds 
and defendants settle, the insurer’s sole remedy is a lien on the settlement. In re Maui Fire Cases (Maui Fires), 155 Hawaiʻ i 
409, 425, 565 P.3d 754, 770 (2025). 
In the context of a tort 
settlement, insurers may not seek to recoup insurance payments 
through their own lawsuits against defendants.  See id. at 432, 
565 P.3d at 777
. 
Here, Class Plaintiffs have settled with Defendants. 
This 
settlement activated the Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) § 663-10 
lien framework. It foreclosed potential subrogation suits by Subrogating Insurers against Defendants related to the Class 
Plaintiffs. 
3  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Still, Subrogating Insurers insist they retain equitable 
subrogation rights justifying intervention. Some class members 
may fail to submit their claim against the class settlement 
fund. There, they receive no settlement award. Thus, 
Subrogating Insurers complain that there is nothing for them to 
attach liens to under HRS § 663-10. Subrogating Insurers are 
wrong. A non-claiming class member’s choice does not conjure 
equitable subrogation rights. 
Adopting Subrogating Insurers’ position would functionally 
eliminate mass tort class settlements. It would also erode HRCP Rule 23’s framework, one that promotes uniformity, judicial and 
litigation economy, and procedural remedies for under-resourced 
plaintiffs who would otherwise be unable to pursue litigation. 
Subrogating Insurers’ effort to narrowly construe a class 
settlement inevitability as conferring subrogation rights fails. 
For purposes of equitable subrogation, class members’ 
entitlement to recover from the settlement fund constitutes recovery from the tortfeasor. When a class settles, insurers 
are limited to their exclusive HRS § 663-10 remedy - liens. See
Maui Fires, 155 Hawaiʻ i at 432, 565 P.3d at 777.  Further, 
because subrogation is fundamentally a derivative claim 
(insurers may only subrogate when insureds have the right to 
sue, and insurers have paid the insured), resolution of a tort 
4  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 lawsuit by settlement ends insurers’ subrogation rights. See
id. at 416, 432, 565 P.3d at 761, 777. 
The settlement’s dispatch of Subrogating Insurers’ 
subrogation rights without party status satisfies due process. 
We have already held that insurers suffer no prejudice when 
policyholders settle and extinguish subrogation rights without 
insurer consent. Id. at 437-38, 565 P.3d at 782-83. We did not
hold that HRS § 663-10’s exclusive lien remedy and process 
offends due process. See id. Accordingly, a settlement 
provision that allows Subrogation Insurers to file claims with the settlement fund does not bestow class member status and the 
connected due process right to opt out. 
We further conclude that no protectable interest exists 
based on Subrogating Insurers’ claim that the settlement fund is 
insufficient. Economic interests alone do not confer 
intervention rights. 
It’s evident. Subrogating Insurers lack a protectable 
interest justifying intervention by right. And absent a protectable interest, the disposition of this action does not 
“as a practical matter, impair or impede [Subrogating Insurers’] 
ability to protect [such an] interest.” See Ing v. Acceptance
Ins. Co.
, 76 Hawaiʻi 266, 271, 874 P.2d 1091, 1096 (1994) 
(citation omitted). Without a protectable interest, Subrogating 
5  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 Insurers cannot intervene by right. See id.; Baehr v. Miike, 80 
Hawaiʻi 341, 345, 910 P.2d 112, 116 (1996). 
Even if Subrogating Insurers had a protectable interest, 
their motion was untimely. Subrogating Insurers should have 
intervened when they knew or should have known that settlement 
would adversely impact their interests. When the class action 
settlement was publicized on November 4, 2024, Subrogating 
Insurers knew the settlement may impact their interests. 
Waiting until after our March 2025 Maui Fires opinion (when they 
were certain of this court’s holding regarding their subrogation 
interests) was misguided.  Intervention derails a complex and 
delicate settlement, substantially prejudicing the parties. Thus, the motion to intervene was too late. 
We also conclude that the circuit court properly denied 
permissive intervention. See HRCP Rule 24(b)(2). 
We affirm Second Circuit Court Judge Peter T. Cahill’s 
order denying Subrogating Insurers’ motion to intervene. 
II. 
A. Circuit Court Filings To start, we revisit the procedural posture preceding our 
March 2025 Maui Fires decision and the present appeal. 
As we related in Maui Fires
, Individual Plaintiffs brought 
numerous actions against several defendants in the Circuit Court 
of the Second Circuit. 155 Hawaiʻi at 414, 565 P.3d at 759. The 
6  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 court initiated a special proceeding per Rules of the Circuit 
Courts of the State of Hawaiʻ i Rule 12 to “coordinate the 
issuance of complex case management orders applicable to all 
individual proceedings in the numerous cases arising from the 
Maui wildfires.” Id.“[T]he circuit court ordered liaison 
counsel to coordinate the Individual Action Plaintiffs[] . . . then appointed a special settlement master and co-administrators 
to facilitate settlement.” Id. at 414-15, 565 P.3d at 759-60. 
“Separately three class action lawsuits were filed in the 
First and Second Circuits in the name of injured parties that 
had not yet filed individual actions (Consolidated Class 
Plaintiffs). These three class actions were removed to the 
United States District Court for the District of Hawaiʻ i, where 
they were consolidated into a single action and later re-filed 
in the Second Circuit.” Id. at 415, 565 P.3d at 760. 
In October 2024, the Consolidated Class Plaintiffs and 
Defendants stipulated to dismiss the federal class action 
complaints. Id. at 415 n.2, 565 P.3d at 760 n.2. On October 
30, 2024, Class Plaintiffs refiled a single complaint in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit. Id.
Before then, the Individual Plaintiffs, Class Plaintiffs, 
Defendants, and Subrogating Insurers had participated in court-
ordered mediation to resolve the pending actions. Id. at 415, 
565 P.3d at 760. In early August 2024, all parties (minus the 
7
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Subrogating Insurers) signed a settlement term sheet. Id.That 
document detailed a global settlement resolving all claims 
against Defendants. Id.The settlement required either (1) 
written release by all Subrogating Insurers of claims against Defendants, or (2) “a judgment, order, or opinion determining 
that if the Settlement Agreement between the [Individual and 
Class Plaintiffs] and the Paying Parties becomes 
effective, . . . the Subrogating Insurers’ exclusive remedy for any Maui Fires Claims would be asserting liens, if any, against 
their policyholders for their respective shares of the Aggregate 
Settlement Amount[.]” Id. (brackets in original omitted). 
As Maui Fires explained, “[o]n August 19, 2024, pursuant to 
the proposed global settlement, the circuit court issued an 
order declaring itself to have ‘exclusive jurisdiction, 
authority, and legal duty to review and resolve any and all 
subrogation claims or liens arising out of claims for payments 
under HRS § 663-10 in the event the global settlement of the Maui Fires claims between Plaintiffs and Defendants becomes 
effective.’” Id. at 416, 565 P.3d at 761. 
On September 12, 2024, the circuit court reserved three 
questions to this court. Id.We accepted the reserved 
questions on September 25, 2024, ordered briefing, held oral argument, and on March 17, 2025, published our opinion answering 
the reserved questions. See id.
8
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
    
 
  
   
 
 
 We held that “the lien-claim process established by HRS 
§ 663-10 provides the exclusive remedy for an insurer to recover 
for claims paid to an insured for damages caused by a third-
party tortfeasor where the insured has settled with the 
tortfeasor[.]” Id. at 425, 565 P.3d at 770. 
Days later, on March 24, 2025, Class Plaintiffs moved for 
preliminary class certification, settlement agreement approval, 
and appointment of class counsel. The settlement agreement provides for a class settlement fund totaling $135 million. 
B. The Class Settlement 
On November 1, 2024, as part of the global settlement and 
shortly after Class Plaintiffs re-filed their action in state court, Class Plaintiffs and Defendants executed a Class 
Settlement Agreement. On the same day, the Individual 
Plaintiffs executed an Individual Settlement Agreement with 
Defendants. 
The Class Settlement Agreement conditioned the settlement 
on either a written release by “[e]ach and every” Subrogating Insurer of all claims against Defendants, or a final and 
unappealable decision that 
if the Class and Individual Settlement Agreements become 
effective, (a) the Subrogation [Insurers’] exclusive remedy 
for any claims arising out of the Maui Fires would be asserting liens, if any, against their policyholders for 
their respective shares of the Aggregate Settlement Amount, 
and (b) the Subrogation [Insurers] shall be barred from bringing or maintaining any claims arising out of the Maui 
Fires against the Defendants. 
9  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 To meet this condition, the settlement agreement states 
that Judge Cahill’s August 19, 2024 special proceeding order 
regarding the operation of HRS § 663-10 “constitutes a decision 
of a trial court that, if rendered Final and Unappealable, would satisfy Section 5.1.2.” 
According to the settlement agreement, the “Settlement 
Class” is defined as all persons who suffered injuries (physical 
or economic), or who had property damage or damages to their 
businesses arising from the fires. 
The Settlement Class also 
includes other “eligible” family or personal representatives of injured or deceased individuals. The “Settlement Class” 
excludes defendants and “insurers and insurance syndicates that 
claim or could claim damage or harm regarding the Maui Fires arising out of a right of subrogation or reimbursement[.]” 
“Class Plaintiffs” are “all Persons included within the 
Settlement Class who do not timely and validly elect to opt-out 
of the Settlement Class pursuant to the procedures set forth in 
the Class Notice.” Class Plaintiffs are thus class members (or 
those who fall under the broad Settlement Class definition) who 
remain part of the class after the opt-out deadline. 
The settlement agreement also defined “Class Claimant.” A 
“Class Claimant,” as defined by the settlement agreement, is “any Person who files a claim for or receives a Monetary Award 
10
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
   
 
  from the Class Settlement Fund.” Per Section 4.1.2(k) of the 
settlement agreement, the class settlement plan (to be crafted 
after preliminary approval for the court’s final approval) must 
“address the resolution of claims of Subrogat[ing] Insurers for 
payments made to policyholders who are Class Plaintiffs but are 
not Class Claimants, which shall include a process for such 
insurers to submit claims on behalf of their insureds when such 
insureds do not submit a claim.” Put differently, when a class member does not file a claim against the settlement fund, 
§ 4.1.2(k) allows insurers to seek reimbursement via the 
settlement plan’s claims process. 
C. Subrogating Insurers’ Motion to Intervene 
On April 8, 2025, Subrogating Insurers moved to intervene. 
They argued that they met all four HRCP Rule 24(a) intervention by right factors. These factors are: “a) whether the 
application was timely; b) whether the [applicants] claimed an 
interest relating to the property or transaction which was the subject of the action; c) whether the disposition of the action 
would, as a practical matter, impair or impede the [applicants’] 
ability to protect that interest; and d) whether the 
[applicants’] interest was inadequately represented[.]” Ing, 76 
Hawaiʻi at 271, 874 P.2d at 1096 (brackets in original omitted).  
First, Subrogating Insurers maintained that their motion 
was timely. Before this court’s March 17, 2025 Maui Fires
11
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
  opinion, they “did not know and could not know their subrogation 
rights with respect to the Class Action litigation and the 
proposed settlement agreement.” The parties would suffer no 
prejudice, Subrogating Insurers insisted, because intervention 
would allow Class Plaintiffs to renegotiate the settlement terms 
and avoid footing the cost of the notice process. 
Second, Subrogating Insurers argued that they possess a 
protectable interest in equitable subrogation rights that would be impaired by the settlement’s release of their claims against 
Defendants. Third, Subrogating Insurers asserted that the 
settling parties cannot adequately represent them because those 
parties aspire to release their subrogation claims without 
compensation. 
Class Plaintiffs and Defendants both opposed the motion to 
intervene. Class Plaintiffs responded that Subrogating Insurers 
lack a protectable interest that could be impaired by this 
action because HRS § 663-10’s lien-claim process provides their exclusive remedy. Defendants agreed that Subrogating Insurers 
possess no protectable interest in equitable subrogation. They 
also argued the motion to intervene was untimely, and that Class 
Plaintiffs adequately represent Subrogating Insurers’ interests. 
In their reply, Subrogating Insurers raised for the first 
time a non-lien theory of recovery. Subrogating Insurers assert 
that the settlement designates them as Class Claimants who may 
12
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 recover directly from the settlement when insured class members 
do not submit settlement claims. They say this procedural 
difference – direct recovery rather than recovery through liens 
on class members’ settlement payments - “demonstrates why [Maui 
Fires] does not extend to the class action settlement.” 
On June 24, 2025, the circuit court denied Subrogating 
Insurers’ motion to intervene. The court ruled that Subrogating 
Insurers “failed to establish a legally protectable interest that would be impaired by the disposition of this action.” It 
reasoned that the settlement confines Subrogating Insurers to a 
lien remedy under HRS § 663-10. Subrogating Insurers lack 
subrogation rights, the court found, reciting a line from Maui 
Fires
: “A right that does not exist cannot be prejudiced.” 155 
Hawaiʻi at 438, 565 P.3d at 783. 
The circuit court rejected Subrogating Insurers’ claim that 
this court, in answering the reserved questions, “was not aware of how the application of HRS § 663-10 would affect class action 
settlements.” 
The court reasoned that our decision considered 
the global settlement, which included the class action 
settlement. It also noted that the Class Plaintiffs filed an 
amicus brief and participated in the reserved questions’ oral 
argument. Further, the circuit court concluded that because HRS 
§ 663-10 applies to “any civil action in tort,” and this class 
action is “indisputably” a civil action in tort, Maui Fires 
13  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
applies equally to class action settlements. Thus, Maui Fires’ 
holding that limits insurers’ equitable subrogation upon a tort 
settlement applies to class actions. 
In a footnote, the circuit court noted that “[i]f an 
insured does not opt out of the class and declines to submit a 
claim, § 4.1.2(k) of the Class Settlement Agreement allows the 
insurer to submit a claim on the insured’s behalf.” The court 
found that the settlement provision allowing insurers to submit claims on behalf of non-claiming class members bears “no nexus” 
to Subrogating Insurers’ grounds for intervention. Whether 
insurers will submit such claims remains uncertain, the court 
explained, and will be determined “after the settlement is 
approved and the claims process is underway.” In other words, 
an insurer’s ability to submit claims for non-claiming insureds 
only arises after settlement approval. The court reasoned that 
this settlement provision “gratuitously protects the value of 
liens for insurers” in this scenario, but “cannot have the unintended effect of creating an intervention right for non-
party insurers that does not already exist[.]” 
The circuit court also rejected Subrogating Insurers’ due 
process challenge to releasing their subrogation rights without 
party status. The court applied Maui Fires’ holding that 
policyholders may settle and extinguish subrogation rights 
without insurer consent. This raised no constitutional 
14
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 concerns, the court found. Because they never had subrogation 
rights to begin with, Subrogating Insurers suffered no 
prejudice. 
The court concluded that Subrogating Insurers lacked due 
process rights. Nonetheless, Subrogating Insurers “received 
sufficient process,” it reasoned. They filed proposed 
objections to the settlement, and argued during a May 28, 2025 
motion to intervene hearing. Later, after there is an allocation to challenge, the court explained, Subrogating 
Insurers “will also be allowed the opportunity to argue[] . . . 
that the settlement allocates money between general and special 
damages in bad faith, to the degree the Hawaii Supreme Court’s 
decision affords them such a right.” But this future 
“opportunity” comes after approval and allocation, and thus 
“cannot be used to object to the settlement itself.” Thus, the 
court found, Subrogating Insurers “received ample process in 
this matter.” 
The court further found that the action’s disposition does 
not impair Subrogating Insurers’ HRS § 663-10 lien rights. The court referenced Section 4.1.2(k) of the class settlement 
agreement. It “expressly preserves the full extent of the 
[Subrogating] Insurers’ lien rights under HRS § 663-10.” 
Subrogating Insurers claimed that the settlement fund 
inadequately satisfied their liens. But the court ruled that 
15
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
  “[a]n economic stake in the outcome of the litigation” cannot 
justify intervention. See Greene v. United States, 996 F.2d 
973, 976 (9th Cir. 1993). 
Next, the circuit court rejected Subrogating Insurers’ 
objections to the settlement amount and class settlement allocation. Maui Fires created a check for “bad faith” on the 
allocation between general and special damages. But our opinion, the court reasoned, did not require that insurers receive full reimbursement, or allow insurers to object to the 
insureds’ settlement amounts. Because the damages allocation 
remains unknown until settlement approval and the claims process 
begins, the circuit court concluded that intervention before 
then “would do nothing to protect the [i]nsurers’ lien rights as 
the [s]upreme [c]ourt defined them.” 
The court also deemed the motion untimely. Subrogating 
Insurers should have intervened when they had “reason to know 
that negotiations might produce a settlement . . . to their detriment.” See California Dep’t of Toxic Substances Control v.
Com. Realty Projects, Inc., 309 F.3d 1113, 1120 (9th Cir. 2002). The court found “[t]hat occurred in November 2024, when the 
class settlement was made public and after the [Subrogating] 
Insurers had been involved in the negotiations.” And 
intervention would be highly prejudicial, the court found, 
because it would “threaten to unwind the complex and delicately 
16
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
   
  
  
 
 balanced global settlement agreement.” See Ing, 76 Hawaiʻ i at 
272, 874 P.2d at 1097 (losing a settlement would be highly 
prejudicial). 
The circuit court further stated that even if the other 
HRCP Rule 24(a)(2) factors were met, it would deny the motion because Class Plaintiffs adequately represent Subrogating 
Insurers’ interests. When the intervention applicant has the 
same “ultimate objective” as an existing party, “a presumption 
of adequacy of representation arises.” See Arakaki v. Cayetano, 
324 F.3d 1078, 1086 (9th Cir. 2003). Here, the court noted, Subrogating Insurers share Class Plaintiffs’ goal to maximize 
recovery from Defendants. 
Last, the circuit court denied permissive intervention 
under HRCP Rule 24(b)(2). Because Subrogating Insurers have no protectable interest in the lawsuit, allowing Subrogating 
Insurers to intervene would not “assist in the just and 
equitable adjudication of any issues between the parties.” See
Baehr, 80 Hawaiʻ i at 345, 910 P.2d at 116. 
Subrogating Insurers appealed to the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals. On October 1, 2025, Class Plaintiffs applied for transfer. We granted the transfer application on October 22, 
2025. Briefing concluded on January 14, 2026. We held oral 
argument on January 27, 2026. 
17
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
    
 
  
 III. 
A. Subrogating Insurers are not entitled to intervention by 
right 
We hold that because Subrogating Insurers lack a 
protectable interest in this class action, they are not entitled 
to intervention by right under HRCP Rule 24(a)(2). By 
extension, without a protectable interest, no impairment arises from disposition of this action. These conclusions alone 
preclude intervention. But there’s more. The motion to 
intervene is untimely. 
We agree with Subrogating Insurers in one respect. Class 
Plaintiffs inadequately represent their interests. Subrogating 
Insurers need to run the table, though. “Failure to meet even 
one [factor] prevents intervention ‘by right’ under HRCP Rule 
24(a)(2).” Baehr, 80 Hawaiʻ i at 345, 910 P.2d at 116. The 
absence of a protectable interest and untimeliness preclude 
intervention. 
We begin with the second HRCP Rule 24(a)(2) factor – a 
protectable interest in the subject of the action. 
1. Subrogating Insurers do not have a protectable 
interest 
a. Maui Fires applies to class actions 
Maui Fires held that once an insured settles with a 
tortfeasor, a subrogating insurer’s “exclusive remedy” is a lien 
18
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 on the settlement recovery under HRS § 663-10. 155 Hawaiʻ i at 
425, 565 P.3d at 770. 
A judgment or settlement in “any civil action in tort” 
activates HRS § 663-10’s lien process. Subrogating Insurers say 
that Maui Fires does not apply to class actions. But a class 
action premised on a tort claim is a civil action in tort. So 
when class action parties settle, subrogating insurers are 
restricted to statutory liens on plaintiffs’ recovery. See id.
We did not limit Maui Fires to individual settlements. The 
statutory term “settlement” encompasses class settlements, not 
just individual ones. 
Class settlements receive the same treatment as individual 
settlements under HRS § 663-10. “Any civil action” is a plain, all-inclusive legislative pronouncement that covers every civil 
suit. HRS § 663-10 (emphasis added). “Any” tort suit includes 
individual and class actions. The statute contains no 
restriction to individually negotiated agreements; it envisions 
“‘a comprehensive structure for addressing liens and subrogation 
rights’ whenever an insured party pursues a judgment or settlement from a third-party tortfeasor.” Maui Fires, 155 
Hawaiʻi at 426, 565 P.3d at 771 (emphasis added) (quoting 
Yukumoto v. Tawarahara, 140 Hawaiʻ i 285, 294-95, 400 P.3d 486, 
495-96 (2017)). 
“[T]he plain language of the statute[] . . . 
evinces a broad application[.]” Id.
19  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 HRS § 663-10’s reference to “the judgment or settlement” 
does not limit the lien process to individual settlements. Nor 
does HRS § 663-10 exclude HRCP Rule 23’s class action framework 
and settlement procedure. 
Rule 23 itself does not require class members to engage in 
settlement negotiations and affirmatively consent to settlement. 
See HRCP Rule 23(a). Rather, the rule permits class 
representatives to pursue claims on behalf of passive class members, promoting judicial and litigation efficiency, and 
decreasing economic burdens on class members. See id.; Life of
the Land v. Land Use Comm’n of State of Haw., 63 Haw. 166, 179, 623 P.2d 431, 442 (1981) (“[HRCP Rule 23’s] pragmatic objectives 
include economies of time, effort, and expense, as well as 
uniformity of decision for persons similarly situated.”). 
HRS § 663-10’s lien procedures apply to all settlements and 
must be read harmoniously with HRCP Rule 23. Both frameworks 
advance aligned objectives: avoiding duplicative litigation, enhancing efficiency, and promoting orderly distribution. See
Life of the Land, 63 Haw. at 179, 623 P.2d at 442; Maui Fires
, 
155 Hawaiʻi at 429, 565 P.3d at 774 (quoting H. Stand. Comm. Rep. 
No. 4-86, in 1986 House Journal, at 42-43). 
Read alongside HRCP Rule 23, neither HRS § 663-10’s text 
nor legislative intent suggests that it applies only to individual settlements. 
To hold otherwise allows insurers to 
20  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  
 
   “interfere with the ability of the injured Plaintiffs and the 
Defendants to settle their dispute” in the class context, a 
disfavored outcome we rejected in Maui Fires. 155 Hawaiʻ i at 
435, 565 P.3d at 780 (“[A]llowing the Subrogating Insurers to 
pursue reimbursement through direct subrogation actions against 
the Defendants, rather than the HRS § 663-10 lien-claim process, 
would interfere with the ability of the injured Plaintiffs and 
the Defendants to settle their dispute.”). 
When it comes to HRS § 663-10, formalistic distinctions 
between individual and class settlements make no sense. Our 
holding promotes uniformity in serving HRS § 663-10’s design. 
Maui Fires’ central holding applies to class actions. 
b. Equitable subrogation is unavailable when class 
members settle but do not file settlement claims 
We turn next to Subrogating Insurers’ argument that they 
have a protectable interest in subrogation because some class 
members may not submit settlement claims. We hold that class 
members’ decision to forego filing claims does not create a protectable interest in subrogation. 
Settlement displaces subrogation. “Where the insured 
recovers by settlement or judgment against the tortfeasor, HRS 
§§ 431:13-103(a)(10)(A) and 663-10 apply and equitable 
subrogation has no place.” Maui Fires
, 155 Hawaiʻi at 433, 565 
P.3d at 778. Maui Fires
 preserved insurers’ subrogation rights 
21  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
 only where there is no recovery from the tortfeasor. Id.It 
does not follow that Subrogating Insurers are entitled to 
equitable subrogation when class members fail to file claims 
against the settlement. See id. at 425, 565 P.3d at 770 (“HRS 
§ 663-10 does not apply in the absence of a settlement or judgment.”). 
Subrogating Insurers’ intervention interest, as they define 
it, relies on a narrow subset of class members who choose not to file claims against the settlement. Because some class members 
will inevitably decline to participate in the claims process, 
treating non-claimants as having never “settled” would grant 
insurers equitable subrogation rights - and with them, 
intervention-worthy interests - in every mass tort class action. 
This would scuttle class action settlements unless defendants 
obtain releases of insurers’ claims. Permitting a subrogation-
based intervention “workaround” discourages comprehensive 
settlement. Defendants’ settlement goal is always to obtain releases of all potential claims, especially in the class action 
context. See Kris J. Kostolansky & Diane R. Hazel, Class Action
Settlements: Res Judicata, Release, and the Identical Factual Predicate Doctrine, 55 Idaho L. Rev. 263, 266 (2019). 
The economics are straightforward. Defendants settle to 
limit their liability. Subrogating insurers seek to maximize 
reimbursement. Allowing subrogation for non-claiming class 
22
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
members in a tort suit undermines the very releases that make 
class settlements possible. Intervention for a limited subclass 
of non-claiming class members would frustrate Rule 23’s core 
purposes: efficiency and access to justice through collective 
recovery. See Life of the Land, 63 Haw. at 179, 623 P.2d at 
442; Gregory M. Wirt, Missed Opportunity: Stephenson v. Dow Chemical Co. and the Finality of Class Action Settlements, 109 
Penn St. L. Rev. 1297, 1298-99 (2005). Our class action framework does not allow this approach. 
For equitable subrogation purposes, class members’ 
entitlement to recover from the settlement fund constitutes 
recovery from the tortfeasor. Upon class settlement, insurers 
are limited to an exclusive statutory remedy. Liens. See HRS 
§ 663-10; Maui Fires
, 155 Hawaiʻi at 432, 565 P.3d at 777. 
Subrogating Insurers’ position that “uninterested” (non
-
participating) class members do not actually “pursue” recovery misreads basic class action procedural principles. HRCP Rule 23 
allows representative class members to protect the class’ 
interests without requiring active class member participation in settlement or judgment. HRCP Rule 23(a). Class members are 
bound by the final judgment. Unless they opt out, they’re in. 
HRCP Rule 23(c)(2) (“the judgment, whether favorable or not, 
will include all members who do not request exclusion”); HRCP 
Rule 23(e) (“A class action shall not be dismissed or 
23
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
compromised without the approval of the court, and notice of the 
proposed dismissal or compromise shall be given to all members 
of the class in such manner as the court directs.”). 
To hold otherwise undercuts finality principles in class 
actions. An “absent” class member who does not opt out pursues 
the civil action resolving their claims. See HRCP Rule 
23(c)(2); Maui Fires, 155 Hawaiʻ i at 433, 565 P.3d at 778; Akau 
v. Olohana Corp., 65 Haw. 383, 388, 652 P.2d 1130, 1134 (1982) 
(“A judgment in a class action consisting of the people actually 
injured will bind the members who are all those allowed to 
sue.”). Thus, insurers are limited to the statutory lien 
process. See Maui Fires, 155 Hawaiʻ i at 433, 565 P.3d at 778.   
We pause to discuss core principles supporting equitable 
subrogation. An insurer’s rights are derivative. Subrogation 
rights derive from and are coextensive with an insured’s claims. 
See State Farm Fire & Cas. Co. v. Pac. Rent-All, Inc., 90 Hawaiʻ i 
315, 329, 978 P.2d 753, 767 (1999). 
Insurers have no greater 
rights than their insureds. See id. “[S]ubrogation involves 
‘stepping into’ the shoes of another, when an insurer brings an 
action against a tortfeasor based upon its subrogation rights, 
the insurer’s rights flow from the insured’s rights.” Id.
(quoting 4 R. Long, The Law of Liability Insurance
 § 23.03, at 
23–13 to 23-14 (1998)). 
24  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
    Where the insureds’ claims are resolved via settlement, so 
too are the insurers’ derivative actions. Insurers cannot 
subrogate when their insureds have settled. See id.
Class members are bound by the settlement, despite whether 
they file their own claims to recover from the settlement fund. 
It follows that even if those non-claiming class members do not 
recover direct payments from the settlement fund, the 
subrogating insurers are still limited to reimbursement from the settlement. See id. Insurers cannot subrogate settled claims. 
See id.
Maui Fires recognized that equitable subrogation prevents a 
tortfeasor’s unjust enrichment. 155 Hawaiʻ i at 433, 565 P.3d at 
778. Class settlements eliminate this concern. Defendants agree 
to compensate claimants without a liability finding. Even when 
class members do not submit settlement claims, defendants remain 
committed to pay a certain amount. That payout remains constant 
even when class members don’t file claims. At the same time, 
there is no plaintiff windfall concern because plaintiffs who 
forego filing claims will not recover twice. See id. at 416, 
565 P.3d at 761 (“Subrogation prevents a double recovery by 
limiting the insured from collecting damages for the same injury 
from both the insurer and the tortfeasor.”). 
Next, we address Subrogating Insurers’ position that absent 
“competition” with their insureds, they may subrogate. 
25
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  Subrogating Insurers misread Maui Fires. They say HRS § 663-10 
only kicks in “when there is some form of practical competition 
between an insurer and their insured for settlement funds.” 
Not so. HRS § 663-10 does not hinge on competition between 
insurer and insured for settlement funds. Maui Fires held that 
absent settlement or judgment, no competition exists between 
insured and insurer for tortfeasor funds. 155 Hawaiʻ i at 433, 
565 P.3d at 778. Thus the insurer’s third-party claim poses no 
risk to the insured’s recovery. Id.In those circumstances (no 
settlement or judgment), equitable subrogation prevents 
tortfeasor unjust enrichment. Id. (citing State Farm, 90 Hawaiʻ i 
at 331, 978 P.2d at 769). 
Subrogating Insurers maintain that “competition” between 
the insurer and the insured must exist before their equitable 
subrogation rights may be precluded. Subrogating Insurers 
insist that where the insured plaintiff “stands ‘to recover 
nothing on [their] own, there [is] no risk of [their] recovery 
being diminished.’” See id. at 435, 565 P.3d at 780. Thus, 
they say, HRS § 663-10 does not apply absent competition. 
Again, Subrogating Insurers misread Maui Fires. This 
court’s discussion of plaintiffs’ non-recovery did not create a “competition” precondition. Subrogating Insurers selectively 
cite our opinion’s analysis of Park v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, a workers’ compensation case they previously relied on in Maui 
26
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Fires. There we explained that citing Park was “misplaced” 
because employee Park’s claim had been dismissed. Id. at 435, 
565 P.3d at 780 (citing Park v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu
, 154 
Hawaiʻi 1, 3, 543 P.3d 433, 435 (2024)). “Because the plaintiff 
stood to recover nothing on her own, there was no risk of her recovery being diminished by the insurer’s subrogation action,” 
this court reasoned. 
Id.The passage Subrogating Insurers 
invoke merely distinguishes 
Park. It does not graft a general 
competition requirement. See id.
As we flagged, Park involved “no recovery by judgment or 
settlement of a third-party claim against which the insurer 
would have been able to assert a lien under HRS § 663-10.” Id.
We contrasted Park with the Maui Fires case, “where the 
Plaintiffs have reached the terms of a settlement agreement with 
the Defendants, and where allowing the Subrogating Insurers to 
pursue their own, separate subrogation actions risks diminishing 
or destroying entirely the Plaintiffs’ recovery under the 
proposed settlement.” Id.
The “competition” concept in Maui Fires protects insureds 
from prejudice when insurers pursue equitable subrogation. See
id. at 425, 565 P.3d at 770. But competition generally does not 
limit when HRS § 663-10 applies . Equitable subrogation applies 
only when no settlement or judgment exists, and thus there’s no 
competition between the insured and the insurer for the same 
27  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
  funds from the same defendants. Id.Therefore, equitable 
subrogation is only available when (1) a judgment or settlement 
has not been reached, and (2) the insurer can recover only 
through a separate action. See id.
Here, the insureds and the defendant-tortfeasors have 
settled. Defendants committed to compensate class members 
through the settlement agreement and fund. A “judgment or 
settlement against which the insurer may assert a lien” now exists. See id. at 433, 565 P.3d at 778. So the “competition” 
Subrogating Insurers invoke neither exists nor is required. 
Class action settlement eliminates a primary justification 
for equitable subrogation: preventing a tortfeasor’s unjust enrichment. See id. Settlement avoids potential unjust 
enrichment regardless whether insurers are fully compensated. 
Here, unused class settlement funds will be “redistributed 
to Class Claimants in an amount proportional to their pro rata share of the recovery.” No funds revert to Defendants. Therefore, individual class member claim filings do not affect 
competition for settlement funds. The settlement amount paid by 
Defendants remains fixed, no matter the degree of class member 
participation. 
The legislature balanced the interests of the insured and 
the insurer. In Maui Fires, we explained that to create “a 
fair, uniform and comprehensive procedure governing the rights 
28  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and obligations of insurance companies and consumers for the 
reimbursement of insurance benefits from third-party sources of 
recovery,” the legislature “‘limit[ed] reimbursement and 
subrogation for all insurance companies’ to the comprehensive 
procedure prescribed by HRS §§ 431:13-103(a)(10) and 663-10.” 
155 Hawaiʻ i at 431, 565 P.3d at 776 (quoting H. Stand. Comm. Rep. 
No. 1330-00, in 2000 H. Journal, at 1515; Yukumoto, 140 Hawaiʻ i 
at 296, 400 P.3d at 497). The statutory framework prevents 
insurers from blocking tort settlements because their lien 
interests are affected. See id. Yet, Subrogating Insurers 
aspire to relitigate HRS § 663-10’s operation. 
Subrogating Insurers believe the settlement’s process 
(allowing them to file claims on behalf of insureds) conflicts with HRS § 663-10 because liens attach only after class members receive awards. The statute requires no such thing. See HRS 
§ 663-10. 
Subrogating Insurers complain that when class members do 
not file claims and obtain awards, no recovery exists for lien attachment. They say that the settlement plan does not actually 
“include provisions that address the resolution of claims of 
Subrogation Insurers for payments made to policyholders who are 
Class Plaintiffs but are not Class Claimants” and does 
not “include a process for such insurers to submit claims on 
29
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
   behalf of their insureds when such insureds do not submit a 
claim.” 
The putative absence of an insurers’ claims procedure in 
the settlement plan does not affect our intervention analysis. 
Subrogating Insurers have not alleged an actual violation of 
their lien rights or an inability to assert claims on behalf of 
their insureds (to the contrary they have asserted settlement 
claims for their insureds). They merely insist that subrogation should be available when class members do not submit claims with 
the settlement fund. 
In any event, intervention in the class settlement 
proceedings is not a condition to later challenge lien 
reimbursement rights under HRS § 663-10. To repeat, settlement 
precludes subrogation. So the settlement provision does not 
confer subrogation rights, and the settlement plan’s purported 
procedural gap does not affect our subrogation analysis. 
In Maui Fires we preserved insurers’ subrogation rights 
when there is no recovery from the tortfeasor. 155 Hawaiʻ i at 
425, 565 P.3d at 770 (“HRS § 663-10 does not apply in the 
absence of a settlement or judgment.”). But that ruling does 
not entitle insurers to equitable subrogation when class members 
fail to file claims against the settlement
. See id. 
We rebuff Subrogating Insurers’ formalistic stance that 
Section 4.1.2(k)’s insurer claims process does not constitute 
30  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 assertion of a lien under HRS § 663-10. Subrogating Insurers 
contend that when insurers file claims on behalf of class 
members, no “judgment or settlement” exists for lien attachment. 
The argument about Section 4.1.2(k)’s procedure does not alter 
its substance. This settlement agreement provision achieves the 
same result as a traditional HRS § 663-10 lien. Subrogating 
Insurers recover from their insureds’ settlement proceeds, just 
as under statutory liens. The HRS § 663-10 lien process ensures that insurers recover the appropriate portion (or all) of their 
insured’s special damages obtained through settlement. See HRS 
§ 663-10. When insurers recover special damages through the claims process, HRS § 663-10’s objectives are met. In class 
actions, an insured’s absence from the settlement claims process 
does not manufacture subrogation rights. 
c. Release of equitable subrogation rights without 
party status does not violate due process 
Subrogating Insurers say their designation as “Class 
Claimants” in the settlement agreement violates due process. 
The “Class Claimant” designation, the insurers contend, 
“unlawfully deprive[s] [them] of the due process rights afforded 
to full class members.” Due process, they believe, requires 
giving class members the opportunity to opt out of the class to 
“prosecute their own claims.” Class Plaintiffs and Defendants counter. Even though insurers may file claims on behalf of 
31
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
class members, they are not Class Claimants, a subclass of class 
members who actually file claims against the settlement. 
Class members have the right to opt out and be excluded 
from the class (and thus, settlement). HRCP Rule 23(c)(2); 
Patrickson v. Dole Food Co., Inc., 137 Hawaiʻ i 217, 229, 368 P.3d 
959, 971 (2015); Silber v. Mabon, 18 F.3d 1449, 1454 (9th Cir. 
1994) (quoting Phillips Petroleum Co. v. Shutts, 472 U.S. 797, 
812 (1985)) (“[D]ue process requires at a minimum that an absent 
[class] plaintiff be provided with an opportunity to remove 
[themself] from the class by executing and returning an ‘opt 
out’ or ‘request for exclusion’ form to the court.”). 
Though they themselves have no such rights, Subrogating 
Insurers try to invoke class members’ due process rights. But class members’ procedural opt-out protections do not extend to 
insurers. Class members’ due process opt-out rights are 
inaccessible to Subrogating Insurers. 
As an initial matter, Subrogating Insurers object that the 
settlement binds them, as though they were class members. The 
settlement between the Class Plaintiffs and Defendants, though, neither adjudicates insurers’ rights nor imposes obligations on 
them. Rather, the settlement itself forecloses equitable 
subrogation by activating HRS § 663-10’s lien-claims process -
the insurers’ exclusive remedy. See Maui Fires
, 155 Hawaiʻi at 
425, 565 P.3d at 770. The “opt out” right Subrogating Insurers 
32  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   covet as their primary procedural protection, therefore, is 
unavailable. 
First, we have already held that insurers suffer no 
prejudice when policyholders settle and douse subrogation rights 
without insurer consent. Id. at 437-38, 565 P.3d at 782-83. We 
did not hold that limiting insurers to the statutory lien process violates due process. Nor did Subrogating Insurers 
argue this at the time. See id. Second, insurers submitting 
claims with the settlement fund on behalf of non-claiming class 
members does not confer class member status or the right to opt 
out. See Alden v. Kona Palisades, Inc., 3 Haw. App. 47, 49, 641 
P.2d 330, 332 (App. 1982) (“[J]udicially-approved settlement is binding upon the members of the class who have not opted out.”); 
4 William B. Rubenstein, Newberg and Rubenstein on Class Actions 
§ 13:22 (6th ed.) (“Courts regularly find that nonclass members 
have no standing to object to a proposed settlement.”). 
Subrogating Insurers’ due process argument rests on class 
member rights. Yet the settlement expressly excludes Subrogating Insurers from the Settlement Class. The 
settlement’s claims process for insurers does not change this. 
We return to the well-worn metaphor of subrogation: the 
insurer steps into the insured’s shoes and acquires no 
independent rights. See Maui Fires
, 155 Hawaiʻi at 418, 565 P.3d 
at 763 (citing 
State Farm
, 90 Hawaiʻi at 329, 978 P.2d at 767).  
33  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
  To grant subrogating insurers their own separate opt-out rights 
as extra class members, cobbles shoes that do not fit the 
insured. Instead of stepping into their insureds’ shoes, 
Subrogating Insurers try to shoehorn themselves into the 
settlement as independent parties. This effort collides with 
the core rationale for equitable subrogation. Thus, Subrogating 
Insurers lack a due process right to opt out under HRCP Rule 
23(b). 
d. Economic interest in the settlement amount is not 
a protectable interest 
We next address Subrogating Insurers’ claim that the class 
settlement is underfunded. 
Economic interest alone does not establish intervention 
rights. “An economic stake in the outcome of the litigation, 
even if significant, is not enough” to establish a protectable 
interest. Greene, 996 F.2d at 976. Greenlighting intervention 
based on supposed settlement fund shortfalls would give insurers 
veto power over tort settlements. The settlement fund’s 
purported inadequacy does not create a protectable interest. 
Subrogating Insurers also challenge the settlement. They 
quote Maui Fires: “settling parties may not, in bad faith, 
structure their settlement in such a way as to nullify the 
protections afforded to insurers[.]” See Maui Fires
, 155 Hawaiʻi 
at 439, 565 P.3d at 784. Subrogating Insurers, though, skip the 
34  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
part that limited insurer protections to those “under HRS § 663-
10.” Id.
Maui Fires addressed settlement structure in the context of 
“protections afforded to insurers under HRS § 663-10.” Id.We 
gave examples of settlement structures that nullify HRS § 663-10’s protections: “settlement . . . that purports to waive a 
property and casualty insurer’s right to assert an otherwise 
valid lien,” and “a settlement improperly structured as for general damages only, when the circumstances do not warrant such 
a settlement.” Id.These scenarios constitute settlement in 
bad faith. See id.
The good faith requirement prevents collusive settlements. 
See id. But it does not confer insurers equitable subrogation 
rights. See id. HRS § 663-10 protects insurers’ settlement 
entitlement and special damages reimbursement – nothing more. Id. at 438, 565 P.3d at 783. 
Our opinion did not require full insurer reimbursement 
through settlement liens. See id. at 439, 565 P.3d at 784. 
Rather, as the circuit court observed, we “created a ‘bad faith’ 
check by providing the right to object that the allocation of 
damages between general damages and special damages was not made 
in good faith.” Id.This good faith check is not a blank check 
for insurers to challenge the settlement amount here, through intervention. 
35
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 Subrogating Insurers do not allege improper conduct. They 
do not assert under-allocation of special damages to evade HRS 
§ 663-10. Defendants state that “[t]here currently is no 
allocation between general and special damages for the insurers 
to challenge.” As for the circuit court, it reasoned that 
damage allocation will occur only after the court “approves the 
settlement and the claims process proceeds.” Maui Fires
expressly preserved challenges to the settlement allocation for 
insurers. Id.This bad-faith review does not support 
intervention in the settlement itself. See id.
Thus the alleged settlement fund inadequacy fails to 
establish a protectable interest justifying intervention. 
2. Subrogating Insurers’ non-existent interest is not 
impeded or impaired 
HRCP Rule 24(a)(2) directs courts to examine if “the 
disposition of the action would, as a practical matter, impair 
or impede the intervenor’s ability to protect that interest.” 
Ing
, 76 Hawaiʻi at 271, 874 P.2d at 1096 (cleaned up) (citation 
omitted). Impairment flows from a protectable interest. Absent 
a protectable interest, exclusion from the litigation does not 
constitute impairment. Am. Nat. Bank & Tr. Co. of Chicago v.
City of Chicago
, 865 F.2d 144, 147 (7th Cir. 1989) (“Because the 
[applicant] has failed to assert a direct, legally protectable 
interest, it follows that it has failed to assert an interest 
36  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
     that could be impaired or impeded by the district court 
proceedings.”). 
Settlement approval impairs nothing. Absent a protectable 
interest in equitable subrogation, a class action settlement 
that covers all claims against all defendants causes no 
impairment. “A right that does not exist cannot be prejudiced.” 
Maui Fires, 155 Hawaiʻ i at 438, 565 P.3d at 783.  Similarly, a 
nonexistent protectable interest cannot be impaired. See id.
Because Subrogating Insurers lack a protectable interest, 
disposition of this action causes no impairment. See Ing, 76 
Hawaiʻi at 271, 874 P.2d at 1096.   
3. Subrogating Insurers’ motion to intervene was untimely 
The motion to intervene was untimely. See HRCP Rule 
24(a)(2). 
Timeliness is “a matter left to the sound discretion of the 
trial court.” Ing, 76 Hawaiʻ i at 271, 874 P.2d at 1096. 
Timeliness depends on the totality of the circumstances. Id.
Two factors matter most. “[E]specially relevant is: (1) the 
lapse of time between when [the applicant] should have sought 
intervention and when it actually did; and (2) the prejudice 
caused to the [existing parties] by the lapse of time.” Id.
Subrogating Insurers insist intervention was timely because 
their subrogation rights remained up in the air until Maui 
Fires. We disagree. 
37  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  Subrogating Insurers should have intervened when the class 
settlement became public on November 4, 2024. At that point, 
they knew or should have known the settlement would adversely 
affect their interests. See Ing, 76 Hawaiʻ i at 271, 874 P.2d at 
1096; Com. Realty Projects, Inc., 309 F.3d at 1120. The class 
settlement agreement conditioned settlement approval on a court 
order barring insurers’ subrogation claims against Defendants. 
That settlement agreement’s express terms belie Subrogating 
Insurers’ argument. Further, knowledge of the settlement amount 
(not available in November 2024) is immaterial to their 
purported equitable subrogation rights. 
The motion to intervene was untimely despite being filed 
before preliminary approval. Treating any delay before preliminary approval as timely would dilute the timeliness 
requirement in class action settlements. Intervention 
contemporaneous with the settlement’s agreement would have 
averted a five-month delay. Given the complexity and scope of 
this settlement and the many plaintiffs and defendants, this 
delay prejudices the parties - irrespective of whether preliminary approval preceded the motion to intervene. 
Subrogating Insurers cannot wait until they are dissatisfied 
with the litigation’s progress. See Ballard v. Garrett, 78 
S.W.3d 73, 76 (Ark. 2002). They offer no passable justification for their delay. 
38
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 The putatively stayed proceedings pending Maui Fires also 
does not justify tabling intervention from November 2024 to 
April 2025. (Subrogating Insurers argue that they couldn’t have 
intervened during the stay, while Class Plaintiffs and 
Defendants say a stay was not in place at the time.) 
Subrogating Insurers concede they waited for our March 2025 
decision on the reserved questions before moving to intervene. 
Strategic choice, not the stay, caused the delay. 
Next, we consider prejudice, the main component of 
timeliness. See Hoopai v. Civil Service Comm’n, 106 Hawaiʻ i 205, 
216, 103 P.3d 365, 376 (2004).  Prejudice outweighs mere delay. “The most important consideration in deciding whether a motion for intervention is untimely is whether the delay in moving for 
intervention will prejudice the existing parties to the case.” 
7C Mary Kay Kane & Allan Stein, 
Fed. Prac. & Proc. Civ. § 1916 
(3d ed. Sep. 2025 update). 
Intervention that “‘interject[s] numerous other issues into 
the litigation’ . . . [leading] to ‘considerable delay’ in the disposition of the case” prejudices the parties. Hoopai, 106 
Hawaiʻi at 216, 103 P.3d at 376 (quoting Blackfield Hawaii Corp. 
v.
 Travelodge Int’l, Inc., 3 Haw. App. 61, 63, 641 P.2d 981, 983 
(App. 1982)). So too with intervention that slows relief. See
Alaniz v. Tillie Lewis Foods, 572 F.2d 657, 659 (9th Cir. 1978) (because the consent decree was “already being fulfilled,” 
39
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
revocation of the decree “would create havoc and postpone the 
needed relief,” thus prejudicing the parties); Orange Cnty. v. 
Air Cal., 799 F.2d 535, 538 (9th Cir. 1986) (allowing 
intervention after the City of Irvine learned the outcome “would 
not be entirely to its liking,” and “undoing . . . five years of 
protracted litigation” would prejudice the parties). 
Maui Fires  held that “Plaintiffs have reached the terms of 
a settlement agreement with the Defendants, and . . . allowing 
the Subrogating Insurers to pursue their own, separate 
subrogation actions risks diminishing or destroying entirely the 
Plaintiffs’ recovery under the proposed settlement.” 
155 Hawaiʻi 
at 435, 565 P.3d at 780. Intervention five months after 
settlement would imperil the settlement and delay relief, 
prejudicing the parties. 
Given the urgent need for relief in the wake of the Maui 
wildfires, unraveling the global settlement would deny plaintiffs’ relief when they need it most. See id. Granting 
intervention would unwind two years of court-ordered mediation 
and settlement negotiations, substantially prejudicing the 
parties. See id. Intervention at this stage would derail a 
“complex and delicately balanced” settlement. See United States
v. State of Oregon, 913 F.2d 576, 588 (9th Cir. 1990) (“[In] 
intervening at this stage to challenge the [Idaho salmon harvest 
40
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
allocation] plan would seriously prejudice all the parties to 
the suit because the plan is complex and delicately balanced.”). 
Prompt settlement is vital. Delay harms victims and erodes 
overall settlement value for injured plaintiffs, especially 
those with underinsured or uninsurable injuries. The settlement 
agreement itself touts “the benefits of a settlement at this 
time to Class Plaintiffs.” (Emphasis added.) 
Undue delay prejudicially extends plaintiffs’ suffering and 
diminishes relief. Plaintiffs may face increased pressure to settle for less if the current settlement upends. And rising 
class litigation costs will reduce class recovery. See John E. 
Lopatka & D. Brooks Smith, Class Action Professional Objectors: What to Do About Them?, 39 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 865, 865-66 
(2012) (delayed “implementation of a class settlement” creates 
“[t]he prospect of financial loss”). Meanwhile, Defendants 
likely settled to avoid higher-cost individual settlements, 
potential liability findings, and prolonged litigation. See
Lopatka & Smith, supra, at 866 n.3 (“the interests of defendants 
in expedition [of litigation termination via settlement] are 
different from those of class counsel”). 
The multi-faceted, carefully calibrated global settlement 
resolves claims for thousands of individual and class 
plaintiffs, allocates defendant contributions, and distributes 
41
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
 
 
  
 
   billions in settlement funds through individual and class 
agreements for a wide range of damages. 
After unimaginable loss, Lahaina and its people approach 
finality through the global settlement. Settlement will allow 
this community to pivot from litigation to restoration. 
The class settlement, alongside the individual settlement, 
balances multiple interests and provides mutually-beneficial 
resolution. Collapse due to Subrogating Insurers’ intervention would severely prejudice the parties
. 
The court properly denied the untimely motion to intervene. 
4. Class Plaintiffs do not adequately represent 
Subrogating Insurers’ interests 
We turn to the last intervention requirement. Because 
Subrogating Insurers lack a protectable interest that would be 
impaired by disposition of this action, and the motion was 
untimely, the motion to intervene by right fails. See Baehr, 80 
Hawaiʻi at 345, 910 P.2d at 116 (failure to meet even one HRCP 
Rule 24(a)(2) factor prevents intervention by right). 
Nonetheless, because the circuit court cites the adequate 
representation factor as a separate basis for denial, we 
clarify. Class Plaintiffs do not adequately represent 
Subrogating Insurers’ interests. 
An applicant intervenor only needs to show that the party’s 
representation of their interests “may have been inadequate.” 
42  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
 
 Hoopai, 106 Hawaiʻ i at 217, 103 P.3d at 377 (citing Sagebrush 
Rebellion, Inc. v. Watt, 713 F.2d 525, 528 (9th Cir. 1983)). 
Class Plaintiffs do not represent Subrogating Insurers’ interest in equitable subrogation for non-claiming class members. 
Throughout this litigation, Class Plaintiffs have consistently 
opposed subrogation. 
Class Plaintiffs quarrel with Subrogating Insurers as to 
the “interest” they represent on behalf of the insurers. Class 
Plaintiffs say that they share an interest in “maximizing 
recovery” with Subrogating Insurers. But they oversimplify the 
two parties’ positions and interests. 
Subrogating Insurers’ interest in this action is not just 
boosting reimbursement. They want to subrogate when class members do not file settlement claims. While subrogation 
enlarges insurer recovery, it conflicts with Class Plaintiffs’ 
core interests: timely settlement, maximum payment from 
Defendants, and release of all subrogation claims as a 
settlement condition. See id. at 217, 103 P.3d at 377. 
Class Plaintiffs inadequately represented Subrogating 
Insurers’ interests. See id.
Still, failure to meet all HRCP Rule 24(a)(2) factors 
prevents intervention by right. 
43
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 
 B. The circuit court properly denied permissive intervention 
HRCP Rule 24(b)(2) permits intervention when (1) the 
application is timely, and (2) “an applicant’s claim or defense and the main action have a question of law or fact in common.” 
HRCP Rule 24(b)(2). When ruling on a motion to intervene, the 
court must assess whether intervention would “unduly delay or 
prejudice the adjudication of the rights of the original 
parties.” Id.
We review denial of permissive intervention for abuse of 
discretion, not whether the Rule 24(b)(2) factors are present. 
Baehr
, 80 Hawaiʻi at 345, 910 P.2d at 116 (“[W]hen we are asked 
to review a denial of permissive intervention, our task is not 
to determine whether the factors of Rule 24(b)(2) are present, 
but it is rather to determine whether the trial court committed 
an abuse of discretion in denying the motion.”). 
The circuit court correctly exercised discretion in denying 
permissive intervention. 
Untimeliness supports that ruling. 
See HRCP Rule 24(b)(2). 
Because Subrogating Insurers have no protectable interest 
in the settlement terms, we also agree with the circuit court 
that intervention does not “assist in the just and equitable 
adjudication of any issues between the parties.” See Baehr
, 80 
Hawaiʻi at 345, 910 P.2d at 116. 
44  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 Here, Subrogating Insurers claim an equitable subrogation 
right derivative of their insureds’ claims. This interest, 
though, does not aid in resolving the lawsuit’s central issues: 
Defendants’ liability and whether the settlement is fair, 
reasonable, and adequate under HRCP Rule 23. See id.
Without a protectable interest, Subrogating Insurers cannot 
establish a “common question of law or fact.”  Id. (absent “an 
interest relating to the property or transaction which is the 
subject of the action” no common questions exist). 
Subrogating Insurers assert that their claims share the 
“same transactional nucleus of facts.” They distort the 
24(b)(2) standard. The “transactional nucleus” test comes from 
Wong v. Cayetano’s claim preclusion doctrine, not HRCP Rule 
24(b)(2). 111 Hawaiʻ i 462, 478, 143 P.3d 1, 17 (2006).  We 
decline Subrogating Insurers’ invitation to transplant a claim 
preclusion standard into the permissive intervention analysis. 
The permissive intervention standard requires commonality 
between the applicant’s “alleged interest and the main action,” 
not a common nucleus of facts. Baehr, 80 Hawaiʻ i at 345, 910 
P.2d at 116; see HRCP Rule 24(b)(2) (requiring that “an 
applicant’s claim or defense and the main action have a question 
of law or fact in common”). 
Equitable subrogation presents no common questions of law 
or fact with these tort claims and the class settlement of those 
45  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 claims. Because Subrogating Insurers lack a protectable 
interest (an “interest relating to the property or transaction 
which is the subject of the action”) they cannot demonstrate 
common questions with the main action. See Baehr, 80 Hawaiʻ i at 
345, 910 P.2d at 116; Maui Fires, 155 Hawaiʻ i at 425, 565 P.3d at 
770. 
IV. 
We affirm the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit’s June 
24, 2025 order denying Subrogating Insurers’ motion to 
intervene. 
Adam M. Romney  
(Vincent G. Raboteau, Michael F. 
O’Connor, Richard A. Ing, Mark S. Anderson, Normand R. Lezy, Christine Forsline, David R. 
Denton, on the briefs) 
for appellants  
Terrance M. Revere 
(Patrick Kyle Smith, Graham B. LippSmith, MaryBeth LippSmith, Celene Chan Andrews, Jaclyn L. 
Anderson on the briefs) 
for appellees Nova Burnes, et al.  
Ginger D. Anders 
(Joachim P. Cox, Randall C. Whattoff, Nicholas D. Fram on 
the briefs) 
for appellees Hawaiian Electric Company, Inc. dba Hawaiian Electric, et al.  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Todd W. Eddins
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
/s/ Kevin T. Morikone /s/ Taryn R. Tomasa
46 