                                                                                                                              ---o0o---
------------------------------------------------***  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S   HAWAI I  REPORTS  A ND  PACIFIC  REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAP-17-0000816 21-JAN-2020 08:11 AM 
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
IN
  THE  MATTER   OF  THE  TAX  APPEAL  OF  KAHEAWA  WIND  POWER,  LLC,
Respondent/Taxpayer-Appellant-Appellee, 
vs. 
COUNTY  OF  MAUI,  
Petitioner/Appellee-Appellant.  
IN  THE  MATTER   OF  THE  TAX  APPEAL  OF  AUWAHI  WIND  ENERGY  LLC, 
Respondent/Taxpayer-Appellant-Appellee, 
vs. 
COUNTY  OF  MAUI,  
Petitioner/Appellee-Appellant. 
SCAP-17-0000816 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  TAX  APPEAL  COURT 
(CAAP-17-0000816  and  CONSOLIDATED  CASES:  CAAP-17-0000817, 
CAAP-17-0000818,  CAAP-17-0000819,  and  CAAP-17-0000820; 
T.X.  No.  14-1-0266  AND  CONSOLIDATED  CASE  T.X.  No.  16-1-0272; 
T.X.  No.  14-1-0267  AND  CONSOLIDATED  CASE  T.X.  No.  16-1-0273; 
and  T.X.  Nos.  16-1-0275,  15-1-0238,  and  16-1-0328)           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
    
   
        
        
          
            
         
          
       
        
          
   
       
         
            
        
        
          
        
          
         JANUARY  21,  2020 
RECKTENWALD,  C.J.,  NAKAYAMA,   McKENNA,  POLLACK,  AND  WILSON,  JJ. 
OPINION  OF  THE  COURT  BY  RECKTENWALD,  C.J. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This case
 arises from a taxation dispute between 
Appellant County of Maui (County) and Appellees Kaheawa Wind 
Power, LLC, Kaheawa Wind Power II, LLC (collectively, Kaheawa), 
and Auwahi Wind Energy LLC (Auwahi), which lease land on the 
island of Maui in order to operate their wind farms.1 At issue 
is whether the County had the authority, under article VIII, 
section 3 of the Hawai i Constitution, to include the  value of 
Appellees’ wind turbines in Appellees’ real property tax 
assessments, and to redefine the term “real property” within 
section 3.48.005 of the Maui County Code (MCC) to include wind 
turbines for that purpose. 
Appellees challenged the County’s actions in the Tax 
Appeal Court (TAC), which issued summary judgment orders and a 
final judgment in their favor. The TAC held that the County, by 
amending the MCC, exceeded its authority under article VIII, 
section 3 because the delegates to the 1978 Constitutional 
Convention did not intend to grant the counties the power to 
redefine “personal property” as “real property.” In response, 
1 Kaheawa and Auwahi operate their wind farms on land leased from 
the State of Hawai i and Ulupalakua  Ranch, Inc., respectively. 
2           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
        
   
       
          
        
         
           
           
            
     
  
   
       
          
      the County filed five separate appeals with the ICA (consolidated 
under CAAP-17-816) and filed an application for transfer, which 
this court granted. 
We hold that the County exceeded its constitutional 
authority by amending MCC § 3.48.005 to expand its definition of 
“real property” to include “personal property,” and agree with 
the TAC that the delegates to the 1978 Constitutional Convention 
did not intend to grant the counties the power to define the 
term. We further hold that the delegates intended for this power 
to be reserved to the legislature. As such, we uphold the TAC’s 
final judgment in favor of Appellees. 
II. BACKGROUND 
To  understand  the  issues   at  the  heart  of  this  case,  we
first  explain  the  proceedings  of  the  1978  Constitutional 
Convention,  the  County’s  initial  enactment  of  MCC  §  3.48.005 
(1980),  and  the  ICA’s  2014  Kaheawa  Wind  Power,  LLC  v.  County  of 
Maui  decision.   See  135  Hawai i  202,  347  P.3d  632  (App.  2014), 
cert.  denied
,  2015  WL  745424  (Feb.  19,  2015).   We  then  explain 
the  County’s  amendment  to  MCC  §  3.48.005  (2013),  the  TAC’s 
rationale  for  granting  summary  judgment  for  the  Appellees,  and 
the  parties’  positions  on  appeal  to  this  court.  
A. Article VIII, Section
 3 
Article VIII, section 3 of the Hawai i Constitution 
took effect in
 1981, pursuant to its adoption by the 1978 
Constitutional Convention and subsequent ratification by the 
3           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
      
 
       
  
       
            
         
         
         
      
        
   voters. Since 1981, it has provided: 
The  taxing  power  shall  be  reserved  to  the  State, 
except  so  much  thereof  as  may  be  delegated  by  the 
legislature  to  the  political  subdivisions,  and  except 
that  all  functions,  powers  and  duties  relating  to  the 
taxation  of  real  property  shall  be  exercised 
exclusively  by  the  counties,  with  the  exception  of  the
county  of  Kalawao.   The  legislature  shall  have  the 
power  to  apportion  state  revenues  among  the  several 
political  subdivisions.  
(emphasis added). 
This  language  as  ultimately  adopted   is  similar  to  the 
language  of  article  VIII,  section  3  as  originally  proposed, 
except  that  the  originally  proposed  language  only  granted  the 
counties  the  “power  to  levy  a  tax  on  real  property.”   Stand. 
Comm.  Rep.  No.  42  in  1  Proceedings  of  the  Constitutional 
Convention  of  Hawai i  of  1978,  at  594   (1980).   Prior  to  the 
amendment’s  adoption,  “all  taxation  authority  was  unequivocally 
vested  in  the  State.”   See  State  ex  rel.  Anzai  v.  City  &  Cty.  of
Honolulu,  99  Hawai i  508,  510,  57  P.3d  433,  435  (2002)  (citing 
Haw.  Const.  art.  VII,  §  3  (1968)).   2  
The Standing Committee on Local Government was the 
first Committee to consider section 3’s proposed language and the 
extent of the taxation authority to grant the counties. See id. 
2 Article VII, section 3 of the 1968 Hawai i Constitution provided: 
Th
e taxing power shall be reserved to the State except 
so much thereof as may be delegated by the legislature 
to the political subdivisions, and the legislature 
shall have the power to apportion state revenues among 
the several political subdivisions. 
4           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
     
      
      
    
      
       
          
       
       
       
       
      
       
  
       
        
          
          
        
       
       
        
   
         
         
   
   
    
      
       
        . . . .    . . . .    . . . . In  Report  No.  42,  the  Committee  recommended  that  the  counties  be
given  the  “power  to  levy  a  tax  on  real  property.”   Id.  at  521.  
In  relevant  part,  Report  No.  42  contained  the  following 
discussion:  
Your Committee finds that the question of a 
centralized real property tax program versus a 
decentralized system has been discussed many times 
over the past several years. 
Pr
esently, under the Hawai i Revised Statute s, the 
State is responsible for assessing all real property 
in the State that is subject to the payment of real 
property taxes, and for levying and collecting all 
such taxes, and adjudicating taxpayer appeals. Basic 
policies defining real property, setting the basis of 
assessment, determining the manner in which rates are 
set, setting exemptions and describing the appeals 
process are the responsibility of state lawmakers. 
In
 recent years, county officials have advocated the 
transfer of real property functions from the State to 
the counties. Such a move, it is felt, would permit 
counties to use the power to tax real property in a 
more effective manner. A general grant of taxing 
powers to the counties would include: a) assessments 
of property, b) adjudications of appeals, c) levying 
of tax rates, d) collections of taxes and e) 
formulation of basic policies. 
Yo
ur Committee concludes that the power to levy a tax 
on real property should be granted to the County for 
the following reasons: 
1) County governments are completely 
responsible and accountable for the 
administration of their local affairs. It 
is felt that in order to have complete 
authority over their county finances the 
5           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
     
  
      
     
      
     
       
 
      
      
      
      
      
     
     
       
    
      
           
       
     
       
        
         
     
       
         
   
      
         
          . . . . re
al property tax function should be given 
to the counties. 
2) By placing total responsibility for the 
real property tax program with the 
counties, public confusion as to who or 
which level of government is responsible 
for the real property tax bite would be 
eliminated. 
3) County administration of the real property 
tax is consistent with home rule. 
4) There are certain program elements which 
do not invoke issues of statewide concern 
and/or which do not lend themselves to 
single, statewide solutions. In other 
words, there are different economic bases 
and needs of the counties which cannot be 
addressed by statewide real property 
provisions. 
Your Committee also considered granting the counties 
the power to levy a general excise tax . . . . 
Yo
ur Committee acknowledges the desire of the counties 
for greater autonomy, self-reliance and financial 
independence. Although the general excise tax looks 
like an attractive way for counties to raise revenues, 
your Committee finds that one should keep in mind the 
issue of fairness to taxpayers[.] 
Your Committee is in accord with the conclusion 
reached by Mr. Fred Bennion of the Tax Foundation of 
Hawai i who states:  
The counties, should they desire additional revenues, 
have the power to raise the added revenue through the 
real property tax by increasing the rates[.] 
Comm.  of  the  Whole  Debates  in  2  Proceedings  of  the  Constitutional
Convention  of  Hawai i  of  1978,   at  594–95  (1980).   
6           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The  floor  debates  on  the  amendment  took  place  next, 
where,  notably,  Delegate  Souki  and  Delegate  Crozier  voiced  their 
concerns  over  the  proposed  amendment’s  language.   Comm.  of  the 
Whole  Debates  in  2  Proceedings  of  the  Constitutional  Convention 
of  Hawai i  of  1978,  at  258–59  (1980).    Delegate  Souki,  for 
instance,  explained  that  “the  intent  of  the  section  providing  for
the  exclusive  power  of  real  property  taxation  [was]  not  so  that 
the  counties  [could]  increase  their  revenue  or  increase  their 
taxing  powers,”   but  rather,  “to  provide  for  better  management  of 
the  taxing  power”  and  “more  accountability.”   Id.   Similarly, 
Delegate   Crozier   explained   that  “while  [he  was]  kind  of  for  the 
counties  get[ting]  control  of  [real  property  taxation],”  he  was 
also  “kind  of  afraid  of  a  council  that  [might]  lean[]  one  special
way”  in  a  way  that  would  “advantage  .  .  .  select  group[s]”  while 
disadvantaging  others.   Id.  at  258.  
 
After  the  floor   debate  ended,  the  Committee  of  the 
Whole  convened  and  issued  Report  No.  7,  which  recommended 
adopting  the  language  found  in  article  VIII,  section  3  today.  
Comm.  as  a  Whole  Rep.  No.  7  in  1  Proceedings  of  the 
Constitutional  Convention  of  Hawai i  of  1978,  at  1008   (1980).   In
relevant  part,  Report  No.  7  explained  its  recommendation  to 
change  the  “tax  levying”  language  to  the  broader  “all  functions, 
powers  and  duties”  language  “to  clarify  the  Standing  Committee’s 
intent  to  grant  all  taxing  powers  relating  to  real  property  to 
the  counties,  except  Kalawao.”   Id.   Report  No.  7  continued:  
7           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
        
       
         
              
        
     
        
         
       
 
         
         
      
       
       
      
       
        
      [T
]here  was  some  ques tion  under  the  earlier  [“tax 
levying”]  language   as  to  whether  or  not  the  counties 
would  have  the  power  to  set  exemptions.   Although  the
mover  of  this  amendment  explained  that  ‘the  power  to 
levy’  did  include  the  lesser  power  of  setting 
exemptions,  this  amendment  was  adopted  as  having  the 
better  language.  
Id. 
The  Report  further  explained  that  the  Committee  of  the
Whole  was  “reject[ing]  an  amendment  to  grant  the  counties  [the] 
power  to  levy  a  general  excise  tax,”  in  light  of  delegates’ 
concerns  that  it  would  “add[]  taxes  to  the  same  people  and  would
therefore  be  unfair.”   Id.   
 
As such, article
 VIII, section 3 of the Hawai i 
Constitution
 was enacted, giving the counties exclusive authority 
over “all functions, powers and duties relating to the taxation 
of real property.” Haw. Const. art. VIII, § 3. At the time of 
the amendment’s adoption, and still, today, the constitution had 
not defined the term “real property.” 
To facilitate
 the transition of real property tax power 
from the State to the counties, the delegates of the 
Constitutional Convention also adopted article XVIII, section 6, 
which explained: 
The amendment to Section 3 of Article VIII shall take 
effect on the first day of July after two full 
calendar years have elapsed following the ratification 
of such amendment [November 7, 1978]; provided that 
for a period of eleven years following such 
ratification, the policies and methods of assessing 
real property taxes shall be uniform throughout the 
State and shall be established by agreement of a 
majority of the political subdivisions. Each 
8           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
      
      
      
         
       
      
       
       
      
      
      
     
     
           
           
   po
litical  subdivi sion  shall  enact  such  uniform 
policies  and  methods  of  assessment  by  ordinance  before
the  effective  date  of  this  amendment  [July  1,  1981], 
and  in  the  event  the  political  subdivisions  fail  to 
enact  such  ordinances,  the  uniform  policies  and 
methods  of  assessment  shall  be  established  by  general 
law.  .  .  .  
Haw.  Const.  art.  XVIII,  §  6. 
B. MCC  §   3.48.005’s  Enactment  (1980) 
In  accordance  with   article  XVIII,  section  6,  and  to 
provide  a  framework  for  the  required  transition,  the  legislature
enacted  HRS  chapter  246A  in  1980  to  take  the  place  of  chapter 
246,  the  State’s  real  property  tax  code.  In  adopting  their 
respective  property  tax  ordinances,  all  the  counties,  with  the 
exception  of  Kalawao,  borrowed  the  statutory  language  of  chapter
246,  including  the  language  from  HRS  §  246-1  (1967),  which 
provided  the  following  definition  of  “real  property”: 3  
 
“Property” or “real property” means and includes all 
land and appurtenances thereof and the buildings, 
structures, fences, and improvements erected on or 
affixed to the same, and any fixture which is erected 
on or affixed to such land, buildings, structures, 
fences, and improvements, including all machinery and 
other mechanical or other allied equipment and the 
foundations thereof, whose use thereof is necessary to 
the utility of such land, buildings, structures, 
fences, and improvements, or whose removal therefrom 
cannot be accomplished without substantial damage to 
such land, buildings, structures, fences, and 
improvements, excluding, however, any growing crops. 
3 Both of these chapters were repealed in 2016 “for the purpose of 
deleting obsolete and unnecessary provisions.” See H.B. No. 2217, H.D. 1, 
S.D. 1. 
9 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
Thus, when the County of Maui enacted MCC § 3.48.005 in
1980, it provided:  4
“Property” or “real property” means and includes all
land and appurtenances thereof and the buildings,
structures, fences, and improvements erected on or
affixed to the same, and any fixture which is erected
on or affixed to such land, buildings structures,
structures, fences, and improvements, including all
machinery and other mechanical or other allied
equipment and the foundations thereof, whose use
thereof is necessary to the utility of such land,
buildings, structures, fences, and improvements, or
whose removal therefrom cannot be accomplished without
substantial damage to such land, buildings,
structures, fences, and improvements, excluding,
however, any growing crops.This definition of “real property” for taxation
purposes remained the same for over thirty years, until 2013
after Kaheawa challenged the County’s authority under the MCC to
include the value of its wind turbines within its real property
tax assessments for the 2007-2011 tax years.   Kaheawa, 1355
Hawai i at 204, 347 P.3d at 634.  
4The County concedes that the ordinance’s language tracked the language
of HRS § 246-1 (1967).  The stricken and underlined text represents the ways
in which the language of MCC § 3.48.005 (1980) differed from the language of
HRS § 246-1 (1967).  The stricken text represents the text of HRS § 246-1 that
was omitted in the County’s ordinance, while the underlined text represents
what was added.   
5Auwahi was not a party to the Kaheawa litigation.  However, after
the ICA’s Kaheawa decision, Auwahi entered into a stipulated final judgment
with the County that Auwahi’s wind turbines were not “real property” under MCC
§ 3.48.005 (1980) for the 2013 tax year.  As discussed below, after the County
amended the definition of “real property” in the MCC, it again classified
Auwahi’s wind turbines as real property for tax years 2014 onward. 10          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
 
         
    
      
       
        
       
        
      
         
 
   
 C. The ICA’s Kaheawa Decision 
In  the  litigation   that  followed,  the  ICA  affirmed  the
TAC’s  grant  of  summary  judgment  to  Kaheawa,  and  held  in  a 
published  opinion  that  wind  turbines  did  not  qualify  as  “real 
property”  under  the  definition  provided  in  MCC  §  3.48.005.   Id.
To  constitute  “real  property”   under  the  MCC,  the  ICA 
explained  that  the  wind  turbines  would,  as  a  threshold  matter, 
need  to  qualify  either  as  “improvements”  or  “fixtures.”   Id.  at 
207,  347  P.3d  at  637.   The  ICA  first  held  that  the  wind  turbines
did  not  qualify  as  “improvements.”   Id.  at  208-09,  347  P.3d  at 
638-39.   The  ICA  explained:   
 
 
The County urges this court to apply the Black’s Law 
Dictionary definition [of ‘improvement’], which 
defines ‘improvement’ as ‘[a]n addition to real 
property, whether permanent or not; esp., one that 
increases its value or utility or that enhances its 
appearance.” Black’s Law Dictionary 826 (9th ed. 
2009). Considering the particular issue before us, we 
disagree that the broad definition of ‘improvement’ 
advanced by the County applies to the wind turbines in 
this case. 
As  recognized  in   the  parties’  stipulation,[ ]  Kaheawa
asserts   that  the  wind  turbines   are  equipment  and 
machinery.   The  County  []  also  expressly  recognizes 
that  ‘[t]he  turbines  are  plainly  machinery.’  []   In 
MCC  §  3.48.005,  certain  types  of  ‘machinery’  are 
incorporated  as  part  of  the  description  of  a 
‘fixture.’  6 
. .
 . . 
6 The  County  and  Kaheawa  signed  a  Stipulation  of  Facts  regarding  the
Kaheawa  litigation  (CAAP-12-728),  which  provided  that  the  Stipulation  was 
“made  solely  for  purposes  of  the  present  action”  and  did  not  “constitute  an 
admission  of  any  fact  for  any  other  purpose  or  with  respect  to  any  third 
party.”   
11           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 If
  the  County’s  broad  interpretation  of  an  improvement
was  applied  to  this  case,  the  language  in  MCC 
§  3.48.005  related  to  fixtures  and  machinery  would  be 
rendered  meaningless.  
Id. 
Second,  the  ICA   held  that  the  wind  turbines  did  not 
qualify  as  “fixtures.”   Id.  at  209-211,  347  P.3d  at  639-641.   To 
qualify  as  a  “fixture”  under  the  MCC’s  definition  of  “real 
property,”  the  ICA  explained  that  it  would  either  have  to  find 
that  “(1)  the  use  of  the  wind  turbines  [would  be]  necessary  to 
the  utility  of  the  land  .  .  .  .  ;  or  []  (2)  the  removal  of  the 
wind  turbines  [could  not]  be  accomplished  without  substantial 
damage  to  the  land[.]”   Id.  at  209-10,  347  P.3d  at  639-40  
(emphases  added).   Because  the  parties  had  stipulated  that 
Kaheawa’s  wind  turbines  could  be  removed  without  substantially 
damaging  the  land,  the  ICA  focused  on  whether  the  land  could  be 
utilized  without  the  wind  turbines’  use.   Id.   Noting  that  the 
MCC  did  not  clarify  whether  the  term  “utility”  meant  (1)  general  
utility  or  (2)  utility  specific  to  a  particular  business  or  use, 
the  ICA  looked  to  the  “traditional  common  law”  analysis  regarding
“fixtures”  for  guidance,  and  in  particular,  its  “adaptation” 
element.   Id.  at  210,  347  P.3d  at  640.   The  analysis  was  as 
follows:   
The  traditional  common  law  test  for  determining 
whether  an  item  of  personal  property  has  become  a 
‘fixture’  requires  three  elements:  (1)  the  actual  or 
constructive  annexation  of  the  article  to  the  realty,
(2)  the  adaptation  of  the  article  to  the  use  or 
purpose  of  that  part  of  the  realty  with  which  it  is  
12           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
       
       
    
          
      
     
           
           
            
            
           
                
              
            
           
   
   
        
         
       
        
        
        
         
       
      
        
        
       co
nnected , and (3) the intention of the party making 
the annexation to make the article a permanent 
accession to the freehold. 
Id.   (citing  35  Am.Jur.2d  Fixtures  §  4  and  Cartwright  v. 
Widemann,  9  Haw.  685,  690-91  (Haw.  Kingdom  1892),  superseded  on 
other  grounds,  RLH  §  8871  (1945),  as  recognized  in  Hess  v.  Paulo,
38  Haw.  279  (Haw.  Terr.  1949))  (emphasis  added).  
While  acknowledging  that  jurisdictions  varied   in  their
interpretation  of  the  test’s  “adaptation”  element,  the  ICA 
applied  the
  analysis  set  forth  in  Zangerle  v.  Republic  Steel 
Corp.,  60  N.E.2d  170  (Ohio  1945),  given  its  consistency  with 
Cartwright  v.  Widemann,  which  the  ICA  described  as  the  “only 87  
7 The ICA did not cite to any cases demonstrating how different 
jurisdictions treated the “adaptation” prong of the common law fixture test. 
We note, however, that while the Ohio Supreme Court in Zangerle only 
considered an article a “fixture” if, under the “adaptability” prong of the 
test, the article was useful to the inherent utility of the land, other 
courts, such as the Supreme Court of New Hampshire considered an article a 
“fixture” if the article was “intimately intertwined with the primary use of 
the land itself,” or in other words, the use to which the land was being put. 
See, e.g., King Ridge, Inc. v. Town of Sutton, 340 A.2d 106, 110 (N.H. 1975) 
(holding that ski lifts were taxable as real property, in part, because the 
hills upon which they were located were “specially cleared and graded for 
downhill skiing”). 
8 The ICA explained: 
In Cartwright , the Supreme Court of the Kingdom of 
Hawai i held that m achinery used as part of an iron 
works company (including lathes, an emery wheel, a 
drill press, a milling machine, a shaping machine and 
a grinding machine), most of which were fastened to 
the flooring of a building or overhead, were not 
fixtures. 9 Haw. at 688-89. Significantly, the court 
also stated that “movable machines, whose number and 
permanency are contingent upon the varying conditions 
of the business differ from engines and boilers and 
other articles secured by masonry and designed to be 
permanent and indispensable to the enjoyment of the 
freehold.” 
(continued...) 
13           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
     
 
     
        
         
        
       
       
       
     
        
        
       
       
         
      
      
      
       
      
        
        
      
        
   
        
            
  Hawai i  case”  to  touch  upon  the  issue.   Id.  at  210-11,  347  P.3d
at  640-41.   The  ICA  explained:  
In Zangerle , a company that operated steel plants 
challenged the tax assessment of machinery and 
equipment as improvements on the land rather than as 
personal property. [] 60 N.E.2d at 173. Addressing 
the second part of the traditional fixture test, the 
Ohio Supreme Court relied on the following: 
The general principle to be kept in view, 
underlying all questions of this kind, is the 
distinction between the business which is 
carried on in or upon the premises, and the 
premises, or locus in quo. The former is 
personal in its nature, and articles that are 
merely accessory to the business, and have been 
put on the premises for this purpose, and not as 
accessions to the real estate, retain the 
personal character of the principal to which 
they appropriately belong and are subservient. 
But articles which have been annexed to the 
premises as accessory to it, whatever business 
may be carried on upon it, and not particularly 
for the benefit of a present business which may 
be of a temporary duration, become subservient 
to the realty and acquire and retain its legal 
character. 
Id. (citing Zangerle , 60 N.E.2d at 177) (emphases added). 
Finding  that  Kaheawa’s  wind  turbines   were  “only 
necessary  to  the  utility  of  the  land  .  .  .  given  the  particular 
business  [that]  Kaheawa  currently  operat[ed],”  –  i.e.,  the 
business  of  producing  wind  energy  –  the  ICA  held  that  the  wind 
turbines  could  not  satisfy  the  “adaptation”  element  of  the 
“utility”  prong  of  the  fixture  test.   Id.  at  209-11,  347  P.3d  at 
(...continued) 
Kaheawa , 135 Hawai i at 211, 347 P.3d at 641 (citing Cartwr ight, 9 Haw. 
at 688-89). 
14           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
       
    
         
       
        
         
          
     
       
       
          
         
         
         
       
      
      
         
       
      
       
       
      
      
      
     
     
          
            
             
           639-41. Accordingly, the wind turbines could not be considered 
“fixtures,” and therefore, could not constitute “real property” 
under the MCC. Id. 
In 2015, the County filed an application for writ of 
certiorari challenging the ICA’s holding that Kaheawa’s wind 
turbines were not “improvements,” and further, its reliance on 
Zangerle in interpreting what constituted a common law “fixture.” 
See SCWC-12-728. This court rejected that application. See 2015 
WL 745424 (Feb. 19, 2015). 
D. The County’s 2013 Amendment to MCC § 3.48.005 
In response to the litigation described above, the 
County amended MCC § 3.48.005 in 2013 to include wind turbines, 
or other articles that would “increase the value” of the 
underlying realty, within its definition of “real property.” As 
amended, and as it reads today, MCC § 3.48.005 provides:9 
“Property” or “real property” means and includes all 
land and appurtenances thereof and the building 
structures s, fences, and improvements erected on or 
affixed to the same,; and any fixture which is erected 
on or affixed to such land, buildings, structures, 
fences, and improvements, including all machinery and 
other mechanical or other allied equipment and the 
foundations thereof, whose use thereof is necessary to 
the utility of such land, buildings, structures, 
fences, and improvements, or whose removal therefrom 
cannot be accomplished without substantial damage to 
such land, buildings, structures, fences, and 
improvements, excluding, however, any growing crops. 
9 The stricken and underlined text represents the ways in which the 
language of MCC § 3.48.005 (2013) differed from its original language. The 
stricken text represents the text of MCC § 3.48.005 (1980) that was omitted in 
the amendment, while the underlined text represents what was added. 
15           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
        
         
         
       
      
         
         
             
           
          
       1.
   Whose  use  ther eof  increases  the  value  to,  or  is 
necessary  to  the  utility  of  such  land, 
buildings,  structures,  fences,  and  improvements;
or  
2.   Whose  removal   therefrom  cannot  be  accomplished 
without  substantial  damage  to  such  land, 
buildings,  structures,  fences,  and  improvements, 
excluding,  however,  any  growing  crops;  or 
3. Any  and  all  wind  energy  conversion  property  that
is  used  to  convert  wind  energy  to  a  form  of 
usable  energy,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  a 
wind  charger,  windmill,  wind  turbine,  tower  and 
electrical  equipment,  pad  mount  transformers, 
power  lines,  and  substation,  and  other  such 
components.   
(2013). 
In  essence,  through  the   changes  to  the  ordinance,  the 
County  redefined  “real  property”  to  include  wind  turbines,  and 
also  allowed  any  article  whose  use  “increases  the  value  to,  or  is
necessary  to  the  utility”  of  the  land  to  become  an  assessable 
accession  to  realty  for  the  purposes  of  real  property  taxation.10  
Under its new authority from the  amended code, the 
County again began including the value of Kaheawa’s and Auwahi’s 
wind turbines within their real property tax assessments for the 
2014, 2015, and 2016 tax years. 
The Appellees thus challenged the County’s actions, 
arguing this time that the County exceeded its authority under 
10 Notably, by allowing any article whose use “increases the value 
to, or is necessary to the utility” of the land to become an assessable 
accession to realty, the County seemed to adopt the broad interpretation of 
“improvement” that it had unsuccessfully advocated for in Kaheawa . See 
Kaheawa , 135 at 208-09, 347 P.3d at 638-39. 
16           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
       
        
       
         
       
        
       
       
     
         
                 
        
         
       
       
         
        . . . . article  VIII,  section  3  of  the  Hawai i  Constitution   by  expanding 
the  definition  of  “real  property”  to  include  “personal  property.”  
E. The TAC’s Grant of
 Summary Judgment to Appellees 
The  TAC  granted  Kaheawa  and  Auwahi’s  motions   for 
summary  judgment  and  issued  final  judgments   in  their  favor  after
finding   that  the  delegates  to  the  1978  Constitutional  Convention
had  never  intended  to  grant  the  counties  the  power  to  redefine 
the  term  “real  property”  to  include  “personal  property.”  11 
 
To  reach  its  conclusion,  the  TAC  emphasized  the 
language   of
  the  Committee  on  Local  Government  and  Committee  of 
the  Whole’s  reports,  as  well  as  Delegate  Souki  and  Crozier’s 
comments  on  the  floor.   In  its  oral  ruling  for  the  Appellees,  the
TAC  explained:  
[W]hen we look at the language of the Constitutional 
Convention Amendment and its reference to taxation of 
real property, the Court finds . . . that the 
Constitutional Convention in 1978 had no intention to 
confer the power of policymaking to the extent that 
the counties [could] redefine the term “real property” 
to include chattel which are personal property because 
that is a matter of policy. 
And if the counties of [Hawai i] have the power to  
redefine real property so broadly as to include 
chattel, then there may be no end to what the counties 
will ultimately do with respect to taxing chattel that 
are located upon real property. Certainly it is not 
endless potential, but the potential for including as 
real property items that were formally chattel on 
personal property is a matter of great public policy. 
11 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. 
17           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
      
     
        
       
       
       
    
  
        
          
       
     
       
         
           
          
          
          
     
        
          
         
        
        
 
            
           
            
              
               
   [T
]he Court is unable to conclude that the 
Constitutional Conventioneers intended to confer onto 
the counties the power to redefine the term “real 
property” to include items of personal property and 
convert those into “real property” and subject those 
items of personal property to real property and 
subject to real property taxation. 
F. The Instant Appeal 
Upon the TAC’s written final judgments in favor of 
Kaheawa and Auwahi,12 the County filed five appeals with the ICA 
(consolidated under CAAP-17-816) and filed an application for 
transfer, which this court granted. 
The County contends that article VIII, section 3 
transferred the power to define “real property” to the counties, 
and that accordingly, the County had the power to (a) add wind 
turbines to its definition of “real property,” and (b) adopt its 
own test, based on appraisal concepts of use, utility, and value, 
to potentially tax any type of property that satisfied the test 
as assessable accessions to realty. 
To its first point, the County contends that article 
VIII, section 3 provided a general grant of authority to the 
counties over the “functions, powers and duties” related to the 
taxation of real property, and that this general grant 
necessarily gave the counties the authority to define “real 
property.” 
12 See Final Judgment in favor of Kaheawa for Tax Years 2014 and 2015 
(October 4, 2017) in CAAP-17-816, JEFS Dkt. 1:7-10 and CAAP-17-817, JEFS Dkt. 
1:1-7; Final Judgment in Favor of Auwahi for Tax Year 2015 in CAAP-17-818, 
JEFS Dkt. 1; Final Judgment in Favor of Auwahi for Tax Year 2014 in CAAP-17-
819, JEFS Dkt. 1; and Final Judgment in Favor of Auwahi for Tax Year 2016 in 
CAAP-17-820, JEFS Dkt. 1. 
18           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Citing  to  Report  No.  42  by  the  Committee  on  Local 
Government  for  support,  the  County  notes  the  Committee’s 
statements  that  in  1978,  “pursuant  to  the  [HRS],  the  ‘real 
property  tax  program’  including  “basic  policies  defining  real 
property”  .  .  .  [was]  the  responsibility  of  state  lawmakers”; 
that  the  State  had  the  ability  to  “utilize  the  real  property  tax 
as  an  instrument  of  land  use  and  economic  policy”;  and  that  “a 
general  grant  of  authority  to  the  counties  [of  the  power  to  tax 
real  property]  would  include  .  .  .  [the]  formulation  of  basic 
policies.”   In  light  of  these  acknowledgments,  the  County  argues 
that  the  Committee  of  the  Whole  would  not  have  adopted  the  broad 
“functions,  powers  and  duties”  language  that  it  did  over  the  more
narrow  “tax  levying”  language  it  had  considered,  had  it  not  meant
to  provide  the  counties  with  a  general  grant  of  authority.   
 
The  County  further  refers  to   Gardens  at  West  Maui  v. 
County  of  Maui,  whereby,  the  County  contends,  this  court  was 
“unambiguous”  in  its  recognition  that  article  VIII,  section  3 
provided  the  counties  with  a  general  grant  of  authority  over  real
property  policymaking  functions.   See  90  Hawai i  334,  978  P.2d 
772,  779  (1999)  (“The  constitutional  and  legislative  acts 
[including  article  VIII,  section  3]  covered  the  whole  subject  of 
property  taxation  power  and  embraced  the  entire  law  in  that 
regard.”).   13  
13 In  its  answering  brief,  Auwahi  argues  that  the  Gardens  at  West 
Maui  case  is  inapposite,  because  this  case  only  recognized  the  counties’  grant
to  tax  real  property.   
19           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
     
   
         
          
         
           
        
         
         
         
           
            
             
            
           
          
          
           
            In  light  of  the  amendment’s  legislative  proceedings  and
Gardens  at  West  Maui,  the  County  contends  that  article  VIII, 
section  3  explicitly  gave  the  County  the  authority  to  define 
“real  property.”   As  such,  and  in  accord  with  the  laws  of  other 
jurisdictions,  the  County  contends  it  had  the  authority  to  amend 
MCC  §  3.48.005  to  redefine  “real  property”  to  include  wind 
turbines,  and  to  rely  on  appraisal  concepts  of  use,  utility,  and 
value  to  further  classify  which  articles  of  property  could  become
assessable  accessions  to  realty.   See,  e.g.,  King  Ridge,  Inc.  v. 
Town  of  Sutton,  340  A.2d  106  (N.H.  1975)  and  Opinion  of  the 
Justices,  697  A.2d  125  (N.H.  1997)). 14 
 
Because the County argues that  article VIII, section 3 
granted the counties the power to define “real property,” and 
because it contends that neither the common law nor the statutory 
scheme in Hawai i defined the “personal property”  that could only 
be taxed by the State, it contends that any reliance in this 
jurisdiction on Zangerle to define “real property”
 is misplaced. 
On the one hand, the County contends that the ICA’s 
Kaheawa decision has no effect on the current lawsuit because 
that decision only held that wind turbines could not be 
14 In King Ridge, Inc., the New Hampshire Supreme Court held that the 
legislature had the power to make any type of property realty for taxation 
purposes, even if that property was personalty at common law. 340 A.2d at 
109-10. In Opinion of the Justices , the same court again recognized the 
legislature’s power to make any kind of property realty for purposes of 
taxation, and further, explained that the legislature could validly subject to 
taxation certain instruments of production or machines, which by their nature 
were designed for use in connection with real estate, regardless of whether 
they were part of or attached to realty. 697 A.2d at 107. 
20           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
considered  “real  property”  under  the  County’s  previous  version  of
MCC  §  3.48.005.   Because  the  County  contends  that  it  resolved  any
confusion  over  whether  wind  turbines  could  be  considered  “real 
property”  under  the  amended  version  of  the  code,  pursuant  to  its 
constitutional  authority  to  redefine  “real  property,”  it  argues 
that  there  is  no  inconsistency  between  the  Kaheawa  decision  and 
the  County’s  actions  now.   
 
On  the  other  hand,  the   County  continues  to  challenge 
the  ICA’s  reliance  on  Zangerle  to  inform  its  analysis  of  what 
constituted  a  “fixture”  at  common  law.   Specifically,  the  County 
contends  that  Zangerle  cannot  control  in  Hawai i  given:  (1)  the 
“significant
  variance  in  the  traditional  common  law  test  of 
fixtures  across  []  jurisdictions[;]”  (2)  the  differences  between 
Ohio  and  Hawaii’s  statutory  and  constitutional  schemes  and  the 
Supreme  Court  of  Ohio’s  “consistent”  repudiation  of  the  test;  (3)
the  test’s  limited  applicability  to  fixtures  as  applied  to 
electric  power  generation  facilities;  and  (4)  the  test’s  “vague” 
concept  of  “general  inherent  utility.”   
Ultimately,  the
  County  argues   that  this  court  should 
abandon  the  ICA’s  recognition  of  Zangerle’s  “fixture”  test,  which
it  claims  erroneously  characterizes  an  article’s  “utility”  as  an 
article’s  “general  utility”  to  realty.   The  County  advocates  that
we  should  now  recognize  an  article’s  “utility”  as  that  use  for 
which  the  land  is  currently  being  put,  because  “it  is  difficult  
 
21           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        
            
        
           
             
          
            
          
            
           
         
             
          
           
         
            
           
           
   to understand what its ‘general inherent utility’ could possibly 
be, except for perhaps the value in owning and possessing it.” 
The  County  further  argues  that  the  Appellees’  wind 
turbines  constitute  “real  property”  because  they  are  permanent 
and  their  removal  would  cause  material  injury  to  the  land.   For 
permanency,  the  County  contends  that  “to  determine  the 
excludability  of  personal  property  from  being  taxed  as  realty” 
for  the  common  law  fixture  test,  the  test  should  be  “whether 
property  installed  similar  to  the  [article  at  issue]  is  not 
‘ordinarily’  intended  to  be  affixed  permanently  to  real  property”
and  should  not  be  based  on  a  party’s  intent  of  permanency.   If 
this  were  the  test,  the  County  contends,  then  by  “all  reasonably 
manifested  outward  appearances[,]  [the  Appellees’]  wind  turbine 
generators”  would  be  considered  permanent.  16 15
 
In  summary,  the  County  urges   this  court  to  hold  that 
the  Hawai i  Constitution   provided   the  counties   with  the  authority  
15 This is inconsistent with the stipulated facts from Kaheawa , 
whereby all parties agreed that Kaheawa’s wind turbines and towers could be 
“unbolted and removed without any harm to either the equipment or the land.” 
See Kaheawa , 135 Hawai i at 204, 347 P.3d  at 640. 
16 See, e.g., NYT Cable TV v. Audubon Borough , 9 N.J. Tax 359, 369 
(1987) (“To determine the excludability of personal property from being taxed 
as realty, the test is not what plaintiffs actually intended as to its 
permanency, but whether property installed similar to the subject tower is not 
‘ordinarily’ intended to be affixed permanently to real property.”); American 
Hydro Power Partners, L.P. v. Clifton City, 12 N.J. Tax 264, 269 (1991) (“the 
improvements should be taxed as real property because plaintiff failed to 
establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the equipment was not 
‘ordinarily intended to be affixed permanently to the real property[.]”); 
Guardian Energy LLC v. Cty. of Waseca, 868 N.W.2d 253, 260 (2015) (rejecting 
contention that tanks were not “permanently affixed” to the land because they 
could theoretically be removed by detaching them from their foundations or by 
towing them away). 
22           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
           
        
        
     
          
           
        
         
         
          
           
             
            
           
      
          
              
            
         
         to define “real property” for taxation purposes, and thus uphold 
its 2013 amendment to the MCC. In the alternative, however, the 
County explains that under the proper interpretations of utility 
and permanence, wind turbines do constitute real property, even 
under the common law fixture test. 
The  Appellees,  as  well  as   Tax  Foundation  of  Hawai i 
(Tax  Foundation)  as  amicus
  curiae,  argue  that  the  County  exceeded
its  authority  under  the  Constitution  when  it  expanded  the 
definition  of  real  property  beyond  what  it  was  commonly 
understood  as  in  1978.   As  such,  they  argue  that  MCC  §  3.48.005 
as  amended  is  ultra  vires,  and  that  the  ICA’s  Kaheawa  decision 
appropriately  applied  Zangerle’s  fixture  test  to  conclude  that 
wind  turbines  could  not  be  “real  property.”   Additionally,  the 
parties  argue  that  permitting  the  County  to  tax  wind  turbines  as 
part  of  its  real  property  scheme  would  both  frustrate  Hawaii’s 
renewable  energy  policy  goals,  and  contravene  federal  and  state 
taxation  policy.   17 
17 For instance, Kaheawa and Tax Foundation argue that at the federal 
level, the IRS has treated wind turbines as tangible personal property for 
energy credit and depreciation purposes (citing IRC §§ 48(a)(3), 
168(e)(3)(B)(vi); IRS Private Letter Ruling 9007042 (1989) (credit allowed for 
wind turbines under IRC section saying that eligible property includes 
tangible personal property and other tangible property except a building and 
its structural components)). And, at the State level, both Appellees note 
that they qualify for a Capital Goods Excise Tax Credit under HRS § 235-
110.7(3) with respect to their wind turbines, and that this credit is limited 
to “tangible personal property” which does not include “property . . . 
integral [to] a building or structure.” 
Last, Kaheawa notes the State of Hawaii’s energy policy to move 
away from fossil fuels. Kaheawa cites to HRS § 269-92, which “set[s] a goal 
of one hundred per cent renewable [energy] by 2045[,]” as well as Governor 
Ige’s and state agencies’ commitments to “move more decisively and 
irreversibly away from imported fossil fuel for electricity and transportation 
(continued...) 
23           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
    
 
 
      
          
      
         
       
     
           
     
          
     
          
 III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Summary Judgment 
“Unlike   other  appellate   matters,   in  reviewing   summary 
judgment   decisions   an  appellate   court  steps  into  the  shoes  of  the
trial  court  and  applies   the  same  legal  standard   as  the  trial 
court  applied.”    Beamer  v.  Nishiki,   66  Haw.  572,  577,  670
  P.2d 
1264,  1270  (1983)  (internal  quotation  omitted).   As  such,  when 
reviewing  questions  of  law  from  summary  judgment  orders  in  the 
TAC,  we  review  those  questions  under  the  right/wrong  standard.  
Maile  Sky  Court  Co.  v.  City  &  Cty.  of  Honolulu,  85  Hawai i  36, 
39,  936  P.2d  672,  675  (1997)
  (citation  omitted).   
B. Constitutional Interpretation 
“Issues  of  constitutional
  interpretation  present  
questions  of  law  that  are  reviewed  de  novo.”   Blair  v.  Harris,  98
Hawai i  176,  178,  45  P.3d  798,  800  (2002)   (citation  omitted).   In 
construing  the  constitution,  the  appellate  court  observes  the 
following  basic  principles:  
Because constitutions derive their power and authority 
from the people who draft and adopt them, we have long 
recognized that the Hawai i Constitution must be  
construed with due regard to the intent of the framers 
and the people adopting it, and the fundamental 
principle in interpreting a constitutional provision 
is to give effect to that intent. This intent is to 
be found in the instrument itself. 
[T]he general rule is that, if the words used in a 
constitutional provision are clear and unambiguous, 
17(...continued) 
and towards indigenously produced renewable energy and an ethic of energy 
efficiency.” 
24           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
          
        
       
         
       
      
       
         
        
 
        
         
         
       
       
           
             
       
         
       
         
        
        
  
       
      
         
       
        th
ey are to be construed as they are written. In this 
regard, the settled rule is that in the construction 
of a constitutional provision the words are presumed 
to be used in their natural sense unless the context 
furnishes some ground to control, qualify, or enlarge 
them. Moreover, a constitutional provision must be construed 
in connection with other provisions of the instrument, 
and also in the light of the circumstances under which 
it was adopted and the history which preceded it. 
Hanabusa  v.  Lingle,  105  Hawai i  28,  31-32,  93  P.3d  670,  673-74
(2004)  (brackets  in  original)  (quotation  omitted).  
C. S
tatutory Interpretation 
“Statutory  interpretation   is  a  question  of  law 
reviewable  de  novo.”   State  v.  Wheeler,  121  Hawai i  383,  390,  219
P.3d  1170,
  1177  (2009)  (internal  quotation  marks  omitted).   Our 
construction  of  statutes  is  guided  by  the  following  rules:  
It is a cardinal rule of statutory construction that 
the courts are bound, if possible, to give effect to 
all parts of a statute, and no sentence, clause or 
word shall be construed as surplusage if a 
construction can be legitimately found which will give 
force to and preserve all the words of the statute. 
In re Ainoa, 60 Haw. 487, 490, 591 P.2d 607, 609 (1978). 
When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is 
to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from 
the language contained in the statute itself. And we 
must read statutory language in the context of the 
entire statute and construe it in a manner consistent 
with its purpose. 
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or 
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used 
in a statute, an ambiguity exists . . . . 
In construing an ambiguous statute, “[t]he meaning of 
the ambiguous words may be sought by examining the 
25           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
           
         
       
        
          
          
        
         
  
       
           
        
        
          co
ntext,  with  which  t he  ambiguous  words,  phrases,  and 
sentences  may  be  compared,  in  order  to  ascertain  their
true  meaning.”  HRS  §  1-15(1)  [(1993)].   Moreover,  the 
courts  may  resort  to  extrinsic  aids  in  determining 
legislative  intent.   One  avenue  is  the  use  of 
legislative  history  as  an  interpretive  tool.  
Gray  [v.  Admi n.  Dir.  of  the  Court],  84  Hawai i  [138,]  
148,  931  P.2d  [580,]  590  [(1997)]  (quoting  State  v. 
Toyomura,  80  Hawai i  8,  18-19,  9 04  P.2d  893,  903-04 
(1995))  (brackets  and  ellipsis  points  in  original) 
(footnote  omitted).   The  appellate  court  may  also 
consider  "[t]he  reason  and  spirit  of  the  law,  and  the
cause  which  induced  the  legislature  to  enact  it  .  .  .
to  discover  its  true  meaning.”   HRS  §  1-15(2).  .  .  . 
“Laws  in  pari  materia,  or  upon  the  same  subject 
matter,  shall  be  construed  with  reference  to  each 
other.   What  is  clear  in  one  statute  may  be  called 
upon  in  aid  to  explain  what  is  doubtful  in  another.” 
HRS  §  1-16  (1993).  
 
State v. Koch, 107 Hawai i 215, 220, 112  P.3d 69, 74 (2005) 
[(some brackets added and some in original) (one ellipsis added 
and some in original)] (quotation omitted). 
Absent an absurd or
 unjust result, the appellate court 
is bound to give effect to the plain meaning of unambiguous 
statutory language; we may only resort to the use of legislative 
history when interpreting an ambiguous statute. State v. 
Valdivia , 95 Hawai i 465, 472, 24  P.3d 661, 668 (2001). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
In prior
 cases, this court addressed the counties’ 
broad scope of authority to set property tax policy. We have 
acknowledged, for instance, that “[a]rticle VIII, section 3 was 
expressly and manifestly designed to transfer to the counties 
broad powers of real property taxation,” that “the purpose of the 
26           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
        
   
     
           
      amendment  was  to  place  the  burden  of  the  real  property  taxation
system  at  the  county  level,”  and  further,  that  the  amendment, 
along  with  the  legislative  enactments  contained  in  HRS  Chapter 
246A,  which  provided  for  the  orderly  transfer  of  property 
taxation  power  to  the  counties,  “covered  the  whole  subject  [of 
real  property  taxation]  and  embraced  the  entire  law  in  that 
regard.”   Gardens  at  West  Maui,  90  Hawai i  at  341,  978   P.2d  at 
779.  
In  Gardens  at  West   Maui,  for  instance,  we  recognized 
that  under  article  VIII,  section  3,  the  counties  were  free  to 
classify  properties  and  tax  them  at  different  rates,  despite  an 
earlier  statute  that  would  have  prohibited  such  action.   Id.  at 
340,  978  P.2d  at  778.   And,  in  Weinberg  v.  City  &  County  of 
Honolulu,  82  Hawai i  317,  324,  922   P.2d  371,  378  (1996),  we  held 
that  after  the  statutory  period  for  uniformity  in  HRS  Chapter 
246A  had  lapsed,  the  counties  were  no  longer  bound  by  the 
assessment  methods  the  State  Department  of  Taxation  had 
previously  imposed  –  in  other  words,  they  were  free  to  set  their
own  methods  of  assessment.   Last,  in  State  ex  rel.  Anzai  v. 
City  &  County  of  Honolulu,   99  18
Hawai i  508,  519-21,  57  P.3d  433, 
444-45  (2002),  we  recognized  that  the  counties,  pursuant  to  this 
 
18 To hold otherwise, we concluded, “would render the provision of 
[the] eleven-year transition period meaningless because HRS chapter 246, 
rather than the county ordinances, would continue to govern the policies and 
methods of assessment.” Id. 
27           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
          
            
         
          
            
             
          
          
       
     
       
       
        
       
       
        
    
           
   authority,  were  free  to  set  and  repeal  exemptions  to  the  real 
property  tax,  as  these  were  clearly  “matters  of  local  concern.”19 
Like  Gardens,  Anzai,  and  Weinberg,  the  instant  case 
concerns  the  scope  of  the  counties’  policymaking  authority  under 
article  VIII,  section  3.   The  County  argues  that,  in  particular, 
Gardens  supports  its  argument  that  the  general  grant  of  authority
over  real  property  policy  making  included  the  authority  to 
redefine  “real  property.”   As  such,  the  County  contends  it  had 
the  authority  to  amend  MCC  §  3.48.005  to  redefine  “real  property”
and  particularly  “fixtures”  thereon  to  include  machinery  or 
equipment  the  use  of  which  “increases  the  value  to”  the 
underlying  realty,  and  “property  that  is  used  to  convert  wind 
energy  to  a  form  of  usable  energy[.]”   MCC  §  3.48.005  (2013).  
 
“To  the  extent  that   the  counties,  in  exercising  their
exclusive  power  to  tax  real  property,  do  not  run  afoul  of  the  
19 In Anzai, in determining the framers’ intent, we referred to the 
Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai i of 1 978. See id. 
This court noted several instances in the proceedings reflecting “the 
understanding that the power to tax real property encompassed matters of 
strictly local concern and that this power included the power to grant or 
repeal exemptions from real property taxation.” Id. One example was from a 
report from the Standing Committee on Taxation and Finance, which reasoned: 
[T]he power to levy a tax on real property should be 
granted to the counties because, inter alia, “[c]ounty 
governments are completely responsible and accountable 
for the administration of their local affairs” and 
“[t]here are certain program elements which do not 
invoke issues of statewide concern and/or which do not 
lend themselves to single, statewide solutions. In 
other words, there are different economic bases and 
needs of the counties which cannot be addressed by 
statewide real property provisions.” 
Id. (citing 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai i of 
19
78, at 594–95 (1980)). 
28           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
    
   
         
          
         
           
   
         
     federal  or  state  constitutions,  they  may  act  as  they  see  fit.”  
Anzai,  99  Hawai i  at  517,  57  P.3d  at  442.   While  we  acknowledge 
the  counties’  broad  policymaking  authority  recognized  in  these 
prior  cases,  however,  we  cannot  conclude  in  this  case  that  this
authority  extends  as  far  as  the  County  claims.  
As set forth
 below, the counties’ taxation authority 
cannot extend beyond “real property,” the definition of which is 
currently set by the legislature, nor can it impact any authority 
the constitution expressly reserved to the State. MCC § 
3.48.005, as amended in 2013, does both and thus runs afoul of 
the state constitution. 
A. Article VIII, Section 3 Does Not Grant the Counties the 
Power to Define Real Property 
Our  court  has   “long  recognized  .  .  .  the  general  rule 
.  .  .  that,  if  the  words  used  in  a  constitutional  provision  are 
clear  and  unambiguous,  they  [must  be]  construed  as  they  are 
written.”   Hanabusa,  105  Hawai i  at  31-32,  93  P.3d  at  673-74.   
The  ultimate
  aim  is  to  give  effect  to  the  constitutional 
delegates’  intent,  which  can  be  done  by  examining  “other 
provisions  of  the  instrument”  and  “the  circumstances  under  which
it  was  adopted  and  the  history  which  preceded  it.”   Id.  
Moreover,  this  court  has  recognized  that  “tax  laws  should  be 
strictly  construed  and  any  doubt  resolved  in  favor  of  the 
public.”   In  re  Assessment  of  Taxes,  Commercial  Pac.  Cable  Co.,  
29           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 16  Haw.  396,  400  (1905)  (citing  Cooley  on  Taxation);  Narmore  v.
Kawafuchi,  112  Hawai i  69,  82,  143  P.3d  1271,  1284   (2006).  
1. Plain Language 
When  interpreting
  a  constitutional  provision,   every 
word  is  presumed  to  have  meaning.   See  Camara  v.  Agsalud,  67 
Hawai i  212,  215-16,  685  P.2d   794,  797  (1984)  (“Courts  are  bound
if  rational  and  practical,  to  give  effect  to  all  parts  of  a 
statute,  and  []  no  .  .  .  word  shall  be  construed  as  superfluous,
void,  or  insignificant  if  a  construction  can  be  legitimately 
found  which  will  give  force  to  and  preserve  all  the  words  of  the
statute.”).  , 
 
 
At  the  time  of  article   VIII,  section  3's  adoption,  the 
term  “real  property”  had  not  been  defined  in  the  Hawai i 
constitution.   Despite  this,  the
  1978  constitution  still  included
amendments  that  distinguished  between  “real”  and  “personal” 
property,  thereby  implying  that  there  was  some  inherent 
difference  between  the  terms.   
Article  X,   section  5,  for  instance,  provided  that  the 
University  of  Hawai i  “shall   have  title  to  all  the  real  and 
personal  property  now  or  hereafter  set  aside  or  conveyed  to 
it[,]”  while  sections  5  and  6  of  article  XII  provided  that  the 
Office  of  Hawaiian  Affairs  and  the  Board  of  the  Office  of 
Hawaiian  Affairs,  respectively,  would  “hold  title  to  all  the  real
and  personal  property  now  or  hereafter  set  aside  or  conveyed  to  
30           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        
     
       
         
        
        
         
      
        
      
        
        
       
  
 
      
        
          it” and would “exercise control over real and personal 
property[.]” (Emphasis added). 
In light of the constitution’s recognition of “real” 
and “personal” property, the use of the word “real” before 
“property” is meaningful. Article VIII, section 3 provides: 
The taxing power shall be reserved to the State, 
except so much thereof as may be delegated by the 
legislature to the political subdivisions, and except 
that all functions, powers and duties relating to the 
taxation of real property shall be exercised 
exclusively by the counties , with the exception of the 
county of Kalawao. The legislature shall have the 
power to apportion state revenues among the several 
political subdivisions. 
(Emphasis added). 
Had  the  delegates   intended  to  provide  the  counties  the
authority  to  tax  “personal”  property,  they  presumably  would  have
done  so  explicitly.   Hanabusa,  105  Hawai i  at  31-32,   93  P.3d  at 
673-74;  Fought  &  Co.,  87  Hawai i  at  55,  951  P.2d  at  505  (“This 
court  has  consistently  applied  the  rule  of  expressio  unius  est 
exclusio  alterius  - the  express  inclusion  of  a  provision  in  a 
statute  implies  the  exclusion  of  another[.]”).   Instead,  the 
delegates  provided  that  “the  taxing  power  [would]  be  reserved  to
the  State  .  .  .  except  that”  the  “functions,  powers  and  duties 
relating  to  the  taxation  of  real  property”  would  be  granted  to  
 
 
the counties.
 Art. VIII, § 3. 
Thus, a plain reading of article VIII, section 3, 
indicates that the counties had only been granted the power to 
31           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
          
 
 
 An  examination  of  the  “circumstances”  under  which 
article  VIII,  section  3  was  adopted  and  the  “history  which 
preceded  it”  supports  this  conclusion.   See  Hanabusa,  105  Hawai i
at  31-32,  93  P.3d  at   673-74;  see  also  Nelson  v.  Hawaiian  Homes 
Comm’n,  127  Hawai i  185,  198,  277  P.3d  279,  292  (2012)  (“In  order
to  give  effect  to  the  intention  of  the  framers  and  the  people 
adopting  a  constitutional  provision,  an  examination  of  the 
debates,  proceedings  and  committee  reports  is  useful.”)  (quoting 
State  v.  Kahlbaun,  64  Haw.  197,  204,  638  P.2d  309,  316  (1981)). 
    
    
         
        
      tax “real property” – not to redefine personal property as “real 
property.” 
2. Legislative Proceedings 
 
 
We note that the
 final language of article VIII, 
section 3 was adopted only after deliberation by the Standing 
Committee on Local Government, floor debates, and deliberation by 
the Committee of the Whole. 
The  Standing  Committee  on   Local  Government  acknowledged
that  at  the  time  of  the  amendment’s  contemplation,  “the  State 
[was]  responsible  for  assessing  []  real  property  []  subject  to 
the  payment  of  real  property  taxes,  []  for  levying  and  collecting
[the]  taxes  upon  such  property,  and  [for]  adjudicating  taxpayer 
appeals.”   Stand.  Comm.  Rep.  No.  42  in  1  Proceedings  of  the 
Constitutional  Convention  of  Hawai i  of  1978,  at  594  (1980).   It 
also  acknowledged
  that  the  “basic  policies  defining  real 
property,  setting  the  basis  of  assessment,  determining  the  manner 
 
 
32           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
     
 
       
          
           
           in  which  rates  [were]  set,  setting  exemptions  and  describing  the
appeals  process”  were  the  responsibilities  of  the  state’s 
lawmakers.   Id.   The  Committee  further  explained  that  a  “general
grant”  of  the  taxing  powers  to  the  counties  would  include 
property  assessments,  appeal  adjudications,  tax  levying, 
collecting  taxes,  and  formulating  basic  policies.   Id.   Notably,
the  Standing  Committee  rejected  a  proposal  to  adopt  a  general 
excise  tax,  noting  that  “should  the  counties  desire  additional 
revenues,”  the  counties  should  do  so  through  “the  real  property 
tax  by  increasing  the  rates.”  (Emphasis  added).   
 
 
Comments  during  the  floor   debates  suggest  that  at  least
two  delegates  supported  only  a  narrow  grant  of  authority  to  the 
counties.   Delegate  Souki,  for  instance,  explained  that  “the 
intent  of  the  section  .  .  .  [was]  not  so  that  the  counties 
[could]  increase  their  revenue  or  increase  their  taxing  powers,” 
while  Delegate  Crozier  explained  his  concern  “of  a  council  that 
[might]  lean[]  one  special  way”  to  “advantage  .  .  .  select 
group[s]”  while  disadvantaging  others.   Id.  Comm.  of  the  Whole 
Debates  in  2  Proceedings  of  the  Constitutional  Convention  of 
Hawai i  of  1978,  at   264  (1980).  
Moreover, although the
 Committee of the Whole 
recommended adopting the “all functions, powers and duties” 
language, as seen in the amendment today, it explained that it 
was doing so to clarify that “the counties would have the power 
to set exemptions .” Id. (emphasis added). And, as the TAC 
33           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
      3. The Legislature’s Power to Define “Real Property”  
       
          
          
          
          
           
         
         
         
         
          
   concluded,  nothing  was  said  in  the  Committee  of  the  Whole’s
report  about  a  “general  grant”  of  authority  to  tax  personal
property.   
 
 
Thus,  from  our  analysis  above,   although  it  is  clear 
that  the  delegates  to  the  1978  Constitution  Convention  did  not 
intend  to  grant  the  counties  the  power  to  tax  anything  more  than 
“real  property,”  it  is  not  clear  from  the  text  of  the  amendment 
or  constitution  what  the  delegates  meant  by  “real  property.”   As 
such,  we  may  look  to  “the  history  of  the  times  and  the  state  of 
being  when  [the  amendment]  was  adopted”  for  guidance.   See 
Nelson,  127  Hawai i  at  198,  277  P.3d   at  292  (quoting  Kahlbaun,  64
Haw.  at  202,  638  P.2d  at  315).  
Well before article VIII,
 section 3's adoption, HRS 
§ 246-1 (1967) clearly provided a definition of the term “real 
property” as related to the subject of real property taxation. 
Because we presume the delegates were aware of this statute at 
the time of article VIII, section 3's adoption, and because the 
delegates took no action to define the term in light of this 
awareness, we presume that they understood that the power to 
define, and redefine, the term “real property” rested with the 
legislature. See Hawai i State AFL-CIO v.  Yoshina , 84 Hawai i
 
374, 377, 935
 P.2d 89, 97 (1997) (explaining that constitutional 
delegates are deemed to be aware of common law and statutory 
principles). 
34           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
     4. This Court’s Power to Interpret Statutes
             The  legislature  incorporated  the  definition  of  “real 
property”  from  HRS  §  246-1,  which  was  repealed  in  2016,  into  our 
current  taxation  statutes.   See  HRS  §§  231-1  and  248-1.   As  such,
the  definition  of  “real  property”  that  applied  to  the  counties  in
1978  still  applies  to  the  counties  today:  
 
“Property”  or  “real  property”  means  and  includes  all 
land  and  appurtenances  thereof  and  the  buildings, 
structures,  fences,  and  improvements  erected  on  or 
affixed  to  the  same,  and  any  fixture  which  is  erected 
on  or  affixed  to  such  land,  buildings,  structures, 
fences,  and  improvements,  including  all  machinery  and 
other  mechanical  or  other  allied  equipment  and  the 
foundations  thereof,  whose  use  thereof  is  necessary  to
the  utility  of  such  land,  buildings,  structures, 
fences,  and  improvements,  or  whose  removal  therefrom 
cannot  be  accomplished  without  substantial  damage  to 
such  land,  buildings,  structures,  fences,  and 
improvements,  excluding,  however,  any  growing  crops.  
HRS  §§  231-1  and  248-1. 20
 
The  legislative  definition  of  “real  property”  cites  to 
“fixtures”  and  “use,”  but  does  not  define  how  the  “use”  prong  of 
the  fixture  test  should  be  interpreted.   Thus,  HRS  §§  231-1  and 
248-1  are  ambiguous.   It  is  the  task  of  this  court,  then,  to 
examine  the  common  law  to  determine  what  these  terms  mean,  in  the
absence  of  legislative  or  constitutional  guidance.   See  Peters  v
Weatherwax,  69  Hawai i  21,  27,   731  P.2d  157,  161  (1987)  (“The 
interpretation  of  well-defined  words  and  phrases  in  the  common 
law  carries  over  to  statutes  dealing  with  same  or  similar  subject
matter.”).   
. 
 
20 We note that any variations from HRS § 246-1 (1967) are minor. 
35           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        
           
             
           
           
               
           
         
          
          
           
               
              
             
             B. Wind Turbines Do Not Constitute Real Property 
“[I]n  the  absence  of  anything  to   the  contrary  it  is 
fair  to  assume  that  [the  legislature]  used  [“fixture”]  in  the 
statute  in  its  common-law  sense.”   Id.  at  27,  731  P.2d  at  161 
(quoting  Gilbert  v.  United  States,  370  U.S.  650,  655  (1962)).  
“We  follow  the  common  law  in  this  jurisdiction.”   Smith  v.  Smith,
56  Haw.  295,  303,  535  P.2d  1109,  1115  (1975).   Thus,  until  the 
legislature  clarifies  how  the  “use”  prong  of  the  fixture  analysis
should  be  interpreted,  we  continue  to  rely  on  the  common  law  test
set  forth  in  Zangerle  to  determine  whether  an  object  affixed  to 
the  land  should  be  considered  a  fixture.  21 
 
 
In  Kaheawa,  the  ICA   applied  the  traditional  common  law
fixture  test  from  Zangerle  to  hold  that  wind  turbines  could  not 
constitute  “fixtures”  under  MCC  §  3.48.005  (1980).   See  Kaheawa,
135  Hawai i  at  210-11,  347  P.3d   at  640-41.   The  ICA  was  correct 
to  rely  on  this  test,  which  is  consistent  with  the  only  cases  in
Hawai i  that  have  analyzed  fixtures.   See  Kaheawa,  135  22Hawai i  
 
 
21 To the extent that Zangerle ’s test has not been adopted among all 
jurisdictions, we note that lack of uniformity in this area of law can be 
traced to individual state laws defining “fixtures” and “real property.” See, 
e.g., Marc L. Roark, Groping Along Between Things Real and Things Personal: 
Defining Fixtures in the Law and Policy in the UCC, 78 U. Cin. L. Rev. 1437 
(2010) (“The law of fixtures under the Uniform Commercial Code [] is 
helplessly tied to the various state laws dictating real estate.”). 
22 Although the Ohio Supreme Court had repudiated its use of the 
Zangerle fixture test for some time after its publication, Ohio courts, 
including the Ohio Supreme Court, began recognizing the test again. Kaheawa , 
135 Hawai i at 641, 347 P.3d  at 632 (citing In re Jarvis, 310 B.R. 330, 337-39 
(Bankr. N.D. Ohio 2004) and Perez Bar & Grill v. Schneider , 2012 WL 6105324 at 
*5 (Ohio Ct. App. 2012); see also Funtime, Inc. v. Wilkins , 822 N.E.2d 781, 
786 (Ohio 2004); Metamora Elev. Co. v. Fulton Cnty. Bd. Of Revision , 37 N.E.3d 
(continued...)
36 
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
       
   
           
          
           
          
          
           
      
       
          
          
   
         
             
           
           
            
  at  210-11,  347  P.3d  at  640-41;  In  re  Waipuna  Trading  Co.,  Inc., 
41  B.R.  812,  815  (Bankr.  D.  Haw.  1984);  Cartwright,  9  Haw.  at  690
(holding  that  affixed  machines  in  an  iron  works  company  were  not 
fixtures,  as  “the  object  of  their  annexation  to  the  ground  was  in
order  to  keep  them  steady,  and  the  attachment  overhead  was  for 
the  purpose  of  communicating  steam  power  to  them,  both  being  in 
order  to  the  more  complete  enjoyment  of  the  machines  as 
chattels”).   Further,  we  agree  with  the  ICA’s  application  of  the 
Zangerle  test  and  its  conclusion  that  wind  turbines  are  not 
fixtures.    
 
By statute, property becomes a fixture if (1) it is 
“necessary to the utility of [the] land” or (2) it cannot be 
removed “without substantial damage to such land[.]” HRS §§ 231-
1 and 248-1. Here, because the parties stipulated that the wind 
turbines could be removed without damage to the land, the only 
question is whether they are “necessary to the utility of the 
land.” Kaheawa , 135 Hawai i at 210-11, 347 P.3d at 640-41.  
In making this determination, the court must 
distinguish between tangible property that is “merely accessory 
to the business,” and property that has been “annexed to the 
premises as accessory to it, whatever business may be carried on 
22(...continued) 
1223, 1229 (Ohio 2015)). 
Notably, Zangerle ’s fixture test was also adopted by statute in 
Ohio. See Ohio Rev. Code § 5701.02 (“‘Fixture’ means any item of tangible 
personal property that has become permanently attached or affixed to the land 
or to a building, structure, or improvement, and that primarily benefits the 
realty and not the business, if any, conducted by the occupant on the 
premises.”). 
37           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
upon  it[.]”   Zangerle,  60  N.E.2d  at  177;  see  also  Cartwright,  9 
Haw.  at  691  (distinguishing  between  “moveable  machines,  whose 
number  and  permanency  are  contingent  upon  the  varying  conditions
of  the  business  differ  from  engines  and  boilers  and  other 
articles  secured  by  masonry  and  designed  to  be  permanent  and 
indispensable  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  freehold”).   In  other 
words,  we  will  only  consider  property  to  be  a  “fixture”  under 
Zangerle  if  the  land  to  which  the  alleged  fixture  is  attached 
cannot  be  purposefully  utilized  without  its  presence.  
Applying  this  test,   wind  turbines  are  “only  necessary 
to  the  utility  of  the  land  []  given  the  particular  business  that 
[Appellees  are]  currently  operating.   The  wind  turbines  are  not 
accessory  or  useful  to  the  land  ‘whatever  business  may  be  carried
on  upon  it.’”   Kaheawa,  135  Hawai i  at  211,   347  P.3d  at  641 
(quoting  Zangerle,  60  N.E.2d  at  177).   Accordingly,  the  wind 
turbines  are  not  “fixtures,”  and  do  not  constitute  “real 
property.”   
We  reject  the   County’s  claims  that  the  Appellees’  wind 
turbines  can  be  considered  “fixtures”  under  this  interpretation 
of  “use,”  and  also  reject  the  County’s  assertion  that  it  may 
define  what  may  become  assessable  accessions  to  realty  pursuant 
to  appraisal  concepts  of  use,  utility,  and  value,  because,  again,
this  expanded  definition  of  what  constitutes  “improvements”  would
be  inconsistent  with  the  common  law  principles  reflected  in  
 
38           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
      
 
       
              
      
           
          
          
         
       
         
         Zangerle.   See  Kaheawa,  135  Hawai i  at  210-11,  347  P.3d  at  640-
41.   
We  note  that
  the  counties’  power  to  tax  real  property 
cannot  be  construed  in  isolation,  but  instead,  must  be  construed 
with  reference  to  “the  current  prohibition  on  the  State  taxing 
real  property.”   City  &  Cty.  of  Honolulu  v.  State,  143  Hawai i 
455,  468,
  431  P.3d  1228,  1241  (2018).   Because  “only  the  counties
currently  possess  the  constitutional  authority  to  levy  a  tax  on 
real  property  within  the  State  of  Hawai i,”  by  re-defining 
certain  personal  property  as  real  property,  the  County  prevents 
the  State  from  exercising  its  taxing  authority  over  those  items.  
See  id.  at  459,  468,  431  P.3d  at  1232,  1241  (“[T]he  constitution 
currently  allows  only  the  counties  to  tax  real  property  to  the 
exclusion  of  all  other  government  entities[.]”  (emphasis  added)). 
 
As established above,
 “real property” pursuant to 
article VIII, section 3 includes affixed machinery or equipment, 
“whose use is necessary to the utility of the land . . . or whose 
removal therefrom cannot be accomplished without causing 
substantial damage to the land[.]” See, e.g., HRS §§ 231-1 and 
248-1. Because the counties have the exclusive authority to tax 
these fixtures, the State cannot. The State can, however, tax 
all other machinery or equipment if the legislature so decides. 
Pursuant to this analysis, wind turbines cannot be 
construed as “real property” subject to the County’s taxation. 
In defining a “fixture” to include machinery or equipment that 
39           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
         
           
           
             
         
          
       
      
  
   
            /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama increases the value of the underlying realty, the County would 
assess the value of virtually any machinery or equipment bolted 
in place, including wind turbines. In turn, the County would now 
preclude the State from taxing the same. “The potency of the 
real property tax as a policy tool . . . is undeniable.” Stand. 
Comm. Rep. No. 42 in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional 
Convention of Hawai i of 1978, at 595  (1980). Unless the 
legislature provides to the contrary, such policy-making power 
must be reserved to the State. 
V. CONCLUSION 
For  the  foregoing   reasons,  we  hold  that  the  County 
exceeded  its  power  under  the  Hawai i  Constitution  when  it  amended
MCC  §  6.48.005  to  redefine  “real  property.”   We  therefore  affirm 
the  TAC’s  summary  judgment  orders  and  final  judgment  in  favor  of 
the  Appellees.  
Brian  A.  Bilberry
for
  appellant  
Ronald
  I.  Heller  
for  appellee  Kaheawa  Wind  Power /s/ Sabrina  S. McKenna 
Vito  Galati  (Christopher   T. 
Goodin  with  him  on  the  brief) 
for  appellee  Auwahi  Wind  Energy/s/ Richard W.
 Pollack 
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
Thomas  Yamachika 
for  amicus  curiae 
Tax  Foundation  of  Hawai i 
40 