*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
KEEP THE NORTH SHORE COUNTRY, 
Appellant- Appellant, 
vs. 
BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES; THE DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND 
NATURAL RESOURCES; SUZANNE D. CASE, IN HER OFFICIAL CAPACITY AS 
CHAIRPERSON OF THE BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES;  
and NA PUA MAKANI POWER PARTNERS, LLC, 
Appellees- Appellees. 
 
 
SCAP-19-0000449 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-19-0000449; CIV. NO. 1CC181000960) 
 
FEBRUARY 22, 2022 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND WILSON, JJ., 
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE VIOLA, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.  
 
This appeal arises from a challenge to the Na Pua 
Makani Wind Farm  (the Wind Farm) , an eight -turbine wind power Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-19-0000449
22-FEB-2022
11:00 AM
Dkt. 35 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
2 plant proposed for  the North Shore of Oʻahu.  To operate the Wind 
Farm, Appellee -appellee Na Pua Makani Power Partners , LLC 
(Applicant) must obtain an incidental take lic ense as part of a 
habitat conservation plan approved by Appellee -appellee Board of 
Land and Natural Resources ( the Board or BLNR).  
After years of study and collaboration with state and 
federal agencies, Applicant submitted a proposed habitat 
conservation p lan and requested the Board’s approval.  However, 
Appellant -appellant Keep the North Shore Country (KNSC) opposed 
the application, citing the Wind Farm’s potential impact on 
‘ōpe‘ape‘a, the Hawaiian hoary bat.  Following significant state 
and federal agency review, numerous public meetings, and a 
contested case hearing, the Board approved Applicant’s habitat 
conservation plan , and authorized Applicant to take up to fifty -
one ‘ōpe‘ape‘a over the course of twenty -one years , or fewer than 
two and a half bats p er year. 
On appeal  to the circuit court, KNSC argued  the Board 
unlawfully approved the habitat conservation plan because of 
alleged procedural irregularities and because the  habitat 
conservation  plan does not comply with Hawaiʻi’s endangered 
species statute, Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter 195D.  
For the reasons explained below, KNSC’s arguments are 
unavailing .  We accordingly affirm the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit’s (circuit court)  May 23, 2019 Final Judgment.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
3  I. Background 
A. Introduction  
1. Habitat Conservation Plans and Incidental Take 
Licenses  
The Legislature enacted the  Hawaiʻi endangered species 
statute, HRS chapter 195D, “ [t]o insure the continued 
perpetuation of indigenous aquatic life, wildlife, and land 
plants[.]”  H RS § 195D-1 (2011).  To effectuate this goal, the 
Legislature made it unlawful to take1 any threatened2 or 
endangered3 species.  HRS § 195D-4(e)(2).4  Nevertheless, the 
                     
1  As relevant here, “‘[t]ake’ means to harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, 
wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect endangered or threatened species of 
. . . wildlife .  . . or to attempt to engage in any such conduct.”  HRS 
§ 195D-2 (2011).  
 
2  Under Hawaiʻi law, a species is “threatened” if it “appears likely, 
within the foreseeable futu re, to become endangered and has been so 
designated.”  HRS §§  195D-2, 195D-4(a) (2011); see also  16 U.S.C. §  1532(20) 
(2012).  The determination of whether a species is threatened may be made by 
either the Department of Land and Natural Resources (the Department or DLNR) 
or the United States Secretary of the Interior or Secretary of Commerce.  HRS 
§§ 195D-2, 195D-4(a)-(b); 16 U.S.C. §§  1532(15), 1533 (2012).  
 
3  Under Hawaiʻi law and as relevant here, a species is “endangered” if its 
“continued existence as a viable component of Hawaii’s indigenous fauna or 
flora is determined to be in jeopardy and ha s been so designated pursuant to 
section 195D -4.”  HRS §§  195D-2, 195D-4(a); see also  16 U.S.C. §  1532(6).  As 
with the threatened species designation, the determination of whether a 
species is endangered may be made by either the Department or the United 
States Secretary of the Interior or Secretary of Commerce.  HRS §§  195D-2, 
195D-4(a)-(b); 16 U.S.C. §§  1532(6), 1533.  
 
4  HRS § 195D-4 (2011) provides in relevant part:  
 
(e) With respect to any threatened or endangered 
species of aquatic life, wildlife, or  land plant, it is 
unlawful, except as provided in subsections (f), (g), and 
(j), for any person to:  
 
. . . 
 
(2) Take any such species within this State[.]  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AN
 
                     D PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
4 . . . . 
 
(f) The department may issue temporary licenses, under 
such terms and conditions as it may  prescribe, to allow any 
act otherwise prohibited by subsection (e), for scientific 
purposes or to enhance the propagation or survival of the 
affected species.  
 
(g) After consultation with the endangered species 
recovery committee, the board may issue a te mporary license 
as a part of a habitat conservation plan to allow a take 
otherwise prohibited by subsection (e) if the take is 
incidental to, and not the purpose of, the carrying out of 
an otherwise lawful activity; provided that:  
 
(1) The applicant, to the maximum extent practicable, 
shall minimize and mitigate the impacts of the 
take; 
(2) The applicant shall guarantee that adequate 
funding for the plan will be provided;  
(3) The applicant shall post a bond, provide an 
irrevocable letter of credit, insura nce, or surety 
bond, or provide other similar financial tools, 
including depositing a sum of money in the 
endangered species trust fund created by section 
195D-31, or provide other means approved by the 
board, adequate to ensure monitoring of the 
species b y the State and to ensure that the 
applicant takes all actions necessary to minimize 
and mitigate the impacts of the take;  
(4) The plan shall increase the likelihood that the 
species will survive and recover;  
(5) The plan takes into consideration the full range 
of the species on the island so that cumulative 
impacts associated with the take can be adequately 
assessed;  
(6) The measures, if any, required under section 195D -
21(b) shall be met, and the department has 
received any other assurances that may be re quired 
so that the plan may be implemented;  
(7) The activity, which is permitted and facilitated 
by issuing the license to take a species, does not 
involve the use of submerged lands, mining, or 
blasting;  
(8) The cumulative impact of the activity, which is  
permitted and facilitated by the license, provides 
net environmental benefits; and  
(9) The take is not likely to cause the loss of 
genetic representation of the affected population 
of any endangered, threatened, proposed, or 
candidate plant species.  
 
Board approval shall require an affirmative vote of not 
less than two -thirds of the authorized membership of the 
board after holding a public hearing on the matter on the 
affected island.  The department shall notify the public of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
5 Legislature recognize d some degree of take is unavoidable — even 
necessary — and theref ore authorized the Board5 to issue 
“incidental take licenses” when certain conditions are met.  See 
HRS § 195D-4(g). 
In order to issue an incidental take license, the 
Board must issue the license as part of a habitat conservation 
plan.  Id.  Broadly speaking, a habitat conservation plan is an 
agreement to “protect[], maintain[], restor[e], or enhance[e] 
identified ecosystems, natural communities, or habitat types” 
protected species depend upon, as well as to “increase the 
likelihood of recov ery of the endangered or threatened species 
that are the focus of the plan.”  HRS §  195D-21(b)(1).6  “All 
                     
a proposed license under this  section through publication 
in the periodic bulletin of the office of environmental 
quality control and make the application and proposed 
license available for public review and comment for not 
less than sixty days prior to approval.  
5  The Board is the e xecutive board that heads the Department.  HRS §  171-
3(a) (2011).  The Board is comprised of seven members appointed by the 
governor subject to the senate’s advice and consent.  HRS §  171-4(a) (Supp. 
2014).  At least one member of the Board must possess a background in 
conservation and natural resources, and at least one other member of the 
Board must have a demonstrated expertise in native Hawaiian traditional and 
customary practices.  HRS §  171-4(b)-(c). 
 
6  HRS § 195D-21(b) (2011) provides in relevant pa rt: 
 
(1) Except as otherwise provided by law, the board, upon 
recommendation from the department, in cooperation 
with other state, federal, county, or private 
organizations and landowners, after a public hearing 
on the island affected, and upon an affirmat ive vote 
of not less than two -thirds of its authorized 
membership, may enter into a habitat conservation 
plan, if it determines that:  
 
(A) The plan will further the purposes of this 
chapter by protecting, maintaining, restoring, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
6 habitat conservation plans, .  . . incidental take licenses, and 
subsequent actions authorized under those plans .  . . and 
licenses shall be designed t o result in an overall net gain in 
the recovery of Hawaii’s threatened and endangered species.”  
HRS § 195D-30 (2011). 
                     
or enhancing identified eco systems, natural 
communities, or habitat types upon which 
endangered, threatened, proposed, or candidate 
species depend within the area covered by the 
plan; 
(B) The plan will increase the likelihood of 
recovery of the endangered or threatened 
species that are the focus of the plan; and  
(C) The plan satisfies all the requirements of this 
chapter.  
 
In the event the board votes to enter into a habitat 
conservation plan for which the majority of the 
endangered species recovery committee recommended 
disapproval,  the board may not enter into the habitat 
conservation plan unless the plan is approved by a 
two-thirds majority vote of both houses of the 
legislature.  Habitat conservation plans may allow 
conservation rental agreements, habitat banking, and 
direct payme nts.  Any habitat conservation plan 
approved pursuant to this section shall be based on 
the best available scientific and other reliable data 
available at the time the plan is approved.  
 
(2) Each habitat conservation plan shall:  
 
. . . 
 
(C) Identify the st eps that will be taken to 
minimize and mitigate all negative impacts, 
including without limitation the impact of any 
authorized incidental take, with consideration 
of the full range of the species on the island 
so that cumulative impacts associated with th e 
take can be adequately assessed; and the 
funding that will be available to implement 
those steps[.]  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
7 Before the Board may approve a habitat conservation 
plan, applicants  and the Board  must undergo a complex 
administrative process.  
First, the applicant must draft  the habitat 
conservation plan , identifying  the area(s) affected, the species 
involved, the action(s) to be taken, an implementation schedule, 
and a funding source.  HRS §  195D-21(a).7  The plan must provide 
                     
7  HRS § 195D-21(a) provides:  
 
(a) The department may enter into a planning process 
with any landowner for the purpose of preparing and 
implementing a hab itat conservation plan.  An agreement may 
include multiple landowners.  Applications to enter into a 
planning process shall identify:  
 
(1) The geographic area encompassed by the plan;  
(2) The ecosystems, natural communities, or habitat 
types within the pla n area that are the focus of 
the plan;  
(3) The endangered, threatened, proposed, and 
candidate species known or reasonably expected to 
occur in the ecosystems, natural communities, or 
habitat types in the plan area;  
(4) The measures or actions to be undert aken to 
protect, maintain, restore, or enhance those 
ecosystems, natural communities, or habitat types 
within the plan area;  
(5) A schedule for implementation of the proposed 
measures and actions; and  
(6) An adequate funding source to ensure that the 
proposed measures and actions are undertaken in 
accordance with the schedule.  
 
After a habitat conservation plan is prepared, the board 
shall notify the public of the proposed habitat 
conservation plan through the periodic bulletin of the 
office of environ mental quality control and make the 
proposed plan and the application available for public 
review and comment not less than sixty days prior to 
approval.  The notice shall include, but not be limited to, 
identification of the area encompassed by the plan, the 
proposed activity, and the ecosystems, natural communities 
and habitat types within the plan area.  The notice shall 
solicit public input and relevant data.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
8 “sufficient information for the board to ascertain with 
reasonable certainty the likely effect of the plan upon any 
endangered, threatened, proposed or candidate species in the 
plan area and throughout its habitat range.”  HRS §  195D-21(c) 
(2011). 
Second, the Board must notify th e public and make the 
proposed plan available for public review and comment for at 
least 60 days.  HRS §  195D-21(a). 
In addition to public review, the Endangered Species 
Recovery Committee (the Committee or ESRC)8 must also review the 
proposed plan and mak e a recommendation for the Board to 
approve, amend, or reject the plan.  HRS §  195D-25(b)(1).9  The 
                     
8  The Committee “serve[s] as a consultant to the [B]oard and the 
[D]epartment on matters relat ing to endangered, threatened, proposed, and 
candidate species.”  HRS §  195D-25(a) (Supp. 2014).  The Committee consists 
of up to seven members, specifically:  
 
two field biologists with expertise in conservation 
biology, the chairperson of the [B]oard or t he 
chairperson’s designee, the ecoregion director of the 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service or the director’s 
designee, the director of the United States Geological 
Survey, Biological Resources Division or the director’s 
designee, the director of the University of Hawaii 
Environmental Center or the director’s designee, and a 
person possessing a background in native Hawaiian 
traditional and customary practices[.]  
Id.  The nongovernmental members, i.e., the two field biologists and the 
person possessing a background in native Hawaiian traditional and customary 
practices, are appointed by the governor subject to the senate’s advice and 
consent.  Id.  If either of the two federal governmental members, i.e., the 
ecoregion director of FWS and the director of the United States Geological 
Survey, Biological Resources Division, declines to participate, the Committee 
may act despite their absence.  Id. 
 
9  HRS § 195D-25(b)(1) (2011) provides:  
 
(b) The endangered species recovery committee shall:  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
9  Committee’s recommendation must be based on “the best available 
scientific and other reliable data and at least one site visit 
to each property that is the subject of the action,” as well as 
a “consideration of the cumulative impacts of the proposed 
action on the recovery potential of the [relevant] species[.]”  
Id. 
Third, following review by the public and the 
Committee , the Board may approve a habitat conse rvation plan and 
incidental take license if (1)  the Committee recommends 
approval,10 (2) at least two -thirds of the Board’s members vote 
in favor of approval, and (3)  the Board makes three key 
determinations.  HRS § 195D-21(b)(1).   These determinations are:   
(A) The plan will further the purposes of [HRS chapter 
195D] by protecting, maintaining, restoring, or 
enhancing identified ecosystems, natural communities, 
or habitat types upon which endangered, threatened, 
proposed, or candidate species depend within the area 
covered by the plan;  
                     
 
(1) Review all ap plications and proposals for habitat 
conservation plans, safe harbor agreements, and 
incidental take licenses and make recommendations, 
based on a full review of the best available 
scientific and other reliable data and at least 
one site visit to each prop erty that is the 
subject of the proposed action, and in 
consideration of the cumulative impacts of the 
proposed action on the recovery potential of the 
endangered, threatened, proposed, or candidate 
species, to the department and the board as to 
whether or  not they should be approved, amended, 
or rejected[.]  
10  In the event the Committee recommends that the Board reject the 
proposed habitat conservation plan, the Board may only enter into the plan 
following approval by a two -thirds majority vote of both hou ses of the 
Legislature.  HRS § 195D-21(b)(1).*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
10 (B) The plan will increase the likelihood of the recovery 
of the endangered or threatened species that are the 
focus of the plan; and  
(C) The plan satisfies all the requirements of this 
chapter.  
Id.  The BLNR must make these determination s using “the best 
available scientific and other reliable data available at the 
time the plan is approved .”  HRS § 195D-21(c). 
Furthermore, an applicant may receive an incidental 
take license only if ten statutory  conditions are met.  First, 
the take must be “incidental to, and not the purpose of, the 
carrying out of an otherwise lawful activity.”  HRS §  195D-4(g).  
Additionally,  
(1) The applicant, to the maximum extent practicable, shall 
minimize and mitigate the impacts of the take;  
(2) The applicant shall guaran tee that adequate funding for 
the plan will be provided;  
(3) The applicant shall post a bond, provide an irrevocable 
letter of credit, insurance, or surety bond, or provide 
other similar financial tools, including depositing a 
sum of money in the endangered sp ecies trust fund 
created by section 195D -31, or provide other means 
approved to the board, adequate to ensure monitoring of 
the species by the State and to ensure that the 
applicant takes all actions necessary to minimize and 
mitigate the impacts of the ta ke; 
(4) The plan shall increase the likelihood that the species 
will survive and recover;  
(5) The plan takes into consideration the full range of the 
species on the island so that cumulative impacts 
associated with the take can be adequately assessed;  
(6) The measures, if any, required under section 195D -21(b) 
shall be met, and the department has received any other 
assurances that may be required so that the plan may be 
implemented;  
(7) The activity, which is permitted and facilitated by the 
license, does not invol ve the use of submerged lands, 
mining, or blasting;  
(8) The cumulative impact of the activity, which is 
permitted and facilitated by the license, provides net 
environmental benefits; and  
(9) The take is not likely to cause the loss of genetic 
representation of an affected population of any *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
11 endangered, threatened, proposed, or candidate plant 
species.  
Id. 
2. Na Pua Makani Wind Farm  
Around 2009 , West Wind Works, LLC began developing 
plans for the Wind Farm.  The Wind Farm would be the third wind 
turbine power plant on Oʻahu, joining the Kawailoa Wind Farm and 
the Kahuku Wind Farm.  Champlin Hawaii Wind Holdings, LLC 
acquired these plans in 2012, and formed Na Pua Makani Power 
Partners, LLC to complete the development and construction of 
the Wind Farm.  Beginning in Janua ry 2013, Applicant began 
consulting with the United States Fish and Wildlife Service  
(FWS) as well as the Department’s  Division of Forestry and 
Wildlife  (DOFAW) to develop a proposed habitat conservation plan 
and incidental take license.  
On February 17, 20 15, Applicant submitted a proposed 
habitat conservation plan and incidental take license ( Proposed  
Plan) to the Department for publication in the Office of 
Environmental Quality Control’s March 8, 2015 Environmental 
Notice.  In the Proposed Plan, Applicant  proposed building eight 
to ten wind turbines with a maximum height of 156 meters each.  
According to Applicant’s site evaluations and consultations with *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
12 FWS and DOFAW, the Wind Farm could take eight federally 
protected species, including ‘ōpe‘ape‘a.11 
Applicant proposed minimizing the take of ‘ōpe‘ape‘a by 
utilizing a low -wind speed curtailment (LWSC)12 rate of 5.0 
meters per second (m/s).  Additionally, Applicant would minimize 
and mitigate the impacts of the take by funding efforts to 
restore the nearb y Poamoho Ridge forest to a native state, as 
well as by funding research on ‘ōpe‘ape‘a to develop additional 
mitigation efforts.  Taking these measures into consideration, 
Applicant, FWS, and DOFAW anticipated the Wind Farm would take 
up to fifty-one ‘ōpe‘ape‘a over the course of twenty-one years, or 
fewer than two and a half ‘ōpe‘ape‘a per year.  
B. Procedural History  
1. Endangered Species Recovery Committee Proceedings  
In the course of reviewing the Proposed Plan, the 
Committee held four public meetings.  First,  on March 30, 2015, 
the Committee conducted a site visit  meeting.  Prior to and 
                     
11  The Wind Farm may also impact the ʻaʻo or Newell’s shearwater, the aeʻo 
or Hawaiian black -necked stilt, the ʻalae keʻokeʻo or Hawaiian coot, the 
ʻalaeʻula or Hawaiian common moorhen, the koloa maoli or Hawaiian duck, the 
nēnē or Hawaiian goose, and the pueo or Hawaiian short -eared owl.   Because 
KNSC solely challenges the Wind Farm’s impact on ‘ōpe‘ape‘a, this opinion does 
not discuss Applicant’s plans in relation to these other protected species.  
 
12  LWSC is a process that sets the minimum wind speed at which a wind 
turbine starts generating energy.  While LWSC is in effect, i.e., while the 
turbine is curtailed, the turbine’s blades are turned parallel to the wind 
direction to minimize the spinning of the  wind turbines.  Thus, with a LWSC 
rate of 5.0 m/s, the wind turbine blades are positioned to be mostly 
stationary while wind speeds are below 5.0 m/s, and turned to “catch” the 
wind, spin, and generate energy once wind speeds exceed 5.0 m/s.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
13 during the site visit, the Committee  and Applicant answered 
questions regarding the Wind Farm.  Second, on March 31, 2015, 
the Committee received public comment on the proposed  habitat 
conservation plan.  During both meetings, Applicant indicated 
the maximum height for the wind t urbines would be 156 meters, 
and not all turbines would be the same height.  
Between March 31, 2015 and December 17, 2015, 
Applicant worked with DOFAW and FWS to address concerns raised 
by public commenters, FWS, DOFAW, and the Committee.  Applicant 
increased the maximum wind turbine height from 156 meters to 200 
meters.  This chan ge, among others, was made known to the public 
as part of the materials prepared for the Committee’s 
December  17, 2015 meeting.  
During this time, the state senate also confirmed 
Dr. Samuel M. ʻOhukani ʻohiʻa Gon III (Gon) to the Committee as a 
member with a  background in native Hawaiian traditional and 
customary practices.  2015 Senate Journal, at 478 (Apr. 10, 
2015); see also  Letter from David Y. Ige, Governor, State of 
Hawaiʻi, to Donna M. Kim, President, Hawaiʻi State Senate (Mar. 
30, 2015).  
On December 1 7, 2015, the Committee  held a third 
public meeting.  At the beginning of the Committee’s discussion 
of the Wind Farm, DOFAW staff highlighted changes to the 
Proposed Plan, including the proposed maximum wind turbine *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
14 height increase.  The Committee asked Applicant to make 
additional amendments to the Proposed Plan, but did not comment 
on Applicant’s proposed maximum wind turbine height increase or 
its potential impact on take.  No member of the public commented 
on the increased turbine height either.  The Committee 
unanimously decided to postpone its recommendation.  
In January 2016, Applicant produced an amended habitat 
conservation plan ( Finalized Plan) that incorporated the 
Committee’s requested amendments.  
On February 25, 2016, the Committee reviewed the 
Finalized  Plan.  Gon moved to  recommend that the Board  approve 
the Finalized Plan , which was unanimously approved by all voting 
Committee members.13 
2. Contested Case Hearing  Officer Proceedings  
The Board took up the Finalized Plan  on November 10, 
2016.  As the Board began its consideration, Gon14 disclosed  
he was briefly on the endangered species advisory committee 
that advises windfarm projects.  He is no longer on that 
                     
13  One Commit tee member, Dr. Eric VanderWerf, recused himself.  
 
14  On August 9, 2016, Governor Ige appointed Gon to fill a vacancy on the 
Board.  Governor Appoints Samuel Gon III to Board of Land and Natural 
Resources , Ofc. of the Governor Press Releases (Aug. 9, 2016) , 
https://governor.hawaii.gov/newsroom/governors -office-news-release-governor -
appoints -samuel-gon-iii-to-board-of-land-and-natural-resources/ .  The member 
Gon replaced, Ulalia Woodside, was nominated to satisfy the statutory 
requirement for one Board membe r to possess demonstrated expertise in native 
Hawaiian traditional and customary practices.  Governor Appoints 3 Members to 
Board of Land and Natural Resources , Ofc. of the Governor News Releases (July 
12, 2014), https://dlnr.hawaii.gov/blog/2014/07/12/gov -appoints -3-members-
blnr/; see also  HRS § 171-4(c). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
15 committee and this particular company and proposal was not 
one that he provided substantial input to.  
Following Gon’s disclosure, n o party objected to Gon 
participating in the Board’s consideration of the Finalized 
Plan. 
The Board heard testimony from Applicant and members 
of the public.  Several members of the public , including KNSC,  
requested a contested case hearing.   The Board un animously 
deferred deciding  whether to grant a contested case hearing, as 
well as its consideration of the Finalized Plan , until its next 
meeting.   KNSC submitted a written petition for a contested case 
hearing on November 21, 2016. 
At its December 9, 2016 meeting, the Board addressed 
KNSC’s contested case hearing petition.  Board Chair Suzanne 
Case and Board members Gon and James Gomes disputed the need for 
a contested case hearing.  Gon explained, with Jam es Gomes 
agreeing, that  
when a habitat conservation plan is put together it has to 
pass the Fish and Wildlife Service and the DLNR.  The 
suggestion that the habitat conservation plan is fatally 
flawed or inadequate[ly] researched [is] problematic in his 
mind. 
No comments objecting to  Gon’s statement  appear in the record.  
The Board granted KNSC’s petition in a four to three vote.  
The contested case hearing proceedings began on 
approximately February 14, 2017, with the appointment of 
Yvonne Y. Izu as the hea ring officer.  During the contested case *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
16 hearing, the parties addressed whether the Finalized Plan  
satisfied the requirements of HRS chapter 195D.   Following 
briefing and a two -day evidentiary hearing, the hearing officer 
recommended the Board disapprove o f the Finalized Plan . 
As relevant here, the hearing officer concluded:  
1.e. ‘Ope‘ape‘a.  By providing for LWSC at 5 m/s, 
instead of 6.5 m/s, the [ Finalized Plan ] fails to minimize 
impacts to ‘ope‘ape‘a to the maximum extent practicable, and, 
therefore, may not be protecting or maintaining the habitat 
used by ‘ope‘ape‘a (i.e., the Project area) as required under 
HRS § 195D-21(b)(1)(A).  FOF 197 -210.  Because of limited 
knowledge about ‘ope‘ape‘a, it cann ot be concluded that the 
proposed mitigation of improvement of habitat at Poamoho 
Ridge will protect, maintain, restore, or enhance the 
ecosystems, natural communities, or habitat types upon 
which ‘ope‘ape‘a depend.  FOF 216.  As the [ Finalized Plan ] 
does not include an effective adaptive management strategy 
for revising mitigation measures if future research reveals 
that different mitigation measures would be more effective 
in protecting and maintaining habitat used by ‘ope‘ape‘a, FOF 
228-238, the [ Finalized Plan] does not [satisfy HRS §  195D-
21(b)(1)(A) -(B)] with respect to ‘ope‘ape‘a. 
 
. . . . 
 
5.e. ‘Ope‘ape‘a.  . . . .  Because very little is known 
about the population status of ‘ope‘ape‘a (estimates range 
from a few hundred to a few thousand), and given  the fact 
that take of ‘ope‘ape‘a by wind energy facilities may have 
been underestimated in the past, a robust analysis of 
potential take is critical.  By relying solely on the 
Kahuku Wind Project as a surrogate and electing not to 
consider data from other wind facilities on Oahu or the 
other islands, and by failing to consider the impact of 
turbine height on bat mortality, the estimated take set 
forth in the [ Finalized Plan ] is not reliable enough for 
the Board to determine the cumulative impacts on ‘ope‘ape‘a.  
FOF 194.  
 
. . . . 
 
11.  In three instances, Applicant failed to use the 
best scientific and reliable data in assessing impacts and 
mitigation as required under HRS §  195D-21(c): (i)  electing 
to use LWSC cut -in speed of 5 m/s, instead of 6.5 m/s; 
(ii) concluding that the height of [ wind turbine 
generators] has no impact on take of ‘ope‘ape‘a; and (iii)  by 
relying solely on data from the Kahuku Wind Project for 
estimating the Project’s take of ‘ope‘ape‘a. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
17   
12.  Because of the less than robust analysis of 
anticipated take of ‘ope‘ape‘a by the Project, combined with 
the limited information available about ‘ope‘ape‘a 
populations on Oahu and statewide, it cannot be determined 
with confidence whether the Project will jeopardize the 
continued existence of ‘ope‘ape‘a.  HRS §  195D-21(c)(1).  F OF 
194. 
 
. . . . 
 
14.  The [ Finalized Plan ], by (i)  relying solely on 
data from the Kahuku Wind Project [and] excluding data from 
other wind projects in the State, and (ii)  failing to 
analyze the impact of the increased height of [wind turbine 
generators] on ‘ope‘ape‘a, failed to provide sufficient 
information for the Board to ascertain with reasonable 
certainty the effect of the plan on ‘ope‘ape‘a in the plan 
area and throughout its habitat range.  HRS §  195D-21(c).  
FOF 194.  
 
. . . . 
 
18.  [HRS §  195D-4(g)(1)] requires the applicant to 
minimize and mitigate impacts of the take to the maximum 
extent practicable .  Increasing cut -in speed to 6.5 m/s, 
rather than 5 m/s, would minimize impacts to the maximum 
extent.  However, the HCP provide s for cut -in speed at 5 
m/s and Applicant did not provide evidence that increasing 
cut-in speed to 6.5 m/s is not practicable.  Therefore, the 
[Finalized Plan ] does not satisfy HRS §  195D-4(g)(1).  FOF 
208-210. 
 
. . . . 
 
21.  The minimization and mitigatio n measures 
proposed in the [ Finalized Plan ] are aimed at increasing 
the likelihood of survival and recovery of all of the 
Covered Species except ‘ope‘ape‘a.  HRS §  195D-4(g)(4).  See 
COL 5.a. through 5.e., above.  Additionally, not enough 
information is known about the potential acquisition of 
property for protection of ‘ope‘ape‘a habitat for the Board 
to analyze whether it would mitigate the impacts of take .  
FOF 226.  
 
22.  Because Applicant conducted a less than robust 
analysis of anticipated take of ‘ope‘ape‘a, especially given 
the higher than anticipated rate of take experienced at 
other wind energy projects in the state, the Board is 
unable to adequately  assess the cumulative impact of the 
take of ‘ope‘ape‘a as required by HRS §  195D-4(g)(5).  FOF 
194. 
. . . . 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
18 27.  The required public hearing was held on the 
[Proposed Plan] on June 4, 2015.  Additionally, the public 
had the opportunity to attend [Commit tee] meetings during 
which the [ Proposed Plan] was discussed.  Although the 
height of the [wind turbine generators] was changed 
subsequent to the June 4, 2015 public hearing, and there 
was no active discussion about the change in [wind turbine 
generator] h eight at the [Committee] meetings, [HRS §  195D-
4(g)] does not require that additional public hearings be 
held after changes are made to the [ Proposed Plan].  FOF 8 -
10. 
3. Board of Land and Natural Resources Hearing  
Proceedings  
After the hearing officer issued  her recommended 
findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision and order, 
Applicant and KNSC submitted further briefing in the form of 
exceptions to the hearing officer’s recommendations.  
On January 12, 2018, the B oard heard arguments from 
both the Ap plicant and KNSC.  
Before the parties made their arguments, Board Chair 
Suzanne Case disclosed that the Board  
received a letter from Senator Lorraine Inouye to be 
distributed to the board in this matter.  We did not -- we 
actually did distribute it accident ally, because I was out 
sick and our regular board person was out sick, and our 
protocol is to check with me first, and so we didn’t have 
that in place.  So it went out, but I immediately saw that 
it had gone out and I followed up in an immediate email to 
ask the board members not to read the letter.  So none of 
us have read that letter, because we didn’t want to have 
any ex parte communications in that, but I wanted to make 
that disclosure that that happened.  
KNSC did not raise  any objections regarding the  letter during 
the hearing.15  KNSC also did not  seek the recusal of any Board 
members based upon the letter.  
                     
15  KNSC later requested a copy of the letter on January 24, 2018.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
19 During the hearing, Applicant argued the hearing 
officer’s conclusions were flawed because  
There was virtually no analysis or evaluation in the 
recommendations provided by the hearing officer about why 
the agencies or the specific experts for the agencies were 
wrong in their recommendation for approval.  There was no 
finding of fact or conclusion of law that explains how [or] 
why [DOFAW] or the ESRC failed to properly analyze the 
statute or not use the best available science.  
Applicant added KNSC did not provide any additional studies or 
data that contravened the agencies’ conclusions.   Nevertheless, 
Applicant volunteered two conditions to the Board’s approval of 
the Finalized Plan  to address the “inherent uncertainty” of the 
studies and science the agencies relied upon regarding the 
impact of wind turbine height on ‘ōpe‘ape‘a take.  Fi rst, 
Applicant would limit the maximum turbine height to 173 meters.  
Second, Applicant would further reduce the total number of 
turbines from nine to eight.  
KNSC responded  that the hearing officer was correct to 
recommend that the Board disapprove of the Finalized Plan  
because (1)  Applicant relied solely on data from the Kahuku Wind 
Farm, (2)  Applicant did not study the impacts of wind turbine 
height on ‘ōpe‘ape‘a take, and (3)  there is no evidence in the 
record that a LWSC rate of 6.5 m/s is impractica ble. 
4. KNSC’s Motion to Recuse Gon  
During the hearing, KNSC orally requested that Gon 
recuse himself “due to prior decision making in his capacity on *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
20 the Endangered Species Recovery Committee on this exact Habitat 
Conservation Plan.”  
After the parties made their arguments, Gon spoke on 
KNSC’s recusal request.  
I don’t have a question, but I should point out in 
response to the request for -- for my recusal.  This was -- 
we discussed this with the attorney general’s office and 
also with the ethics -- ethics com mission and the opinion 
is that -- is that my serving on the Endangered Species 
Recovery Committee is via my expertise as a conservation 
biologist.  I have in fact published on Hawaiian bats.  
 
. . . . 
 
So, you know, the -- the idea of turning this 
[Finalized Plan] back [to] the ESRC at this stage, mere 
months after its issuance and approval, is not going to 
result in any -- in any significant change in the 
information that has already been considered by the ESRC 
and by the state and federal agencies.  And y et I’m very 
interested in hearing and in fact have looked over the -- 
this contested case record.  
 
The idea of my ability to take in fresh information 
and provide for an opinion on this particular case is not 
in question.  I enjoy looking at new informatio n, 
considering whether or not it provides a significant 
deviation from what has already been known at the time.  
I’m actually in a really good position to determine whether 
or not what I hear today, what I’ve read in the contested 
case information does rep resent relatively new information.  
So the decision was made in consultation with the [attorney 
general] for me to remain in this deliberation.  
 
And then continuing on now, the idea that the ESRC 
did not consider other turbine projects and other bats and 
the ramifications of that on this particular case is 
probably erroneous.  I mean, the fact that it doesn’t show 
up in the [ Finalized Plan ] record kind of flies in the face 
of the fact that the ESRC went to visit as many of these 
projects in person to look a t the areas that were being 
surveyed, to consider the records for each of those places, 
the different conditions and habitat, the -- everything 
from the vegetation, to the wind, typical wind, behavior, 
and the like in order to assess what was most appropri ate 
to apply to this particular [habitat conservation plan].  
 
So I just wanted to point out that the decision by 
the ESRC to follow the guidance of the state and federal 
representatives there to utilize the Kahuku -- the adjacent 
Kahuku information was not  lightly made, nor was it meant *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
21 to try to fudge the data or in other ways influence o r 
minimize the potential impact of this.  In fact they 
considered, with a great deal of concern, the fact that the 
take of ‘ope‘ape‘a were higher than anticipated in almost all 
of the sites, actually.  So that’s another consideration to 
take as we consider -- continue in this deliberation.  
On January 24, 2018, KNSC submitted written briefing 
to elaborate on its request for Gon’s recusal .  KNSC specified 
that Gon’s “participation would have provided him very specific 
information about this habitat conservation plan that is not in 
the record.”  As evidence of Gon’s alleged extra -record 
considerations, KNSC pointed to Gon’s statement during  the Board 
hearing that  
The fact that it does not show up in the [ Finalized Plan ] 
record, kind of flies in the face of the fact that the ESRC 
went to visit as many of these projects in person to look 
at the areas that were being surveyed, to consider the 
records for each of those places, the different conditions 
and habitat, everything from the vegetation, to typical 
wind behavior and the like, in order to assess what was 
most appropriate to apply to this particular [ Finalized 
Plan]. 
KNSC also argued Gon’s vote for the Board to approve of the 
Finalized Plan  meant that he prejudged the issues before the 
Board. 
Gon submitted a supplemental written disclosure on 
February 21, 2018.  Gon noted, inter alia , that “ I was invited 
to serve on the ESRC of the DLNR, whe re, with other experts and 
agency managers of endangered species, we considered the impacts 
and mitigation recommendations for various projects of relevance 
to the DLNR.  W hile on the ESRC, I considered the [habitat 
conservation plan] at issue currently.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
22  On March 23, 2018, the Board denied KNSC’s request for 
Gon’s recusal.  The Board observed that “[n]othing in the record 
shows that Member Gon has not complied or will not comply with 
HRS §§ 91-9(g) and 91 -13.”  The Board also reasoned that the 
fact that HR S § 195D-25 authorizes the Board chair to also serve 
on the Committee means there is no inherent conflict from  Gon 
sitting on both the Committee and the Board.  The Board noted 
that this court’s decision in Liberty Dialysis -Hawaii, LLC v. 
Rainbow Dialysis,  LLC, 130 Hawaiʻi 95, 306 P.3d 140 (2013) 
supports its conclusion because, there, this court held that an 
administrator could participate in both an initial decision and 
a subsequent reconsideration.  Additionally, the Board stated 
that “KNSC has not shown  that Member Gon’s participation on the 
ESRC during the ESRC’s review and deliberation on the habitat 
conservation plan prejudices his views in this contested case.”  
C. Board Decision  
On May 18, 2018, the Board entered its findings of 
fact, conclusions of law , and decision and order approving 
Applicant’s Finalized Plan .  The Board summarized its decision 
to follow the Committee’s recommendation and disagree with the 
hearing officer in four points:  
a. The hearing officer did not give sufficient weight 
to the sc ientific expertise of the ESRC and DOFAW, which 
recommended approval of the [ Finalized Plan ]. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
23 b. The [Finalized Plan ] properly relied upon the 
actual experience of the adjacent Kahuku wind farm in 
estimating the probable take of ‘ōpe‘ape‘a. 
 
c. The [Finalized Plan ] requires that the wind farm 
idle its turbines at speeds less than 5.0 meters per second 
(“m/s”), during the months that bats are found more often.  
The hearing officer supported a 6.5 m/s requirement.  
Current science does not establish tha t this will 
significantly reduce bat fatalities, and it is not what the 
ESRC recommends.  The Board’s decision would require that 
turbines be idled at wind speeds higher than 5.0 m/s under 
certain circumstances.  
 
d. The hearing officer was skeptical that p art of the 
proposed mitigation for the take of bats —the protection of 
existing ‘ōpe‘ape‘a habitat in a native forest —would be 
effective.  This type of mitigation is supported by the 
consensus of scientific opinion, including the ESRC, DOFAW, 
and the U.S. F ish and Wildlife Service’s Endangered Species 
Recovery Plan.  
Furthermore, the Board imposed two relevant conditions: “[b]ased 
on the representations of the Applicant, [ (1)] the Project shall 
include not more than eight wind turbines, [ (2)] with a maximum 
blade tip height of not more than 173 meters above pad 
elevation.”  
The Board elaborated  
The [Finalized Plan ] was developed through consultation not 
only with the ESRC, but also with DOFAW and [FWS], species 
experts, other important stakeholders, and the pu blic.  
Input and incorporation of requirements and revisions from 
the ESRC occurred throughout the development process and 
public review periods of the [ Finalized Plan ]. 
The Board emphasized that, rather than “rubber -stamp[ing]” the 
Finalized Plan , the Com mittee actually requested amendments 
during its December 17, 2015 meeting.  Furthermore, the 
Committee based its decision on the Hawaiian Hoary Bat Guidance 
Document, which was analyzed during a two -day workshop “attended *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
24 by government regulators, ecologic al researchers, consultants, 
industry personnel, and members of the public.”  
With respect to Applicant and the Committee ’s focus on 
the Kahuku Wind Farm data, the Board reasoned  there was “ample 
justification” for the Finalized Plan ’s reliance on the Kahuk u 
Wind Farm data and rejection of the Kawailoa Wind Farm data.  
The Board explained  
The choice to use only Kahuku data, not Kawailoa, was 
proper because:  
 
a. Kahuku is immediately adjacent to [the Wind Farm].  
 
b. Kahuku is also on the windward side of the Koʻolau 
Mountains; Kawailoa is more than four miles away on 
the leeward side.  
 
c. Kahuku has similar topography and vegetation.  
. . . . 
 
d. Kahuku has similar levels of bat activity to the 
[Wind Farm] site.  
 
e. Kawailoa has a much higher level of bat acti vity 
than Kahuku, and hence higher projected take, than 
the [Wind Farm] site.  
 
f. If Kawailoa data was included, there would have to 
be some weighting of the Kawailoa data vs. the Kahuku 
data.  Any weighting —50/50? 20/80? —would be 
arbitrary.  
The Board also rejected KNSC’s claims that the 
Kawailoa Wind Farm data should be considered because it has 
larger turbines that are closer in blade tip height and rotor 
sweep16 to the Wind Farm’s.  In particular, the Board pointed out 
                     
16  A wind turbine’s “rotor sweep” is a function of its blade length.  This 
relationship is dictated by the mathematical relationship betwe en the blade 
length (which creates the radius of a circle) and the rotor sweep area (the 
area of the circle formed by the blade’s rotation).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
25 that record evidence  indicated n either turbine blade tip height 
nor turbine rotor sweep is correlated with ‘ōpe‘ape‘a take.  
Moreover, even assuming that either factor correlated with 
‘ōpe‘ape‘a take, the Board noted the Finalized Plan  actually 
overestimated its potential take by (1)  increasing possible take 
by 50%; (2)  using a heightened unobserved take estimate; 
(3) basing its calculations on nine turbines when only eight 
would be approved; and (4)  not including Kahuku Wind Farm data 
showing no observed take in fiscal year 2016.  
In terms of KNSC’s challenge to the LWSC rate, the 
Board explained the record evidence was inconclusive on whether 
increasing the LWSC rate from 5.0 to 6.5 m/s  would minimize 
‘ōpe‘ape‘a take.  The Board noted studies showed ‘ōpe‘ape‘a 
typically are not pre sent when average wind speeds exceed 5.0 
m/s, and that 80% of ‘ōpe‘ape‘a observations occur at wind speeds 
below 5.0 m/s.  
As for Applicant’s proposed means of mitigation, the 
Board concluded Applicant’s measures “provid[e] an improved 
natural habitat for b ats which presumably would provide 
additional food resources, thereby improving ōpe‘ape‘a survival 
and productivity and contributing to an increased likelihood of 
the survivability of the species.”  The Board noted, in 
particular,  that the FWS determined “ the decline of the ōpe‘ape‘a 
is probably a result of habitat loss.”  The Board also found *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
26 that the “main” threats to ‘ōpe‘ape‘a included “reduction in tree 
cover, loss of roosting habitat, [and] roost disturbance.”   The 
nearby Poamoho Ridge forest “current ly provides habitat for the 
ōpe‘ape‘a,” but it is “declining because of feral pigs, which 
destroy vegetation, and invasive weeds.”  As part of its 
mitigation measures, Applicant proposed “fund[ing ] fence 
maintenance, feral pig removal, invasive weed control, 
monitoring, and research.”  Thus, the Board determined “[t]he 
proposed mitigation should more than offset the take of 
ōpe‘ape‘a.”  The Board further stated the measures  
“overcompensate []” because they compensate for the take of 
fifty-one ‘ōpe‘ape‘a, when it is likely that fewer than thirty-
four bats will be taken.  
D. Circuit Court Proceedings  
On June 15, 2018, KNSC appealed the Board’s decision 
to approve the Finalized Plan  to the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (circuit court).17  KNSC asked the circuit court to 
reverse the Board’s decision on six grounds:  
(1) Applicant failed to minimize ‘ōpe‘ape‘a take to the 
maximum extent practicable, contrary to HRS § § 195D-4(g)(1) and 
195D-21(b)(2)(C) ; 
                     
17  The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
27 (2) Applicant failed to provide evidence that ‘ōpe‘ape‘a 
will survive and recover as a species, contrary to HRS §§  195D-
4(g)(4), 195D -21(b)(1)(B), and 195D -30; 
(3) Applicant failed to adequately assess the 
cumulative impacts of the take on the Oʻahu ‘ōpe‘ape‘a population, 
contrary to HRS §§  195D-4(g)(5) and 195D-21(b)(2)(C);  
(4) the Committee did not base its recommendation on 
the best scientific and other reliable data  available , contrary 
to HRS §  195D-25(b)(1);  
(5) the Board should have excluded Gon from 
participating in the contested case hearing because Gon 
considered extra -record evidence and demonstrated bias in favor 
of the Applicant, contrary to HRS §§  91-9(g) and 91 -13 and 
KNSC’s right to a fair hearing; and  
(6) the Board should have provided the letter  from 
state Senator Inouye to KNSC because it constituted an ex parte  
communication that exerted improper political pressure on the 
Board, contrary to Hawaiʻi Administrative Rules (HAR) §  13-1-3718 
and KNSC’s right to a fair hearing.  
                     
18  HAR § 13-1-37 (2009) provides in relevant part:  
 
No party or person petitioning to be a party in a contested 
case, nor the party’s or such person’s to a proceeding 
before the board nor their employees, representatives or 
agents shall make an unauthorized ex parte communication 
either oral or written conc erning the contested case to the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
28 Following briefing and a hearing, the circuit court 
summarily rejected each of KNSC’s alleged bases for reversal.   
The circuit court noted that pursuant to HRS §  91-14, the 
Board’s findings of fact and mixed determinations of law and 
fact are reviewed under the clearly erroneous  standard, while 
the Board’s conclusions of law are freely reviewable.  
Turning to KNSC’s claims, the circuit court pointed 
out KNSC’s first three claims “argue a mixed question of law and 
fact on whether the BLNR’s findings comply with HRS Section 195 
regarding the likelihood that ‘ōpe‘ape‘a deaths are minimized as a 
result of the [ Finalized Plan ], and the likelihood that the 
‘ōpe‘ape‘a population will increase as a result of the [ Finalized 
Plan].”  Thus, the circuit court concluded that KNSC’s first 
three arguments raised “factual issues where the decision -making 
or analysis could reasonably vary from what the ESRC and BLNR 
concluded.”  Considering the record – and the Committee’s 
Hawaiian Hoary Bat Guidance document in particular – the circuit 
court was “satisfied that those decisions were based on the best 
available data, and the [take estimates] were reasonably 
adjusted to account for ambiguity or uncertainty on these 
factors.”  Furthermore, the circuit court noted that “if the 
                     
presiding officer or any member of the board who will be a 
participant in the decision -making process.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
29 essential facts relied on  in approving the [ Finalized Plan ] and 
[incidental take license] turn out to be wrong, the adaptive 
measures which are part of the [ Finalized Plan ] should step in 
and provide further protection for the ‘ōpe‘ape‘a.” 
As for KNSC’s demand for Gon’s recusal, t he circuit 
court noted that “a potential problem” arose from Gon’s 
participation in both the Committee and the Board.  However, the 
circuit court was unable to identify any legal authority 
precluding Gon’s sequential involvement with both bodies.  
Lastly, t he circuit court deemed KNSC’s challenge to 
state Senator Inouye’s letter waived insofar as KNSC did not 
raise any objection before the Board. 
The circuit court entered a final order and its 
judgment on May 23, 2019.  
KNSC timely appealed the circuit court’ s decision to 
the Intermediate Court of Appeals, and submitted an application 
to transfer said appeal to this court.  This court granted 
KNSC’s application for transfer.  
II. STANDARD S OF REVIEW  
A. Secondary Appeals  
Appellate review of a circuit court decision rev iewing 
an agency decision constitutes a secondary appeal.  Flores v. 
Bd. of Land and Natural Res. , 143 Hawaiʻi 114, 120, 424 P.3d 469, 
475 (2018).  The appellate court must determine whether the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
30 circuit court was right or wrong in its decision by applying the 
standards set forth in HRS §  91-14(g) to the agency’s decision.  
Id.  The statute provides:  
Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the 
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions 
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the 
decision and order if the substantial rights of the 
petitions may have been prejudiced because the 
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders 
are: 
 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory 
provisions;  
 
(2) In excess of the  statutory authority or 
jurisdiction of the agency;  
 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure;  
 
(4) Affected by other error of law;  
 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, 
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole 
record; or  
 
(6) Arbitrary, or capri cious, or characterized by 
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise 
of discretion.  
HRS § 91-14(g) (Supp. 2016).  “ [U]nder HRS §  91-14(g), 
conclusions of law are reviewable under subsections (1), (2), 
and (4); questions regarding procedural defec ts under subsection 
(3); findings of fact under subsection (5); and an agency’s 
exercise of discretion under subsection (6).”  Paul’s Elec. 
Serv., Inc. v. Befitel , 104 Hawaiʻi 412, 416, 91 P.3d 494, 498 
(2004) (brackets in original) (quoting In re Hawaiian Elec. Co. , 
81 Hawaiʻi 459, 465, 918 P.2d 561, 567 (1996)).  
In a secondary appeal, “[t]his court’s review is 
further qualified by the principle that the agency’s decision *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
31 carries a presumption of validity and appellant has the heavy 
burden of m aking a convincing showing that the decision is 
invalid .  . . .”  Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of Hawaii v. 
Sullivan , 87 Hawaiʻi 217, 229, 953 P.2d 1315, 1327 (1998)  (citing 
Bragg v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. , 81 Hawaiʻi 302, 304, 916 
P.2d 1203, 1205  (1996)). 
B. Statutory Interpretation  
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
which this court reviews de novo.  State v. Ruggiero , 114 Hawai‘i 
227, 231, 160 P.3d 703, 707 (2007).  
III.  DISCUSSION  
A. The circuit court properly applied the clear error stan dard 
in reviewing KNSC’s challenges based on mixed questions of 
law and fact . 
On appeal, KNSC asserts the circuit court erred in 
reviewing KNSC’s fact -based arguments under the clear error 
standard.  Specifically, KNSC claims the Board “violated its 
statutory mandate or exceeded its statutory authority by failing 
to adhere to parameters required by HRS chapter 195D, committed 
other errors  of law, and issued its decision upon an unlawful 
procedure” because the Board did not use the “best scientific 
and other  reliable data available.”  KNSC proceeds to claim that 
three of the Board’s determinations are unsupported by any 
studies or data: (1)  a LWSC rate of 5.0 m/s would minimize and 
mitigate the impact of ‘ōpe‘ape‘a take to the maximum extent *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
32 practicable, as required by HRS §  195D-4(g)(1); (2)  the 
Finalized Plan will increase the recovery of ‘ōpe‘ape‘a in 
compliance with HRS §§  195D-4(g)(4), 195 D-21(b)(1)(B), and 195D -
30; and (3)  the Board had sufficient information to assess the 
cumulative imp acts of take on the Oʻahu ‘ōpe‘ape‘a population as 
mandated by HRS §§  194D-4(g)(5) and 195D -21(c). 
Whether the Board utilized the best scientific and 
other reliable data available constitutes a mixed question of 
law and fact.  The circuit court therefore c orrectly reviewed 
the Board’s decisions under the clear error standard.  
1. Courts review agency conclusions on mixed questions of 
law and fact under the clear error standard.  
As a preliminary matter, courts separate their review s 
of agency decisions using three categories: (1)  issues of law, 
(2) issues of fact, and (3)  mixed issues of law and fact.   See 
Poe v. Hawaiʻi Labor Rels. Bd. , 87 Hawaiʻi 191, 195, 953 P.2d 
569, 573 (1998).  Issues of law are reviewed de novo.  Id.  
Meanwhile, issues of fact and mixe d issues of law and fact are 
reviewed for clear error.  Id.  A mixed question of law and fact 
exists when the “conclusion is dependent upon the facts and 
circumstances of the particular case.”  Price v. Zoning Bd. of 
Appeals of City and Cnty. of Honolulu , 77 Hawaiʻi 168, 172, 883 
P.2d 629, 633 (1994)  (citations omitted) . 
[A finding of fact] or a mixed determination of law and 
fact is clearly erroneous when (1)  the record lacks *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
33 substantial evidence to support the finding or 
determination, or (2)  despite substantial evidence to 
support the finding or determination, the appellate court 
is left with the definite and firm conviction that a 
mistake has been made.  See Leslie v. Estate  of Tavares , 91 
Hawaiʻi 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 1225 (1999).  “We have 
defined ‘substantial evidence’ as credible evidence which 
is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a 
person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.”  Id. 
(quoting State v. Kotis , 91 Hawaiʻi 319, 328 , 984 P.2d 78, 
87 (1999)). 
In re Water Use Permit Applications , 94 Hawaiʻi 97, 119, 9 P.3d 
409, 431 (2000).  
Furthermore, courts generally grant significant weight 
to an agency’s determinations based on technical or scient ific 
facts.  Charles H. Koch, Jr., Administrative Law & Practice 83 -
88 (3d ed. 2010).  This deference arises from the fact that 
agencies possess and exercise subject -matter expertise and 
experience the courts generally lack.  Id. at 75-76.  These 
qualities  place agencies “in a better position than the courts 
to evaluate ‘scientific investigations and research[.]’”  Koʻolau 
Agric. Co. v. Comm’n o n Water Res. Mgmt. , 83 Hawaiʻi 484, 493, 
927 P.2d 1367, 1376 (1996).  Courts are therefore hesitant to 
substitute their judgment for an agency’s when the agency uses 
its expertise and experience to make a mixed determination of 
law and fact.  Pasco v. Bd. of Trustees of Emps.’ Ret . Sys., 142 
Hawaiʻi 373, 379, 420 P.3d 304, 310 (2018);  see also  In re Water 
Use Permit Applications , 94 Hawaiʻi at 154, 9 P.3d at 466; Camara 
v. Agsalud , 67 Haw. 212, 216, 685 P.2d 794, 797 (1984).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
34 Moreover, we have recognized  for issues within an 
agency’s expertise  “the principle that the agency’s decision 
carries a pre sumption of validity and [the] appellant has the 
heavy burden of making a convi ncing showing that the decision is 
invalid .  . . .”  Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Templ e, 87 Hawaiʻi 
at 229, 953 P.2d at 1327. 
2. The endangered species statute grants the Board and 
the Committee the authority to determine what 
constitutes the best scientific and other reliable 
data available . 
On appeal and throughout the underlying proceedings, 
KNSC argues the Board’s decision was flawed primarily because 
the Board did not utilize th e best scientific and other reliable 
data available to make the three challenged conclusions.  To 
support this argument, KNSC implicitly proclaims that one study 
constitutes the best scientific and other reliable data 
available on the impact of LWSC rates on ‘ōpe‘ape‘a take.  KNSC 
similarly insists that data regarding the Kawailoa Wind Farm’s 
‘ōpe‘ape‘a take forms part of the best scientific and other 
reliable data available on the relationship between wind turbine 
height and blade length and the quantity o f ‘ōpe‘ape‘a take. 
Contrary to KNSC’s implied argument that either KNSC 
or the courts can and should identify the best scientific and 
other reliable data available, the Legislature delegated that 
responsibility to the Board and the Committee.  As previousl y *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
35 mentioned, HRS chapter 195D lays out multiple requirements with 
which an applicant, a habitat conservation plan, the Committee, 
and the Board must comply before the Board may approve the 
habitat conservation plan.  As relevant here, the Committee 
reviews any proposed habitat conservation plan first, using “the 
best available scientific and other reliable data and at least 
one site visit .  . . .”  HRS §  195D-25(b)(1).  Once the 
Committee finishes its review, it may then recommend that the 
Board either appr ove, amend, or reject the proposed plan.  Id. 
Next, the Board must determine whether the proposed 
plan, inter alia , “will increase the likelihood of recovery of 
the endangered or threatened species that are the focus of the 
plan” and “satisfies all the requirements of [HRS chapter 
195D].”  HRS §  195D-21(b)(1).  Pursuant to HRS §  195D-21(c), the 
Board must make this de termination using the “best scientific 
and other reliable data available at the time its determination 
is made.”  If the “best scientific and other reliable data 
available at the time [the Board’s] determination is made” 
indicates the habitat conservation plan “fails to meet the 
criteria of [HRS §  195D-21(a)-(b)]” or “fails to meet the 
criteria of [HRS §  195D-4(g)],” the Board must disapprove of the 
plan.  HRS §  195D-21(c). 
Considering  the Board and the Committee’s statutory 
obligations, the two necessarily  must determine what constitutes *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
36 the best scientific and other reliable data available as part of 
their decision -making processes.  
3. Whether an agency utilizes  the best scientific and 
other reliable data available is a mixed question of 
law and fact.  
Although KNSC labels the issue of whether the Board 
utilized the best scientific and other reliable data as a purely 
legal or procedural error, KNSC does not dispute that the issue 
presents a mixed question of law and fact.  In fact, KNSC 
tacitly acknowledges this truth by raising factual arguments 
regarding  which studies and data the Board should consider.  
In requiring the Board to consider the “best 
scientific and other reliable data available at the time of its 
determination,” the Legislature established three criteria to be 
met before the Board must consider a particular piece of 
information.  First, the information must be “available at the 
time of its determination.”  In other words, the Board need not 
consider information that is unavailable when the Board m akes 
its determination.  See Ctr. for Biological Diversity v. U.S. 
Fish & Wildlife Serv. , 807 F.3d 1031, 1047 (9th Cir. 2015) 
(explaining “the best scientific and commercial data available” 
standard “does not require the agency to ‘conduct new tests or 
make decisions on data that does not yet exist.’”) (quoting San 
Luis & Delta -Mendota Water Auth. v. Locke , 776 F.3d 971, 996 
(9th Cir. 2014)).   Moreover, if little research has been done on *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
37 a subject, the Board need not develop  its own research before it 
may act.  See id.; Sw. Ctr. for Biological Diversity v. Babbitt , 
215 F.3d 58, 60 (D.C. Cir. 2000)  (“The ‘best available data’ 
requirement makes it clear that the Secretary has no obligation 
to conduct independent studies.”) . 
Second, the information must be “sc ientific data” or 
“other reliable data.”  This factor allows the Board to consider 
a range of information from anecdotal evidence to controlled, 
repeatable studies .  See, e.g. , Nw. Ecosystem All . v. U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Serv. , 475 F.3d 1136, 1147 (9th Ci r. 2007) (“Of 
course a rigorous, large -scale study of Washington gray 
squirrels’ behavior and morphology would be preferable, but in 
the absence of such a study, credible anecdotal evidence 
represents the ‘best scientific .  . . data available’  and cannot 
be ignored .”) (underscored emphasis added) . 
Third, the information must be  the “best.”  This 
factor requires the Board to evaluate factors such as the 
applicability and quality of the information.  See Gen. Category 
Scallop Fishermen v. Sec’y, U.S. Dep’t of Commerce , 635 F.3d 
106, 115 (3d Cir. 2011) (“In deciding whether scientific 
information is the ‘best available,’ substantial deference is 
accorded to the Secretary’s assessment of the quality  of what is 
available.”) (citing Washington Crab Pr oducers, Inc. v. 
Mosbacher , 924 F.2d 1438, 1448 -49 (9th Cir. 1990))  (emphasis *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
38 added).  The Board may therefore weigh the information before 
it, identify some information as inapplicable, and exclude that 
information from its calculations if it does not con stitute the 
best scientific and other reliable data available .  Locke, 776 
F.3d at 995 (“An agency complies with the best available science 
standard so long as it does not ignore available studies, even 
if it . . . discredits them .”) (emphasis added).  
The determination of whether a piece of information 
constitutes the “best scientific and other reliable data 
available at the time of [the Board’s] determination ” raises a 
mixed question of law and fact.  Again, a mixed question of law 
and fact exists when the  “conclusion is dependent upon the facts 
and circumstances of the particular case.”  Price, 77 Hawaiʻi at 
172, 883 P.2d at 633.  The evaluation of whether a piece of 
information satisfies all three of these criteria is necessarily 
fact- and circumstance -dependent.  For instance, if a person is 
asked what the boiling point of water is, the  response might be  
“100 degrees Celsius.”  See, e.g. , Does water’s boiling point 
change with altitude? Americans aren’t sure , Pew Research Ctr., 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact -tank/2015/09/14/does -waters-
boiling-point-change-with-altitude -americans -arent-sure/ (“It 
seems like one of those basic science facts: Water boils at 212 
degrees Fahrenheit (100 degrees Celsius), right?”).  However, 
this information is neither “reliable data” nor the “best” for a *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
39 person who is attempting to boil water at the peak of Mauna Kea, 
where the reduced air pressure lowers the boiling point of 
water.  See id. (“The boiling point of water .  . . varies 
according to the  surrounding atmospheric pressure.  .  . . . But 
pressure drops as you gain elevation”).  
Under these circumstances, we note that the Committee 
and the Board are in the best position to determine what 
constitutes the best scientific and other reliable data  
available .  It bears repeating that agencies and their heads, 
such as the Board, are “in a better position than the courts to 
evaluate ‘scientific investigations and research[.]’”  Koʻolau 
Agric. Co., 83 Hawaiʻi at 493, 927 P.2d at 1376.  This is because 
agencies possess subject -matter expertise and experience the 
courts lack.  Administrative Law & Practice 83 -88. 
In sum, what constitutes the best scientific and other 
reliable data available is fact - and circumstance -dependent.  
The determination of the best  scientific and other reliable data 
available therefore raises a mixed question of law and fact.   
Price, 77 Hawaiʻi at 172, 883 P.2d at 633 .  Thus, the circuit 
court correctly evaluated KNSC’s challenges to the Board’s 
conclusions under the clear error sta ndard.  Poe, 87 Hawaiʻi at 
195, 953 P.2d at 573.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
40   B. Substantial evidence supports the conclusion that t he Board 
utilized the best scientific and other reliable data 
available to approve the Finalized Plan.  
We now turn to KNSC’s contention  that the Board’s 
decision must be vacated because  substantial evidence does not 
support three of the Board’s conclusions.  To reiterate briefly, 
KNSC claims (1)  there is no evidence that a 6.5 m/s LWSC rate 
would not decrease ‘ōpe‘ape‘a take more than a 5.0 m/s LWSC rate; 
(2) there is no evidence that forest restoration efforts will 
restore Oʻahu’s ‘ōpe‘ape‘a population; and (3)  the Board could not 
assess the impact of the Wind Farm because it improperly 
disregarded data.  However, a rev iew of the record shows that 
Applicant and KNSC presented the Committee and the Board with 
conflicting information  on these matters.  KNSC’s concerns 
therefore appear to arise from the Board’s treatment of certain 
studies and data as opposed to an actual a bsence thereof.  
KNSC’s contentions are devoid of merit.  As detailed 
below, substantial evidence supports the Board ’s findings.  
Substantial evidence consequently also supports the Board’s 
challenged conclusions  and this court is not left with the 
definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
41 1. Substantial evidence supports the Board’s conclusion 
that the Finalized Plan will minimize and mitigate the 
impacts of the take of ‘ōpe‘ape‘a to the maximum extent 
practicable.  
According to KNSC, “[t]he Board pointed to no evidence 
that increasing [the LWSC rate] to a cut -in speed of 6.5 m/s 
would not decrease take of ‘ōpe‘ape‘a.”  Instead, KNSC claims the 
Board ignored evidence that a 6.5 m/s LWSC rate would reduce 
‘ōpe‘ape‘a mortality.  
Contrary to KNSC’s claims, the Board cited two studies 
for the proposition that a LWSC rate of 6.5 m/s would not result 
in less take than an LWSC rate of 5.0 m/s.  First, the Board 
pointed to the Bats and Wind Energy Cooperative’s 2008 annual 
report, which “indicated no significant difference in fatalities 
between these two changes in cut -in speed (5.0 m/s and 6.5 
m/s).”  Second, the Board found that “[a] study reported in 
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment noted .  . . there was 
no difference  in bat fatalities between the 5.0 and 6.5 m/s 
treatments[.]”  
Furthermore, the Board actually considered the very 
data KNSC alleges the Board ignored.  Among its findings of 
fact, the Board acknowledged  
The Fowler Ridge Wind Energy Facility (Indiana) study  is 
the first to demonstrate that bat casualty rates were not 
only significantly different between control and treatment 
turbines, but that bat casualty rates were significantly 
different between cut -in speeds raised to 5.0 m/s (50% 
reduction in overall ba t mortality) versus turbines with *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
42 cut-in speeds raised to 6.5 m/s (78% reduction in overall 
bat mortality).  
However, the Board dismissed this study because  
The best data in the record correlating bat activity with 
wind speed in Hawaiʻi is the study in the northern Koʻolau 
area.  According to this study, at Kawailoa, where the 
researchers obtained extensive data from thermal imaging, 
“bats were more likely to be present when mean wind speeds 
were < 4.6 m/s.”  The study also says that “bats were more 
likely t o be present when maximum wind speeds were <8.2 
m/s.”  The difference between the two statements is due to 
the first referring to mean wind speeds, the second to 
maximum speeds, i.e. gusts, in ten -minute intervals.  
According to [the study], about 80% of b at observations 
occurred when mean wind speeds were <  5 m/s. 
(Citations omitted.)  
Given the inconsistent nature of the information 
before the Board, the Board was best positioned to determine 
which study or studies represented the best scientific and other 
reliable data available at the time of its determination.  
Koʻolau Agric. Co.  83 Hawaiʻi at 493, 927 P.2d at 1376.  The 
Board’s decision to dismiss the study on which KNSC relies 
therefore “lies within the [Board’s] designated expertise and 
sound discretion.”  In re Water Use Permit Applications , 94 
Hawaiʻi at 154, 9 P.3d at 466 (citat ions omitted).  Rather than 
present any evidence that the three studies on which the Board 
relied did not constitute the best scientific and other reliable 
data, KNSC baldly accuses the Board of disregarding data.19  Such 
conclusory allegations fall short o f satisfying KNSC’s burden  of 
                     
19  In so arguing, KNSC ironically does the very thing of which it accuses 
the Board — disregard evidence inconsistent wi th its position.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
43 showing that the decision is invalid.  Korean Buddhist Dae Won 
Sa Temple , 87 Hawaiʻi at 229, 953 P.2d at 1327.  
In light of the Board’s articulated reason for 
discounting the study on which KNSC relies and KNSC’s failure to 
provide any evidence to controvert the Board’s reasoning, 
substantial evidence supports the Board’s conclusion that the 
5.0 m/s LWSC rate will minimize the take of ‘ōpe‘ape‘a to the 
maximum extent practicable.   In re Water Use Permit 
Applications , 94 Hawaiʻi at 119, 9 P.3d at 431.   In turn, there 
was no need for the Board to establish that a higher LWSC rate 
was impracticable.  
2. Substantial evidence supports the Board’s conclusion 
that the Finalized Plan will increase the likelihood 
that ‘ōpe‘ape‘a will survive and recover.  
KNSC also asserts that “[n]o actual studies or data 
supported the Board’s acceptance of representations that 
protecting forests at Poamoho will ‘increase the likelihood that 
the species will survive and recover’ as required by HRS §  195D-
4(g)(4).”  (Citation omitted.)  
However, data in the record indicate that the 
Finalized Plan’s forest restoration provisions will increase 
‘ōpe‘ape‘a survival and recovery.  Citing the Committee’s Hawaii an 
Hoary Bat Guidance Document  and the FWS’s Recovery Plan for the 
Hawaiian Hoary Bat , the Board attributed the reduction of 
‘ōpe‘ape‘a population to habitat loss, and identified the “main *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
44 potential threats” as “reduction in tree cover, loss of roosting 
habitat, [and] roost disturbance .”  The Committee study showed 
that “[t]he best available information to date indicates that 
habitat restoration that enhances or increases forested and 
foraging areas for bats is an optimum mitigation approach as 
demonstrated in approved [habitat conserva tion plans] to date.”  
The Board determined that although the Poamoho Ridge forest 
already provided habitat for ‘ōpe‘ape‘a, the forest  was “declining 
because of feral pigs, which destroy vegetation, and invasive 
weeds.”  Given the data before the Board and  its findings, it 
stands to reason that actions that remove factor s that 
contribute to the decline of ‘ōpe‘ape‘a habitat will reduce, if 
not reverse, habitat loss, and thereby prevent roost disturbance 
and increase roosting habitat.  This is precisely what  the 
Committee indicated that the best available information 
prescribes to support ‘ōpe‘ape‘a recovery and survival.  
Moreover, the Board found that the Wind Farm would 
“eliminate about one million tons of [carbon dioxide] over 
twenty years ,” “[carbon dioxi de] is the most important 
greenhouse gas and contributor to global warming ,” and “global 
warming will be disastrous for wildlife.”  The Board recognized 
that “[w]hile the [Wind Farm] will have only a small effect in 
the struggle against global warming .  . . ‘[w]e cannot afford to 
ignore even modest contributions to global warming.’”  (Citation *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
45 omitted.)  In other words, while the Wind Farm would not 
completely prevent the harms global warming would visit upon 
‘ōpe‘ape‘a, it is one small step to reducing such harms.  
As with its challenge to the Board’s determination 
regarding the LWSC rate, KNSC does not point to any evidence 
that the Board did not base its decision on the best scientific 
and other reliable data available at the time of its 
determination.  
Based upon  the Board’s uncontroverted findings, 
substantial evidence supports the Board’s conclusion that the 
Finalized Plan will increase the likelihood that ‘ōpe‘ape‘a will 
survive and recover.  In re Water Use Permit Applications , 94 
Hawaiʻi at 119, 9 P.3d at 431.  Absent any evidence to undermine 
the Board’s data and findings, KNSC does not satisfy its burden 
to show that the Board’s decision was invalid.  Korean Buddhist 
Dae Won Sa Temple , 87 Hawaiʻi at 229, 953 P.2d at 1327.  
3. Substantial evidence suppo rts the Board’s conclusion 
that it had sufficient information to adequately 
assess the cumulative impacts associated with the take 
of ‘ōpe‘ape‘a. 
KNSC further argues the Board lacked sufficient 
information to assess the cumulative impacts associated with t he 
take of ‘ōpe‘ape‘a “[b]ecause it [(1)] relied solely on Kahuku 
Wind Project data, excluded consideration of other wind projects 
in the State, and [(2)] failed to analyze the impact of the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
46 increased wind turbine generator [blade] length on ‘ōpe‘ape‘a.”  
KNSC claims that in order for the Board to have sufficient data 
to address both of these issues, the Board should have utilized 
data from the Kawailoa Wind Project.20 
a. The Board’s decision to exclude the Kawailoa Wind 
Project data on take quantity is not cle arly 
erroneous.  
During oral argument, KNSC insisted the Board 
“disregard[ed] reliable data” from the Kawailoa Wind Farm 
because it was inconsistent with approving the Finalized Plan.  
KNSC added – for the first time – that consideration of the best 
scientific and other reliable data available at the time of the 
Board’s determination required the Board “to account for all of 
the data that  is collected scientifically” and “account for all 
of the factors that are observable.”  
KNSC mischaracterizes the Board’s decision -making 
process.  The Board went to great lengths to evaluate the data 
before it.  Out of the Board’s 349 findings of fact, 173 
addressed issues KNSC raised about ‘ōpe‘ape‘a.  Rather than 
disregarding the Kawailoa Wind Farm data, fifty-five findings – 
approximately a third of the Board’s ‘ōpe‘ape‘a-related findings – 
contemplated the applicability of the Kawailoa Wind Farm data.  
                     
20  To the extent KNSC believes the Board should have utilized data from 
other Hawaiʻi wind farms, KNSC did not brief the issue before the Board and 
provides no argument on the issue before this court.  KNSC has therefore 
waived any claims requiring data from other Hawaiʻi wind farms.  Hawaiʻi Rules 
of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
47 Through these findings, the Board identified a concern 
regarding the Kawailoa Wind Farm data: “Kawailoa has far mo re 
bat activity than Kahuku.”  For example, a study of the Kawailoa 
Wind Farm and the Kahuku Wind Farm determined the bat activity 
at the Kawailoa Wind Farm is anywhere between two to twenty 
times higher than at the Wind Farm ’s location .  Similarly, 
“[p]re-2011 data also showed bat activity at Kawailoa about ten 
times that of Kahuku.”  Moreover, the annual reports from Kahuku 
and Kawailoa confirmed this distinction.  The Board therefore 
concluded , “[t]he actual history of a wind farm operating on the 
adjacent land, with . . . similar levels of bat activity  . . . 
is the better predictor of future take.”  
Considering  the Board’s detailed rationale for 
excluding the Kawailoa Wind Farm data, we cannot say that the 
Board’s treatment of the data was unreasonable.  In re Water Use 
Permit Applications , 94 Hawaiʻi at 154, 9 P.3d at 466.   
Substantial evidence therefore supports the Board’s exclusion of 
the Kawailoa Wind Farm data.  Id. at 119, 9 P.3d at 431.  
KNSC’s new argument that the Board is obligated to 
consider “a ll of the data that  is collected scientifically” and 
“account for all of the factors that are observable” does not 
establish otherwise.  Again, HRS chapter 195D requires the 
Committee and the Board to utilize the “best scientific and 
other reliable data av ailable at the time of its determination.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
48 HRS § 195D-21(c).  As our previous discussion indicates, not all 
scientifically collected information is necessarily reliable 
data or the best data.  To KNSC’s point that the best scientific 
and other reliable da ta available must “account for all of the 
factors that are observable,” it is that very accounting which 
allows experts to rule out certain information.  Returning to 
our example of the boiling point of water, determining the 
boiling point of water at the peak of Mauna Kea requires 
accounting for atmospheric pressure.  In turn, the fact that 
water boils at 100 degrees Celsius at sea level does not 
constitute the best data  for determining the boiling point of 
water atop Mauna Kea . 
Based on  the Board’s forego ing analysis, the Board 
reasonably established that the Kawailoa Wind Farm data is not 
the best available data because its higher levels of bat 
activity are not comparable to the Wind Farm’s .  In contrast, 
KNSC effectively asserts the Board should disregar d this 
undisputed finding and consider the Kawailoa Wind Farm data  
anyway.21 
Under these circumstances, KNSC has not carried its 
burden to show that the Board’s decision to exclude the Kawailoa 
                     
21  This flies in the face of KNSC’s own demand that the best scientific 
and other reliable data available “account for all of the factors that are 
observable.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
49 Wind Farm data was invalid.  Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple , 
87 Hawaiʻi at 229, 953 P.2d at 1327.  
b. The Board analyzed the impacts of increased wind 
turbine blade length and height.  
Turning to KNSC’s complaint that the Board “failed to 
analyze the impact of the increased wind turbine generator 
length on ‘ōpe‘ape‘a,” the record shows that the Board explicitly 
considered whether a wind turbine’s height or blade length would 
affect take rates.  
With regard to wind turbine height, the Board noted 
that a 2016 Canadian study found “no relationship between bat 
mortality and h eight of wind turbines.”  Additionally, a 2009 
Canadian study indicated that “ [a]t sites with little bat 
activity .  . . tower height is inconsequential.”  In contrast, a 
2007 study “found a very strong association between height and 
take, [but] had no data  for towers between the height of 
Kahuku’s and [Applicant’s].”  
As for wind turbine blade length, the Board found that 
“the two studies in the record which directly address this 
[issue] came to contrary conclusions.”  Specifically, the 2007 
study that found  a strong association between height and take 
concluded that “[r]otor -swept area was not a significant factor 
in [its] analysis.”  On the other hand, a different study *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
50 determined that “turbines with a bigger rotor -sweep area, 
mounted at the same height, di d cause more bat fatalities.”  
Given the inconsistent data before it, the Board 
concluded  
The scientific evidence introduced at the contested case 
hearing does not establish that there is a direct 
correlation between either height or rotor -sweep area  and 
bat mortality at the heights of [Applicant’s] turbines.  
Even if there is, the conservative assumptions made by the 
[Finalized Plan] would more than accommodate an adjustment 
based on the greater height and rotor sweep area of 
[Applicant’s] turbines vs. the Kahuku turbines.  
Under these circumstances, the Board was entitled to 
rely on its expertise and experience to determine how to factor 
wind turbine height and blade length into its ‘ōpe‘ape‘a take 
calculations.  In re Water Use Permit Applications , 94 Hawaiʻi at 
154, 9 P.3d at 466.  KNSC does little more than disagree with 
the Board’s conclusion that neither factor is relevant.  Without 
any argument that the Boar d’s determination was flawed, 
substantial evidence supports the conclusion that a wind turbine 
generator’s height and blade length will not affect ‘ōpe‘ape‘a 
take rates.   Id. at 119, 9 P.3d at 431.  We therefore  see no 
reason to upset the Board’s determination.  Korean Buddhist Dae 
Won Sa Temple , 87 Hawaiʻi at 229, 953 P.2d at 1327.  
C. The Board did not err in relying on the Committee’s 
recommendation . 
KNSC next declares  the Board’s decision should be 
vacated because HRS chapter 195D prohibited  the Board from *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
51 relying on the Committee’s recommendation when the Committee did 
not conduct “an analysis of the changed wind turbine [blade] 
length.”  Specifically, KNSC implies the Committee never 
considered the impact of the increased wind turbine blade length 
on potential take estimates because Applicant increased the 
maximum wind turbine hei ght to 200 meters during the Committee’s 
review process.  
However, the record shows the Committee was not only 
informed  of Applicant’s mid -review alterations to the Proposed 
Plan, but  also actively considered Applicant’s changes.  Prior 
to the Committee’s December 17, 2015  public meeting, Applicant 
submitted materials regarding its amendments to the Proposed 
Plan – including  the maximum wind turbine height  increase  as 
well as additional fence construction  funding to protect birds  - 
to the Committee.  At the start of the meeting, DOFAW staff 
talked the Committee through the proposed changes.  During the 
meeting, Committee members requested more data on how the fence 
construction would ensure reduced bird take.  Members also 
emphasized that continuous monitorin g for ‘ōpe‘ape‘a take was 
necessary to ensure the Applicant does not “miss a trigger.”   
Moreover , the Committee had time to consider the 
ramifications of the height increase.  Again, Applicant 
submitted its materials including the height increase before 
December 17, 2015.  The Committee subsequently recommended that *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
52 the Board approve the Finalized Plan – including the increased 
maximum wind turbine height – on February 25, 2016.  Thus, the 
Committee had over two months to review Applicant’s proposal as 
well as the potential impacts of  the wind turbine  height 
increase on ‘ōpe‘ape‘a take. 
In light of the foregoing, the Committee was aware of 
the proposed maximum wind turbine height increase and had the 
opportunity to review the change.  We therefore presume that the 
Committee considered the amendment and determined that it would 
not result in more ‘ōpe‘ape‘a take.  See Korean Buddhist Dae Won 
Sa Temple , 87 Hawaiʻi at 229, 953 P.2d at 1327.  Given that KNSC 
does not provide  any evidence to the opposite effect , KNSC does 
not meet its burden to show the Committee erred.  Id.  In turn, 
there is no evidence that the Board erred in relying on the 
Committee’s recommendation to approve the Finalized Plan.  Id.  
D. The Board correctly de termined that Gon was not required to 
recuse himself from the Board proceedings.  
KNSC also claims this court should vacate the Board’s 
decision to approve the Finalized Plan because Gon tainted the 
Board’s decision -making process by first evaluating the 
Finalized Plan as a member of the Committee.  Specifically, KNSC 
asserts that Gon’s participation in the Board proceedings 
violated KNSC’s constitutional right to due process because 
(1) there is an appearance of impropriety when a Board member *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
53 evaluates a h abitat conservation plan application as a Committee 
member and (2)  Gon expressed a bias in favor of the Finalized 
Plan.  KNSC adds that Gon’s participation also violated 
statutory prohibitions against Board members considering 
information not contained in the record.  For the reasons 
discussed below, KNSC’s insistence upon Gon’s recusal is 
unwarranted.  
1. Gon’s participation in both the Committee and Board 
proceedings did not violate any statutory limitations.  
Turning first to KNSC’s statutory argument, the 
statutory scheme of HRS chapter 195D and HRS §  171-4 indicates 
that a Board member may participate in both the Committee and 
Board proceedings without violating a statute . 
a. The Legislature intended for  the chairperson of 
the Board to participate in both the C ommittee 
and Board proceedings.  
As a preliminary matter, we note that the Legislature 
explicitly authorized the chairperson of the Board to 
participate in both the Committee and Board proceedings.  Again, 
The committee shall consist of two field biologists  with 
expertise in conservation biology, the chairperson of the 
board or the chairperson’s designee , the ecoregion director 
of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service or the 
director’s designee,  the director of the United States 
Geological Survey, Biol ogical Resources Division or the 
director’s designee,  the director  of the University of 
Hawaii Environmental Center  or the director ’s designee, and 
a person possessing a background in native Hawaiian 
traditional and customary practices.  
(Emphasis added.)  As a member of the Committee, the chairperson 
may evaluate proposed habitat conservation plans and make a *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
54 recommendation on whether the Board should approve, amend, or 
reject the proposal.  HRS §  195D-25(b)(1).  Next, as a member of 
the Board, the chairperson must vote on whether to approve, 
amend, or reject the same proposal.  HRS §§  171-4(e), 195D -4(g), 
195D-21(b)(1).  Thus, the Legislature explicitly authorized the 
chairperson of the Board to (1)  make a recommendation as a 
member of th e Committee on whether the Board should approve a 
habitat conservation plan, and (2)  vote as the chairperson of 
the Board to approve or reject a habitat conservation plan.  See 
also Liberty Dialysis -Hawaii, 130 Hawaiʻi at 104-06, 306 P.3d at 
149-51. 
b. The legislative history and language of  
HRS §§ 195D-25(a) and 171 -4 indicates that the 
Legislature intended to authorize other Board 
members to participate in both the Committee and 
Board proceedings  as well. 
Having established that the chairperson of the Board 
may participate in both the Committee and Board proceedings, we 
address whether the Legislature’s authorization extends to other 
members of the Board.  We conclude that it does.  
First, the legislative history of HRS §  195D-25(a) 
indicates the Legislature i ntended for a member of the Board to 
participate in the Committee’s proceedings.  As initially 
designed, the Committee was a completely separate entity from 
the Board.  The Legislature proposed the Committee consist of  
three private landowners, three field  biologists, the 
administrator of the division of forestry and wildlife or *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
55 the administrator’s designee, the ecoregion director of the 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service or the director’s 
designee, the director of the United States Geological 
Survey ( “USGS”), Biological Inventory and Research Division 
or the director’s designee, one representative from a local 
private conservation organization, one representative from 
the University of Hawaii Environmental Center, three 
academic experts in conservation  biology, and three 
representatives from non -landowning environmental or 
Hawaiian organizations.  
S.B. 1089, S.D. 1, 19th Leg., Reg. Sess. (1997).22 
However, the Legislature received testimony that the 
“provision .  . . gives far too much power to the head of  the 
Division of Forestry and Wildlife with too little Board .  . . 
oversight .”  Hawaii Audubon Society, Testimony to the Senate 
Committee on Ways and Means on S.B. No. 1089, 19th Leg. Reg. 
Sess. (Feb. 21, 1997) (emphasis added).  Another commenter 
suggeste d, instead, that “[t]he duties of the recovery committee 
are properly performed by the Board of Land and Natural 
Resources.”  Kamehameha Schools Bernice Pauahi Bishop Estate, 
Testimony to the Senate Committee on Ways and Means on S.B. No. 
1089, 19th Leg., Reg. Sess. (Feb. 21, 1997).  The Board’s 
chairperson suggested, as an alternative, that the Legislature 
“designate the chairperson of the board of land and natural 
resources or his designee as the recovery committee member 
                     
22  The legislature ultimately enacted the endangered species statute using 
H.B. 1292, H.D. 1, S.D. 1, C.D. 1, 19th Leg., Reg. Sess. (1997) as the 
legislative vehicle.  See 1997 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 380, at 1193 -206.  
However, this only occurred  after the senate replaced the text of H.B. 1282, 
H.D. 1, 19th Leg., Reg. Sess. (1997) with the text of S.B. 1089, S.D. 2, 19th 
Leg., Reg. Sess. (1997).  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1183, in 1997 Senate 
Journal, at 1343.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
56 rather than the administrator of the division of forestry and 
wildlife.”  Board of Land and Natural Resources, Testimony to 
the Senate Committee on Ways and Means on S.B. No. 1089, 19th 
Leg., Reg. Sess. (Feb. 21, 1997).  
The Legislature subsequently amended the bill to, 
inter alia , “[s]ubs titut[e] the Chair of the Board  for the 
Administrator of the Division of Forestry and Wildlife on the 
Committee.”  S . Stand. Comm. Rep. 827, in 1997 Senate Journal at 
1220.  However, the Legislature retained the provision allowing 
the chairperson to design ate someone else to represent her on 
the Committee.  S.B. 1089, S.D. 2, 19th Leg., Reg. Sess. (1997).  
It therefore appears the Legislature amended the bill to allow 
the Board to play a role in the Committee’s proceedings and to 
oversee directly the Commit tee’s work.  
Second, reading HRS §  195D-25(a) in conjunction with 
HRS § 171-4 indicates the Legislature did not intend to restrict 
its authorization for a person to participate in both the 
Committee and Board proceedings to the Board’s chairperson.  
Again, HRS § 195D-25(a) authorizes the chairperson of the Board 
to have a designee take her place on the Committee .  However, it  
does not place any restrictions on who can be a designee.  The 
statute therefore does not prohibit the chairperson of the Board 
from designating another Board member to serve on the Committee.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
57 Moreover, the fungible nature of the chairperson 
position indicates the Legislature recognized that any of the 
Board’s members may be  called upon to serve on both the 
Committee as well as the Board.  Under HRS §  171-4(a), 
The board of land and natural resources shall be composed 
of seven members, one from each land district and three at 
large, to be nominated and, by and with the advice  and 
consent of the senate, appointed by the governor as 
provided in section 26 -34.  The term and removal of a 
member of the board and the filling of a vacancy on the 
board shall also be as provided in section 26 -34.  There 
shall be not more than three mem bers on the board from the 
same political party.  
Additionally, according to HRS §  171-4(e), 
The governor shall select a chairperson of the board from 
among its members.  The chairperson shall call and preside 
at meetings and may appoint a member of the boa rd as 
secretary.  The members of the board shall choose one of 
their number to act as chairperson during the absence or 
disability of the chairperson.  
In light of the foregoing, each of the Board’s members may be 
called upon to serve as the chairperson at any given time.  The 
governor selects the chairperson from the pool of senate -
confirmed Board members and may replace the chairperson with a 
different Board member.   HRS § 171-4(e).  However, if the 
governor -selected Board member is unable to carry out the  
chairperson’s duties, the Board’s members may designate any of 
the remaining Board members to act as the chairperson.   Id. 
This fungibility is particularly important where, as 
here, the Committee and the Board’s reviews of the habitat 
conservation plans o ccurs sequentially.  This creates a 
situation where two or more Board members may serve as the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
58 chairperson throughout the relevant proceedings.  For instance, 
Board member A may serve as the chairperson during the 
Committee’s review and be replaced by Boar d member B as the 
chairperson during the Board’s review, but remain on the Board 
during the Board’s review.23  In such a situation, restricting 
the Legislature’s authorization to the chairperson of the Board 
could preclude the Board from reviewing and/or ap proving any 
habitat conservation plan.  See HRS §§ 171-5 (2011) (providing 
in relevant part that “Four members of the board shall 
constitute a quorum to do business.” ), 195D-21(b)(1) (requiring 
“an affirmative vote of not less than two -thirds of [the 
Board’s] authorized membership,” or five Board members, for 
approval).  
Accordingly, we read HRS §§  195D-25(a) and 171 -4(e) to 
authorize other Board members to participate in both the 
Committee and Board proceedings.  
c. HRS §§ 91-9(g) and 91 -13 do not prohibit Boar d 
members from considering information obtained 
during the Committee proceedings.  
In light of the Legislature’s intention for Board 
members to participate in the Committee proceedings, the 
statutory prohibitions against considering extra -record 
                     
23  To further complicate matters, the governor may replace the chairperson 
during either of these review processes.  Id.  Alternatively, the Board’s 
members may select an acting chairperson due to “absence or disability.”  Id.  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
59 information  do not preclude Board members from considering 
information obtained from the Committee proceedings.  
According to KNSC, HRS §§  91-9(g) and 91 -13 precluded 
Gon from considering “extra -record” information he obtained 
during the Committee proceedings.  Howeve r, the requirements of 
HRS chapter 195D and HRS §  171-4(e) conflict with those of HRS 
§§ 91-9(g) and 91 -13. 
Pursuant to HRS §  91-9(g) (2012), “[n]o matters 
outside the record shall be considered by the agency in making 
its decision except as provided herei n.”  Additionally, HRS 
§ 91-13 (2012) provides  that “[n]o official of an agency who 
renders a decision in a contested case shall consult any person 
on any issue of fact except upon notice and opportunity for all 
parties to participate, save to the extent r equired for the 
disposition of ex parte matters authorized by law.”  However, if 
a Board member’s exposure to information obtained during the 
Committee proceedings requires disqualification from the Board 
proceedings, the chairperson of the Board would hav e to recuse 
herself from the Board proceedings despite HRS chapter 195D’s 
express authorization for the chairperson to participate in both 
proceedings.  See HRS §§ 195D-4(g), 195D -21(b), 195D -25(a).  
Thus, the text of HRS §§  91-9(g) and 91 -13 conflicts wit h that 
of HRS §  195D-25(a). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
60 The requirement of HRS chapter 195D and HRS §  171-4(e) 
that a Board member participate in both proceedings overrides 
the prohibitions of HRS §§  91-9(g) and 91 -13.  “[W]here there is 
a ‘plainly irreconcilable’ conflict between a general and a 
specific statute concerning the same subject matter, the 
specific will be favored.”  Mahiai v. Suwa , 69 Haw. 349, 356, 
742 P.2d 359, 366 (1987) (citations omitted).  In this case, HRS 
§§ 195D-25(a) and 171 -4(e) provide the more specific langu age 
because the statutes apply to Committee and Board proceedings in 
particular, whereas HRS §§  91-9(g) and 91 -13 apply to all 
contested case hearings.  Under such circumstances, HRS §§  91-
9(g) and 91 -13 do not preclude Board members who participated in 
the Committee proceedings from using information obtained during 
the Committee proceedings in the Board proceedings.  See id. 
In turn, KNSC does not identify any statutory basis 
for Gon’s recusal.  
2. Gon’s participation in both the Committee and Board 
proceedings did not raise any due process issues.  
Turning to KNSC’s due process claims, KNSC argues that 
because Gon served on the Committee, he improperly prejudged 
whether the Board should approve the Finalized Plan.  KNSC 
intimates such prejudgment created an appearance of impropriety, 
and due process therefore required Gon’s recusal.  KNSC *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
61 additionally avers that Gon was biased in favor of approving the 
Finalized Plan . 
Under the Hawai ʻi Constitution, “[n]o person shall be 
deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of law 
. . . .”  Haw. C onst. art. I, §  5.  However, “due process is 
flexible and calls for such procedural protections as the 
particular situation demands.”  Morrissey v. Brewer , 408 U.S. 
471, 481 (1972); see also  Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. Bd. of Land 
and Natural Res., 136 Hawaiʻi 376, 389, 363 P.3d 224, 237 (2015).  
We hold that when the Legislature structures an administrative 
agency to perform multiple roles, due process does not require 
the agency or its members to sacrifice one function to 
accomplish another.  Gon’s participat ion in the Committee 
therefore did not disqualify him from the Board’s proceedings.  
Furthermore, where a challenger asserts an agency 
adjudicator is disqualified by bias, the challenger must 
overcome a “presumption of honesty and integrity.”  Sifagaloa v. 
Bd. of Trustees of Emps. ’ Ret. Sys., 74 Haw. 181, 192 -93, 840 
P.2d 367, 372 -73 (1992)  (quoting Wolkenstein v. Reville , 694 
F.2d 35, 42 (2d Cir. 1982)) .  KNSC does not meet this burden.  
a. Agency adjudicators may participate in sequential 
proceedings without v iolating due process.  
KNSC asserts that Gon’s recusal is warranted because 
he “publicly expresse[d] a predisposition” when he recommended *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
62 that the Board approve  the Finalized Plan and because he 
prejudged “disputed issued [sic] of adjudicative fact.”  
However, the mere fact that Gon expressed a position on the 
Finalized Plan as a function of his membership on the Committee 
does not require his recusal.  
As a preliminary matter, the fact that a decision -
maker previously adjudicated an issue does not mean that  they 
will improperly prejudge subsequent proceedings on the same 
issue.  For instance, when this court reverses a lower court’s 
decision, we generally remand the matter to the same judge or 
panel for further proceedings.  See State v. Ortiz , 91 Hawaiʻi 
181, 196, 981 P.2d 1127, 1142 (1999) (“Absent ‘unusual 
circumstances’ —such as those presented by a judge’s failure to 
grant a defendant his or her presentence right of allocution —or 
‘personal bias,’ remand to a different trial judge is uncalled 
for.”) (citat ion omitted).  This court also regularly remands 
agency decisions with instructions for the agency to reconsider 
issues they already passed upon.  See, e.g. , Mauna Kea Anaina 
Hou, 136 Hawaiʻi at 399, 363 P.3d at 247 (remanding for Board to 
reconsider issui ng a land use permit); Kilakila ʻO Haleakala v. 
Bd. of Land & Nat ural Res., 131 Hawaiʻi 193, 196, 317 P.3d 27, 30 
(2013) (same).  Notably, this is the precise relief KNSC demands 
in this case: a remand to the Committee and Board to reconsider 
the Finalized Plan.  By KNSC’s reasoning, however, any Board *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
63 member who voted on the Finalized Plan  would be recused on the 
requested remand.  
Rather, when an agency decision -maker expresses a 
position on an issue as a function of carrying out his statutory 
obligations, due process does not require the decision -maker’s 
recusal in a subsequent proceeding on the same issue.  The 
federal courts’ analysis on the matter is persuasive.   
In 1948, the Cement Institute called for the United 
States Supreme Court to disqualify the Federal Trade Commission 
(FTC) from adjudicating unfair trade proceedings on a specif ic 
trade practice because the FTC previously issued a 
congressionally -mandated report concluding that the trade 
practice was illegal.  Federal Trade Comm ’n v. Cement Institute , 
333 U.S. 683, 700 -03 (1948).  However, the Court rejected Cement 
Institute’s co ntention that the FTC’s prior findings constituted 
improper prejudgment, reasoning that “the fact that the [FTC] 
had entertained such views as the result of its prior ex parte 
investigations  did not necessarily mean that the minds of its 
members were irrev ocably closed on the subject of the 
respondents’ [trade] practices.”  Id. at 701 (emphasis added).  
The Court point ed out that, instead, members of the cement 
industry had the opportunity to “produce[] evidence —volumes of 
it.  They were free to point out t o the [FTC] by testimony, by 
cross-examination of witnesses, and by arguments, conditions of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
64 the trade practices under attack which they thought kept these 
practices within the range of legally permissible business 
activities.”  Id. 
The Court added that re quiring disqualification simply 
because the FTC had considered a similar issue previously flies 
in the face of administrative law principles.  Id. at 702.  
Specifically,  
If the [FTC’s] opinions expressed in congressionally 
required reports would bar its me mbers from acting in 
unfair trade proceedings, it would appear that opinions 
expressed in the first .  . . unfair trade proceeding would 
similarly disqualify them from ever passing on another.  
Thus experience acquired from [the adjudicators’] work as 
commissioners would be a handicap instead of an advantage.  
Such was not the intendment of Congress. For Congress acted 
on a committee report stating: “It is manifestly desirable 
that the terms of the commissioners shall be long enough to 
give them an opportuni ty to acquire the expertness in 
dealing with these special questions .  . . that comes from 
experience.”  
Id. (citation omitted).  The United States Supreme Court th ereby 
laid the foundation for the principle that a legislature’s 
intent guides whether due pr ocess requires an agency 
adjudicator’s recusal when the adjudicator previously made 
related determinations.  
Building upon the United States Supreme Court’s 
analysis, the United States Court of Appeals for the First 
Circuit articulated that there is no impr oper prejudgment or due 
process violation when an agency carries out multiple related, 
congressionally -required proceedings.  Pangburn v. Civil 
Aeronautics Bd. , 311 F.2d 349, 358 ( 1st Cir. 1962).  There, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
65 Sheldon Pangburn asserted the Civil Aeronautics Boar d’s (CAB)  
determination that Pangburn’s “pilot error” caused a crash in a  
statutorily -mandated  Accident Investigation Report improperly 
predetermined the results of the CAB’s investigation into 
whether to affirm the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) 
Administra tor’s order suspending Pangburn’s airline transport 
pilot rating.  Id. at 355.  The court disagreed.  
The court initially emphasized that both of the CAB’s 
proceedings were congressionally authorized.  On the one hand, 
Congress required the CAB to “investig ate accidents involving 
civil aircraft and ‘report the facts, conditions, and 
circumstances .  . . and the probable cause thereof.’”  Id.  On 
the other , a related statute  allowed the CAB “to entertain and 
decide appeals from revocation or suspension orders [of] the 
[FAA] Administrator.”  Id. at 356.  The court thereby noted 
that, “in both proceedings, the [CAB] is acting under a 
Congressional mandate to perform the functions which were in 
fact performed here.”  Id. 
The court further recognized that  “[i]t is well 
settled that a combination in investigative and judicial 
functions within an agency does not violate due process .”  Id.  
Thus, the Court concluded that  
we cannot say that the mere fact that a tribunal has had 
contact with a particular factual complex in a prior 
hearing, or indeed has taken a public position on the 
facts, is enough to place that tribunal under a *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
66 constitutional inhibition to pass upon the fa cts in a 
subsequent hearing.  We believe that more is required.  
Particularly is that so in the instant case where the 
[CAB’s] prior contact with the case resulted from following 
the Congressional mandate  to investigate and report the 
probable cause of all  civil air accidents.  If we were to 
accept [Pangburn’s] argument, it would mean that because 
the [CAB] obeyed the mandate of [ one statute ], it was 
thereupon constitutionally precluded from carrying out its 
responsibilities under [ another]. 
Id. at 358 (emp hasis added).  Thirteen years later, the United 
States Supreme Court approvingly cited the United States Court 
of Appeals for the First Circuit’s analysis in Withrow v. 
Larkin, 421 U.S. 35, 50 n.16 (1975).  
The federal courts’ analysis is applicable to the 
present case.  As in Pangburn , Gon acted under multiple 
statutory obligations in evaluating the Finalized Plan – first 
as a member of the Committee under HRS §  195D-25(b)(1), and 
later as a member of the Board under HRS §§  195D-4(g) and 195D -
21.  See 311 F.2d at 355 -56.  Gon’s recommendation that the 
Board approve the plan did not mean his mind was “irrevocably 
closed” on the matter.  See Cement Institute , 333 U.S. at 701.  
Instead, like Cement Institute, KNSC was allowed to “produce[] 
evidence —volumes of i t.  They were free to point out to the 
[Board] by testimony, by cross -examination of witnesses, and by 
arguments” why the Board should reject the Finalized Plan.  Id.  
Accepting  KNSC’s argument would mean that because Gon obeyed the 
mandate of HRS §  195D-25(b)(1), he was constitutionally *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
67 precluded from carrying out his responsibilities under HRS 
§§ 195D-4(g) and 195D -21.  See Pangburn , 311 F.2d at 358.   
When the Legislature calls upon an administrative 
agency and its members to perform multiple roles, due process 
does not require the agency or its members to sacrifice one 
function to accomplish another.  See id.  Due process therefore 
did not require Gon’s recusal.24 
b. KNSC does not carry its burden to show that Gon 
acted without honesty or integrity.  
Having f allen short of establishing that Gon’s work on 
the Committee disqualified him from participating in the Board’s 
proceedings, KNSC next claims that three of Gon’s statements 
constitute evidence of bias in favor of the Finalized Plan.  
Specifically, (1)  prior to voting against a contested case 
hearing, Gon stated that “[t]he suggestion that the habitat 
conservation plan is fatally flawed or inadequate[ly] researched 
[is] problematic in his mind”; (2)  following the contested case 
hearing, Gon commented that “t urning this HCP back [to] the ESRC 
at this stage, mere months after its issuance and approval, is 
not going to result in any – in any significant change in the 
                     
24  In light of Gon’s statutory obligations, KNSC’s citation to American 
Cyanamid Co. v. FTC , 363 F.2d 757 (6th Cir. 1966) in support of its demand 
for Gon’s recusal is inapposite.  There, “one of the commissioners had 
previously served actively as counsel for a Senate subcommittee investigat ing 
many of the same facts an d issues before the [FTC] for consideration.”  
Withrow, 421 U.S. at 50 n.16.  Thus,  unlike the present case,  the 
commissioner ’s prejudgment did not arise from a statutory obligation.  See 
id. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
68 information that has already been considered by the ESRC and by 
the state and federal agencies”;  and (3) in responding to KNSC’s 
motion to disqualify Gon, Gon made an allegedly inconsistent 
disclosure regarding the extent of his work on the Committee.  
However, not one of these statements indicates bias on 
Gon’s part.  First, the pre -contested case he aring statement 
reflects a  principle of review for agency decisions : “the 
agency’s decision carries a presumption of validity and 
appellant has the heavy burden of making a convincing showing 
that the decision is invalid .  . . .”  Korean Buddhist Dae Won 
Sa Temple , 87 Hawaiʻi at 229, 953 P.2d at 1327.  Gon ’s complete 
observation was that 
when a habitat conservation plan is put together it has to 
pass the [U.S.] Fish and Wildlife Service and the DLNR.  
The suggestion that the habitat conservation plan is 
fatally flawed or inadequate[ly] researched [is] 
problematic in his mind.  
By prefacing his statement with an acknowledgement of the work 
conducted by both FWS and DOFAW, Gon pointed out that the 
Finalized Plan was the product of significant government agency 
scrutiny.  These proceedings and their resulting product carry a 
presumption of validity.  See id.  Taken in context, this 
statement does not indicate bias.25 
                     
25  Notably, KNSC appears to recognize that Gon’s statement does not 
require recusal.  “Member Gomes said he agreed with Member Gon.”  However, 
KNSC never moved to disqualify Member Gomes.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
69 Second, the post -contested case hearing statement 
reflects the state of the evidence before the Committee and the 
Board.  The Committee unanimously recommended that the Board 
approve the Finalized Plan on February 25, 2016.  A review of 
the record indicate s KNSC submitted six studies published after 
the Committee’s recommendation .  However, none of these 
submissions indisputably controverted the information the 
Committee had already considered .  Thus, it does not appear KNSC 
identified any new evidence the Committee was required to 
consider, much less evidence that constituted a “significant 
change in the information that has already been considered by 
the ESRC .  . . .” 
Third, Gon’s disclosures were not inconsistent and, in 
any event, did not prejudice KNSC.   To reiterate, Gon initially 
disclosed on November 10, 2016 “that he was briefly on the 
endangered species advisory committee that advises windfarm 
projects.  He is no longer on that committee and this particular 
company and proposal was not one that he p rovided substantial 
input to.”   On February 21, 2018, Gon’s disclosure explained “I 
was invited to serve on the ESRC of the DLNR, where, with other 
experts and agency managers of endangered species, we considered 
the impacts and mitigation recommendations for various projects 
of relevance to the DLNR.  While on the ESRC, I considered the 
[habitat conservation plan] at issue currently.”  These *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
70 disclosures are consistent.  The fact that Gon considered the 
Finalized Plan and moved for the Committee to recommen d that the 
Board approve the Finalized Plan and voted accordingly does not 
mean he provided substantial input on the Finalized Plan.  By 
contrast, other Committee members identified specific issues in 
the Proposed Plan for Applicant to address in the Final ized 
Plan. 
Furthermore, KNSC does not identify any prejudice 
resulting from the alleged inconsistency .  As our foregoing 
discussion illustrates, KNSC’s concerns with Gon’s participation 
in the Board proceedings arise from the fact that he also 
participated  in the Committee proceedings.  Thus, to the extent 
Gon’s February 2018 disclosure revealed any additional 
information about his work on the Committee, Gon’s November 2016 
disclosure already furnished KNSC with sufficient information to 
identify the challe nges it has raised throughout these 
proceedings.  
Under these circumstances, KNSC has not carried its 
burden to overcome the presumption that Gon acted with honesty 
and integrity.  See Sifagaloa , 74 Haw. at 192 -93. 
E. KNSC waived its challenge to State Senator  Inouye’s 
communications.  
Lastly, KNSC assert s that State Senator Lorraine 
Inouye’s letter to the BLNR constituted an improper ex parte  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
71 communication and  that BLNR’s failure to provide the letter to 
KNSC rendered the Board’s approval of the  Finalized  Plan and 
License void.   However, KNSC did not timely object regarding the 
letter, and has therefore waived any challenge thereon.   
“[T]he general rule that an appellate court will 
consider only such questions as were raised and reserved in the 
lower court applies on review by courts of administrative 
determinations so as to preclude from consideration questions or 
issues which were no t raised in administrative proceedings.”  
Waikiki Resort Hotel, Inc. v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu , 63 Haw. 
222, 250, 624 P.2d 1353, 1372 (1981) (citing Petition of Village 
Bd. of Wheatland , 42 N.W.2d  321 (N.D. 1950)).  KNSC conceded 
during oral argument that it did not raise any objection to 
Senator Inouye’s letter during the BLNR proceedings.  We 
therefore do not resolve this assertion.  
Nevertheless, we  take this opportunity to  reiterate 
that “[i]n future contested case hearings, BLNR could certainly 
do more to remove doubts of impropriety and build confidence in 
its permit approval process.”  Kilakila ʻO Haleakala , 138 Hawaiʻi 
at 401, 382 P.3d at 213.  KNSC contends the Board should have at 
least retained a copy of the letter, even if it was prohibited 
from considering the letter’s contents during the proceedings.   
We agree.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
72 Pursuant to Hawaiʻi Administrative Rules  (HAR) § 13-1-
16 (2009), “[a]ll documents filed with or presented to the board 
may be retained in the files of the board.”  The disclosure and 
maintenance of potentially objectionable communications would 
increase confidence in the Board’s proceedings .  See Kilakila ʻO 
Haleakala , 138 Hawaiʻi at 417, 382 P.3d at 229 (Pollack, J., 
dissenting).  We therefore respectfully suggest that the Board 
develop procedures to retain documents submitted to, but not 
considered by, the Board during contested case hearings.26 
IV. CONCLUSION  
In summary, substantial evidence supported the Board’s 
decision to approve the Finalized Plan because both the Board 
and the C ommittee utilized the best scientific and other 
reliable data available at the time of their respective 
determinations.  Furthermore, neither due process nor any 
statutory provision disqualified Gon from complying with his 
statutory obligations and sequent ially participating in the 
Committee and Board proceedings.  Finally, we do not consider 
the merits of KNSC’s ex parte  communications argument because 
KNSC did not raise a timely objection.   
                     
26  Although such documents may become a part of the contested case hearing 
record by virtue of being “on file with the [B]oard,” “an y party may object, 
in the manner provided in [HAR] section 13 -1-35, to any part of such record.”  
See HAR § 13-1-32.4 (2009).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
73 Accordingly, we affirm the circuit court’s May 23, 
2019 Final Jud gment, which affirmed the Board’s May 18, 2018 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order . 
 
Lance D. Collins 
and Bianca Isaki 
for Appellant-Appell
ant 
 
Ewan C. Rayner (Kimberly T. 
Guidry, William J. Wynhoff, 
Linda L.W. Chow, and Cindy Y. 
Young on the briefs) for 
Appellees-Appellees Board of Land
and Natural Resources, 
Department
of Land and Natural Resources, 
and Suzanne D. Case in her 
official capacity as Chairperson 
of the Board of Land and Natural 
Resources  
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
John P. Manaut (Puananionaona P.
Thoene with him on the briefs) 
for Appellee-Appellee Na Pua 
Makani Power Partners, LLC    
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
/s/ Matthew J. Viola  
