                                                                 
                                                                 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAP-14-0000889 09-JUN-2016 08:35 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
---o0o--­
PEER NEWS LLC dba CIVIL BEAT,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
CITY & COUNTY OF HONOLULU and HONOLULU POLICE DEPARTMENT,
Defendants-Appellees,
 
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I ORGANIZATION OF POLICE OFFICERS,
Intervenor-Defendant-Appellant.
 
SCAP-14-0000889
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CAAP-14-0000889; CIV. NO. 13-1-2981-11)
 
JUNE 9, 2016
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND WILSON, JJ.,
CIRCUIT JUDGE CRABTREE, IN PLACE OF McKENNA, J., RECUSED,
WITH POLLACK, J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
This case arises out of Civil Beat’s request for the
 
disciplinary records of twelve Honolulu Police Department (HPD)
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
officers who were suspended for at least twenty days for various 
types of misconduct. HPD denied the request, and Civil Beat filed suit. The State of Hawai' i Organization of Police Officers 
1
(SHOPO) intervened as a defendant. The circuit court  found in
favor of Civil Beat, ordering HPD to disclose the records, and
 SHOPO appealed.
 
The circuit court based its conclusion on this court’s 
1996 decision, State of Hawai' i Organization of Police Officers 
v. Soc’y of Professional Journalists - University of Hawai' i 
Chapter, 83 Hawai' i 378, 927 P.2d 386 (1996) (hereinafter SHOPO 
v. SPJ), and on Office of Information Practices (OIP) Opinion
 Letter No. 97-01 (Feb. 21, 1997). In SHOPO v. SPJ, this court
 held that under a prior version of Hawaii’s Uniform Information
 Practices Act (UIPA), police officers had no privacy interest in
 their disciplinary suspension records, and thus HPD must disclose
 the records upon request. The OIP, in Opinion Letter No. 97-01,
 ruled that even though the legislature amended the UIPA in Act
 242 to recognize a “significant privacy interest” in police
 officers’ disciplinary suspension records, SHOPO v. SPJ still
 mandated disclosure of such records. Thus, the circuit court
 concluded that police officers have a “non-existent” privacy
 interest in their disciplinary suspension records.
 
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 
2
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
We hold that SHOPO v. SPJ is not controlling. The
 
legislature’s amendments to the UIPA in Act 242, the plain
 
language of the UIPA, and its legislative history demonstrate
 that police officers have a significant privacy interest in their
 disciplinary suspension records. Disclosure of the records is
 appropriate only when the public interest in access to the
 records outweighs this privacy interest. 
The records requested by Civil Beat here involve cases
 
of serious misconduct that reasonably could call into question
 the police officers’ trustworthiness or fitness to perform their
 public duties. However, we cannot determine whether disclosure
 is appropriate given the limited factual record in this case. We
 therefore vacate the circuit court’s judgment and remand to that
 court so it can review the records to determine whether the
 public interest outweighs the officers’ significant privacy
 interests.
 
I. Background
 
A. Civil Beat’s request for information
 
On October 4, 2013, Civil Beat sent a letter to the HPD
 
Custodian of Records requesting records of disciplinary actions
 of twelve different police officers who were suspended for
 misconduct between 2003 and 2012. All of these disciplinary
 actions resulted in employee suspensions of at least twenty days. 
3
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The suspensions involved the following types of misconduct:
 
1.	 Violation of HPD’s electric gun policy and utilized
malicious force (twenty day suspension);
 
2.	 Was untruthful during an investigation. Failed to
 maintain the confidentiality of the investigation
(twenty day suspension);
 
3.	 Falsified a police report and was untruthful during the
investigation (seventy-seven day suspension);
 
4.	 Hindered a federal investigation (six hundred twenty-
six day suspension);
 
5.	 Pled guilty to criminal charges (twenty day
suspension);
 
6.	 Fled the scene of a motor vehicle collision, failed to
report the collision, and provided false information on
the police report (twenty day suspension);
 
7.	 Falsified information in a motor vehicle collision. 
Failed to remain impartial during a motor vehicle
collision investigation. Was untruthful during an
administrative investigation (twenty day suspension);
 
8.	 Submitted a falsified report and fabricated the facts
regarding the probable cause to conduct a traffic stop
(twenty day suspension);
 
9.	 Willfully used physical force against another employee
causing injury (twenty day suspension);
 
10.	 Involved in a motor vehicle collision while under the
 
influence of alcohol. Fled the scene and falsely
reported the vehicle stolen. Failed to update personal
information (twenty day suspension);
 
11.	 Falsified police reports and expense vouchers.
Misappropriated expense funds. Failed to submit
 evidence. Participated in illegal gambling. Was
 untruthful (thirty day suspension);
 
12.	 Assaulted another person and harassed the officer who
was investigating the incident (twenty day
 
4
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
suspension).2
 
2
 The information regarding the incidents of misconduct Civil Beat
 
listed in the letter was taken from “HPD’s annual disclosure of misconduct to
 
the State legislature in accordance with HRS § 52D-3.5.”  This information is
 available to the public but includes no more detail than the brief summary of
the misconduct listed here.
 
HRS § 52D-3.5 (2014) provides, in relevant part:
 
(a) The chief of each county police department shall
submit to the legislature no later than January 31 of
each year an annual report of misconduct incidents
that resulted in suspension or discharge of a police
officer.
 
. . . .
 (b) The report shall:
 
(1) Summarize the facts and the nature of the
misconduct for each incident;
(2) Specify the disciplinary action imposed for
each incident;
(3) Identify any other incident in the annual
report committed by the same police officer; and
(4) State whether the highest nonjudicial
grievance adjustment procedure timely invoked by
the police officer or the police officer's
representative has concluded:
(A) If the highest nonjudicial grievance
adjustment procedure has concluded, the
report shall state:
(i) Whether the incident concerns
conduct punishable as a crime, and
if so, describe the county police
department’s findings of fact and
conclusions of law concerning the
criminal conduct; and
(ii) Whether the county police
department notified the respective
county prosecuting attorney of the
incident; or
(B) If the highest nonjudicial grievance
adjustment procedure has not concluded,
the report shall state the current stage
of the nonjudicial grievance adjustment
procedure as of the end of the reporting
period.
 
. . . .
 
(e)
 For any misconduct incident reported pursuant to
(continued...)
 
5
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Civil Beat requested the following information for each
 
instance of misconduct resulting in a suspension:
 
For each incident, if the highest non-judicial
grievance adjustment procedure timely invoked by the
employee or the employee’s representati ve has
 
concluded and thirty days has elapsed following a
written decision sustaining the suspension after that
procedure, [Civil Beat] specifically requests a
document or documents sufficient to provide the
following information:
 
• The employee’s name;
• The nature of the employment-related misconduct;
• HPD’s summary of the allegations of misconduct;
• Findings of fact and conclusions of law; and
• The disciplinary action taken by the agenc y.
 
For all other incidents, [Civil Beat] specifically
requests a document or documents sufficient to show
the date(s) that the employ ee or the employee’s
representative invoked each step in the non-judicial
grievance adjustment procedure.  In addition, if
the non-judicial adjustment procedure terminated for a
reason other than a decision sustaining the
suspension, [Civil Beat] specifically requests a
document or documents sufficient to summarize the
 reason that the procedure concluded and to show the
date that the procedure concluded.  For documents
 responsive to this paragraph, [Civil Beat] agrees that
HPD may redact the employee’s name and other
information that would disclose the employee’s
identity.
 
2(...continued)
this section and subject to subsection (b)(4)(B), the
chief of each county police department shall provide
updated information in each successive annual report,
until the highest nonjudicial grievance adjustment
procedure timely invoked by the police officer has
concluded.  In each successive annual report, the
updated information shall reference where the incident
appeared in the prior annual report. For any incident
resolved without disciplinary action after the
conclusion of the nonjudicial grievance adjustment
procedure, the chief of each county police department
shall summarize the basis for not imposing
disciplinary action.
 
6
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Thus, for cases where the highest grievance procedure
 
timely invoked by the employee has concluded, and thirty days has
 
passed following a written decision sustaining the employees’
 suspensions, Civil Beat requested information that included the
 employees’ names. For all other cases, Civil Beat did not
 request the employees’ names.
 
HPD denied Civil Beat’s request in its entirety. To
 
justify its denial, HPD cited to HRS § 92F-13(1)
3
 and HRS § 92F­
14,4
 and stated that Civil Beat’s request was an “[u]nwarranted
3 HRS § 92F-13 provides:  “This part shall not require disclosure
 
of: (1) Government records which, if disclosed, would constitute a clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy[.]”
 
4 The version of HRS § 92F-14 as amended by Act 242, which was in
 
effect at the time Civil Beat made its request provided, in pertinent part:
 
(a) Disclosure of a government record shall not
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal
privacy if the public interest in disclosure outweighs
the privacy interest of the individual.
 
(b) The following are examples of information in which
the individual has a significant privacy interest:
 
. . . .
 (4) Information in an agency’s personnel file, or
applications, nominations, recommendations, or
proposals for public employment or appointment to a
governmental position, except:
 
. . .
 
(B) The following information related to
employment misconduct that results in an
employee’s suspension or discharge:
 
(i) The name of the employee;
(ii) The nature of the employment related
(continued...)
 
7
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
invasion of privacy,” and that the “[i]ncidents did not result in
 
discharge.” 
B. Prior proceedings
 
On November 7, 2013, Civil Beat filed a complaint in
 
the circuit court seeking an order directing HPD to disclose all
 
of the information Civil Beat sought in its October 4, 2013
 letter. Civil Beat filed a motion for summary judgment (MSJ),
 arguing that after this court’s decision in 
SHOPO v. SPJ , police
 
officers have no constitutional privacy interest in their
 disciplinary records where the officers were suspended but not
 discharged. Civil Beat further argued that UIPA permits
 
(...continued)
 
misconduct;
(iii) The agency’s summary of the
allegations of misconduct;
(iv) Findings of fact and conclusions of
law; and
(v) The disciplinary action taken by the
agency;
 
when the following has occurred: the highest
nonjudicial grievance adjustment procedure
timely invoked by the employee or the employee’s
representative has concluded; a written decision
sustaining the suspension or discharge has been
issued after this procedure; and thirty calendar
days have elapsed following the issuance of the
decision; provided that this subparagraph shall
not apply to a county police department officer
except in a case which results in the discharge
of the officer[.]
 
HRS § 92F-14 (Supp. 1996).
 
HRS § 92F-14 was amended in 2004 and 2014, but these subsequent
amendments are not relevant to this appeal.  See 2004 Haw Sess. Laws Act 92, §
4 at 368; 2014 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 121, § 2 at 334-35.
 
8
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
withholding government records on the grounds of personal privacy
 
only if the individual has a constitutionally protected right of
 privacy. Thus, according to Civil Beat, HPD police officers have
 no privacy interest in their records of disciplinary suspensions. 
Civil Beat also relied on a formal opinion of the OIP,
 
Opinion Letter No. 97-01. In OIP Opinion Letter No. 97-01, the
 OIP first concluded that when the legislature amended the UIPA by
 enacting Act 242 in 1995, it intended “to balance the competing
 privacy and public interests in favor of keeping confidential
 information about suspended officers.” Id. at 6. The OIP went
 
on, however, to conclude that this court’s decision in SHOPO v.
 SPJ “erodes the significant weight assigned by the Legislature to
 the suspended officer’s privacy interest, as set out in Act 242”
 such that “only a ‘scintilla’ of public interest is enough to
 overcome this privacy interest in the balancing test.” Id. at 8. 
The OIP also noted that arguably, the legislature was free to
 create a significant privacy interest in police officers’ records
 of disciplinary suspensions, even if no constitutional privacy
 right existed, but that even if this were true, the interests
 still need to be weighed, and this court’s ruling in SHOPO v. SPJ
 “tips the balance heavily toward finding that the public has a
 strong countervailing interest about suspended police officers.” 
Id. at 8-9. The OIP therefore concluded
:
 
9
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Whether one finds that SHOPO eliminates the
 
Legislature’s finding of a significant privacy
interest or whether the Legislature has the power to
create the right, the result is the same-–disclosure
of information about suspended police officers cannot
be found to constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion
of personal privacy under the UIPA.
 
Id. at 9.
 
In its MSJ, Civil Beat argued that OIP’s analysis was
 
correct based on a plain reading of the UIPA, and that even if
 
the UIPA is ambiguous, OIP’s conclusion is entitled to deference. 
In the alternative, Civil Beat argued that even if the
 
UIPA does recognize a broader right of privacy than the
 constitution, the public interest in disclosure nevertheless
 outweighs the individual privacy interest. Civil Beat argued
 that the public has an overwhelming interest in the disclosure of
 disciplinary records regarding egregious misconduct by police
 officers because: 
Instances of misconduct of a police officer while on
the job are not private, intimate, personal details of
the officer’s life . . . .  They are matters with
which the public has a right to concern
itself. . . .  If the off duty acts of a police
officer bear upon his or her fitness to perform public
duty or if the activities reported in the records
involve the performance of a public duty, then the
interest of the individual in “personal privacy” is to
be given slight weight in the balancing test and the
appropriate concern of the public as to the proper
performance of public duty is to be given great
weight.  In such situations privacy considerations are
overwhelmed by public accountability.
 
(Quoting Cowles Publ’g v. State Patrol, 748 P.2d 597, 605 (Wash.
 
10
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1988)).5
 
Thus, according to Civil Beat, even if police officers
 
have a “significant privacy interest” in their disciplinary
 
suspension records, this interest must nonetheless be weighed
 against the public interest in disclosure, and in this case, this
 public interest outweighs the officers’ privacy interest. 
On January 9, 2014, the circuit court granted SHOPO’s
 
motion to intervene as a defendant. HPD and SHOPO each filed a
 memorandum in opposition to Civil Beat’s MSJ. 
HPD argued that the plain language of HRS § 92F-14(b),
 
as amended by Act 242, indicated that an HPD officer has a
 significant privacy interest in records related to employment
 misconduct where the officer was suspended, but not discharged. 
HPD asserted that the “legislative history of Act 242 shows that
 the legislature intended to conduct the balancing itself and
 conclude “as a matter of public policy that the privacy of the
 individual outweighs the public interest in disclosure with
 respect to the information sought by [Civil Beat] in this case.” 
In SHOPO’s memorandum in opposition to Civil Beat’s
 
MSJ, SHOPO made similar arguments to HPD’s. SHOPO argued that
 because HRS § 92F-14 recognizes a “significant privacy interest”
 
5
 This same language was also quoted approvingly by this court in 
SHOPO. 83 Hawai 'i at 399, 927 P.2d at 407. 
11
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in information related to police officer misconduct not resulting
 
in discharge, it “plainly and unambiguously exempts from
 disclosure the disciplinary records of county police officers who
 have not been discharged.” 
The circuit court granted Civil Beat’s MSJ, finding as
 
follows:
 
Article I, Section 6 of the Hawai 'i Constitution 
does not recognize a protected privacy interest in
police misconduct resulting in suspension or
discharge.  The court interpreted Article I, Section 6
in light of the Supreme Court of Hawaii’s decision [in
SHOPO]. The Supreme Court of Hawai 'i determined that 
police officers do not have a protected privacy
interest in records of police misconduct that lead to
suspension or discharge. 
  
. . .
 .
 
The supreme court also stated that “information
regarding charges of misconduct by police officers, in
their capacities as such, that have been sustained
after investigation and that have resulted in
suspension or discharge is not ‘highly personal and
intimate information’ and, therefore, is not within
the protection of Hawai 'i’s constitutional right of 
privacy.”  The court also went on to state:  “The
 information that must be disclosed pursuant [to] HRS
§ 92F-14(b)(4)(B) regarding a public employee’s
employment-related misconduct and resulting
discipline, is not ‘highly personal and intimate
information’ and is, therefore, not within the scope
of Hawai 'i’s constitutional right of privacy.” 
The UIPA cannot recognize a protected privacy
interest in police officer misconduct because to do so
would be to directly contravene the provision it
implements, which is Article I, Section 6.  Under
 Article I, Section 6, police officers have no
protected privacy interest regarding on-duty
misconduct that results in suspension or discharge,
and the UIPA implements Article I, Section 6, as given
in the 
SHOPO decision, which states “[t]he UIPA, and
the challenged amendment by Act 191, implements
article I, section 6 of the Hawai 'i 
Constitution . . . .”  Thus, reading that language,
the court concludes under SHOPO as [sic] there is no
 
12
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
protected privacy interests regarding on-duty
misconduct by police officers, therefore, public
access interest would outweigh non-existent privacy
interests in on-duty police misconduct.
 
The court believes that this is supported in
part on three grounds:
 
1.	 Looking at the purpose of the UIPA, which is
geared towards disclosure;
 
2.	 That the Hawai 'i Supreme Court certainly
recognized that Act 242 would require onlylimited disclosure to those police officers thatwere discharged; 
3.	 That the court finds that the State of Hawai 'i 
[OIP] decision, Opinion Letter No. 97-1, was noterroneous. 
. . . .
 
[L]ooking at the SHOPO decision, it again
appears to recognize that, there, Act 242 was about to
limit disclosure of records just to discharged
officers. The SHOPO court did begin its analysis
centered specifically at Act 191, but then the supreme
court went further in the analysis to consider,
moreover, the history of Article I, Section 6 of the
Hawai'i Constitution and went in-depth in a
constitutional analysis of police misconduct.
  
Accordingly, the Supreme Court of Hawai 'i recognized
the impact of Act 242 and chose to additionally and
separately address its shortcomings under Article I,
Section 6.
 
. . .
 .
 
Based on the record and the analysis set forth
above, Plaintiff’s [MSJ] is GRANTED.  Defendants are
 hereby ORDERED to open public inspection and copying
by Plaintiff the requested records of twelve police
officers identified in the October 4, 2013 letter.
 
(Internal citation omitted). 
SHOPO filed a notice of appeal, and on February 10,
 
13
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2015, this court granted Civil Beat’s application for transfer.6
 
In its opening brief, SHOPO presents three points of
 
error:
 
1.	 Whether the Circuit Court erred when it granted
Plaintiff-Appellee Civil Beat’s [MSJ] by ruling
that Defendant-Appellee City was required to
disclose the disciplinary information of the 12
police officers who were not discharged.
 
2.	 Whether the Circuit Court erred when it found
 that police officers that had not been
discharged from their employment had no privacy
interests in their disciplinary records in
reliance of SHOPO v. SPJ, 83 Haw. 378, 927 P.2d
386 (1996).
 
3.	 Whether the Circuit Court erred when it found
 that OIP Op. 97-1 was not palpably erroneous.
 
II. Standards of Review
 
A.	 Summary judgment
 
“On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
 
reviewed de novo.” Lales v. Wholesale Motors Co.,  133 Hawai' i 
332, 343, 328 P.3d 341, 352 (2014) (citing First Ins. Co. of Haw.
 
v. A & B Props., Inc., 126 Hawai' i 406, 413, 271 P.3d 1165, 1172 
(2012)). Furthermore,
 
summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions
on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show
that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law.  A fact is material if proof of that
fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting
one of the essential elements of a cause of action or
 
defense asserted by the parties.  The evidence must be
 
6
 The City and County of Honolulu and HPD filed a notice stating
 
that neither party was taking a position in the appeal.
 
14
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving
party.  In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Id. (citing First Ins. Co. of Haw., 126 Hawai' i at 413-14, 271 
P.3d at 1172-73).
 
B. Statutory interpretation
 
The interpretation of a statute is a question of
law reviewable de novo.  When construing a statute,
this court’s foremost obligation is to be obtained
primarily from the language contained in the statute
itself.  Where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, this court’s sole duty is to give effect
to its plain and obvious meaning.
 
Implicit in the task of statutory construction
is our foremost obligation to ascertain and give
effect to the intention of the legislature, which is
to be obtained primarily from the language contained
in the statute itself; however, when there is doubt,
doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness or
uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an
ambiguity exists.
 
McLaren v. Paradise Inn Hawai' i LLC, 132 Hawai 'i 320, 327-28, 321 
P.3d 671, 678-79 (2014) (citations omitted). 
Further, this court has stated that an appellate court
 
generally reviews questions of statutory
interpretation de novo, but, in the case of . . .
ambiguous statutory language, the applicable standard
of review regarding an agency’s interpretation of its
own governing statute requires this court to defer to
the agency’s expertise and to follow the agency’s
construction of the statute unless that construction
 is palpably erroneous[.]
 
Gillan v. Gov’t Emps. Ins. Co.,  119 Hawai' i 109, 114, 194 P.3d 
1071, 1076 (2008) (citing Vail v. Employees’ Ret. Sys., 75 Haw.
 
42, 66, 856 P.2d 1227, 1240 (1993)) (citation, quotation marks,
 and brackets omitted).
 
15
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
III. Discussion
 
As explained below, the circuit court incorrectly
 
concluded that police officers have a “non-existent” privacy
 
interest in their disciplinary suspension records. SHOPO is
 correct that SHOPO v. SPJ is not dispositive because in Act 242,
 the legislature recognized a privacy interest in police officers’
 disciplinary records that was not applicable in SHOPO v. SPJ. 
Thus, Civil Beat cannot rely on the balancing conducted by this
 court in SHOPO v. SPJ. However, the language and legislative
 history of Act 242 indicate that even after a significant privacy
 interest is found, that interest must be weighed against the
 
public interest in disclosure. Therefore, this case must be
 
remanded to the circuit court to balance the public and privacy
 
interests at stake to determine whether disclosure is
 appropriate. 
A.	 Act 242 created a “significant” personal privacy interest in
records of disciplinary suspension, which is broader than
the right of privacy recognized in SHOPO v. SPJ
 
SHOPO first argues that the circuit court erred in
 
finding that police officers had a “‘non-existent privacy
 
interest’ in their disciplinary records,” because this finding is
 contrary to the language of Act 242. Specifically, SHOPO asserts
 that HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B)(v) explicitly provides that police
 
16
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
officers have a “‘significant privacy interest’ in their
 
disciplinary records that do not involve a discharge from their
 employment.” 
SHOPO further argues that SHOPO v. SPJ is not
 
controlling in this case because this court’s analysis in SHOPO
 v. SPJ was limited to an analysis of a prior version of the UIPA, before Act 242 became effective. SHOPO also maintains that the SHOPO v. SPJ court recognized that, under article I, section 6 of the Hawai' i Constitution, the legislature has the authority to 
define the scope of the protected right of privacy, and that when the legislature enacted Act 242, it broadened the protections of the right of privacy to encompass police officers’ disciplinary suspension records. 
Civil Beat does not dispute that UIPA recognizes a
 
significant privacy interest in disciplinary information in
 police officers’ personnel files unless the officer is
 discharged, but argues that this “does not mean police officers
 have a right to insist that HPD withhold all such files.” 
According to Civil Beat, even these “significant privacy
 interests” must be balanced against the public interest in
 disclosure. 
Civil Beat further argues that this court and the OIP
 
have already weighed those interests and determined that the
 
17
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
public interest in disclosure outweighs the police officers’
 
privacy concerns. Essentially, Civil Beat argues that because
 the UIPA implements the constitutional right of privacy, the
 privacy interest in disciplinary suspension records recognized by
 UIPA is equivalent to the constitutional right of privacy under
 article I, section 6. Thus, according to Civil Beat, even though
 this court in SHOPO v. SPJ was applying a prior version of the
 UIPA, when the court balanced the constitutional privacy interest
 in disciplinary suspension records against the public interest in
 disclosure, this balancing also applies to the current version of
 the UIPA. 
On this point, SHOPO is correct. Although UIPA does,
 
as Civil Beat contends, implement article I, section 6, the plain
 language of Act 242 clearly indicates that the legislature
 recognized a “significant privacy interest” in police officers’
 disciplinary suspension records in HRS § 92F-14(b). Because this
 court in SHOPO v. SPJ stated that there was no privacy interest
 in disciplinary suspension records protected by article I,
 section 6, the “significant privacy interest” recognized in Act
 242 is clearly broader than the non-existent right of privacy
 recognized by this court in SHOPO v. SPJ. 
This court’s analysis in SHOPO v. SPJ was based on a
 
prior version of the UIPA, before the legislature recognized a
 
18
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
significant privacy interest in police officers’ disciplinary
 
suspension records. Furthermore, Civil Beat has not provided any
 authority to show that the legislature is without power to
 broaden the definition of the right of privacy to recognize a
 significant privacy interest in police officers’ disciplinary
 suspension records, as it did in Act 242. The circuit court thus
 erred in finding that police officers have a “non-existent
 
privacy interest” in their disciplinary suspension records.
 
1. Article I, section 6, UIPA, and Act 242
 
Article I, section 6 of the Hawai' i Constitution 
provides: “The right of the people to privacy is recognized and 
shall not be infringed without the showing of a compelling state interest. The legislature shall take affirmative steps to implement this right.” Thus, article I, section 6 recognizes a general right of privacy and tasks the Hawai' i Legislature with 
implementing that right. 
The Hawai' i Legislature has implemented this right to 
privacy in the UIPA. See HRS § 92F-2 (“The policy of conducting 
government business as openly as possible must be tempered by a recognition of the right of the people to privacy, as embodied in section 6 and section 7 of article I of the constitution of the state of Hawai' i.”). Codified in HRS chapter 92F, UIPA was 
enacted in 1988 for the following purposes: 
19
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(1) Promot[ing] the public interest in disclosure;
 
(2) Provid[ing] for accurate, relevant, timely, and
complete government records;
 
(3) Enhanc[ing] governmental accountability through a
general policy of access to government records;
 
(4) Mak[ing] government accountable to individuals in
the collection, use, and dissemination of information
relating to them; and
 
(5) Balanc[ing] the individual privacy interest and
the public access interest, allowing access unless it
would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of
personal privacy.
 
HRS § 92F-2 (2012).
 
The UIPA establishes the general rule of disclosure 
that “[e]xcept as provided in section 92F-13, each agency upon 
request by any person shall make government records available for inspection and copying during regular business hours.” HRS § 92F-11(b) (Supp. 2014); see also SHOPO, 83 Hawai' i at 383, 927 
P.2d at 391. The UIPA also provides for certain types of government records that must be disclosed (HRS § 92F-12), and certain types of records that are exempted from the general disclosure requirement (HRS § 92F-13). The current version of HRS § 92F-13, which excludes certain records from disclosure requirements, is substantively identical to the original version enacted in 1988, and provides: 
This part shall not require disclosure of:
 
(1) Government records which, if disclosed, would
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal
privacy;
 
20
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(2) Government records pertaining to the prosecution
or defense of any judicial or quasi-judicial action to
which the State or any county is or may be a party, to
the extent that such records would not be
 discoverable;
 
(3) Government records that, by their nature, must be
confidential in order for the government to avoid the
frustration of a legitimate government function;
 
(4) Government records which, pursuant to state or
federal law including an order of any state or federal
court, are protected from disclosure; and
 
(5) Inchoate and draft working papers of legislative
committees including budget worksheets and unfiled
committee reports; work product; records or
transcripts of an investigating committee of the
legislature which are closed by rules adopted pursuant
to section 21-4 and the personal files of members of
the legislature.
 
HRS § 92F-13 (2012) (emphasis added).
 
Thus, although the general rule is that government
 
agencies must disclose records upon request, section 92F-13
 
exempts from disclosure any record that, if disclosed, would
 constitute a “clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.”
 
HRS § 92F-14 currently states, as it did in 1988, that
 
“[d]isclosure of a government record shall not constitute a
 clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy if the public
 interest in disclosure outweighs the privacy interest of the
 individual.” HRS § 92F-14(a). Section 92F-14 then goes on, in
 subsection (b), to list a number of examples of the types of
 information in which an individual has a “significant privacy
 interest.” Relevant to the present appeal, the legislature has
 made significant changes to section 92F-14(b) on two occasions
 
21
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
since 1988. As originally enacted, UIPA recognized that
 
individual employees had a significant privacy interest in the
 following relevant information:
 
(b)	 The following are examples of information in
which the individual has a significant privacy
interest:
 
. . . .
 
(4)	 Information in an agency’s personnel file, or
applications, nominations, recommendations, or
proposals for public employment or appointment
to a governmental position, except information
relating to the status of any formal charges
against the employee and disciplinary action
taken or information disclosed under section
 
92F-12(a)(14).
[7]
 
HRS § 92F-14 (Supp. 1991) (emphasis added).
 
The 1988 version of UIPA thus provided that although
 
individuals had significant privacy interests in their personnel
 
file generally, there was no significant privacy interest in any
 
7 In 1988, HRS § 92F-12(a)(14) provided that agencies were required
 
to make the following information available for public inspection:
 
The name, compensation (but only the salary range for
employees covered by chapters 76, 77, 297 or 304), job
title, business address, business telephone number,
job description, education and training background,
previous work experience, dates of first and last
employment, position number, type of appointment,
service computation date, occupational group or class
code, bargaining unit code, employee agency name and
code, department, division, branch, office, section,
unit, and island of employment, of present or former
officers or employees of the same agency, provided
that this provision shall not require the creation of
a roster of employees; except that this provision
shall not apply to information regarding present or
former employees involved in an undercover capacity in
a law enforcement agency.
 
HRS § 92F-12(a)(14) (Supp. 1991).
 
22
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
disciplinary action taken against the employee. 
In 1993, the legislature enacted Act 191, which amended
 
HRS § 92F-14(b) to read as follows:
 
(b)	 The following are examples of information in
which the individual has a significant privacy
interest:
 
. . . .
 
(4)	 Information in an agency’s personnel file,
or applications, nominations,
recommendations, or proposals for public
employment or appointment to a
governmental position, except:
 
(A)	 Information disclosed under section
 
92F-12(a)(14); and
 
(B)	 The following information related to
employment misconduct that results
in an employee’s suspension or
discharge:
 
(i)	 The name of the employee;
 
(ii)	 The nature of the employment-
related misconduct;
(iii) The agency’s summary of the
allegations of misconduct;
 
(iv)	 Findings of fact and
conclusions of law; and
 
(v)	 The disciplinary action taken
by the agency;
 
when the following has occurred: 
the highest non-judicial grievance
adjustment procedure timely invoked
by the employee or the employee’s
representative has concluded; a
written decision sustaining the
suspension or discharge has been
issued after this procedure; and
thirty calender days have elapsed
following the issuance of the
decision; provided that this
subparagraph shall not apply to a
county police department officer
with respect to misconduct that
occurs while the police officer is
not acting in the capacity of a
police officer[.
]
 
23
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRS § 92F-14 (1993) (emphases added).
 
Thus, Act 191 amended section 92F-14 such that UIPA
 
recognized no significant privacy interest in information
 
relating to police officer misconduct if the misconduct occurred
 while the police officer was acting in the capacity of a police
 officer, thirty days had passed since the highest timely invoked
 grievance procedure, and the suspension or discharge was
 sustained in writing. 
In 1995, the legislature again amended section 92F-14,
 
when it enacted Act 242. Act 242 amended section 92F-14 to read
 as follows:
 
(b)	 The following are examples of information in
which the individual has a significant privacy
interest:
 
. . . .
 
(4)	 Information in an agency’s personnel file, or
applications, nominations, recommendations, or
proposals for public employment or appointment
to a governmental position, except:
 
(A)	 Information disclosed under section
 92F-12(a)(14); and
 
(B)	 The following information related to
employment misconduct that results
in an employee’s suspension or
discharge:
 
(i)	 The name of the employee;
 
(ii)	 The nature of the employment-
related misconduct;
(iii) The agency’s summary of the
allegations of misconduct;
 
(iv)	 Findings of fact and
conclusions of law; and
 
(v)	 The disciplinary action taken
by the agency;
 
24
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
when the following has occurred: 
the highest non-judicial grievance
adjustment procedure timely invoked
by the employee or the employee’s
representative has concluded; a
written decision sustaining the
suspension or discharge has been
issued after this procedure; and
thirty calender days have elapsed
following the issuance of the
decision; provided that this
subparagraph shall not apply to a
county police department officer
except in a case which results in
the discharge of the officer.
 
HRS § 92F-14 (2012) (emphases added).
 
Thus, under Act 242, the UIPA recognizes a significant
 
privacy interest in information in employees’ personnel files,
 
creates an exception from this significant privacy interest for
 information relating to employee misconduct that results in
 suspension or discharge, and then creates another exception to
 this exception for police officers, unless the misconduct
 resulted in the discharge of the officer. In other words, HRS
 § 92F-14 now recognizes a significant privacy interest in all
 information relating to police officer misconduct unless that
 misconduct resulted in the officer’s discharge (in which case,
 there is no privacy interest).
8
 
Based on the plain language of HRS § 92F-14(b), there
 
8
 The relevant portion of HRS § 92F-14 was amended again in 2014,
 
when the legislature clarified that “this subparagraph” referred to
subparagraph (B) and increased the number of days that must elapse following
the written decision from thirty to ninety.  See 2014 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 121,
 
§ 2 a 
t 334-35.
 
25
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
is thus no question that the UIPA, as modified by Act 242,
 
recognizes a “significant privacy interest” in personnel
 information relating to disciplinary action for police officer
 misconduct where that discipline resulted in the suspension of
 the police officer.
 
2. SHOPO v. SPJ
 
Although this court decided SHOPO v. SPJ on 
November 15, 1996--after the July 6, 1995 effective date of Act 
242--SHOPO v. SPJ interpreted the prior version of UIPA, as amended by Act 191, because the proceedings in that case began before Act 242’s effective date. See SHOPO v. SPJ, 83 Hawai' i at 
391, 927 P.2d at 399 (“The instant proceedings were begun well before the July 6, 1995 effective date and are, therefore, not affected by Act 242. Accordingly, we hold that Act 242 does not moot this litigation.”). 
In SHOPO v. SPJ, the Society of Professional 
Journalists, University of Hawai' i Chapter (SPJ), requested from 
HPD the names and titles of all HPD employees “who, from January 1, 1998 to [August 30, 1993], were either suspended or discharged as a result of disciplinary action against them.” SHOPO v. SPJ, 83 Hawai' i at 384, 927 P.2d at 392. SPJ also 
requested “information that explains the nature of the employment-related misconduct, any findings of fact and 
26
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conclusions of law, and the type of disciplinary action taken by
 
your department.” Id. Although HPD did not outright deny SPJ
 
access to these records, a dispute arose regarding SPJ’s
 obligation to pay for the records. Id. at 384-86, 927 P.2d at
 
392-94.
 
Before this dispute was resolved, SHOPO filed a lawsuit
 
against HPD, seeking a declaratory judgment that, inter alia,
 “HRS Chapter 92F is unconstitutional and, therefore, void;
 and . . . HPD may not release the type of information sought by
 SPJ under Chapter 92F.” Id. at 386, 927 P.2d at 394. The
 
circuit court granted SHOPO’s request for a temporary restraining
 order (TRO), enjoining HPD from disclosing the information
 pending the outcome of the lawsuit. Id.
 
SPJ also filed suit, and requested that the circuit
 
court order HPD to produce all the relevant records in response
 to its request. Id. SPJ and OIP both intervened as defendants
 
in the lawsuit filed by SHOPO. Id. at 387, 927 P.2d at 395. The
 
circuit court granted SPJ’s MSJ and ordered HPD to disclose the
 relevant records. Id. at 387-88, 927 P.2d at 395-96. 
On appeal, this court noted that “[a]t the heart of the
 
City’s appeal is its contention that disclosure of police
 disciplinary records, pursuant to HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B),
 constitutes an unconstitutional invasion of police officers’
 
27
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
right of privacy in violation of article I, section 6 of the
 
Hawai'i Constitution . . . .” Id. at 396, 927 P.2d at 404.   In 
response to the City’s argument, this court held:
 
[I]n adopting Act 191, the Legislature balanced the
competing interests of individual privacy and publicaccess and concluded, as a matter of public policy,that after a public employee has exhausted anynonjudicial grievance procedures available to him orher and charges of employment-related misconduct havebeen sustained, resulting in suspension or discharge,the public interest in disclosure of that person’sname and information regarding the misconductoutweighs the employee’s privacy interest.  The Cityhas failed to overcome the presumption that theLegislature has achieved this balance in accordancewith the mandate of article I, section 6 of theHawai'i Constitution. 
Moreover, considering the history of article 1,section 6 of the Hawai 'i Constitution, our prior
interpretation of that section, and the great weightof authority from other jurisdictions, we hold thatinformation regarding a police officer’s misconduct inthe course of his or her duties as a police officer isnot within the protection of Hawai 'i’s constitutional 
right to privacy. 
Id. at 396-97, 927 P.2d at 404-05.
 
Thus, this court held that the UIPA, as amended by Act
 
191, did not violate article I, section 6 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution by requiring disclosure of police disciplinary
 
suspension records.   In undertaking this constitutional analysis,
 
this court stated that: 
Under the holding in Painting Industry, the privacy
right protected by the “informational privacy” prong
of article I, section 6 is the right to keep
confidential information which is “highly personal and
intimate.”  The issue, therefore, is whether the
identities and disciplinary records of police officers
who have engaged in such misconduct in the course of
their public duties . . . is “highly personal and
 
28
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
intimate information.”  The legislature, having
determined as a matter of public policy that public
employees who have been suspended or discharged for
employment-related misconduct do not have a
significant privacy interest in information about that
misconduct, obviously answered in the negative. So
 too have those jurisdictions that have considered the
issue.
 
Id. at 398, 927 P.2d at 406 (emphasis added).
 
This court ultimately held that:
 
HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B) does not implicate the right ofprivacy protected by article I, section 6 of theHawai'i Constitution.  The information that must be 
disclosed pursuant to HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B) regardinga public employee’s employment-related misconduct andresulting discipline, is not “highly personal andintimate information” and is, therefore, not withinthe scope of Hawai 'i’s constitutional right to 
privacy. 
Id. at 400, 927 P.2d at 408.
 
This court in  SHOPO v. SPJ  therefore limited its
 
analysis to whether application of the UIPA, as amended by Act
 
191, violated the right to privacy in article I, section 6 of the
 Hawai'i Constitution. This court did not, however, determine 
whether disclosure of the police officers’ disciplinary
 suspension records violated UIPA as amended by Act 242 because,
 even though Act 242 had already become effective, Act 242 was not
 applicable to the request for records in that case. 
Thus, contrary to the circuit court’s finding in the
 
present case, this court in 
SHOPO v. SPJ  did not choose to
 
“additionally and separately address [Act 242’s] shortcomings”;
 instead, the SHOPO v. SPJ court’s analysis of Act 242 was limited
 
29
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to a determination that Act 242 was not applicable to the facts
 
of the case, and that as a result, Act 242 did not render the
 
case moot. In this case, unlike in SHOPO v. SPJ, SHOPO does not
 
ask us to determine whether disclosure of the police officers’
 
disciplinary suspension records would violate article I, section
 6, but asks us to determine whether such disclosure would violate
 the police officers’ privacy interests under the UIPA, as amended
 by Act 242. The court in SHOPO v. SPJ did not answer this
 question, so SHOPO v. SPJ is not controlling in this regard.
 
Similarly, Civil Beat’s reliance on Painting Industry
 
is also misplaced. Civil Beat relies on a single statement in
 Painting Industry that, because the UIPA implements the
 constitutional right of privacy, “the scope of information
 protected must be consistent with that right.” (Quoting Painting
 Industry, 69 Haw. at 453, 746 P.2d at 81-82). Civil Beat argues
 that this means that the scope of the privacy interest in the
 UIPA, as amended by Act 242, is identical to the constitutional
 right discussed in SHOPO v. SPJ. 
First, the court’s conclusion in Painting Industry is 
not dispositive because it was interpreting the statutory right of privacy as it stood before the UIPA was enacted. Second, although the court in Painting Industry looked to the scope of the privacy protection in article I, section 6 of the Hawai' i 
30
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Constitution to help determine the scope of the statutory right
 
of privacy, the court’s statement that the statutory right “must
 be consistent with” the constitutional right means simply that
 the legislature may not limit the scope of privacy protected so
 as to allow disclosure of records that are protected by the
 constitution. Put another way, article I, section 6 establishes
 a floor for protection of privacy rights, but does not preclude
 the legislature from providing greater protection. Thus,
 contrary to Civil Beat’s argument, Painting Industry does not
 stand for the proposition that the legislature is powerless to
 amend the statutory right to privacy to provide protections
 beyond what was discussed in SHOPO v. SPJ. 
SHOPO also asserts that part of the SHOPO v. SPJ 
court’s analysis was that the legislature, in the applicable version of the UIPA, had unambiguously determined “as a matter of public policy” that police officers do not have a significant privacy interest in information about their disciplinary suspensions. SHOPO contends that this means that this court acknowledged that it is the Hawai' i Legislature’s responsibility 
to “define constitutional protected privacy rights.”
9 Although 
9
 In support of this argument, SHOPO also cites to the Proceedings 
of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai 'i, which states that the Convention,
when drafting article I, section 6, felt that: 
(continued...)
 
31
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
we do not agree that it is the Legislature’s exclusive role to
 
“define” the constitutional privacy right, nevertheless, as set
 forth above, the legislature is not precluded from providing
 privacy protections greater than those provided by the
 constitution.
 
Civil Beat also relies on OIP Opinion Letter No. 97-01,
 
which concludes that “Act 242 recognized that suspended police
 officers . . . have a significant privacy interest in information
 relating to their employment misconduct.” Id.
 at 5. The OIP
 
went on to analyze the effect of the SHOPO v. SPJ  decision on Act
 
242, and determined that: 
The SHOPO ruling eliminates the primary intent of Act
242 . . . of recognizing that suspended police
officers have significant privacy interests in
employment-related misconduct information.  Because
 the SHOPO decision erodes the significant weight
assigned by the Legislature to the suspended officer’s
privacy interest, as set out in Act 242, then only a
“scintilla” of public interest is enough to overcome
this privacy interest in the balancing test. 
(...continued)
We in the bill of rights committee could have gone
through the process of listing all the different ways
in which the right to privacy should be protected, but
we felt that this was not our job as constitutional
delegates, that we should merely state broad
principles and then let the legislature balance all
the different kinds of rights--the Freedom of
Information Act, the right of the people to know
(though not put in our Constitution, it still exists),
the right of attorneys to discover information, the
freedom of the press.  The legislature should balance
all of these different competing rights and then have
something which would implement the right of privacy.
 
1 Pro
ceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai 'i 1978, at 639 (1980). 
32
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Id. at 8.
 
As explained supra, SHOPO v. SPJ does not “eliminate[]
 
the primary intent of Act 242” because SHOPO v. SPJ applied the
 
prior version of the UIPA only, and because the legislature
 possesses the authority to enact a broader privacy protection
 than that articulated by this court in SHOPO v. SPJ in its
 analysis of article I, section 6. Under the OIP’s analysis,
 which Civil Beat argues we should adopt, the legislature’s
 amendments to the UIPA in Act 242 would be a nullity, and the
 legislature would be powerless to change the scope of the privacy
 protection for disciplined police officers, despite article I,
 section 6’s mandate that “[t]he legislature shall take
 affirmative steps to implement this right [of privacy].” Haw.
 Const. art. I, § 6. Thus, the OIP’s analysis in Opinion Letter
 No. 97-01 is palpably erroneous and does not inform our
 interpretation of SHOPO v. SPJ or Act 242.
10
 
In sum, the legislature recognized a significant
 
privacy interest in police officers’ disciplinary suspension
 records in Act 242. However, as discussed below, this privacy
 interest does not absolutely preclude disclosure, and must still
 
10
 This court has held that OIP’s interpretations of its governing 
statutes are entitled to deference unless found to be “palpably erroneous.”
Kanahele v. Maui Cnty. Council , 130 Hawai 'i 228, 245-46, 307 P.3d 1174, 1191­
92 (2013).  An OIP opinion is “palpably erroneous” when “inconsistent withunderlying legislative intent.”  Id. at 246, 307 P.3d at 1192. 
33
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
be weighed against the public’s interest in the information. 
B.	 HRS § 92F-14, as amended by Act 242, requires a weighing of
the individual’s “significant privacy interest” against the
public interest in disclosure 
SHOPO argues that when the Hawai' i Legislature enacted 
Act 242, it balanced the competing interests and intended to 
preclude police officers’ disciplinary suspension records from public disclosure without any further weighing required by the courts. Although SHOPO acknowledges that “‘once a significant privacy interest is found’ the second step is to balance that interest ‘against the public interest in disclosure,’” (citing SHOPO v. SPJ, 83 Haw. at 383, 927 P.2d at 391) it argues that the Hawai'i Legislature performed this balancing in Act 242. 
According to SHOPO, the legislative history of Act 242 demonstrates this intent. 
Civil Beat argues that even though the legislature
 
recognized a significant privacy interest in police officers’
 disciplinary suspension records in Act 242, the legislature did
 not provide “absolute confidentiality” for these records, and the
 privacy interest must still be weighed against the public
 interest in disclosure before disclosure is precluded. Civil
 Beat contends that interpreting the UIPA to create absolute
 confidentiality in these types of records despite the
 legislature’s silence on the matter would be contrary to the
 
34
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
UIPA’s underlying purpose. 
When construing a statute, “our foremost obligation is 
to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the 
legislature.” Kauai Springs, Inc. v. Planning Comm’n of Cnty. of 
Kauai, 133 Hawai' i 141, 163, 324 P.3d 951, 973 (2014). A statute 
must be read in context and construed in a manner consistent with its purpose and “each part or section of a statute should be considered in connection with every other part or section.” Id. 
If a statute is ambiguous, we may take into account the statute’s legislative history. Id. 
HRS § 92F-13 exempts from disclosure any record that,
 
if disclosed, would constitute a “clearly unwarranted invasion of
 personal privacy.” HRS § 92F-14(a) provides that “[d]isclosure
 of a government record shall not constitute a clearly unwarranted
 invasion of personal privacy if the public interest in disclosure
 outweighs the privacy interest of the individual.” HRS § 92F­14(b) then unambiguously includes police officers’ disciplinary
 suspension records as an example of the type of record in which
 the individual has a “significant privacy interest.” Nowhere in
 the UIPA does the legislature state that disclosure of police
 officers’ disciplinary records constitutes a “clearly unwarranted
 invasion of personal privacy.” 
The terms “significant privacy interest” and “clearly
 
35
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy” are not the same, and
 
where the legislature uses different terms in different parts of
 a statute, we must presume this was intentional, and that the
 legislature means two different things. Agustin v. Dan Ostrow
 
Constr. Co., 64 Haw. 80, 83, 636 P.2d 1348, 1351 (1981). Indeed,
 HRS § 92F-14(a) indicates that for a “significant privacy
 interest” to constitute a “clearly unwarranted invasion of
 personal privacy,” the privacy interest at stake must be balanced
 against the public interest in disclosure of the information. 
Thus, the structure and language of HRS § 92F-14 indicate that
 once a “significant privacy interest” is recognized, it must be
 balanced against the public interest in disclosure to determine
 whether disclosure of the information would constitute a “clearly
 unwarranted invasion of privacy.”
 
This interpretation is supported by the UIPA’s
 
legislative history. When the UIPA was enacted in 1988, the
 House Judiciary Committee explained that “described in [section
 92F-14(b)] are examples of those records in which the individual
 has a significant privacy interest. Your Committee intends that
 these records are available following application of the
 ‘balancing test’ to determine whether the public interest in
 disclosure outweighs the individual privacy interest.” H. Stand.
 Comm. Rep. No. 342-88, in 1988 House Journal, at 969 (emphases
 
36
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
added). Commenting on the same provision, the Conference
 
Committee also stated that “[o]nce a significant privacy interest
 is found, the privacy interest will be balanced against the
 public interest in disclosure.” Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 112-88, in
 1988 House Journal, at 818. These statements in the committee
 reports, made in reference to versions of the provision identical
 to the final version (which is also identical the current
 version), indicate that there may be instances in which an
 individual has a significant privacy interest in certain
 information, but the public interest in disclosure is great
 enough that it outweighs the individual’s privacy interest. 
Furthermore, this court in SHOPO v. SPJ
 came to the
 
same conclusion. The SHOPO v. SPJ  court stated that:
 
The instant case requires application of HRS
§ 92F–13(1), excepting from the general disclosure
requirement “[g]overnment records which, if disclosed,
would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of
personal privacy[.]”  The conference committee’s
 explanation of this provision, which it “intended to
serve as a clear legislative expression of intent
should any dispute arise as to the meaning of these
provisions[,]” is that, “[o]nce a significant privacy
interest is found, the privacy interest will be
balanced against the public interest in disclosure. 
If the privacy interest is not ‘significant,’ a
scintilla of public interest in disclosure will
preclude a finding of a clearly unwarranted invasion
of personal privacy.”  Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 112–88, in
1988 House Journal, at 817–18.
 
SHOPO v. SPJ, 83 Hawai' i at 383-84, 927 P.2d at 391-92. 
This court thus found that:
 
HRS § 92F–14(b)(4) expressly confirms that an
 
37
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
individual has a “significant privacy interest” in
information in an agency's personnel file, with the
exception of the specified information relating to
misconduct.  This information unrelated to misconduct,
therefore, is exempt from the general disclosure
requirement unless “the public interest in disclosure
outweighs the privacy interests of the individual.”
 
Id. at 399-400, 927 P.2d at 407-08 (emphasis added).
 
The SHOPO v. SPJ  court therefore held that information
 
in which an individual has a “significant privacy interest,” such
 
as “information unrelated to misconduct,” may nonetheless be
 subject to disclosure if the public interest in disclosure
 outweighs the individual’s privacy interest.
 
Although, as noted above, the 
SHOPO v. SPJ  court was
 
applying a prior version of the UIPA, nothing in Act 242’s
 amendments to the UIPA purports to change this analysis. Act 242
 amended section 92F-14 so that the provision required disclosure
 for police disciplinary actions resulting in discharge,
11 but
 
left all other types of disciplinary action in the “significant
 privacy interest” category, for which additional weighing is
 required. In fact, the textual amendments in Act 242 support
 
11
 Pursuant to SHOPO v. SPJ, if a police officer is discharged rather 
than suspended as a result of a disciplinary action, disclosure would be
required upon showing a mere “scintilla” of public interest in disclosure. Shopo v. SPJ, 83 Hawai 'i at 383-84, 927 P.d at 391-92 (“If the privacy
interest is not ‘significant,’ a scintilla of public interest in disclosurewill preclude a finding of a clearly unwarranted invasion of personalprivacy.”) (quoting Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 112-88, in 1988 House Journal at 817­18).  We note that because Act 242 recognizes a significant privacy interestin suspension records, and all of the records at issue in the present caseinvolve disciplinary suspensions rather than discharges, the “scintilla” testis not applicable here. 
38
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
this analysis because in addition to including police officers’
 
disciplinary suspension records as a “significant privacy
 interest,” Act 242 changed the title of HRS § 92F-14 from
 “Clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy” to
 “Significant privacy interest; examples.” 1995 Haw. Sess. Laws,
 Act 242 § 1, at 641. This amendment further clarifies that the
 listed examples are not “clearly unwarranted invasions of
 personal privacy,” but are instead “significant privacy
 interests.” 
Further, although SHOPO v. SPJ was decided after the
 
legislature enacted Act 242, the OIP had also come to the same
 conclusion before Act 242 was enacted. See OIP Op. Ltr.
 
No. 90-12, February 26, 1990, at 8, available at
 http://files.hawaii.gov/oip/opinionletters/opinion 90-12.PDF
 (stating that although an agency employee has a “significant
 privacy interest” in information relating to disciplinary action
 that is not in response to a “formal charge,” there are
 circumstances where “the public interest in disclosure may
 outweigh the employee’s privacy interest in the fact that
 disciplinary action was taken and the circumstances surrounding
 that action”) (emphasis added).
 
The legislature is presumed to know the law when it
 
enacts statutes, including this court’s decisions, and agency
 
39
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
interpretations. See Agustin, 64 Haw. at 83, 636 P.2d at 1351 
(“[T]he legislature is presumed to know the law when enacting 
statutes, and we must presume that the legislature knew of the definition we assigned to the word ‘accrued’ in Yoshizaki v. Hilo Hospital, 50 Haw. 150, 433 P.2d 220 (1967), at the time it amended § 657-8 in 1972.”); Keliipuleole v. Wilson, 85 Hawai' i 
217, 225-26, 941 P.2d 300, 308-09 (1997) (“Presumably the legislature was aware of the status of the law and the policies of the [Board of Land and Natural Resources], yet declined to amend the statute.”). Thus, we must presume that the legislature was aware of the OIP’s interpretation of HRS § 92F-14 when it enacted Act 242. The legislature nonetheless chose to place police officer disciplinary suspension records in the provision that recognized a “significant privacy interest,” instead of creating an explicit exclusion from the UIPA’s disclosure requirements. 
SHOPO cites to remarks in the legislative history of
 
Act 242 to support its argument that the legislature intended, in
 Act 242, to conclusively weigh the interests and find that police
 officers’ disciplinary suspension records are precluded from
 disclosure. 
However, SHOPO’s argument is without merit. First, as
 
explained supra, the language of the UIPA, as amended by Act 242,
 
40
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
unambiguously requires us to balance the interests upon finding a 
significant privacy interest, and as such, we need not resort to the legislative history in order to interpret it. See Seki ex 
rel. Louie, 133 Hawai' i at 406-07, 328 P.3d at 415-16. Second, 
an analysis of Act 242’s legislative history reveals no clear statement of intent that would warrant overriding what appears to be clear from the plain language of the statute–-that we must weigh the police officers’ significant privacy interest against the public interest in disclosure of their disciplinary suspension records. 
To support its argument, SHOPO points to two committee
 
reports accompanying S.B. No. 171 (the bill that proposed Act
 242) which, SHOPO argues, indicate that the legislature intended
 to preclude disclosure of disciplinary suspension records. 
First, the joint Senate Standing Committee report of the
 Judiciary, Agriculture, Labor, and Employment Committees, which
 referred to the original proposed version of S.B. No. 171,
 stated: “The purpose of the bill, as originally received, is to
 exclude from required disclosure under the government records
 law, information pertaining to police department personnel
 misconduct.” S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 627, in 1995 Senate
 Journal, at 1064. The joint committees went on to amend the bill
 as follows:
 
41
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
To address some of the concerns expressed in
testimony, your Committees have amended this bill by
extending the applicability of the disclosure
requirement to acts of police misconduct which result
in the discharge of an officer.  Your Committees have
 further amended this bill by directing the chief of
each county police department to submit an annual
report to the legislature containing information on
the number of police officers suspended or discharged
by the department over the year.  Your Committees find
 that this bill, as amended, balances the concern over
the public’s right to know with the considerations
involved in ensuring and maintaining an effective
system of law enforcement in the State.
 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 627, in 1995 House Journal, at 1064.
 
However, contrary to SHOPO’s argument, this purpose
 
statement merely shows that the committees read the bill as
 
proposing to exclude disciplinary suspensions from required
 disclosure
; that is, the type of disclosure that disciplinary
 
discharge records are subject to (where a “scintilla” of public
 interest in disclosure is sufficient to require disclosure). The
 report, however, is silent as to the whether other records (e.g.,
 those for which disclosure is not “required,” but in which there
 is a “significant privacy interest”) are subject to balancing
 against the public interest in disclosure. 
SHOPO also argues that the joint committees’ addition
 
of a legislative reporting requirement to HRS § 52D-3.5
12
 
12
 This proposal was ultimately enacted as HRS § 52D-3.5, which
 
provides, in relevant part:
 
(a) The chief of each county police department shall
submit to the legislature no later than January 31 of
each year an annual report of misconduct incidents
(continued...)
 
42
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
constituted the legislature’s solution after it had balanced the
 
privacy interests of the officers against the public interest in
 disclosure. However, there is no indication that HRS § 52D-3.5
 was the product of such balancing. The committee stated that the
 bill would “balance[] the concern over the public’s right to know
 with the consideration involved in ensuring and maintaining an
 effective system of law enforcement in the State.” Id. (emphasis
 
added). This, however, is not the same balancing that must be
 performed under HRS § 92F-14(a) because there is no mention of
 the “privacy interest of the individual.” HRS § 92F-14(a). 
SHOPO next points to a standing committee report of the
 
House Judiciary Committee, which states that “[t]he purpose of
 [S.B. No. 171] is to prevent the disclosure of the names of
 administratively disciplined police officers, unless they have
 been discharged from the force.” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1584,
 in 1995 House Journal, at 1627. 
Although the purpose statement in this report also
 
seems to support SHOPO’s argument, the House draft bill
 accompanying the report, S.B. 171, S.D.1, H.D.1, 18th Leg., Reg.
 Sess. (1995), contained a statement that the purpose of the bill
 
(...continued)
that resulted in suspension or discharge of a police
officer.
 
43
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was to “provid[e] that the names of the administratively
 
disciplined officers are not subject to the disclosure
 requirements of [section 92F-14(b)(4)] unless the discipline
 imposed is discharge from the force.” Again, this statement
 suggests that the intent was merely to prevent mandatory
 disclosure of disciplinary suspension records, but is silent as
 to whether further weighing against the public interest in
 disclosure is required.
 
Furthermore, the remainder of the committee report does
 
not support SHOPO’s argument. The committee concluded that “the
 release of police officers’ names simply because they have been
 suspended is not appropriate since they are subject to more
 stringent standards and tougher discipline than most other
 government employees[.]” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1584, in 1995
 House Journal, at 1627 (emphasis added). The committee also
 expressed concern that police officers, “unlike most government
 and private employees, are subject to para-military discipline
 which manifests itself in the form of frequently applied
 suspensions from duty for misconduct or violation of departmental
 rules.” Id. 
Thus, the clear concern of the House committee was that
 
requiring disclosure of disciplinary suspension records in all
 cases would lead to the disclosure of officers’ names for rule
 
44
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
violations which, in other professions, would not be as serious
 
and may not result in suspension. The corollary to this concern
 is the committee’s apparent recognition that in more serious
 circumstances, disclosure of disciplinary suspension records is
 appropriate. The committee’s concern is thus consistent with
 interpreting Act 242 as requiring a balancing of the individual
 officers’s privacy interests against the public interest in
 disclosure. Instances of less serious police officer misconduct,
 even those resulting in suspension, would likely not be subject
 to disclosure because the officers’ significant privacy interests
 would outweigh the public’s interest in knowing about the
 misconduct. The more egregious the misconduct, the more likely
 the public interest would outweigh the individual privacy
 interest.
 
SHOPO also relies on floor remarks by legislators who
 
voted on Act 242 to support its argument that the legislature
 conclusively weighed the competing factors and determined that
 disciplinary suspension records should not be disclosed. For
 example, SHOPO cites to remarks made by Representative Amaral:
 
[P]olice Officers are held to high standards, are held
to strict rules, are monitored and chastised in ways
that I have never seen other people chastised or
punished.
 
And now I hear that the public is fearful of what
police officers may be doing and, therefore, it needs
to have the names of those police officers that have
 
45
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
been disciplined administratively.  I hear that police
officers need to be trusted and so the way that police
officers can be trusted is if they will disclose the
names of those officers that they have disciplined.
 
The trust is a two-way street.  I think you’ve got to
trust that there are systems and places for monitoring
the behavior of these officers, for correcting their
behavior, for punishing them appropriately.
 
(Quoting 1995 House Journal, at 681 (remarks of rep. Amaral)). 
SHOPO also refers to remarks made by Senator Graulty,
 
who quoted the testimony of HPD Chief Michael Nakamura:
 
I also want to instill in the public the trust and
confidence that if an officer commits a criminal act,
that officer is prosecuted to the fullest extent of
the law and the name of the officer is disclosed
 publicly.  Similarly, if an officer is sued civilly,
that officer’s name becomes part of the public record. 
However, it is not fair to punish police officers in
the media, nor is it fair to expose and subject their
friends and families to scorn, retaliation and threats
by disclosing the police officers’ names.
 
(Quoting 1995 Senate Journal, at 287 (remarks of Senator
 
Graulty)).
 
SHOPO’s reliance on these floor remarks is misplaced. 
First, remarks by individual legislators are not attributable to
 the full legislature that voted for the bill, and as such are
 less reliable indicators of legislative intent. See Wright v.
 
Home Depot U.S.A., Inc.
, 111 Hawai' i 401, 411 n.8, 142 P.3d 265, 
275 n.8 (2006) (“To the extent that legislative history may be
 considered, it is the official committee reports that provide the
 authoritative expression of legislative intent. . . . Stray
 comments by individual legislators, not otherwise supported by
 
46
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
statutory language or committee reports, cannot be attributed to
 
the full body that voted on the bill.”) (quoting Bennett v.
 Yoshina, 98 F. Supp. 2d 1139, 1150 (D. Haw. 2000)). 
Second, even if we were to consider individual
 
legislators’ remarks as evidence of legislative intent, these
 remarks, like the committee reports, do not support SHOPO’s
 argument because they do not expressly state any intent to
 preclude disclosure of disciplinary suspension records without
 first weighing the individual officers’ privacy interests against
 the public interest in disclosure. Further, the remarks indicate
 the same concern noted by the committees, that requiring
 disclosure of suspension records could result in disclosure of
 officers’ identities when they have been disciplined for
 relatively non-serious misconduct. For example, in remarks not
 cited by SHOPO, Representative Alcon stated, in support of S.B.
 No. 171:
 
[T]his bill is a good bill because the police officers
have a way of handling their internal problems.  You
 mean to say, just because the policeman did not shine
his shoes that we will have to publish his name in the
paper?  You mean to say that if a policeman is late
reporting to work, we have to publish his name in the
paper?  You mean to say if a policeman did not make
his report, do we have to publish his name in the
paper?
 
1995 House Journal, at 682 (remarks of Rep. Alcon).
 
Again, recognition of these concerns is consistent with
 
a reading of the UIPA that requires us to weigh the police
 
47
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
officers’ privacy interest in disciplinary suspension records
 
against the public interest in disclosure of the records.
 
Civil Beat, in further support of its position, argues
 
that the legislative history of subsequent amendments to HRS
 §§ 92F-14 and 52D-3.5 in 2014 demonstrates that the legislature
 intended for the courts to weigh individual officers’ privacy
 interests against the public interest in disclosure even after a
 significant privacy interest has been shown. 
In Act 121, signed into law in 2014, the legislature
 
specified with greater detail the information that police chiefs
 must report to the legislature in their annual reports regarding
 police discipline. Act 121 also changed the number of days that
 must elapse following a written decision affirming an employee’s
 discharge or suspension before records may be disclosed from
 thirty to ninety in HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B)(v). See 2014 Haw.
 
Sess. Laws, Act 121, §§ 1-2, at 333-35. 
In arguing that the 2014 legislative history supports
 
its position, Civil Beat notes that the Conference Committee
 “rejected the House’s effort to address police suspensions by
 statute.” The House had proposed amending the exception provided
 in HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B) to read, in relevant part: “provided
 that this subparagraph shall [not] apply to a county police
 department officer [except] only in a case which results in the
 
48
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
suspension of one year or more for one incident or the discharge
 
of the officer[.]” S.B. 2591, S.D.1, H.D.1 § 2, 27th Leg., Reg.
 Sess. 2014 (brackets and emphasis in original).
13 The Conference
 
Committee deleted this proposed language and stated that its
 version of the bill “creates a more informed public dialogue
 about misconduct by police officers while recognizing that the
 balance of privacy and public interest is not easily defined and
 is a task better suited to common law.” Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 32­14, in 2014 House Journal, at 1481-82. Thus, according to Civil
 Beat, “[t]he Legislature . . . refused to amend the misconduct
 exception to address police suspensions because it interpreted
 the existing plain language of the UIPA as leaving the balance of
 interests to the courts[.]” 
In addition, Civil Beat explains that when the House
 
Judiciary Committee proposed its amendment to HRS § 92F­14(b)(4)(B), it cited SHOPO v. SPJ and acknowledged that the
 decision may result in disclosure of such records:
 
Your Committee respectfully notes that consistent with
[SHOPO v. SPJ], allowing the disclosure of suspensioninformation instead of just discharge information doesnot violate the privacy rights of individual policeofficers.  The Hawai 'i Supreme Court held in SHOPO v.
SPJ that, “The information that must be disclosedpursuant HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B) [sic] regarding apublic employee’s employment-related misconduct and 
13
 The brackets in the text indicate language that the draft bill
 
proposed deleting from the existing statute, and the underlined text indicates
language that the draft bill proposed adding to the statute.
 
49
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
resulting discipline, is not “highly personal and
intimate information” and is, therefore, not within
the scope of Hawaii’s constitutional right to
privacy.”  Nonetheless, your Committee has determined
to limit required disclosures of police misconduct to
suspensions of one year or more per incident and
discharges.
 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1360-14, in 2014 House Journal, at 1364. 
Civil Beat argues that the Legislature therefore “knew that
 failure to amend the misconduct exception or enact a
 confidentiality statute may result in disclosure under SHOPO v.
 SPJ.” 
SHOPO is correct that we should be wary of
 
“bootstrap[ping] the 2014 legislature’s intent to the 1995
 legislature’s intent in enacting Act 242.” 
The legislative
 
history for Act 121 cited by Civil Beat is indicative of the 2014
 legislature’s intent when enacting Act 121. It is not
 dispositive of the 1995 legislature’s intent when it enacted Act
 242. Further, the 2014 House Judiciary Committee’s reference to
 SHOPO v. SPH
 is not relevant to the issue here because SHOPO v.
  
SPJ did not interpret Act 242. Thus, the 2014 legislature’s
 rejection of the proposed amendment to HRS § 92F-14(b)(4)(B) does
 not inform our understanding of Act 242.
 
Ultimately, although the relevant legislative history
 
of Act 242 contains some evidence of an intent to preclude
 disclosure of police disciplinary suspension records, the
 
50
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
legislative history of Act 242 as a whole lacks any clear
 
statement of such intent, which would be contrary to the plain
 language of the statute. At best, the legislative history shows
 an intent to preclude disclosure of disciplinary suspension
 records in certain circumstances--i.e., where the police
 officers’ misconduct is not egregious. This is consistent with
 our reading of the plain language of HRS § 92F-14, which
 requires, after finding a significant privacy interest in the
 records sought, balancing that privacy interest against the
 public interest in disclosure of the records. 
C.	 Given the limited factual record in this case, we must
remand to the circuit court to weigh the public and privacy
interests 
The circuit court, relying on SHOPO v. SPJ, reasoned
 
that police officers have no protected privacy interest in their
 
disciplinary records and concluded that “public access interest
 would outweigh non-existent privacy interests in on-duty police
 misconduct.” By not considering police officers’ “significant
 privacy interest” in their records, the court did not engage in
 the balancing required by HRS § 92F-14. Given the limited
 factual record developed in this case, this court cannot now
 properly weigh the interests in each instance of misconduct. 
Thus, we must remand this case to the circuit court to determine
 whether the public interest in disclosure outweighs the privacy
 
51
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
interests at stake. As contemplated by HRS § 92F-15, the court
 
should conduct an in camera14 review of the records and determine
 
on a case-by-case basis whether disclosure is warranted. See HRS
 
§ 92F-15(b) (In actions to compel disclosure of government
 records, “[t]he circuit court may examine the government record
 at issue, in camera, to assist in determining whether it, or any
 part of it, may be withheld”). 
If the interests weigh in favor of disclosure of a
 
record, the court should also determine whether any redaction is
 necessary, such as to remove identifying information of the
 victim of a crime. Moreover, there is no compelling public
 interest in the disclosure of police officers’ confidential
 personal information such as home addresses, dates of birth,
 social security numbers, driver’s license numbers, and bank
 account information. Such information, if present in relevant
 records, must be redacted. 
We further note that this court, as well as many
 
others, has emphasized the weight of the public interest in cases
 involving police officer misconduct. In SHOPO v. SPJ, this court
 recognized that “the appropriate concern of the public as to the
 proper performance of public duty is to be given great weight”
 
14
 An in camera review is a judge’s private consideration of
 
evidence. See Black’s Law Dictionary 878 (10th ed. 2014) (defining “in
camera” as “[i]n the judge’s private chambers”).  
52
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
when balanced against competing privacy interests. 83 Hawai' i at 
399, 927 P.2d at 407 (quoting Cowles Publ’g Co. v. State Patrol, 
748 P.2d 597, 605 (Wash. 1988)). This is true when “the off duty acts of a police officer bear upon his or her fitness to perform public duty or if the activities reported in the records involve the performance of a public duty.” Id. 
Similarly, in Rutland Herald v. City of Rutland, the
 
Supreme Court of Vermont explained that substantial weight should
 be given to the public interest in disclosure because “there is a
 significant public interest in knowing how the police department
 supervises its employees and responds to allegations of
 misconduct.” 84 A.3d 821, 825 (Vt. 2013). The court highlighted
 the importance of the public’s ability to “gauge the police
 department’s responsiveness to specific instances of misconduct
 [and] assess whether the agency is accountable to itself
 internally[.]” Id. (internal quotation marks and citation
 
omitted). 
In Tompkins v. Freedom of Information Commission, the
 
Connecticut Appellate Court reviewed records regarding the
 disciplinary investigation of a discharged police officer and
 emphasized the need to “facilitate the public’s understanding and
 evaluation of the [department’s] investigative process,
 decision-making and overall handling of an important matter
 
53
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
involving a fellow police officer.” 46 A.3d 291, 299 (Conn. App.
 
Ct. 2012). The court further noted that “the more egregious the
 specific behavior, the more a finding of legitimate public
 concern is warranted.” Id.
 
Lastly, in City of Baton Rouge/Parish of East Baton
 
Rouge v. Capital City Press, L.L.C., the Louisiana First Circuit
 Court of Appeal found that “the public has a strong, legitimate
 interest in disclosure” of records of investigations into police
 misconduct. 4 So.3d 807, 821 (La. Ct. App. 2008). The court
 reasoned that “[t]he public should be ensured that both the
 activity of public employees suspected of wrongdoing and the
 conduct of those public employees who investigate the suspects is
 open to public scrutiny.” Id. (internal quotation marks and
 
citation omitted). 
These cases recognize the compelling public interest in
 
instances of police misconduct given the importance of public
 oversight of law enforcement. Police officers are entrusted with
 the right to use force--even deadly force in some circumstances-­and this right can be subject to abuse. Public oversight
 minimizes the possibility of abuse by ensuring that police
 departments and officers are held accountable for their actions. 
The press’s access to records such as those at issue here is one
 of the primary channels through which such public oversight can
 
54
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
operate. See Gentile v. State Bar of Nevada, 501 U.S. 1030, 1035
 
(1991) (“[T]he press . . . guards against the miscarriage of
 
justice by subjecting the police, prosecutors, and judicial
 processes to extensive public scrutiny and criticism.”) (quoting
 Sheppard v. Maxwell, 384 U.S. 333, 350 (1966)). The more
 egregious the misconduct, and the more closely connected to the
 officer’s performance of his or her duties as an officer, the
 more compelling this public interest.
 
Here, though the descriptions of the records requested
 
by Civil Beat are brief (recounted in full, supra, part I.A), it
 is clear that the records involve serious misconduct. These
 records include falsifying police reports, use of malicious
 force, wilfully injuring another employee, fabricating facts
 regarding probable cause, hindering investigations, and
 misappropriating police funds. Further, two of the records––(1)
 the seventy-seven day suspension for falsifying a police report
 and being untruthful during an investigation and (2) the six
 hundred twenty-six day suspension for hindering a federal
 investigation–-appear to involve particularly egregious conduct,
 as demonstrated by the length of the suspension imposed. 
With these considerations in mind, during its in camera
 
review of the records, the circuit court should review the
 misconduct at issue in each case and determine whether the public
 
55
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
interest in disclosure of such conduct outweighs the privacy
 
interests of a particular officer. 
D.	 SHOPO may not invoke the “frustration of a legitimate
government function” exception on HPD’s behalf
 
SHOPO also argues that “[t]he disclosure of a police
 
officer’s disciplinary records would frustrate a legitimate
 
government function” pursuant to HRS § 92F-13(3).15 In response,
 
Civil Beat argues that SHOPO may not invoke the legitimate
 government function exception because only the agency from which
 the records have been requested may invoke the exception. 
We conclude that Civil Beat is correct that only the
 
relevant government agency--in this case HPD--may invoke this
 exception.
 
In OIP Opinion Letter No. 98-02, the OIP addressed 
arguments made by Hawai' i Management Alliance Association (HMAA) 
that the disclosure of eligible charges listed in HMAA’s contract with Kona Community Hospital (KCH) would frustrate a legitimate government purpose. OIP Op. Ltr. No. 98-02, at 1, 9, available at http://files.hawaii.gov/oip/opinionletters/opinion 98-02.pdf. HMAA argued that disclosure of the charges would mean other healthcare benefits companies would discover KCH’s lowest 
15
 HRS § 92F-13 provides, in pertinent part:  “This part shall not
 
require disclosure of: . . . (3) Government records that, by their nature,
must be confidential in order for the government to avoid the frustration of a
legitimate government function[.]”
 
56
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
acceptable price, which would mean they could negotiate lower
 
payments to KCH, which in turn would result in higher copayments
 for patients. Id. at 9. The OIP stated that:
 
Although HMAA raises these frustration arguments on
behalf of KCH and [Hawai 'i Health Systems
Corporation], the federal courts have refused to allowa submitter to make such an argument on a governmentagency’s behalf, particularly where the agencydeclines to make the argument itself.  Hercules, Inc.v. Marsh, 839 F.2d 1027, 1030 (4th Cir. 1988) (where
an agency declines to argue that disclosure of
information would impair the agency’s ability to
obtain similar information in the future, the court
will not allow the submitter to raise the issue on the
 agency’s behalf).  And in Comdisco, Inc. v. GSA, 864
F.Supp. 510 (E.D. Va. 1994), the court deferred to the
agency’s determination that disclosure of the
requested information would not impair the agency’s
ability to obtain such information in the future. The
 Comdisco court observed that the agency is in the best
situation to determine if disclosure would inhibit
 future submissions. Id. at 515. 
Id. at 9-10 (footnote omitted).
 
The OIP thus concluded that “[a]s the agency does not
 
claim that disclosure of the eligible charges from the HMSA and
 
HMAA Contracts frustrates any legitimate government function of
 KCH or HHSC, the OIP finds that there is no frustration.” Id. at
 
10 (emphasis added). SHOPO has not argued that the OIP’s
 interpretation of HRS § 92F-13(3) is erroneous.
 
As Civil Beat notes, HPD did not claim in the circuit
 
court that disclosure of the suspension records would frustrate
 
57
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
any government purpose.16 Moreover, HPD filed a notice of no
 
position regarding SHOPO’s appeal. Thus, HPD has not claimed at
 
any point in this litigation that disclosure of the records at
 issue would frustrate any legitimate government purpose, and
 SHOPO, as a third-party intervenor, cannot make that argument on
 HPD’s behalf.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
HRS § 92F-14 recognizes a significant privacy interest
 
in police officers’ disciplinary suspension records, and this
 interest must be balanced against the public interest in
 disclosure of the requested records. Given the limited factual
 record in this case, we cannot definitively determine whether
 disclosure of the requested records is appropriate. The circuit
 court must engage in an in camera review of the requested records
 and determine whether the public interest outweighs the officers’
 significant privacy interest in each instance. Thus, we vacate 
16
 In its opposition to Civil Beat’s MSJ, HPD argued only the issue
 
of whether disclosure would constitute an unwarranted invasion of the police
officers’ personal privacy.  Moreover, at the hearing on Civil Beat’s MSJ, the
only argument HPD made was that, when Civil Beat made its request for the
records in this case, HPD was precluded from releasing the records pursuant to
a 2001 circuit court order. 
58
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the circuit court’s June 10, 2014 final judgment and remand for
 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 Keani Alapa and
Vladimir Devens
 for intervenor-defendant­appellant
 
Donna Y.L. Leong, Paul S.
Aoki, Duane W.H. Pang and
Nicolette Winter for 
defendants-appellees City
and County of Honolulu and
Honolulu Police Department
 
Robert Brian Black 
for plaintiff-appellee
Peer News LLC
 
Jeffrey S. Portnoy
and John P. Duchemin 
for amicus curiae 
The Reporters Committee
for Freedom of the Press
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson
 /s/ Jeffrey P. Crabtree
 
59
 