 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I  
 
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAP-15-0000912 13-JUN-2017 
08:00 AM 
---oOo--
-
LAURA GABRIEL, Plaintiff/Appellant-Cross-Appellee,  
 
vs.  
 
ISLAND PACIFIC ACADEMY, INC., a domestic nonprofit corporation;
  
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
  
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE UNINCORPORATED ORGANIZATIONS 1-10;
  
AND DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-10,
  
Defendants/Appellees-Cross-Appellants.
  
SCAP-15-0000912  
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
  
(CAAP-15
-0000912; CIV. NO. 15-5-0852-05)
 
JUNE 13, 2017
  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.
  
 
OPINION  OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.
  
I.
 Introduction 
At issue in this case is whether it is unconscionable to 
require an employee to pay half the estimated arbitration costs 
up front in order to access the arbitral forum. We hold that, 
under the circumstances of this case, such a requirement is  
  
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
   
 
  
  
  
 
 
 unconscionable and unenforceable. We further hold that, in this 
case, striking this requirement in the arbitration provision 
provides an insufficient remedy; rather, the entire arbitration 
provision must be invalidated. 
II. Background 
A. Facts 
Laura Gabriel (“Gabriel”) taught physical education at 
Island Pacific Academy (“IPA”) from 2006 through 2014. Gabriel 
and IPA contracted for her employment annually.  In December 
2013, one of her 8th grade male students dropped his water 
bottle, and water hit Gabriel. She remarked, “Why are you guys 
always getting me wet?” which prompted three of her male 
students to snicker that the boys in the class were always 
getting Gabriel wet. Gabriel surmised that she was the butt of 
a sexual joke and reported the incident as sexual harassment to 
IPA administration. The Secondary Principal, Kip Cummings, told 
Gabriel that she would no longer be teaching the class containing those male students. Ms. Cummings also expressed her 
concern over parent complaints about Gabriel’s class. Ms. 
Cummings said she could not trust Gabriel and would not support 
her when parents complain. 
Three months after this incident, in March 2014, IPA issued 
Gabriel an employment agreement for the 2014-2015 school year 
2
  
  
The employment agreement also provided  that “[t]he parties agree 
that this contract shall be interpreted in accordance with the 
laws of the state of Hawaii. . . .”   Gabriel timely signed and 
submitted the employment contract.   Gabriel alleged that the 
Headmaster informed her that her employment contract was not  
going to be honored because Ms. Cummings did not want to work with her. Gabriel’s last day with IPA was in June 2014.     
 In October 2014, Gabriel filed her charge of discrimination 
with the Hawai i Civil Rights Commission (“HCRC”), to be filed 
with the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, alleging retaliation.   The HCRC issued Gabriel a right to sue 
letter in February 2015.   
 
                     
  
  and requested her signature on it by April 2014.   The employment 
agreement contained the following arbitration provision:  
L. Arbitration. The parties desire that any dispute 
concerning the Agreement be handled out of court. 
Accordingly, they agree that any such dispute shall, as the parties’ sole and exclusive remedy, be submitted to an 
arbitrator licensed to practice law in the State of Hawaii 
and selected in accordance with the standard procedures of 
Dispute Prevention Hawaii [sic]. The arbitrator will not 
be entitled to add to or subtract from its terms.  Should 
either party start any legal action or administrative 
proceeding against the other with respect to any claim 
related to this Agreement, or pursue any method of 
resolution of a dispute other than mutual agreement of the 
parties or arbitration, then all damages, costs, expenses  
and attorneys’ fees incurred by the other party as a result 
shall be the responsibility of the one bringing the suit or 
starting the proceeding. [
1]  
The 2013- 2014 employment agreement between Gabriel and IPA contained an 
identical agreement to arbitrate. 
3
 1  
  
  
  
 
   
  
 
    
  
 
  
  
  
                     
   
 
  
  
  B. Gabriel’s First Amended Complaint 
In May 2015, Gabriel filed her First Amended Complaint with 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit.2 She alleged that IPA 
refused to hire her for the 2014-2015 school year in retaliation 
for her sexual harassment complaint, in violation of HRS § 378 -
2(2) (2015), and that IPA’s actions resulted in intentional 
infliction of emotional distress (“IIED”) . She sought back pay, 
front pay, and all employee benefits that she would have 
enjoyed, as well as general and punitive damages for IIED. 
C. IPA’s Motion to Compel Arbitration 
IPA filed a Motion to Compel Arbitration. IPA, through 
counsel, averred that Gabriel was terminated due to a reduction 
in force because of insufficient enrollment, not due to 
discriminatory retaliation. IPA pointed out that subsection 
H(e)3 of the employment agreement provided for termination due to 
business conditions. Should the employee be terminated for that reason, IPA noted that subsection H of the employment agreement provided for the continuation of the arbitration obligation. 
IPA asked the circuit court to stay the proceedings pending 
arbitration. IPA also sought an award of its attorney’s fees 
2 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided. 
3 Subsection H(e) of the employment agreement is titled “Termination Due 
to Business Conditions.” It states, “As necessary as determined by the 
school due to business conditions, including, but not limited to, 
insufficient enrollment, unsuitability of facilities, change in curriculum, 
or elimination of position, all is determined in the School’s sole 
discretion.” 
4
  
   
  
   
 
  
  and costs for bringing the motion to compel arbitration, 
pursuant to the employment agreement’s arbitration provision. 
IPA also contended that an award of attorne y’s fees and costs 
could also be made pursuant to the circuit court’s inherent 
power, arguing that any opposition to IPA’s motion would be 
frivolous. 
Gabriel opposed IPA’s motion to compel arbitration. She 
argued that she and IPA had not entered into the 2014-2015 
employment agreement (IPA had not signed the agreement) and no 
consideration was given under the agreement; therefore, IPA was 
foreclosed from attempting to enforce the agreement’s 
arbitration provision. Assuming there was a valid agreement to arbitrate, Gabriel argued that her civil rights claim was beyond 
its scope. Furthermore, she argued, the arbitration agreement 
was unenforceable because it was included in an employment 
agreement that constituted a contract of adhesion, offered to 
Gabriel on a “take-it-or-leave-it” basis. Gabriel also argued 
that the arbitration provision was unconscionable because it 
required her to pay for the arbitration costs in a civil rights 
matter. Lastly, Gabriel opposed IPA’s request for attorney’s 
fees and costs under the arbitration provision, arguing that the provision was unenforceable. Gabriel also opposed an award of 
fees and costs under the circuit court’s inherent power, arguing 
5
  
   
 
  
  
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 that her opposition to the motion to compel arbitration was not 
frivolous. 
The circuit court held a hearing on IPA’s motion to compel 
arbitration. 
Although the arbitration provision states that the 
parties shall submit disputes concerning the employment 
agreement “to an arbitrator licensed to practice law in the 
State of Hawaii and selected in accordance with the standard 
procedures of Dispute Prevention Hawaii  [sic]” (emphasis added), 
the parties and the court assumed that Dispute Prevention and 
Resolution, Inc. (“DPR”) would be the arbitral body. The 
circuit court directed the parties to enter DPR’s standard 
procedures into the record. The circuit court also asked the 
parties to submit supplemental briefing addressing whether the 
arbitration provision was unconscionable because DPR’s standard 
procedures required the parties to split arbitration fees.  
D. Supplemental Briefing 
DPR’s standard procedures were entered into the record. 
In 
her supplemental brief, Gabriel quoted the following material 
from DPR’s rules to show that she would have to pay for half of 
the cost of arbitration, and would be required to pay and submit 
half of the deposit for the fees of the arbitrator prior to the 
arbitration: 
I. DPR FEES & COSTS 
. . . .  
Any out- of-pocket expenses incurred by the DPR appointed 
neutral  (e.g., air fare, lodging,  meals) in conjunction 
6  
  
 
 DPR policy requires that each party submit advance 
deposits toward the anticipated fees and expenses of the 
DPR appointed neutral on an equal or pro rata basis .  DPR 
may require the parties to submit additional deposits 
during the pendency of the arbitration proceeding based on 
the expected duration of the matter. 
DPR and the DPR 
appointed neutral reserve the right to suspend their 
services for non -payment by any party.  In the event of 
inadequate or non -payment of requested deposits by a party, 
DPR may request that the other party(s) involved in the 
proceeding submit additional deposits to assure that  an 
adequate sum is available to compensate the DPR neutral .  
 
  
 
  
 In its supplemental brief, IPA first argued that the 
arbitration agreement did not require cost-splitting and was, in 
fact, silent on the issue of fees and costs; all the arbitration 
agreement required was  selection of a neutral  arbitrator  “in 
accordance with the standard procedures of Dispute Prevention 
Hawaii [sic].”   IPA pointed out that the final payment of fees 
and costs is determined by the arbitrator according to HRS § 
                     
 
  with a DPR proceeding are to be borne equally by the 
parties  and shall be paid to the appointed neutral from 
funds deposited by the parties with DPR for that purpose.  
. . . . 
II. ADVANCE DEPOSITS & REFUNDS 
. . . .  
Gabriel’s supplemental brief was accompanied by a declaration in 
which she averred that she was without a full-time job, having 
financial difficulty, and unable to pay for the costs of 
arbitration.4 Gabriel also cited out-of-jurisdiction cases for 
the proposition that courts have found arbitration agreements 
unconscionable where the putative grievant is made to pay for 
arbitration costs in a civil rights matter. 
Elsewhere in the record, there is evidence that IPA paid Gabriel 
$35,000 the first year she taught (2006 -2007); $36,400 the following year 
(2007-2008); and would have paid Gabriel $45,000 for the 2014 -2015 school 
year. 
7
 4  
    
 
   
 
   
  
    
 
 
   
                     
 
 658A-21(d) (2016).5 Consequently, IPA argued, Gabriel’s claim 
that she will incur costs in arbitration that will prevent her 
from vindicating her rights is “completely speculative ” and an 
insufficient basis for refusing to compel arbitration under Green Tree Fin. Corp.-Alabama v. Randolph , 531 U.S. 79 (2000). 
IPA then argued that, if the circuit court was persuaded 
that the cost of arbitration would be prohibitively expensive 
for Gabriel, it should sever any arguably unconscionable 
provision or interpret t he parties’ agreement to require 
arbitration under conditions that the Court believes are necessary to allow Gabriel the ability to vindicate her rights. 
IPA considered the possibility that Gabriel might have to pay 
half of the arbitration deposit to be the only arguably 
unconscionable aspect of the agreement. The 2014-2015 
employment agreement did contain a severability clause that 
states, “Should any provision of this contract be invalidated by 
a court of law with proper jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.” 
E. The Parties’ Arbitration Cost Estimates 
The circuit court then ordered the parties to submit an 
estimate of arbitration costs from DPR for this case. Gabriel’s 
counsel estimated that it would take three and one half days to 
put on Gabriel’s case, and IPA’s counsel estimated that it would 
HRS § 658A- 21(d) states, “An arbitrator’s expenses and fees, together 
with other expenses, shall be paid as provided in the award.” 
8
 5  
   
 
 The circuit court granted IPA’s  motion to compel 
arbitration, on the condition that IPA pay all of the 
arbitrator’s fees in con nection with the resolution of Gabriel’s 
claims. The circuit court first concluded that the parties 
entered into a valid employment contract when Gabriel  returned 
the signed 2014-2015 employment Agreement.   The circuit court 
concluded that IPA terminated the 2014-2015 employment Agreement 
according to its terms, for business reasons.   The circuit court 
concluded that the arbitration agreement was broad enough to 
encompass Gabriel’s claim that IPA refused to renew her 
employment for the 2014-2015 academic year due to discriminatory 
retaliation against her.   The circuit court found that the take half a day to put on its case.   At Gabriel’s counsel’s 
request, DPR Case Manager Kelly Bryant estimated that it would 
cost $20,418.84 for a four-day arbitration.   Bryant informed 
Gabriel’s counsel that each party would need to rem it a 
$10,200.00 deposit to DPR.   After previously telling Gabriel’s 
counsel that the defense portion of the arbitration would take half a day, IPA’s counsel estimated that the 
entire  arbitration 
would take half a day.   At IPA’s counsel’s request, Bryant 
estimated that the total cost would be $2,748.69 and that she would ask each party for a deposit of $1,375.00.     
F. 
	The Circuit Court’s Order Granting IPA’s Motion to Compel 
Arbitration 
9
  
  The circuit court, however, concluded that  the arbitration 
agreement was unconscionable as applied, because it effectively 
requires Gabriel to pay for arbitration costs to adjudicate her 
statutory civil rights claim in an arbitral forum, and that she 
would not have to bear such costs by bringing her action in a 
judicial forum. The circuit court concluded that the 
arbitration clause was procedurally unconscionable  as a contract 
of adhesion because it was the result of coercive bargaining 
between parties of unequal bargaining strength.   The circuit 
court reasoned that the employment agreement  was drafted and 
proffered by IPA, the stronger of the contracting parties;  the 
employment agreement  was offered to Gabriel on a take-it-or-
leave-it basis; Gabriel was given only a few weeks to review and 
sign the 2014-2015 employment agreement, which contained the arbitration agreement was supported by consideration, as both 
parties mutually agreed to arbitrate and forgo the right to 
litigate in court. Even though Gabriel was not hired for the 
2014-2015 school year, the circuit court found that she was 
bound by the 2014-2015 employment agreement ’s  terms, analogizing 
Gabriel’s case to failure -to-hire cases.   The circuit court also 
concluded that the absence of an IPA agent’s signature on the 
2014-2015 employment agreement was not a basis for avoiding 
arbitration, where the agreement manifests the employer’s intent 
to be bound by the arbitration provision.   
10
  
   
  
 
 
  
 
  arbitration provision; the employment agreement required Gabriel 
to certify that she sought employment only with IPA; and Gabriel 
was given no opportunity to modify the terms of the employment 
agreement. The circuit court also concluded that the 
arbitration clause was substantively unconscionable because it 
unfairly limits the obligations of and unfairly advantages IPA, 
the stronger party, by compelling Gabriel, the weaker party, to 
split the arbitration costs. The circuit court supported its 
conclusion with a citation to Cole  v. Burns Int’l Sec. Servs. , 
105 F.3d 1465 (D.C. Cir. 1997).  
Although the circuit court noted that the arbitration 
agreement did not contain an express provision regarding payment or sharing of arbitration fees and costs, it noted that the 
arbitration agreement required the parties to arbitrate 
through 
DPR. The circuit court deemed Gabriel’s $20,418.84 arbitration 
estimate to be reasonable, and noted that Gabriel would have to 
pay roughly half of this amount as a deposit. The circuit court found it unconscionable that Gabriel would have to pay a 
$10,200.00 deposit to even access the arbitral forum; it 
concluded that enforcing such a payment would preclude Gabriel 
from vindicating her statutory rights in the arbitral forum. 
The circuit court noted that Gabriel would have to pay a filing 
fee of only $515.00 to have her case heard in circuit court, 
11
  
  
    
  
 
 
     
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 making the $10,200.00 arbitration cost prohibitive and 
exorbitant. 
Nevertheless, the circuit court concluded that the 
arbitration clause could still be enforced by requiring IPA to 
pay for all arbitration fees and costs to resolve Gabriel’s 
claims, as the Cole court had done. 
Lastly, the circuit court denied IPA’s request for an award 
of fees and costs in connection with its motion to compel arbitration. 
G. Gabriel’s Appeal and IPA’s Cross -Appeal 
Gabriel timely appealed from the order granting IPA’s 
motion to compel arbitration. Gabriel raises the following 
points of error on appeal: 
1. The Circuit Court, through its Order, erred in 
concluding that as a matter of la w that Plaintiff’s claims 
against Defendant are subject to, and require, mandatory 
arbitration pursuant to the non -honored Employment 
Agreement and the applicable Hawai i law. 
. . . .  
2. The Circuit Court, through its Order, after finding the 
Arbitration 
Clause . . . was unconscionable, erred in 
ordering an erroneous modification of the Arbitration 
Clause of the Employment Agreement. 
IPA cross-appealed from the order.   IPA raises the following 
points of error on appeal:  
1. The Circuit Court erred in holding the arbitration 
agreement is substantively unconscionable, and therefore ordering IPA to pay for all fees and costs of arbitration, because “[t]he arbitration clause in the instant case would 
make Plaintiff pay for half the cost of the DPR 
arbitration.  Arbitration would prohibitively and 
exorbitantly cost Plaintiff $10,200.00.”  
. . . . 
2. The Circuit Court erred in denying IPA fees and costs 
for the necessity of bringing its motion to compel. 
12
  
  
 
 
 “A petition to compel arbitration is reviewed de novo .” 
Siopes v. Kaiser Found. Health Plan, Inc. , 130 Hawai i 437, 446, 
312 P.3d 869, 878 (2013). “The standard is the same as that 
which would be applicable to a motion for summary judgment, and 
the trial court’s decision is reviewed ‘using the same standard 
employed by the trial court and based upon the same evidentiary 
materials as were before [it] in determination of the motion.’” 
Brown v. KFC Nat’l Mgmt. Co. , 82 Hawai i 226, 231, 921 P.2d 146,    
151 (1996) (brackets in original; citations omitted).  
 
 
  
 Before this appeal was transferred to this court from the 
ICA, IPA moved to dismiss Gabriel’s appeal for lack of appellate 
jurisdiction. IPA argued that federal substantive law of 
arbitrability precludes an appeal from an order compelling 
arbitration. The ICA issued an order denying  IPA’s motion , as 
well as an order denying IPA’s  motion for reconsideration of 
that order.   In its Answering Brief to Gabriel’s Opening Brief, 
however, IPA persists in arguing that appellate jurisdiction is lacking because the Federal Arbitration Act, or “FAA,” applies 
to the parties’ agreement to arbitrate and preempts Hawaii’s This court accepted transfer of this appeal from the ICA. 
III. Standard of Review 
IV. Discussion 
A. This court has jurisdiction over this appeal. 
13
  
    
 It is true that the FAA states that “an appeal may not be 
taken from an interlocutory order . . . compelling arbitration 
under section 206 of [the FAA].” 9 U.S.C. § 16(b)(3) (West, 
Westlaw through P.L. 114-327 (also including P.L. 114-329 and 115-1 to 115-8.  Title 26 current through 115-18)).  According 
to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, it 
is now “well established th at § 16(b)  bars appeals of 
interlocutory orders compelling arbitration and staying judicial proceedings.” 
Johnson v. Consumerinfo.com, Inc. , 745 F.3d 1019, 
1021 (9th Cir. 2014).  In the case before us, the circuit court  
compelled arbitration and stayed the judicial proceedings 
pending arbitration.   Had this order been issued by a federal 
district court, it is clear that it would not be appealable. 
See, e.g., MediVas, LLC v. Marubeni Corp., 741 F.3d 4, 7 (9th 
Cir. 2014) (“[A]n order compelling arbitration may be appealed 
if the district court dismisses all the underlying claims, but 
may not be appealed if the court stays the action pending 
arbitration.”) (citations omitted).  
 This order, however, was issued in our state circuit court. 
Under Hawai i law, a circuit court order compelling arbitration 
and staying proceedings is an appealable final order over which our appellate courts have jurisdiction. See Association of  procedural rule permitting appeal of an order compelling 
arbitration and staying judicial proceedings. We disagree. 
14
  
  IPA argues that the Hawai i rule allowing appeals of orders 
staying proceedings and compelling arbitration is preempted 
because it conflicts with the FAA rules regarding appeals.  IPA 
asserts that by delaying arbitration proceedings, the Hawai i 
rule contradicts and obstructs the overarching purpose of the 
FAA to ensure the enforcement of arbitration agreements 
according to their terms so as to facilitate streamlined 
proceedings.   
 Alternatively, while IPA acknowledges that the parties’ 
employment agreement contains a choice-of-law provision calling 
for the application of Hawai i law, IPA argues that the parties 
have not agreed to apply Hawaii’s proc edural rule simply by 
having a choice of law provision that selects Hawai i law.   We 
disagree and conclude that the FAA does not preempt Hawaii’s 
procedural rule, and applying Hawaii’s procedural rule will be Owners of Kukui Plaza v. Swinerton & Walberg Co. , 68 Haw. 98, 
107, 705 P.2d 28, 35 (198 5) (holding that “orders granting stays 
and compelling arbitration are appealable” under HRS § 641 -
1(a)); County of Hawai i v. UNIDEV, LLC , 129 Hawai i 378, 392, 301 
P.3d 588, 602 (2013) (“[A]fter Hawaii’s adoption of HRS § 658A -
28, orders compelling arbitration remain appealable under 
Hawaii’s final judgment statute, HRS § 641 -1.”)) (citation 
omitted). 
15

  
  
 
  consistent with the parties’ expectations under the arbitration 
agreement. 
The FAA does not automatically preempt “different rules 
than those set forth in the Act itself.” Volt Info. Scis., Inc. 
v. Board of Trs. of the Leland Stanford Junior Univ.,
 489 U.S. 
468, 479 (1989). The FAA’s purpose is “sim ply [to] require[] 
courts to enforce privately negotiated agreements to arbitrate, 
like other contracts, in accordance with their terms.” 489 U.S. 
at 478. Under the FAA, parties may “agree[] to abide by state 
rules of arbitration, [and] enforcing those rules according to 
the terms of the agreement is fully consistent with the goals of 
the FAA. . . .” 489 U.S. at 479. The FAA does not preempt 
those state rules that may delay arbitration “where the Act 
would otherwise permit it to go forward.” Id.  The Volt court 
emphasized that no federal policy exists for “favoring 
arbitration under a certain set of procedural rules. . . .” 489 
U.S. at 476. A state procedural rule governing arbitration, applied “in accordance with the terms of the arbitration 
agreement itself,” does not “undermine the goals and policies of 
the FAA.” 489 U.S. at 477 -78.  So long as the state procedural 
rule does not “stand as  an obstacle to the accomplishment and 
execution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress” in 
enacting the FAA, it does not conflict with the FAA, and the FAA 
will not preempt it. 489 U.S. at 477 (citation omitted).  
16

  
  For those jurisdictions that have examined whether the 
FAA’s appeal provisions preempt state appeal provisions (where 
those state appeal provisions are based on the Uniform 
Arbitration Act, as Hawaii’s arbitration appeal provisions are), 
a majority rule has emerged: the FAA’s appeal provisions do not 
preempt state appeal provisions because (1) state appeal provisions are procedural rather than substantive; (2) 
procedural provisions should not be preempted unless they stand 
as an obstacle to the full purposes and objectives of the FAA;  
and (3) the state procedural rules do not impede the FAA’s objective of ensuring the enforceability of arbitration 
agreements in private contracts. 
Morgan Keegan & Co., Inc. v. 
Smythe, 401 S.W.3d 595, 606 (Tenn. 2013) (collecting cases 
following the majority rule). More specifically, some of these 
jurisdictions have held that an order compelling arbitration is 
immediately appealable under state procedural rules. See, e.g., 
Kremer v. Rural Cmty.  Ins. Co., 788 N.W.2d 538 (Neb. 2010); 
Wells v. Chevy Chase Bank, F.S.B., 768 A.2d 620 (Md. 2001); Simmons v. Deutsche Fin. Servs. Corp. , 532 S.E.2d 436 (Ga. 
2000).    
 Therefore, this court will enforce the parties’ choice -of-
law provision and apply Hawaii’s procedural rules to this matter. This court has jurisdiction to entertain this appeal.  
 
17

  
  
   
   
   
 
 Under Brown, a court faced with a motion to compel 
arbitration must first address whether an arbitration agreement 
exists between the parties. Brown, 82 Hawai i at 238, 921 P.2d 
at 158 (citation omitted). In order to be valid and 
enforceable, “an arbitration agreement must h ave the following 
three elements: (1) it must be in writing; (2) it must be 
unambiguous as to the intent to submit disputes or controversies 
to arbitration; and (3) there must be bilateral consideration.” 
Douglass v. Pflueger Hawaii, Inc. , 110 Hawai i 520, 531, 135 P.3d 
129, 140 (2006) (citation omitted).    
 
  
  
 
     
 
  
  B. 	 The circuit court correctly concluded that the parties 
entered into a valid arbitration agreement , and that 
Gabriel’s retaliation claim was within the scope of 
the arbitration agreement. 
On appeal, Gabriel argues that the parties did not enter 
into the 2014-2015 employment agreement, and, therefore, did not 
enter into the arbitration agreement found within it. Gabriel 
argues that, as she was not hired for the 2014-2015 academic 
year, no consideration supported the 2014-2015 contract or the arbitration provision within it. She again points out that IPA 
did not sign the 2014-2015 employment agreement.  
IPA’s position is that the parties entered into a valid 
arbitration agreement. IPA argues that Gabriel accepted IPA’s 
offer of employment when she signed and returned the 2014-2015 employment agreement, unmodified. In so doing, she entered into 
18
  
    
 For the reasons stated by IPA,  we  conclude that Gabriel and  
IPA entered into an arbitration agreement  .   The arbitration 
agreement (1) was in writing; (2) unambiguously bound the 
parties to “handle[] out of court” “any dispute concerning this 
Agreement” through submission of the dispute  to an arbitrator;  
and was supported by bilateral consideration, as both parties 
“would forego [sic] their respective rights to a judicial forum ”  
and accept the binding arbitration process.” Brown, 82 Hawai i 
at 239-40, 921 P.2d at 159-60.   Additionally,  it did not matter  
that an agent from IPA did not sign the employment agreement. This case is similar to Brown, where this court enforced an 
arbitration agreement found in an employment application signed by the prospective employee but not by the employer.  See  Brown, 
82 Hawai i at 229, 921 P.2d at 149.  When Gabriel signed and 
returned the 2014-2015 employment agreement, she accepted IPA’s the arbitration agreement, which was contained in the employment 
agreement. Concerning Gabriel’s argument that no consideration 
existed to support the 2014-2015 employment agreement and the 
arbitration agreement within it, IPA counter-argues that 
consideration supported the arbitration agreement because both 
Gabriel and IPA agreed to forgo their rights to litigate in 
court, citing Brown , 82 Hawai i at 239-40, 921 P.2d at 159-60; 
and Douglass, 110 Hawai i at 534-35, 135 P.3d at 143-44.  
19
  
  
 We note that the entire employment agreement is relatively 
short at four pages long.   It is written in plain English with 
no fine print or cross-references to other documents.   The 
arbitration agreement is located on the same page as Gabriel’s 
signature. Thus, this case  is unlike other cases in which 
questions arise as to an employee’s intent to be bound to an 
arbitration provision that is physically separate from an 
employment contract. See, e.g., Brown,  82 Hawai i at 245, 921 
P.2d at 165 (holding that an arbitration agreement contained in 
an employment application applied to a discrimination claim arising out of a later executed oral contract for employment); 
Douglass, 110 Hawai i at 534, 135 P.3d at 143 (holding that 
mutual assent to arbitrate was lacking, where the employment 
contract did not contain the arbitration agreement, and the 
employee merely signed an acknowledgement of having read a 
separate employee handbook, which did contain the arbitration 
agreement). In this case, by contrast, the plain language of 
the  arbitration agreement demonstrates the parties’ mutual 
assent to arbitrate.  In short, a valid and enforceable   
arbitration agreement exists between the parties.  
 offer for employment, and all of the terms that came with it, 
including an agreement to arbitrate. 
A court faced with a motion to compel arbitration must next 
decide whether “the subject matte r of the dispute is arbitrable 
20
  
   
 
  
  
 under the agreement.” Brown, 82 Hawai i at 238, 921 P.2d at 158 
(citation omitted). Gabriel argues that the arbitration 
agreement governs matters covered in the employment agreement, but not civil rights claims under HRS § 378-2(2).   IPA counter-
argues that Hawai i courts have long recognized the strong public 
policy supporting Hawaii’s arbitration statutes, and that any doubts concerning the scope of arbitrable issues should be 
resolved in favor of arbitration, citing Lee v. Heftel, 81 
Hawaii 1, 4, 911 P.2d 721, 724 (1996).   
We conclude that Gabriel’s discriminatory retaliation claim 
was within the scope of the arbitration agreement, because the 
arbitration agreement required her to “handle[] out of court” 
“any di
spute concerning this Agreement ” by submitting the 
dispute to an arbitrator. At the federal and state level, there exists a strong policy in favor of arbitration, such that any 
doubt concerning whether a dispute is covered by an arbitration agreement should be resolved in favor of arbitrability. 
See 
Moses H. Cone Mem’l Hosp. v. Mercury Constr. Corp. , 460 U.S. 1, 
24 (1983) (“The Arbitration Act establishes that, as a matter of 
federal law, any doubts concerning the scope of arbitrable 
issues should be resolved in favor of arbitration, whether the 
problem at hand is the construction of the contract language 
itself or an allegation of waiver, delay, or a like defense to 
21

  
  IPA also correctly observes that arbitration agreements 
should be interpreted  broadly in favor of finding arbitrability, 
where the arbitration agreement is worded similarly to the 
instant one regarding “any dispute concerning this Agreement.”   
Indeed, in UNIDEV, we examined an arbitration agreement that 
stated that “[a]ny dispute arising under the terms of this Agreement . . . shall[, if the matter cannot be resolved by 
other preliminary means] submit the matter to arbitration. . . 
.” 129 Hawai
i at 381, 301 P.3d at 591 (emphasis added). We 
held that an arbitration agreement worded this way “constitutes 
a ‘general’ arbitration clause” whose scope should be 
interpreted broadly. 129 Hawai i at 395-96, 301 P.3d at 605-06.   
In short, Gabriel’s retaliation claim falls within the scope of 
the arbitration agreement.  
 arbitrability.”) (footnote omitted); Lee, 81 Hawai i at 4, 911 
P.2d at 724 (“[T]he proclaimed pu blic policy [supporting 
Hawaii’s arbitration statutes] is to encourage arbitration as a 
means of settling differences and thereby avoiding litigation. 
[A]ny doubts concerning the scope of arbitrable issues should be 
resolved in favor of arbitration[.]”) ( citations omitted).  
Lastly, Gabriel argues that a discriminatory retaliation 
claim is not expressly referenced in the employment agreement, and, therefore, falls beyond the scope of the arbitration 
22
  
  
 
This court favorably cited to and applied this general rule in 
City and Cty. of Ho  nolulu v. Kam,  48 Haw. 349, 402 P.2d 683 
(1965), and Quedding v. Arisumi Bros., 66 Haw. 335, 661 P.2d 706 
(1983) (per curiam). In both Kam  and Quedding, this court held 
that the “general rule [is] that the existing law is part of a contract where there is  no stipulation to the contrary.” Kam, 48 
Haw. at 355, 402 P.2d at 687; Quedding , 66 Haw. at 338, 661 P.2d 
at 709. Therefore, the arbitration agreement’s scope included 
Gabriel’s retaliatory discrimination claim.  agreement. We disagree and note that the arbitration agreement 
covered termination due to alleged retaliatory discrimination, 
because the employment agreement implicitly included within it 
Hawaii’s laws concerning discrimination in employment. A 
contract is presumed to include all applicable statutes and 
settled law relating to its subject matter. Section 363 of 17A 
Am.Jur.2d Contracts (2016) states  
Contracting parties are presumed to contract in reference 
to the existing law, and to have in mind all the existing 
laws relating to the contract, or to the subject matter 
thereof. All existing applicable or relevant statutes, and 
settled law of the land at the time a contract is made 
become a part of it and must be read into it just as if an express provision to that effect were inserted therein, 
except where the contract discloses a contrary intention. 
By virtue of this rule, the laws which exist at the time 
and place of making a contract and at the place where it is 
to be performed, affecting its validity, construction, operation, performance, enforcement, and discharge, enter 
into and form a part of it as if they were expressly 
referred to or incorporated into its terms. 
23

  
 
  In short, the parties entered into a valid employment 
agreement containing an arbitration agreement, and the 
arbitration agreement  covered Gabriel’s claims.  
  
 
  
 
  
  
    
 Under Hawai i law, an arbitration agreement is generally 
“valid, enforceable, and irrev ocable except upon a ground that 
exists at law or in equity for the revocation of a contract.” 
HRS § 658A-6(a) (2016)  .  One of those grounds is C.  	The arbitration agreement’s cost -splitting requirement is 
unconscionable and, therefore, unenforceable.    
On appeal, Gabriel argues that the arbitration agreement is 
unenforceable because it is procedurally and substantively 
unconscionable. She contends the 2014-2015 employment agreement 
that contained the arbitration agreement was procedurally 
unconscionable because it was a contract of adhesion, offered to 
her on a take-it-or-leave-it basis, and she was only given a few 
weeks to review and sign it. Gabriel maintains that she had no 
opportunity to negotiate the terms of the 2014-2015 employment 
agreement, that she was not told she was agreeing to arbitrate 
civil rights claims, and that the arbitration agreement was not 
made conspicuous within the employment agreement. Gabriel 
argues that the arbitration agreement was also substantively 
unconscionable because it unfairly advantaged IPA by limiting 
her access to the courts and costing her a significant amount of 
money to arbitrate her claims. 
24
  
  
 
  unconscionability.  See  Lewis v. Lewis , 69 Haw. 497, 500, 748 
P.2d 1362, 1366 (1988). Unconscionability encompasses two 
principles: one-sidedness (substantive unconscionability) and 
unfair surprise (procedural unconscionability). Balogh v. 
Balogh, 134 Hawai i 29, 41, 332 P.3d 631, 643 (2014). The Balogh  
court noted, “Generally, a determination of unconscionabil ity 
requires a showing that the contract was both procedurally and 
substantively unconscionable when made,”  but an impermissibly  
one-sided contract can be unconscionable and unenforceable 
without a showing of unfair surprise. Id.  (citing Adler v. Fred 
Lind Manor, 103 P.3d 773, 782 (Wash. 2004) (en banc)  (brackets  
and ellipsis omitted).    
We have applied the doctrine of unconscionability in 
multiple contractual contexts, not just in the arbitration 
context. See
, e.g., Balogh, 134 Hawai i 29, 332 P.3d 631 
(memorandum of understanding regarding property division in divorce); Thompson v. AIG Hawaii Ins. Co. , 111 Hawai i 413, 142 
P.3d 277 (2006) (personal injury settlement agreement); Lewis, 
69 Haw. 497, 748 P.2d 1362 (premarital agreements); Earl M. 
Jorgensen Co., v. Mark Constr.,
 56 Haw. 466, 540 P.2d 978 (1975) 
(contract for sale of goods). Therefore, application of the 
unconscionability doctrine in this case places the arbitration 
agreement “on equal footing with all other contracts,” DIRECTV, 
25

  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 In Ferguson v. Countrywide Credit Industries, Inc.,   298 
F.3d 778, 785 n.7 (9th Cir. 2002), the Ninth Circuit favorably 
cited Adams’ holding, noting that a cost -splitting requirement 
between employer and employee posed a “significant deterrent effect . . . on employees who are required to arbitrate their Inc. v. Imburgia, 136 S. Ct. 463, 465 (2015), and does not 
“single[]out arbitration agreements for disfavored treatment. . 
. .” Kindred Nursing Ctrs.  Ltd. P’ship v. Clark , 137 S. Ct. 
1421, 1425 (2017). 
Gabriel urges us to follow cases from the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit that hold that an arbitration agreement’s cost -splitting requirement is, standing 
alone, so substantively unconscionable as to render the entire 
arbitration agreement unenforceable. The Ninth Circuit has 
examined, under California law, a similar requirement that an 
employee split arbitration fees with her employer. Circuit City 
Stores, Inc. v. Adams , 279 F.3d 889, 894 (9th Cir. 2002).  The 
Ninth Circuit held, “This fee allocation scheme alone would 
rend
er an arbitration agreement unenforceable.” Id. (footnote 
and citation omitted). 
The Ninth Circuit ultimately invalidated 
the entire arbitration agreement because additional provisions 
provided further justification for finding the arbitration agreement unconscionable and, therefore, unenforceable. Id. at 
896. 
26
  
  
 During the course of her employment with IPA, Gabriel’s  
salary ranged from $35,000 to $45,000.  As part of this 
litigation, she filed a declaration stating that she was without 
a full-time job, having financial difficulty, and unable to pay 
for the costs of arbitration.   Gabriel  also submitted evidence 
from DPR that it would cost $20,418.84 for a four-day civil rights claims.” The Ferguson  court elaborated that “the 
significant up-front costs associated with bringing a claim in an arbitral forum may prevent individuals with meritorious 
claims from even pursuing these claims in the first place.” Id.  
at n.8. Similarly, in Ingle v. Circuit City Stores, Inc. , 328 
F.3d 1165, 1178 (9th Cir. 2003), the Ninth Circuit again 
favorably cited Adams  and added that an arbitration agreement 
calling for an employee to share arbitration costs with an 
employer was “harsh and unfair to employees seeking to arbitrate 
legal claims,” and is, therefore, substantively unconscionable.  
We do not go so far as to 
adopt a holding that a cost-
splitting requirement in arbitration is per se unconscionable 
and, therefore, unenforceable. Rather, whether cost-splitting 
in arbitration is unconscionable depends on the facts of each 
case. Under the circumstances of this case, the cost-splitting 
provision is substantively unconscionable because it would be 
prohibitively expensive for Gabriel to pursue her claims in the arbitral forum. 
27
  
  
                     
  
 
 
 
  
 6 arbitration, and that she would need to remit a $10,20  0.00  
deposit to DPR. It is  unconscionable  to require a terminated 
school teacher to pay, up-front, a deposit amounting to one-
quarter to one-third of her former annual  salary in order to 
6 access the arbitral forum.   Therefore, we hold that the cost-
splitting requirement alone is unconscionable as impermissibly  
one-sided, in favor of IPA.   Balogh, 134 Hawai i at 41, 332 P.3d 
at 643.  This conclusion renders it unnecessary for this court  
to pass on the issue of procedural unconscionability.  We note, however, that IPA did not challenge the circuit court’s finding 
7 that the manner  by which Gabriel agreed to the cost-splitting 
requirement was procedurally unconscionable. Therefore, we accept that finding, which provides an additional basis for 
rendering the cost-splitting requirement unenforceable as 
unconscionable.    
Despite ample evidence in the record that Gabriel will not 
be financially able to arbitrate her claims, IPA argues that 
We would similarly conclude that it would be unconscionable to require 
such cost- splitting in, for example, the mediation context.  As such, our 
unconscionability analysis does not single out arbitration agreements for 
disfavored treatment. See Kindred Nursing Ctrs.   Ltd. P’ship , 137 S. Ct. at 
1425. 
As stated earlier, the circuit court concluded that the arbitration 
agreement was procedurally unconscionable as a contract of adhesion because it was the result of coercive bargaining between parties of unequal 
bargaining strength. 
The circuit court noted that the arbitration agreement 
was drafted and proffered by IPA, the stronger of the contracting parties; was offered to Gabriel on a take -it-or-leave-it basis; Gabriel was given only 
a few weeks to review and sign the 2014 -2015 employment agreement, which 
contained the arbitration agreement; the employment agreement required Gabriel to certify that she sought employment only with IPA; and Gabriel was 
given no opportunity to modify the terms of the employment agreement. 
28
 7  
   
  
 
 
 Gabriel did not carry her burden of proving the likelihood that 
she would incur prohibitively expensive arbitration costs under 
Green Tree , 531 U.S. 79. In Green Tree , an employee asserted 
that she would be unable to vindicate her statutory rights 
(there, her rights under the federal Truth in Lending Act and 
the federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act) if she were compelled 
to arbitrate her claims, because there was a risk she would have 
to pay potentially substantial costs in arbitration. 531 U.S. 
at 83, 89. The United States Supreme Court disagreed, noting 
that the employee had utterly failed to substantiate her 
assertion. 531 U.S. at 90 n.6. 
The United States Supreme Court 
observed that the record 
“does not show that [the employee] will bear such [ large 
arbitration] costs if she goes to arbitration. Indeed, it contains hardly any information on the matter.” 531 U.S. at 90 
(footnote omitted). All the employee submitted to the district 
court, in a motion for reconsideration, was an “assert[ion] that ‘[a]rbitration costs are high’ and that she did not h ave the 
resources to arbitrate. ” 531 U.S. at 90 n.6. The employee 
provided no estimates of the cost of arbitration and, instead, 
“assumed” the American Arbitration Association, or AAA, would 
conduct the arbitration, noting (without evidentiary support) 
that the AAA charged a $500 filing fee for claims under $10,000.  
29
  
  
  
  
  
 IPA argues that, like the employee in Green Tree , Gabriel 
failed to carry her burden of  proving that arbitration would be 
so prohibitively expensive for her that it would prevent her 
from vindicating her statutory rights (in this case, statutory 
rights under HRS Chapter 378, which prohibits discrimination in 
employment). Green Tree , however, involved the vindication of 
federal statutory rights in the arbitral forum.  531 U.S. at 89-91. It is an open question, however, as to whether Green Tree  
applies in cases where claimants challenge arbitration as a forum for vindicating state statutory r ights.  See, e.g., Id.  The employee also submitted an article stating that 
arbitration costs are, on average, $700 per day. Id.    
The Court concluded that t he employee “plainly failed to 
make any factual showing that the American Arbitration 
Association would conduct the arbitration, or that, if it did, 
she would be charged the filing fee or arbitrator’s fee that she 
identified.” Id. The Court stated, “The ‘risk’ that [the 
employee] will be saddled with prohibitive costs is too 
speculative to justify the invalidation of an arbitration 
agreement.” 531 U.S. at 91. The Court went on to hold that, 
“where . . . a party seeks to invalidate an arbitration agreement on the ground that arbitration would be prohibitively 
expensive, that party bears the burden of showing the likelihood 
of incurring such costs.” 531 U.S. at 92. 
30

  
  Green Tree   itself thrice referenced the vindication of 
“federal statutory claims” in reaching its holding. Green Tree , 
531 U.S. at 89-90 (emphasis added).  The majority of federal 
circuits ruling on the issue have concluded that Green Tree  does 
not apply where a claimant seeks to vindicate only state 
statutory claims, as Gabriel seeks in this case.  See, e.g.,  
Stutler v. T.K. Constructors, Inc., 448 F.3d 343, 346 (6th Cir. 
2006) (“Green Tree  . . . [is] limited by [its] plain language to 
the question of whether an arbitration clause is enforceable 
where federal  statutorily protected rights are affected. In 
this case, no federally protected interest is at stake.”) (emphasis added); Pro Tech Indus., Inc. v. URS Corp.  , 377 F.3d 
868, 873 (8th Cir. 2004) (noting that  Green Tree addresses  
arbitration of federal  statutory claims, not unconscionability 
of an arbitration agreement under state law); Coneff v. AT&T 
Corp., 673 F.3d 1155, 1158 n.2 (9th Cir. 2012) (“ Green Tree  . . Kaltwasser v. AT&T Mobility, 812 F. Supp.   2d 1042, 1048 (N.D. 
Cal. 2011) (“[I]t is not clear that Green Tree ’s solicitude for 
the vindication of rights applies to rights arising under state law, which are the only rights that [the claimant] seeks to 
vindicate here.”); and James v. McDonald’s Corp. , 417 F.3d 672, 
679 (7th Cir. 2005) (“It remains unclear whether the rationale of Green Tree applies to situations that do not involve the 
assertion of federal statutory rights.”).  
31
  
  Assuming arguendo that Green Tree   does apply, Gabriel has 
sufficiently carried her burden of proof: exhibits and 
declarations in the record show that arbitration was estimated 
to cost $20,418.84, that Gabriel would have to remit a 
$10,200.00 deposit to DPR to arbitrate her claim, that Gabriel  
made $45,000 annually during the last academic year she worked for IPA, and that Gabriel was without a full-time job, having 
financial difficulty, and unable to pay for the costs of 
arbitration. Unlike the plaintiff in Green Tree, who could only speculate as to the high costs of arbitration, Gabriel has shown 
precisely what the costs were estimated to be and that such 
costs were prohibitively expensive for her.  Therefore, we 
disagree with IPA’s assertion that Gabriel presented “nothing 
but speculation she would incur any arbitration costs.”   
   . [is] limited to federal  statutory rights.”) (emphasis added); 
but see  Kristian v. Comcast Corp. , 446 F.3d 25, 29 (1st Cir. 
2006) (finding “provisions of . . . arbitration agreements . . . invalid because they prevent the vindication of statutory rights 
under state and federal law”); and Booker v. Ro bert Half Int’l, 
Inc., 413 F.3d 77, 79-81 (D.C. Cir. 2005) (applying Green Tree  
to District of Columbia statutory rights without analysis into 
whether Green Tree  applied only to federal statutory rights).    
32

  
   
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 We agree that the circuit court improperly modified the 
parties’ arbitration agreement whe n it attempted to reform the 
parties’ agreement by ordering IPA to pay all arbitration costs. 
We note that the parties’ employment agreement allows 
modification of the agreement only “in writing, signed by both 
the Educator and the Head of School and/or h
is designee, and 
entitled ‘Modification of Contract.’”   As Gabriel argues, 
neither party sought to modify the arbitration agreement to 
direct IPA to pay arbitration costs.   The court’s order D. The circuit court erred in compelling arbitration and 
ordering IPA to pay for all arbitration costs. 
The circuit court found the cost-
splitting requirement 
unconscionable but nonetheless compelled arbitration and ordered 
IPA to pay all of the arbitration costs. On appeal, Gabriel argues that the circuit court should have denied IPA’s motion to 
compel or invalidated the entire arbitration provision. On 
cross-appeal, IPA argues that the circuit court was correct in 
compelling arbitration, but it should have severed the cost-
splitting requirement pursuant to the severability clause in the 
parties’ employment agreement instead of conditioning 
arbitration upon IPA’s payment of all arbitration costs. 
Gabriel points out, and IPA agrees, that the parties had no 
intention to allow for the rewriting of the arbitration clause 
to have IPA pay for the arbitration cost. 
33
  
  
 
 
 
Kuamu v. Iaukea , 9 Haw. 612, 614 (quoting Pomeroy’s Eq. Jur. 
vol. 2, Sec. 870, p. 344); see also   State v. Kahua Ranch, Ltd., 
47 Haw. 28, 33, 384 P.2d 581, 585 (1963) (holding that 
reformation is appropriate where the contract contains a “mutual 
mistake [that] does not reflect the true intention of the 
parties. . . .”); Lee v. Aiu, 85 Hawai i 19, 31, 936 P.2d 655, 
667 (1997) (noting that reformation of a deed is appropriate to 
reflect the true intent of the parties, where such intent was 
incorrectly expressed through mutual mistake or the fraud of the 
defendant). These circumstances are not present in this case; 
therefore, the circuit court improperly reformed the arbitration 
agreement by requiring IPA to pay all arbitration costs.  
 
 compelling arbitration and directing IPA to pay costs is a 
result neither party intended, and amounts to a reformation of 
the arbitration agreement without a firm basis in our precedent 
to do so. Ordinarily, reformation of a contract is a remedy in 
the following circumstances: 
Reformation is appropriate, when an agreement has been 
made, or a transaction has been entered into or determined 
upon, as intended by all the parties interested, but in 
reducing such transaction to writing, either through the 
mistake of both parties, or through the mistake of the 
plaintiff accompanied by the fraudulent knowledge and 
procurement of the defendant, the written instrument fails 
to express the real agreement or transaction. 
Further, the circuit court justified its decision to order 
IPA to pay all arbitration costs by 
relying on Cole, 105 F.3d 
1465, a case that is distinguishable from the instant case. In 
34
  
     Cole, the United States Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit  
affirmed the district court’s order compelling arbitration of an 
employee’s Title VII claim. 105 F.3d at 1488.  Like the instant 
arbitration agreement, the arbitration agreement at issue in Cole contained no express provision on the payment of fees; 
rather, it incorporated by reference the AAA’s rules.  105 F.3d 
at 1485. Unlike the instant case, where DPR’s rules require 
cost-splitting, the AAA’s rules were silent on the issue of 
payment of fees and made no provision for reduced or waived fees 
in case of financial hardship. 105 F.3d at 1469, 1484, 1485. 
The D.C. Circuit upheld the arbitration agreement but construed 
the silences within it against the drafter (the employer) in 
requiring the employer to pay all of the costs of arbitration, 
as follows: 
In our view, an employee can never be required, as a 
condition of employment, to pay an arbitrator’s 
compensation in order to secure the resolution of statutory 
claims under Title VII (any more than an employee can be made to pay a judge’s salary). If there is any risk that 
an arbitration agreement can be construed to require this 
result, this would surely deter the bringing of arbitration 
and constitute a 
de facto   forfeiture of the employee’s 
statutory rights. The only way that an arbitration 
agreement of the sort at issue here can be lawful is if the 
employer assumes responsibility for the payment of the 
arbitrator’s compensation.  
 
105 F.3d at 1468 (footnote omitted). Thus, Cole stands for the 
proposition that, where no provision is made for the payment of 
arbitration costs, and where arbitration of a Title VII claim is 
compelled in the employment context, an employer can be ordered 
35
  
   
 
 The appropriate course for the circuit court was to examine 
the arbitration agreement as a whole to determine whether parts 
of it could be severed, or whether the entire arbitration 
agreement should be invalidated. Under our case law, in the 
context of illegal contracts, a partially invalidated agreement 
may nevertheless be upheld if the invalid provisions are 
severable from the valid provisions. See, e.g., Beneficial 
Hawaii, Inc. v. Kida , 96 Hawai i 289, 311, 30 P.3d 895, 917  
(2001) (“Thus, the general rule is that sever ance of an illegal 
provision of a contract is warranted and the lawful portion of the agreement is enforceable when the illegal provision is not 
central to the parties’ agreement and the illegal provision does 
                     
    
  
 
 8 to bear all arbitration costs.   Cole appears to be an outlier in  
judicially creating a condition that an employer pay for 
arbitration costs; other courts address unconscionable 
arbitration cost provisions by severing offending provisions or  
invalidating the arbitration agreement altogether.   See, e.g., 
Adams, 279 F.3d 889; Ingle, 328 F.3d 1165; Ferguson, 298 F.3d 
778 (all applying California contract law).    
E. 
	The circuit court erred in declining to invalidate the 
entire arbitration provision. 
8 Green Tree  has called into question Cole’s continuing viability. In 
Shatteen v. Omni Hotels Mgmt. Corp. , 113 
F.Supp.3d 176, 182 n.3 (D.C.D.C. 
2015), the D.C. District Court doubted whether Cole 
remained good law, 
noting, “ Cole
’s holding is, in any event, on shaky ground in light of the 
Supreme Court’s subsequent decision in  Green Tree Financial, which eschews 
any per se ban on fee shifting in the arbitral context.” 
36
  
  
 
 
 
 not involve serious moral turpitude, unless such a result is 
prohibited by statute.”);  Ai v. Frank Huff Agency, Ltd.,  61 Haw. 
607, 607 P.2d 1304 (1980), overruled on other  grounds by 
Robert’s Haw. Sch.   Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Trans. Co.  , 91 
Hawaii  224, 982 P.2d 853 (1999) (“It is well settled under 
ordinary contract law, however, that a partially illegal 
contract may be upheld if the illegal portion is severable from 
the part which is legal.”) (citations omitted).     
Similarly, in the context of u
nconscionable contracts, the 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 208 (1981) states, “If a 
contract or term thereof is unconscionable at the time the 
contract is made a court may refuse to enforce the contract, or may enforce the remainder of the contract without the 
unconscionable term, or may so limit the application of any 
unconscionable term as to avoid any unconscionable result.” 
Comment g to the Restatement elaborates, “Where a term rather 
than the whole contract is unconscionable, the appropriate 
remedy is ordinarily to deny effect to the unconscionable term.” 
Other jurisdictions following the Restatement, however, 
have articulated circumstances under which invalidation of an 
entire arbitration provision, not just severance of an 
unconscionable term, is necessary, where no part of the 
arbitration provision can be spared and given effect.  For 
example, in New Mexico, where an unconscionable provision in an 
37
  
  Even more similar to this case, the Washington Supreme  
Court held, “Severance is the usual remedy for substantive ly 
unconscionable terms, but where such terms ‘pervade’ an 
arbitration agreement, [the Washington courts] refuse to sever 
those provisions and declare the entire agreement void.” Gandee 
v. LDL Freedom Enters., Inc. , 293 P.3d 1197, 1199-1200 (Wash. 
2013) (citation omitted). In Gandee, the Washington Supreme 
Court invalidated an entire arbitration agreement due to 
pervasive substantively unconscionable terms, thereby affirming 
the denial of a motion to compel arbitration. 293 P.3d at 1203.  
 
 
 arbitration agreement is “central” to the means by which the 
parties would arbitrate their claims, severance of the 
unconscionable provision is not possible, and the entire 
arbitration agreement must be invalidated. See Felts v. CLK  
Mgmt., Inc., 254 P.3d 124, 139 (N.M. 2011). In Felts, the New 
Mexico Supreme Court invalidated an entire arbitration agreement 
due to a substantively unconscionable class action ban that was 
central to the parties’ agreement to arbitrate. 254 P.3d at 
140. 
In this case, 
substantively unconscionable terms pervade 
the arbitration agreement. Therefore, no part of the arbitration agreement can be spared and given effect. Again, 
the entire provision states 
L. Arbitration. The parties desire that any dispute 
concerning the Agreement be handled out of court.  
38
  
  
 
 
  Accordingly, they agree that any such dispute shall, as the 
parties’ sole and exclusive remedy, be submitted to an 
arbitrator licensed to practice law in the State of Hawaii 
and selected in accordance with the standard procedures of 
Dispute Prevention Hawaii [sic]. The arbitrator will not 
be entitled to add to or subtract from its terms. Should either party start any legal action or administrative 
proceeding against the other with respect to any claim 
related to this Agreement, or pursue any method of 
resolution of a dispute other than mutual agreement of the 
parties or arbitration, then all damages, costs, expenses and attorneys’ fees incurred by the other party as a result 
shall be the responsibility of the one bringing the suit or 
starting the proceeding.  
 
The employment agreement contains a severability provision, 
which states, “Should any provision of this contract be 
invalidated by a court of law with proper jurisdiction, the 
remaining provisions shall remain in fu ll force and effect.”   
Although the circuit court did not review each provision in the arbitration agreement for its enforceability, “this court may 
nonetheless [do so] because unconscionability is a question of 
law, reviewable de novo.” 
Balogh, 134 Hawai i at 42-43, 332 P.3d 
at 644-45.   
We note that the second sentence in the arbitration 
provision incorporates, by reference, DPR’s cost -splitting 
rules. 
The circuit court implicitly found this provision 
unconscionable, and we agree. The third sentence states, “The 
arbitrator will not be entitled to add or subtract from its 
terms.” With the second sentence invalidated, there remains no 
grammatical referent for the “its” in the third sentence, which 
39
  
  We also note that the last sentence in the arbitration 
9 agreement (the fee-shifting provision) is obviously unfair.    The 
fee-shifting provision requires the party challenging 
arbitration to pay the other party’s attorney’s fees and costs ,  
solely for challenging the arbitration provision in court, and  
even if the challenge is meritorious and/or successful.  Under  
this provision, because Gabriel initiated these proceedings, she 
would have to pay for all of the “damages, costs, expenses, and 
attorney’s fees” incurred by IPA thus far, simply for 
challenging the arbitration provision in court, and  even though 
                     
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    9 appears to refer back to the procedures mentioned in the second 
sentence. Therefore, the third sentence must be stricken.  
We note that, at oral argument, IPA’s counsel represented that the 
substance of the fee- shifting provision in the arbitration agreement “was not 
presented below. It was not presented in the briefing [before the Hawai i 
Supreme Court],” and that it was “presented for the first time at oral 
argument” by this court. http://www.courts.state.hi.us/supreme_court_oa_scap -15-912 at 34:14- 27.  
IPA’s counsel went on to represent that he “ha[d]n’t even read the clause,” because “it wasn’t presented at the circuit court and it wasn’t presented in 
briefing before [the Hawai i Supreme Court].” 
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/supreme_court_oa_scap -15-912 at 52:17- 28. 
IPA’s counsel misstates the record.  The fee- shifting provision in the 
arbitration clause appeared in IPA’s briefing before the circuit court and 
before this court. In briefing before the circuit court, IPA argued, “The 
Court should award Defendant’s attorneys’ fees in bring ing this motion 
because the parties agreed to that as part of the arbitration agreement,” and 
quoted the final sentence of the arbitration agreement.  In briefing before 
this court, IPA referred specifically to the fee -shifting provision in the 
point of error regarding the circ uit court’s denial of an award of fees, as 
follows: “Because of the parties’ agreement to the party opposing arbitration paying the fees of the party required to compel it, and because 
of the frivolousness of Gabriel’s arguments in opposition to complying with 
her agreement to arbitrate, the Court should order her to pay the reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by IPA to enforce the parties’ agreement to 
arbitrate Gabriel’s claims.”  Therefore, the substance of the fee -shifting 
provision in the arbitration agreement was not raised by this court for the 
first time at oral argument, and it has been raised throughout these 
proceedings by IPA itself. 
40
  
   
 
  
 
 
 This court invalidated the entire arbitration agreement; 
therefore, the fee-shifting provision within the arbitration 
agreement cannot serve as the basis for an award of attorney’s 
fees and costs to IPA. Further, as Gabriel’s opposition to 
IPA’s motion to compel was not frivolous, as it legitimately 
challenged an unconscionable arbitration agreement, an award of 
attorney’s fees and costs was not warranted under the circuit 
court’s inherent power.   Therefore, the circuit court did not 
abuse its discretion in denying IPA’s request for attorney’s fees and costs.  
 she won this appeal. 
This provision is plainly substantively 
unconscionable and must be stricken as well. What remains in the arbitration agreement is just the first sentence, which 
states only, “The parties desire that any dispute concerning the 
Agreement be handled out of court.” Arbitration is not 
mentioned in this sentence. Therefore, the remaining sentence does not clearly evidence the parties’ desire to arbitrate their 
claims. It cannot serve as a basis for compelling arbitration. 
In effect, no part of the arbitration agreement remains. 
Consequently, the circuit court erred in compelling arbitration 
in this case. 
F.   The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying 
IPA’s request for attorney’s fees and costs.  
41
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
        V. Conclusion 
We conclude that (1) this court has jurisdiction over this 
appeal; (2) the circuit court correctly concluded that the 
parties entered into a valid arbitration agreement; (3) the 
cost-splitting requirement in the arbitration agreement is 
unconscionable; (4) however, the circuit court improperly 
reformed the arbitration agreement to require IPA to pay all 
arbitration costs instead of invalidating the entire arbitration 
agreement; and (5) the circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion in denying IPA’s request for attorney’s fees and 
costs. Consequently, we vacate the circuit court’s order 
compelling arbitration and remand this case to the circuit court 
for further proceedings. 
Joseph T. Rosenbaum     
for plaintiff/appellant-  
cross-appellee      /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
Jeffrey S. Harris  
 
for defendant/appellee-  
cross-appellant    
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
42
 