 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAP-22-0000557 28-AUG-2024 12:35 PM Dkt. 38 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
---o0o---
WILLIE KAUPIKO; KA‘ IMI KAUPIKO; MIKE NAKACHI; FOR THE FISHES; 
CENTER FOR BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY; and KAI PALAOA, 
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees, 
 
vs. 
 
BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES, STATE OF HAWAI‘ I; and 
DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES, STATE OF HAWAI‘I, 
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants, 
 
and 
 
PET INDUSTRY JOINT ADVISORY COUNCIL, 
Defendant-Intervenor-Appellee/Cross-Appellee. 
SCAP-22-0000557 
 
APPEAL FROM THE ENVIRONMENTAL COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-22-0000557; CASE NO. 1CCV-21-0000892) 
AUGUST 28, 2024 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., AND EDDINS, JJ., AND 
CIRCUIT JUDGE TONAKI AND CIRCUIT JUDGE PARK, 
ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCIES, 
WITH McKENNA, J., CONCURRING IN PART AND DISSENTING IN PART  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This case concerns environmental review of commercial 
aquarium fishing permits. 
In 2017, this court ruled in Umberger
v. Dep’t of Land & Nat. Res., 140 Hawai‘ i 500, 403 P.3d 277 
(2017) that the commercial aquarium collection permitting 
process is subject to environmental review under the Hawai
ʻi 
Environmental Policy Act (HEPA). We held that commercial 
aquarium collection is not exempt from HEPA review because, as a 
matter of law, “a permit for extraction of an unlimited number 
of aquatic life cannot be said to constitute only a ‘minor 
alteration’ in the condition of State waters and submerged 
lands.” Id. at 525, 403 P.3d at 302 (quoting Hawai‘ i 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 11-200-8(a)(4) (2018) (repealed 
2019)) (brackets and footnote omitted). On remand, the environmental court issued an order voiding all existing 
commercial aquarium permits issued pursuant to Hawai‘ i Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 188-31 (2011) and enjoining the Hawai‘ i 
Department of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR) from issuing or 
renewing further permits without completion of HEPA review. 
After the Umberger
 injunction, the Pet Industry Joint 
Advisory Council (PIJAC) prepared an environmental impact statement (EIS) in pursuit of permits to continue commercial 
aquarium fishing in the West Hawai‘ i Reef Fishery Management Area 
2  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(WHRFMA). The Board of Land and Natural Resources (BLNR or the 
State) initially rejected the EIS for fourteen reasons. PIJAC 
revised the EIS and published it. During the mandatory public 
comment period, the EIS received extensive feedback, including 
from the plaintiffs-appellants in this case. PIJAC then 
submitted the final EIS to BLNR. After another hearing, BLNR 
voted 3-3 because the seventh member of the Board was absent, and the revised final EIS (RFEIS) was “deemed to be accepted” by 
operation of law. See HRS § 343-5(e) (2022). 
Plaintiffs sued BLNR in the Environmental Court for 
the First Circuit, seeking declaratory and injunctive relief 
concerning the default acceptance of the RFEIS. The 
environmental court ruled against Plaintiffs, finding that, 
under the “rule of reason,” the EIS adequately disclosed facts 
so that the agency could render an informed decision. 
Plaintiffs appealed and applied for transfer, which we accepted. Separately, the State cross-appealed from the environmental 
court’s denial of its motion to dismiss. The State argues that 
the 3-3 vote does not constitute state action and accordingly, 
it should not be charged with defending the EIS. 
We hold that (1) the State is a proper defendant to 
the case and should defend the EIS; (2) a reviewing court should 
consider the “rule of reason” in conjunction with HEPA’s content requirements in evaluating an EIS; and (3) the EIS here was 
3  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
legally sufficient because it both met HEPA’s content 
requirements and contained information sufficient for BLNR to 
make an informed decision. We therefore affirm the 
environmental court’s denial of the State’s motion to dismiss 
and its grant of summary judgment for PIJAC. 
II. BACKGROUND 
To improve the management of fishing and fishery 
resources in Hawai‘ i, the legislature created the WHRFMA throug
Act 306 in 1998. See 1998 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 306, § 1 at 985-
86. 
In doing so, it “recognize[d] the scientific support for 
establishing fish replenishment areas where no fishing is 
allowed as an effective means to enhance stocks of sport fish 
and food fish.” Id. at 986. The Act directed DLNR to set asid
at least thirty percent of the West Hawai‘ i coastline as fish 
replenishment areas (FRAs) where aquarium fish collecting is 
prohibited. Id. Commercial collectors can seek permits to fis
in the WHRFMA from the DLNR pursuant to HRS § 188-31 and its 
associated administrative rules. See Umberger, 140 Hawai‘ i at 
504, 403 P.3d at 281.  h 
e 
h 
In 2017, this court held in Umberger
 that HRS § 188-
31’s commercial aquarium collection permitting process is 
subject to environmental review under HEPA. Id. at 528, 403 
P.3d at 305. Aquarium collection is not exempt from HEPA review because, as a matter of law, “a permit for extraction of an 
4  
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
unlimited number of aquatic life cannot be said to constitute 
only a ‘minor alteration’ in the condition of State waters and 
submerged land.” Id. at 525, 403 P.3d at 302 (quoting Hawai‘ i 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 11-200-8(a)(4) (2018) (repealed 
2019)) (brackets and footnote omitted). 
On remand, the 
environmental court issued an order voiding all existing commercial aquarium permits issued pursuant to HRS § 188-31 
across the state and enjoining DLNR from issuing or renewing 
further permits without completion of HEPA review. 
HRS § 343-2 (2010) defines an EIS as, 
an informational document prepared in compliance with the rules 
adopted under section 343- 6 and which discloses the environmental 
effects of a proposed action, effects of a proposed action on the economic welfare, social welfare, and cultural practices of the 
community and State, effects of the economic activities arising 
out of the proposed action, measures proposed to minimize adverse effects, and alternatives to the action and their environmental 
effects.  
  Broadly, an applicant seeking to carry out an “action” 
under HRS § 343-5 (2010) must engage in environmental review — 
either an environmental assessment or an EIS.  HAR § 11-200-1 
(2018) explained that HRS Chapter 343 21
establishes a system of environmental review at the state 
and county levels which shall ensure that environmental 
1 The type of environmental review at issue here is an EIS. 
Environmental assessments, which are a different type of review, are 
therefore not discussed further. 
2 HAR § 11- 200 was replaced with HAR § 11- 200.1 in 2019.  HAR § 11-
200 (2018) is applicable because the EIS was published in 2018, before the 
new rules were adopted. In any event, the relevant rules are substantively 
much the same. 
5  
 
  
 
  HAR § 11-200-17 (2018) (now codified at HAR § 11-
200.1-24) contained the content requirements for an EIS, which 
includes a description of the action, significant beneficial and
adverse impacts, proposed mitigation measure, alternatives 
considered, and unresolved issues, and amongst several other 
requirements. HAR § 11-200-23 (2018) (repealed 2019) provided 
the rule for the acceptability of an EIS. An EIS is reviewed by
a government agency — in this case, BLNR — which may or may not 
accept the EIS. See HRS § 343-5(e). If the agency denies the 
EIS, it can provide reasons for doing so and the applicant can 
submit a revised EIS. See id., HAR §  11-200-23(e) (2018) 
(repealed 2019). 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
concerns are given appropriate consideration in decision making along with economic and technical considerations. The purpose of this chapter is to provide agencies and 
persons with procedures, specifications of contents of 
environmental assessments and environmental impact 
statements, and criteria and definitions of statewide 
application. 
 
 
On appeal, courts use “rule of reason” analysis to 
review an accepted EIS: 
In reviewing a challenge to an accepted EIS, this court 
“uses the ‘ rule of reason’ to determine whether an EIS is 
legally sufficient in adequately disclosing facts to enable 
a decision- making body to render an informed decision.” 
Citizens for Prot. of 
N. Kohala Coastline v. Cnty. of 
Hawai‘i, 91 Hawai‘i 94, 107, 979 P.2d 1120, 1133 (1999) 
(brackets and citation omitted). Under the “rule of reason,” 
an EIS need not be exhaustive to the point of 
discussing all possible details bearing on the 
proposed action but will be upheld as adequate if it 
has been compiled in good faith and sets forth 
sufficient information to enable the decision
-maker 
to consider fully the environmental factors involved 
6  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and to make a reasoned decision after balancing the 
risks of harm to the environment against the benefits to be derived from the proposed action, as well as to 
make a reasoned choice between alternatives. 
Kaleikini v. Yoshioka, 128 Hawai‘ i 53, 67, 283 P.3d 60, 74 
 
(2012) (quoting Price v. Obayashi Hawai
‘i Corp., 81 Hawai‘ i 171, 
182, 914 P.2d 1364, 1375 (1996)).  
A. Procedural Background 
1. BLNR proceedings 
After the Umberger
 injunction, PIJAC prepared an EIS 
in pursuit of permits to continue commercial aquarium fishing in 
the WHRFMA. In May 2020, BLNR held a public meeting to 
determine if the EIS satisfied HEPA. BLNR voted unanimously to 
reject it, citing fourteen reasons for the rejection. In 
accordance with procedure in effect at the time, PIJAC appealed 
BLNR’s non-acceptance to the environmental council, which 
affirmed BLNR’s decision but held that BLNR’s reasons 4, 11, and 
14 were arbitrary and capricious. Plaintiffs appealed to the 
environmental court, arguing they should have been allowed to intervene and that the council’s holding regarding Reason 11 was 
wrong. In March 2021, the environmental court vacated the 
Environmental Council’s decision and remanded to BLNR for 
further proceedings. Those proceedings were cut short, however, 
7  
 
   
  
  
 
   
   
   
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
when Act 1523 took effect in July 2021, which transferred the 
Environmental Council’s jurisdiction over EIS rejection appeals 
to the environmental court. See 2021 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 152 
§ 15 at 576. 
PIJAC began preparing a revised EIS. It published the 
revised draft EIS (RDEIS) in February 2021. During the mandatory public comment period, fisherman Willie Kaupiko, conservation and animal protection organizations For the Fishes 
and Center for Biological Diversity, and native Hawaiian 
cultural practitioners Kai Palaoa (collectively, Plaintiffs) 
commented extensively. Plaintiffs identified what they believed 
to be deficiencies identical to those of the initial EIS. PIJAC 
published the 1,585-page RFEIS in June 2021. Later that month, 
following a public meeting on whether the RFEIS complied with 
HEPA, three BLNR members voted to accept and three voted to 
reject the statement. [https://files.hawaii.gov/dlnr/meeting/audio/Audio-LNR-210625-
1.m4a] 
3 Act 152 replaced the Environmental Council with the Environmental 
Advisory Council and administratively transferred the Environmental Advisory 
Council from the Department of Health to the Office of Planning and 
Sustainable Development. See 2021 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 152 § 2 at 567. 
HRS § 341-6 (2022) sets out the functions of the Environmental Advisory 
Council. The purpose of Act 152 was to “transfer the purpose, functions, and duties of the office of environmental quality control and environmental 
council to the office of planning to improve the coordination of these 
related planning functions so state government can work more efficiently to achieve the State’s long- term environmental quality goals for a more abundant 
future for the people of Ha wai‘i.”  Id., § 1 at 567. 
8  
 
  
 
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Ordinarily, BLNR sits as a seven-member board. 
However, one member was absent from the public hearing on the 
subject RFEIS. Without a subsequent meeting, the RFEIS was 
“deemed to be accepted” by operation of law. See HRS § 343-5(e) 
(“The agency receiving the request, within thirty days of 
receipt of the final statement, shall notify the applicant and 
the office of the acceptance or nonacceptance of the final statement. The final statement shall be deemed to be accepted
if the agency fails to accept or not accept the final statement 
within thirty days after receipt of the final 
statement.”) (Emphasis added). 
2. Environmental court proceedings In July 2021, Plaintiffs sued the DLNR and BLNR 
(collectively, the State) in the Environmental Court for the First Circuit, seeking declaratory and injunctive relief 
concerning the default acceptance of the RFEIS.
4 The 
environmental court permitted PIJAC’s request to intervene in 
the case. The State then filed a motion to dismiss, arguing the 
State was not the proper defendant in the suit because the 
RFEIS’s “‘acceptance’ was achieved by by operation of law and 
not due to any ‘decision’ by the Agency.” The environmental 
4 The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided. 
9  
 
   
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
court denied the State’s motion to dismiss. That denial is the 
subject of the State’s cross-appeal. 
Plaintiffs moved for summary judgment, challenging 
BLNR’s acceptance of the RFEIS on the basis of content 
deficiencies. The environmental court determined that the 
requirements under HAR § 11-200-23(e) do not impose a higher 
standard than the otherwise applicable “rule of reason” 
established in Price, 81 Hawaiʻ i 171, 914 P.2d 1364.  The Price
rule of reason states that, in evaluating an EIS, “we use the 
‘rule of reason’ to determine whether the EIS is legally 
sufficient in adequately disclosing facts to enable a decision-making body to render an informed decision.” Id. at 182, 914 
P.2d at 1375 (quoting Life of the Land v. Ariyoshi, 59 Haw. 156, 164-65, 577 P.2d 1116, 1121 (1978)). Therefore, the question at 
issue was whether the RFEIS disclosed sufficient information to 
enable BLNR to make an informed decision. In its August 16, 
2022 Ruling on Plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment, the 
environmental court analyzed the initial non-acceptance of the initial EIS, how the RFEIS addressed the reasons for that non-
acceptance, and other deficiencies alleged by Plaintiffs. 
a. Initial non-acceptance: catch/sustainability 
levels 
BLNR rejected the initial EIS in part due to its 
reliance on a non-peer-reviewed field manual that stated that 
10  
 
   
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
taking five to twenty-five percent of a fish population is a 
sustainable level of annual take. The RFEIS abandoned that take 
level in favor of a catch limit based on a twenty-year historic 
average catch from the entire WHRFMA, or 1% of the population 
estimate. In other words, for each of the eight “white-listed” 
(permitted) species, the RFEIS proposed a catch quota. To 
calculate the catch quota for each species, the RFEIS used either the twenty-year historic average catch rate from the 
entire WHRFMA, or it used 1% of the population estimate from a 
2019 survey. This stands in contrast with the initial EIS’s 
proposed catch quota, which was 5-25% of each of forty species. 
The environmental court cited multiple sections of the body and 
the appendices of the RFEIS that discussed the sustainability 
level of the proposed take on a species-by-species basis and 
determined that the RFEIS disclosed sufficient information 
regarding catch levels to enable BLNR to make an informed decision. 
b. Initial non-acceptance: relevant negative 
findings 
BLNR also rejected PIJAC’s initial EIS on the basis of 
its failure to account for the harmful impacts of aquarium 
collection, citing, for example, the reduced numbers of aquarium 
fish at certain collection cites discussed in a 2003 article by 
Brian Tissot and Leon Hallacher. In response, PIJAC argued two 
11  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
points before the environmental court: (1) the RFEIS cannot be 
accepted or rejected on the basis of an alleged failure to 
discuss a single article, one which was disclosed and commented 
on in the RFEIS and the authors of which co-signed a letter to 
BLNR supporting the RFEIS; and (2) the RFEIS must be assessed in 
its entirety. 
The environmental court quoted sections of both the 
body and appendix of the RFEIS that discussed the impact of the proposed catch on the species most affected in the WHRFMA. 
It 
further cited a comment letter from a member of the State of 
Hawai iʻ Division of Aquatic Resources (DAR) supporting the RFEIS 
in discussing the impacts of the proposed take within the WHRFMA. The environmental court concluded that the RFEIS 
disclosed sufficient information regarding the impacts of 
aquarium fishing on the proposed fish species to allow BLNR to 
make an informed decision. 
c. Initial rejection: cultural impacts 
BLNR also rejected the initial EIS due to its failure 
to sufficiently consider the cultural impact of the proposed 
aquarium fishing program. 
PIJAC argued that data disclosed in 
the RFEIS show that the eight targeted fish populations are sustainable and therefore, the proposed take should not 
negatively impact cultural practices of those that rely on the 
WHRFMA, while acknowledging that cultural practitioners may view 
12  
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
any amount of take as harmful. The environmental court quoted 
excerpts from the body and appendix of the RFEIS, noting that 
the appended “Cultural Impact Assessment” in the RFEIS is 146 
pages. The Cultural Impact Assessment can be found, in its 
entirety, in Appendix A to the RFEIS, and the assessment’s 
conclusions are summarized in the “Executive Summary” in the 
body of the RFEIS. 
Further, the environmental court cited the section of 
the RFEIS analyzing the proposed take of the eight selected species, noting that each individual section included a sub-
section on the cultural significance for that species. The 
court acknowledged that the cultural impact of the collection of 
the proposed species is subject to disagreement as seen in the 
appended comments to the RFEIS. It concluded that this 
disagreement is not in itself grounds for rejecting the RFEIS 
and determined that the RFEIS sufficiently disclosed the differences to allow BLNR to make an informed decision. 
In addition to analyzing BLNR’s reasons for rejecting 
the initial EIS, the environmental court also evaluated 
Plaintiffs’ arguments in their motion for summary judgment 
(MSJ), as detailed below. Plaintiffs argued that BLNR violated 
HEPA when it failed to reject the RFEIS for not satisfying 
various HEPA EIS content requirements including PIJAC’s the baseline fish population, economic impacts, and mitigation 
13  
 
  
  
  
  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
measures. They also contend that “since BLNR rejected PIJAC’s 
Oahu EIS just a few months later for some of the same concerns 
as the instant EIS, the Board’s approval of the Big Island RFEIS 
was arbitrary and capricious.” Plaintiffs argued that these 
alleged content deficiencies are fatal to the RFEIS. 
d. O‘ahu FEIS 
In tandem with its WHRFMA RFEIS, PIJAC had prepared 
and submitted a final EIS (FEIS) on behalf of commercial aquarium fishermen seeking collection permits on the island of 
O‘ahu. In October 2021, not long after it evaluated the WHRFMA 
RFEIS at issue in this case, BLNR considered the sufficiency of the O‘ahu FEIS at a public hearing. On a motion for non-
acceptance, BLNR voted 6-0
5 to not accept the FEIS. 
BLNR determined that the O‘ ahu FEIS “fail[ed] to 
provide sufficient information about the anticipated 
impacts . . . and where impacts [we]re identified, it fail[ed] 
to set forth appropriate mitigation measures to avoid, minimize, 
rectify, or reduce those impacts.” Plaintiffs argued that, 
because BLNR rejected the O‘ ahu EIS for similar concerns as the 
WHRFMA RFEIS, BLNR’s approval of the WHRFMA RFEIS was arbitrary 
and capricious. The environmental court disagreed, finding that each EIS “stands or fails on its own merits” and that factors 
5 One voting member abstained. 
14  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that lead to the rejection of one EIS may not be weighed equally 
for another. 
e. Baseline fish population 
Plaintiffs further argued that HEPA requires an EIS to 
disclose and discuss cumulative impacts over time, including the impact of the proposed commercial aquarium take on the baseline 
fish population. It claimed that this EIS’s depleted baseline 
fish data did not give BLNR sufficient information to make an 
informed decision. The environmental court quoted a five-page 
section from the RFEIS discussing the “best available science” on baseline fish populations in the WHRFMA. It determined that, while 
the parties disagree on the quality of and proper method of 
analyzing baseline fish population data, there is no dispute that 
the RFEIS contained such information and discussion. The court 
ruled that such differences do not require BLNR to reject a RFEIS and found that the RFEIS disclosed and discussed sufficient 
information to permit BLNR to make an informed decision. 
f. Economic impacts 
Plaintiffs also argued that the RFEIS failed to 
satisfy HEPA’s economic impact disclosure requirements, asserting that the RFEIS only discussed revenue for the aquarium 
collectors. They averred that the RFEIS failed to address a 
2021 cost-benefit analysis article (Schaar and Cox), claiming that the article supported its position. The environmental 
15  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
court disagreed, finding that the RFIES discussed the article in 
multiple places in the appendices. Citing additional sections 
of the RFEIS’s body and appendix, the court held that the RFEIS 
sufficiently discussed statewide socioeconomic issues and per-
fish economic impacts to allow BLNR to make an informed 
decision. 
g. Mitigation Measures 
Plaintiffs argued that BLNR violated HEPA when it 
failed to reject the RFEIS because it did not discuss mitigation 
measures as statutorily required under HRS § 343-2 and HAR 
§ 11-200-17(b)(3) (2018) (repealed 2019). Specifically, 
Plaintiffs pointed to the RFEIS’s lack of analysis on the issue 
of reporting catch data by smaller, “local areas,” as opposed to 
larger, “zones,” a practice that may disguise overfishing or 
depletion. Plaintiffs’ argument here is emblematic of several 
of their arguments. They consider the failure to include specific content as fatal to the RFEIS, despite discussion of 
other relevant content in the body and appendices of the RFEIS. 
The RFEIS discusses mitigation measures — for example, its 
reduction of the types of species from forty to eight — but not 
all of the mitigation measures that Plaintiffs assert are 
relevant or required. 
The environmental court referenced an email appended 
to the RFEIS describing Fishery Management Areas (FMAs) as 
16  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
having successfully spurred increases in the populations of the 
most abundantly captured fish. While not adopting these 
findings, the court considered their discussion to be 
representative of the fact that the RFEIS disclosed and 
discussed information on existing FMA mitigation that was 
sufficient to permit BLNR to make an informed decision. 
h. Alleged deficiencies related to the DAR 
Determination 
DAR submitted a Determination document prepared by its 
staff, weighing in on whether the RFEIS complies with applicable 
law. The DAR Determination raised concerns regarding the proposed take for two of the eight species but ultimately 
concluded that “the RFEIS sets forth sufficient information to 
consider fully the environmental impacts of the proposed action 
and make a reasoned decision.” As to coral reef health, the DAR 
recommended that the issue be “carefully considered” in future 
decisions up to and including during the permitting process. 
Plaintiffs assert that this recommendation violated HEPA because 
a full environmental review at the earliest practicable time is 
a condition precedent to acceptance of an EIS. The environmental court agreed that BLNR’s environmental review must 
be “front-loaded” to allow early and informed decision-making, 
but the court concluded that the RFEIS did disclose and discuss 
impacts to coral reefs and the two species the DAR Determination 
17  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
identified. The environmental court further noted that the DAR 
Determination ultimately supported the RFEIS. While not 
adopting DAR’s statement, the environmental court found that the 
statement indicated that the DAR’s concerns did not lead to the 
conclusion that the RFEIS disclosed insufficient information for 
BLNR to make an informed decision. 
On August 16, 2022, the environmental court entered 
its written Ruling denying Plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment. It held that as a matter of law, “the RFEIS provided 
sufficient information to enable the Board to make an informed 
and reasoned decision” under the Price “rule of reason” 
standard. The court noted that it ruled exclusively on whether 
the RFEIS disclosed sufficient information to enable BLNR to 
make an informed decision, rather than “decide which side of the 
3-3 vote was ‘correct.’” 
On September 12, 2022, the environmental court entered 
a written order denying Plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment, as well as a final judgment in favor of the defendants, the 
State and PIJAC, and against all plaintiffs. 
3. Appellate proceedings Plaintiffs appealed the environmental court’s order 
denying their motion for summary judgment and the environmental court’s final judgment. The State filed a cross-appeal 
18  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
regarding the environmental court’s denial of the State’s motion 
to dismiss. 
In its opening brief before the ICA, the State argued 
a single point of error: the environmental court erred in ruling 
that a tie vote by BLNR resulting in acceptance by operation of 
law under HRS § 343-5(e) was a “decision” by BLNR to accept the 
RFEIS, such that BLNR must be named in any lawsuit seeking judicial review on the merits. It claimed that the tie vote on 
the motion to accept the RFEIS did not constitute a “decision” 
and that “[i]t would be absurd to force the Agency [BLNR] to 
defend a ‘decision’ it did not make.” (Emphasis omitted.) The 
State argues that to interpret HRS § 343-5(e) otherwise would 
render the statute a nullity and force BLNR to “expend 
significant time and resources to defendant a ‘decision’ that 
the Agency did not make.” (Emphasis omitted.) Pointing to 
language of HRS § 343-7(c)(2022), the State argued that the statute is silent on who is required to defend a challenge to an 
acceptance of an EIS. The State further argues that PIJAC, and 
not BLNR, is the proper defendant because PIJAC authored and 
proposed the RFEIS to BLNR. 
In February 2023, Plaintiffs timely applied for 
transfer to this court. We accepted transfer in March 2023. In 
their appeal, Plaintiffs assert that the environmental court erred for three reasons: (1) the court misapplied the “rule of 
19  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reason” standard under Price; (2) the court “[i]mproperly relied 
on the contents of [RFEIS] comment letters and responses instead 
of the disclosure and analysis that must be included in the 
revised EIS itself;” and (3) the court “[f]ailed to uphold 
HEPA’s requirements to disclose environmental impacts,” 
including aquarium collection’s cumulative impacts, the impacts 
of concentrated take, the economic impacts to the broader 
community and State of Hawaiʻ i, and the impacts of increasing 
take for some species far beyond historical catch levels. The 
parties finished briefing the case after we accepted transfer. 
III. Standards of Review 
A. Agency Determinations Under HEPA 
Under HEPA, “whether or not an agency has followed 
proper procedures or considered the appropriate factors in making its determination is a question of law, and will be 
reviewed de novo.” Kia‘i Wai v. Dep’t of Water, 151 Hawai‘ i 442, 
454, 517 P.3d 725, 737 (2022). 
B. Environmental Impact Statement Sufficiency 
The sufficiency of an EIS is a “question of law, which 
is properly addressed through the summary judgment procedure. This is because the only question presented is whether the EIS 
complies with applicable statutory mandates, such as HRS chapter 
343 and EIS Rules chapter [11-]200.” Price
, 81 Hawai‘i at 182, 
914 P.2d at 1375. 
20  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Courts use the “rule of reason” in determining the 
sufficiency of the EIS. 
[W]e use the “rule of reason” to determine whether the EIS is legally sufficient in adequately disclosing facts to 
enable a decision- making body to render an informed 
decision. Life of the Land v. Ariyoshi, 59 Haw. 156, 164, 
577 P.2d 1116, 1121 (1978). 
In Life of the Land, we enunciated the standard of 
review that governs a court’ s determination as to whether 
an EIS satisfies the statutory requirements: 
In making such a determination the court is 
guided by the “rule of reason,” under which an 
EIS need not be exhaustive to the point of 
discussing all possible details bearing on the proposed action but will be upheld as adequate 
if it has been compiled in good faith and sets 
forth sufficient information to enable the 
decision- maker to consider fully the 
environmental factors involved and to make a 
reasoned decision after balancing the risks of 
harm to the environment against the benefits to 
be derived from the proposed action, as well as 
to make a reasoned choice between alternatives. 
Id. (quoting Life of the Land, 59 Haw. at 164-65, 577 P.2d at 
1121) (citation omitted). 
C. Motions to Dismiss 
“A trial court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss is 
reviewed de novo.” Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 
117 Hawai‘i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008).   
A complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state a 
claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can 
prove no set of facts in support of [their] claim that would entitle him or her to relief. This court must, 
therefore, view a plaintiff’s complaint in a light most 
favorable to [them] in order to determine whether the 
allegations contained therein could warrant relief under 
any alternate theory. . . . Consequently, in reviewing the 
[environmental] court’s order dismissing the plaintiffs’ 
complaint in this case, our consideration is strictly limited to the allegations of the complaint, and we must 
deem those allegations to be true. 
21  
 
  
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Kahala Royal Corp. v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 113 
Hawaiʻi 251, 266, 151 P.3d 732, 747 (2007) (quotation omitted). 
D. Motions for Summary Judgment 
“A trial court’s ruling on a motion for summary 
judgment is reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard.” Umberger, 140 Hawai‘ i at 512, 403 P.3d at 289 (citing Salera v. 
Caldwell, 137 Hawai‘ i
 409, 415, 375 P.3d 188, 194-95 (2016).  
 Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non- moving party. In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom 
in the light most favorable to the party opposing the 
motion.  
Id. at 527-28, 403 P.3d at 304-05 (quoting Lambert v. Waha, 137 
Hawai‘i 423, 432 n.9, 375 P.3d 202, 211 n.9 (2016)). 
E. Statutory Construction and Interpretation of Agency Rules 
“General principles of statutory construction apply” 
to this court’s interpretation of agency rules. Cmty. Ass’ns ofHualalai, Inc. v. Leeward Plan. Comm’n, 150 
Hawai‘i 241, 259, 500 
P.3d 426, 444 (2021) (citation omitted). 
If an administrative rule’s language is unambiguous, and 
its literal application is neither inconsistent with the 
policies of the statute the rule implements nor produces an 
absurd or unjust result, courts enforce the rule’s plain meaning. While an agency’s interpretation of its own rules 
22  
 
  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
is generally entitled to deference, this court does not 
defer to agency interpretations that are plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the underlying legislative purpose. 
Id. (citation omitted). 
IV. Discussion 
We first address the State’s motion to dismiss. Then 
we address whether a revised EIS must, in addition to the 
requirements of Price, also meet the requirements of HAR § 11-
200-23(e) and “fully address the inadequacies of the non-
accepted EIS.” Finally, we address whether the EIS at hand was 
sufficient. 
A. The State is a Proper Party to the Case 
The State argues that because the EIS was “deemed to 
be accepted” via the 3-3 BLNR vote, the State did not make an affirmative decision and thus should not be charged with defending this suit. See HRS § 343-5(e). Instead, the State 
argues, PIJAC should defend the merits of the RFEIS because PIJAC was the author of the RFEIS. The environmental court 
denied the State’s motion to dismiss. We affirm the 
environmental court’s denial. 
HRS § 343-5(e) states that a final EIS “shall be 
deemed to be accepted if the agency fails to accept or not accept the final statement within thirty days after receipt of 
the final [EIS].” HRS § 343-7(c) then provides for judicial 
review of the “acceptance or nonacceptance of an environmental 
23  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
impact statement required under section 343-5.” As to judicial 
review, HRS § 343-7(c) does not differentiate between whether 
the EIS was accepted by a majority vote or via deemed 
acceptance. Nor does any other part of the statute 
differentiate as to outcomes following from a deemed acceptance 
versus a majority-voted-upon acceptance. A deemed acceptance is 
still an acceptance, and it therefore subject to judicial review. 
The State cites to Haw. Elec. Light Co. v. Dep’t of 
Land & Nat. Res
., 102 Hawai‘i 257, 75 P.3d 160 (2003) (
HELCO). 
As the environmental court wrote, however, HELCO is “easily distinguishable.” That case involved HRS § 183-41(a) (1993) 
(repealed 1994), which provided, “if within one hundred eighty 
days after receipt of the application the department shall fail 
to give notice, hold a hearing, and render a decision, 
. . . [the] owner may [then] automatically put the owner’s land 
to the use or uses requested in the owner’s application.” Id.
at 262, 75 P.3d at 165 (quoting HRS § 183-41(a)). There, BLNR 
failed to make a decision on an applicant’s conservation 
district land use application. Id. at 270-71, 75 P.3d at 174-
75. Because BLNR neither granted nor declined the application 
in that case, we held that there was no decision capable of 
being reversed. Id.HELCO is inapplicable because the statute 
there had no deemed acceptance provision. 
24  
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The appeal of the acceptance of an EIS is just that — 
an appeal of the acceptance, not just the EIS itself. In 
creating a deemed acceptance provision, the legislature intended 
a tie vote to be construed as an acceptance (unlike in HELCO). 
And if PIJAC were the only necessary party to the case for 
judicial review, judicial review would be limited to only the 
content of the EIS and not the procedures used to decide upon it. We therefore affirm the environmental court’s denial of the 
State’s motion to dismiss. B. The Proper Standard for Court Review of a RFEIS is to 
Consider the Rule of Reason Along with HEPA’s Substantive Requirements 
The sufficiency of an EIS is a “question of law, which 
is properly addressed through the summary judgment procedure. 
This is because the only question presented is whether the EIS 
complies with applicable statutory mandates, such as HRS chapter 
343 and EIS Rules chapter [11-]200.” Price, 81 Hawai‘ i at 182, 
914 P.2d at 1375. 
Hawai‘i courts have used the “rule of reason” in 
determining the sufficiency of the EIS. 
[W]e use the “rule of reason” to determine whether the EIS 
is legally sufficient in adequately disclosing facts to 
enable a decision- making body to render an informed 
decision. Life of the Land v. Ariyoshi, 59 Haw. 156, 164, 
577 P.2d 1116, 1121 (1978).  
In Life of the Land, we enunciated the standard of review 
that governs a court's determination as to whether an EIS 
satisfies the statutory requirements:  
25  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In making such a determination the court is 
guided by the “rule of reason,” under which an EIS need not be exhaustive to the point of 
discussing all possible details bearing on the 
proposed action but will be upheld as adequate 
if it has been compiled in good faith and sets 
forth sufficient information to enable the decision- maker to consider fully the 
environmental factors involved and to make a reasoned decision after balancing the risks of 
harm to the environment against the benefits to 
be derived from the proposed action, as well as to make a reasoned choice between alternatives. 
County of Suffolk v. Secretary of Interior, 562 
F.2d 1368, 1375 (2d Cir.[ ]1977), cert. den., 
434 U.S. 1064[.] 
Price, 81 Hawai‘ i at 182, 914 P.2d at 1375 (quoting Life of the 
Land, 59 Haw. at 164-65, 577 P.2d at 1121). 
The environmental court here wrote the following: 
The court attempts to focus on 1) the reasons for the 
initial non- acceptance of the EIS, 2) whether the revised 
FEIS fully addressed those reasons, 3) whether the RFEIS 
completely discussed the changes made, and 4) whether the 
RFEIS satisfactorily addresses the findings and reasons for 
non-acceptance. See Section 11- 200-23(e).6 However, the 
court concludes these requirements under Section 11- 200-
23(e) ultimately do not impose any higher standard than the “rule of reason” set forth in Price. In other words, 
although Price was an EIS case, and although a revised EIS 
is required to address the non- accepted items from the 
initial EIS, the ultimate standard is still the rule of reason as set forth in Price: does the RFEIS adequately 
disclose sufficient facts to enable BLNR to render an 
informed decision? Since the Board voted 3- 3, reasonable 
minds can clearly differ on the issues raised. This court is not to decide which side of the 3- 3 vote was “correct.” 
6 HAR § 11- 200-23(e) reads: 
A non-accepted EIS may be revised by a proposing agency or applicant. The revision shall take the form of a revised draft EIS document which shall fully address the inadequacies of the non-accepted EIS and shall completely and thoroughly discuss the changes made. The requirements for filing, distribution, publication of availability for review, acceptance or non-acceptance, and notification and publication of acceptability shall be the same as the requirements prescribed by sections 11-200-20, 11-200-21, 11-200-22, and 11-200-23 for an EIS submitted for acceptance. In addition, the revised draft EIS shall be evaluated for acceptability on the basis of whether it satisfactorily addresses the findings and reasons for non-acceptance. 
26  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
This court’s job is to decide whether the RFEIS was legally 
sufficient. Did it adequately disclose facts so that the agency could render an informed decision? 
(Emphasis in original.) 
This court has not yet considered, in determining the 
sufficiency of an EIS, whether the rule of reason must be 
considered in conjunction with the content requirements provided 
by HEPA and the applicable HAR. Following precedent from the 
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), on which HEPA is 
modeled, we conclude that it should. 
Federal caselaw is instructive here. As a preliminary 
matter, the rule of reason is the backbone of NEPA precedent. 
See Dep’t of Transp. v. Pub. Citizen, 541 U.S. 752, 767 
(2004) (“[I]nherent in NEPA and its implementing regulations is 
a ‘rule of reason,’ which ensures that agencies determine whether and to what extent to prepare an EIS based on the 
usefulness of any new potential information to the 
decisionmaking process.”). In applying the rule of reason to an 
EIS, the Tenth Circuit wrote that the standard helps decide 
“whether claimed NEPA violations ‘are merely flyspecks, or are 
significant enough to defeat the goals of informed 
decisionmaking and informed public comment.’” Dine Citizens
Against Ruining our Env’t v. Bernhardt, 923 F.3d 831, 852 (10th 
Cir. 2019) (quoting Utahns for Better Transp. v. U.S. Dep’t of 
27  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Transp., 305 F.3d 1152, 1163 (10th Cir. 2002). Elsewhere, the 
Fourth Circuit wrote that: 
[the court] may not “flyspeck” [the] agency’s  environmental 
analysis, looking for any deficiency,  no matter how minor. 
Instead, we must take a  holistic view of what the agency 
has done to assess  environmental impact and examine all of 
the various  components of [the] agency’s environmental 
analysis.  .  . to determine, on the whole, whether the 
agency  has conducted the required “hard look.”  
Webster v. U.S. Dep’t of Agric., 685 F.3d 411, 421-22 (2012) (internal quotation marks omitted); see also Habitat Educ.
Ctr., Inc. v. U.S. Forest Serv., 673 F.3d 518 (7th Cir. 2012). 
Federal courts use the rule of reason and analyze 
whether alleged NEPA violations are “merely flyspecks, or are significant enough to defeat the goals of informed 
decisionmaking and informed public comment.” Utahns for Better
Transp., 305 F.3d at 1163. They also ensure that the agency had the information it needed to make an informed decision and took a hard look at the EIS and the environmental consequences. Our 
courts should do the same. 
A reviewing court in Hawai‘i should consider whether 
the EIS meets the content requirements set out by the HAR, using 
the rule of reason to ensure that the EIS was: 
compiled in good faith and sets forth sufficient 
information to enable the decision- maker to consider fully 
the environmental factors involved and to make a reasoned 
decision after balancing the risks of harm to the 
environment against the benefits to be derived from the 
proposed action, as well as to make a reasoned choice 
between alternatives. 
28  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Price, 81 Hawai‘i at 183, 914 P.2d at 1376 (quoting Life of the 
Land, 59 Haw. at 164-65, 577 P.2d at 1121). “Additionally, 
‘courts are reluctant to second guess the decision-making body 
regarding the sufficiency of an EIS.’” Kaleikini v. Yoshioka
, 
128 Hawai‘i 53, 67, 283 P.3d 60, 74 (2012) (quoting 
Price
, 81 
Hawai‘i at 182, 914 P.2d at 1375) (internal quotation marks 
omitted). 
The HAR sets forth the environmental factors that the 
court should consider. See
 HAR § 11-200-17. Those factors 
include (but are not limited to): the significant beneficial and 
adverse impacts (including cumulative impacts and secondary 
impacts), proposed mitigation measures, alternatives considered, 
unresolved issues, and compatibility with land use plans and 
policies. Overall, an EIS should “be sufficiently detailed to 
allow the comparative evaluation of the environmental benefits, costs, and risks of the proposed action and each reasonable 
alternative.” HAR § 11-200-17. 
The court should ensure that “the agency has taken a 
hard look at environmental factors, and, if the agency has 
followed the proper procedures, its action will only be set 
aside if the court finds the action to be arbitrary and 
capricious, given the known environmental consequences.” Unite
Here! Local 5 v. City & Cnty of Honolulu
, 123 Hawai‘i 150, 171, 
231 P.3d 423, 444 (2010) (quoting 
Life of the Land, 59 Haw. at 
29  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
      
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
182 n.12, 914 P.2d at 1375 n.12) (quotation marks and brackets 
omitted). 
Next, the reviewing court should ensure compliance 
with HAR § 11-200-18 and HAR § 11-200-23,7 which govern the 
requirements of a final EIS and the standards for acceptability. HAR § 11-200-18 requires a final EIS to contain: 
(1) The draft EIS revised to incorporate substantive 
comments received during the consultation and review 
processes; 
(2) Reproductions of all letters containing substantive 
questions, comments, or recommendations, and, as applicable, summaries of any scoping meetings held; 
(3) A list of persons, organizations, and public agencies 
commenting on the draft EIS; 
(4) The responses of the applicant or proposing agency to each substantive question, comment, or recommendation 
received in the review and consultation processes[;] 
(5) The text of the final EIS which shall be written in a format which allows the reader to easily distinguish 
changes made to the text of the draft EIS. 
HAR § 11-200-23 governs the rules for acceptability. 
As relevant here, HAR § 11-200-23(e) requires the revised EIS to 
“fully address the inadequacies of the non-accepted EIS . . . 
the revised draft EIS shall be evaluated for acceptability on 
the basis of whether it satisfactorily addresses the findings 
and reasons for non-acceptance.” The focus of the reviewing court here should be on the following: first, does the final EIS 
contain the information required by HAR, such that the agency 
7 HAR § 11-200-18 is now 11- 200.1-27 (2021) and HAR § 11-200-23 is 
now 11-200.1-28.  Both new rules are substantially the same. 
30  
 
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
could consider fully the environmental factors involved to make 
a reason decision? Second, did the final EIS actually address 
the substantive feedback it received, both from the agency’s 
feedback on the previous draft version (if any) and from the 
public and any other parties? Third, are the alleged errors 
significant enough to defeat the goals of informed decision 
making and informed public comment? 
To summarize, the reviewing court should first look to 
HAR § 11-200-17 (now 11-200.1-24) and ensure that, under the rule of reason, the EIS contains enough information to enable 
the decision-maker to make a reasoned decision concerning the 
environmental factors described in the rule. Second, the 
reviewing court should look to HAR § 11-200-18 (now 11-200.1-27) 
to ensure that the finalized version of the EIS addressed the 
initial reasons for rejection (if any) and that the EIS was 
revised to respond to substantive feedback received during the process. In evaluating the EIS’s compliance with the HAR, the 
reviewing court should use the rule of reason and ask whether 
the alleged HEPA violations frustrate the goals of informed 
decision-making and informed public comment. C. The Environmental Court Did Not Err in Concluding that the 
RFEIS Complied with HEPA 
Following the appropriate standard for review 
described supra, we conclude that the environmental court did 
31  
 
  
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
not err in concluding that the RFEIS complied with HEPA. 
Accordingly, we affirm the environmental court’s denial of 
Plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment and its final judgment 
in favor of the State and PIJAC. 
1. The environmental court did not err in relying on 
appended information in the EIS 
Preliminarily, we address Plaintiffs’ argument that 
the environmental court erred in relying on information from the 
EIS’s appendices. HAR § 11-200-18 (now 11-201.27) requires that 
the final EIS must, among other things, “incorporate substantive 
comments received during the consultation and review processes” and include “responses of the applicant or proposing agency to 
each substantive question, comment, or recommendation received 
in the review and consultation process.” In the environmental 
court’s order, there are several instances in which the court 
relies on comment letters and other appended information to 
conclude that the EIS “adequately disclose[d] facts so that the 
agency could render an informed decision.” Plaintiffs argue 
that by relying on comment letters and appended information, the 
court impermissibly shifted the burden of disclosing impacts to the public. 
We disagree. HAR § 11-200-18’s mandate that a final 
EIS must “incorporate substantive comments” does not require 
that the substantive comments must be incorporated into the body 
32  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(as opposed to an appendix) of the EIS. The purpose of the EIS 
here was to ensure that BLNR made a fully informed decision as 
to the environmental impact of commercial aquarium permits in 
the WHRFMA. That purpose is not defeated when important 
information is held in an appendix. Rather than creating an 
artificial delineation between the body of an EIS and its 
appendices, the appendix should be considered part of a complete document. Of course, the document must still “enable a 
decision-making body to render an informed decision,” Price
, 81 
Hawai‘i at 182, 914 P.2d at 1375, and alleged violations should 
not “defeat the goals of informed decisionmaking and informed 
public comment.” Utahns for Better Transp.
, 305 F.3d at 1163. 
In other words, the EIS should not just be a “document dump,” but rather a cohesive document that informs the approving agency 
and the public. 
Plaintiffs cite two cases for the proposition that the 
environmental court erred in relying on appended information. 
The first is Ctr. for Biological Diversity v. U.S. Forest Serv., 349 F.3d 1157 (9th Cir. 2003), a NEPA case. There, the Ninth 
Circuit held that the Forest Service was required to disclose 
and respond to comments that directly challenged the scientific 
basis central to the EIS. The key scientific question was 
whether Northern Goshawks, a type of hawk found on the mainland, 
were habitat generalists (as the agency argued) or habitat 
33  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
specialists (as opponents argued). The agency in that case 
impermissibly redacted a portion of a comment letter; the 
redacted material contained an important scientific paper 
expressing views different from the EIS. The Ninth Circuit also 
held that the agency could not point to internal memoranda from 
the Forest Service (that were not part of the EIS) to 
demonstrate that the agency responded to the pertinent concern. It does not follow from this holding that the disclosures 
required by the HAR cannot be in an appendix. HAR § 11-200-18 
requires an EIS to incorporate substantive comments received, 
reproduce all letters received containing substantive feedback, 
and include the applicant’s responses to those letters. An 
agency can so incorporate, reproduce, and include via an 
appendix. See Earth Island Inst. v. Carlton, No. 2:09-CV-02020-
MCE, 2012 WL 1130650, at *9 (E.D. Cal. Mar. 29, 2012) (“Center for Biological Diversity, cited by Plaintiff for this assertion, merely states that the response cannot come in the 
administrative record outside of the EIS; it does not hold that 
the response cannot come in an appendix to the EIS.”). 
The second case cited is Oregon Nat. Res. Council v. 
Marsh, 832 F.2d 1489 (9th Cir. 1987), another NEPA case in the 
Ninth Circuit. The case concerned a dam construction project 
proposed by the Army Corps of Engineers. The court there held that 
34  
 
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
an agency may place responsible opposing views in a 
separate ‘comments and responses’ section when, as here, many of the critical comments prompted revisions in the 
body, the Corps discussed in the body all of the 
environmental problems to which the comments were 
addressed, and the Corps provided thoughtful and well-
reasoned responses to most of the critical comments. We 
therefore hold that the Corps sufficiently complied with 
the purposes of the NEPA in its treatment of opposing 
views. 
Id. at 1498-99. 
This case supports the holding that the environmental 
court can base its findings on the contents of an appendix. HAR 
§ 11-200-1 sets out the purpose of the administrative rules 
under § 11-200, which is to ensure that environmental concerns 
are given appropriate consideration in decision making. Here, 
the letters received in response to the initial FEIS were incorporated via their inclusion in an appendix. The EIS also 
similarly provided “thoughtful and well-reasoned” responses to 
most of the critical comments. Some responses are simply 
responses to a comment; some responses point the reader to 
particular parts of the body of the EIS; and some responses 
point the reader to amended parts of the body of the EIS. There 
were many comments that were duplicative, to which the EIS responded “[y]our comment has been forwarded to the decision 
makers.” Like the agency at issue in Marsh, the EIS “discussed 
in the body all of the environmental problems to which the 
comments were addressed.” 
35  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Here, the environmental court relied on comment 
submissions to find that the RFEIS included mitigation measures 
and baseline fish population data as required by HEPA. 
Regarding mitigation, the court explicitly wrote that 
Dr. Walsh’s letter and the other sections he included discussing 
fish populations at collection sites are not the only sections 
of the RFEIS that discuss the issue, but were included as representative samples. It therefore found there was sufficient 
information regarding impacts of aquarium fishing on the fish 
species proposed for collection and that the RFEIS adequately 
disclosed facts to allow the agency to render an informed 
decision. 
On the baseline fish population data requirement, the 
environmental court wrote “[t]he parties disagree on how good 
the baseline information is, and how to analyze it, but there is 
no question baseline information is in the RFEIS and was available to BLNR.” 
The court then quoted a letter from Drs. 
Carlson, Pyle, and Kosaki, included in one of the appendices, where the three scientists discuss issues from a scientific 
paper and their disagreements with that paper’s conclusions 
regarding baseline fish populations. It then wrote, “the above 
shows differences of opinion about the data and conclusions. 
Such differences do not require DLNR to reject the RFEIS. The court concludes the RFEIS made sufficient disclosures to allow 
36  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the agency to make an informed decision on baseline populations 
and cumulative impacts over time.” 
The issue of whether an environmental court may rely 
on appended comments in determining that the EIS was legally 
sufficient is one of first impression. The goal of the RFEIS is 
to ensure that “environmental concerns are given appropriate 
consideration in decision making along with economic and technical considerations.” HAR § 11-200-1 (2018) (now 11-200.1-
1). The acceptability of an EIS is “evaluated on the basis of 
whether the statement, in its completed form, represents an 
informational instrument which fulfills the definition of an EIS 
and adequately discloses and describes all identifiable 
environmental impacts and satisfactorily responds to review 
comments.” HAR § 11-200-23 (2018) (now 11-200.1-28). In other 
words, the EIS should “enable a decision-making body to render 
an informed decision,” Price, 81 Hawai‘ i at 182, 914 P.2d at 
1375, and alleged violations should not “defeat the goals of 
informed decisionmaking and informed public comment.” Utahns
for Better Transp., 305 F.3d at 1163. 
Confining an environmental court’s analysis to non-
appended information is arbitrary when the decision-making body, 
BLNR in this case, makes its decision based on the entirety of 
the EIS. If we forced every EIS to include every piece of 
relevant information and every comment and response in the body, 
37  
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the statement would balloon to thousands of pages, decreasing 
the public accessibility of the document. Rather, an appendix 
provides readers with important information while not 
overwhelming them with every piece of information at once. Of 
course, the EIS should not just shove all relevant documents 
into an appendix. The body of the EIS should give a reader 
guidance as to where to find information through the document, including appendices. The EIS at issue here did so, describing 
what is in each appendix and, throughout the body of the EIS, 
referencing parts of appendices and information therein 
throughout. We therefore hold that the environmental court did 
not err in relying on appended information. 
2. The EIS was legally sufficient The sufficiency of an EIS is a “question of law.” 
Price
, 81 Hawai‘i at 182, 914 P.2d at 1375. 
First, we use the rule of reason to determine whether 
the EIS contains enough information to enable the decision-maker to make a reasoned decision concerning the relevant environmental factors. We focus our analysis on the 
deficiencies alleged by Plaintiffs, which include (a) disclosure 
of commercial aquarium collection’s cumulative impacts; 
(b) assessments of mitigation measures; (c) analysis of economic 
impacts, and (d) analysis of the impacts of increasing the take 
above historical catch rates. 
38  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a. Cumulative impacts 
HAR § 11-200-17(b)(2) (2018) (now HAR § 11-200.1-24) 
requires disclosure of the cumulative impacts of commercial 
aquarium collection. Cumulative impacts is defined by HAR § 11-
200-2 as “the impact on the environment which results from the 
incremental impact of the action when added to other past, 
present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions regardless of what agency or person undertakes such other actions.” The EIS 
thoroughly presents and discusses the cumulative impact of 
commercial aquarium fishing. 
Section 5.4 of the RFEIS summarizes the cumulative 
impact of aquarium collection on biological resources, 
calculated based on historic trends. Much of the data in this 
section, it appears, is based on independent research conducted 
by DAR. DAR’s research, a four-year monitoring report conducted 
in collaboration with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), is appended in full. 
Plaintiffs’ central allegation here is that the EIS 
uses the wrong baseline data. Baseline data is the measure of a 
condition before an action is taken — in this case, estimates of 
fish populations. It is important because, to assess the 
cumulative impacts of the proposed action, the RFEIS compares 
the projected impact of aquarium fishing against the baseline data. For its baseline data, the EIS contains current 
39  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
population estimates and trends from DAR and NOAA’s report. 
Plaintiffs argue that this is the wrong baseline because it does 
not account for the effect past aquarium fishing has had on fish 
populations, including underreporting and poaching. Instead, 
Plaintiffs argue, the baseline should be what fish populations 
would look like without any aquarium fishing. 
The RFEIS discloses its baseline. At the beginning of 
Section 4.0, the EIS reads: 
The affected environment is the area and its resources 
(i.e., socioeconomic, cultural, physical, biological) 
potentially impacted by the proposed action and the alternatives under consideration. The purpose of describing 
the affected environment is to define the current baseline of conditions in which the impacts would occur. To make an 
informed decision about which alternative to select, it is 
necessary to first understand which resources would be affected and to what extent each alternative would result 
in changes from the baseline. This section attempts to 
provide the baseline for this understanding. Relative to 
the proposed action, the affected environment includes 
nearshore habitats within the WHRFMA from a depth of 0- 600 
feet (0- 100 fathoms) along the west coast of the island of 
Hawai‘i, although most fishers collect the majority of fish 
at depths between 30- 70 feet (5- 11.7 fathoms), with minimal 
collecting beyond this range. 
Commercial aquarium fish collection has been taking place in Hawaiian waters since the late 1940s. In 1953, the 
territorial government of Hawai
‘i enacted Act 154, which 
authorized the Board of Agriculture and Forestry to 
establish a permit system for the use of fine- mesh nets and 
traps for the taking of aquarium fish (DAR 2014a). Beginning in 1973, collectors were required to report their 
monthly catch on a detailed aquarium fish catch report. As of 2014, Aquarium Permit holders are required to keep daily 
trip reports and submit on a monthly basis. Since 1999 when 
FRA’s were established, the number of commercial aquarium 
fishers working in West Hawai‘ i has ranged from 24- 63, and 
in East Hawai‘ i from <3- 18 (DAR 2018a). The 10 commercial 
fishers who are part of this proposed action made up 2 to 8 of the WHRFMA fishers in any given year from 2000 – 2017. 
Permitted commercial aquarium fishing has been a part of 
40  
 
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the socioeconomic, cultural, physical, and biological 
resources for decades and is considered a part of the baseline condition of the affected environment. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The RFEIS goes into even more detail regarding its 
baseline data in Section 5.4.3.3. 
Appendix C of the RFEIS reproduces all letters and 
comments that the revised EIS received. In at least two letters 
(one from Sierra Club, another from For the Fishes), the writers 
bring up the baseline data issue. The EIS substantively 
responds to both comments in Appendix C, writing that “[c]urrent 
population estimates are used to evaluate impacts, as those are 
the populations that would be impacted. Underreporting and 
poaching are addressed in Section 5.4.3.6 of the EIS. . . . Past 
cumulative impacts, including changes in reef habitat, were disclosed in Section 5.4.3 of the EIS.” 
As the environmental court wrote, “[t]he parties 
disagree on how good the baseline information is, and how to 
analyze it, but there is no question baseline information is in 
the RFEIS and was available to BLNR.” It also inserted the 
letter from Drs. Carlson, Pyle, and Kosaki, which highlights the 
differences in opinion on the data. The question is whether the RFEIS contains sufficient information such that BLNR could make 
a reasoned decision concerning the relevant environmental 
factors. Here, the RFEIS contains sufficient information from 
41  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
both sides of the issue to meet the HEPA content requirements. 
We therefore conclude that as to cumulative impacts, the RFEIS 
is sufficient and the environmental court did not err. 
b. Mitigation measures 
HAR § 11-200-17 (now 11-200.1-24) requires an EIS to 
consider mitigation measures to “avoid, minimize, rectify, or reduce impact.” Plaintiffs argue that the RFEIS failed to “assess the impacts of concentrated commercial take or propose 
related mitigation measures.” As to the “concentrated 
commercial take” issue, Plaintiffs essentially argue that the 
RFEIS fails to account for and plan for the impact of 
concentrating fish take within certain, targeted areas. It 
continues that the RFEIS should establish, within certain 
targeted areas, specific catch quotas. 
We disagree with Plaintiffs. First, the RFEIS clearly 
states that “DAR will receive the collection data by zone, and can review any necessary changes when they issue the permits on 
an annual basis. In the unlikely event that all collection 
occurred within a single [aquarium collection] zone, the DAR 
would be able to evaluate this information.” And in responding 
to the letter from For the Fishes in which the organization 
raises this concern the RFEIS continues: 
Given that on the island of Hawaii there is connectivity 
between adjacent reefs (up to 184 kilometers), with fish 
from protected FRAs being documented to seed unprotected 
areas (Christie et al. 2010), it is assumed that the 
42  
 
  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
population growth occurring in other non- fished areas would 
seed the collection zone where fishing occurred, and 
therefore the total allowable catch limits are based upon 
the entire population, not subpopulations along the WHRFMA coast. 
This information was also included in an edit to 
Section 3.7.1. 
The question is whether the RFEIS contains sufficient 
information such that BLNR could make a reasoned decision 
concerning the relevant environmental factors. Here, the RFEIS 
contains information from both sides of the issue. The RFEIS 
proposes general take limits across all zones of the WHRFMA, but Plaintiffs want take limits within the zones. BLNR had this 
information in front of it in the RFEIS, and chose to approve 
the RFEIS without zone limits. 
The environmental court’s analysis reflects this 
debate. The court both noted that the concern was raised in the 
comments to the EIS, and cited an email from Dr. William Walsh. 
Dr. Walsh argued that a network of fish replenishment areas and 
marine protected areas had contributed to the sustainable 
management of the WHRFMA, and, along with the revised EIS’s substantial reductions in limits, the WHRFMA would continue to 
see sustainable levels of fish. 
We further note that an EIS “need not be exhaustive to 
the point of discussing all possible details bearing on the 
proposed action.” Kaleikini
, 128 Hawai‘i at 67, 283 P.3d at 74.  
43  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Just because the RFEIS did not propose localized take limits 
does not mean the RFEIS is invalid. And, as noted above, BLNR 
had both sides of this issue before it when deciding on the 
RFEIS. In its rejection of the initial EIS, BLNR did not 
mention localized quotas as a reason for rejection. 
On this issue, the dissent argues that we are 
“[a]pplying the ‘rule of reason’ without regard to HEPA’s applicable statutory mandates.” Respectfully, as discussed 
above, we have inquired into whether the RFEIS complied with HAR 
§ 11-200-17(m)’s requirement that an EIS “consider mitigation 
measures to avoid, minimize, rectify, or reduce impact,” and 
whether it met the rule of reason. It is true that the RFEIS 
did not have a section entitled “mitigation measures.” But 
substantively, the RFEIS extensively discussed such measures. 
Notably, the RFEIS includes regular monitoring from DAR, which 
will receive collection data by zone and can choose whether or not to issue permits on an annual basis after reviewing the 
data. We therefore conclude that as to cumulative impacts, the 
RFEIS is sufficient, and accordingly, the environmental court 
did not err. 
c. Economic impacts 
HRS § 343-2 requires disclosure of the “effects of the 
proposed action on the economic welfare, social welfare, and 
cultural practices of the community and State.” HAR § 11-200-2 
44  
 
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
defines “environment” to include “all the physical, economic, 
cultural, and social conditions that exist within the area 
affected by a proposed action.” An EIS must therefore disclose 
the economic impacts of a proposed action to the “community and 
State” and not just to the industry itself. 
Plaintiffs argue that the “RFEIS limit[ed] its 
economic analysis to only the commercial interests of and monetary benefits to the aquarium trade.” Plaintiffs and 
members of the public raised this issue in comments to the 
RFEIS, where they, among other things, cited to a 2021 paper 
analyzing the costs and benefits of the aquarium trade in Hawai‘ i 
— Schaar & Cox, 2021. The Schaar & Cox paper concluded that 
ending the commercial aquarium trade was the only option that 
yielded positive economic benefits. The RFEIS responds to this 
comment, writing that the Schaar & Cox paper did not analyze the 
preferred alternative, which limited the collection to eight 
species from the previous forty.  
The RFEIS also contains an entire section (4.1) 
labelled “Socioeconomic Resources” that describes not just revenue that aquarium fishers will bring in, but the number of 
jobs. The executive summary of the RFEIS also states: 
The Preferred Alternative does not substantially affect the 
economy but plays an important role as a nearshore fishery 
in the state. The Preferred Alternative would add an estimated $2.5 to $10 million over the 5- year analysis 
period (range of $499,416 to $2,022,686 per year), and another five times this value in indirect economic 
45  
 
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
benefits. Loss of the fishery would result in the loss of 
income, tax revenue, and jobs. 
d. Increasing take above historical catch rates 
The next alleged deficiency is that the RFEIS fails to 
analyze the impacts of increasing catch above historical rates. 
Section 3.7.1 of the RFEIS describes how the eight species were 
chosen and explains that the catch quotas for each was set based 
on “either the 20-year historic average catch from the entire 
WHRFMA fishery (during which the species populations have all 
been increasing or stable) or to 1% of the 2019 [population 
estimate study].” Plaintiffs point to the DAR’s submittal to 
BLNR on the RFEIS in which the DAR wrote that for Potter’s 
angelfish and Thompson’s surgeonfish, the proposed quotas were “substantially beyond that which has occurred historically.” 
Because of this, the DAR concluded that “it is not possible to 
assess whether or not past population trends will continue into 
the future,” and “[t]his uncertainty must be carefully 
considered in any future management decisions regarding the 
actions proposed in the RFEIS.” 
Commentors to the EIS noted this issue, and those 
comments are appended to the RFEIS. In responding, the EIS points to Section 5.4.1.3, which includes a table comparing the 
density of all eight species in 1999-2000 and 2017-18. In their 
briefing on appeal, PIJAC emphasized that the final EIS imposed 
caps on take, limited the number of species from forty to eight 
46  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
species specifically chosen because they had not experienced 
population declines in open areas. 
BLNR had both sides of this issue before it in the 
RFEIS. Plaintiffs and the environmental court both rightly 
acknowledge that, under HRS § 343-5(e), full and adequate 
environmental review is a “condition precedent” to implementing 
a proposed action — that is, environmental review ought to be “front-loaded.” This ensures that an applicant may not escape 
public and agency review by, for example, analyzing the 
environmental impact of their actions once those actions have 
already begun. Here, the RFEIS includes recent data on trends 
in fish populations, reasonable explanations for how it decided 
on each catch limit, and the public comments indicating 
opposition to the catch limit. Part of the RFEIS includes 
regular monitoring from the DAR, which will receive collection 
data by zone. This is a reasonable mitigation measure rather than deference to future decision-makers. The EIS details this 
in section 3.7.1: 
An annual species- specific individual catch quota 
would be allotted to each fisher and therefore the total 
potential catch shown in Table 3- 2 would only occur if all 
seven fishers individually reached their individual catch 
quota for all eight species. The DAR will receive the 
collection data by zone, and can review any necessary 
changes when they issue the permits on an annual basis. In 
the unlikely event that all collection occurred within a 
single AQ reporting zone, the DAR would be able to evaluate this information; however, this would effectively leave the 
rest of the coast completely free of collecting, and 
essentially create an FRA everywhere else. Given that on 
the island of Hawaii there is connectivity between adjacent 
47  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reefs (up to 184 kilometers), with fish from protected FRAs 
being documented to seed unprotected areas (Christie et al. 2010, see Section 4.0), it is assumed that the population 
growth occurring in other non- fished areas would seed the 
collection zone where fishing occurred, and therefore the total allowable catch limits are based upon the entire 
population, not subpopulations along the WHRFMA coast. It is noted that the individual catch quotas may be revised 
(i.e., increased or decreased) over time during the annual 
permit renewal period based on re- evaluation by the DLNR of 
each proposed Revised White List species’ population status (e.g., new population estimates, new population trend data, etc.). Changes to the individual catch quotas may require 
additional HEPA review. 
3. The EIS sufficiently responded to BLNR’s initial 
reasons for non-acceptance 
We next analyze the EIS’s compliance with HAR 
§ 11-200-18 (now HAR § 11-200.1-27) and HAR § 11-200-23. First, 
HAR § 11-200-18 requires that the revised final EIS contain: 
(1) the draft EIS revised to incorporate substantive 
comments received during the consultation and review 
processes; 
(2) Reproductions of all letters containing substantive questions, comments, or recommendations and, as 
applicable, summaries of any scoping meetings held; 
(3) A list of persons, organizations, and public agencies commenting on the draft EIS; 
(4) The responses of the applicant or proposing agency to 
each substantive question, comment, or recommendation 
received in the review and consultation processes[;] 
(5) The text of the final EIS which shall be written in a format which allows the reader to easily distinguish 
changes made to the text of the draft EIS. 
The final EIS contains all of this information. 
Plaintiffs argue that because some of the required information 
is contained in an appendix, the revised EIS is invalid. As 
discussed supra, there is no reason why BLNR and the 
environmental court cannot rely on appended information. The 
48  
 
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
EIS was revised to incorporate substantive comments as detailed 
in the executive summary, sections 1.0 to 1.1.3, and Appendix E. 
Appendix E details what changes and additions were made in every 
section of the EIS. This is enough to meet the requirements of 
HAR § 11-200-18(1) and (5). Reproduction of all letters and 
comments as well as responses to each substantive question, 
comment, or recommendation are included in Appendix C. We note that this section is voluminous — to require it to be included 
in the “body” of the EIS would be impracticable and further 
complicate an already complex document. Appendix C satisfies 
HAR § 11-200-18(2) and (4). HAR § 11-200(3) is satisfied by 
Section 6.0 of the EIS, which contains an 
extensive list of people, 
organizations, and public agencies that were consulted with for the 
EIS. 
HAR § 11-200-23 governs the acceptability of an EIS. 
It requires that an EIS be 
evaluated on the basis of whether the final EIS, in its 
completed form, represents an informational instrument that 
fulfills the intent and provisions of chapter 343, HRS, and 
adequately discloses and describes all identifiable environmental impacts and satisfactorily responds to review 
comments.  
HAR § 11-200-23(a). 
Plaintiffs’ main argument here is about HAR § 11-200-
23(e), which reads in full: 
A non-accepted EIS may be revised by a proposing agency or 
applicant. The revision shall take the form of a revised draft EIS document which shall fully address the 
inadequacies of the non- accepted EIS and shall completely 
49  
 
  
     
 
  
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and thoroughly discuss the changes made. The requirements 
for filing, distribution, publication of availability for review, acceptance or non- acceptance, and notification and 
publication of acceptability shall be the same as the requirements prescribed by sections 11- 200-20, 11-200-21, 
11-200-22, and 11- 200-23 for an EIS submitted for 
acceptance. In addition, the revised draft EIS shall be 
evaluated for acceptability on the basis of whether it 
satisfactorily addresses the findings and reasons for non-
acceptance. 
Plaintiffs argue that the environmental court erred in 
writing that the rule “ultimately do[es] not impose any higher 
standard than the ‘rule of reason’ set forth in Price.” As 
discussed supra, this statement does not fully capture how an 
EIS should be reviewed. HAR § 11-200-23 has specific 
requirements — but those requirements were met. As to 11-200-
23(e), Plaintiffs’ argument is that the revised EIS failed to “fully address the inadequacies of the non-accepted EIS.” 
BLNR gave fourteen reasons for not accepting the 
initial EIS. As detailed below, FEIS contained each of the 
fourteen reasons and its response to each one: 
1. In order to properly assess the likely impact of the 
proposed take of the aquarium fish, the FEIS should 
contain a reasonably reliable estimate of the amount 
of future take. 
• This concern is addressed by the new Preferred 
Alternative which has been added to Section 3.7 of 
the Revised FEIS which includes species- specific 
individual catch quotas for participants in the 
WHRFMA. Therefore, a maximum allowable collection 
for each species is now provided in Section 5.0. 
2. Except for the pāku‘iku‘i, or Achilles tang, the FEIS 
does not contain any daily bag limits on any of the “White List” species which the fishers are allowed to 
take, and there are no annual limits on the take of 
any species except that the total take of pāku‘ iku‘i 
would be limited by the fact that only ten permits 
with a daily limit of five each would be allowed 
50  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
under the proposed action. In addition, there is no 
scientific basis provided for reducing daily take of 
pākuiku i‘ ‘ from ten to five per permit, nor any 
analysis of the impact of that level of take on the population of pāku‘ iku
‘i. 
• This concern is addressed by the new Preferred 
Alternative which has been added to Section 3.7 of 
the Revised FEIS which includes individual catch 
quotas for all species on a proposed Revised White List, and collection of Achilles Tang would no 
longer be permitted in the WHRFMA. While daily 
limits are not included, the inclusion of annual 
individual catch quotas addresses this concern by 
limiting collection within any given year. 
3.  The existing regulations of the WHRFMA do not contain  
any daily or annual bag limits other than for the 
pāku‘iku
 ‘i, a “slot limit” for yellow tang, and a 
limit on Kole over 4” long. To project how many fish 
are likely to be taken, the FEIS relies completely on the historical catch records of these ten fishers for 
the forty “White List” species. See Tables 5
-2 and 5-
11. The FEIS concludes that 160,832 fish would be 
taken annually, based on the maximum number taken by 
the ten permittees in any year, during the 2000- 2017 
period. See §5.4.1.5.  
• This concern is addressed by the new Preferred 
Alternative which has been added to Section 3.7 of 
the Revised FEIS which includes individual catch quotas for the eight species on the proposed 
Revised White List. While daily limits are not 
included, annual individual catch quotas addresses 
this concern by limiting collection within any 
given year. 
4. It appears that no more than 8 of the 10 fishers were active in any previous year. See Table 4
-2. It seems 
likely that all ten fishers will be active, given they had sufficient interest in the permits to fund the EIS, and that they will have a monopoly on the 
use of fine- mesh nets to collect fish in the WHRFM
A. 
• This concern was determined by the Environmental 
Council to be arbitrary and capricious. 
5. The FEIS has no information about the level of effort of these 10 fishers in prior years, i.e., whether 
they collected 100, 200, or 300 days a year, for 
example, and the amount of time spent collecting. It is possible that they could significantly increase 
their collection efforts and total take. 
51  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
    
     
    
    
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
• This concern is addressed by the new Preferred 
Alternative which has been added to Section 3.7 of 
the Revised FEIS, which implements species-
specific individual catch quotas for each of the 
requested permits. 
6. The fishers could also or alternatively change what species they target for collection and increase the 
impact on some species. 
• This concern is addressed by the new Preferred 
Alternative which has been added to Section 3.7 of the Revised FEIS, which includes a proposed 
Revised White List of only eight species and 
individual catch quotas for each of those species. 
7. The data in the FEIS show that these ten fishers take some species at a very different rate than the 
fishery as a whole. For example, although the 
percentage taken of all species by the ten in the 
WHRFMA varies from a low of 7.0% in FY2000 (when only 
two were active) to 46.4% in FY2017 (Table 5- 2), 
their percentage of take of individual species, at 
least in certain years, has been much higher. Table 
5-11 gives the maximum catch in any one year for each 
of the “White List” species, and the maximum catch in any one year by the ten. The ten fishers took 83.7% of the lei triggerfish (252/301), 95.5% of the 
milletseed butterfly fish (402/421), and 89.2% of the Fisher’s angelfish (257/288), and 54.6% of the kole 
(23,014/42,122.) On the other hand, they took only 
9.1% of the ornate wrasse (1130/12,445). This demonstrates that collectors can, and do, selectively 
target some species more than others. (It is not 
clear whether the maximum year given for all 
collectors is the same year as that given for the 
maximum by the ten fishers. The basic point made here is valid in either case, however.) 
• This concern is addressed by the new Preferred 
Alternative which has been added to Section 3.7 of 
the Revised FEIS, which includes a proposed Revised White List of only eight species and 
individual catch quotas for each of those species. 
8. In order to assess the likely impact of the take, the 
FEIS should adequately analyze the sustainable level 
of take. The FEIS relies on Ochavillo and Hodgson 
(2006) for the proposition that 5- 25% of a population 
is a sustainable level for annual take. The FEIS has an inadequate justification for the reliance on this 
publication as the best available science. The FEIS does not provide data for nor statistically analyze 
the sustainability of that level of take for each 
type of fish, given each fish species’ life span, 
population size, reproductivity rates and age at 
first reproduction. 
52  
 
   
   
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
  
 
 
   
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
     
    
    
    
    
    
 
  
 
 
  
    
    
 
  
 
 
  
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
• This concern is addressed by the new Preferred 
Alternative which has been added to Section 3.7 of 
the Revised FEIS, which includes a proposed 
Revised White List of only eight species, all of 
which have shown a stable or increasing population 
size in the WHRFMA over the last 20 years. No species with declining populations will be allowed 
to be collected in the WHRFMA. 
9. In §5.4.1.5, the FEIS uses Table 5- 11 to compare the 
take of various species to the CREP population 
estimates, to show that they are well below the 
claimed 5- 25% sustainable level. In Table 4- 5, 
however, the harvest/population ratios of four or five species (depending on the year) in the West 
Hawai‘i open areas at 30’- 60’ depth exceeded 5% for 
several species, and are as high as 39.67% for the 
paku
‘iku‘i in 2017- 2018. The West Hawai‘ i open area 
population estimates may be more relevant than the 
island-wide CREP data. 
• This concern is addressed by the new Preferred 
Alternative which has been added to Section 3.7 of 
the Revised FEIS, which includes a proposed Revised White List of only eight species, all of 
which have shown an increase in population size in 
the WHRFMA over the last 20 years. In addition, 
Section 5.4.1 has been revised to include an 
analysis of impacts based on Pacific Islands Fisheries Science Center Ecosystem Sciences 
Division (PIFSC- ESD; formerly Coral Reef 
Ecosystems Program [CREP]) population estimates within the WHRFMA, WHAP WHRMFA population 
estimates, WHAP Open Area population estimates, 
and impacts specific to East Hawai
‘i. 
10. The FEIS has an inadequate discussion of the role of 
herbivores. Many of the “White List” species are 
herbivores. 
• This concern has been addressed by adding detail 
on herbivores to Section 5.4.1 of the Revised 
FEIS. 
11. The FEIS does not adequately discuss relevant negative findings, for example, the reduced numbers 
of aquarium fish at collection sites found by Tissot 
and Hallacher (2003). The FEIS need not agree or 
disprove the negative findings, but it should discuss 
them. 
• This concern was determined by the Environmental 
Council to be arbitrary and capricious. 
53  
 
  
  
 
 
  
    
 
  
 
 
   
    
 
  
 
 
   
    
    
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
12. The extreme threat of climate change on our reefs 
warrants extreme caution in reviewing activities that 
may affect them. The FEIS should further discuss potential effects of present and future levels of 
climate change including ocean warming, ocean 
acidification, coral bleaching, extreme storms, and 
resulting reef destruction and algae growth, and the 
potential for mitigating harm (i.e., further regulation) if the proposed fishery has unanticipated 
or greater negative effects with climate change. 
• This concern has been addressed through edits to 
Section 5.4.3. 
13. The FEIS failed to sufficiently consider cultural 
impacts. The FEIS improperly concluded that the 
impacts to cultural resources under any of the 
proposed alternatives would be less than significant based on the flawed premise that cultural impacts 
would only occur if the proposed action would cause a 
significant decline in the population of a White List 
Species considered to be a cultural resource. A 
number of testimonies expressed misgivings from a cultural standpoint with the proposed activity 
itself, regardless of impact on resources, and this 
was not adequately considered in concluding no 
significant impact. 
• This concern has been addressed through edits to 
Section 5.3. 
14. The FEIS does not adequately discuss the effect of 
illegal aquarium fishing on the numbers of projected sustainable take of fish species. 
• This concern was determined by the Environmental 
Council to be arbitrary and capricious. The 
Applicant does not support or condone poaching or any infractions of the law. 
As to Reasons 1-3, 5-10, and 12-13, the EIS is clearly 
responsive: it notes edits that it made to the EIS in response 
to this concern. In conjunction with Appendix E, where the EIS 
provides more detail to its edits, we conclude that the document 
provides enough information for BLNR to make a reasoned decision. 
54  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As to Reasons 4, 11, and 14, the EIS states that the 
concerns were determined to be arbitrary and capricious by the 
environmental council. But the environmental council’s decision 
was vacated by the environmental court several months before 
PIJAC submitted its revised EIS. The environmental court, 
however, only reversed as to the council’s finding that Reason 
11 was arbitrary and capricious. It is therefore reasonable that as to Reasons 4 and 14, the revised FEIS would not be 
responsive — the environmental court did not vacate the 
environmental council’s decision as to those two Reasons. We 
therefore only discuss whether PIJAC appropriately responded to 
Reason 11. Reason 11 for nonacceptance was: 
The FEIS does not adequately discuss relevant negative 
findings, for example, the reduced numbers of aquarium fish 
at collection sites found by Tissot and Hallacher (2003). 
The FEIS need not agree or disprove the negative findings, 
but it should discuss them. 
Plaintiffs and the dissent argue that the RFEIS does 
not adequately respond to this reason for non-acceptance. 
Respectfully, we disagree. We do not read Reason 11 to require 
that the revised EIS address Tissot and Hallacher. Rather, we read this Reason to describe the Tissot and Hallacher paper as 
just one example of negative findings that the RFEIS should 
engage with. As the environmental court recognized, the RFEIS 
discloses and engages with negative findings extensively. 
Further, the EIS does discuss the Tissot and Hallacher article, 
55  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
noting its existence several times throughout the document — for 
example, in section 5.4.2.3. The RFEIS also responds to the 
science of the Tissot and Hallacher article in the appendix, 
writing “[t]he collection that was occurring during the Tissot 
and Hallacher study was before the establishment of the WHRFMA, 
including the implementation of the current White List [of eight 
species], and therefore the impacts on fish populations were not as relevant as more recent data from the DAR focused on the time 
period since the WHRFMA went into effect (i.e., the time period 
from 1999/2000-2017/2018).” Finally, Tissot and Hallacher 
themselves signed onto a letter urging BLNR to accept the RFEIS, 
though we recognize this point has only limited force because 
the letter is not in the RFEIS. 
In sum, we conclude that the environmental court did 
not err in entering judgment for the State and PIJAC. 
V. CONCLUSION 
Accordingly, we affirm the environmental court’s 
(1) January 2, 2022 “Order Denying Defendants’ Motion to Dismiss 
Complaint Filed July 13, 2021”; (2) August 16, 2022 “Ruling on 
Plaintiffs’ MSJ”; (3) “Order Denying [072] Plaintiffs Willie 
Kaupiko, Ka‘imi Kaupiko, Mike Nakachi, For the Fishes, Center for 
Biological Diversity, and Kai Palaoa’s Motion for Summary 
56  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Judgment Filed February 18, 2022”; and (4) September 12, 2022 
Final Judgment. Mahesh Cleveland,    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
Isaac H. Moriwake, 
Kylie W. Wager Cruz   /s/ Todd W. Eddins 
for plaintiff-appellants/ cross-appellees    /s/ John M. Tonaki 
 Melissa D. Goldman,   /s/ Shanlyn A.S. Park 
(Julie H. China and    
Daniel A. Morris, on the briefs), 
for defendants-appellees/ 
cross-appellants  Geoffrey M. Davis, 
for defendant-intervenor-
appellee/cross-appellees 
57 