 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAP-22-0000371 24-SEP-2024 11:47 AM Dkt. 44 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
---o0o---
LINDA K. ROSEHILL, Trustee of the Linda K. Rosehill Revocable 
Trust dated August 29, 1989, as amended; MARK B. CHESEBRO and 
CAROLINE MITCHEL, Trustees of the First Amendment and 
Restatement of the 1999 Mark Brendan Chesebro and Caroline 
Mitchel Revocable Trust U/D/T dated January 6, 1999; SOMTIDA S. SALIM, Trustee of the Somtida Salim Living Trust dated February 
15, 2007; TODD M. MOSES; PSALMS 133 LLC; JOHN T. FENTON, Trustee 
of the John T. Fenton Revocable Trust dated February 27, 2014; 
FRANCES T. FENTON, Trustee of the Frances T. Fenton Revocable 
Trust dated February 27, 2014; DIRK AND LAURA BELLAMY HAIN, 
Trustees of the Bellamy-Hain Family Trust dated September 13, 
2017; ROBERT STOPPEK; LAURA B. STOPPEK; NEIL ALMSTEAD; DOYLE LAND PARTNERSHIP; CHARLES E. and NANCY E. ROSEBROOK; MICHAEL 
CORY and EUGENIA MASTON; PAUL T. and DELAYNE M. JENNINGS, 
Trustees of the Jennings Family Revocable Trust dated January 5, 
2010; MAGGHOLM PROPERTIES LLC; NETTLETON S. and DIANE E. PAYNE, 
III, Appellants-Appellees, 
 
vs. 
 
STATE OF HAWAI‘ I, LAND USE COMMISSION, 
Appellee-Appellant, 
 
and 
 
COUNTY OF 
HAWAI‘I,  
Appellee-Appellee.  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
SCAP-22-0000371 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-22-0000371; CIV. NO. 3CCV-21-0000178) 
 
September 24, 2024 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, EDDINS, AND GINOZA, JJ., AND 
CIRCUIT JUDGE CASTAGNETTI, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Hawai‘i land use 
is broadly guided by state law. The 
counties play an important role, however. They propose land use 
maps to the State, implement the land use scheme through zoning ordinances, and carve out permissible exceptions to the State’s 
broad scheme. In 2019, the County of Hawai‘ i passed an ordinance 
banning short-term vacation rentals in the agricultural district 
on lots built after 1976. The Rosehill Petitioners challenge the County’s ordinance, seeking permission to use farm dwellings 
as short-term vacation rentals. We hold that farm dwellings in 
the agricultural district may not be used as short-term vacation 
rentals because such relief would undermine the purpose of the 
agricultural district. 
In brief summary, 
Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 205-4.5 (2017) details all permissible uses of land in the 
agricultural district. HRS § 205-4.5(a)(4) (2017) defines a 
“farm dwelling,” a permissible use, as “a single-family dwelling 
2  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
located on and used in connection with a farm . . . or where 
agricultural activity provides income to the family occupying 
the dwelling.” In 2019, the County of Hawai‘i amended its zoning 
code to regulate the use of short-term vacation rentals by 
requiring owners to register and obtain nonconforming use 
certificates from the County Planning Department. Under the 
ordinance, the County may only issue a nonconforming use 
certificate for land in the agricultural district where the lot 
existed before June 4, 1976. Anyone operating a short-term 
vacation rental without first obtaining a nonconforming use certificate is subject to criminal prosecution and 
administrative penalties. 
After the ordinance was enacted, the Rosehill 
Petitioners, who all own lots created after June 4, 1976, sought 
nonconforming use certificates. 
The County denied the 
certificates, and the Rosehill Petitioners appealed to the County Board of Appeals. The County and the Rosehill 
Petitioners agreed to stay the appeal and each file a petition 
with the Land Use Commission (LUC), seeking to establish whether the County’s denial was proper under state law. The LUC ruled 
on the County’s petition and found that farm dwelling use and 
short-term vacation rental use are not compatible uses — i.e., 
that farm dwellings cannot be used as short-term vacation 
3  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
rentals. The LUC also concluded that the Rosehill Petition was 
speculative and hypothetical. 
The Rosehill Petitioners appealed to the circuit 
court, which reversed the LUC. The circuit court held that farm 
dwelling use and short-term vacation rental use are “not 
incompatible.” It compared the County ordinance to HRS 
§ 205-4.5(a) and held that a dwelling can simultaneously meet 
the definition of a farm dwelling and a short-term vacation rental. 
The LUC appealed to the Intermediate Court of Appeals 
(ICA), where the case was extensively briefed. While the case 
was pending before the ICA, this court issued In re Kanahele
, 
which held that declaratory orders entered by the LUC have the “same status” for judicial review as orders in contested cases. 
152 
Hawai‘i 501, 512, 526 P.3d 478, 489 (2023). Here, that would 
mean that the Rosehill Petitioners should have appealed directly 
to this court from the LUC order (rather than, as they did to 
the circuit court). The Rosehill Petitioners then applied for 
transfer, which we granted. 
This case raises several questions. 
Preliminarily, 
there are two procedural issues raised by Kanahele: (1) Can this case be transferred from the ICA to this court, nunc pro tunc to 
June 18, 2021, the date this appeal was initially filed in the 
circuit court; and (2) if the case can be transferred nunc pro
4  
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
tunc, what record may the Court consider, and which party should 
have the burden of showing error? There are also two 
substantive issues: (3) Could the LUC grant the declaratory 
order to the County while denying the Rosehill Petition, and 
(4) can a farm dwelling in the state agricultural district be 
used as a short-term vacation rental? 
We hold as follows: (1) yes, we may transfer the case 
nunc pro tunc
 because it is within the statutory and inherent 
power of this court to do so and would accord with our 
longstanding policy to hear cases on the merits; (2) this court 
can use the entirety of the record (though the circuit court’s 
findings of fact and conclusions of law have no weight), and the 
Rosehill Petitioners have the burden of showing that the LUC 
order was arbitrary and capricious; (3) yes, the LUC properly 
granted the declaratory order for the County while denying the Rosehill Petition because the two parties were not similarly 
situated; and (4) no, a farm dwelling in the agricultural 
district may not be used as a short-term vacation rental because 
that use does not accord with the agricultural district’s 
purpose. 
We therefore vacate the circuit court’s judgment and 
affirm the LUC’s declaratory order. 
5  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Statutory Background 
HRS § 205-4.5, originally enacted as Act 199 in 1976, 
governs the LUC and agricultural lands: 
205-4.5  Permissible uses within the agricultural 
districts. 
(a) Within the agricultural district, all lands with soil 
classified by the land study bureau’ s detailed land 
classification as overall (master) productivity rating 
class A or B and for solar energy facilities, class B or C, 
shall be restricted to the following permitted uses: 
     . . . . 
(4) Farm dwellings, employee housing, farm buildings, 
or activities or uses related to farming and animal 
husbandry. “Farm dwelling
”, as used in this 
paragraph, means a single- family dwelling located on 
and used in connection with a farm, including 
clusters of single- family farm dwellings permitted 
within agricultural parks developed by the State, or where agricultural activity provides income to the 
family occupying the dwelling[.] 
(b) Uses not expressly permitted in subsection (a) shall be 
prohibited, except the uses permitted as provided in 
sections 205- 6 and 205- 8, and construction of single- family 
dwellings on lots existing before June 4, 1976. Any other law to the contrary notwithstanding, no subdivision of land within the agricultural district with soil classified by 
the land study bureau’ s detailed land classification as 
overall (master) productivity rating class A or B shall be approved by a county unless those A and B lands within the 
subdivision are made subject to the restriction on uses as prescribed in this section and to the condition that the 
uses shall be primarily in pursuit of an agricultural 
activity. 
6  Any deed, lease, agreement of sale, mortgage, or 
other instrument of conveyance covering any land within the 
agricultural subdivision shall expressly contain the 
restriction on uses and the condition, as prescribed in 
this section that these restrictions and conditions shall 
be encumbrances running with the land until such time that the land is reclassified to a land use district other than 
agricultural district.    
 
 
   HRS § 205-6 (2017) allows counties to “permit certain 
unusual and reasonable uses within agricultural and rural 
districts other than those for which the district is 
classified.” 
 
  
 
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Zoning Code Background and County Planning Procedure 
The County of Hawaiʻi zoning code regulates land 
development and use within the County. See
 Hawai‘i County Code 
(HCC or the Code) § 25-1-2(b). In April 2019, the County 
amended its zoning code to regulate the use of short-term 
vacation rentals by requiring the owner to register and obtain a 
nonconforming use certificate from the Planning Department. HCC 
§§ 25-4-16, 25-4-16.1, Hawaiʻ i County Ordinance, No. 18-114 
(2018). Anyone that operates a short-term vacation rental 
without obtaining a nonconforming use certificate may be subject 
to criminal prosecution and administrative penalties. HCC 
§§ 25-4-16(b)(7), 25-2-31, 25-2-35 (2019). The Code provides, “[i]n the State land use agricultural district, a short-term 
vacation rental nonconforming use certificate may only be issued 
for single-family dwellings on lots existing before June 4, 
1976.” 
See
 HCC § 25-4-16.1(e) (2019).1 
1 June 4, 1976 was the effective date for Act 199, H.B. No. 3262-
76, the act in which the legislature designated the permissible uses within 
the agricultural districts now codified at HRS § 205-4.5. 
7  
 
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The County defines a short-term vacation rental as “a 
dwelling unit of which the owner or operator does not reside on 
the building site, that has no more than five bedrooms for rent 
on the building site, and is rented for a period of thirty 
consecutive days or less.” HCC § 25-1-5(b) (2019). Short-term 
vacation rentals are permitted in several areas of the County, 
including its resort-hotel district, the general commercial 
district, village commercial district, multiple-family residential district, and General Plan Resort and Resort Node 
areas. HCC §§ 25-4-16(a)(1), 25-5-90 (2019). 
The Rosehill Petitioners applied for a non-conforming 
use certificate for their short-term vacation rental operated on 
a lot created after June 4, 1976 in an agricultural district, 
which the County denied. 
Subsequently, the Rosehill Petitioners appealed the 
denials of their application for nonconforming use certificates to the County’s Board of Appeals. See HCC § 25-4-16.1(f). The 
County and the Rosehill Petitioners jointly stipulated to stay the proceedings at the Board of Appeals pending the disposition 
of LUC petitions. 
C. The LUC Proceedings 
In May 2020, the County and the Rosehill Petitioners 
separately filed petitions for declaratory orders before the 
8  
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
LUC, which were subsequently consolidated. The County presented 
the following factual situation: petitioners (a subset of whom 
are now the Rosehill Petitioners) who sought and were denied 
nonconforming use certificates for short-term vacation rentals 
have appealed the denials. The County requested “a Declaratory 
Order that ‘farm dwellings’ may not be used as short-term 
vacation rentals pursuant to [HRS] §§ 205-2 and 205-4.5, and 
Hawaiʻi Administrative Rules (HAR) § 15-15-25.”  (Emphasis 
added.) 
The Rosehill Petitioners requested a declaratory ruling 
“to clarify and affirm that the rental of farm dwellings for 
periods of 30 days or less was not prohibited
 in the State 
Agricultural District as of June 4, 1976.” The Rosehill Petition described the Petitioners as owners of various parcels 
of land in the agricultural district, but did not specifically 
describe how the Petitioners were using the land. 
On May 20, 2021, the LUC entered a consolidated order 
denying the Rosehill Petition and granting the County’s 
petition. 
The LUC concluded: 
62. The farm dwelling use and a [short- term vacation 
rental] use are not compatible uses. A farm dwelling 
defined under HRS § 205-4.5(a)(4) as a single- family 
dwelling that either must be located on and used in 
connections with a farm, or where agricultural activity 
provides income to the family occupying the dwelling. 
9  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
63. In the present proceedings, no facts were submitted 
which would contradict the conclusion that a [short- term 
vacation rental] use is basically a transient accommodation effectively for vacation or tourist use, which has no 
connection to a farm and is not accessory to an agricultural use, and does not meet either of the requirements of the farm dwelling definition. A [short-
term vacation rental] use would therefore improperly displace the required agricultural use of a farm dwelling. 
64. A [short- term vacation rental] is not a permitted use 
of a farm dwelling in the Agricultural District under HRS 
chapter 205. HRS §§ 205-2(d) and 205- 4.5(a) expressly lists 
the permitted uses in the Agricultural District as a matter 
of law. If a use is not listed, it is prohibited. [Short-
term vacation rentals] are not listed permitted uses of a 
farm dwelling under HRS chapter 205, and therefore, are 
prohibited. 
65. Residential use of a farm dwelling without any connection to an agricultural use has never been allowed in 
the Agricultural District. The law has always required that 
a farm dwelling be used in connection with a farm or 
accessory to an agricultural use. 
    . . . . 
69.
 A [short- term vacation rental] is not a permitted use 
as a farm dwelling under HRS chapter 205. 
The order cited Save Sunset Beach Coal. v. City & 
Cnty. of Honolulu, 102 Hawaiʻi 465, 482, 78 P.3d 1, 18 (2003), in 
which we held, “[t]o the extent that the Hawaiʻ i County Council  
has exercised its legislative judgment to regulate [short term  
vacation rentals] to protect and preserve agricultural land in a 
manner more restrictive than that provided by the LUC, the  
County Ordinance controls and must be followed.”   
10  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The LUC Order further held that the petition filed by 
the Rosehill Petitioners was speculative under HAR § 15-15-
98(a): 
79. Without a “specific factual situation” presented to the 
Commission, the ROSEHILL PETITIONERS are putting forth a 
speculative or purely hypothetical scenario “which does not 
involve an existing situation or one which may reasonably be expected to occur in the near future.” Therefore, the 
ROSEHILL PETITIONERS’ request for relief should be denied, 
leaving only the County’s question of whether a farm dwelling may be used as a [short- term vacation rental] for 
the Commission’s consideration.
 D. Court Proceedings 
In June 2021, the Rosehill Petitioners appealed the 
LUC Order to the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit.2 In May 
2022, the circuit court entered “Findings of Fact, Conclusions 
of Law, Decision and Order Reversing the State of Hawai‘i Land 
Use Commission’s Consolidated Declaratory Order.” It held that 
the County’s petition should be denied and the Rosehill petition 
granted for two reasons. First, it concluded that the “LUC 
abused its discretion when it denied the Rosehill Petition on 
the grounds that it was ‘speculative or purely hypothetical.’” 
It found that the questions were substantially similar and based 
on the same factual situation, so the LUC’s denial was an abuse 
of discretion. Second, it concluded that “language of HRS §§ 205-2 and 205-4.5 is plain and unambiguous,” and that “[a] 
comparison of [the County ordinance] with HRS Chapter 205 as of 
2 The Honorable Wendy M. DeWeese presided. 
11  
 
 
    
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
June 4, 1976 reveals that a dwelling may simultaneously meet the 
definition of a ‘farm dwelling’ pursuant to HRS Chapter 205 and 
the County's definition of ‘short-term vacation rental.’” 
The LUC appealed the circuit court’s order and 
judgment to the ICA. First, the LUC argued that the circuit 
court failed to recognize the distinctions between the two 
petitions, which were critical to the LUC’s decision. Namely, 
the LUC never found that the Rosehill Petitioners actually had farm dwellings, so it concluded that their petition was 
hypothetical. The County, on the other hand, needed to know if 
it could enforce its ordinance. Because of this, the LUC 
argued, the parties were not similarly situated — so granting 
the County petition while denying the Rosehill petition was 
permissible. 
Second, the LUC argued that short-term vacation 
rentals are not a permissible use of farm dwellings in the agricultural district. The LUC argued (1) short-term vacation 
rental was not a permitted use under HRS § 205-4.5, which 
specifically states that “uses not expressly permitted . . . 
shall be prohibited”; (2) short-term vacation rentals would not 
align with the purpose of the agricultural district, which is to 
protect agricultural land for agricultural use; and (3) the 
LUC’s interpretation of its own ambiguous statute should be 
12  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
accorded deference. Under the relevant LUC administrative 
rules: 
“Dwelling” means a building designed or used exclusively 
for single family residential occupancy, but not including 
house trailer, multi- family unit, mobile  home, hotel, or 
motel.  
    . . . . 
“Farm dwelling” means a single
-family dwelling located on 
and used in connection with a farm or where agricultural 
activity provides income to the family occupying the 
dwelling. 
“Single- family dwelling” means a dwelling occupied 
exclusively by one family. 
HAR § 15-15-03 (emphasis added). 
As an “accessory building or use,” a farm dwelling 
must also be “a subordinate building or use which is incidental 
to and customary with a permitted use of the land.” 
HAR § 15-
15-03. The LUC argued that transient uses cannot coexist with agricultural activity, and that it used its expertise in land 
use when making that determination. And because its interpretation is consistent with the underlying legislative 
purpose of HRS chapter 205 (“to prevent ‘the development of 
urban type residential communities in the guise of agricultural 
subdivisions’”), the LUC argued it did not err. 
The County filed an answering brief, agreeing with the 
LUC’s arguments. The Rosehill Petitioners also answered, 
13  . . . .  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
defending the circuit court’s decision. First, they argued that 
they and the County presented the same fundamental question to 
the LUC, so the LUC could not deny the Rosehill petition as 
speculative or hypothetical while granting the County petition. 
Second, they argued that the plain language of HRS § 205-
4.5(a)(4), which defines a farm dwelling as a permissible use of 
agricultural land, does not set out a minimum rental period. On 
the other hand, the County’s definition of a short-term vacation rental relies solely on how long the premises are rented and not 
by the actual usage — so a farm dwelling can also be a short-
term vacation rental. 
Extensive briefing followed, in which the parties 
reiterated their arguments for and against the use of farm 
dwellings as short-term vacations rentals. The Honolulu 
Department of Planning filed an amicus brief in support of the County’s actions. The brief reiterated the County’s and LUC’s 
arguments, but also raised the jurisdictional issue following 
this court’s holding in Kanahele, which had recently been 
published. It argued: 
there appears to be a question of whether the Third Circuit 
Court possessed jurisdiction to hear an appeal from the 
LUC’s consolidated order. HRS § 205- 19(a) states “[a]ny 
other law to the contrary notwithstanding, including 
chapter 91, any contested case under this chapter shall be 
appealed from a final decision and order or a preliminary 
ruling that is of the nature defined by section 91- 14(a) 
upon the record directly to the supreme court for final decision.” HRS § 205- 19(a) (2017 and Supp. 2019). In 
addition, on March 15, 2023, the 
Hawai‘i Supreme Court 
14  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
issued an opinion in In re Kanahele, [152] Haw[ ai‘i] [501, 
526 P.3d 478] (2023); No. SCOT- 19-0000830, 2023 Haw. LEXIS 
75 (2023), in which it accepted jurisdiction over a direct 
appeal from an LUC order. See, Kanahele, 2023 LEXIS 75 at 
pp. 21-27. DPP respectfully declines to take a position on 
the proper disposition of this case in light of HRS § 205-
19(a) and Kanahele because jurisdictional matters are 
outside of its area of expertise and interest. However, DPP 
notes the issue raised by HRS [] and Kanahele based on 
counsel’s duty to make this court aware of relevant law. 
The Rosehill Petitioners responded. They claimed that 
the circuit court had appellate jurisdiction under Lingle v. 
Haw. Gov’t Emps. Ass’n, 107 Hawai‘ i 178, 111 P.3d 587 (2005), and 
no party disputed that jurisdiction. 
Alternatively, they 
requested the ICA transfer the case to this court nunc pro tunc
. 
The LUC opposed the Rosehill Petitioners’ request to transfer. 
Instead, the LUC asserted that the “correct, non-prejudicial way 
to dispose of the instant appeal, in light of Kanahele, is to 
vacate the circuit court order, strike any associated 
proceedings,” and then proceed. (Emphasis in original.) 
The Rosehill Petitioners followed their last brief 
with a motion to transfer the case to this court. They argued that when the LUC issued its declaratory order in 2020, all 
parties understood that the proper procedure to appeal was to 
the circuit court under Lingle. Then Kanahele changed that. 
Nunc pro tunc transfer, then, was necessary to preserve their 
right to appeal. The LUC and County both opposed the motion. 
They argued that in light of Kanahele, the only action that the 
15  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
ICA could take was to vacate the circuit court’s decision for 
lack of jurisdiction. 
The Rosehill Petitioners also filed an application to 
transfer with this court. We accepted transfer in June 2023.3 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Statutory Interpretation 
“The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
which this court reviews de novo.” Kanahele, 152 
Hawai‘i at 509, 
526 P.3d at 486 (quoting Keep the N. Shore Country v. Bd. Of 
Land & Nat. Res., 150 Hawai
‘i 486, 506, 506 P.3d 150 (2022)). 
In reviewing questions of statutory interpretation, we are 
guided by the following principles: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory interpretation is the language of the statute itself. 
Second, where the statutory language is plain and 
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its 
plain and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the 
task of statutory construction is our foremost obligation to ascertain and give effect to the 
intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained 
primarily from the language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when there is doubt, doubleness of 
meaning, or indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an 
expression used in a statute, an ambiguity exists. 
State v. Castillon, 144 Hawai‘ i 406, 411, 443 P.3d 98, 103 (2019) 
(quoting Panado v. Bd. Of Trs., Emps.’ Ret. Sys., 134 
Hawai‘i 1, 
10, 332 P.3d 144, 153 (2014)).   
3 The County and LUC objected to transfer on jurisdictional 
grounds. But a jurisdictional defect in the case does not deprive this court 
of its ability to review the jurisdictional question. See Lingle
, 107 Hawai‘i 
at 182-83, 111 P.3d at 591- 92 (“When reviewing a case where the circuit court 
lacked subject matter jurisdiction, the appellate court retains 
jurisdiction . . . for the purpose of correcting the error in 
jurisdiction.”). 
16  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Agency Appeals 
A court’s review of administrative agency decisions is 
governed by HRS § 91-14(g) (Supp. 2016), which provides: 
Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the 
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions 
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the 
decision and order if the substantial rights of the petitioners may have been prejudiced because the 
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders 
are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions; 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or 
jurisdiction of the agency; 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; 
(4) Affected by other error of law; 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, 
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole 
record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by 
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion. 
“Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are 
reviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions 
regarding procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of 
fact under subsection (5); and an agency’s exercise of 
discretion under subsection (6).” Kanahele
, 152 Hawai‘i at 509
-
10, 526 P.3d at 486-87 (brackets omitted) (quoting Paul’s Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel
, 104 Hawai‘i 412, 416, 91 P.3d 494, 498 
(2004)). 
17  
 
 
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV. DISCUSSION 
As discussed below, we hold as follows: (1) the case 
can be transferred nunc pro tunc because under Honoipu Hideaway,
LLC v. Land Use Comm’n, 154 Hawai͑i 372, 550 P.3d 1230 (2024), 
it is within the inherent power of this court and is in pursuit 
of our longstanding policy to hear cases on the merits; (2) we 
may use the record from the lower courts in the interest of 
judicial efficiency, though we owe the circuit court’s holding no deference and the Rosehill Petitioners have the burden of 
showing that the LUC order was arbitrary and capricious; 
(3) 
the LUC could grant the County petition while denying the 
Rosehill petition because the two parties were not similarly situated; and (4) a farm dwelling in the agricultural district 
cannot be used as a short-term vacation rental because that use 
fails to accord with the purpose of the agricultural district. 
Accordingly, we vacate the circuit court’s order and 
judgment, and affirm the LUC’s declaratory order. 
A. The Case Can be Transferred Nunc Pro Tunc
 to Accord with 
Hawai‘i Courts’ Longstanding Policy to Reach the Merits of a 
Case 
This court recently issued Honoipu, in which a party 
appealed a declaratory order from the LUC. Its reasoning applies with equal force here. There, the circuit court 
reserved a question for this court: “Whether [the circuit court] 
18  
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
        
    
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
has the inherent and statutory authority to transfer nunc pro
tunc an appeal, which was timely filed with [the circuit court], 
to the Supreme Court of Hawai‘ i as the court with appellate 
jurisdiction.”4 Honoipu, 154 Hawai͑i at 373, 550 P.3d at 1231 
(brackets in original). The question was briefed by both 
Honoipu (who was represented by the same lawyers as the Rosehill 
Petitioners) and the LUC (who is party to this case). 
We 
answered yes to the reserved question because “[a]llowing such a transfer in these limited circumstances accords with our 
longstanding policy to hear cases on the merits, and there is both inherent and statutory power for the courts to do so.” Id.
at 374, 550 P.3d at 1232. The reasoning in Honoipu
 applies 
here, as the circumstances are nearly the same. Honoipu 
appealed a LUC declaratory order and that appeal was pending 
before a circuit court when Kanahele was published. This case, 
also an appeal of a LUC declaratory order, was pending before 
the ICA when Kanahele was published. 
In Honoipu, we held that: 
There is both statutory and inherent power to transfer 
[the] case. . . . this court has the authority “to make and 
issue any order or writ necessary or appropriate in aid of its jurisdiction.” HRS § 602-5(a)(5)(2016).  This court 
may also 
4 “Nunc pro tunc translates to ‘now for then.’ Nunc pro tunc 
actions allow courts to remedy clerical issues, clear errors, and prevent manifest injustice.” Honoipu at 374 n.2, 550 P.3d at 1232 n.2 (citing Nunc 
Pro Tunc, Black’s Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019)). 
19  
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
make and award such judgments, decrees, orders 
and mandates, issue such executions and other 
processes, and do such other acts and take such 
other steps as may be necessary to carry into 
full effect the powers which are or shall be 
given to it by law or for the promotion of justice in matters pending before it. 
HRS § 602- 5(a)(6) (emphasis added). 
Article VI, section 1 of the Hawai‘ i Constitution entrusts 
courts with the “judicial power of the State.” This court has interpreted the judicial power as inherently including 
“the power to administer justice.” Farmer[ v. Admin Dir. 
of Ct., State of Haw
.], 94 
Hawai‘i [232,] 241, 11 P.3d 
[457,] 466 [(2000)] 
(quoting State v. Moriwake, 65 H aw. 47, 
55, 647 P.2 d 705, 712 (1982)).  
Hawai‘i courts “have 
inherent equity, supervisory, and administrative powers as well as inherent power to control the litigation process 
before them. Inherent powers of the court are derived from the state Constitution and are not confined by or dependent 
on statute.” State v. Harrison, 95 
Hawai‘i 28, 32, 18 P.3d 
890, 894 (2001) (quoting Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United 
Agric. 
Prods., 86 Hawai
‘i 214, 242, 948 P.2d 1055, 1083 
(1997)). These powers include, but are not limited to, the 
power to “create a remedy for a wrong even in the absence 
of specific statutory remedies[,] . . . to prevent unfair 
results[,] . 
. . and to curb abuses and promote a fair 
process.” 
    ... . 
[T]he power to “do such other acts and take such other steps as may be necessary to carry into full effect the 
power which are or shall be given to them by law or for the 
promotion of justice” gives the circuit court the power to correct a jurisdictional mistake that was no party’s or 
court’s fault. 
HRS § 603- 21.9(6). 
Honoipu, 154 Hawai͑i at 375-76, 550 P.3d at 1233-34. 
This court further held that nunc pro tunc transfer 
was appropriate to accord with “our longstanding policy to hear 
cases on the merits.” Id. at 374, 550 P.3d at 1232. If nunc
pro tunc transfer was not deemed appropriate in Honoipu, the 
appellant likely would have lost their right to appeal and their 
day in court. Id. at 376-77, 550 P.3d at 1284-85. Similarly, 
20  
 
 
  
     
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
here, unless the transfer is made nunc pro tunc to when the 
Rosehill Petitioners filed their initial appeal, they will lose 
their right to an appeal. The case is ripe for review now. 
Thus, for the same reasons expressed in Honoipu, we 
hold that this case can be transferred using this court’s 
inherent and statutory powers and that the transfer is effective 
nunc pro tunc to June 18, 2021, the date the Rosehill 
Petitioners filed their initial appeal of the LUC declaratory order. 
B. This Court May Review the Entire Record on Appeal, 
Including the Circuit Court and ICA Proceedings, but the 
Circuit Court’s Ruling Holds No Weight 
The LUC and County argue that we should only review 
the agency record and disregard the circuit court and ICA 
records entirely. They contend that if the Rosehill Petitioners 
had properly brought the case under Kanahele’s ruling, “[t]he record accompanying a direct appeal would have included only the 
LUC’s record and Consolidated Order, not the record developed by 
the circuit court or the ICA briefing.” Further, they contend 
that because the circuit court lacked jurisdiction, that record 
and references to that court’s decision will “taint the 
arguments” on appeal. The LUC specifically argued that our 
holding in Kanahele stated “that the proper record is the record 
21  
 
 
   
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
from the LUC’s proceedings that resulted in the LUC’s 
declaratory order — nothing less, and, importantly, nothing 
more.” See Kanahele
, 152 Hawai‘i at 511–12, 526 P.3d at 488–89 
(citing HRS § 205-19) (“any contested case under this chapter 
shall be appealed from a final decision and order or a 
preliminary ruling that is of the nature defined by section 
91-14(a) upon the record directly to the supreme court for final 
decision.”). 
For the sake of judicial efficiency, we may review the 
briefing from both the ICA and the circuit court. 
If the 
Rosehill Petitioners had properly brought their appeal to this 
court under Kanahele’s holding, then we would have reviewed the 
case in the same posture as the circuit court did here. The 
circuit court acted as an appellate body in precisely the same 
manner as this court does now. 
The LUC and County do not contend that additional 
evidence was introduced at the circuit court level that would 
have affected that court’s review of the agency’s record below. 
They want us to ignore the entire record from the lower courts and dismiss the case. We decline to do so. 
This court held in Kanahele that it may directly 
review agency decisions on petitions for declaratory relief. 
152 Hawai‘ i at 511, 526 P.3d at 488.  Prior to that holding, 
22  
 
 
       
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
there was confusion among litigants as to the proper procedural 
avenue. Some petitioners, like Kanahele, appealed directly to 
this court. Others, such as the Rosehill Petitioners, appealed 
their agency decision to the circuit court. Kanahele’s 
jurisdictional rule aimed to align appeals of agency decisions with the legislature’s intent in passing HRS § 205-19(a) (as 
amended by Act 48) to provide for this court’s direct review of 
contested cases and declaratory orders because they have the “same status” under HRS §§ 91-8, 91-14 and 205-19. Id. at 512, 
526 P.3d at 489. 
While we may review the record from the lower court, 
the circuit court’s findings of fact, conclusions of law, and judgment hold no weight. We primarily consider the briefing by 
the parties because those briefs set forth the parties' 
positions on direct appeal from the LUC. We review the LUC order de novo. See Kanahele
, 152 Hawai͑i at 509-10, 526 P.3d at 
486-87 (brackets omitted) (quoting 
Paul’s Elec. Serv., Inc. v. 
Befitel
, 104 Hawai͑i 412, 416, 91 P.3d 494, 498 (2004)). 
Because the Rosehill Petitioners had the initial burden on appeal to show that the LUC acted arbitrarily and capriciously, 
they still have that burden now. 
23  
 
 
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C. The LUC Did Not Act Arbitrarily or Capriciously in Granting 
the County’s Declaratory Order While Denying the Rosehill 
Petition because the Two Parties Were Not Similarly 
Situated 
The Rosehill Petitioners argue that the LUC acted 
outside of its authority by denying their petition. They claim 
that because both petitions were premised on the same facts, the 
LUC acted arbitrarily and capriciously in denying one petition 
and ruling on the other. We disagree. While the two petitions 
were consolidated by the LUC for factfinding, the two parties 
are not similarly situated. The County is required to construe 
and enforce HRS chapter 205 through its own ordinances. By 
presenting the LUC with a question of whether it had the authority to enforce that code against landowners, the County 
showed it was not dealing with a hypothetical or speculative 
situation. The County needed to know if it could enforce HCC § 
25-4-16 against landowners in violation of the ordinance. There 
is nothing hypothetical or speculative about that situation. 
The Rosehill Petitioners, on the other hand, did not 
provide evidence in the record for the LUC to hold that they had 
farm dwellings connected to agricultural use of the land. Their 
counsel stated the following on the record: “As a matter of candor, I have no idea how these particular properties are used. 
I don’t know, because that doesn’t matter;” and “we talked about 
this, the [County] Corp Counsel and I, we specifically discussed 
24  
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
what facts should be presented to the Commission, whether it was 
necessary to present issues related to any particular property 
or any particular use, and we both agreed that it was not . . . 
and that there was no need for any particular information about 
any particular property because that’s not why we’re here.” 
Determining whether the Rosehill Petitioners actually 
had farm dwellings was the LUC’s obligation. The LUC found that 
the Rosehill Petitioners “have not submitted a sufficient record demonstrating that their use or intended use of their subject 
properties are ‘farm dwellings’ or related to agriculture.” It 
found that the Rosehill Petitioners showed only that they had 
lots in the agricultural district created after June 4, 1976 and 
that they had rented those lots for periods of less than thirty-
one days. The Rosehill Petitioners argue that the County 
“admitted” that the Petitioners had farm dwellings, and that admission should carry the day. The Rosehill Petitioners are 
wrong. 
In the hearing that the Rosehill Petitioners refer to for 
County’s “admission,” a deputy planning director for the County said, “[the Rosehill lots] are all on ag property and parcels 
that were created after June 4th, 1976, therefore, we consider 
all of their dwelling units on their property to be farm 
dwellings.” But that is not all it takes to be a farm dwelling. 
A farm dwelling must also be “used in connection with a farm.” 
For the LUC to find that the Rosehill lots were farm dwellings, 
25  
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the Rosehill Petitioners would have had to also show that their 
dwellings were “used in connection with a farm.” It found that 
they did not provide such evidence. If a representative from 
the county used the wrong definition for a farm dwelling, there 
is no reason for the LUC to credit her “admission” that the 
Rosehill lots were farm dwellings. 
The Rosehill Petitioners asked the highly-specific 
question to the LUC: whether “the rental of farm dwellings for periods of 30 days or less was not prohibited in the State 
Agricultural District as of June 4, 1976.” This attempt to 
narrow the question while not showing “any particular 
information about any particular property” fails to “involve an 
existing situation or one which may reasonably be expected to 
occur in the near future” required by HAR § 15-15-
100(a)(1)(A) (2013). Therefore, the LUC’s conclusion that the Rosehill Petition was hypothetical was reasonable. 
D. The LUC Did Not Act Arbitrarily or Capriciously in Holding 
that Farm Dwellings in the Agricultural District Cannot Be 
Used as Short-Term Vacation Rentals 
The central merits issue of this appeal is whether 
farm dwellings in the agricultural district can be used as 
short-term vacation rentals under HRS chapter 205. We hold that 
they cannot. 
26  
 
 
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1. HRS § 205-4.5 is ambiguous as to short-term vacation 
rentals 
The Rosehill Petitioners contend that the text of 
HRS chapter 205 controls and is unambiguous. They argue that 
because HRS § 205-4.5(a)(4) does not mention how long farm dwellings need to be rented for, and because the County 
Ordinance defines short-term vacation rentals in part as being 
rented for thirty days or fewer, farm dwellings may be used as 
short-term vacation rentals. That narrow view of the statute, 
which would allow for the subversion of the purpose of 
HRS chapter 205, cannot stand. 
In interpreting statutes, we start with the statute’s 
language. If there is ambiguity, we look to the intent of the 
legislature. See Citizens Against Reckless Dev.
, 114 Hawai‘i 
184, 194, 159 P.3d 143, 153 (2007) (quoting 
Peterson v. Haw. 
Elec. Light Co.
, 85 Hawai‘i 322, 327-28, 944 P.2d 1265, 1270- 71 
(1997)). 
27  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRS § 205-4.55 states: 
205-4.5  Permissible uses within the agricultural 
districts. (a) Within the agricultural district, all 
lands with soil classified by the land study bureau's 
detailed land classification as overall (master) productivity rating class A or B and for solar energy 
facilities, class B or C, shall be restricted to the 
following permitted uses: 
 . . . 
(4) Farm dwellings, employee housing, farm buildings, or 
activities or uses related to farming and animal husbandry. 
“Farm dwelling” , as used in this paragraph, means a single-
family dwelling located on and used in connection with a 
farm, including clusters of single- family farm dwellings 
permitted within agricultural parks developed by the State, 
or where agricultural activity provides income to the 
family occupying the dwelling. 
  By the statute’s text, there appear to be two types of 
single-family dwellings that qualify as farm dwellings: the 
first is a single-family dwelling located on and used in 
connection with a farm. The second is one in which agricultural 
activity provides income to a resident or family occupying the 
dwelling. 
There is ambiguity in the first type of farm dwelling 
as to what “in connection with” a farm means. In the past, this 
5 In 2021, the legislature amended “used in connection with” to 
“accessory to” following a State Office of Planning “Study of Subdivision and 
[Condominium Property Regime] on Agricultural Lands on Oahu” in 2021. 2021 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 77, §§ 1- 2  at 247- 48.  The Office of Planning 
recommended the change after it found that there was a “proliferation of 
dwellings in the agricultural district without any significant farm 
component.” Off. of Planning, State of Haw., Act 278 Study of Subdivision and 
CPR on Agricultural Lands on Oahu, at 17 (Dec. 29, 2020) 
https://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/op/lud/20201221%20Act%20278%20SLH%202019%20Pro ject/Act278FinalReporttoLeg20201230.pdf [https://perma.cc/59QG- 5L7P]. The 
shift from “used in connection with” to “accessory to” supports our 
analysis. If anything, it confirms that farm dwellings are not, and were 
never intended to be, properly used as short- term vacation rentals. 
28  
 
 
    
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
court has interpreted “in connection with” to mean “related to,” 
“linked to,” or “associated with.” See Laeroc Waikiki Parkside,
LLC v. K.S.K. (Oahu) Ltd. P’ship
, 115 Hawai‘i 201, 225, 166 P.3d 
961, 985 (2007). But that definition does not shed more light 
on what the relationship between the single-family dwelling and 
the farm must be. It might mean that a farmer tenant has a 
long-term lease to grow a particular crop, and that tenant lives 
in the single-family dwelling. The dwelling is “linked to” the 
farm in that it houses the person that farms there. Or it might 
also mean that a visitor to the County of Hawai‘ i stays at a 
single-family dwelling on a farm that operates as a short-term 
vacation rental. “Reasonably well-informed persons” can 
understand the statute “in two or more different senses.” 
Sutherland Statutory Construction § 45:2 (7th ed.). Thus, the statute has some ambiguity. 
The fact that HRS chapter 205 does not require a 
minimum rental period for farm dwellings does not mean that they 
can be short-term vacation rentals. 
Rather, the text prohibits 
“uses not expressly permitted.” HRS § 205-4.5(b). And “it is ‘generally presumed that the legislature acts intentionally and 
purposely in the disparate inclusion or exclusion’ of terms in 
its statutes.” Matter of Gas Co., LLC
, 147 Hawai‘i 186, 200, 465 
29  
 
 
  
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
P.3d 633, 647 (2020) (quoting State v. Savitz , 97 Hawai‘i 440, 
447, 39 P.3d 567, 574 (2002) (holding that the legislature could 
have drafted a statute to include a limitation on the court’s discretion and noting that “[t]he fact that it did not do so 
manifests its intent that it chose not to do so”). 
Expressio
unius est exclusio alterius
 principles apply here.6 The 1976 
legislature could have accounted for some type of transient 
vacation accommodation in its extensive list of permitted uses. 
But it did not. 
Of the twenty-four expressly permitted uses under 
HRS § 205-4.5, of which farm dwellings are but one, none of them resemble anything close to the type of transient accommodation 
that a short-term vacation rental is. A somewhat comparable use 
is “agricultural tourism,” which was not added until later and 
is only permissible in Maui County. 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 
329, § 2 at 1113. Overnight camps, another somewhat close use, 
are explicitly prohibited. HRS § 205-4.5(a)(6); 
see Ho‘omoana 
Found. v. Land Use Comm’n
, 152 Hawai‘i 337, 526 P.3d 314 (2023) 
(holding that prohibited uses in the agricultural district 
cannot be permitted via special use permits). 
6 Expressio unius est exclusio alterius means “the expression of 
one thing is the exclusion of the other.” Expressio unius is “a canon of 
construction holding that to express or include one thing implies the 
exclusion of the other.” Expressio unius est exclusio alterius, Black’s Law 
Dictionary (12th ed. 2024). 
30  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 The LUC argued that “if farm dwellings could be used 
for transient accommodations the Legislature would not have 
needed to add a provision expressly permitting agricultural 
tourism in HRS Chapter 205.” While “the views of a subsequent 
[legislature] form a hazardous basis for inferring the intent of 
an earlier one,” the more recent statutory language can provide 
some context for the scope of HRS chapter 205 from 1976. United
States v. Price, 361 U.S. 304, 313 (1960). It can tell us what the subsequent legislature thought was permissible and what was 
not. See Keliipuleole v. Wilson, 85 Hawai‘ i 217, 225, 941 P.2d 
300, 308 (1997) (“a court may look to ‘subsequent legislative 
history or amendments to confirm its interpretation of an 
earlier statutory provision.’”) (quoting Franks v. City & Cnty. 
of Honolulu, 74 Haw. 328, 340 n.6, 843 P.2d 668, 674 n.6 
(1993)); see also Cnty. of Hawai‘ i v. Ala Loop Homeowners
, 123 
Hawai‘i 391, 415, 235 P.3d 1103, 1127 (2010) (holding that a 
report from a subsequent legislature “is not dispositive in our 
analysis since it cannot change the meaning of article XI, 
section 9 as approved by the voters in 1978, and since it sets 
forth the views only of the joint committee, rather than the 
legislature as a whole. Nevertheless, it is 
relevant to the 
extent that it provides an explanation for the non-action of the legislature, which is the body that would be charged with 
31  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
enacting legislation to implement the provision if it was not 
self-executing.”) (emphasis added). 
Both parties cite to Curtis. There, this court wrote 
that because land use statutes are in derogation of the common 
law, their provisions must be strictly construed. But because 
the court determined that the term “utility lines” in HRS § 205-
4.5(a)(7) was ambiguous, it looked to the purpose of the 
statute. We therefore do the same. 
2. The purpose of HRS § 205-4.5 is to restrict the use of 
specific land to agricultural purposes, and short-term 
vacation rentals undermine that purpose 
Because the meaning of “farm dwelling” is ambiguous, 
we undertake our “obligation to ascertain and give effect to the 
intention of the legislature.” Castillon
, 144 Hawai‘i at 411, 
443 P.3d at 103 (quoting 
Panado
, 134 Hawai‘i at 10, 332 P.3d at 
153). While we primarily look at the statute’s text, in some 
situations “an examination of the debates, proceedings and 
committee reports is useful.” Nelson v. Hawaiian Homes Comm’n
, 
127 Hawai‘i 185, 198, 277 P.3d 279, 292 (2012). As discussed 
supra
, the text of HRS § 205-4.5 and HRS chapter 205 more 
broadly cut against the use of transient short-term vacation rentals in agricultural districts. The text specifically 
32  
 
 
   
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
excludes any unenumerated use,7 and the requirement that the farm 
dwelling be “used in connection with a farm” also cuts against 
transient rental uses. See HRS § 205-4.5(a)(4). 
When creating the LUC in 1961, the legislature wrote 
that, 
[i]nadequate controls have caused many of Hawai͑i’s limited 
and valuable lands to be used for purposes that may have a 
short-term gain to a few but  result in a long- term  loss to 
the income and growth potential of our economy.  .  .  .   
Scattered subdivisions  with expensive, yet reduced, public 
services; the shifting of prime agricultural lands  into 
nonrevenue producing residential uses when other lands are available that  could serve adequately the urban 
needs  .  .  .  these are evidences  of the need for public  
concern and action.  
1961 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 187, § 1 at 299. 
A standing committee report described the purpose of 
the bill proposing the LUC to be, in part, “to protect and 
conserve through zoning the urban, agricultural, and 
conservation lands within all the counties. A coordinated, 
balance[d] approach . . . is essential in order to . . . 
[c]onserve forests, water resources and land, particularly to 
preserve the prime agricultural lands from unnecessary 
urbanization.” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 395, in 1961 House 
Journal at 855 (emphasis added). 
7 HRS § 205- 4.5(b) reads, in part: “Uses not expressly permitted in 
subsection (a) shall be prohibited, except the uses permitted as provided in 
sections 205- 6 and 205- 8, and construction of single- family dwellings on lots 
existing before June 4, 1976.” 
33  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Fifteen years later, seeking to protect agricultural 
lands from increasing urbanization, the legislature found that, 
[a]fter careful consideration, your Committee finds there 
is a danger that agricultural subdivisions may be approved 
by the counties, and thus, put agricultural lands to uses other than for an agricultural pursuit. Inasmuch as the 
purpose of the agricultural district classification is to restrict the uses of the land to agricultural purposes, the 
purpose could be frustrated in the development of urban 
type residential communities in the guise of agricultural subdivisions. 
To avoid possible abuse within the agricultural 
district, this bill more clearly defines the uses permissible within the agricultural district. Except for 
those uses permitted under special use permits in Section 
205-6 and those non- conforming uses permitted in Section 
205-8, uses not specifically permitted by this bill shall 
be prohibited. This bill further provides that the 
restrictions on uses and the condition that the uses shall 
be primarily in pursuit of an agricultural activity shall 
be expressly contained in the instruments of conveyance and 
shall be encumbrances running with the land. 
    .
. . . 
[T
]his bill is not intended to change the existing 
permitted uses on lands within the agricultural district 
. . . . Rather, the intent of this bill is to give 
additional protection to those lands within the 
agricultural district . . . . 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 6, in 1976 House Journal, at 1095 (first 
emphasis added, second emphasis in original). 
  The definition of “farm dwelling” was codified by 
House Bill 3262-76. Remarks from the chair of the House 
Committee on Water, Land Use Development, and Hawaiian Homes add 
more color to the findings and purpose of the bill: 
We, in Hawai‘i, have always been proud of our Land Use 
Law and its effectiveness in regulating land use activities 
in the State. The economic importance of agriculture, the 
imminent pressures of land development, and the prospect of 
urban sprawl were factors behind the establishment of land 
use laws. In fact, when the Legislature enacted Chapter 
205, it declared that ‘ inadequate controls have caused many 
34  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of Hawai‘i’s limited and valuable lands to be used for 
purposes that may have a short- term gain for a few, but 
would result in long
-term losses to the income and growth 
potential of our economy.’ 
As part of our land use regulation scheme, we 
established land use classifications, among which is the 
agricultural district. Within an agricultural district, we 
define certain permitted uses. These uses include growing 
of crops, raising livestock, grazing, farm buildings, 
public buildings necessary for agricultural practices, 
utility lines, some open
-type recreation, and other uses 
necessary for conducting agricultural activities. 
The administration of permitted uses within 
agricultural districts was left to the counties which, by ordinance, could set more restrictive regulations if they so desired. 
Mr. Speaker, we have laws, we have regulations and we 
have county ordinances which govern the uses of agricultural lands. But, today, we have agricultural 
subdivisions within agricultura l districts which can only 
be viewed as a subterfuge of the spirit and intent of our land use laws. 
What has been happening, Mr. Speaker, is that 
landowners have found it difficult to get land reclassified 
from agriculture to urban. Therefore, they have taken 
advantage of county zoning provisions and, under the 
pretext of agricultural subdivision s, have been subdividing 
prime agricultural lands into two- acre sites for 
residential purposes. 
In practice, these agricultural subdivisions are not 
only circumventing county zoning provisions but are being 
offered at prices very few can afford and becoming, in fact, agricultural estates. 
 . . . . 
House Bill 3262
-76, House Draft 2, amends the land 
use law by listing permissible uses of Class A and B lands 
within agricultural districts. Further, the bill 
specifically states that no subdivision of Class A or B 
lands within an agricultural district shall be approved by 
a county unless the land within the subdivision is subject to the use restrictions in the law and only on the 
condition that the use shall be primarily in pursuit of 
agricultural activity. The bill provides for county 
regulation of uses for Class C, D and E lands. 
The bill further requires that any deed, lease, 
agreement of sale, mortgage or any instrument of conveyance 
on land located within an agricultural subdivision shall 
expressly contain a restriction on use, and that such 
35  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
restriction shall provide that the use will be primarily 
agricultural in nature. This condition on any instrument 
of conveyance shall remain with the land until it is 
reclassified for another use. 
1976 House Journal at 532-33 (Statement of Representative 
Richard Kawakami, Chairman, H. Comm. on Water, Land Use Dev. & 
Hawaiian Homes) (emphases added). 
While only some of the issues motivating the passage 
of House Bill 3262-76 are relevant here, it is clear that the general intent of the legislature was to protect land in the 
agriculture district from being used for non-agricultural 
purposes. 
There is no indication either in the statute’s text or 
its legislative history that the legislature intended to allow 
for farm dwellings to be used as short-term vacation rentals 
untethered from agricultural purposes. Rather, transient 
accommodations are antithetical to the legislature’s intent. In 
Curtis
, this court held that there was ambiguity in whether 
cellphone towers were “utility lines” or “communications 
equipment buildings” under HRS § 205-4.5(a)(7). 90 Hawai‘i at 
395-96, 978 P.2d at 833-34. We therefore looked “to the ‘reason 
and spirit’ of state land use law to determine whether a 
cellular phone tower falls within what the legislature 
36  
 
 
    
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
contemplated as utility lines.” Id. at 396, 978 P.2d at 834 
(quoting HRS § 1-15(2)). This court wrote: 
In sum, the overarching purpose of the state land use law 
is to “protect and conserve” natural resources and foster 
“intelligent,” “effective,” and “orderly” land allocation and development. See 1961 Haw. Sess. L. Act 187, § 1 at 
299 (“[I]n order to preserve, protect and encourage the development of the lands in the State for those uses to 
which they are best suited for the public welfare ..., the 
power to zone should be exercised by the State.”). See 
also Pearl Ridge Estates Community Ass’ n v. Lear Siegler, 
Inc., 65 Haw. 133, 144 n. 9, 648 P.2d 702, 709 n. 9 (Nakamura, J., concurring) (“Thus, conservation lands must 
be reserved if practicable, agricultural lands should be 
protected, and urban lands should be developed in orderly fashion.”). 
Id. 
This court therefore held that “wholesale inclusion of 
cellular telephone towers in agricultural districts as ‘utility 
lines’ under HRS § 205-4.5(a)(7) unreasonably expands the 
intended scope of this term and frustrates the state land use 
law’s basic objectives of protection and rational development.” 
Id. (emphasis added). Including short-term vacation rentals in 
the definition of “farm dwellings” would similarly unreasonably 
expand the intended scope of the term and frustrate the state 
land use law’s basic objectives of protection and rational 
development. 
A farm dwelling must be a “single-family dwelling 
located on and used in connection with a farm,” or “where agricultural activity provides income to the family occupying 
the dwelling.” HRS § 205-4.5(a)(4). In other words, it must be 
37  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
used in connection with agricultural activities. The use of a 
dwelling as a short-term vacation rental is not connected to 
agricultural activities. 
3. This court defers to the LUC’s interpretation of an 
ambiguous statute unless it is plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the underlying legislative purpose 
When there is ambiguous statutory language, “the 
applicable standard of review regarding an agency’s 
interpretation of its own governing statute requires this court to defer to the agency’s expertise and to follow the agency’s 
construction of the statute unless that construction is palpably 
erroneous.” Pofolk Aviation Haw., Inc. v. Dep’t of Transp.
, 136 
Hawai‘i 1, 5-6, 354 P.3d 436, 440-41 (2015) (quoting 
Gillan v. 
Gov’t Emps. Ins. Co.
, 119 Hawai‘i 109, 114, 194 P.3d 1071, 1076 
(2008)). Of course, the “court must still independently analyze the ambiguous statute to determine whether the agency's 
interpretation is palpably erroneous.” 
Id.
 at 7, 354 P.3d at 
442 (citing Chun v. Emps. Retirement Sys., 61 Haw. 596, 600-02, 607 P.2d 415, 419 (1980). Palpable error can occur when the 
agency’s interpretation is “inconsistent with the underlying 
legislative purpose.” Dist. Council 50, of Int’l Union of
Painters & Allied Trades v. Lopez
, 129 Hawai‘i 281, 287, 298 P.3d 
1045, 1051 (2013) (quoting 
Haw. Teamsters & Allied Workers v. 
38  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Dep’t of Labor & Indus. Rels., 110 Hawai‘ i 259, 265, 132 P.3d 
368, 374). This deference to the agency “‘reflects a 
sensitivity to the proper roles of the political and judicial branches,’ insofar as ‘the resolution of ambiguity in a 
statutory text is often more a question of policy than law.’” 
Gillan
, 119 Hawai‘ i at 118, 194 P.3d at 1080 (quoting In re Water 
Use Permit Applications, 94 
Hawai‘i 97, 145, 9 P.3d 409, 457 
(2000)). 
As discussed supra, the text of HRS § 205-4.5 is 
ambiguous as to whether a farm dwelling can be used as a short-
term vacation rental. Here, the LUC’s interpretation of 
HRS § 205-4.5 was not palpably erroneous and was consistent with 
the underlying legislative purpose of the statute. The LUC 
correctly concluded that the State and the County have 
concurrent jurisdiction over land in the agricultural district, 
and, quoting this court’s decision in Save Sunset Beach
, 102 
Hawai‘i at 482, 78 P.3d at 18, “only a more restricted use as 
between [the county zoning and State Land Use law] is 
authorized.” The LUC ruled that unless a dwelling is in fact 
used in connection with a farm, it is not a farm dwelling; that a short-term vacation rental is a use antithetical to farm 
dwelling usage; and that therefore a farm dwelling may not be 
39  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
used as a short-term vacation rental. Therefore, it determined 
that the County ordinance was enforceable. 
The LUC Order conforms with HRS § 205-4.5, resolving 
the ambiguity in a manner that is consistent with the underlying 
legislative purpose. The underlying purpose, discussed supra
Section IV(D)(2), is to protect land in the agriculture district 
from being used for non-agricultural purposes. The LUC Order 
concluded that farm dwellings cannot be used as short-term vacation rentals, protecting land in the agriculture district 
from what it found to be non-agricultural use. This decision 
accords with the legislative purpose of the statute discussed 
above, and we therefore affirm. 
We note that Hawai‘i's approach to administrative 
deference now differs sharply from federal precedent. These 
days, the United States Supreme Court seems determined to ensure 
that “settled law easily unsettles.” City & Cnty. of Honolulu
v. Sunoco LP, 153 Hawai‘ i 326, 361, 537 P.3d 1173, 1208 (2023) 
(Eddins, J., concurring). Recently, the court toppled forty 
years of precedent that shaped the ”warp and woof of modern 
government.” Loper Bright Enters. v. Raimondo, 144 S. Ct. 2244, 
2294 (2024) (Kagan, J., dissenting). The court overruled Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Nat. Res. Def. Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 
837 (1984), which molded administrative law doctrine. Under 
Chevron, the reviewing court would, upon close inspection, ask  
40  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
if Congress had “directly spoken to the precise question at 
issue.” Id. at 842. If it had, “that is the end of the matter; 
for the court, as well as the agency, must give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of Congress.” Id. at 842-43. If 
the statute was silent or ambiguous as to the question at hand, 
the court would defer to the administrative agency’s reasonable 
interpretation of the statute. Id. at 844. 
Chevron’s well-reasoned analysis allowed agencies to 
function in a modern nation using older statutes — statutes that, at the time they were written, could not possibly account 
for the many nuanced situations that arise in a rapidly changing 
world. Justice Kagan’s dissent in Loper Bright cites to 
paradigmatic examples of agency deference. See Loper Bright, 
144 S. Ct. at 2296-97. Chevron made for good, balanced 
governance, whereby Congress made laws while agencies, subject to accountability from a duly-elected President, implemented 
those laws and reasonably filled in the gaps. As is often the 
case, policy implementation requires substantial know-how. 
Under Chevron, agencies had the ability to allow experts to, 
within reason, make the rules. 
Now, the U.S. Supreme Court considers itself and other 
federal courts the experts on exceedingly complicated areas of 
41  
 
 
   
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
    
 
   
 
      
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
American life, including worker safety,8 air quality,9 food and 
drug safety,10 airplane safety,11 telecommunications,12 and the 
integrity of our financial markets.13 We do not believe the 
expertise of courts outstrips that of the agencies charged with 
implementing complex regulatory schemes on a day-to-day basis.14 
In Hawai‘ i, we defer to those agencies with the na‘ auao 
(knowledge/wisdom) on particular subject matters to get complex 
issues right. “
Ku‘ia ka hele a ka
 na‘au ha‘aha‘a (hesitant walks 
the humble hearted).” Sunoco, 153 Hawai‘ i at 363, 537 P.3d at 
1210 (2023) (Eddins, J., concurring). A court’s domain is the 
law, and judges should recognize the limits of their expertise. 
4. The County ordinance is a valid legislative act 
accorded deference 
When the County passed Ordinance 18-114, amending 
Chapter 25 of the HCC, it required that existing short-term 
8 See, e.g., Pauley v. BethEnergy Mines, Inc., 501 U.S. 680 (1991). 
9 See, e.g., EPA v. EME Homer City Generation, L.P., 572 U.S. 489 
(2014). 
10 See, e.g., Teva Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc. v. FDA, 514 F. Supp. 
3d 66 (D.D.C. 2020) 
11 See, e.g., Newton v. F.A.A., 457 F.3d 1133 (10th Cir. 2006). 
12 See, e.g., City of Arlington v. F.C.C., 569 U.S. 290 (2013). 
13 See, e.g., U.S. v. O’Hagan, 521 U.S. 642 (1997). 
14 E.g., Ohio v. EPA, 144 S. Ct. 2040, 2049 (2024) (In Court’s 
initial opinion, pausing EPA’s plan to bring several states into compliance 
with ozone pollution- control requirements, confusing “nitrogen oxides,” a 
group of gases that the EPA is targeting to stem air pollution, with “nitrous oxide,” commonly known as laughing gas). 
42  
 
 
   
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
vacation rentals obtain nonconforming use certificates. 
HCC §§ 25-1-5; HCC § 25-4-16.1(a), (e). The scheme generally 
prohibited the issuance of nonconforming use certificates in the 
agricultural district — only single-family dwellings on lots 
existing before June 4, 1976 could obtain a certificate. HCC 
§ 25-4-16.1(e).15 This court held in Save Sunset Beach that a 
zoning ordinance passed by the County of Honolulu was a legislative act and is subject to the deference given 
legislative acts. 102 Hawai‘ i at 474, 78 P.3d at 10. 
We also held in Save Sunset Beach that “only a more 
restricted use as between [the County zoning and the State Land 
Use law] is authorized.” 102 Hawai‘ i at 482, 78 P.3d at 18.  The 
State adopted a dual land use designation approach, 
“envision[ing] that the counties would enact zoning ordinances that were somewhat different from, but not inconsistent with, 
the statutes.” Id.Here, the ordinance is more restrictive 
than HRS § 205-4.5 in that it defines short-term vacation rentals and the County will not issue nonconforming use 
certificates unless lots were existing before June 4, 1976. 
When read in conjunction with HRS § 205-4.5(b)’s mandate that 
15 The County defines a short- term vacation rental as “ a dwelling 
unit of which the owner or operator does not reside on the building site, 
that has no more than five bedrooms for rent on the building site, and is 
rented for a period of thirty consecutive days or less.” HCC § 25-1- 5. 
43  
 
 
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
uses are prohibited unless expressly authorized, the County 
ordinance is “different from, but not inconsistent with” the 
state statute. 
The Rosehill Petitioners argue that because HRS § 205-
4.5(a)(4) does not mention a minimum rental period, it allows 
for their less-than-30-day rentals. But that conclusion ignores 
the Sunset Beach holding that allows counties to make more 
restrictive zoning rules than the state, so long as those rules are consistent with the purpose of state zoning. Here, the 
County’s ordinance is consistent with state zoning. 
V. CONCLUSION 
For the reasons stated above, we hold that (1) this 
case’s transfer is nunc pro tunc to June 18, 2021; (2) the Rosehill Petitioners have failed to show that the LUC acted 
arbitrarily or capriciously in granting the County’s petition while denying the Rosehill Petition; and (3) farm dwellings may 
not be used as short-term vacation rentals under HRS chapter 
205. 
Because it lacked jurisdiction, we (1) vacate the 
circuit court’s May 2, 2022 “Findings of Fact, Conclusions of 
Law, Decision and Order Reversing the State of Hawai‘ i Land Use 
Commission’s Consolidated Declaratory Order”; and (2) vacate the 
44  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circuit court’s May 2, 2022 Judgment. On the merits, we affirm 
the LUC’s May 20, 2021 declaratory order. 
Calvert G. Chipchase   /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
Christopher T. Goodin 
(Roy A. Vitousek III and  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
Katherine E. Bruce, 
on the briefs)    /s/ Todd W. Eddins  
for appellants-appellees   
       /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
Douglas S. Chin    
Christine N. Ohira    /s/ Jeannette H. Castagnetti
Eric S. Robinson Cori J. Terayama (Julie H. China, 
on the briefs) 
for appellee-appellant  Mark D. Disher 
(Jean Campbell and 
Lerisa L. Heroldt, on the briefs) 
for appellee-appellee 
 Brad T. Saito, on the briefs 
for amicus curiae 
 
45 