***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 HAWAIʻI TECHNOLOGY ACADEMY and the DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, Appellants- Appellees, 
 
vs. 
 
L.E., Appellee-Appellant, 
 
and 
 
HAWAIʻI CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION, Appellee-Appellant. 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCAP-15-0000520 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-15- 0000520; CIV. NO. 14- 1-2438-11) 
 
DECEMBER 5, 2017 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, Mc KENNA, POLLACK, WILSON, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.   
 
I.  Introduction  
This case concerns whether the Hawai ʻi Civil Rights 
Commission (“HCRC” ) has jurisdiction under Hawai ʻi Revised Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-15-0000520
05-DEC-2017
08:06 AM***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
2 
 
 
 1Statutes (“HRS”) § 368-1.5 (1993)  over claims that a child 
(“Student”) was subjected to disability discrimination and 
2improper denial of r easonable accommodations and modifications  
to take an on-line grade-level placement examination  required of 
homeschooled students applying for entrance to Hawai ʻi Technology 
Academy (“the Academy”) (“HCRC complaint”) .  The Academy is a 
public charter school within Hawaii’s statewide school district 
and is part of the State of Hawai ʻi Department of Education 
(“DOE”). 
                         
1  HRS § 368- 1.5 (1993) provides:  
   
Programs and activities receiving state financial  
assistance.   (a)  No otherwise qualified individual in the 
State shall, solely by reason of his or her disability, be 
excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits 
of, or be subjected to discrimination by state agencies, or 
under any program or activity receiving state financial 
assistance.  
     (b)  As used in this section, the term “disability” 
means the state of having a physical or mental impairment 
which substantially limits one or more major life 
activities, having a record of such an impairment, or  being 
regarded as having such an impairment.  
     (c)  As used in this section, “state financial 
assistance” means grants, purchase -of-service contracts, or 
any other arrangement by which the State provides or 
otherwise makes available assistance in the form of funds 
to an entity for the purpose of rendering services on 
behalf of the State.  It does not include procurement 
contracts, state insurance or guaranty contracts, licenses, 
tax credits, or loan guarantees to private businesses of 
general concern that do not render services on behalf of 
the State.  
 
 
2  Student’s parent, L.E. (“Parent”), asked for a different day Student 
could take the test in a room without other students with the 
assistance of an adult, time for a snack break, to take the test in the 
same manner he had taken the test at home the year prior (with approved 
accommodations of taking the test at home with Parent over a period of 
a few days), or for the school to use test scores from the test taken 
the year prior.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
3 
 
 
 We hold the HCRC lacks jurisdiction over the HCRC complaint 
because the legislature intended HRS § 368- 1.5 to provide the 
HCRC with jurisdiction over disability discrimination claims 
only when Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 
does not apply, and Section 504 does apply  to the HCRC 
complaint.  We therefore affirm the circuit court’s f inal 
judgment.  
II.  Background 
To provide context, we begin with a brief overview of  
federal laws protecting a child’s access to a free appropriate 
public education (“FAPE”)  before discussing the factual and 
procedural background in this matter.  
A. Free Appropriate Public Education (“FAPE”)  
 Both the Individual s with Disabilities Education Act 
(“IDEA”), 20 U.S.C. § 1400, et. seq. , (previously known as the 
Education for All Handicapped Children  Act), and  the 
implementing regulations of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation 
Act of 1973 (“the Act”) , 21 U.S.C. § 701, et. seq. , 34 C.F.R. 
Part 104, Subpart D, ensure that children with disabilities have 
access to a FAPE.  T he IDEA and the Section 504 regulations 
differ, however, regarding what constitutes a FAPE and who is 
entitled to one.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
4 
 
 
 3 The “core guarantee”  of the IDEA  is “to ensure that all 
children with disabilities have available to them a [FAPE] that 
emphasizes special education and related services designed to 
meet their unique needs and prepare them for further education, 
employment, and independent living .”  20 U.S.C. § 1400(d)(1)(A).  
Under the IDEA, “special education” means “specially designed 
instruction, at no cost to parents, to meet the unique needs of 
a child with a disability.”  20 U.S.C. § 1401(29).   A “child 
4with a disability”  is a child with at least one disability on an 
5enumerated list,  and “who, by reason thereof, needs special 
education and related services. ”  20 U.S.C. § 1401(3)(A).  A 
“FAPE” means “special education and related services” that, 
among other things, “are provided in conformity with the 
individualized education program [ (“IEP”)] required under 
6section 1414(d) of this title.”   20 U.S.C. § 1401(9)(D).    A 
                         
3  Fry v. Napoleon Cmty. Schs., 580 U.S. ___, 137 S.Ct. 743, 748 (2017).  
  
4  The IDEA provides a different definition of a “child with a disability” for 
a child aged 3 through 9, which is not applicable to Student.  See
 20 U.S.C. 
§ 1401(3)(B). 
 
5  The list includes:  “intellectual disabilities, hearing impairments 
(including deafness), speech or language impairments, visual impairments 
(including blindness), serious emotional disturbance (referred to in this 
chapter as ‘emotional disturbance’ ), orthopedic impairments, autism, 
traumatic brain injury, other health impairments, or specific learning 
disabilities.”  20 U.S.C. § 1401(3)(A)(i).  See also  34 C.F.R. § 300.8 
(adding “deaf- blindness” and “multiple disabilities” to the list).  
 
6  The definition of FAPE in the implementing regulations of the IDEA, see 34 
C.F.R. § 300.17, is taken directly from the Act, and is therefore not 
separately discussed.  See 71 Fed. Reg. 46,582 (Aug. 14, 2006) (discussing 
the regulatory definition of FAPE).   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
5 
 
 
 team comprised of a student ’s parents and educators determine a 
student’s IEP.  See 20 U.S.C. § 1414(d)(1)(B).  
 In contrast, Section 504 of the Act generally prohibits 
disability discrimination : “No otherwise qualified individual 
with a disability in the United States . . . shall, solely by 
reason of her or his disability, be excluded from the 
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to 
discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal 
financial assistance . . . .”  29 U.S.C. § 794(a) .  Thus, 
Section 504 applies to other programs in addition to educational 
institutions.  However, b ecause the Act was not intended to be 
self-executing, see, e.g. , Cherry v. Mathews , 419 F. Supp. 922, 
924 (U.S.D.C. 1976), relevant federal agencies, such as the U.S. 
Department of Education, were mandated to promulgate regulations 
tailored to the particular recipients of that agency’s programs .  
See Nancy Lee Jones, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of  
1973: Prohibiting Discrimination Against Individuals with
Disabilities in Programs or Activities Receiving Federal  
Assistance , at 4 (Congressional Research Service 2009), 
http://www.llsdc.org/assets/sourcebook/crs-rl34041.pdf;  see also 
29 U.S.C. § 794(a); 34 C.F.R. §  104.1 (“The purpose of this part 
is to effectuate section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 . 
. . .”).   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
6 
 
 
 Therefore, Section 504  regulations promulgated by the U.S. 
Department of Education contain both general provisions 
7prohibiting discrimination, see, e.g. , 34 C.F.R. § 104.4(b),  as 
well as provisions specific to preschool, elementary,  and 
secondary education,  in Subpart D.   See 34 C.F.R. Part 104, 
Subpart D.   
                         
7  Under the Section 504 regulations, a recipient of Federal financial 
assistance may not:   
 
(i) Deny a qualified handicapped person the opportunity to 
participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or 
service;  
 
(ii) Afford a qualified handicapped person an opportunity 
to participate in  or benefit from the aid, benefit, or 
service that is not equal to that afforded others;  
 
(iii) Provide a qualified handicapped person with an aid, 
benefit, or service that is not as effective as that 
provided to others;  
 
(iv) Provide different or separate  aid, benefits, or 
services to handicapped persons or to any class of 
handicapped persons unless such action is necessary to 
provide qualified handicapped persons with aid, benefits, 
or services that are as effective as those provided to 
others; 
 
(v) Aid or perpetuate discrimination against a qualified 
handicapped person by providing significant assistance to 
an agency, organization, or person that discriminates on 
the basis of handicap in providing any aid, benefit, or 
service to beneficiaries of the recipients program or 
activity;  
 
(vi) Deny a qualified handicapped person the opportunity to 
participate as a member of planning or advisory boards; or  
 
(vii) Otherwise limit a qualified handicapped person in the 
enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or  
opportunity enjoyed by others receiving an aid, benefit, or 
service.  
 
34 C.F.R. § 104.4(b) . 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
7 
 
 
 Subpart D requires, among other things, that each qualified 
handicapped person within the jurisdiction of a public 
elementary or secondary education program or activity receiving 
federal financial assistance be provided a FAPE by that program 
or activity.  See 34 C.F.R. § 104.33(a).  Under Section 504 
regulations, a FAPE is defined as the “regular or special 
education and related aids and services that . . . are designed 
to meet individual educational needs of handicapped persons as 
adequately as the needs of nonhandicapped persons are met.”  34 
C.F.R. § 104.33(b)(1) (emphasis added).  Because Section 504 
8regulations define a “qualified handicapped person”  more broadly 
than a “child with a disability”  under the IDEA, children who 
may not be covered by the IDEA may be covered by Section 504.   
In sum, coverage of students under the IDEA  may be more 
limited in scope than coverage under Section 504.  However, for
those students who are covered by the IDEA, the IDEA provides  
                         
8  A “handicapped person” is “any person who (i) has a physical or mental 
impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities, (ii) 
has a record of such an impairment, or (iii) is regarded as having such an 
impairment.”  34 C.F.R. § 104.3(j).  A “qualified handicapped person” with 
respect to public elementary or secondary educational services, means:  
 
 
a handicapped person (i) of an age during which 
nonhandicapped persons are provided such services, (ii) of 
any age during which it is mandatory under state law to 
provide such services to handicapped persons, or (iii) to 
whom a state is required to provide a free appropriate 
public education under section 612 of the Education of the 
Handicapped Act [.]   
 
34 C.F.R. § 104.3(l)(2).   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
8 
 
 
 broader protections than Section 504 as the IDEA requires that 
specialized instruction “meet the unique needs of a child with a 
disability,” whereas Section 504 requires only that the 
individual educational needs of handicapped persons be met “as 
adequately as the needs of nonhandicapped persons are met.”   
Because of the IDEA’s additional protections , providing a FAPE 
under the IDEA meets the standards of providing a FAPE under 
Section 504.  See 34 C.F.R. § 104.33(b)(1).      
B. Procedural Safeguards 
 
 The IDEA requires local educational agencies that receive 
federal assistance to “establish and maintain procedures in 
accordance” with 20 U.S.C. § 1415 “to ensure that children with 
disabilities and their parents are guaranteed procedural 
safeguards with respect to the provision of a [FAPE] by such 
agencies.”  20 U.S.C. § 1415(a).   Specific required procedures 
include, but are not limited to, providing parents an 
opportunity to examine a student’s records, written notification 
to the parents regarding any changes as to how FAPE would be 
provided to a student, and an opportunity for mediation or to 
file a due process complaint notice for an impartial due process 
hearing conducted by the State educational agency.  See 
generally
 20 U.S.C. § 1415. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
9 
 
 
  Simila rly, the Section 504 regulations pertaining to 
schools also require procedural safeguards: 
A recipient that operates a public elementary or 
secondary education program or activity shall establish and 
implement, with respect to actions regarding the 
identification, evaluation, or educational placement of 
persons who, because of handicap, need or are believed to 
need special instruction or related services, a system of 
procedural safeguards that includes notice, an opportunity 
for the parents or guardian of the person to examine 
relevant records, an impartial hearing with opportunity for 
participation by the person’ s parents or guardian and 
representation by counsel, and a review procedure.  
 
34 C.F.R. § 104.36.  These standards can be met by compliance 
with the procedural safeguards requirements of the IDEA .  See 
id. 
C. Factual Background 
 
 Student, who was thirteen years old in 2014, was born with 
Trisomy 21, also known as Down syndrome.  Student has mild 
bilateral hearing loss, wears corrective lenses to read, and has 
also been diagnosed with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity 
Disorder (“ADHD”), hypotonia (low muscle tone), and dysphagia 
(swallowing disorder).  The DOE found Student eligible for 
special education services in 2003.    
 Student attended the Academy from 2008 to 2012 and received 
special education and related services.  In May 2011, Student’s 
IEP team recommended that Student be placed at a public 
elementary school offering daily face-to- face classes, which 
contrasted with the Academy’s hybrid face -to-face and on -line ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
10 
 
 
 learning environment.  Parent c hallenged that recommendation and 
requested a due process hearing before an impartial hearing 
officer pursuant to the IDEA, 20 U.S.C. § 1415(f)(1)(A), 
(f)(3)(a)(i).  Student remained at the Academy for the 2011 –2012 
school year during the administrative proceedings.  On May 21, 
2012, an administrative hearing officer affirmed the May 2011 
decision by Student’s IEP team.    
Ten days later, o n May 31, 2012, the Academy sent Parent a 
letter stating that the Academy would be implementing the May 
2011 IEP and advised Parent to enroll Student at Heʻ eia 
Elementary, Student’s geographic home school.  By letter dated 
June 12, 2012, the Academy notified Parent that Student would no 
longer be able to attend
 the Academy as of June 18, 2012, the 
Academy’s school-wide withdrawal date.  On June 15, 2012, Parent 
hand-delivered to the Academy and the DOE a revocation of her 
consent for special education and related services to Student.  
Parent also sent an e-mail to the Academy and the DOE stating 
that as a consequence of her revocation, she expected Student to 
remain at the Academy as a “regular education student.”  
The Academy, however, withdrew Student from enrollment on June 
18, 2012.    
 On June 20, 2012, the same date as Parent’s deadline for 
appealing the administrative hearing officer’s decision, the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
11 
 
 
 Academy issued a writ ten notice stating that Student’s special 
education and related services would be terminated upon Parent’s 
receipt of the notice.  Parent received the written notice on 
June 22, 2012.  By letter dated July 25, 2012, the Academy 
stated that Parent’s revocation of special education and related 
services did not take effect until June 20, 2012, the date of 
the written notice.  
 Parent then applied Student for enrollment as a general 
education student for the 2012 –2013 academic year.  Student was 
permitted to take the required grade- level placement test at 
home with Parent over several days in September 2012.  Student 
was ultimately waitlisted, and Parent homeschooled Student for 
the 2012-13 school year.    
Parent again applied Student for admission to the Academy 
for the 2013 –2014 academic year.  Parent requested 
accommodations or modifications to the Academy’s grade-level 
placement test requirement, such as allowing use of the previous 
year’s test scores, allowing Student to take the test at home as 
he had done the previous year, allowing Student to take the test 
alone in a room with an adult, or providing Student addi tional 
time for a snack break.    
Parent took Student to the Academy campus during scheduled 
test times in May 2013 and July 2013.  Parent was informed by ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
12 
 
 
 the Academy’s director that because Parent had revoked consent 
to the IDEA and the IEP, the Academy would not be able to give 
Student any accommodations or supports.  Student was unable to 
complete the test.  Specifically, according to Parent, Student 
needed help being focused and directed question by question, but 
he was not given a one
-to-one aide  during the test.  As a 
result, Student was unable to complete the test because he was 
distracted and ended up going on the internet instead.  
According to Parent, Student’s enrollment application was 
discarded as insufficient because he was not able to take the 
test due to his disabilities; his application was therefore not 
processed.   
 Student was again homeschooled during the 2013 –2014 
academic year.  In July 2014, when Student would have 
chronologically been a ninth grader, Parent and the Academy 
agreed to enroll Student as a sixth grade general education 
student, where he received some services through a Section 504 
plan.  By June 2015, Student was given a new IEP that placed him 
at a different school.  Parent thereafter  withdrew Student from 
the Academy.   
D. IDEA and Section 504 Claims in United States District Court 
 Meanwhile, on June 20, 2012, two days after the Academy’s 
schoolwide withdrawal date and the termination date for ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
13 
 
 
 Student’s special education services based on Parent’s 
revocation of consent, as deemed by the Academy, and after 
exhausting administrative remedies, Parent filed an IDEA  
complaint in the United States District Court for the District 
of Hawaiʻ i, arguing th e May 2012 decision of the administrative 
hearing officer — that Student’s appropriate  placement to 
receive a FAPE was at Heʻeia Elementary, not the Academy — should 
be reversed .  See 
Jason E. v. Dep’t of Educ. , Civ. No. 12-00354 
ACK-BML.  By order dated February 14, 2013, the federal district 
court ruled the complaint 
moot because Parent had revoked 
consent for Student to continue receiving IDEA special education 
services.  However, the court permitted Parent to amend the 
complaint  to reflect her intent for Student to be treated as a 
general education student at the Academy.     
Parent filed a first amended complaint on March 19, 2013, 
reflecting that intent .  Parent’s May 10, 2013 second amended 
complaint asserted that she revoked consent for the continued 
provision of special education and related services to determine 
whether Student would benefit from a general education program 
at the Academy with or without Section 504 reasonable 
modifications.  O n May 7, 2014, Parent filed a third amended 
complaint, alleging in part: (1) the DOE and the Academy should 
have honored the revocation of consent by treating Student as a ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
14 
 
 
 general education student and continuing his enrollment at the 
Academy; and (2) the DOE and the Academy violated Section 504 
and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 when 
Student, by reason of his disability, was released as a student 
and no longer had access to the general educ
ation curriculum at 
the Academy.  At a hearing before the federal district court, 
Parent clarified that the relief sought was for Student to 
receive a FAPE at the Academy as a general education student.      
By order dated November 20, 2014, the federal district 
court granted the defendants’ motion to d ismiss the third 
amended complaint.  The court deemed the third amended complaint 
moot because Student was already enrolled as a general education 
student at the Academy and because the Academy had provided 
Student a FAPE through a Section 504 Plan.  In the alternative, 
on the merits, the court ruled in part that federal regulations 
do not expressly require that a disabled student remain at the 
same school after a parent revokes IDEA consent; rather, the 
regulations leave open the possibility that a student may be 
placed in a different school as a general education student.  
The federal district court also concluded Parent only provided 
conclusory statements that the accommodations she requested for 
Student were reasonable or that the Section 504 Plan was 
deficient.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
15 
 
 
 E.   Pre-complaint Questionnaire and Petition for Declaratory 
Relief 
 
 While Student was still being homeschooled during the 2013-
2014 school year after not being able to complete the Academy’s 
placement examination, on January 14, 2014, Parent submitted a 
pre-complaint questionnaire to the HCRC alleging disability 
discrimination based on the Academy’s alleged failure to provide 
reasonable accommodations for the examination.  On Fe bruary 10, 
2014 the HCRC’s Executive Director ruled the HCRC lacked 
jurisdiction over Parent’s claim .  By letter dated April 21, 
2014, Parent submitted a petition to the HCRC, asserting the 
HCRC has  jurisdiction to review her complaint alleging 
disability discrimination when Studen t’s application to the 
Academy for the 2013 –2014 school year was denied based on his 
inability to complete the grade level placement test; Parent 
alleged the Academy denied Student reasonable accommodations or 
modifications required based on Student’s disability.  On July 
25, 2014, the Executive Director submitted a memorandum in 
opposition.  For purposes of addressing jurisdiction, the 
Executive Director assumed that Studen t was “an otherwise 
qualified individual with a disability and that he was unable to 
complete the required test because of his disability.”  The 
Executive Director opined, however, that because publicly funded 
educational institutions are not “public accom modations, ” the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
16 
 
 
 9HCRC lacked jurisdiction under HRS § 368-1 (Supp. 2011).   The 
Academy and the DOE also opposed the petition based on lack of 
subject matter jurisdiction.  
 The HCRC  held an oral argument on August 18, 2014, after 
Student had been re-enrolled at the Academy.  Parent focused on  
Student’s need t o learn effective communication through sign 
language.  She explained that the Academy’s grade -level 
placement test re quires com munication skills and  the ability to 
be seated, which was something Student could not master.  Parent 
argued that despite her revocation of special education and 
related services, Student was entitled to disability 
accommodations and supports during the placement test.     
Parent conceded the Academy had already eliminated its 
grade-level admission test policy and that Student was then 
currently attending the Academy.  However, neither the Executive 
Director nor the Academy and 
DOE argued  mootness.   Instead, the 
Executive Director focused on the legislative purpose behind HRS 
§ 368-1.5, and argued that for two reasons, it was necessary to 
examine the legislative history of HRS § 368-1.5.  According to 
the Executive Director, first, nothing in Chapter 368 defines  
                         
9  HRS § 368- 1 states in relevant part: “The legislature finds and declares 
that the practice of discrimination because of race, color, religion, age, 
sex, including gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, marital 
status, national origin, ancestry, or disability in employment, housing, 
public accommodations, or access to services receiving state financial 
assistance is against public policy.”  HRS § 368 -1.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
17 
 
 
 “program or activity” or “ state agency. ”  Second, as the 
legislature had opted to leave out language from HRS § 368 -1.5 
that was present in Section 504, it was unclear whether the 
manner in which Section 504 and
 its implementing regulations 
define those same terms should apply to HRS § 368- 1.5.  The 
Executive Director also argued that the legislature did not 
supplant or supplement existing University of Hawai ʻi and DOE 
procedures for handling discrimination claims, and that if the 
HCRC did indeed have jurisdiction over claims such as those in 
the petition, extensive rulemaking would be required to not 
wreak havoc on the current system.   
The Academy and the DOE argued the petition was essentially 
a special education matter under the IDEA.  They further argued 
the DOE had extensive administrative rules governing IDEA and 
Section 504 claims, and that HRS § 368-1.5 does not require the 
State to implement Section 504.   Counsel also argued that if an  
HRS § 368-1.5 violation provided the HCRC with jurisdiction over 
any disability discrimination claim, t
hen language specifically 
identifying the areas of the HCRC’s jurisdiction —  employment, 
real estate, and public accommodations — would be superfluous.   
The HCRC  decision characterized the dispute as one in which 
Parent sought a disability accommodation for Student, but was 
denied:  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
18 
 
 
 During the application process, [Parent] sought an 
accommodation from [the Academy] in the form of extra time 
for [Student], who was otherwise qualified for admission to 
[the Academy], to complete a grade -level placement exam.  
[The Academy] denied the requested accommodation, and 
because [Student] did not complete the placement assessment 
in the time provided, [the Academy] denied his application 
for admission.  
 
In its Decision and Order dated October 28, 2014, the HCRC  
determined it lacked jurisdiction under HRS § 368-1 over 
Student’s claim regarding the denial of reasonable 
accommodations, as the Academy was not a “place of public 
accommodation.”  The HCRC then determined, however, that it  
nevertheless had jurisdiction over Parent’s claim under HRS § 
368-1.5, as the Academy was a state agency or a “program or 
activity receiving state financial assistance.”  The HCRC 
examined the plain language of various sections of Chapter 368, 
and noted HRS § 368-17(a)(3) provides a remedy of “[a]dmission 
of persons to a public accommodation or an educational 
institution,” and ruled the existence of the remedy of admission 
to educational institutions would be absurd without the 
existence of a right under HRS § 368- 1.5.  Moreover, the HCRC 
asserted that if HRS § 368-1.5 did not apply to public schools, 
then families whose children were excluded from or otherwise 
discriminated against by public schools would be unable to file 
complaints of discrimination with the HCRC.  Further, according 
to the HCRC, if the HCRC cannot accept the complaint, it cannot 
issue a right to sue letter and if a person cannot get a right ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
19 
 
 
 to sue letter, she cannot file suit in state court — or in any 
court — to obtain the remedies provided in HRS § 368-17 for the 
discriminatory exclusion.   
 The HCRC  deemed it unnecessary to do so but nevertheless 
went on to examine the legislative history of HRS § 368- 1.5.  It 
asserted that despite the legislature’s intent to model HRS § 
368-1.5 on Section 504, the legislative history of Section 504 
did not bear on the legislative purpose in  enacting HRS § 368-
1.5.  Rather, according to the HCRC, the legislative history 
behind subsequent amendments to HRS § 368- 1.5 reflect ed the 
legislature’s intent to vest the HCRC with enforcement authority 
over all cases under HRS § 368-1.5, which the HCRC characterized 
as Hawaii’s “Section 504 analog. ”    
 The HCRC decision did not address whether any federal 
remedies interacted with HRS § 368- 1.5 or whether the HCRC’s 
jurisdiction would be affected by federal law or existing DOE 
complaint procedures.  
F.   Circuit Court Proceedings 
 
The Academy and the DOE timely appealed to the circuit 
court.  After the parties submitted their briefs, oral argument 
was held.     
The circuit court reversed the HCRC decision,  ruling as 
follows: ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
20 
 
 
 After carefully reviewing the entire record on appeal 
and considering the written submissions and arguments of 
the parties, the Court finds and concludes that pursuant to 
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes  §91-14(g)(2), the Hawai ʻi Civil 
Rights Commission acted in excess of its statutory 
authority and/or jurisdiction under Hawai ʻi Revised Statute 
§368-1.5 by asserting jurisdiction over [Parent’s] 
discrimination claim against the Department of Education 
and Hawaiʻ i Technology Academy.  
  
G. The Current Appeal  
The HCRC timely filed its notice of appeal with the ICA; 
the appeal was then transferred to this court.  The HCRC argues 
in its opening brief that public charter schools, such as the 
Academy, are “ state agencies” or “program s or activities 
receiving state financial assistance ” under HRS § 368 -1.5.  The 
HCRC also argues the legislature did not intend to exclude 
public educational institutions from HRS § 368- 1.5’s coverage .  
It asserts HRS § 368-1.5 is the state counterpart to Section 
504, which at the time of § 368-1.5’s enactment covered p ublic 
educational institutions, and which required such institutions 
to make reasonable accommodations.  The HCRC emphasizes 
legislative history stating HRS § 368-1.5 was “intended to 
extend the protection provided by Section 504 to State financed 
programs” in the areas of “employment, housing, education, 
access to services, and public accommodations.”   (quoting H. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 819, in 1989 House Journal, at 1140 and 
citing an attachment to the testimony of Nancy S. Partika, 
Director of the Governor’s Committee on AIDS).   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
21 
 
 
 The HCRC  also asserts  Section 504 does not  preempt HRS § 
368-1.5 because nothing in Section 504 prohibits states from 
enacting state laws to prohibit disability discrimination by 
state agencies or state- funded programs and because compliance 
with and enforcement of both Section 504 and HRS § 368-1.5 is 
possible.  Further, it argues the HCRC  would not evaluate the 
content of “pure Section 504 academic special education 
instructional plans and related accommodations.”  According to 
the HCRC, its enforcement of HRS § 368-1.5 would only overlap 
with the DOE’s enforcement of non -academic accommodations under 
Section 504.    
 The HCRC acknowledges it lacks  jurisdiction over student 
complaints under the IDEA and/or accommod ations relating to IEPs 
because neither HRS § 368 -1.5 nor its legislative history 
indicate it was meant to apply to benefits and programs provided 
under the IDEA.  The HCRC  argues, however, that there is nothing 
that prevents a student from pursuing remedies under both the 
IDEA and HRS § 368-1.5.  The HCRC  also observes that there is no 
conflict between HRS § 368-1.5 and statutes governing Hawai ʻi 
public charter schools or the DOE’s administrative rules 
governing its “Civil Right s Policy and Complaint Procedure.”   
The Academy and the DOE concede in their answering brief 
that public charter schools are “state agencies,” bu t argue HRS ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
22 
 
 
 § 368-1.5 does not apply to state agencies that also receive 
federal funds.  The Academy and the DOE 
interpret the statement 
in the House Standing Committe e Report that “[t]his measure is 
intended to extend  the protection provided by Section 504 to 
State financed programs,” to 
mean that “the Legislature intended 
to provide Section 504-type protections only to those state 
agencies that were not already covered by Section 504.” 
(emphasis added).     
In addition , the Academy and the DOE also note that within 
the educational context, there is no bright line distinction 
between a “non -academic” and “ academic” modification, 
accommodation, or service, because the failure to provide a 
student with a necessary modification, accommodation, or service 
pursuant to Section 504 directly impacts the student’s ability 
to receive a FAPE.  
III.  Standards of Review 
A. Interpretation of a Statute 
Statutory interpretation is a question of law reviewable de 
novo.  See Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of 
Appeals, 114 Hawai ʻi 184, 193, 159 P.3d 143, 152 (2007) (citation 
omitted).  When construing statutes, the court is governed by 
the following rules: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory 
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
23 
 
 
 unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain 
and obvious meaning.  Third, implicit in the task of 
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to 
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the 
language contained in the statute itself.  Fourth, when 
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness 
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an 
ambiguity exists.  
 
When there is ambiguity in a statute, the meaning of 
the ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context, 
with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may 
be compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.  
Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids in 
determining legislative intent, such as legislative history, 
or the reason and spirit of the law.  
 
114 Hawaiʻ i at 193-94, 159 P.3d at 152- 53 (citations omitted).  
 
B. Administrative Agency Appeals 
Ordinarily, deference will be given to decisions of 
administrative agencies acting within the realm of their 
expertise.  The rule of judicial deference, however, does 
not apply when the agency’s reading of the statute 
contravenes the legislature’s manifest purpose.  
Consequently, we have not hesitated to reject an incorrect 
or unreasonable statutory construction advanced by the 
agency entrusted with the statute’s implement ation. 
 
Coon v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu , 98 Hawai ʻi 233, 245, 47 P.3d 
348, 360 (2002) (citations and brackets omitted). 
IV.  Discussion 
A.  Preliminary Issues 
 Preliminarily, we note that Student was admitted to and re-
enrolled at the Academy for the 2014 –2015 academic year.  Parent 
subsequently voluntarily withdrew Student by July 2015.  
Possible mootness was not, however, argued by the Academy or 
DOE.  In any event, the question of whether the HCRC has 
jurisdiction over the HCRC complaint is one that affects the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
24 
 
 
 public interest and is “capable of repetition yet evading 
review.”  Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply , 99 Hawai ʻi 
191, 196, 53 P.3d 799, 804 (2002) (citations omitted).  
Accordingly, even if mootness had been raised, the 
jurisdictional question raised presents an exception to the 
mootness doctrine and we proceed to address the issue. 
 HCRC asserts that provision of services to the disabled for 
school placement examinations is a “non -academic” accommodation 
over which it has jurisdiction under HRS § 368- 1.5.  Whether an 
accommodation is “academic” or “non -academic,” as those terms 
are used by the HCRC, may  not affect  whether that accommodation 
is necessary to a FAPE under Section 504.  For example, the HCRC 
provides the following illustrations of “non -academic” 
accommodations : “if a public high school student with a mobility 
impairment requested additional time to get to his or her next 
class,” “if a child needs a ramp,” or “if a child . . . needs 
materials in large print.”   These accommodations, however,  also 
relate to the provision of a FAPE under Section 504, and 
therefore concern a student’s education or academics.   See 34 
C.F.R. § 104.33(b)(1) (defining a FAPE  under Section 504 as the 
“regular or special education and related aids and services that 
. . . are designed to meet individual educational needs of 
handicapped persons as adequately as the needs of nonhandicapped ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
25 
 
 
 persons are met.”).  Thus, it is not clear whether the 
distinction made by the HCRC has merit.  In any event, based on 
the analysis in the next section, any distinction along these 
lines is irrelevant. 
B.   The legislature intended for HRS § 368-1.5 to apply to 
schools only when Section 504 is inapplicable.  
 
 We hold that based on the following analysis of the 
legislative history of HRS Chapter 368 and HRS § 368- 1.5, the 
legislature did not intend the HCRC to have jurisdiction over 
disability discrimination claims if Section 504 protections are 
applicable.  In this case, because Section 504 protections apply 
to the HCRC complaint, the HCRC lacks jurisdiction.   
1. Formation of the HCRC  
The HCRC was formed by Act 219 of 1988 to “ establish a 
civil rights commission to enforce the State’ s laws which 
prohibit discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, 
age, sex, marital status, national origin, ancestry, physical 
handicap, or medical condition in employment, housing, or public 
accommodation.”   H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 387-88, 1988 House 
Journal, at 991.  The legislature explained the need for a 
commission focused solely on discrimination complaints:  
Presently, statutorily mandated enforcement  
responsibilities for the State’ s discrimination laws are 
divided primarily among several agencies within the 
department of labor and industrial relations and the 
department of commerce and consumer affairs.  Enforcement 
of discrimination laws is only one of many other important ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
26 
 
 
 functions of these departments and the enforcement programs 
must compete with other departmental programs for priority 
status.  Typically, the enforcement agencies are hampered 
in their delivery of services because of limited fiscal and 
personnel resources.  
 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 660-88, 1988 House Journal, at 1081; 
see Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 165
-88, in 1988 House Journal, at 845, 
1988 Senate Journal, at 717
.  Act 219 created HRS Chapter 368 
and the “General Provisions ” governing the HCRC (now Part 1 of 
Chapter 368).  See 1988 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 219, § 1 at 386-88.  
The General Provisions included HRS § 368-1 (Purpose and 
intent), HRS § 368-2 (Civil rights commission
 established), HRS 
§ 368-3 (Powers and functions of commission), HRS § 368-4 
(Records; reporting requirements), and HRS § 368-5 (Penalties).  
See id. 
Act 219 directed th e State Legislative Auditor to “ conduct 
a review of all state discrimination laws and the current 
policies, procedures, and staffing of the respective state 
departments and agencies”  and report to the legislature with its 
findings and recommendations.  1988 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 219, § 3 
at 388.  
2. 1989 Amendments  through Act 386   
In early January 1989, the State Legislative Auditor 
submitted a report to the Governor and the legislature entitled, 
“A Study on Implementation of the Civil Rights Commission  for 
the State of Hawaii.”  The report provided an initial analysis ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
27 
 
 
 of the HCRC and made several recommendations for creating a 
uniform procedure for enforcement.  The l egislature then passed 
Act 386 “ to implement Chapter 368, Hawaii Revised Statutes, 
which created a civil rights commission to provide a uniform 
procedure for handling all types of discrimination complaints, 
to provide funding[] and staffing authorization necessary for 
the civil rights commission  to begin operations as intended by 
the 1988 Legislature, and to more effectively enforce the 
State’s discrimination laws.”   H. Stan d. Comm. Rep. No. 1064, 
1989 House Journal,  at 1226.   
Act 386 amended HRS Chapter 378 (Employment Practices), HRS 
Chapter 489 (Discrimination in Public Accommodations), and HRS 
Chapter 515 (Discrimination in Real Property Transactions) to 
give the HCRC authority to handle discrimination complaints 
under those chapters.  See 1989 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 386, §§  2-4, 
8-26 at 1105-13.  HRS §§ 368-2, - 3, and -4 were amended to 
reflect this new authority.  See 1989 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 386, § 
5-7 at 1106-07.  
Act 386 also created “Remedies”  for the HCRC (now Part II  
of Chapter 368), including HRS § 368 -11 (Complaint against 
unlawful discrimination); HRS § 368-12 (Notice of right to sue); 
HRS § 368-13 (Investigation and conciliation of complaint); HRS 
§ 368-14 ( Commission hearings); HRS § 368-15 (Compliance ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
28 
 
 
 review); HRS § 368-16 (Appeals; de novo review; procedure); and 
HRS § 368 -17 (Remedies).  See 1989 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 386, § 1 
at 1102-05.  
3. 1989 Amendments through Act 387    
In 1989, the legislature also passed Act 387.  Act 387 
added “access to services”  to the purpose a nd intent under HRS § 
368-1:  “The legislature finds and declares that the practice of 
discrimination because of race, color, religion, age, sex, 
marital status, national origin, ancestry, or handicapped status 
in employment, housing, public accommodations, or access to 
services receiving state financial assistance is against public 
policy.”  1989 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 387, § 1 at 1114. 
Act 387 also added what is now codified as HRS § 368 -1.5, 
the subject of this appeal, using language very similar to 
Section 504:  
(a) No otherwise qualified individual in the [S]tate shall, 
solely by reason of his or her handicapped status, be 
excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits 
of, or be subjected to discrimination by State agencies, or 
under any program or activity receiving State financial 
assistance.  
 
(b) As used in this section, the term “handicapped status”  
means the state of having a physical or mental impairment 
which substantially limits one or more major life 
activities, having a record of such an impairment, or being 
regarded as having such an impairment.     
    
(c) As used in this section, “ State financial assistance”  
means grants, purchase -of-service contracts, or any other 
arrangement by which the State provides or otherwise makes 
available assistance in the form of funds to an entity for 
the purpose of rendering services on behalf of the State. 
It does not include procurement contracts, state  insurance 
or guaranty contracts, licenses, tax credits, or loan ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
29 
 
 
 guarantees to private businesses of general concern that do 
not render services on behalf of the State.  
 
1989 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 387, §  2 at 1114 -15.  
a. Standing Committee Reports on Act 387   
  
The Senate Standing Committee Report contains little 
discussion regarding the intended scope of the HCRC’s 
jurisdiction under HRS § 368-1.5, but does clarify that Act 387 
was not meant to extend to private businesses receiving no state 
funding.  See S. Stan d. Comm. Rep. No. 1326, 1989 Senate 
Journal, at 1304.  The House Standing Committee Report, however, 
elucidates that Act 387 was intended to provide the HCRC with 
jurisdiction only 
in areas not covered by Section 504:  
The purpose of this bill is to extend civil rights 
guarantees to handicapped individuals impacted by programs 
receiving state funds. . . .  Additionally, the practice of 
discrimination in access to public services is added to the 
list of acts declared to be contrary to public policy.   
 
Your Committee received favorable testimony from the 
Governor’ s Committee on AIDS, the State Planning Council on 
Developmental Disabilities, the Hawaii Center for 
Independent Living, the Department of Health and the 
Commission on the Handicapped.   
 
Your Committee finds that Section 504 of the Federal 
Rehabilitation Act prohibits discrimination under any 
program or activity receiving federal financial assistance.  
This measure is intended to extend the protection provided 
by Section 504 to State financed programs, and establishes 
investigation and enforcement mechanisms within the State 
Civil Rights Commission.   
 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 819, 1989 House Journal, at 1140.   
The concern identified in the report is the lack of 
“protection provided by Section  504 to State financed programs. ”  
Additionally, nothing in the report indicates that State ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
30 
 
 
 protection is needed for federally funded programs.  Therefore, 
“extend” can only mean to provide coverage to, and was not meant 
to also encompass federally funded programs already subject to 
Section 504.  The testimony cited to in the report also reflects 
this understanding of the Act.  See infra Part IV.B.3.b..    
b. Testimony regarding Act 387  
   
The House Judiciary Committee, the House Committee on 
Health and Human Services, and the Senate Judiciary Committee 
received testimony regarding H.B. 932, later enacted as Act 387.   
All of the testimony was in support of H.B. 932.  Much of the 
testimony demonstrated a basic understanding that H.B. 932 would 
“extend” the protection provided by Section 504, and would only 
apply when Section 504 did
 not.  The testimony conflicts with 
the HCRC’s interpretation that the legislature intended to 
create “Hawaii’s § 504 analog” that w ould also encompass Section 
504 claims.   
For example, testimony from the Director of the Governor’ s 
Committee on AIDS, relied on by the HCRC to support its 
position, stated:  
Currently, Section 504 prohibits discrimination under any 
program or activity receiving federal financial assistance.  
This applies to all State government programs, and to 
private agencies receiving federal funds through a State 
program, as well as to private agencies receiving federal 
funds directly from the federal government.  It is not  
clear, however, that private agencies receiving only State
financial assistance are subject to the nondiscrimination  
provision s of Section 504.   State contracts using solely 
State funds do not include the nondiscrimination language ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
31 
 
 
 of Section 504.  HB 932, HD 1 will clearly extend  the 
concept of not tolerating discrimination by reason of 
handicap to any program receiving State funds, and 
establishes investigation and enforcement mechanisms at the 
State level.  
 
(emphases added).    
   
The Director’s comment  that “[i]t is not clear . . . that 
private agencies receiving only State financial assistance are 
subject to the nondiscrimination provision s of Section 504”  is 
critical to understanding the testimony’s use of “extend.”  
The concern regarding lack of remedies against state 
agencies or programs and activities that do not receive federal 
funds (and therefore not subject to Section 504) was reiterated 
in testimony to House and Senate Committees from multiple 
parties.  For example, as the Department of Health testified 
before the Senate Committee:  
We note that programs and activities of the State and 
of other agencies which receive Federal financial 
assistance currently must provide services or opportunities 
without excluding people also on the basis of their race, 
color, national origin, or age, in addition to handicap.  
For some, sex is also a protected factor.  
 
The creation of Chapter 368 last year clearly 
indicated that it is against public policy to discriminate 
because of race, color, religion, age, sex, marital status, 
national origin, ancestry, handicapped status, or medical 
condition in employment, public accommodations, and 
housing. . . .  
 
Therefore, we propose that HB 932, HD 2, be amended 
to clarify and reflect this public policy in State programs 
and activities and in programs and activities receiving 
State financial assistance. . . .  
 
In other testimony before the House Judiciary Committee, the 
Department of Health stated, “We support these extensions.”   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
32 
 
 
 Similarly, before the House Health and Judiciary Committee s, the 
Department of Health explained , “The additions use the phrasing 
found in Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 
and in Section 504 implementing regulation.  As such we are 
familiar with its meaning and agree that it would be a 
significant addition  to the protections against discrimination.” 
(emphasis added
).   
As another example, the Protection and Advocacy Agency of 
Hawaii’s testimony stated, “According to 29 U.S.C [§ ] 794, 
individuals with handicapping conditions shall not be 
discriminated against because of their handicap in services, 
programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance.  
This bill would ensure the same guarantees to disabled 
individuals in all programs and services receiving state  
financial assistance. ”  (emphasis added).  The ACLU of Hawaii’ s 
testimony echoed this view:  “[A]s  state government increasingly 
contracts for services with private agencies, there are an 
increasing number of agencies that do not receive any federal 
funds but whose programs are funded in large part by state 
grants.”  So, too, did the testimony by the Commission  on the 
Handicapped:  
The federal [Section 504] law applies to programs and 
activities which receive federal financial assistance and 
precludes those programs and activities from discriminating 
against qualified handicapped individuals. . . .  
  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
33 
 
 
 We believe that it is of prime importance for the 
State of Hawaii to demonstrate the same commitment to 
equality for persons with disabilities by adopting similar 
language in State law.  This law would bind recipients of 
state financial assistance to the same standards as current 
recipients of federal financial assistance.  
 
In sum, this testimony  reflects the House Committee 
Report’s intention that  Act 387 was meant to provide protection 
for disability discrimination only when federal Section 504 
protections did not apply.  There is no mention of providing 
overlapping jurisdiction between Act 387 and Section 504 or 
offering an additional state remedy to those who are already 
protected by Section 504.  
4. 1991 Amendments through Act 252     
Act 252 of 1991 clarified the provisions of Chapter 368 
that relate to contested case hearings and appeal procedures, 
explaining:  
The legislature has established the Hawaii civil rights 
commission  to create a mechanism which would provide a 
uniform procedure for the enforcement of the state’ s laws 
prohibiting discrimination in employment, housing, and 
public accommodations.  The legislature finds that in 
implementing its legislative mandate, there are ambiguous 
and inconsistent provisions.   
 
1991 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 252, § 1 at 549.  Act 252 was not 
intended to substantively change chapter 368 or increase or 
decrease the rights provided under HRS chapters 489 and 515 and 
part I of chapter 378.  See id.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
34 
 
 
 5.   The above legislative history shows that HRS § 368- 1.5 
was intended to be gap-filling . 
   
This legislative history demonstrates the legislature 
intended HRS § 368-1.5 to provide the HCRC with jurisdiction 
over disability discrimination complaints only when federal 
protections under Section 504 do not apply.  The committee 
reports and testimony regarding Act 387 were concerned with 
scenarios in which disabled individuals lacked legal protections 
from discrimination, but that concern is not present where 
Section 504 applies.  Moreover, there is no suggestion in the 
legislative history that the legislature wanted to provide an 
alternative state remedy in situations where federal remedies 
already existed.  In other words, HRS § 368 -1.5 was designed to 
be gap-filling, rather than to offer overlapping state and 
federal protection against disability discrimination.  
Based on the legislative history, we infer the legislature 
intended to extend this gap -filling protection to “state 
agencies” in addition to “ any program or activity receiving 
state financial assistan ce.”  HRS §  368-1.5.  By 1989, when Act 
387 was enacted, it was clear that Section 504 applied to any 
entity receiving federal funding, including state agencies.  
Thus, the same rationale for extending Section 504 protections 
would apply to state agencies not receiving federal funding.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
35 
 
 
 This interpretation of HRS §  368-1.5 is also compatible 
with the inclusion of language regarding “[a]dmission of persons 
to . . . an educational institution” in HRS §  368-17(a)(3).  HRS 
§ 368-17 provides remedies for all of the enumerated types of 
discrimination in HRS § 368-1, not just disability.  
Accordingly, the HCRC’s ass ertion that the  remedy in HRS § 368-
17(a)(3) would be superfluous if it did not imply  that HRS § 
368-1.5 provides coverage to educational institutions receiving 
both federal and state financial assistance, lacks merit.   
Without HRS § 368-17(a)(3), a person who is denied admission to 
a school on the basis of race, color, religion, age, etc.,  would 
be without a remedy.  Thus, contrary to the HCRC’s position,  HRS 
10§ 368-17(a)(3) is not superfluous.   
We conclude HRS § 368 -1.5 was intended to be a gap-filling 
measure.  Here, Parent’s petition asserts that when Student took 
the 2013 grade- level placement exam, Student was deprived of 
accommodations or modifications that would have allowed him to 
take the same test given to nonhandicapped students, which is 
subject to Section 504.  See 34 C.F.R. § 104.33(a), (b)(1) 
(stating that a child with a disability is entitled to “regular 
                         
10  Because the issue is not before us, we do not address whether HRS § 368 -
1.5 provides th e HCRC with jurisdiction over disability discrimination claims
against educational institutions when Section 504 does not apply, such as 
state agencies not receiving federal funding that may provide educational 
services or private schools receiving state financial assistance that do not 
receive federal funds.    
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
36 
 
 
 or special education and related aids and services that . . . 
are designed to meet individual educational needs of handicapped 
persons as adequately as the needs of nonhandicapped persons are 
met”).  Accordingly, the HCRC lacks jurisdiction over the 
petition because the Academy is administered by the DOE, which 
11receives federal funds and is therefore subject to Section 504.      
V.  Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we hold the HCRC lacks 
jurisdiction over the Petition.  We therefore affirm the circuit 
court’s Final Judgment dated July 6, 2015, entered pursuant to  
its July 6, 2015 “Order Reversing the Hawai ʻi Civil Rights 
Commission ’s Decision and Order, Filed October 28, 2014.”  
  
Livia A. Wang  and Lowell K.Y.  
Chun-Hoon for appellant        
Hawaiʻi Civil Rights Commission  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
 
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
 
Douglas S. Chin, Holly T.     
Shikada, Carter S. Siu, and 
Gregg M. Ushiroda for 
appellees Hawai ʻi Technology 
Academy and the Department of
Education, State of Hawai ʻi     /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson                            
  
     
                         
11  The Academy and the DOE had also argued before the HCRC and the circuit 
court that the HCRC lacked jurisdiction over L.E.’s petition because the 
petition was essentially a special education matter  under the IDEA.  That 
argument was not specifically addressed below, and the issue is not now 
before this court.  In any event, the U.S. Supreme Court has already issued 
some guidance for analyzing whether the gravamen of a complaint seeks relief 
for the denial of a FAPE.  See  Fry v. Napoleon Cmty. Sch s., 580 U.S. ___, 137 
S.Ct. 743, 748 (2017).     
