                      
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 ________________________________________________________________ ---o0o---
 
 ________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
  In  response  to  a  Uniform  Information  Practices  Act  
(“UIPA”)   request   from  Plaintiff-Appellant  Honolulu   Civil  Beat  
Inc.  (“Civil   Beat”)  to  Defendant-Appellee  the  Department   of  the 1
 
         ***  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAIʻI  REPORTS  AND  PAC IFIC  REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAP-17-0000480 11-MAR-2020 09:48 AM 
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAIʻI 
HONOLULU
  CIVIL  BEAT  INC.,   
Plaintiff-Appellant,  
 
vs.  
 
DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  ATTORNEY  GENERAL,
Defendant-Appellee.   
SCAP-17-0000480  
 
APPEAL  FROM  THE
  CIRCUIT  COURT  OF  THE  FIRST  CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-17-0000480;  CIV.  NO.  16-1-1743-09)  
 
MARCH  11,  2020  
RECKTENWALD,  C.J.,  McKENNA,  POLLACK,  AND  WILSON,  JJ.  AND
CIRCUIT  JUDGE  WONG,  IN  PLACE  OF  NAKAYAMA,  J.  RECUSED  
 
OPINION  OF  THE  COURT  BY  WILSON,  J.   
1 Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”) Chapter 92F (Supp. 2018).            
 
 
 
 
 2          
          
           
        
        
          
          
           
           
            
        
   
         
         
            
           
           
        
         
         
        
          
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Attorney General (“the Department”) for the results of an 
investigation into the Office of the Auditor, the State refused 
to produce any documentation; its refusal was based in part on 
the lawyer-client privilege and the professional rule protecting 
confidential lawyer-client communications. We hold that the 
State may not exclude a government record from disclosure under 
the UIPA on the basis of a lawyer-client relationship between 
two State entities which is “asserted but not proved[.]” Ipse 
Dixit, Black’s Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019). “An ipse dixit 
claim of privilege is insufficient.” Sapp v. Wong, 62 Haw. 34, 
38, 609 P.2d 137, 140 (1980). 
I. BACKGROUND 
A. Investigation of the Office of the Auditor 
Pursuant to the Hawaiʻi Constituti on, the legislature, 
by a majority vote of each house in joint session, appoints a 
state auditor, who serves for an eight-year term. Haw. Const. 
art. VII, § 10. The auditor’s constitutional duties are to 
conduct post-audits of the transactions, accounts, programs, and 
performance of all state departments, offices, and agencies; to 
certify the accuracy of financial statements issued by the 
respective accounting officers; to report the auditor’s findings 
and recommendations to the governor and the legislature; and to 
make additional reports and conduct additional investigations as            
 
 
 
 3 
             
            
   
          
          
           
          
         
        
            
    
          
        
        
          
             
             
             
      
             
       
         
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
directed by the legislature. Id. The legislature can remove an 
auditor for cause by a two-thirds vote of the members in joint 
session. Id. 
On April 22, 2015, the Department began an 
investigation of the Office of the Auditor in response to 
information it received from a legislator. On April 23, 2015, 
the Department requested that the legislator send it a letter 
formally requesting an investigation. A letter from the 
legislator requesting the investigation was received by the 
Department on April 24, 2015. The contents of the letter are 
not in the record. 
An employee of the Department conducted the requested 
investigation, which the employee referred to as an 
“administrative investigation[.]” The employee drafted a report 
based on the investigation. That report, dated February 8, 
2016, is in the record under seal, as is a declaration of its 
author and a brief follow up report dated April 11, 2016. The 
report was sent to the legislature in the spring of 2016. 
B. Civil Beat’s UIPA Request 
On April 27, 2016, a reporter for Civil Beat emailed a 
special assistant to the attorney general, requesting, 
“[p]ursuant to Hawaii’s public records law,” “access to or 
copies of all final investigative reports related to the state            
 
 
 
 
 4            
           
              
          
        
 
           
          
         
           
         
         
        
     
        
        
        
           
                     
           
        
 
       
 
        
       
 
 
   
 . . . 
          
         
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
auditor’s office from Jan. 1, 2015 to present.” The term 
“Hawaii’s public records law” in the April 27, 2016 email was 
understood by the trial court to be referring to the UIPA. 
The only document in the Department’s custody that met the 
reporter’s description was the February 8, 2016 investigative 
report. 
On May 11, 2016, the Department responded with a 
“Notice to Requester” which denied Civil Beat’s request in its 
entirety based on two exceptions to the UIPA’s disclosure 
requirements, HRS § 92F-13(1) and (3).2 As justification for its 
denial of the request under these exceptions, the Department 
explained that disclosure of the report would constitute a 
clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy and would 
frustrate a legitimate government purpose: 
The individuals identified in the requested record 
have a significant privacy interest in the personnel 
information contained in the record which outweighs any 
public interest in disclosure. Due to the nature of the 
2 HRS § 92F-13 is entitled “Government records; exceptions to the 
general rule.” Subsections (1) and (3) provide: 
This part shall not require disclosure of: 
(1) Government records which, if disclosed, would 
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy; 
(3) Government records that, by their nature, must be 
confidential in order for the government to avoid the 
frustration of a legitimate government function[.]            
 
 
 
 
 5        
         
       
        
   
 
          
       
         
   
 
  On  August  23,  2016,  the  Department  sent  Civil  Beat  an  
“Amended  Notice  to  Requester”  denying  the  request  in  its  
entirety  on  the  basis  of  an  additional  exception,  HRS  §  92F-
13(4).   As  justification,  the  Department  stated  that  the  record  
was  “confidential  and  subject  to  the  attorney  client  privilege.”   3 
     
           
           
         
        
          
          
            
                     
     
 
  
 
   
 . . . 
          
           
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
information contained within the record, segregation of 
identifying information is not possible. Disclosure of the 
requested record would constitute a clearly unwarranted 
invasion of personal privacy of the individuals identified 
within the record. 
In addition, the requested record is protected by the 
deliberative process privilege and must remain confidential 
in order to avoid the frustration of a legitimate 
government function. 
C. Circuit Court
 Proceedings 
Civil Beat filed a complaint against the Department in 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (“circuit court”). In 
its complaint, Civil Beat alleged that the Department’s stated 
reasons for nondisclosure did not justify withholding the 
requested record in its entirety and that the Department had 
denied Civil Beat its right to access government records under 
the UIPA. Civil Beat requested that the circuit court enter an 
3 HRS § 92F-13(4) provides: 
This  p art  shall  not  require  disclosure  of: 
(4)
 Government records which, pursuant to state or federal 
law including an order of any state or federal court, are 
protected from disclosure[.]            
 
 
 
 
 6         
          
           
         
          
         
           
         
          
       
        
           
        
         
          
       
         
         
           
           
            
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
order directing the Department to disclose all public 
information sought in its April 27, 2016 request. 
The Department filed an answer and a motion for 
summary judgment, arguing that the UIPA exceptions it identified 
in its Notice to Requester and Amended Notice to Requester 
protected the record from disclosure. The Department attached 
to its motion for summary judgment a declaration of the First 
Deputy Attorney General (“First Deputy Declaration”). The First 
Deputy Declaration states that in the spring of 2015, the 
Department “received a communication from the Legislature 
requesting that the Department conduct an investigation and 
provide a report to the Legislature on matters relating to the 
Office of the Legislative Auditor[,]” that the Department 
conducted the investigation and transmitted the report to the 
legislature in the spring of 2016, and that “[t]he report 
contains information which would reveal the communications 
between the Legislature and the Department, which are attorney 
client communications related to legal services provided by the 
Department to the Legislature.” Civil Beat also filed a motion 
for summary judgment on the grounds that the Department had not 
and could not meet its burden to prove that the record was 
exempt from disclosure.            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
          
          
           
           
            
           
     
             
         
         
         
    
          
        
            
            
          
          
                     
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (continued . . .) In the Department’s reply memorandum in support of its 
motion for summary judgment and in opposition to Civil Beat’s 
motion, the Department stated that it would be willing to submit 
the requested record to the court under seal.4 Civil Beat 
opposed in camera review of the report in its reply memorandum. 
Prior to a hearing on the motions, the circuit court reviewed 
the record in camera. 
On April 20, 2017, the circuit court held a hearing on 
the Department’s motion for summary judgment and Civil Beat’s 
cross-motion for summary judgment.5 The court granted the 
Department’s motion for summary judgment and denied Civil Beat’s 
motion for summary judgment. 
The court concluded that HRS § 92F-13(4), which 
exempts government records protected from disclosure by state 
law from the requirements of the UIPA, applies to the facts of 
this case. The court first stated that HRS § 26-7 (2009) 
“authorizes the Department to render legal services to the State 
legislature”6 and that HRS § 28-4 (2009) “requires that the 
4 HRS § 92F-15(b) provides: 
In  an  action  to  c ompel  disclosure,  .  .  .  [t]he  circuit  court  may  
examine  the  government  record  at  issue,  in  camera,  to  assist  in  
determining  whether  it,  or  any  part  of  it,  may  be  withheld.  
5  The  Honorable   Keith  K.  Hiraoka  presided. 
6  HRS  §  26-7  (2009)  provides: 
7                                                                   
    
 
    (. . . continued)            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
       
           
        
          
       
         
            
     
           
         
          
 
 
         
         
         
       
 
      
 
          
           
         
          
           
  
 
     
 
             
         
        
            
 
 
 
 
     (continued . . .) Attorney General advise and counsel the legislature without 
charge at all times when called upon.”7 The circuit court 
defined the parameters of the lawyer-client privilege with 
reference to Hawaiʻi Rules of Evid ence (“HRE”) Rule 503 (1992) 
and the professional rule protecting confidential communications 
with reference to Hawaiʻi Rules of Professional Conduct (“HRPC”) 
Rule 1.6 (2014). It explained that HRE Rule 503 “recognizes a 
lawyer-client privilege” for “confidential communications 
between a lawyer or a representative of the lawyer and that 
lawyer’s client made for the purpose of facilitating the 
rendition of professional legal services to the client.”8 The 
.
. . 
The department shall administer and render state legal services, 
including furnishing of written legal opinions to the governor, 
legislature, and such state departments and officers as the 
governor may direct . . . . 
7 HRS § 28-4 (2009) provides: 
The attorney general shall, without charge, at all times when 
called upon, give advice and counsel to the heads of departments, 
district judges, and other public officers, in all matters 
connected with their public duties, and otherwise aid and assist 
them in every way requisite to enable them to perform their 
duties faithfully. 
8 HRE Rule 503(b)(1) provides: 
General rule of privilege. A client has a privilege to refuse to 
disclose and to prevent any other person from disclosing 
confidential communications made for the purpose of facilitating 
the rendition of professional legal services to the client . . . 
8            
 
 
 
 
 9            
        
          
           
           
        
         
           
         
          
         
       
         
          
          
           
         
    
                                                                  
    
 
          
       
 
     
 
         
          
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circuit court noted that HRPC Rule 1.6(a) “states that a lawyer 
shall not reveal confidential information relating to the 
representation of a client unless the client consents.”9 
The court, having reviewed the report in camera, found 
that “it was prepared by the Department in response to the 
legislature’s request for a rendition of services[,]” and 
concluded that it was a communication subject to the lawyer-
client privilege under HRE Rule 503. Because there was no 
evidence that the legislature had consented to the Department 
revealing any of the information contained in the report, the 
circuit court further concluded that the report was a 
confidential communication covered by HRPC Rule 1.6. 
Accordingly, it held that the report was protected from 
disclosure under state law—HRE Rule 503 and HRPC Rule 1.6—and 
was therefore exempt from the UIPA under HRS § 92F-13(4). 
The circuit court entered final judgment in favor of 
the Department and against Civil Beat, and dismissed any 
remaining claims with prejudice. 
(. . . continued) 
between the client or the client's representative and the lawyer 
or the lawyer's representative . . . 
9 HRPC Rule 1.6(a) provides: 
A lawyer shall not reveal confidential information relating to 
the representation of a client unless the client consents after 
consultation . . . .            
 
 
 
 
 10      
           
           
  
           
         
       
        
           
          
        
        
    
 
 
           
        
               
 
 
         
           
      
     
     
           
            
           
            
       
   
 . . . 
   . . . *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
D. Appeal and Transfer 
Civil Beat filed an appeal in the Intermediate Court 
of Appeals (“ICA”). On appeal, Civil Beat raised three points 
of error: 
1. Whether the circuit court erred by, sua sponte, 
using HRPC 1.6 as a confidentiality statute to bar 
disclosure of non-privileged client information in the 
possession of the Department of the Attorney General. 
2.
 Whether the circuit court erred by holding that 
the Department of the Attorney General met its burden of 
proof to justify withholding from the public the non-
privileged facts in the Department’s investigation of the 
Office of the Auditor. 
3.
 Whether the circuit court erred by reviewing the 
investigation report in camera without first requiring the 
Department of the Attorney General to provide non-
privileged information about the report in the public 
record. 
Once briefing before the ICA was complete, Civil Beat 
filed an application to transfer the case to the supreme court, 
and transfer was accepted. 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Abuse of Discretion 
“A court abuses its discretion if it clearly exceeds 
the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or 
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.” AC 
v. AC, 134 Hawaiʻi 221, 229, 339 P.3d 719, 727 (2014) (internal 
quotation marks, brackets, and citations omitted).            
 
 
 
 
 11          
         
          
           
      
         
            
           
           
         
  
 
           
    
   
            
    
           
         
       
          
          
            
           
            
            
       
          
           
             *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Grant or Denial of Summary Judgment 
“Appellate courts review an award of summary judgment 
de novo under the same standard applied by the circuit 
court. . . . Summary judgment is appropriate if the 
pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and 
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, 
show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact 
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a 
matter of law. This court must review the evidence and 
inferences in the light most favorable to the non-moving 
party. 
Salera v. Caldwell, 137 Hawaiʻi 40 9, 415, 375 P.3d 188, 194 
(2016) (internal citations omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. The circuit court did not abuse its discretion by reviewing 
the report in camera. 
The circuit court’s decision to conduct an in camera 
review of the investigative report without first requiring the 
Department to provide non-privileged information about the 
report was not an abuse of its discretion. 
The judicial enforcement section of the UIPA provides 
that, “[i]n an action to compel disclosure, . . . [t]he circuit 
court may examine the government record at issue, in camera, to 
assist in determining whether it, or any part of it, may be 
withheld.” HRS § 92F-15(b). “The plain language of a statute 
is ‘the fundamental starting point of statutory 
interpretation.’” State v. Anzalone, 141 Hawaiʻi 4 45, 454, 412 
P.3d 951,
 960 (2018) (quoting State v. DeMello, 136 Hawaiʻi 193, 
195, 361 P.3d 420, 422 (2015)). The plain language of HRS §            
 
 
 
 
 12          
            
           
          
        
          
          
           
            
            
            
            
            
         
        
          
           
       
            
        
          
          
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
92F-15(b) provides that the circuit court’s decision to examine 
the record in camera is discretionary. See State v. Kui Ching, 
46 Haw. 135, 138, 376 P.2d 379, 381 (1962) (“Legislatively, it 
is common practice to use the word ‘may’ to indicate 
discretionary authority.”). There are no express statutory 
limitations on the exercise of this power, other than the 
requirement that in camera review be employed to assist the 
circuit court in its determination of whether a record or part 
of a record may be withheld. The discretion available to the 
court to conduct in camera review pursuant to HRS § 92F-15(b) is 
broad and is not limited to instances in which one of the 
parties makes a request. See Anastasi v. Fid. Nat. Title Ins. 
Co., 134 Hawaiʻi 400, 419  n.19, 341 P.3d 1200, 1219 n.19 (App. 
2014) (noting that there is no restriction preventing Hawaiʻi 
courts
 from reviewing communications claimed to be privileged 
without the request or agreement of the party claiming the 
privilege and that “in camera review is utilized by our courts, 
as demonstrated in this case”). 
In this case,
 the circuit court was presented with the 
Department’s motion for summary judgment and Civil Beat’s cross-
motion for summary judgment. The Department argued that the 
report at issue met three exceptions to the UIPA’s general 
disclosure requirement, HRS § 92F-13(1), (3), and (4), while            
 
 
 
 
 13             
             
           
          
        
         
          
        
         
         
            
          
          
          
             
            
          
                     
            
           
             
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Civil Beat argued that the Department had not met its burden to 
prove that the report met any of the exceptions. Given that one 
party knew the general character,10 but not the contents, of the 
report, and the other was trying to avoid disclosing its 
contents, some of the parties’ arguments were naturally 
speculative or vague. For example, the Department’s memorandum 
in support of its motion argued that “the record contains 
confidential personal information about employees of the Office 
of the Legislative Auditor” without specifying what manner of 
personal information the report contains. In its memorandum, 
Civil Beat stated that “it is not clear that the report even 
concerns a person, such that it would implicate personal privacy 
interests.” The circuit court decided that reviewing the report 
itself would assist it in making a determination about whether 
the report legally had to be disclosed. Its decision to do so 
was clearly not an abuse of discretion. To the contrary, the 
decision to review the report was reasonable, based on the 
10 Based on its reporter’s April 27, 2016 email, Civil Beat was 
apparently aware that the Department had access to a “final investigative 
report” related to the Office of the Auditor and prepared after January 1, 
2015.            
 
 
 
 
 14           
          
           
           
           
          
          
          
         
         
          
          
          
                     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
limited information possessed by the court and the parties, and 
squarely within the text and purpose of HRS § 92F-15(b).11 
Civil Beat does not present any argument that would 
cause us to interpret HRS § 92F-15(b) contrary to its plain 
meaning. Rather, it offers policy reasons why the circuit court 
should have delayed in camera review until after the Department 
made additional public disclosures about the record at issue. 
In particular, Civil Beat contends that in camera review limits 
effective advocacy by depriving the party seeking disclosure of 
the information necessary to argue for its position, which 
unfairly distorts the process in favor of the party opposing 
disclosure. Civil Beat suggests that we adopt a procedure 
analogous to the one required in federal actions to compel 
11  The  fe deral  Freedom  of  Information  Act  (“FOIA”)  also  provides  for  
in  camera  review  of  records  by  a  trial  court.   5  U.S.C.  §  552(a)(4)(B)  (2018)  
(“the  [U.S.  district]  court  .  .  .  may  examine  the  contents  of  such  agency  
records  in  camera  to  determine  whether  such  records  or  any  part  thereof  shall  
be  withheld  under  any  of  the  exceptions  set  forth  in  subsection  (b)  of  this  
section  .  .  .  .”).   “The  in  camera  review  provision  is  discretionary  by  its  
terms,  and  is  designed  to  be  invoked  when  the  issue  before  the  District  Court  
could  not  be  otherwise  resolved[.]”   N.L.R.B.  v.  Robbins  Tire  &  Rubber  Co.,  
437  U.S.  214,  224  (1978).   The  D.C.  Circuit  has  observed  that  FOIA  requesters  
typically  prefer  an  in  camera  examination  “since  the  alternative  is  the  
district  court’s  sole  reliance  on  the  affidavits  and  descriptions  of  the  
agency.”   Spirko  v.  U.S.  Postal  Serv.,  147  F.3d  992,  996  (D.C.  Cir.  1998).   
It  “has  yet  to  identify  particular  circumstances  under  which  in  camera  
inspection  would  be  inappropriate ,  although  several  concerns  counsel  against  
hasty  resort  to  in  camera  review[.]”   Id.  at  996–97  (emphasis  in  original).   
But  it  is  not  an  abuse  of  discretion  for  a  federal  trial  court  to  proceed  to  
in  camera  review  when  the  agency  has  provided  information  sufficient  for  the  
trial  court  to  determine  that  its  review  of  the  documents  would  not  burden  
judicial  resources,  and  that  seeking  further  disclosure  would  not  advance  the  
just,  speedy,  and  inexpensive  determination  of  the  case.   Id.  at  998.               
 
 
 
 
 15  
  In  Vaughn,  the  U.S.  Court  of  Appeals  for  the  D.C.  
Circuit  devised  a  process  to  “(1)  assure  that  a  party’s  right  to
information  is  not  submerged  beneath  governmental  obfuscation  
and  mischaracterization,  and  (2)  permit  the  court  system  
effectively  and  efficiently  to  evaluate  the  factual  nature  of  
disputed  information.”   484  F.2d  at  826.   Its  solution,  known  as
the  Vaughn  index,  requires  a  non-disclosing  federal  agency  to  
“(1)  identify  each  document  withheld;  (2)  state  the  statutory  
exemption  claimed;  and  (3)  explain  how  disclosure  would  damage  
the  interests  protected  by  the  claimed  exemption.”   Citizens  
Comm’n  on  Human  Rights  v.  Food  &  Drug  Admin.,  45  F.3d  1325,  1326
n.1  (9th  Cir.  1995).   
 
 
           
         
              
          
           
          
          
         
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
disclosure  under  FOIA  by  Vaughn  v.  Rosen,  484  F.2d  820  (D.C.
Cir.  1973).   
 
 
 
The circuit court’s failure in this case to require 
the Department to produce additional information in the nature 
of a Vaughn index did not amount to an abuse of its discretion. 
While we look favorably upon Vaughn, and do not conclusively 
rule out the possibility that such a requirement may exist under 
our law, we conclude that the Department’s explanation of its 
refusal to disclose the investigative report in this case was 
sufficient to provide Civil Beat with enough information to 
argue its position that the report should have been disclosed.            
 
 
 
 
 16  
 
 
  
            
          
        
        
          
         
          
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In  Vaughn,  the  volume  of  the  documents  ostensibly  exempt  from  
disclosure  was  unknown,  the  party  seeking  disclosure  was  
seriously  disadvantaged  by  its  lack  of  information,  and  the  
judicial  effort  required  to  determine  whether  certain  statutory  
exemptions  applied  would  have  been  “immense.”   484  F.2d  at  825.  
In  this  case,  the  documents  the  Department  sought  to  exempt  were
not  innumerable  and  mysterious;  rather,  the  disputed  record  
consisted  of  a  single  report,  the  existence  and  general  
character  of  which  both  parties  appear  to  have  been  aware.   And  
the  effort  required  to  determine  the  applicability  of  the  
exemptions  in  HRS  §  92F-13  was  not  “immense.”   The  circuit  court
resolved  the  question  of  whether  the  report  was  subject  to  
disclosure  under  the  UIPA  on  the  basis  of  the  lawyer-client  
privilege  and  the  professional  conduct  rule  forbidding  
disclosure  of  confidential  client  communications,  exceptions  
that  both  parties  were  adequately  equipped  to  dispute  and  that  
did  not  require  extensive  judicial  review  of  the  entire  report.   
 
B. The circuit court erred in granting summary judgment to the 
Department on the basis that the Department proved that the 
investigative report was prepared pursuant to a lawyer-client 
relationship between the Department and the legislature. 
The issue on the Department’s motion for summary 
judgment was whether the investigative report prepared by the 
Department about the Office of the Auditor is protected from 
disclosure under the exceptions to the UIPA’s general rule of            
 
 
 
 
 17              
        
          
         
            
           
          
           
        
           
          
       
           
   
                     
           
              
            
           
 
            
           
            
            
           
                
             
               
                  
              
     
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
disclosure. See HRS § 92F-13. The circuit court held that the 
report was prepared pursuant to a lawyer-client relationship 
between the Department and the legislature and is thus protected 
from disclosure under HRS § 92F-13(4), the exception that 
applies to government records protected by state or federal law. 
The UIPA contains a strong presumption in favor of 
public disclosure of government records. See HRS §§ 92F-2, 92F-
11(a).12 In an action to compel disclosure, “[t]he agency has 
the burden of proof to establish justification for 
nondisclosure.” HRS § 92F-15(c). Thus, the Department bore the 
burden under HRS § 92F-15(c) to prove that the lawyer-client 
privilege and confidentiality rules protected the investigative 
report from disclosure.13 In this case, the Department failed to 
meet its burden. 
12 Relatedly, the Hawaiʻi Rules of  Evidence provide that no person 
has a privilege to refuse to disclose any matter, unless such a privilege is 
provided for by the constitutions, statutes, or court rules of the United 
States or the State of Hawaiʻi. HRE Rule 501(2) (1980). 
13 The UIPA states that the director of the Office of Information 
Practices (“OIP”) may provide advisory opinions regarding the rights of the 
public and the functions and responsibilities of agencies under the UIPA, HRS 
§ 92F-42(3), and that OIP opinions are admissible and precedential in actions 
to compel disclosure unless found to be “palpably erroneous,” HRS § 92F-
15(b); see Peer News LLC v. City & Cty. of Honolulu , 143 Hawaiʻi 472, 485, 431 
P.3d 1245,
 1258 (2018). OIP has opined that records protected by the lawyer-
client privilege are covered by HRS § 92F-13(4). OIP Op. Ltr. No. F14-01 at 
6 (June 5, 2014); OIP Op. Ltr. No. 91-23 at 9 (Nov. 25, 1991). While we do 
not find that conclusion to be “palpably erroneous,” that is not the end of 
the inquiry in this case.            
 
 
 
 
 18            
       
           
    
           
        
         
         
         
        
           
        
         
          
           
          
       
           
          
              
                     
          
           
             
            
             
               
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1. Both the lawyer-client privilege, HRE Rule 503, and the 
professional rule requiring confidentiality, HRPC Rule 1.6, 
can apply to the Department when it is in a lawyer-client 
relationship with the legislature. 
In order for a document to be protected from 
disclosure pursuant to the lawyer-client privilege, as defined 
in HRE Rule 503, the document must contain information 
communicated within the context of a lawyer-client relationship. 
HRE Rule 503(b) provides for an evidentiary privilege for 
confidential lawyer-client communications: “[a] client has a 
privilege to refuse to disclose and to prevent any other person 
from disclosing confidential communications made for the purpose 
of facilitating the rendition of professional legal services to 
the client (1) between the client or the client’s representative 
and the lawyer or the lawyer’s representative . . . .”14 
With regard to the lawyer-client privilege, we have 
held that “[p]roper practice requires preliminary judicial 
inquiry into the existence and validity of the privilege and the 
burden of establishing the privilege rests on the claimant.” 
Sapp, 62 Haw. at 38, 609 P.2d at 140. This inquiry must be 
14 “A ‘client’ is a person, public officer, or corporation, 
association, or other organization or entity, either public or private, who 
is rendered professional legal services by a lawyer, or who consults with a 
lawyer with a view to obtaining professional legal services.” HRE Rule 
503(a)(1). “A ‘lawyer’ is a person authorized, or reasonably believed by the 
client to be authorized, to practice law in any state or nation.” HRE Rule 
503(a)(3).            
 
 
 
 
 19  
 
 
          
          
          
           
              
          
       
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“meaningful”  and  “‘turns  largely  on  the  client’s  subjective  
belief  that  it  exists,’  and  the  character  of  the  communication,  
which  must  be  intended  as  confidential[.]”   DiCenzo  v.  Izawa,  68
Haw.  528,  536,  723  P.2d  171,  176  (1986)  (quoting  In  re  
McGlothen,  663  P.2d  1330,  1334  (Wash.  1983)).   Thus,  in  order  to
determine  whether  the  Department  could  properly  claim  that  the  
report  is  protected  from  disclosure  by  state  law,  a  meaningful  
preliminary  judicial  inquiry  must  be  conducted  to  determine  
whether  it  was  communicated  in  the  context  of  a  lawyer-client  
relationship.   If  uncontroverted  evidence  submitted  by  the  
Department  to  the  circuit  court  establishes  that  the  legislature
believed  that  it  was  entering  into  a  lawyer-client  relationship  
and  that  the  report  was  a  document  communicated  to  it  in  
confidence,  the  report  may  have  been  protected  from  disclosure  
by  HRS  §  92F-13(4).   
 
 
The Department of the Attorney General and the 
legislature or its members may at times enter into a lawyer-
client relationship, such as when the Department is required to 
provide legal services to the legislature or a legislator. See 
Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.’ Ret. Sys. of State of Haw., 87 
Hawaiʻi 152, 173,  952 P.2d  1215, 1236 (1998) (“The Legislature 
has thus created a traditional attorney-client relationship 
between the Attorney General and the state officers or            
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
        
        
        
          
            
         
           
        
        
        
          
          
         
 
 
 
 
                     
         
              
               
            
        
           
             
              
             
          
 
 
 
 
 
    (continued . . .) instrumentalities  she  is  required  to  represent.”  (quoting  
Manchin  v.  Browning,  296  S.E.2d  909,  920  (W.Va.  1980))  (brackets
omitted)).   The  statute  that  defines  the  Department’s  primary  
duties,  HRS  §  26-7,  includes  among  those  duties  the  provision  of
legal  services  to  the  legislature:    
 
The department shall administer and render state legal 
services, including furnishing of written legal opinions to 
the governor, legislature , and such state departments and 
officers as the governor may direct; represent the State in 
all civil actions in which the State is a party; approve as 
to legality and form all documents relating to the 
acquisition of any land or interest in lands by the State; 
and, unless otherwise provided by law, prosecute cases 
involving violations of state laws and cases involving 
agreements, uniform laws, or other matters which are 
enforceable in the courts of the State. The attorney 
general shall be charged with such other duties and have 
such authority as heretofore provided by common law or 
statute. 
(Emphasis  added.)   When  the  Department  renders  state  legal  
services  to  the  legislature,  furnishes  written  legal  opinions  to
the  legislature,  represents  the  legislature  in  a  civil  action,  
or  otherwise  acts  as  the  legislature’s  lawyer  in  accordance  with
common  or  statutory  law,  it  is  acting  in  the  context  of  a  
lawyer-client  relationship.    15  
 
15 The Department’s statutory duties to the legislature and 
legislators are detailed further in HRS Chapter 28 (2009). See HRS §§ 28-1 
(requirement to appear for the State in all cases in which it is a party), 
28-3 (requirement to give written opinions upon questions of law submitted by 
state officials, including the legislature and legislators), 28-4 
(requirement to give advice and counsel to public officers in matters 
connected with their public duties). However, that does not mean that the 
Department’s powers are limited to those laid out in the statute. We have 
held that the Department is permitted to “exercise all such power as the 
public interests may from time to time require[,]” unless expressly 
20            
 
 
 
 
 21   The  circuit  court  held  that  the  UIPA  exception  for  
records  protected  from  disclosure  by  law  covers  the  report  
because  it  is  protected  by  the  lawyer-client  privilege.   It  also
held  that  the  exception  applies  because  the  report  is  
confidential  under  HRPC  Rule  1.6.   HRPC  Rule  1.6(a)  subjects  
lawyers  to  discipline  if  they  fail  to  keep  information  about  
clients  confidential:   “[a]  lawyer  shall  not  reveal  confidential
information  relating  to  the  representation  of  a  client  unless  
the  client  consents  after  consultation,  the  disclosure  is  
impliedly  authorized  in  order  to  carry  out  the  representation,  
or”  as  otherwise  provided  for  in  the  Rule.   When  the  Department  
is  acting  as  the  legislature’s  lawyer,  it  is  subject  to  the  same
professional  conduct  rules  as  any  other  attorney.   See  Chun,  87  
Hawaiʻi  at  174,  952  P.2d  at  1237  (“We  have  never  held,  however,  
that  the  Attorney  General  is  relieved  of  all  obligations  to   
 
 
                                                                  
    
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
(. . . continued) 
restricted  by  statute.   Hussey  v.  Say,  139  Hawaiʻi  181,  190,  384  P.3d  1282,  
1291  (2016)  (quoting  Chun,  87  Hawaiʻi  at  173,  952  P.2d  at  1236).   Thus,  in  the 
absence  of  a  common  law  or  statutory  restriction,  the  Department  may  exercise  
powers  not  expressly  granted  by  statute,  including  in  its  representation  of  
the  legislature,  or  a  component  part  thereof.   See  id.   “The  Attorney  
General’s  common  law  duty  to  protect  the  public  interest  is  subject  to  his  or  
her  definition  of  what  is  in  the  best  interests  of  the  state  or  public  at  
large.”   Id.  at  190  n.15,  384  P.3d  at  1291  n.15.             
 
 
 
 
 22    
  Thus,  the  Department’s  confidential  communications  
with  the  legislature  as  lawyer  and  client  may  be  privileged  
under  HRE  Rule  503  and  confidential  under  HRPC  Rule  1.6,  unless
disclosure  of  such  communications  is  otherwise  required  by  
statute.   See,  e.g.,  HRS  §  28-3  (requiring  that  when  the  
attorney  general  gives  a  written  legal  opinion  on  a  question  of
law  at  the  request  of  specified  state  officials,  the  attorney  
general  must  file  a  copy  of  the  opinion  with  the  lieutenant  
governor,  the  public  archives,  the  supreme  court  library,  and   
 
                     
           
          
              
              
           
 
          
          
         
 
          
           
            
    
 
                
           
            
               
           
           
            
                
         
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conform  her  conduct  to  the  HRPC,  which  are  applicable  to  all  
lawyers  licensed  to  practice  in  the  courts  of  this  state.”). 16
 
 
16 Although the Department is subject to the same rules of 
professional conduct as other lawyers, the HRPC are not “mechanically 
appl[ied]” to the Department. Chun, 87 Hawaiʻi at 173, 952 P.2d at 1236 
(quoting Stat
e v. Klattenhoff , 71 Haw. 598, 603, 801 P.2d 548, 551 (1990)). 
Strict application of the HRPC to the Department would be impractical: 
due to the multiple duties statutorily imposed upon the AG’s 
office, the ethical rules for private law firms are not 
necessarily applicable, in all cases, to the AG’s office. 
The practical reality is that every employee, appointee or 
elected official in state government who may be advised by the 
AG, or receive some legal service from the AG is a potential 
client of the AG. 
Klattenhoff, 71 Haw. at 604, 801 P.2d at 551; see also HRPC Rule 1.13 cmt. 8 
(“Defining precisely the identity of the client and prescribing the resulting 
obligations of such lawyers may be more difficult in the government context 
and is a matter beyond the scope of these Rules.”). “Accordingly, there is a 
risk, in any given case, that the attorney general’s professional obligations 
as legal counsel to her statutory client—a public officer or instrumentality 
of the state vested with policy-making authority—may clash with her vision of 
what is in the best global interests of the state or the public at large.” 
Chun, 87 Hawaiʻi  at 1 70, 952 P.2d at 1233.            
 
 
 
 
 23         
 
            
        
         
    
            
         
         
        
         
        
        
          
        
         
       
           
         
        
                     
            
         
           
           
             
             
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the legislative reference bureau for publication and public 
inspection).17 
2. On this record, the Department failed to prove that it 
was acting in a lawyer-client relationship with the 
legislature with regard to its investigative report on the 
Office of the Auditor. 
The Department failed to meet its burden to prove that 
the Department and the legislature were acting within the 
context of a lawyer-client relationship with regard to the 
report. Notwithstanding the Department’s conclusory claims that 
the report was privileged and confidential, the record before 
this court—including the contents of the sealed investigative 
report, its attached documents, and information about the 
circumstances under which it arose and was communicated to the 
legislature—fails to establish that the Department was acting 
pursuant to a lawyer-client relationship when it prepared the 
report and provided it to the legislature. 
The investigation into the Office of the Auditor began 
after the Department received information from a legislator that 
the Department considered worthy of investigation. Shortly 
17 OIP has opined that “the advice and counsel provided by the 
Attorney General described by section 28-4, Hawaii Revised Statutes, 
satisfies the elements of the attorney-client privilege set forth by Rule 
503, Hawaii Rules of Evidence, chapter 626, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and, 
therefore, may be withheld from public inspection and copying . . . under 
section 92F-13(3) and (4), Hawaii Revised Statutes.” OIP Op. Ltr. No. 91-23 
at 9 (Nov. 25, 1991).            
 
 
 
 
 24           
         
     
  However,  the  record  does  not  support  the  inference  
that  the  legislator,  or  the  legislature  as  a  whole,  would  have  
had  a  “subjective  belief”  that,  in  suggesting  that  an  
investigation  be  conducted,  the  legislature  was  requesting  that  
it  be  supplied  with  a  privileged  and  confidential  document.   
DiCenzo,  68  Haw.  at  536,  723  P.2d  at  176  (quoting  In  re  
McGlothen,  663  P.2d  1330,  1334  (Wash.  1983))   The  record  
contains  no  evidence  that  the  letter  or  any  other  communication  
from  the  legislature  or  a  legislator  was  a  request  for  legal  
advice,  legal  representation,  or  any  other  legal  service.   
Rather,  what  was  requested  was  that  an  investigation  be  
conducted.   The  First  Deputy  Declaration  states  that  the  
Department  “received  a  communication  from  the  Legislature  
requesting  that  the  Department  conduct  an  investigation  and  
provide  a  report  to  the  Legislature  on  matters  relating  to  the  
Office  of  the  Legislative  Auditor.”   Correspondingly,  the  
circuit  court  found  that  the  legislature  asked  the  Department  
“to  conduct  an  investigation  relating  to  the  Office  of  the  
Auditor”  and  that  the  Department  “conducted  the  investigation  as *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
after the investigation began, and at the request of the 
Department, the legislator sent the Department a letter formally 
requesting an investigation. 
            
 
 
 
 
 25           
       
          
           
         
         
            
         
         
        
         
         
        
          
           
         
            
         
          
        
        
          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
requested by the Legislature and communicated its findings in a 
report sent to the Legislature[.]” 
A request that the Department conduct an investigation 
is not necessarily a request that it provide legal services. 
The Department’s statutory investigatory powers make this clear. 
Under HRS § 28-2.5(a), “[t]he attorney general shall investigate 
alleged violations of the law when directed to do so by the 
governor, or when the attorney general determines that an 
investigation would be in the public interest.” An 
investigation under this section may be “a civil, 
administrative, or criminal investigation[.]” HRS § 28-2.5(b). 
The author of the investigative report indicated that it 
represented the results of “an administrative investigation” the 
author had conducted. There is no indication that this 
investigation was directed by the governor, but it may have been 
undertaken because the attorney general determined that it would 
be in the public interest. That is, the Department may have 
been exercising its discretionary function to conduct a “public 
interest” investigation under HRS § 28-2.5. We cannot conclude, 
simply because the investigation was requested by the 
legislature, that the Department was necessarily fulfilling a 
mandatory duty to the legislature, such as rendering state legal            
 
 
 
 
 26             
         
         
        
        
         
          
           
            
        
          
        
          
          
           
                     
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
services under HRS § 26-7, giving a legal opinion under HRS § 
28-3, or providing legal advice under HRS § 28-4.18 
Furthermore, when the Department undertakes a public 
interest investigation, the results of that investigation are 
not automatically covered by the lawyer-client privilege, HRE 
Rule 503, and professional rule of confidentiality, HRPC Rule 
1.6, solely because the Department is acting on information it 
received from a state government official or entity. That is 
true even if the official or entity is one that may be 
represented by the Department under other circumstances. 
Although the Department is required by law to respond to 
requests for legal services from the legislature, the 
legislature has no statutory power to compel the Department to 
conduct a public interest investigation under HRS § 28-2.5; that 
power is exclusive to the governor and the attorney general.19 
18  Under  HRE  Rule   502  (1980),  a  public  entity  has  a  privilege  to  
refuse  to  disclose  a  report  that  it  is  required  by  law  to  make,  as  does  a  
public  officer  or  agency  to  whom  a  report  is  required  by  law  to  be  made,  if  
the  law  requiring  it  to  be  made  so  provides.   No  such  privilege  exists  for  
reports  that  an  entity  is  not  required  to  make  by  law.  
19  The  reservation  of   criminal  investigatory  powers  to  the  executive 
branch  is  consistent  with  the  separation  of  powers  doctrine  inherent  in  the  
Hawaiʻi   Constitution,  which  “is  intended  to  preclude  a  commingling  of  
essentially  different  powers  of  government  in  the  same  hands  and  thereby  
prevent  a  situation  where  one  department  would  be  controlled  by,  or  
subjected,  directly  or  indirectly,  to,  the  coercive  influence  of  either  of  
the  other  departments.”   AlohaCare  v.  Dep’t  of  Human  Servs.,  127  Hawaiʻi  76,  
85,  276  P.3d  645,  654  (2012)  (internal  quotation  marks  and  ellipses  
omitted)).   The  legislature  has  its  own  statutory  investigatory  powers  to  aid 
in  its  legislative  functions.   See  HRS  Chapter  21  (2009).             
 
 
 
 
 27          
       
     
  Having  reviewed  the  report  at  issue  in  this  case  in  
camera,  we  find  that  by  providing  it  to  the  legislature,  the  
Department  was  not  necessarily  rendering  a  legal  service.   The  
contents  of  the  report  itself  are  factual,  implying  that  it  was  
not  intended  to  serve  as  legal  advice,  but  rather  as  a  summary  
of  facts.   There  is  no  indication  that  the  investigator  who  
authored  the  report  is  a  lawyer,  although  there  is  a  relatively  
brief  section  summarizing  some  legal  research  which  provides  
context  for  some  of  the  facts.   Most  of  the  report  consists  of  
witness  statements  to  the  investigator,  which  are  not  generally  
covered  by  the  lawyer-client  privilege.   See  DiCenzo,  68  Haw.  at 
536-38,  723  P.2d  at  176-77  (refusing  to  apply  the  privilege  to  
statements  to  an  insurance  investigator).   The  report  contains  
findings  and  conclusions,  but  they  are  factual,  not  legal.   The  
report  explains  that  the  investigation  began  in  response  to  
information  received  from  a  legislator.   The  attached  follow  up  
report  indicates  that  the  main  report  was  submitted  to  a  
legislator  “for  appropriate  dissemination.”   It  does  not  
indicate  the  manner  in  which  the  report  was  submitted  nor  if  any 
steps  were  taken  to  ensure  the  confidentiality  of  its   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Nor does transmitting or communicating a document from the 
Department to the legislature necessarily establish the 
existence of a lawyer-client relationship.            
 
 
 
 
 28  
  A  document  in  the  Department’s  custody  is  not  made  
privileged  and  confidential  by  its  communication  to  the  
legislature  if  that  document  was  not  believed  or  intended  by  
either  party  to  be  legal  advice.   See  id.   The  First  Deputy  
Declaration  claims  that  “[t]he  report  contains  information  which
would  reveal  the  communications  between  the  Legislature  and  the  
Department,  which  are  attorney  client  communications  related  to  
legal  services  provided  by  the  Department  to  the  Legislature”  is
cursory  and  entirely  conclusory.   The  Declaration  contains  no  
facts  to  suggest  that  the  provision  of  the  report  was  a  lawyer-
client  communication.   Without  evidence  that  the  communication  
actually  was  for  the  purpose  of  providing  legal  services,  the  
conclusion  that  it  was  a  lawyer-client  communication  is  
unsupported.   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
communication.   See  DiCenzo,  68  Haw.  at  536,  723  P.2d  at  176  
(“[T]he  character  of  the  communication  .  .  .  must  be  intended  as 
confidential”  for  the  lawyer-client  privilege  to  apply).   The  
First  Deputy  Declaration  states  that  “the  Legislature  
request[ed]  that  the  Department  .  .  .  provide  a  report  to  the  
Legislature”  following  its  investigation  into  the  Office  of  the  
Auditor.   Clearly  a  simple  request  for  an  investigation  and  a  
report  does  not  necessarily  constitute  a  request  for  legal  
service.    
 
            
 
 
 
 
 29   However,  our  opinion  should  not  be  read  to  imply  that 
an  investigation  undertaken  by  the  Department  can  never  
constitute  the  provision  of  legal  services  by  the  Department  to 
the  legislature.   We  find  only  that  the  Department  failed  to  
prove  that  legal  services  were  being  provided  in  this  case.     
 
  In  furtherance  of  its  argument  that  the  report  was  
communicated  in  response  to  a  request  for  legal  services,  the  
Department  likens  its  administrative  investigation  to  a  
corporate  internal  investigation.   The  United  States  Supreme  
Court,  in  Upjohn  Co.  v.  United  States,  held  that  communications  
made  by  a  corporation’s  employees  to  the  corporation’s  counsel  
in  order  to  secure  legal  advice  for  the  corporation  were  
protected  against  compelled  disclosure  by  the  attorney-client  
privilege.   449  U.S.  383,  394-95  (1981).   The  Department  
attempts  to  make  an  analogy  to  Upjohn,  asserting  that  the  Office
of  the  Auditor  is  “an  entity  falling  under  the  Legislature’s  
authority,”  and  even  referring  to  the  office  as  “the  Office  of  
the  Legislative  Auditor”  (emphasis  added).   But  the  relationship
between  the  legislature  and  the  auditor  is  more  complex  than  the
Department  recognizes.   The  state  constitution  gives  the  
legislature  the  power  to  appoint  and  remove  the  auditor,  but  
removal  requires  a  two-thirds  vote  and  cause.   Haw.  Const.  art.  
VII,  §  10;  cf.  Humphrey’s  Exec’r  v.  United  States,  295  U.S.  602, 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 30  
 
 
           
        
      
             
          
             
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
629  (1935)  (forbidding  removal  except  for  cause  is  one  way  to  
ensure  agency  independence).   While  the  constitution   requires   
the  auditor   to  report  the  auditor’s   findings   and  recommendations
to  the  legislature  and  to  make  reports  and  conduct  
investigations  at  the  legislature’s  direction,  it  imposes  other  
constitutional  responsibilities  on  the  auditor  unconnected  to  
the  legislature.   Id.  (providing  that  the  auditor  shall  conduct  
certain  audits,  certify  the  accuracy  of  financial  statements,  
and  report  findings  and  recommendations  to  the  governor).   The  
constitutional  role  of  the  auditor  is  neither  directly  
subordinate  to,  nor  completely  independent  of,  the  legislature.  
An  investigation  of  the  Office  of  the  Auditor  conducted  by  the  
Department  at  the  request  of  the  legislature  is  not  analogous  to
an  investigation  of  a  corporate  subsidiary  by  the  corporation’s  
counsel  at  the  request  of  the  corporation’s  counsel.   See  
Upjohn,  499  U.S.  at  383.   
 
The policies underlying HRE Rule 503 and HRCP Rule 
1.6, the lawyer-client privilege and the professional rule 
forbidding disclosure of confidential communications, support 
our holding in this case. “The scope of any privilege is based 
upon policy considerations.” Matsuura v. E.I. du Pont de 
Nemours & Co., 102 Hawaiʻi 149, 15 5, 73 P.3d 687, 693 (2003). 
Because the lawyer-client privilege “works to suppress otherwise            
 
 
 
 
 31  
 
       
         
        
          
          
       
        
          
          
        
         
         
           
          
         
           
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
relevant  evidence,  the  limitations  which  restrict  the  scope  of  
its  operation  .  .  .  must  be  assiduously  heeded.”   Sapp,  62  Haw.  
at  38,  609  P.2d  at  140.   “[T]he  privilege  ‘must  be  strictly  
limited  to  the  purpose  for  which  it  exists.’”   DiCenzo,  68  Haw.  
at  535,  723  P.2d  at  175  (quoting  Dike  v.  Dike,  448  P.2d  490,  496 
(Wash.  1968)).   The  purpose  of  confidentiality  in  the  lawyer-
client  relationship  is  to  encourage  clients  or  potential  clients 
to  communicate  fully  and  frankly  with  legal  counsel:  
A fundamental principle in the client-lawyer 
relationship is that, in the absence of the client’s 
consent after consultation, the lawyer must not reveal 
information relating to the representation. . . . This 
contributes to the trust that is the hallmark of the 
client-lawyer relationship. The client is thereby 
encouraged to seek legal assistance and to communicate 
fully and frankly with the lawyer even as to embarrassing 
or legally damaging subject matter. The lawyer needs this 
information to represent the client effectively and, if 
necessary, to advise the client to refrain from wrongful 
conduct. Almost without exception, clients come to lawyers 
in order to determine their rights and what is, in the 
complex of laws and regulations, deemed to be legal and 
correct. Based upon experience, lawyers know that almost 
all clients follow the advice given, and the law is upheld. 
HRPC  Rule  1.6  cmt.  2.   “The  privilege  is  bottomed  on  assumptions 
that  lawyers  ‘can  act  effectively  only  if  they  are  fully  advised 
of  the  facts  by  the  parties  they  represent’  and  disclosure  will  
be  promoted  ‘if  the  client  knows  that  what  he  tells  his  lawyer  
cannot  be  extorted  from  the  lawyer.’”   DiCenzo,  68  Haw.  at  535,  
723  P.2d  at  175  (internal  ellipses  and  brackets  omitted)  
(quoting  Edward  W.  Cleary,  McCormick  on  Evidence  §  87  (3d  ed.  
1984)).   Furthermore,  the  professional  rule  of  confidentiality             
 
 
 
 
 32          
           
 
          
          
        
           
        
          
         
           
          
        
          
           
            
          
  
           
           
           
        
         *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
is not intended to prevent public disclosure of government 
misconduct that is harmful to the public good. HRPC Rule 
1.6(b)(5). 
The conclusion that the Department failed to prove 
that it was acting within the context of a lawyer-client 
relationship when it prepared and communicated the investigative 
report is consistent with the purposes of the privilege. When 
the legislator requested that the Department undertake an 
investigation of the Office of the Auditor, the legislator was 
not seeking advice regarding the legislator’s own legal rights 
and liabilities, nor those of the legislature as a whole, and 
the legislator had no incentive to either withhold or disclose 
embarrassing or legally damaging subject matter because the 
information being shared did not relate to the legislator’s own 
conduct. The Department was not relying on the legislature to 
fully advise it of the facts. Rather, information shared by the 
legislator formed the basis of a more fulsome investigation by 
the Department. 
The UIPA must also “be applied and construed to 
promote its underlying purposes and policies[.]” HRS § 92F-2. 
Our holding in this case promotes the underlying policies of the 
UIPA, particularly the policies of “promot[ing] the public 
interest in disclosure[,]” HRS § 92F-2(1), and “enhanc[ing]            
 
 
 
 
 33         
       
            
         
           
         
          
         
          
           
          
      
   
          
        
          
        
            
         
           
         
        
           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
governmental accountability through a general policy of access 
to government records[.]” HRS § 92F-2(3). 
The Department failed to meet its burden to prove that 
it was acting within a lawyer-client relationship when it 
prepared the report. Accordingly, it failed to prove that the 
report itself is covered by either the lawyer-client evidentiary 
privilege, HRE Rule 503, or the professional conduct rule of 
confidentiality, HRPC Rule 1.6. The circuit court therefore 
erred in granting summary judgment to the Department on the 
basis of its conclusion that HRS § 92F-13(4) protects the report 
from disclosure, and erred in denying Civil Beat’s motion for 
summary judgment on the same issue. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
In this case, the circuit court resolved the 
Department’s motion for summary judgment and Civil Beat’s cross-
motion for summary judgment on the basis of its erroneous 
conclusion that the requested record was protected from 
disclosure under the UIPA by HRS § 92F-13(4). It did not 
address the two other disclosure exceptions asserted by the 
Department, HRS §§ 92F-13(1) and (3). We therefore vacate the 
circuit court’s final judgment and its order granting the 
Department’s motion for summary judgment and denying Civil 
Beat’s cross motion for summary judgment and remand the case for            
 
 
 
 34 
          
         
        
           
          
         
     
   
      
 
 
      
 
 
 
                     
            
            
           
            
              
    
    
    
    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
proceedings consistent with this opinion. On remand, the 
circuit court shall consider whether disclosure of this record 
“would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy[,]” HRS § 92F-13(1), and whether the record, “by [its] 
nature, must be confidential in order for the government to 
avoid the frustration of a legitimate government function[.]” 
HRS § 92F-13(3).20 
Robert  Brian  Black 
for  Petitioner  
Kalikoʻonalani  D.  Fernandes
(Clyde  J.  Wadsworth   with   
her  on
  the  briefs)  
For  Respondent
      
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Paul B.K. Wong 
20 With regard to HRS § 92F-13(3), the circuit court should note 
that we recently held that the “deliberative process privilege” cited by the 
Department in its initial Notice to Requester “is clearly irreconcilable with 
the plain language and legislative history of Hawaiʻi’s public record law s.” 
Peer News,
 143 Hawaiʻi at 475, 431 P.3 d at 1248. 