 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAP-23-0000460 27-SEP-2024 07:54 AM Dkt. 25 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
---o0o---
ALVIN F. JARDINE, III, 
Petitioner-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
STATE OF HAWAI‘ I,   
Respondent-Appellee. 
SCAP-23-0000460 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-23-0000460; CASE NO. 2SP161000056) 
 
SEPTEMBER 27, 2024 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, EDDINS, AND GINOZA, JJ., 
WITH DEVENS, J., CONCURRING IN PART AND DISSENTING IN PART 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This case concerns Hawai‘i’s wrongful conviction 
compensation statute, Hawai i ‘ Revised Statutes (HRS) 
chapter 661B (2016). In 2016, the legislature enacted HRS 
chapter 661B, which provides compensation to individuals who 
have been wrongfully convicted. To present an actionable claim,  
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRS § 661B-1(b)(1) (2016) requires that a petitioner allege 
“[t]he judgment of conviction was reversed or vacated because 
the petitioner was actually innocent of the crimes for which the 
petitioner was convicted, and the court decision so states[.]” 
In 1991, Alvin F. Jardine, III was convicted of ten 
counts related to an alleged home invasion and rape, and was sentenced to thirty-five years in prison. 
In 2011, he filed a 
petition to vacate his conviction under Hawai‘i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 based on newly discovered DNA evidence. 
The criminal circuit court (HRPP Rule 40 court) vacated his 
conviction and ordered a new trial, but the Maui Prosecuting 
Attorney filed a motion to dismiss the case with prejudice, 
which the court granted. In 2016, Jardine filed a civil 
petition for compensation under HRS chapter 661B. The civil 
circuit court (HRS chapter 661B court) held that Jardine failed 
to allege an actionable claim because the order vacating his conviction did not state that he was “actually innocent.” 
Jardine appealed and applied for transfer of the case to this 
court, which we granted. 
We hold that HRS § 661B-1’s requirement that an order 
vacating or reversing a petitioner’s conviction “so state[]” 
that they were “actually innocent” does not require those two 
exact words to be present. 
It does, however, require that such 
an order state a finding that supports a petitioner’s “actual 
2  
 
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
innocence” – that is, the order should support the conclusion 
that the petitioner did not commit the crime. The order 
vacating Jardine’s conviction meets this standard, and he 
therefore has presented an actionable claim for relief under HRS 
chapter 661B. 
Because there are still issues of material fact as to 
Jardine’s “actual innocence,” the circuit court erred in granting the State summary judgment as to the merits of his 
compensation claim. Therefore, the case is remanded for the HRS 
chapter 661B court to hold a trial on the issue of whether 
Jardine is “actually innocent,” and entitled to compensation 
under the statute. 
Accordingly, we vacate the HRS chapter 661B court’s 
grant of summary judgment to the State and remand for further proceedings. 
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Factual Background 
The HRPP Rule 40 court, which vacated Jardine’s 
conviction, described the alleged criminal incident in 1990 as follows. One night in December 1990, a stranger entered 
Complainant’s home on Maui. Complainant saw a “man, whom the 
complainant described as bare-chested and sweaty” inside of her home, and observed him remove his shorts. The man then “forced 
the complainant to the floor . . . then lifted her off the floor 
3  
 
  
  
 
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
with his arm around her neck and held a knife to the side of her 
neck.” The man “continued to hold the complainant at 
knifepoint, on his lap, as he sat naked on a round ‘papa-san’ 
chair.” That chair was “covered by a green and white checked 
tablecloth.” The man then sexually assaulted Complainant. Later, police collected the green and white checked tablecloth 
as evidence. 
Jardine was charged with the alleged home invasion and 
rape, and the case went to trial. The first two trials were 
declared mistrials because the juries were unable to reach a 
verdict. A third jury convicted Jardine of ten felony counts, 
including four counts of Sexual Assault in the First Degree. He was sentenced to imprisonment for thirty-five years. 
In 2008, Jardine filed a petition for post-conviction 
DNA testing under HRS § 844D-121, which was granted. Based on 
the results of that testing, in 2010 Jardine filed an HRPP Rule 
40 petition for post-conviction relief, seeking a new trial 
based on newly discovered DNA evidence.
1 His petition alleged 
that there were several witness identification issues and new, exculpatory DNA evidence, that required a new trial. 
1 The Honorable Joel E. August presided. 
4  
 
  In January 2011, the court held a hearing on the 
results of the DNA testing, with Jardine’s counsel and Maui 
County prosecutors present.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As explained by the HRPP Rule 40 court: 
8. The only remaining piece of tangible evidence from 
the crime scene is the green and white checked tablecloth 
recovered from the crime scene by the police and tested by 
Orchid Cellmark, a certified DNA testing laboratory located 
in Farmers Branch, Texas. 
9. On January 10, 2011, the Petitioner and the State 
stipulated to the admission into evidence of: (1) The 
expert “Report of Laboratory Examination dated September 28, 2009, Supplemental- FR09-003-A” a deposition recorded on 
a DVD and the deposition transcript of Petitioner’s expert, 
Ms. Huma Nasir of Orchid Cellmark; (2) all deposition 
exhibits marked in Ms. Nasir’s deposition; (3) the chain of 
custody of all of the evidentiary materials and 
Petitioner’s DNA sample utilized by Ms. Nasir in her DNA 
analysis and in rendering her opinion. 
10. The results of the DNA analysis and testing by 
Orchid Cellmark conclusively excluded Mr. Jardine as the 
contributor of the DNA found in the bodily fluid that was 
located on the green and white checked tablecloth taken by 
the police as evidence from the crime scene. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The HRPP Rule 40 court granted Jardine’s petition, 
vacated his conviction, and ordered a new trial. It based its 
decision on the test outlined in State v. McNulty, 60 Haw. 259, 
267–68, 588 P.2d 438, 445 (1978), in which this court held: 
5  A motion for new trial based on newly discovered 
evidence will be granted only if all of the following 
requirements have been satisfied: (1)  the evidence has been 
discovered after trial; (2)  such evidence could not have 
been discovered before or at trial through the exercise of 
due diligence; (3)  the evidence is material to the issues 
and not cumulative or offered solely for purposes of 
impeachment; and (4)  the evidence is of such a nature as 
would probably change the result of a later trial.   
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
   
 
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Overruled on other grounds by Raines v. State, 79 Hawai‘ i 219, 
900 P.2d 1286 (1995) (citation omitted). 
The HRPP Rule 40 court made a number of conclusions of 
law, including: 
3. Newly discovered DNA evidence, obtained pursuant 
to this Court’s October 14, 2008 Order Compelling Post-
Conviction DNA Testing of Evidence, conclusively excludes 
Mr. Jardine as the contributor of the male DNA found on evidence (the tablecloth) recovered from the crime scene. 
This evidence is sufficient to merit a new trial . . . . 
    . . . . 
7. The fourth 
McNulty/Caraballo element, that the 
evidence be of such a nature as would reasonably probably 
change the result of a later trial, is also satisfied as 
the potentially exculpatory nature of the new DNA evidence 
has the reasonable probability of changing the jury’s 
verdict. 
(Emphasis added.)2 
  In July 2011, the Maui County Prosecutor filed a 
motion to dismiss Jardine’s criminal case with prejudice.  The 
motion did not describe the reason the Maui County Prosecutor 
sought dismissal. The HRPP Rule 40 court granted the motion by 
signing the State’s prepared order and provided no further 
reasoning. 3
2 The Cellmark DNA report is in the record, and states that in 
testing two samples, there was evidence of “a mixture consistent with at 
least two individuals, including at least one unknown male.” For both of 
those samples, the report stated that “Alvin Jardine is excluded as a 
possible donor of the DNA detected on this sample.” 
3 Jardine asserts the motion was filed ex parte. The motion was 
entitled “Motion to Dismiss With Prejudice; Order. ”  The record in the 
instant case does not include a certificate of service for the motion. 
6  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Procedural Background 
In 2016, the legislature enacted House Bill 1046, 
which was signed into law as Act 156 and codified as HRS 
chapter 661B, Hawai‘ i’s statute for redress for wrongful 
conviction and imprisonment. 
HRS § 661B-1, provides the 
pleading requirements that petitioners must allege to present an 
actionable claim under the statute: 
(a) Any person convicted in a court of the State and 
imprisoned for one or more crimes of which the person was 
actually innocent may file a petition for relief pursuant to this chapter for an award of damages against the State; 
provided that the requirements of subsection (b) are met. 
(b) To present an actionable claim against the State for 
wrongful conviction and imprisonment, the petitioner shall 
allege that the petitioner was convicted of one or more 
crimes under the laws of the State, was subsequently 
sentenced to a term of imprisonment, and has served all or 
any part of the sentence and either that: 
(1) The judgment of conviction was reversed or 
vacated because the petitioner was actually innocent 
of the crimes for which the petitioner was convicted, 
and the court decision so states; or 
(2) The petitioner was pardoned because the 
petitioner was actually innocent of the crimes for 
which the petitioner was convicted and the pardon so 
states. 
(Emphases added.) 
HRS § 661B-2 (2016) describes the presentation of a 
claim: 
(a) A petition for relief filed pursuant to this 
chapter shall be filed in the circuit court of the circuit 
in which the petitioner lives, or if the petitioner lives 
outside the State, in the circuit court of the first circuit. The petitioner shall serve the petition upon the 
attorney general, and if the prosecuting authority was 
other than the attorney general, upon the prosecuting 
authority. The petition shall set forth the facts and 
authority that support the petitioner's claim. 
7  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(b) No later than sixty days after service, the 
attorney general shall file with the court an answer that 
shall either admit that the petitioner is entitled to 
compensation or deny the petitioner’ s claim. 
If the attorney general admits that the petitioner is 
entitled to compensation, the court shall conduct a trial 
to determine the amount of compensation; provided that if the attorney general and the petitioner agree on the amount 
of the compensation, the court may issue a final judgment 
awarding the petitioner the amount agreed upon or, in its 
discretion, conduct a trial to determine the amount to 
award the petitioner. 
If the attorney general denies that the petitioner is 
entitled to compensation, then the court shall conduct a 
trial to determine if the petitioner is entitled to 
compensation and the amount, if any. 
    .
. . . 
(d) Any action against the State under this chapter shall 
be tried by the court without a jury
; provided that the 
court, with the consent of all the parties, may order a 
trial with a jury whose verdict shall have the same effect as if trial by jury had been a matter of right. 
(Emphases added.) 
HRS § 661B-3 (2016) provides the standards and 
procedures for a judgment and award under the statute. 
Importantly, it sets forth the burden of proof and the elements 
that the petitioner must establish at trial: 
(a) The petitioner shall have the burden to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence: 
(1) That the petitioner is eligible to seek 
compensation in accordance with the requirements set 
forth in section 661B- 1; 
(2) That the petitioner was convicted in a court of 
the State and subsequently imprisoned for one or more 
crimes, but the petitioner was actually innocent of 
the crimes at issue; and 
8  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(3) That the petitioner served time in prison for the 
crime or crimes, including time served prior to 
conviction, if any. 
(Emphases added.) 
1. HRS chapter 661B proceedings 
In 2016, Jardine filed a civil HRS chapter 661B 
petition in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit seeking 
relief for wrongful conviction and imprisonment. Jardine filed a motion for summary judgment, contending that he was entitled 
to a court order stating: 
(1) Petitioner has standing to bring his claim; 
(2) Petitioner is entitled to compensation for 
redress for wrongful conviction and imprisonment under 
Chapter 661B of the Hawaii Revised Statutes (“HRS”) based 
upon Petitioner’s twenty (20) years of incarceration for a 
crime for which he is actually innocent; 
(3) Petitioner shall be awarded compensation as 
provided for by HRS § 661B-3 as a result of Petitioner’s 
wrongful conviction and imprisonment; and 
9  (4) A final judgment shall enter.  
  He argued that he met all of the standing requirements 
of HRS § 661B-1 and elements of the claim under HRS § 661B-3(a), 
and was therefore entitled to compensation under the statute. Jardine further contended that the HRPP Rule 40 court’s vacatur 
of his conviction “specifically [found that] the exculpatory DNA 
evidence made it probable a jury would not convict Mr. Jardine 
at trial,” and therefore satisfied HRS § 661B-1(b)(1)’s 
requirement of “actual innocence.” Jardine also argued that HRS 
chapter 661B’s purpose was “to address the harms due as the  
 
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
result of an exoneration for a crime due to innocence.” Thus, 
denying him compensation because he was not found “actually” 
innocent before the statute’s enactment would conflict with the 
statute’s express purpose. 
The State filed a motion for judgment on the pleadings 
or, in the alternative, summary judgment. It contended that the legislature chose to include the phrase “and the court decision 
so states” to indicate that the statute requires that a 
petitioner prove this element specifically. Here, because the 
HRPP Rule 40 court’s order vacating Jardine’s conviction did not 
explicitly state that he was “actually innocent,” the State 
argued Jardine did not present an actionable claim under HRS § 661B-1. 
The HRS chapter 661B court granted the State’s motion 
for summary judgment.
4 It made the following findings of fact 
and conclusions of law: 
4. On September 20, 2010, Petitioner filed his 
Fourth Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment 
or to Release Petitioner Alvin F. Jardine, from Custody, 
and moved for a new trial based on newly discovered DNA evidence. 
5. On February 2, 2011, Petitioner’ s fourth petition 
was granted. Petitioner's convictions in Criminal No. 91-0004(1) were vacated, and Petitioner was granted a new trial. 
4 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided. 
10  
 
   
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
  
    
 
 
   
  
 
   
  
 
  
 
   
   
     
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
6. In granting a new trial, the court found, among 
other things, that “ the potentially exculpatory nature of 
the new DNA evidence has the reasonable probability of changing the jury's verdict.” 
7. However, the court did not state, or otherwise 
find, that Petitioner was actually innocent of the crimes 
for which he had been convicted in Criminal No. 91-
0004(1). 
8. There was no new trial after Petitioner's 
convictions were vacated. 
9. On July 21, 2011 , the Maui Prosecuting Attorney 
filed a Motion to Dismiss With Prejudice, for no stated reason. 
B. FINDINGS AND DECISION OF COURT IN CRIMINAL CASE 
13. ln the Vacatur Order, the court in the 
underlying criminal case found: “ The results of the DNA 
analysis and testing by Orchid Cellmark conclusively excluded Mr. Jardine as the contributor of the DNA found in 
the bodily fluid that was located on the green and white checked tablecloth taken by the police as evidence from the 
crime scene.” 
14. The tablecloth was placed as a throw on the 
“papa-san” chair in the living room of victim, 
[Complainant]’ s home. 
15. The perpetrator of sexual assaults against 
[Complainant] sat naked on the round “ papa-san” chair and 
forced [Complainant] to sit on his lap as she placed a 
telephone call to her neighbor, to let her neighbor know that she was alright. 
16. The perpetrator did not sexually assault 
[Complainant] on the “ papa-san” chair. 
17. [Complainant] was sexually assaulted by the 
perpetrator elsewhere in the house, on the living room floor, and on the bed in the smaller bedroom of the house. 
18. No semen was detected on the tablecloth covering 
the “papa-san” chair. 
19. Of 31 items provided to Orchid Cellmark for 
possible examination, only the green and white checked 
tablecloth was tested. 
20. The green and white checked tablecloth was the 
only remaining piece of tangible evidence from the crime scene recovered by the police. 
11  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
    
 
   
 
 
    
 
     
 
  
 
   
 
    
  
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
21. There was no evidence presented on how long, 
prior to the date of the sexual assaults, the tablecloth 
had been placed on the “ papasan” chair, or anywhere else in 
the home. 
22. There was no evidence of the tablecloth being 
recently laundered. 
23. There were four stains on the tablecloth that 
were identified and tested by Orchid Cellmark. 
24. Petitioner was excluded as the donor of two 
yellow stains on the tablecloth. 
25. A third stain was a blood stain “ consistent with 
originating from an unknown female,” i.e., not 
[Complainant]. 
26. A fourth stain was another blood stain for which 
“[m]ale DNA was not detected.” 
27. There was no evidence that either [Complainant] 
or the perpetrator of the sexual assaults were bleeding, or 
had any open wounds, at the time the perpetrator was seated on the “ papasan” chair, covered by the tablecloth, with 
[Complainant] on his lap. 
28. Based on the foregoing evidence, there is a 
genuine issue of material fact as to whether the perpetrator and victim, [Complainant], were the only 
possible donors of the bodily fluids detected on the 
tablecloth. 
29. Based on the foregoing evidence, Petitioner was 
“conclusively excluded ... as the contributor of the DNA 
found in the bodily fluid that was located on the green and white checked tablecloth taken by the police as evidence 
from the crime scene.” 
30. However, Petitioner was not “conclusively 
excluded” as the perpetrator of the sexual assaults against 
[Complainant]. 
31. Based on the foregoing, there is a genuine issue 
of material fact as to whether Petitioner is actually innocent of the crimes for which he has been convicted. 
 . . . . 
II. CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
A. ELIGIBILITY TO FILE PETITION 
1. The prerequisites for an actionable claim, which 
are required for eligibility to file a petition for 
12  
 
 
 
    
  
     
 
 
     
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
    
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
compensation under HRS Chapter 661B, are set out in HRS §661B-1(b)(1). 
2. Under HRS § 661B-l(b)(l), Petitioner’ s 
convictions must have been vacated because he was actually 
innocent, and the order vacating his convictions must “ so 
state.” 
3. The plain language of HRS § 661B-l(b)(1), and its 
legislative history, compel this reading of the statute --requiring an explicit finding of actual innocence in the 
criminal court’ s order vacating his convictions. 
4. The findings in the Vacatur Order that “ the 
potentially exculpatory nature of the new DNA evidence has 
the reasonable probability of changing the jury's verdict” 
fail to meet the prerequisites for an actionable claim in 
HRS § 661B-1(b)(1). 
5. The findings in the Vacatur Order were that: The 
new DNA evidence is of a “ potentially exculpatory nature,” 
i.e., the new DNA evidence was possibly exculpatory; and that the new DNA evidence had a “ reasonable probability of 
changing the jury’ s verdict,” which is not equivalent to a 
finding of actual innocence. 
6. Consequently, Petitioner fails to allege an 
actionable claim under HRS § 661B- l(b)(1), and thus, is not 
eligible to file a petition for compensation under HRS 
Chapter 661B. 
(Emphases added.) 
The court went on to consider the merits of Jardine’s 
claim for compensation, concluding: 
7. Moreover, even assuming an actionable claim, the 
evidence presented by Petitioner, taken in the light most 
favorable to the State, fails to show that there is no 
genuine issue of material fact as to Petitioner’ s actual 
innocence of the crimes for which he had been convicted. 
8. Therefore, Petitioner failed to establish that he 
is entitled to compensation as a matter of law, under HRS § 661B-3. 
The court subsequently entered judgment in favor of 
the State and against Jardine. 
13  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2. Appellate proceedings 
Jardine appealed to the ICA and then applied for 
transfer to this court, which we granted. Jardine asks this 
court to reverse the HRS chapter 661B court’s grant of summary 
judgment to the State and grant his motion for summary judgment. 
The HRS chapter 661B court held that an explicit 
finding of actual innocence in the order vacating Jardine’s conviction was required for him to present an actionable claim 
under HRS § 661B-1. Jardine argues that this conclusion is 
inconsistent with the plain language of HRS chapter 661B and 
will lead to absurd results. He argues that HRS chapter 661B 
only requires “evidence of innocence,” and “not an express finding of ‘actual innocence.’” 
Further, Jardine argues that before HRS chapter 661B’s 
enactment in 2016, “the term ‘actual innocence’ did not exist” 
in Hawai‘ i’s jurisprudence. Thus, he could not have requested a 
finding of actual innocence when his conviction was vacated in 
2011. Because the legislature intended HRS chapter 661B to 
compensate wrongfully convicted individuals, including those 
convicted before its enactment, interpreting the statute to 
require such “magic words” or an express finding of actual 
innocence would contradict its purpose. 
Jardine argues that other jurisdictions have 
“consistently determined a finding of innocence in a vacatur 
14  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
order simply means the conviction was vacated due to evidence of 
innocence, and not based upon some technicality or procedural 
issue.” (Emphases omitted.) He contends that the “true issue” 
is whether his vacatur was based “on grounds resting upon facts 
and circumstances probative of the proposition that [he] did not commit the crime,” quoting Coyle v. State, 492 P.3d 366, 373-
74 (Colo. App. 2021) (citations omitted). In his case, Jardine 
argues that the vacatur order of his conviction focused on “the 
identity of the Rapist, and new DNA evidence that conclusively 
excluded Mr. Jardine as a contributor to the male DNA found on 
evidence at the crime scene.” (Emphases omitted.) He therefore 
contends that the “only plausible basis for the vacatur” of his conviction is his actual innocence, as proven by the exculpatory 
DNA evidence. Moreover, he argues that the State cannot rely 
upon a lack of an express finding of actual innocence since the 
Maui County prosecutors made the motion to dismiss the criminal 
case with prejudice, which prevented a determination of his 
innocence. 
The State asks this court to affirm the HRS 
chapter 661B court’s grant of summary judgment in its favor. 
First, the State argues that the HRS chapter 661B court’s vacatur of Jardine’s conviction was supported neither by an 
explicit finding of actual innocence, nor any finding equivalent 
to actual innocence. It contends that the “unambiguous 
15  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
language” and legislative history of HRS § 661B-1 show that the 
legislature intended to require that a vacatur or reversal order 
be based on express findings of actual innocence, not just 
findings that are “consistent with” or “probative of” actual 
innocence. At minimum, it argues that “an explicit finding legally equivalent to actual innocence” is required. 
While Jardine cites to other jurisdictions’ statutes 
and caselaw, the State argues that these comparisons do not help 
him. It contends that other states’ wrongful conviction 
compensation statutes have language more similar to that in the 
earlier version of the HRS chapter 661B bill, a standard that 
the legislature declined to adopt. That proposed bill required that a conviction be vacated “on grounds consistent with 
innocence.” See H.B. 1046, 28th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2015). In 
contrast, the enacted version of HRS chapter 661B requires that a petitioner’s conviction was “reversed or vacated because the 
petitioner was actually innocent of the crimes . . . , and the 
court decision so states.” HRS § 661B-1(b)(1). Thus, the State 
argues that the legislative history of HRS chapter 661B supports 
requiring an explicit finding of actual innocence in the order 
vacating or reversing a conviction. 
The State concludes that Jardine cannot show he is 
entitled to compensation under HRS § 661B-1(b)(1), and therefore 
16  
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the HRS chapter 661B court’s grant of summary judgment in its 
favor should be affirmed. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Motion for Summary Judgment 
We review a circuit court’s grant of summary judgment 
de novo. Honolulu Auth. for Rapid Transp. ex rel. City & Cnty.
of Honolulu v. Victoria Ward, Ltd., 153 Hawai‘ i 462, 475, 541 
P.3d 1225, 1238 (2023). Summary judgment is only appropriate where the relevant pleadings, depositions, interrogatory 
answers, admissions, and affidavits, “show that there is no 
genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party 
is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” Id.
 (internal 
citations and quotations omitted). “This court may affirm a grant of summary judgment on any ground appearing in the record, 
even if the circuit court did not rely on it.” 
Reyes v. 
Kuboyama, 76 Hawai‘ i 137, 140, 870 P.2d 1281, 1284 (1994) 
(citations omitted). 
B. Statutory Interpretation 
“Statutory interpretation is a question of law 
reviewable de novo.” State v. Wheeler
, 121 Hawai‘i 383, 390, 
219 P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009). . . . Our construction of 
statutes is guided by the following rules: 
First, the fundamental starting point for 
statutory
[ ]interpretation is the language of the 
statute itself. Second, where the statutory language is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty is to give 
effect to its plain and obvious meaning. Third, 
implicit in the task of statutory construction is our 
foremost obligation to ascertain and give effect to 
the intention of the legislature, which is to be 
17  
 
 
   
    
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
obtained primarily from the language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when there is doubt, 
doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness or 
uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an ambiguity exists. 
First Ins. Co. of Haw. v. A&B Props., 126 Hawai‘ i 406, 414, 271 
P.3d 1165, 1173 (2012) (quoting  Citizens Against Reckless Dev. 
v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of Honolulu, 114 Hawai‘i 184, 193, 159 
P.3d 143, 152 (2007) (citations omitted)).  
IV. DISCUSSION 
The parties dispute whether Jardine can present an 
actionable claim under HRS § 661B-1(b), and whether he is 
eligible for compensation because he is “actually innocent.” 
The HRS chapter 661B court granted the State’s summary judgment 
motion, and ruled in its favor on both issues. 
We hold that HRS § 661B-1’s requirement that a vacatur 
or reversal of a conviction “so state” that a petitioner is “actually innocent” means that such order must set forth facts 
supporting the petitioner’s actual innocence, but need not use 
the words “actually innocent.” 
The HRS chapter 661B court erred 
in granting summary judgment for the State because Jardine sufficiently presented an actionable claim for compensation 
under HRS § 661B-1(b)(1). Accordingly, we vacate the HRS chapter 661B circuit court’s decision and remand the case for a 
trial according to the procedures outlined in HRS § 661B-2 and 
HRS § 661B-3. 
18  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
A. Jardine Has Met the Pleading Requirements of HRS § 661B-1 
and the HRS Chapter 661B Court Erred in Granting Summary Judgment for the State on that Issue 
HRS § 661B-1(b) outlines four requirements: the 
petitioner “shall allege” that (1) they were “convicted of one 
or more crimes under the laws of the State,” (2) they were “subsequently sentenced to a term of imprisonment,” (3) they 
have “served all or any part of the sentence,” and (4) that 
“[t]he judgment of conviction was reversed or vacated because 
the petitioner was actually innocent of the crimes for which the 
petitioner was convicted, and the court decision so states.” 
The parties contest the meaning of the fourth element. 
The State argues that the order vacating Jardine’s 
conviction did not make “any explicit finding of actual innocence,” or an equivalent finding, and therefore, Jardine 
does not have an actionable claim under HRS § 661B-1(b). 
Jardine urges us to adopt a broader understanding of 
the pleading requirement, such that a petitioner may present an 
actionable claim so long as a conviction is vacated “on grounds 
tending to show[] actual innocence.” He highlights that the 
order vacating his conviction satisfies this standard because it 
was based on new DNA evidence indicative of his actual innocence, and not merely a procedural or technical trial error. 
The HRS chapter 661B court held that Jardine could not 
allege an actionable claim because the order vacating his 
19  
 
  
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conviction did not state the words “actually innocent” or an 
equivalent finding. 
Here, the parties and the HRS chapter 661B court 
conflated the standard necessary to satisfy a threshold pleading 
requirement and the standard for determining whether a petitioner is eligible for compensation. We interpret “actual 
innocence” based on its plain meaning. Thus, “actual innocence” 
simply means that a petitioner did not commit the alleged crime. 
To allege an actionable claim under HRS chapter 661B, 
a petitioner needs to assert that their conviction was vacated 
based on facts that support factual innocence, meaning that they 
did not commit the crime. If a petitioner only alleges that their conviction was vacated on purely technical or procedural 
grounds that do not affect their factual innocence, then their 
claim will fail under the statute. At trial, a petitioner will 
need to prove their factual innocence by a preponderance of the 
evidence under HRS § 661B-3. 
In this case, Jardine sufficiently alleged a claim 
under HRS § 661B-1 because he asserted his conviction was 
vacated based on exonerating DNA evidence that tended to show 
that he did not commit the alleged crime. However, because there is still a genuine issue of material fact as to whether 
Jardine is “actually innocent,” that issue should be remanded 
for trial. 
20  
 
 
   
   
   
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1. HRS § 661B-1 does not require that an order vacating or reversing a conviction use the exact words “actually innocent” for a petitioner to present 
an actionable claim 
Under HRS § 661B-1(b)(1), to present an actionable 
claim a petitioner must allege that “[t]he judgment of 
conviction was reversed or vacated because the petitioner was 
actually innocent of the crimes for which the petitioner was 
convicted, and the court decision so states.” HRS § 661B-
1(b)(1) (emphases added). The State contends that these phrases, read together, indicate that the order vacating or 
reversing a conviction must include the words “actually 
innocent,” or an equivalent finding. Jardine argues that 
requiring the use of such “magic words” would lead to absurd 
results. 
We agree with the ICA’s reasoning in Guity v. State, 
153 Hawai‘ i 368, 376 538 P.3d 780, 788 (App. 2023) that the words 
“actual innocence” need not appear in the order reversing or vacating a petitioner’s conviction for a petitioner to survive 
summary judgment as to their eligibility for relief under HRS 
§ 661B-1(b)(1). See Amantiad v. Odum, 90 Hawai‘ i 152, 161, 977 
P.2d 160, 169 (1999) (“[T]his court is bound to construe 
statutes so as to avoid absurd results. . . . A rational, sensible and practicable interpretation of a statute is 
preferred to one which is unreasonable, impracticable, 
21  
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
inconsistent, contradictory, and illogical.”) (internal 
quotations, brackets, citations, and citations omitted). 
In Guity, the ICA concluded that the court decision 
reversing or vacating a conviction need not contain the exact 
words “actually innocent” for a petitioner to present an 
actionable claim under HRS § 661B-1(b)(1). 153 Hawai‘ i at 376– 
77, 538 P.3d at 788–89. 
It held: 
The State argues that the court decision reversing or 
vacating a conviction must contain the precise words, “actually innocent,” because HRS § 661B- 1(b)(1) requires 
that “the court decision so state[].” Were that the case, 
any court could subvert an actually innocent person’ s 
standing to make a claim for redress by simply omitting the words “actually innocent” from its decision. That result would be absurd. 
Id. at 376, 538 P.3d at 788 (citing Barker v. Young , 153 Hawai‘i 
144, 149 n.8, 528 P.3d 217, 222 n.8 (2023) (“[I]f a literal 
construction of statutory language would produce an absurd 
result, we presume that result was not intended and construe the 
statute in accord with its underlying legislative intent.” 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). 
It would be especially unreasonable to deny 
petitioners like Jardine any redress when their convictions were vacated or reversed prior to the enactment of HRS chapter 661B. 
The statute’s enactment in 2016 established “actual innocence” 
as a novel legal standard in 
Hawai‘i’s jurisprudence.  Under the 
State’s interpretation of HRS chapter 661B, which requires the 
words “actually innocent” or an equivalent finding to be present 
22  
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in a vacatur order, a petitioner such as Jardine would rarely, 
if ever, be eligible for compensation. But that reasoning 
conflicts with the fact that the legislature specifically 
included language in HRS chapter 661B that would allow such 
individuals to submit petitions under the statute: 
Every claim arising under this chapter shall forever be 
barred unless the action is commenced by filing a petition with the circuit court within two years after the 
conviction that is the subject of the petition is either 
reversed or vacated, or the petitioner is pardoned for that 
conviction; provided that: 
(1) If the claim is based on a conviction reversed or 
vacated or a pardon granted prior to June 29, 2016, 
the claim shall be commenced by filing a petition 
with the circuit court no later than July 1, 2018, or 
be forever barred. 
HRS § 661B-4 (2016) (emphasis added). 
Further, the legislative history of HRS chapter 661B 
suggests that the legislature did not intend to require the 
exact words “actually innocent” to be written in a vacatur order 
for a petitioner to bring a claim under the statute. The 
Committee on Conference noted that “[i]nnocent persons who have 
been wrongfully convicted of crimes and subsequently imprisoned 
have been uniquely victimized, have distinct challenges re-
entering society, and have difficulty achieving legal redress 
due to a variety of substantive and technical challenges in the 
law.” Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 146-16 on H.B. No. 1046, in 2016 House Journal, at 1410, 2016 Senate Journal, at 835. 
Accordingly, the Committee found that innocent individuals 
23  
 
 
     
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“deserve a process of redress over and above the existing tort 
remedies to seek compensation for damages from the jurisdiction 
that wrongly convicted and imprisoned them.” Id.Requiring 
that the vacatur order include the precise words “actual innocence” would be imposing the type of “technical obstacle” that the legislature was trying to eliminate. 
We therefore hold that the language “and the court 
decision so states,” means that the order must make clear that 
the basis for the reversal or vacatur is factual innocence, or 
innocence of the crime, rather than a procedural technicality. 
But that language does not specifically require the words 
“actually innocent” to be included in the vacatur order. 
2. Jardine has sufficiently alleged an actionable claim 
under HRS § 661B-l because the order vacating his conviction stated a basis for his factual innocence 
Here, the HRS chapter 661B court erred in concluding 
that because the underlying vacatur order did not make a finding 
“equivalent to a finding of actual innocence,” Jardine failed to 
allege an actionable claim under HRS § 661B-l(b)(1). The HRPP 
Rule 40 court that vacated Jardine’s conviction concluded: 
3. Newly discovered DNA evidence, obtained pursuant 
to this Court’s October 14, 2008 Order Compelling Post-
Conviction DNA Testing of Evidence, conclusively excludes 
Mr. Jardine as the contributor of the male DNA found on 
evidence (the tablecloth) recovered from the crime scene. This evidence is sufficient to merit a new trial under the 
four-part test established in McNulty and Caraballo. 
24     . . . .  
 
  
 
                                                                                                                             *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
7. The fourth McNulty/ Caraballo element, that the 
evidence be of such a nature as would reasonably probably 
change the result of a later trial, is also satisfied as 
the potentially exculpatory nature of the new DNA evidence has the reasonable probability of changing the jury’s 
verdict. 
The HRS chapter 661B court erroneously reasoned that 
“[t]he plain language of HRS § 661B-l(b)(1), and its legislative 
history, compel this reading of the statute -– requiring an 
explicit finding of actual innocence in the criminal court's 
order vacating his convictions.” Because the vacatur order in 
Jardine’s case stated only that “the potentially exculpatory nature of the new DNA evidence has the reasonable probability of 
changing the jury's verdict,” the HRS chapter 661B court 
determined that this language “fail[ed] to meet the 
prerequisites for an actionable claim in HRS § 661B-1(b)(1).” 
Accordingly, the HRS chapter 661B court concluded that Jardine 
failed to allege an actionable claim under HRS § 661B-l(b)(1). 
The HRS chapter 661B court’s reasoning is unpersuasive 
for several reasons. First, it is unlikely that an HRPP Rule 40 court will use the words “actually innocent,” because that is 
not the legal standard under which it vacates a conviction or 
orders a new trial. Moreover, contrary to the State’s argument 
that the federal habeas definition of “actual innocence” applies 
to HRS chapter 661B, nothing in the statute’s text or 
legislative history indicates that our legislature intended for 
that definition to be used. See Schlup v. Delo, 513 U.S. 298, 
25  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
327 (1995) (holding that a petitioner for federal habeas relief 
must “show that it is more likely than not that no reasonable 
juror would have found petitioner guilty beyond a reasonable 
doubt” to prove that they are “actually innocent”). Finally, a 
finding “equivalent” to actual innocence would be nearly impossible to satisfy, particularly for defendants whose 
convictions were vacated before HRS chapter 661B was enacted. 
Instead, a petitioner can allege an actionable claim when their 
conviction was reversed or vacated on the basis of facts that 
support factual innocence. 
In Jardine’s case, the HRPP Rule 40 court reviewed the 
new DNA evidence under the standard for granting a new trial based on newly discovered evidence, which requires that the 
evidence be “material to the issues and not cumulative or 
offered solely for purposes of impeachment[,]” and “the evidence 
is of such a nature as would probably change the result of a 
later trial.” McNulty, 60 Haw. at 268, 588 P.2d at 445. The 
HRPP Rule 40 court found that the “new potentially exculpatory DNA evidence goes to the identity” of the perpetrator and “the 
potentially exculpatory nature of the new DNA evidence has the 
reasonable probability of changing the jury’s verdict.” It focused on whether or not Jardine provided evidence that would 
probably change the result of a trial, i.e. result in an 
acquittal, under HRPP Rule 40(a)(1)(iv) (2018) (“that there is 
26  
 
 
  
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
newly discovered evidence”), but not whether he was “actually 
innocent.” The HRPP Rule 40 court’s decision is therefore 
sufficient for Jardine to allege an actionable claim under HRS 
chapter 661B. 
Importantly, the State does not argue that the HRPP 
Rule 40 court’s vacatur order is based on anything other than findings and conclusions related to Jardine’s innocence. It 
does not contend that the vacatur occurred because of a purely 
procedural defect. Instead, the State argues: 
In other words, while the Vacatur Order established 
that the new DNA evidence created enough reasonable doubt 
that it was likely a jury in a future trial would acquit, 
it did not establish that Petitioner was actually innocent. And this makes sense in light of the exact nature of the 
new DNA evidence in this case. The Court in the Vacatur 
Order found that “[t] he results of the DNA analysis and 
testing by Orchid Cellmark conclusively excluded Mr. Jardine as the contributor of the DNA found in the bodily fluid that was located on the green and white checked 
tablecloth taken by the police as evidence from the crime 
scene.” ROA Dkt. 105 at PDF 33, FOF ¶10. Thus, while 
Petitioner was excluded as the contributor to the DNA on this one piece of evidence, he “was not ‘conclusively excluded’ as the perpetrator of the sexual assaults against 
[the complainant] .” 
But the State did not show there was “an absence of 
evidence to support the nonmoving party's [here, Jardine’s,] 
case.” See Ralston v. Yim
, 129 Hawai‘i 46, 57, 292 P.3d 1276, 
1287 (2013) (quotation marks and citation omitted). The vacatur 
order clearly focuses on evidence that would support Jardine’s 
substantive claim of actual innocence. Notably, Jardine’s 
conviction was vacated before this standard existed. The 
legislature knew that petitioners like Jardine, whose 
27  
 
   
 
  
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
convictions were vacated before HRS chapter 661B was enacted, 
would bring claims under the statute. Indeed, it specifically 
permitted them to do so. See HRS § 661B-4(1) (2016) (allowing 
claims under the statute for convictions that were “reversed or vacated or a pardon granted prior to June 29, 2016” on the condition that such claims “shall be commenced by filing a 
petition with the circuit court no later than July 1, 2018, or 
be forever barred”). The legislature therefore knew that the 
words “actually innocent,” or even an equivalent finding, would 
not be present in such petitioners’ vacatur orders. In sum, HRS 
chapter 661B is meant to allow petitioners like Jardine to bring 
a claim and have a trial on their petition when the order vacating their conviction is based on findings that pertain to 
the petitioner’s factual innocence. 
We conclude that Jardine has sufficiently alleged that 
he is eligible for relief under HRS § 661B-1(b)(1), such that he 
is entitled to proceed to the merits of his claim under HRS 
§ 661B-3. The HRS chapter 661B court therefore erred in 
granting summary judgment to the State on this issue. 
3. HRS § 661B-1 requires that a petitioner allege that 
their conviction was vacated for substantive reasons 
related to factual innocence 
When enacting HRS chapter 661B, the legislature had to 
decide who would be eligible for compensation, and who would 
not. The House Judiciary Committee noted that 
28  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[w]rongful convictions and the subsequent incarcerations 
may be the result of many factors, including eyewitness 
misidentification, false confessions, improper forensic 
science, and government misconduct. The conundrum confronting any compensation scheme is to identify 
deserving individuals who are innocent of crimes from those 
who are not. 
H. Stand. Rep. No. 411-16, in 2016 House Journal, at 903. 
While the legislature had the opportunity to 
compensate any individual whose conviction was reversed or 
vacated, it chose not to do so. Instead, the legislature 
decided that petitioners under HRS chapter 661B must be screened 
via a two-stage process. First, under HRS § 661B-1 a petitioner 
must allege an actionable claim. Second, under HRS § 661B-3, a petitioner must prove that they are “actually innocent.” 
Thus, while the legislature did not specifically describe which 
kinds of vacaturs will constitute “actual innocence,” it does 
indicate that petitioners who can state an actionable claim 
might be able to do so because there are issues related to 
“eyewitness misidentification, false confessions, improper 
forensic science, and government misconduct.” Id.We agree 
with Jardine that under HRS § 661B-1, a petitioner must show that their conviction was vacated based on evidence of innocence, rather than a technical or procedural issue. See
Guity
, 153 Hawai‘i at 376-77, 538 P.3d at 788-89 (holding that an 
order vacating a conviction on the basis of legal impossibility 
met the pleading requirements of HRS § 661B-1(b)(1) that a 
29  
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conviction be reversed or vacated “because the petitioner was 
actually innocent,” and that court decision “so state[d].”). As 
discussed further below, the vacatur order must provide a basis 
for the “actual innocence” that will be litigated at trial, 
which in the context of HRS chapter 661B means factual innocence. 
We therefore conclude that it is sufficient for a 
petitioner to allege that their conviction was vacated or 
reversed on the basis of facts that support factual innocence. 
If this threshold requirement is met, and the State disputes 
their eligibility for compensation, a petitioner is then subject 
to a trial to prove their actual innocence by a preponderance of the evidence. 
B. At Trial, a Petitioner Must Prove That They Are Actually 
Innocent, Which Means They Are Factually Innocent of the 
Alleged Crime 
The heart of HRS chapter 661B centers on a trial, in 
which a petitioner must prove by a preponderance of the evidence 
that they are “actually innocent.” Once a conviction is 
vacated, a presumption of innocence is restored to the defendant 
for purposes of a criminal prosecution. However, in a HRS 
chapter 661B civil claim, the petitioner then has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that they are “actually 
innocent of the crimes at issue.” The State, for its part, has 
30  
 
  
         
           
           
         
          
           
         
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence any of 
its affirmative defenses. See HRS § 661B-3. 
As the Supreme Court of Oklahoma explained, 
[s]ignificantly, the concept of actual innocence is not a 
common law legal standard in the same sense as guilt beyond 
a reasonable doubt. The term actual innocence is a general 
expression of Legislative intent to limit tort claim relief to cases in which the defendant was exonerated, as opposed to cases in which a conviction is set aside from the 
suppression of a confession or the exclusion of other 
evidence. 
Courtney v. State, 307 P.3d 337, 340 (Okla. 2013). 
Our court has not specifically defined “actual 
innocence.” This court has stated that “the fundamental 
starting point for statutory interpretation is the language of 
the statute itself. . . . [W]here the statutory language is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its 
plain and obvious meaning.” Unite Here! Loc. 5 v. City & Cnty.
of Honolulu, 123 Hawai‘ i 150, 170, 231 P.3d 423, 443 (2010) 
(citation omitted). “
In interpreting a statute, we give the 
operative words their common meaning, unless there is something in the statute requiring a different interpretation.” Ross v.
Stouffer Hotel Co., 76 Hawai‘ i 454, 461, 879 P.2d 1037, 
1044 (1994) (citations omitted). 
The State asks us to adopt the Colorado Court of 
Appeals’ explanation that “actual innocence refers to factual 
innocence as distinguished from legal innocence, the legal 
presumption of innocence afforded to people who are acquitted or 
31  
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
not yet convicted of a crime.” Coyle, 492 P.3d at 372. The 
State defines actual innocence as “an affirmative finding tha[t] 
an individual is factually innocent, as opposed to merely the 
absence of guilt.” 
We agree that a petitioner must establish they are 
factually innocent by making an affirmative showing that they did not commit the crime at issue. When determining whether a 
petitioner is eligible for compensation under HRS chapter 661B, 
a civil court cannot rely solely on the presumption of innocence 
that has been restored to a petitioner after their conviction 
has been vacated or reversed. Instead, the HRS chapter 661B 
civil court must evaluate whether a petitioner has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that they did not commit the 
alleged crime. We therefore hold that in the context of HRS 
chapter 661B, “actual innocence” means that a petitioner did not 
commit the crime. 
While our legislature chose not to adopt a specific 
definition of “actual innocence,” the legislative history of HRS 
chapter 661B accords with an interpretation of “actual 
innocence” meaning factual innocence. See Frank v. Haw. Planing
Mill Found.
, 88 Hawai‘i 140, 144, 963 P.2d 349, 
353 (1998) (“[T]his court may also consider the reason and 
spirit of the law, and the cause which induced the legislature to enact it . . . to discover its true meaning.” (internal 
32  
 
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
quotation marks and citations omitted)). HRS chapter 661B’s 
language and legislative history clearly indicate the 
legislature’s desire to narrow the scope of relief under the 
statute to “balance[] the interests of an allegedly wrongfully 
imprisoned petitioner with the State’s limited resources.” Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 146-16 on H.B. No. 1046, in 2016 House 
Journal, at 1410, 2016 Senate Journal, at 835. 
First proposed in 2015, the initial language of the 
bill that would become HRS chapter 661B required a petitioner to 
show that their conviction was vacated or reversed on “grounds 
consistent with innocence and supported by findings that clearly 
state such consistency.”  H.B. 1046. 28th Leg. Reg. Sess. (2015) 
(emphasis added); see also H.B. 148, H.D. 2, S.D. 2, 28th Leg., 
Reg. Sess. (2015). In contrast, HRS chapter 661B’s final 
language requires that a petitioner show they are “actually 
innocent.” The legislature recognized that the “conundrum 
confronting any compensation scheme is to identify deserving 
individuals who are innocent of crimes from those who are not.” 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 411-16, in 2016 House Journal, at 903. 5
5 The legislature first considered H.B. 1046 in 2015, but the bill 
did not receive a hearing during that session. See H.B. 1046, 28th Leg., 
Reg. Sess. (2015). That same year, a nearly identical bill, House Bill 148, 
passed readings in both the House and the Senate but was ultimately deferred in conference committee. H.B. 148, H.D. 2, S.D. 2, 28th Leg., Reg. Sess. 
(2015). 
33  
 
  A review of other states’ statutes concerning 
compensation for wrongful conviction turns up a number of 
definitions of “actual innocence,” all of which focus on 
elements of factual innocence.  See, e.g., Colo. Rev. Stat. Ann. 
§ 13-65-101(1)(a) (West 2018) (defining actual innocence under 
the wrongful conviction compensation statute to be when a 
“conviction was the result of a miscarriage of justice” or 
petitioner “presented reliable evidence that he or she was 
factually innocent of any participation in the crime at issue”); 
La. Stat. Ann. § 15:572.8(B) (West 2021) (defining factual 
innocence to mean that “the petitioner did not commit the crime 
for which he was convicted and incarcerated nor did he commit any crime based upon the same set of facts used in his original 
conviction”); Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 13, § 5574(a)(3) (West 
2017) (defining actual innocence to mean that a claimant must 
prove that they “did not engage in any illegal conduct alleged 
in the charging documents”). 6
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
6 Such review was conducted by a special committee on redress 
formed by the Hawai‘ i Chapter of the American Judicature Society in the 2015 
legislative interim (AJS Special Committee). American Judicature Society, 
Final Report of the American Judicature Society Committee on Redress for 
Unlawful Imprisonment Appendix F (2015), 
https://americanjudicaturesociety.org/wp- content/uploads/2022/08/2015- AJS-
Redress- Final-Report.pdf [https://perma.cc/7FNR- VLJD]. The AJS Special 
Committee was convened to “work on [statutory] language with various 
stakeholders,” and “suggestions of the [AJS Special Committee] were 
incorporated into H.B. No. 1046, H.D. 1.” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 411- 16, 
in 2016 House Journal, at 903. 
34  
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Because there is no other indication in HRS 
chapter 661B as to what “actual innocence” means, an 
interpretation of the phrase as factual innocence accords with 
the plain meaning, the legislative history, and the structure of 
the statute, which all focus on “identify[ing] deserving individuals who are innocent of crimes from those who are not.” 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 411-16, in 2016 House Journal, at 903. 
1. The HRS chapter 661B court erred in granting the 
State’s motion for summary judgment because there are genuine issues of material fact regarding Jardine’s 
actual innocence 
We have established the following framework for 
summary judgment: 
 The burden is on the party moving for summary  
judgment  (moving party) to show the absence of any genuine 
issue as to all material facts, which, under applicable 
principles of substantive law, entitles the moving party to 
judgment as a matter of law.   This burden has two 
components.  
 First, the moving party has the burden of producing 
support for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material fact exists with respect to the essential elements 
of the claim or defense which the motion seeks to establish 
or which the motion questions; and (2) based on the 
undisputed facts, it is entitled to summary  judgment  as a 
matter of law. 
 Only when the moving party satisfies its 
initial burden of production does the burden shift to the non[-]moving party to respond to the motion for summary  
judgment  and demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to 
general allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial.  
35  Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of 
persuasion.   This burden always remains with the moving 
party and requires the moving party to convince the court that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that the 
moving party is entitled to summary  judgment  as a matter of 
law.   
 
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Ralston, 129 Hawai‘i at 56–57, 292 P.3d at 1286–87 (quotation and 
citation omitted). 
“[A] summary judgment movant may satisfy his or her 
initial burden of production by either (1) presenting evidence 
negating an element of the non-movant’s claim, or (2) 
demonstrating that the non[-]movant will be unable to carry his 
or her burden of proof at trial.” Id.
 at 60, 292 P.3d at 1290. 
In reviewing Jardine and the State’s cross-motions for 
summary judgment, the court concluded: 
 [E]ven assuming an actionable claim, the evidence 
presented by Petitioner, taken in the light most favorable 
to the State, fails to show that there is no genuine issue 
of material fact as to Petitioner's actual innocence of the 
crimes for which he had been convicted.  
8.
 Therefore, Petitioner failed to establish that he 
is entitled to compensation as a matter of law, under HRS § 
661B-3. 
The HRS chapter 661B court erred in concluding that 
the State had shown there was no genuine issue of material fact 
as to whether Jardine was actually innocent and that he 
therefore “failed to establish that he is entitled to compensation as a matter of law, under HRS § 661B-3.” It 
appears that the HRS chapter 661B court incorrectly assessed the 
evidence before it. The court stated that “the evidence 
presented by Petitioner, taken in the light most favorable to 
the State, fails to show that there is no genuine issue of 
material fact as to Petitioner’s actual innocence of the crimes 
36  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for which he had been convicted.” But this standard only 
applies when reviewing Jardine’s summary judgment motion. The 
court should have reviewed the evidence in the light most 
favorable to Jardine when reviewing the State’s summary judgment 
motion. See Ralston, 129 Hawai‘ i at 56, 292 P.3d at 1286 (“The 
evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-
moving party. In other words, we must view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to 
the party opposing the motion.”) (quotation and citation 
omitted). 
Reviewing the evidence in the light most favorable to 
Jardine, we conclude that there are genuine issues of material 
fact as to whether Jardine is actually innocent. See Kamaka v.
Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai‘ i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 
91, 103 (2008) (“A fact is material if proof of that fact would 
have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. 
The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non-moving party. In other words, [the 
appellate court] must view all of the evidence and the 
inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the 
party opposing the motion.”) (quoting Price v. AIG Haw. Ins. 
Co.,
 107 Hawai‘ i 106, 110, 111 P.3d 1, 5 (2005)). 
37  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In his opposition to the State’s motion for summary 
judgment, Jardine presented evidence in support of his claim 
that he was factually innocent of the crime. Jardine submitted 
a declaration in which he stated that “[n]o physical evidence 
ever connected [him] to the Incident or to any of the alleged 
crimes for which he was charged” and on the night of the crime, 
he was “with friends and family . . . all of whom confirmed Mr. 
Jardine was with them during the attack.” He also attached to his own motion for summary judgment a copy of the DNA lab 
results, and transcripts of his testimony at trial that he did not commit the crime. 
To its motion for summary judgment, the State attached 
the HRPP Rule 40 court’s findings of fact and conclusions of law, the Maui Deputy Prosecuting Attorney’s July 2011 motion to 
dismiss the case with prejudice, and Jardine’s response to the 
State’s first request for answers to interrogatories in the HRS 
chapter 661B proceedings. But the State did not address the 
exculpatory DNA evidence head on. Instead, the State relied on 
the fact that the HRPP Rule 40 court vacating Jardine’s 
conviction concluded the DNA evidence was only “potentially 
exculpatory,” and therefore contended that Jardine could not show that he was actually innocent of the alleged crime. 
However, the State’s reliance on the HRPP Rule 40 court’s 
vacatur order is insufficient to show that Jardine would be 
38  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
unable to meet his burden of proof at trial, given that there 
was evidence in Jardine’s opposition to the State’s motion for 
summary judgment to suggest that he did not commit the crime. 
Much of the dispute centers on the new DNA evidence 
obtained from the green and white checked tablecloth that was on the “papa-san” chair, a critical piece of evidence from the 
crime scene. At Jardine’s criminal trial, there was an “absence 
of DNA” evidence that conclusively linked Jardine to the crime 
scene. The 2011 DNA analysis “conclusively excluded” Jardine as 
the contributor of the DNA found on the tablecloth. However, 
while Jardine’s DNA was not found on that tablecloth, that 
evidence alone does not conclusively establish his actual innocence, since the sexual assault occurred in locations other 
than that chair. Those issues must be remanded for a trial, 
where both Jardine and the State can present evidence and the 
HRS chapter 661B court may adjudicate Jardine’s “actual 
innocence” under the appropriate evidentiary burdens of proof. 
In sum, evidence in the record shows that there are 
genuine issues of material fact regarding Jardine’s actual 
innocence. Accordingly, the HRS chapter 661B court did not err 
in denying Jardine’s motion for summary judgment.
7 However, it 
7 The dissent suggests that we should grant summary judgment to 
Jardine because the State did not present any evidentiary material in 
opposition to Jardine’s motion. We respectfully disagree. 
(. . . continued) 
39  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was error for the HRS chapter 661B court to grant summary 
judgment to the State because Jardine provided evidence creating 
a genuine issue of material fact and the State did not 
demonstrate Jardine would be unable to carry his burden of proof 
at trial. 
(continued . . .) 
Although Jardine asserted that he was innocent in a declaration 
in support of his motion, that portion of his declaration did not form the 
basis of his argument as to his actual innocence. Rather, he sought summary judgment based on the HRPP Rule 40 c ourt’s finding that the DNA testing of 
the tablecloth required a new trial. Specifically, Jardine contended that the Rule 40 c ourt’s finding supported the application of res judicata or 
collateral estoppel to establish his actual innocence in the 661B action. 
The State’s response to Jardine’s motion was not a sidetrack, but 
a direct counter to his argument “that both collateral estoppel and res judicata apply to findings entered by the Circuit Court in the Criminal 
Case.” (Emphases omitted) The State correctly recognized that Jardine was 
“argu[ing] that he has already proven that he is ‘actually innocent’ of crimes for which he had been convicted, and is entitled to compensation in 
this action, as a matter of law, relying on the doctrines of res judicata and 
collateral estoppel.” In response to that argument, the State pointed out 
that “a [changed] verdict from guilty to not guilty does not equal actual 
innocence.” 
Consistent with this reading of the motion, Jardine’s own 
proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law submitted to the 661B court 
asked the court to find that the Rule 40 c ourt’s order provided the basis for 
applying res judicata, collateral estoppel and/or judicial estoppel to 
establish his actual innocence. 
Because the State responded directly to the argument Jardine put 
forth in his motion, and because the DNA evidence did not conclusively exclude Jardine as the perpetrator, the 661B court was correct in finding that there was still a genuine issue of material fact as to Jardine’s actual 
innocence. Thus, summary judgment in favor of Jardine was not appropriate. 
See Adam N. Steinman & Mary Kay Kane, 108 Fed. Prac. & Proc. Civ. § 2739 (4th 
ed. 2024) (“Where the evidentiary matter in support of the motion does not establish the absence of a genuine issue, summary judgment must be denied, even if no opposing evidentiary matter is presented.” (Emphasis, internal 
quotation marks, and citation omitted.)) 
40  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2. The case is remanded for a trial under HRS 
§ 661B-3 
The legislature specifically designed HRS chapter 661B 
to create a process that would adjudicate whether individuals 
who were wrongfully convicted were entitled to compensation: 
Your Committee finds that compensation for wrongful 
imprisonment generates many viewpoints about the State’s 
responsibility in these circumstances. Wrongful 
convictions and the subsequent incarcerations may be the 
result of many factors, including eyewitness 
misidentification, false confessions, improper forensic 
science, and government misconduct. The conundrum
confronting any compensation scheme is to identify deserving individuals who are innocent of crimes from those 
who are not. 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 411-16, in 2016 House Journal, at 
903 (emphasis added). 
HRS § 661B-2(d) provides that “[a]ny action against 
the State under this chapter shall be tried by the court without a jury; provided that the court, with the consent of all the 
parties, may order a trial with a jury whose verdict shall have 
the same effect as if trial by jury had been a matter of right.” 
HRS § 661B-3(a) outlines the trial procedures that 
will “identify deserving individuals” who are entitled to 
compensation. The petitioner has the burden to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence: 
(1) That the petitioner is eligible to seek 
compensation in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 661B- 1; 
(2) That the petitioner was convicted in a court of 
the State and subsequently imprisoned for one or 
more crimes, but the petitioner was actually innocent of the crimes at issue; and 
41  
 
 
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(3) That the petitioner served time in prison for the 
crime or crimes, including time served prior to 
conviction, if any. 
While HRS chapter 661B does not indicate what evidence 
should be admitted in trial to establish or negate actual 
innocence, courts from other jurisdictions have permitted both 
the State and petitioners to submit evidence from prior 
proceedings, as well as new evidence or witness testimony. See,
e.g., In re Williams, 984 So.2d 789, 792 (La. Ct. App. 2008) (permitting a court reviewing a wrongful conviction 
compensation claim to “consider any relevant evidence regardless 
of whether it was admissible in, or excluded from, the criminal 
trial in which the applicant was convicted”). In a New York 
case, Ivey v. State, the civil court reviewing a claim under the state’s “Unjust Conviction and Imprisonment Act” permitted a 
petitioner who had the burden of proving his innocence by “clear 
and convincing evidence” to present his own alibi testimony, 
alibi witness testimony, and “other culprit” testimony of a new 
witness. 606 N.E.2d 1360 (N.Y. 1992). In Gonzales v. Cal.
Victim Compensation Bd., the State introduced enhanced audio-
recordings of petitioner’s post-arrest interview that was previously inaudible and not in the trial record. 316 Cal. 
Rptr. 3d 757, 774 (Cal. Ct. App. 2023). The petitioner also 
testified and presented an affidavit from a witness that was not 
called to testify at trial. Id.These cases illustrate that a 
42  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRS chapter 661B trial will likely involve existing record 
evidence, as well as potential new evidence in the form of 
written documents, DNA evidence, or witness testimony. These 
trials will proceed under the Hawai‘i Rules of Civil Procedure 
and the court will admit relevant evidence as necessary to make 
determinations as to a petitioner’s eligibility for compensation 
under the statute. 
Because the HRS chapter 661B court erred in granting 
summary judgment for the State, a trial will permit both parties to further adjudicate whether Jardine is actually innocent of 
the alleged crimes. C. Jardine’s Res Judicata and Collateral Estoppel Arguments 
are Without Merit 
Finally, Jardine argues that res judicata (claim 
preclusion) and collateral estoppel (issue preclusion) apply 
here. 
These arguments are without merit. 
Claim preclusion applies when: “(1) there was a final 
judgment on the merits, (2) both parties are the same or in 
privity with the parties in the original suit, and (3) the claim 
decided in the original suit is identical with the one presented 
in the action in question.” Bremer v. Weeks
, 104 Hawai‘i 43, 54, 
85 P.3d 150, 161 (2004). 
Here, claim preclusion does not apply because both the 
claim and the cause of action are different. 
Jardine’s HRPP 
43  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Rule 40 petition was adjudicated in criminal court using the 
McNulty standard that asks whether new evidence would probably 
have changed the outcome of the trial. See 60 Haw. at 267–68, 
588 P.2d at 445 (outlining a four-element test for a new trial based on newly discovered evidence). Now, in his HRS chapter 661B proceeding, Jardine must show by a preponderance of 
the evidence in civil court that he was actually innocent of the 
crime. These are two different standards that break the chain 
of requirements needed for claim preclusion. 
Issue preclusion applies when: (1) the issue decided 
in the prior adjudication is identical to the one presented in 
the action in question; (2) there is a final judgment on the merits; (3) the issue decided in the prior adjudication was 
essential to the final judgment; and (4) the party against whom 
[issue preclusion] is asserted was a party or in privity with a 
party to the prior adjudication.” Bremer
, 104 Hawai‘i at 54, 85 
P.3d at 161 (citing 
Dorrance v. Lee
, 90 Hawai‘i 143, 149, 976 
P.2d 904, 911 (1999)). 
Issue preclusion cannot apply here because the issue 
in the order vacating Jardine’s conviction was whether the new 
evidence was “of such a nature as would reasonably probably 
change the result of the later trial.” 
Actual innocence, at 
issue in a HRS chapter 661B petition, is a separate issue that requires Jardine to show that he did not commit the crime. 
44  
 
 Under Jardine’s preclusion theories, no HRS 
chapter 661B claim would ever get to trial — and it hardly seems 
that the legislature intended for that to be the case. The 
legislature structured HRS chapter 661B to have both a pleading 
standard (HRS § 661B-1(b)) and a later evidentiary burden (HRS § 661B-3). If a petitioner could use preclusion to show their 
actual innocence, the evidentiary standard the legislature 
created would be essentially moot. This difference in standards 
of proof indicates that the legislature did not intend for the 
underlying vacatur order to be used for preclusion in the later 
HRS chapter 661B claim. 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Between the HRPP Rule 40 petition and the HRS chapter 
661B petition, there are different claims, different courts, and different issues. 
Accordingly, we affirm the HRS chapter 661B 
court’s decision that neither res judicata nor collateral estoppel apply. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In sum, we vacate the HRS chapter 661B court’s grant 
of summary judgment for the State because it incorrectly concluded that Jardine did not allege an actionable claim under 
the statute, and also incorrectly determined that there was no 
genuine issue of material fact as to whether he was actually 
innocent of the alleged crimes. 
45  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
For the foregoing reasons, we (1) affirm the circuit 
court’s July 25, 2023 Order in part, specifically its denial of 
Jardine’s May 22, 2023 motion for summary judgment; (2) vacate 
the circuit court’s July 21, 2023 Order in part, specifically 
its granting of the State’s May 22, 2023 Motion for Judgment on the Pleadings, or in the Alternative, for Summary Judgment; 
(3) vacate the circuit court’s July 28, 2023 Final Judgment in 
favor of the State and against Jardine; and (4) remand the case 
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. F. Matson Kelley  
  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
Joseph L. Wildman 
(Alexander L. Wilkins,   /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
Anthony P. Takitani, Gilbert S.C. Keith-Agaran, and /s/ Todd W. Eddins David M. Jorgensen, 
on the briefs)    /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
for petitioner-appellant 
 Ewan C. Rayner 
for respondent-appellee 
46 