***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI I, 
Plaintiff- Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
JOSEPH PITTS, 
Defendant -Appellant. 
 
 
SCAP-16-0000830 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-16 -0000830; CR. NO. 09- 1-0097) 
 
DECEMBER 17, 2019 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.  
  The defendant in this case was convicted of attempted 
murder in the second degree in connection with the stabbing of 
his longtime friend.  After trial, the defendant made several 
motions, including a motion for new trial contending  that the 
jury during its deliberations conducted an improper examination 
of his clothing to search for evidence of blood, and as a result 
several jurors  discovered “stains”  that had not been introduced Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-16-0000830
17-DEC-2019
09:27 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
2 
 as evidence during trial.  The circuit court denied the motions, 
and the defendant was subsequently sentenced to life 
imprisonment with the  possibility of parole.  The defendant 
appealed to the Intermediate Court of Appeals and the case was 
transferred to this court upon request.  
  On review, we conclude that the jury’s discovery of 
the stains constituted an outside influence that may  have 
tainted the jury’s impartiality.  Because we find that the 
jury’s discovery was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, the 
judgment of conviction is vacated and the case is remanded  to 
the circuit court for further proceedings.   
I. BACKGROUND  
A. Arrest & Pretrial Motions 
 
 On December 22, 2008, longtime friends Jason Brown and 
Joseph Pitts were driving to the airport to pick up a mutual 
friend.  On the way to the airport , Brown and Pitts made a stop, 
during which time Brown was stabbed in the neck and arm.  Pitts 
was taken into custody by officers of the Honolulu Police 
Department later that night and released pending investigation.  
Pitts was subsequently charge
d in the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (circuit court) with attempted murder in the second 
degree, in violation of Hawai i Revised Statutes 
§§ 705-500 
(1993), 707-701.5 (1993), and 706- 656 (Supp. 2008) .  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
3 
   Prior to trial,  Pitts filed a m otion to dismiss the 
indictment, contending that the State failed to present to the  
grand jury a prior statement made by Brown describing the 
assailant as “
an older black man ” whom he did not know “but 
could identify him if he saw a picture.”  Pitts argued that 
because he had known Brow n for almost twenty years the statement 
was clearly exculpatory.  The circuit court denied the motion, 
concluding that because another witness, James Igawa,  identified 
Pitts during the grand jury proceeding, Brown’s statement was 
not clearly exculpatory.1  At the same hearing, the court granted 
Pitts’ separate motion to preclude Igawa from testifying at 
trial to an identification of Pitts , ruling that Igawa’s 
pretrial identification was the result of an impermissibly 
suggestive drive-by identification made while Pitts was 
handcuffed next to a police car.  Igawa, however, was allowed to 
describe what he saw 
during the incident and testify to the 
statements he gave to police.   
B. Trial 
  During jury selection, a  prospective juror,  responding 
to a question from defense counsel , shared her thoughts about 
the composition of the jury pool:  
                                                        
 1 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided over all the circuit court 
proceedings referenced in this opinion.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
4 
 [PROSECTIVE JUROR:] [F]or a long time I ’ve been very 
concerned about if a black man in America can have a fair 
trial because, you know, it ’s supposed to be a jury of your 
peers . . . .  I guess it’s just been interesting . . . it 
doesn’t look to me like there’s any black people in the 
entire pool, so that just kinda concerns me.   
 But, on the other hand, you guys obviously are not 
going to be able to get an entire pool of black people, of 
black men who are in his age range who have the same 
experience . . . . 
 
Defense counsel asked the prospective juror whether she had any 
biases, leading to the following:  
[PROSECTIVE JUROR
:] I might say that I have a bias against 
the status quo, and that is just that, you know, people who 
are minorities have to fight harder to be in an equal 
position, so that would be a bias, yes.  
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL
:] Do you feel that you could be a strong 
juror in this case?  
 
. . . . 
 
[PROSECTIVE JUROR
:] Yes, I think so.  But also as a 
scientist, I’m open to debate and providing sides, multiple 
sides of the story and, you know, coming to a conclusion 
based on that, so I would be open to hearing what other 
people have to say.  But I also have very strong 
convictions myself and I can hold onto those.  
 
After this exchange, the State used a  peremptory challenge to 
excuse the prospective juror.  The defense did not make an 
objection.   
 
 Before the evidentiary portion of the trial commenced, 
Pitts made an oral motion to preclude admission of evidence 
that, during his release from custody, he allegedly accused 
Brown of raping or sleeping with his then girlfriend and 
demanded an apology.  T he State admitted in the hearing on the 
motion that there was no evidence that prior to the stabbing 
Pitts thought Brown had been sleeping with his girlfriend.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
5 
 Without such evidence, the circuit court concluded , introduction 
of Pitts’ alleged accusation and demand for an apology were not 
relevant to the crime and the “probative value was so thin” that 
it was “outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.”   The 
court accordingly granted Pitt s’ motion. 
  T he State called security officer Bernard Prescott who  
testified that during his shift at “Kaiser Moanalua Hospital” 
(Kaiser Hospital) on December 22, 2008, at approximately 11:00  
p.m., he was approached by an African- American male wearing a 
black shirt and carrying a black jacket.   This individual,  whom 
Prescott identified as Pitts, was later arrested by police.   
Prescott described Pitts ’ movements in and around the hospital 
lobby area and stated that he did not see  any blood on his face 
and visible hand or that he had a weapon of any kind.   
  Keol a Guadiz testified that he encountered Pitts 
outside of Kaiser Hospital on that evening at around 11:00  p.m.  
Guadiz stated that Pitts asked him for a ride,  and he described 
Pitts’ demeanor as nervous.   He testified that he saw no other 
“black men”  in the area that night and that he did not see any 
blood on Pitts’ face or hands.   
  James Igawa testified that on the night of the 
incident he was sitting in his car when a red car parked in 
front of him about two and a half car- lengths away.  About fiv e 
minutes later, stated Igawa, he heard screaming and commotion ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
6 
 coming from the car and saw the passenger get out of the car on 
the passenger side and get  back in.  The passenger then appeared 
to be “throwing punches ” at the driver, he recounted .  Igawa 
testified that he observed two heads going back and forth, with 
the passenger lunging at the driver .  According to Igawa, the 
passenger got out of the car, the driver started making noise, 
and the driver jumped out of the car backwards and ran down the 
street when the passenger reentered the car.  Igawa testified 
that the passenger then got out of the car, looked back in the 
car and grabbed some items, and began walking slowly up the 
sidewalk in the opposite direction from the driver.  Igawa 
stated that he then called 911.   
 
 Igawa described the passenger a s a black male who was 
“tall . . . wearing black --dark black clothes; long, long black 
pants; looked like a long black sweater of some sort; kinky 
hair,” and had a “kind of [a] swaggering” wa lk.  Igawa testified  
that he did not see another “black man dressed in all black 
clothing
” in the area.  The State played an audio of Igawa’s 911 
call in which he described the possible suspect as wearing dark 
clothes “[l] ike long-sleeve black pants, long- sleeve black 
shirt.”   
  
Officer Antwan Stuart testified that on that date he 
arrived at Kaiser Hospital about 11:30 p .m.  The officer 
testified that he found and detained an African-American male ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
7 
 that fit the description of the subject “to a T,” whom he 
identified as Pitts.   Officer Stuart stated that the only blood 
he saw was on the sleeve of the jacket Pitts was carrying.  
Officer Stuart further testified that he did not see any blood 
on Pitts’ face or hands and th at Pitts did not appear injured.   
The officer identified the jacket Pitts was carrying and the 
clothes that he was wearing when he was arrested, and these  
items were admitted into evidence. 
  Evidence Specialist Autumn Sunaoka testified to taking 
pictures of the cr
ime scene and the clothing recovered from 
Pitts, swabbing Pitts ’ hands for evidence,  and photographing his 
hands.  The State also introduced several photographs of the 
interior of Brown’s car, including photographs of the  passenger 
side of the vehicle,  which Sunaoka testified showed, “small 
blood-like spots on the seat.”   Sunaoka testified that she did 
not see any “visible stains or blood-like spots”  on Pitts’ 
pants, black shirts, shoes, socks, or shoelaces when she 
photographed them.2 
  Jason Brown test ified that his relationship with Pitts 
was very close, calling Pitts his “family” and “brother.”   
According to Brown, he and Pitts met when Brown was 16 or 17 
years old, sometime around 1991.  Brown testified that on 
                                                        
 2 Midway through Sunaoka’s testimony, Pitts waived his right to 
counsel and continued pro se throughout the remainder of the trial.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
8 
 December 22, 2008, he picked up Pitts in his car to drive to the 
airport to pick up their mutual friend.  On the way, Brown 
testified, Pitts asked him to make a stop to speak to a person 
called “Niki, ” and he pulled over near where Niki lived and 
parked under a tree.   
According to Brown, Pitts got out of the car when they 
pulled over, and Brown lit a cigarette.  Brown testified that he 
was looking forward
 and exhaling when he was first hit, which 
Brown said was within about two minutes of parking.  Brown said  
that he turned and saw Pitts,  at which time he  put his arms up 
and began kicking , trying to get away, and he pulled himself out 
of the driver side window.  Brown testified that he was 
initially stabbed in the neck and then stabbed in the arm when 
he put his hands up to protect himself.  After pulling himself 
out of the car window, Brown testified, he ran down the hill 
toward a guard shack holding his bleeding neck and screaming for 
help.  Brown stated that he told the security guards at the 
guard shack that “[t]here’s a black guy up there that just 
stabbed me .”  Brown said that he was positive that Pitts was the 
person who attacked him and that he did not see anyone else on 
the street. 
  Brown was transported to Queen’s Hospital.  When he 
awoke in the hospital,  Brown recalled, Detecti ve Kon was asking 
him for a statement, and he asked the detective to return later.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
9 
 At the time Detective Kon returned, Brown continued, he was 
requesting either a statement or Brown’s signature on a paper .  
Brown stated that he signed the paper although he could not even 
see or read it because he needed to rest.  Brown also testified 
that he did not remember speaking with 
an officer named Jonathan 
Locey at the hospital, did not remember making statements 
identifying his assailant as “an older black guy,” or remember 
responding to Officer Locey’s questions about whether he knew 
his assailant and could identify him.   
 Brown  was asked by the prosecutor about a conversation 
that he purportedly had with Pitts following his release from 
the hospital: 
[PREOSECUTOR:] Okay.  Let me just--let me just, um, direct 
your questioning here.  
 So you talked to him.  Did you ever ask him why he 
stabbed you?  
 
. . . . 
 
[BROWN:] Yes. 
 
[PROSECUTOR:]  
You asked him, “ Why did you stab  me?” 
 
[BROWN:] Right. 
 
[PROSECUTOR:]  And did he respond?  
 
[BROWN:] His response was, “ All I wanted was an apology. ” 
 
[PROSECUTOR:] I ’m sorry?  Can you-- 
 
[BROWN:] “All I want is an apology.   Why don’ t you just 
apologize. ” 
 
[PROSECUTOR:]  So that’ s what he told you when he--when you  
asked him, “Why did you stab me? ” 
 
[BROWN:] Right. 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
10 
 [PROSECUTOR:]  Okay.  And at that point, when you were 
talking to  him, did you already know what he wanted an 
apology for?  
 
Brown explained that he found out after the stabbing “[w]hat 
[Pitts] wanted an apology for ,” from “Jamie.”  The prosecutor 
then again elicited Brown’s account  of Pitts ’ statements 
regarding the alleged apology: 
[PROSECUTOR:] So when you asked  him, “Why did you stab me ,” he 
said, “All I want is an apology. ” 
 
[BROWN:] Right. 
 
[PROSECUTOR:]  Just apologize. 
 
[BROWN:] He said, “ You know what you did.  Just apologize. ” 
 
[PROSECUTOR:]  So before you picked the defendant up on 
December 22, 2008, did you know why he was mad at you?  
  
[BROWN:] I didn’ t know he was mad at me.  
 
  T he following morning Pitts orally moved to  strike all 
references of an “apology” that the State elicited from Brown.  
The circuit court agreed with Pitts that leaving the reference 
to an apology for speculation in the jury’s mind was prejudicial 
to him and asked the prosecutor for any argument or explanation: 
THE COURT:  . . . . I will tell you right now, if there had 
been an objection, I would have cut you off at the pass 
because I agree with Mr. Pitts that you’re leaving that for 
speculation in the jury’s mind is prejudicial to him.  
 So do you have
--do you have anything you want to add 
or you want to argue this point?  
 
[PROSECUTOR :] Well, Your Honor, I--I --all I wanted to do is 
get out from the victim any conversation he had with the 
defendant regarding the stabbing.  And I knew that I wasn’t 
going to get into the actual allegations of the rape, and I 
stopped there.  And I-- 
 
THE COURT: All  right. 
 
[PROSECUTOR :
]--just didn’t think tha t would be a problem, 
Your Honor
.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
11 
  
The judge further agreed with Pitts that the evidence had been 
precluded.  T he circuit court granted Pitts’ motion to strike 
the testimony of “an apology for something”  and instructed the 
jury as follows: 
[COURT]: All right. . . .  I have an instruction for you at 
this point.   
 All this testimony yesterday from Mr. Brown having to 
do with his testimony that the defendant, Mr. Pitts, was in 
contact with him after the stabbing  in this case demanding 
an apology for something is stricken from the record.  
 I’m striking it from the record.  Anything to do with 
this alleged apology you are to disregard.  All right?  
 
  
Dr. Frederick Yost testified that on the night of the 
incident he treated Brown for three wounds, the main wound being 
to Brown’s external jugular vein,  which was located on the left 
side of his neck and bleeding intermittently.  He testified that 
the pressure in a vein is lower than in an artery and would tend 
to flow continuously,  and that a vein would theoretically bleed 
more while a person was lying down or breathing heavier.  
  Officer  Jonathan  Locey testified that at about 11:50 
p.m. that evening he arrived at Queen’s Hospital to obtain a 
statement from Brown
.  The officer testified that he located 
Brown in the emergency room lying down on his back wearing an 
oxygen mask with his eyes mostly closed and being tended to by 
staff.  According to Officer Locey , he asked Brown who had 
stabbed him and Brown replied, “An older black guy.”  Officer 
Locey said that Brown appeared to nod his head “no” when he 
asked Brown whether 
he knew his assailant and appeared to nod ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
12 
 “yes” when asked whether he could identify the person.  Officer 
Locey clarified that Brown never verbally stated that he did not 
know who stabbed him or that he could recognize his assailant if 
he saw him again. 
  Paulette Utu testified that Brown ran to her security 
guard shack with a bleeding neck.   She stated that all Brown 
said when she got to him was, “Black man, red car.  Black man.”  
The State also played a recording of Utu’s 911 call in which a 
voice is heard asking, “So all he’s saying is it was a black 
guy?” to which another voice replies , “Yeah.”  
  David Esaki testified-- as an expert in DNA analysis--
that he tested stains on a black jacket recovered from Pitts and 
found blood stains on the sleeve and shoulder.  One stain tested 
positive for blood that matched Brown’s DNA , Esaki indicated, 
and the other stain only revealed a partial DNA profile.  Esaki 
stated that he did not have a reference sample from Pitts to 
test, and that he did not test Pitts’ pants or black shirt for 
the presence of blood.  Esaki further testified that he 
processed swabs from Pitts’ hands and did not find blood, but 
found DNA from two unknown individuals, one of which was a 
female. 
  During his presentation of the evidence, Pitts called 
Detective Darryl Kon, who testified that he spoke to Brown in 
the hospital at approximately 7 :00 a.m. on the morning following ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
13 
 the stabbing.  Detective Kon testified that Brown “[b]asically 
[] said, What complaint?  I didn’t make a complaint,” and that 
when he returned at a later time Brown did not want to make a 
statement, and instead “he signed a 172, a withdrawal of 
complaint.”3  When asked whether the case was reopened as a 
result of threats to the department by Brown’s father, Detective 
Kon replied, “It’s hearsay.  I wasn’t in on that meeting, but 
that is what I understood.”  
  Pit ts in his testimony described his relationship with 
Brown: “That is my brother.  Literally like a brother from a 
different mother.  That’s my brother.”  According to Pitts, on 
the evening of December 22, 2008, Brown picked him up, and Pitts 
told him he needed to make a stop to sell drugs.  Pitts stated 
that when they parked, he got out of the car to look for the 
person to whom he was supposed to sell the drugs.  However, 
Pitts testified, he heard a scream and when he got back to the 
car, Brown looked at him and then headed in one direction,  while 
some other people were headed in a different direction.  Pitts 
stated that two people were running from the car after the 
stabbing that night and that one person was a black male wearing 
a black hoodie.  Pitts stated that he grabbed the jacket from 
                                                        
 3 Detective Kon stated that the second time he visited Brown to get 
a statement, he told Brown, “I have to get a statement now, get a 172, or 
I’ll be written up for insubordination.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
14 
 the car and headed down to Kaiser Hospital where he was 
ultimately encountered by Officer Stuart.   
C. Closing Arguments 
  In closing argument, the prosecutor suggested that 
Pitts came up with his defense after reviewing  the police 
reports and the evidence in the case:  
Now, the defendant does not have to put on a case at all.  
It’s the State ’s burden.  After looking at all the facts, 
after looking at the police reports and the evidence that ’s 
in this case, the defendant comes up with an idea.  It 
wasn’t me.  It was somebody else.  I didn’t do this.    
 
No objection was made.   In his closing argument, Pitts attacked 
the State’s evidence, focusing on the lack of blood found on his 
person or clothing.  Pitts argued that the blood that should be 
on the passenger’s  seat of the car “must be on the person that 
stabbed [Brown]” and that there was no blood on him , no blood on 
his hands, and no blood on his shirt because he did not commit 
the stabbing.  Pitt s further questioned how it would be “humanly 
possible” for him to “multiply stab somebody and come out with 
no blood.”   
  
Following jury deliberations and before the verdict 
was returned, the circuit court informed the parties that the 
jury had requested-- via a communication-- two pairs of gloves to 
examine “the pants” that had been admitted into evidence.  Pitts 
and the State did not make an objection.  The verdict was then ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
15 
 received, and the ju ry found Pitts guilty as charged;  Pitts was 
sentenced to life imprisonment with the possibility of parole. 
D. First Appeal and Motions on Remand 
  P rior to sentencing, Pitts, who had proceeded pro se 
since midway through the State’s case , requested the appointment 
of substitute counsel to assist him with his post- verdict 
motions and for sentencing.  State v. Pitts (Pitts I), 131 Hawaii 
537, 540, 319 P.3d 456, 459 (2014).  The circuit court denied 
Pitts’
 request.  Id.  On appeal, the ICA concluded Pitts’ appeal 
was without merit and affirmed his conviction.  Id. 
  On certiorari review, we held that a defendant who has
exercised the right to self-representation at trial but 
expressly requests counsel for post-verdict motions or for 
sentencing has a right to counsel.  Id. at 543, 319 P.3d at 462.
Accordingly, we vacated the ICA’s judgment  on appeal and 
remanded the case to the circuit court to allow for the 
appointment of substitute counsel for the purpose of allowing 
the filing of a motion for new trial and for resentencing.  Id.  
at 544, 319 P.3d at 463.  
  
  On remand, Pitts filed two new trial motions, each of 
which were later amended.4  The first motion contended that the 
                                                        
 4 At Pitts’ request, only the amended version of the motion for new 
trial based on prosecutorial misconduct was considered; both motions for new 
trial based on juror misconduct were considered.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
16 
 prosecutor committed misconduct  by (1) arguing that Pitts 
benefitted from being at trial, (2) comment ing on Pitts’ 
testimony, guilt, and credibility as a witness and the 
credibility of other witnesses,  (3) elicit ing testimony of a 
motive that was prohibited in motions in limine, and (4 ) stating 
Igawa’s description matched Pitts “to a T .”5  Pitts argued that 
the prosecutorial misconduct denied him  a fair trial and was so 
egregious as to bar reprosecution.  
  The second motion for new trial 
was primarily based on 
juror misconduct.  Pitts contended  that the jury improperly 
investigated the clothing he  was wearing at the time of his 
arrest, thereby “supplementing the evidence in the case with an 
unsubstantiated finding that the clothes had Jason Brown’s blood 
on them,” which was contrary to the evidence at trial.  Pitts 
maintained that his constitutiona
l right to a fair trial by an 
impartial jury was violated by the jury conducting an 
investigation that was outside of the scope of the evidence 
presented at trial. 
  At the hearing, the circuit court initially denied a 
motion to continue to allow Pitts time to file a motion to 
recuse the presiding judge.  The court also denied the new trial 
                                                        
 5 The motion also included arguments that have not been raised on 
appeal.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
17 
 motion based on prosecutorial misconduct, finding that there 
were insufficient grounds to support the motion.   
With regard to the motion for a new trial based on 
juror misconduct, Pitts called one of the trial jurors (Juror 
no. 9) to testify.  Juror no. 9 testified that during 
deliberations the jurors requested scissors to cut open the 
packaging containing 
Pitts’ clothing, and three of the jur ors 
examined Pitts’ shirt and pants  for blood.  Juror no. 9 stated 
that the jurors examined the pants “ [f]irst, outside, and then 
turned inside out.”  Juror no. 9 testified that the jurors found 
small spots on the inside of the pants and that the jurors 
“determined” that the spot s “must be blood.”  However, as to her 
own belief, Juror no. 9 testified that she did not know what the 
spots were.  According to Juror no. 9, four jurors looked at the 
stains, including herself.   
  T he circuit court orally denied the motion and in its 
written order found the following: the jury had properly 
received for its consideration a pair of pants and a shirt in a 
sealed plastic bag; the pants and shirt were properly admitted 
into evidence; the jurors requested and received scissors and 
gloves to remove and examine the pants and shirt; the jurors 
examined the pants and shirt on the outside and then inside out; 
Juror no. 9 observed four jurors examining the pair of pants; 
the jurors observed three s
mall stains on the pants, but Juror ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
18  
(continued . . .)  
 no. 9 did not know what the stains were.  Based on these 
findings, the court concluded that “[t]he jury was not precluded 
from examining exhibits during deliberations”;  that it was 
reasonable and diligent for the jury to visually examine the 
clothing; that the jury did not consider extraneous prejudicial 
information; and that the defendant failed to show that the jury 
obtained or used evidence that had not been introduced at trial, 
and the court denied the motion.6   
  Pitts was sentenced to life imprisonment with the 
possibility of parole.  Pitts appealed, and th e request to 
transfer the case from the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) 
to this court was granted on August 10, 2018.  On appeal, Pitts 
challenges the circuit court’s denial of the two new trial 
motions, the motion to continue, 
and his pretrial motion to 
dismiss the indictment.7  Pitts also argues that  his right to a 
jury of his peers was violated.   
                                                        
6 The court’s oral denial of the juror misconduct motion also 
appeared to include Pitts’ argu ment at the hearing that Juror no. 9 was 
“pressured” into changing her vote by other jurors.   
 
 7 The State contends that this court’s decision in Pitts I should 
be considered “law of the case” because Pitts argued in his first appeal  that 
the jury committed misconduct during deliberations and that the circuit court 
erred in denying his motion to dismiss the indictment, and that this court 
did not find error on these issues.  The “law of the case” doctrine provides 
that “a determination of a question of law made by an appellate court in the 
course of an action becomes the law of the case and may not be disputed by a 
reopening of the question at a later stage of the litigation.”  Hussey v. 
Say, 139 Hawai i 181, 185, 384 P.3d 1282, 1286 (2016).   
  In Pitts I , we concluded that Pitts’ right to post -verdict 
counsel had been violated, and we vacated the ICA’s judgment on appeal and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
19 
 II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW  
A. Denial of Motions for New Trial Based on Juror Misconduct and 
Motion to Dismiss Indictment 
 
  A trial court’s granting or denial of a motion  for new 
trial, including one premised on juror misconduct, will not be 
disturbed absent abuse of discretion.  State v. Kim , 103 Hawai i 
285, 290, 81 P.3d 1200, 1205 (2003).  A motion to dismiss an 
indictment is similarly reviewed for an abuse of discretion.  
State v. Akau, 118 Hawaii 44, 51, 185 P.3d 229, 236 (2008).  The 
trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly exceeds the 
bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or 
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.  Kim , 
103 Hawaii at 290, 81 P.3d at 1205. 
B. Constitutional Violations 
  Questions of constitutional law are reviewed under the 
right/wrong standard.  State v. Pratt, 12 7 Hawaii 206, 212, 277 
P.3d 300, 306 (2012).  
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
remanded the case to allow for the appointment of substitute counsel for the 
purposes of filing a motion for new trial and for resentencing.  131 Hawai i 
at 544, 319 P.3d at 463.  By doing so, we noted, we sought “to place Pitts in 
the position he would have been in had the constitutional violation never 
occurred.”  Id. at 544 n.6, 319 P.3d at 463 n.6.  Thus, there  was no 
determination of “law” with respect to the issues presented in this appeal to 
which the law of the case doctrine may be applied.  We accordingly address 
the merits of Pitts’ appeal.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
20 
 III.  DISCUSSION  
A. Juror Misconduct 
  The United St ates Constitution and the Hawai i 
Constitution guarantee the accused in serious criminal cases a 
fair trial by an impartial jury.8  State v. Kim, 103 Hawai i 285, 
290-91, 81 P.3d 1200, 1205-06 (2003).  “Because the right to an 
impartial jury in a criminal trial is so fundamental to our 
entire judicial system, it therefore follows that a criminal 
defendant is entitled to twelve impartial jurors.”  State v. 
Gabalis, 83 Hawaii 40, 45, 924 P.2d 534,  539 (1996) (quoting 
State v. Furutani, 76 Hawaii 172, 179, 873 P .2d 51, 58 (1994)).  
“Thus, the trial court must grant a new trial if any member . . 
. of the jury was not impartial; failure to do so necessarily 
constitutes an abuse of discretion.”  Id.  
  On appeal, Pitts contends that it was juror misconduct 
for three jurors to examine his pants, find bloodlike stains, 
and change their votes to “guilty” as a result.  This conduct 
                                                        
 8 The Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides in 
relevant part that “[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy 
the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and 
district wherein the crime shall have been committed [.]”  Article I, section 
14 of the Hawai‘ i Constitution provides in relevant part that “[i]n all 
criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and 
public trial by an impartial jury of the district wherein the crime shall 
have been committed[.] ” 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
21 
 violated his right to due process, Pitts argues, and the circuit 
court erred in not granting his motion for a new trial.   
1. The Jury’s Examination o f Pitts’ Pants Led to the Discovery of 
New Evidence of “Stains”  
 
  Inherent in a defendant’s right to a trial by an 
impartial jury is the requirement that the jury be free from 
outside influences.  State v. Keliiholokai, 58 Haw. 356, 357- 58, 
569 P.2d 891, 893-94 (1977).  Accord ingly, the jury’s verdict 
must be based upon evidence received in open court and not from 
outside sources.  Id. ; see State v. Chin, 135 Hawai i 437, 447, 
353 P.3d 979, 989 (2015) (“Contact between witnesses and jurors  
is ‘generally improper’ because it rai ses a fundamental concern 
of whether the jury reached ‘their verdict based solely on the 
evidence presented at trial’ . . . .” (quoting Dillard v. State, 
3 A.3d 403, 408-09 (Md. 2010))).  For, as this court has stated, 
“The function of the jury in rendering an accurate verdict based 
on the facts presented at trial is paramount in upholding the 
truth seeking function of the judicial system.”   State v. 
Flores, 131 Hawai i 43, 56, 314 P.3d 120, 133 (2013) (internal 
quotations omitted).   
  Our cases demonstrate that outside influences may 
improperly taint jury deliberations in a variety of 
circumstances, including the inadvertent exposure of the jury to 
items not properly introduced into evidence.  In State v. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
22 
 Estrada, the jury discovered the defendant’ s fingerprint 
exemplar, which had been accidentally included in one of the 
State’s exhibits, during deliberations along with the exemplars 
of two other individuals.  69 Haw. 204, 220-21, 738 P.2d 812, 
824 (1987).  On appeal, we determined that the defendan t’s 
fingerprint exemplar that the jury received was inadmissible 
evidence of an unrelated crime.  
Id. at 221, 738 P.2d at 824.  
The jury was therefore in possession of an item that had not 
properly been admitted into evidence for the jury’s 
consideration.  See id.   Because there was no “overwhelming, 
uncontradicted evidence of guilt, ” we concluded that the jury’s 
exposure to the inadmissible evidence was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt.  Id.   
  In State v. Joseph, the jury received for its 
examination a properly admitted wallet that contained a straw, 
which had not been independently introduced into evidence, and a 
list of numbers, which an officer testified was in the wallet 
but had not otherwise been admitted into evidence.  77 Hawai i 
235, 238-39, 883 P.2d 657, 660- 61 (App. 1994) .  The circuit 
court had allowed the jury to examine the list but instructed 
the jury that it could not consider the straw as evidence in 
reaching its verdict.  Id.  at 238 n.6, 239- 40, 883 P.2d at 660 
n.6, 661-62.  The ICA held that the trial court properly 
instructed the jury to not consider the straw in  its ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
23 
 deliberations because the State had not laid a proper foundation 
for the straw’s introduction, the straw was not in evidence, and 
exposure to the straw constituted an outside influence.  Id.  at 
238-39, 883 P.2d at 660- 61.  For these same reasons, the ICA 
held that the jury was erroneously allowed to examine the list 
of numbers as it was not properly introduced into evidence.  Id.  
at 238 n.6, 883 P.2d at 660 n.6.   
  Our cases have also found the sanctity of jury 
deliberations infringed when a juror’s conduct has introduced an 
outside influence into the jury room.  In State v. Williamson , 
jurors had asked for a dictionary to look up the definitions of 
the words “entrapment” and “preponderance.”  72 Haw. 97, 99, 807 
P.2d 593, 595 (1991).  After the court denied the request, a 
bailiff discovered a dictionary in the jury room, and the 
foreperson was questioned by the trial court as to whether the 
dictionary was used.  Id.  at 99-101, 807 P.2d at 595- 96.  The 
foreperson responded that the dictionary was not used at all 
during deliberations because the jury’s questions had been 
clarified the day before the dictionary was brought into the 
jury room.  Id. at 101, 807 P.2d at 595- 96.  The trial court 
denied the defense’s motion for mistrial and did not question 
any of the other potentially tainted jurors.  Id.  at 101, 807 
P.2d at 596. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
24 
   In vacating the trial court’s judgment, we noted that 
the dictionary’s definition of “preponderance” differed from the 
court’s instructions.  Id. at 104, 807 P.2d at 597.  Because the 
dictionary definition placed a higher burden on the defendant in 
proving an entrapment defense, this court stated, the defendant 
would have been substantially prejudiced if any of the jurors 
could have been influenced by the dictionary’s definition.  Id.  
We highlighted the problematic aspect of the juror’s conduct, 
which was the potentia l to “infect[]” the jury’s consideration 
of information provided by the court with “extraneous” 
information.  See id.;  see also  Lopez v. Sears Roebuck and Co.,  
70 Haw. 562, 562-64, 777 P.2d 715, 715-17 (1989 ) (holding that 
it was improper for the jury foreperson to conduct an 
unauthorized, independent observation of the defendant’s 
assembly process and report his observations to the jury).   
  Just as  the law requires that items exposed to the 
jury must have been properly rec eived in evidence in open court, 
our caselaw has defined the limits of acceptable jury conduct 
when examining exhibits in evidence.  In State v. Pauline, 
during trial, but outside the presence of the court and counsel, 
the jury was allowed to view a vehic le’s trunk that the 
defendant had allegedly used to transport the victim.  100 
Hawaii
 356, 362-63, 60 P.3d 306, 312-13 (2002).  At the viewing, 
the trunk hood was opened and closed by detectives at the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
25 
 jurors’ request.  Id. at 363, 60 P.3d at 3 13.  On appeal, the 
defendant argued that the jury had conducted an improper 
experiment in violation of his due process rights.  Id. at 379, 
60 P.3d at 329. 
  In demarcating the line between acceptable and 
improper jury conduct with regard to exhibits in evidence, this 
court stated that the jury may “carry out experiments within the 
lines of offered evidence or which amount to no more than a 
careful examination of the evidence which was presented in 
court.”  Id. at 380, 60 P.3d at  330 (internal quotations 
omitted) (quoting People v. Cooper , 95 Cal.App.3d 844, 853- 54 
(1979)).  We explained that experiments are generally prohibited 
“where the result is the production of ‘new’ evidence” for which 
it “is not possible for the party injured to meet, answer, or 
explain.”  Id. at 379, 60 P.3d at 329 (quoting Cooper, 95 
Cal.App.3d at 853).  Analyzing the facts in Pauline  against this 
standard, we found that “the only potential bearing [that] the 
‘experiment’ had on [the defendant’s] guilt was whether [the 
victim’s] body could fit in the trunk,” and the jury had already 
viewed the trunk without the trunk cover, photographs of the 
trunk with the hood closed, and the dimensions of the trunk as 
evidence.  Id. at 380, 60 P.3d at 330.  Thus, we concluded, the 
opening and closing of the hood did not produce new evidence.  
Id.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
26 
   As our holding in Pauline  illustrates, the critical 
inquiry with regard to a jury’s examination of evidence is 
whether the jury’s conduct resulted in the production of new 
evidence.  See id. at 379, 60 P.3d at 329 .  This court’s 
decisions have thus vigilantly protected the integrity of jury 
deliberations against the risk of outside influences.   
  In the present case, Juror no. 9 testified that four 
jurors, including herself, asked for a pair of scissors, cut 
open the evidence bag containing Pitts’ pants, examined the 
pants on the outside and then inside out, and found three small 
stains on the inside.  Juror no. 9 testified that they did this 
because they “were looking for blood” on the pants and that 
their examination resulted in the discovery of “small drops, and 
they determined it must be blood.”  In its findings of facts, 
the circuit court found that the jurors asked for and received a 
pair of gloves for a closer examination of the pants and shirt; 
examined the pants on the exterior side and then inside out; 
four jurors were observed by Juror no. 9 examining the pants; 
and that these jurors observed three small stains on the pants.9 
                                                        
 9 The circuit court in its conclusions of law cited State v. 
Kassebeer, 118 Hawai i 493, 506, 193 P.3d 409, 422 (2008), for the proposition 
that “[t]he jury is not precluded from examining exhibits during 
deliberations.”  The issue in Kassebeer dealt with whether the court erred in 
the first instance by allowing a weapon in the jury room.  See id.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
27 
   Unlike the examination of the trunk in Pauline, here 
the jury’s examination resulted in the discovery of new evidence 
in the form of three small stains on the pants which introduced 
an outside influence that could have tainted the jurors’ 
impartiality.  During trial in this case, there was no evidence 
that blood was found on Pitts or on the clothes that he was 
wearing.  Because the jurors were actively trying to supplement 
the evidence presented at trial with information not provided at 
trial or by the court, the jurors’ actions were similar to the 
actions taken by jurors in Lopez and Williamson .  See Lopez, 70 
Haw. at 564, 777 P.2d at 717 (jury foreperson conducted an 
unauthorized view of the defendant’s store and related his 
observations to the jury); Williamson, 72 Haw. at  103, 807 P.2d 
at 596 (juror improperly obtained definitions differing from 
those supplied by the court).  Thus, the  jurors’ examination was 
neither within the lines of offered evidence nor merely 
cumulative to the evidence already presented at trial.  See  
Pauline, 100 Hawai i at 380, 60 P.3d at 330.   
  Further, because the evidence was discovered for the 
first time during jury deliberations, it was evidence that had 
not been presented in court, for which no foundation had been 
laid, and which had not been properly admitted into evidence.  
See Estrada, 69 Haw. at 221, 738 P.2d at 824; Joseph , 77 Hawai i 
at 239, 883 P.2d at 661.   Therefore the stains were an outside ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
28 
 influence and constituted evidence that Pitts did not have the 
opportunity to meet, answer, or explain.10  See Pauline, 100 
Hawaii at 379-80, 60 P.3d at  329-30.   
In a Florida case with analogous facts to this case, 
Williams v. State, a witness saw a man break the window of a 
business with his “naked hand” and reported the crime.  448 
So.2d 49, 50 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1984).  The defendant was 
arrested shortly thereafter and identified as the suspect by the 
witness.  Id.  At the time of his arrest, the defendant was 
wearing gloves, which were received into evidence.  Id. 
  During trial, the defen dant’s defense was that he was 
misidentified because the person who broke the window would have 
injured and bloodied his hand, and there was no evidence that 
the defendant’s hand was injured or bleeding at the time of the 
arrest.  Id.  However, during jury deliberations, the jury 
discovered a piece of paper with a stain on it in one of the 
fingers of the glove and asked the trial court whether they 
could consider the “bloody piece of paper” in their 
                                                        
10 As our cases provide, the jury’s receipt of an outside influence 
is not to be condoned merely because the vehicle for its discovery is 
properly admitted evidence.  By way of analogy, if the jurors in this case 
had presented their discovery to the court and asked if they could consider 
the stains in their deliberations, the circuit court, as in Joseph, would 
have been required to specifically instruct the jurors that they could not.  
See Joseph, 77 Hawai i at 238, 883 P.2d at 660 (“The law requires that items 
exposed to the jury must have been properly received in evidence in open 
court.  In our view, the straw was not properly received in evidence.” 
(citation omitted)).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
29 
 deliberations.  Id.  The trial court denied defense counse l’s 
motion for mistrial and allowed the jury to consider the paper 
it had found.  Id.   
  On appeal, the appellate court found that the jury’s 
discovery of the stained paper was “a total surprise with no 
opportunity for discovery, defense or cross- examinat ion as to 
it.”  Id.  The appellate court noted that the paper was never 
tested to determine whether the stain was blood, and if it was 
blood, whether the blood belonged to the defendant.  Id.  
Further, the appellate court concluded that “[t]he ‘bloody’ 
paper effectively destroyed [the defendant’s] closing argument, 
and his counsel had no opportunity to even try to rebut or 
explain it, even had [counsel] been in a position to do so.”  
Id.   
  As in Williams , the stains on Pitts’ pants were first 
discovered by the jury, the stains were not tested “to determine 
if the stain[s] [were] blood and, if blood, that it was 
[Brown’s] blood.”  Id.  Under our caselaw, the jurors were 
exposed to an outside influence not presented at trial, which 
Pitts did not have the opportunity to meet, answer, or explain.  
See Pauline, 100 Hawai i at 379, 60 P.3d at 329.  The circuit 
court thus erred in finding the jurors’ conduct permissible 
merely because the pants had been received in evidence, failing 
to recognize the misconduct in discovering the stains, and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
30 
 concluding that the jury was not exposed to an outside 
influence.   
2. The Jury’s Discovery of “Stains” on Pitts’  Pants Was Not 
Harmless Beyond a Reasonable Doubt 
 
  “If the jury conducts an experiment that produces 
‘new’ evidence, the court must then examine whether the 
defendant was thereby denied his or her right to a fair trial by 
an impartial jury.”  Pauline, 100 Hawai i at 380, 60 P.3d at  330 
(citing Keliiholokai, 58 Haw. at 358, 569 P.2d at 893-94).   
  We have previously stated that a rebuttable 
presumption of prejudice is raised when the nature of an outside 
influence is such that it “could” substantially prejudice the 
defendant’s right to a fair trial.  See Williamson, 72 Haw. at 
102, 807 P.2d at 596; Lopez, 70 Haw. at 564, 777 P.2d at 717.  
“To overcome the presumption of prejudice, the State must prove 
that the outside influence on the jury was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt.”  State v. Chin, 135 Hawaii 437, 448, 353 P.3d 
979, 990 (2015).  This requires the trial court to investigate 
the totality of the circumstances to determine the impact of the 
outside influence on the jury’s impartiality.  Id. at 443, 353 
P.3d at 985. 
  In Williamson,  this court determined that the 
defendant would have been substantially prejudiced if “any” of 
the jurors could have been influenced by the dictionary ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
31 
 definition of “preponderance.”  72 Haw. at 104, 807 P.2d at 597.  
Because the trial court only questioned the foreperson, we 
concluded, the court could not be sure that the juror who 
brought in the dictionary was not affected by independently 
looking up the word.  Id.   Further, we were not convinced that 
no other jurors were potentially influenced by the extraneous 
definition considering that a juror felt it necessary to bring 
the dictionary into the jury room.  Id .  Similarly, in Lopez , 
although it was not clear that the foreperson’s investigation 
and comments to other jurors affected the verdict, we concluded 
that the foreperson’s actions could have influenced the outcome 
of the case, requiring a new trial.  70 Haw. at 564, 777 P.2d at 
717.   
  This court has reached the same conclusion in cases in 
which only one juror’s impartially has been potentially taint ed 
by an outside influence.  In State v. Chin, the jury foreperson 
approached one of the defendant’s witnesses, inquired about the 
possibility of employment, and handed the witness his business 
card.  135 Hawai i at 440-41, 353 P.3d at 982-83.  The witness 
had no further communication with the foreperson and related the 
encounter to defense counsel.  Id.   We concluded that the 
contact between the foreperson and the defendant’s witness was 
an outside influence that could have substantially prejudiced 
the defendant.  Id. at 447- 48, 353 P.3d at 989- 90.  Because the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
32 
 trial court failed to conduct an inquiry into the totality of 
the circumstances, we held that there was no showing by the 
State that such misconduct was harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  Id. at 449, 353 P.3d at 991.  
  In this case, Pitts’ defense focused on the lack of 
evidence indicating that blood was found on his person or the 
clothing that he wore the night of the stabbing.  Pitts 
repeatedly cross-examined the State’s witness abou t whether they 
had noticed blood on his person or clothing on the night of the 
stabbing, and he argued during closing arguments that the blood 
that should be on the passenger seat “must be on the person that 
stabbed [Brown] because it ain’t on that seat.”  Pitts contended 
that the lack of blood found on him and his clothing showed that 
he was not the person who attacked Brown.  Thus, the 
nonexistence of the evidence of blood on Pitts’ clothing was 
essential to his defense and credibility.   
  The jury had heard testimony and seen photographs 
that, though the majority of the blood was on the driver’s side, 
there were small blood- like spots on the passenger seat.  From 
this evidence, the jurors could have inferred that if Pitts were 
the attacker, as the State contended, then there might be blood 
on his clothing.  Juror no. 9’s testimony that the jurors were 
actively searching Pitts’ clothes for blood confirms the 
likelihood of this inference. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
33 
   Having found three small stains on the inside of 
Pitts’ pants, the jurors could have concluded--as Juror no. 9’s 
testimony suggests that they did
--that the stains on Pitts’ 
pants were blood.  This in turn would have had the effect of 
completely undermining Pitts’ defense and credibility.  The harm 
from this discovery cannot be overstated given that the stains 
were not tested “to determine if the stain[s] [were] blood and, 
if blood, that it was [Brown’s] blood.”  Williams v. State, 448 
So.2d 49, 50 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1984). 
  Further, the evidence of Pitts’ guilt was not 
overwhelming.  No weapon was recovered and  no evidence was 
presented of blood found on Pitts’ person or the clothing he was 
wearing.  Because Brown was the only person that positively 
identified Pitts as the attacker, this case depended heavily on 
the credibility of Brown and Pitts, negating against a finding 
of harmlessness.  Cf.  State v. Underwood, 142 Hawai i 317, 329, 
418 P.3d 658, 670 (2018) (“When a conviction is largely 
dependent on a jury’s determination as to the credibility of a 
complainant’s testimony, we have held that the evidence of the 
offense is not so ‘overwhelming’ that it renders the 
prosecutor’s improper statements harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt.”). 
  The State argues that the discovery of the stains was 
duplicative of the evidence presented at trial inasmuch as blood ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
34 
 was found on Pitts’ jacket.  However,  Pitts testified that he 
grabbed the jacket from the car after the stabbing and there is 
no persuasive evidence of the assailant wearing a jacket at the 
time of the stabbing.11  Accordingly, the stains on Pitts’ pants 
viewed by the jurors were not cumulative evidence but instead 
resulted in the likely inference that the stains were of Brown’s 
blood.  
  Accordingly, the evidence 
and arguments presented at 
trial and Juror no. 9’s testi mony that the jurors were looking 
for blood on Pitts’ clothing, all indicate that the discovery of 
the three stains on the inside of Pitts’ pants could have 
potentially tainted the impartiality of any or all of the four 
jurors exposed to the stains,  thereby significantly prejudicing 
Pitts’ defense.12  Based on the totality of the circumstances in 
                                                        
 11 The State’s arg ument is premised on the assumption that Pitts was 
wearing the jacket at the time of the offense.  Igawa testified that the 
person he described getting out of the car was wearing what “looked like a 
long black sweater of some sort,” and his 911 phone call,  which was played 
for the jury, indicates that he identified the possible suspect as wearing a 
“long-sleeve black shirt.”  The clothing that Pitts was arrested wearing 
included two black shirts, one long and one short, and Igawa did not testify 
about the jacket admitted into evidence.  Igawa’s testimony thus does not 
resolve whether Pitts or anyone else was wearing the jacket during the 
offense.   
  The State also argues that the lack of blood on Pitts’ clothing 
was not persuasive in light of Dr. Yost’s testimony regarding Brown’s wounds.  
However, the jury’s discovery of the stains, if inferred to be blood, did 
more than affect the persuasiveness of Pitts defense: it directly 
contradicted and “effectively destroyed” it.  Williams, 448 So.2d at 50.  
 
 12 The circuit court having found no misconduct, did not seek to 
question whether any of the other three jurors who had examined the stains 
could have been influenced by what they viewed or whether any of the other 
jurors could have been potentially influenced.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
35 
 this case, it cannot be said that the jury’s exposure to the 
stains on Pitts’ pants was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.13 
B. Prosecutorial Misconduct 
  It is  the prosecutor’s “duty to seek justice, to 
exercise the highest good faith in the interest of the public 
and to avoid even the appearance of unfair advantage over the 
accused.”   State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 
1238 (1999) (quoting Stat e v. Quitog, 85 Hawaii 128, 136 n.19 
938 P.2d 559, 567 n.19 (1997)).   
  Pitts asserts that multiple instances of prosecutorial 
misconduct occurred, and the circuit court thus erred in denying 
his new trial motion on this ground.14   
1. Eliciting Inadmissible Evidence of an Apology in Violation of 
the Circuit Court’s Motion in Limine Ruling  
 
  Pitts asserts that the prosecutor elicited 
inadmissible evidence of a motive in violation of the circuit 
court’s motion in limine ruling.  In State v. Pacheco, during 
                                                        
 13 Pitts also argues that his motion for new trial should have been 
granted because Juror no. 9 voted guilty based on coercion by other jurors.  
In light of our disposition regarding the motion for new trial based on juror 
misconduct, we do not address the contention as to juror coercion.  For the 
same reason, we also do not address whether the circuit court erred when it 
denied the motion to continue.   
 
 14 Pitts argues that the prosecutor committed the following 
instances of misconduct: (1) improperly eliciting inadmissible evidence, (2) 
improperly commenting on Pitts’ right to be present at trial, (3) improperly 
commenting on the credibility of witnesses, a
nd (4)
 distorting, manipulating, 
and misrepresenting evidence at trial and during closing arguments.  In light 
of our disposition in Part III. A, supra
, we address Pitts’ first two 
contentions to provide guidance to the parties and the court on remand.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
36 
 motions in limine, the defense sought to exclude any evidence of 
prior criminal convictions.  96 Hawaii 83, 88-89, 26 P.3d 572, 
577-78 (2001).  The circuit court ruled that the prosecutor 
could refer to a specific theft arrest and conviction but could 
not refer to it as “a crime of dishonesty.”  Id. at 89, 26 P.3d 
at 578.  Nevertheless, the prosecutor asked the defendant during 
cross-examination, “Why should this jury . . . believe a thief 
like you.”  Id. at 91, 26 P.3d at 580.  And, during closing 
arguments, the prosecutor twice referred to the defendant’s 
prior theft crime as “a crime of dishonesty” and argued that 
there was no reason for the jury to believe “a convicted thief.”  
Id. at 92, 26 P.3d at 581.  On appeal, we stated that the 
prosecutor had com
mitted misconduct by violating the circuit 
court’s express in limine ruling.  Id. at 98-99, 26 P.3d 587-88 ; 
see also State v. Pemberton, 71 Haw. 466, 473-77 , 769 P.2d 80, 
83-85 (1990) (holding that it was misconduct for prosecutor to 
attempt to introduce inadmissible evidence despite the trial 
court repeatedly sustaining defense counsel’s objections).   
  In this case during motions in limine the circuit 
court precluded the State from introducing evidence that after 
Pitts’ initial release from custody, Pitts accused Brown of 
sleeping with his girlfriend and asked for an apology.  The 
circuit court concluded that the probative value of an alleged 
motive related to Pitts asking for an apology was outweighed by ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
37 
 the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant.  However, the 
prosecutor specifically directed the questioning to elicit from 
Brown testimony regarding the reason for the stabbing, and the 
term “apology ” or “apologize ” was used in succession eight times 
by the prosecutor and Brown in reference to that reason.   
  The circuit court confirmed the impropriety of the 
prosecutor’s line of questioning when Pitts objected the 
following day, stating that it would have sustained an objection 
if one had been made because the prosecutor’s questioning was 
“leaving that for speculation in the jury’s mind [ and it was] 
prejudicial to him.”   In other wo rds, the questions regarding an 
apology allowed the jury to infer that Pitts had a reason for 
stabbing Brown.  When the court asked the prosecutor to explain 
the basis of the questioning, the prosecutor stated 
that “all I 
wanted to do is get out from [Brown] any conversation he had 
with [Pitts] regarding the stabbing” and not to get into the 
“actual” allegations of rape.   Yet obtaining any conversation 
regarding the stabbing circumvented the court’s in limine ruling  
to preclude any testimony regarding an apology.  The court 
thereafter sought to cure the prejudice by instructing the jury 
that testimony of the previous day as to Pitts “demanding an 
apology” and “[a]nything to do with this alleged apology” was to 
be disregarded; however, the cautionary instruction may have ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
38 
 only had the effect of highlighting that the “apology” had been 
demanded “for something.”   
  The nature of the prosecutor’s line of questioning was 
particularly problematic because the inferences taken from the 
testimony concerned the main issue in the case: the identity of 
Brown’s attacker.15  Brown was the only person who positively 
identified Pitts as the assailant, but Pitts testified that a 
third, unidentified black male committed the stabbing.  Given 
this conflicting testimony, the State’s most difficult hurdle in 
its case against Pitts was convincing the jury that Pitts 
suddenly and without reason attacked his friend of almost twenty 
years.16  The testimony of an alleged apology invited the jury to 
infer that Pitts had a motive to stab Brown, making Brown’s 
testimony regarding the attacker’s identity more belie vable.  In 
turn, speculation about an alleged apology would weigh heavily 
on Pitts’ credibility and impair his defense.   
                                                        
 15 The State argues that this was not misconduct because the 
prosecutor did not elicit testimony that Pitts accused Brown of sleeping with 
Pitts’ girlfriend.  However, the circuit court ruling clearly precluded the 
State from eliciting testimony that Pitts demanded an apology after his 
release from custody without regard to its substance.  As the court’s 
comments and cautionary instruction make evident, the alleged apology had to 
be for “something” and that something in the jury mind’s was likely Pitts’ 
motive. 
 
 16 Similarly damaging to Pitts was the inference that he had a 
reason to be “mad” at Brown before the stabbing, which could be inferred from 
the Prosecutor’s question to Brown, “So before you picked the defendant up on 
December 22, 2008, did you know why he was mad at you? ”  (Emphasis added.)  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
39 
   Because of our determination regarding the motion for 
a new trial based on the juror misconduct, we need not determine 
whether this introduction of inadmissible evidence would require 
granting Pitts a new trial.  We emphasize, however, the 
obligation of counsel to comport with rulings of the court and 
“to avoid even the appearance of unfair advantage over the 
accused.”  Rogan, 91 Hawai i at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238.   
2. Improper Statement on Pitts’ Right to Review Evidence and 
Prepare a Defense 
 
  Pitts also contends that the prosecutor improperly 
argued that “[Pitts] listened to the testimony and then came up 
with his” defense because this argument “d[id] not tie Pitts’ 
testimony in with any other evidence in the case.”17   
  Generally, a prosecutor has wide latitude on 
commenting on the evidence during closing argument, including 
drawing reasonable inference from the evidence.  State v. 
Basham, 132 Hawai i 97, 112, 319 P.3d 1105, 1120 (2014).  
“Because the prosecutor ’s argument is likely to have significant 
persuasive force with the jury, the scope of argument must be 
consistent with the evidence and marked by the fairness that 
should characterize all of the prosecutor ’s conduct.”   Id. at 
                                                        
 17 While Pitts frames this argument as a comment on Pitts’ right to 
be present at trial, we address only the general propriety of the 
prosecutor’s statement.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
40 115, 319 P.3d at 1123 (internal quotations omitted) (quoting 
State v. Klinge, 92 Hawaii 577, 592, 994 P.2d 509, 524 (2000)).  
Therefore, a prosecutor’s comment on matters “outside the 
evidence” is improper.   State v. Walsh, 125 Hawaii 271, 290, 260 
P.3d 350, 369 (2011) (quoting State v. Tuua, 125 Hawaii 10, 14,
250 P.3d 273, 277 (2011)).  And a prosecutor’s comments may not 
infringe on a defendant’s constitutional rights.  Id. at 284, 
260 P.3d at 363. 
Here, the prosecutor contended that Pitts’ 
identification defense was the result of Pitts having reviewed 
the police reports and the evidence in the case:  
Now, the defendant does not have to put on a case at all.  
It’s the State’s burden.  After looking at all the facts, 
after looking at the police reports and the evidence that’s 
in this case, the defendant comes up with an idea.  It 
wasn’t me.  It was somebody else.  I didn’t do this . 
Thus, according to the prosecutor, Pitts had “come[] up” with 
the “idea” of his identification defense based on his review of 
the police reports in the case and after “looking at all the 
evidence that’s in the case.”  Not only was there no evidence 
presented a t trial from which the prosecutor could have 
reasonably inferre d that Pitts’ identification defense 
originated after or as a result of reviewing the police reports 
and the evidence in the case, but more fundamentally such ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
41 comments are a clear infringement on a defendant’s 
constitutional right to prepare and present a defense.18
This court has stated on numerous occasions that 
“[c]entral to the protections of due process is the right to be 
accorded a meaningful opportunity to present a complete 
defense.”   State v. Tetu, 139 Hawai i 207, 219, 386 P.3d 844, 856 
(2016) (alterations in original) (quoting State v. Kaulia, 128 
Hawaii 479, 487, 291 P.3d 377, 385 (2013)).  It is well 
established that “all defendants must be provided with the basic 
tool[s] of an adequate defense.”  Id. (internal quotations 
omitted) (alteration in original) (quoting State v. Scott, 131 
Hawaii 333, 352, 319 P.3d 252, 271 (2013)) .  An essential 
component of the basic tools is the process of d iscovery, which 
promotes “fairness in [our] adversary system.”  Id. (quoting 
State v. Valeros, 126 Hawaii 370, 379, 271 P.3d 665, 674 
(2012)); see also Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 16 (2012)  
(requiring the disclosure of prescribed materials by the 
prosecution and defense); Ake v. Oklahoma, 470 U.S. 68, 77 
(1985) (“[A] criminal trial is fundamentally unfair if the State 
proceeds against an indigent defendant without making certain 
18The State concedes that, “[n]aturally, a defendant would look at 
all the facts, including police reports and evidence the prosecution obtained 
in forming a defense.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
42 
 that [the defendant] has access to the raw materials integral to 
the building of an effective defense.”).    
  T he State acknowledges that the prosecutor in this 
case “referred to all facts, police reports and evidence in this 
case” but maintains that “[i]nsofar as there was no reference to 
Pitts’ right to be present at trial, there was no misconduct.”  
However, the prosecutor’s comments were an attack on Pitts for 
being a defendant as it penalized him for reviewing the police 
reports and evidence in the case and for the defense raised.19  
See Basham, 132 Hawai i at 118, 319 P.3d at 1126 ( “Generic 
arguments by the prosecutor that defendants, by virtue of being 
defendants, have no reason to tell the truth or have the 
greatest incentive to lie also transform a defendant ’s decision 
to testify at trial into an ‘automatic burden on . . . 
credibility.’” (alteration in original) ). 
                                                        
19 As we explained in  Walsh:  
 
[T]he prosecution is free to refer to the specific 
inconsistencies and contradictions in a defendant ’s 
testimony or with other evidence, without referring to [the 
defendant’s right to review the evidence presented against 
the defendant ].  Even in cases where there are no 
inconsistencies, the “close or perfect symmetry between a 
defendant ’s testimony and other witnesses ’ testimony, or 
other evidence of  tailoring, may prompt the jury’ s 
scrutiny. ”  [State v. Daniels, 861 A.2d 808, (N.J. 2004)].   
Prosecutors may already cite to specific facts indicating a 
defendant ’s lack of trustworthiness; there is no reasonable 
justification for placing a tailoring burden on testimony.  
 
Walsh, 125 Hawai i at 295, 260 P.3d at 374.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
43 
   T he prosecutor’s argument in this case thus wrongly 
infringed on Pitts ’ constitutional right to conduct discovery, 
present a defense, and be afforded a fair trial.  See State v. 
Davis, 63 Haw. 191, 196, 624 P.2d 376, 479 (1981) (the 
enlargement of pretrial discovery under the penal rules is 
“designed to enhance the search for truth in the criminal 
trial”).  Because of our disposition in this case, we need not 
determine whether the improper closing argument constituted 
plain error.  
C. Denial of Right to Jury of Peers 
  Pitts asks this court to review as plain error his 
assertion that he was denied his right to a jury of his peers 
when a prospective juror who expressed concern about the lack of 
African-Americans in the jury pool was peremptorily dismissed.20  
  Article I, s ection 5 of the Hawai i Constitution 
guarantees a criminal defendant the equal protection of law.21  
                                                        
 20 We do not address Pitts’ argument that African -Americans were 
systematically excluded from the jury list as the record in this case is 
clearly insufficient to support this assertion.   
 
 21 Article I, section 5 of the Hawai i Constitution provides as 
follows:  
 
No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property 
without due process of law, nor be denied the equal 
protection of the laws, nor be denied the enjoyment of the 
person’s civil rights or be discriminated against in the 
exercise thereof because of race, religion, sex or 
ancestry.  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
44 
 State v. Batson, 71 Haw. 300, 302, 788 P.2d 841 , 842 (1990).  As 
such, “[i]t is impermissible to exercise peremptory challenges 
in a manner which discriminates on the basis of such categories 
as race, religion, ancestry, or gender.”  State v. Daniels
, 109 
Hawaii
 1, 5, 122 P.3d 796, 800 (2005) (Caucasian males);  see 
State v. Levinson, 71 Haw. 492, 795 P.2d 845 (1990)) (women); 
Batson, 71 Haw. at 302,
 788 P.2d at 842 ( same ethnic minority as 
defendant).  Our precedent requires that the defendant first 
make a prima facie showing that “the challenged juror is a 
member of a protected group, that the opposing party exercised a 
peremptory challenge to remove the juror, and that the facts and 
circumstances surrounding the exercise of the peremptory 
challenge raise an inference of discrimination. ”  Daniels, 109 
Hawaii at 5, 122 P.3d at 800.  
  In this case, the juror was allegedly excused based 
not on her ethnicity, gender, or membership in another protected 
group, but rather on her expression of concern about the lack of 
African-Americans in the jury venire.  O ur caselaw does not 
prohibit peremptory challenge s against jurors  unless the 
challenge is based on the prospective juror’s membership in  a 
protected group.  Nonetheless, a court’s inherent authority to 
administer justice would 
likely allow intervention when the 
specific circumstances of a peremptory challenge threatened the 
integrity of the judicial system.  
Cf. Alaka i Na Keiki, Inc. v. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
45 
 Matayoshi, 127 Hawai i 263, 283, 277 P.3d 988, 1008  (2012) 
(“[A]lthough the exact nature of the ‘judicial power’ is not 
defined in the constitution [of Hawai i], the ‘inherent power of 
the court is the power to protect itself[  and] the power to 
administer justice whether any previous form of remedy has been 
granted or not . . . .” (quoting State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 
56, 647 P.2d 705, 712 (1982))).   
Thus, a court concerned that a peremptory challenge 
exercised upon a prospective juror appears to discriminate on a 
prohibited basis has the authority to request that counsel 
provide a reason for the exercise of the  challenge.  See 
Levinson, 71 Haw. at 499, 795 P.2d at 849 (holding that the 
right to serve on a jury “cannot be taken away for any of the 
prohibited bases of race, religion, sex or ancestry”) ; 
Matayoshi, 127 Hawai i at 283, 277 P.3d at 1008.  
D. Denial of Motion to Dismiss Indictment  
  “[W]here evidence of a clearly exculpatory nature is 
known to the prosecution, such evidence must be presented to the 
grand jury.”  State v. Bell, 60 Haw. 241, 245, 589 P.2d 517, 520 
(1978).   
  Pitts argues that evidence that Brown did not 
initially identify Pitts as his attacker was clearly exculpatory 
and should have been presented to the grand jury.  Although ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
46 
 Brown may have initially indicated that he did not know his 
attacker, he subsequently identified Pitts as the assailant.  
The State also presented the testimony of Igawa-- whose testimony 
before the grand jury identified Pitts as the attacker22--as well 
as the testimony of Officer Campbell, who assisted in arresting 
Pitts after the incident.  While Brown’s failure to initially 
identify Pitts as his attacker may bring into question Brown’s 
credibility, this evidence is not clearly exculpatory in light 
of the other evidence presented to the grand jury that 
inculpated Pitts, particul arly Brown’s subsequent identification 
of Pitts.  See Bell, 60 Haw. at 253, 589 P.2d at 524 -25 
(concluding that the victim’s failure to identify the defendant 
at the lineup reflected on the victim’s believability but was 
not clearly exculpatory because the victim previously identified 
the defendant outside the police station).  Therefore, the 
circuit court did not err in denying Pitts’ motion to dismiss 
the indictment.  
IV. CONCLUSION 
  Because it cannot be said that the several jurors’ 
discovery of the stains on Pitts’ pants during deliberations was 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, we vacate the circuit 
                                                        
 22 As previously noted, Igawa’s identification of the assailant was 
precluded at trial, but his description of the person was permitted.  See 
supra Part I.A.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
47 
 court’s Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, filed November 9, 
2016, and remand the case to the circuit court for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
 
Walter R. Schoettle
for appellant  
 
Sonja P. McCullen
for appellee  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
