 
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST ’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAII 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
LEONA KALIMA; DIANE BONER; RAYNETTE NALANI AH CHONG, 
special administrator of the estate of JOSEPH CHING, deceased; 
CAROLINE BRIGHT; DONNA KUEHU; IRENE CORDEIRO-VIERRA; 
and JAMES AKIONA, on behalf of themselves and all others 
similarly situated, 
Plaintiffs- Appellees -Cross-Appellants,  
 
vs. 
 
STATE OF HAWAI I; STATE OF HAWAII DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME 
LANDS; STATE OF HAWAI I HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS TRUST INDIVIDUAL CLAIMS 
REVIEW PANEL; DAVID Y. IGE, in his official capacity 
as Governor of the State of Hawaii, 
Defendants-Appellants-Cross-Appellees. 
 
 
SCAP-18-0000068 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-18 -0000068; CIV. NO. 99- 4771-12) 
 
JUNE 30, 2020  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., 
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE VIOLA, IN PLACE OF McKENNA, J., RECUSED 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J. 
  Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-18-0000068
30-JUN-2020
10:12 AM 
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
2 I.  INTRODUCTION 
In 1990, Senator Michael Crozier observed,  “[b]oth the 
length of the list and the length of the wait make the vast 
majority of Native Hawaiian people despair of ever receiving an 
award of land.”  Senator Michael Crozier, Testimony Before the 
Hawaii Advisory Committee, 
United States Commission on Civil 
Rights (Aug. 2, 1990).  In the thirty years since Senator 
Crozier’s statement, the State of Hawai i has done little to 
address the ever-lengthening waitlist for lease awards of 
Hawaiian home lands.  
In light of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit’s 
(circuit court) 2009 ruling that the State breached its duties 
as trustee of the Hawaiian Home Lands Trust (the Trust), we are 
now tasked with reviewing the circuit court’s decision granting 
and apportioning monetary damages to those Native Hawaiian 
beneficiaries who, as a result of the State’s mismanagement of 
the Trust, have languished on the waitlist – some for decades. 
Constrained by the provisions of Hawai i Revised 
Statutes (HRS) Chapter 674
 (Supp. 1991), entitled “Individual 
Claims Resolution Under the Hawaiian Home Lands Trust, ” the 
circuit court adopted a Fair Market Rental Value model (FMRV 
model) by which the circuit court can estimate the actual loss 
each individual beneficiary incurred.  The interests of justice  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
3 and the extent of the State’s wrongful conduct support a liberal 
interpretation of HRS Chapter 674 and a generous construal of 
the circuit court’s damages model.  We hold that the FMRV model 
is an adequate method for approximating actual damages.   
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm in part and 
vacate in part the circuit court’s January 9, 2018 final 
judgment and remand for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. 
II.  BACKGROUND 
Plaintiffs- Appellees Cross-Appellants Leona Kalima, 
Diane Boner, Raynette Nalani Ah Chong, special administrator of 
the Estate of Joseph Ching, deceased, Caroline Bright, Donna 
Kuehu, Irene Cordeiro- Vierra, and James Akiona, on behalf of 
themselves and all similarly situated (collectively 
“Plaintiffs”) are a group of Native Hawaiian Trust beneficiaries 
who claim that they incurred damages while on the waitlist to 
receive homestead land as a result of breaches of trust duties 
by Defendants-Appellants C ross-Appellees the State of Hawai i, 
the State of 
Hawaii Department of Hawaiian Home Lands (DHHL), 
the State of Hawai i Home Lands Trust Individual Claims Review 
Panel (the Panel), and Governor David Y. Ige (collectively “the 
State”).  Both Plaintiffs and the State appealed the circuit 
court’s January 9, 2018 final judgment.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
4 A. Trust History 
In 1920, Congress enacted the Hawaiian Homes 
Commission Act (HHCA), which created a land trust intended to 
rehabilitate displaced N ative Hawaiian people by enabling them 
to lease residential, agricultural, or pastoral homestead land 
from the Trust for one dollar  per year.  Kalima v. State (Kalima 
I), 111 Hawai i 84, 87, 137 P.3d 990, 993 (2006); Hawaiian Home
s 
Commission Act, ch. 42, sec. 207, 42 Stat. 108, 48-49 (1920).  
When the Territory of 
Hawaii became a state in 1959, the State 
took over the management and disposition of the Trust.  Kalima 
I, 111 Hawai i at 87, 137 P.3d at 993.  In the years that 
followed, the State struggled to carry out its duties and 
obligations as trustee.  The State began efforts in 1983 to 
resolve issues relating to the HHCA and to the Trust.  Id. at 
87-88, 137 P.3d at 993-94. 
In 1988, the Hawai i State Legislature (the 
Legislature) passed “The Native Hawaiian Judicial Trusts Relief 
Act,” which provided for limited waiver of the State’s sovereign 
immunity to enable beneficiaries of the Trust to bring suits for 
past breaches of the Trust and prospective suits for damages 
related to breaches of the Trust after 1988.  Id. at 88, 137 
P.3d at 994; 1988 Haw. Sess. L. Act 395, § 3 at 945.   
In 1991, the Legislature passed the “Individual Claims  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
5 Resolution Under the Hawaiian Home Lands Trust Act.”  1991 Haw. 
Sess. L. Act 323, § 1 at 990 (Act 323).  Act 323 was codified as 
HRS Chapter 674.  HRS Chapter 674 established a process for 
resolving claims for damages by individual beneficiaries of the 
Trust caused by the State’s breaches of the Trust which occurred 
between August 21, 1959, and June 30, 1988.   HRS § 674 -1 (1993).   
We described the process for resolving claims under HRS Chapter 
674 as follows: 
Chapter 674 authorizes the Panel to review and evaluate 
the merits of claims brought by individual beneficiaries, 
render findings, and recommend monetary damages and other 
relief.  HRS § 674 -1.  After reviewing an individual’s 
claims, the Panel is then required to render an advisory 
opinion to the legislature regarding the merits of each 
claim, including an “estimate of the probable compensation or 
any recommended corrective a ction for legislative action[.]” 
HRS § 674- 1(c). 
 
Kalima I, 111 Hawai i at 90, 137 P.3d at 996.   
Part III of Chapter 674, entitled “Judicial Relief for 
Retroactive Claims by Individual Native Hawaiians, ” provides, 
[t]he State waives its immunity from liability for actual 
damages suffered by an individual beneficiary arising out of 
or resulting from a breach of trust or fiduciary duty, which 
occurred between August 21, 1959, to June 30, 1988, and was 
caused by an act or omission of an employee of the State in 
the management and disposition of trust resources.  
 
HRS § 674-16 (1993) (emphasis added).  Chapter 674 defines 
“actual damages” as  
direct, monetary out -of-pocket loss, excluding noneconomic 
damages as defined in section 663 -8.5 and consequential 
damages, sustained by the claimant individually rather than 
the beneficiary class generally, arising out of or resulting 
from a breach of trust, which occurred between August 21, 
1959, and June 30, 1988, and was caused by an act or omission 
by an employee of the State with respect to an individual  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
6 beneficiary in the management and disposition of trust 
resources.   
 
HRS § 674-2 (1993). 
Meanwhile, the State was taking steps to better 
perform its duties as trustee by recovering alienated land and 
compensating the Trust for non- beneficiary use of that land.  In 
1994, with the passage of Act 352, the State transferred 16,518 
acres of trust lands from the Department of Land and Natural 
Resources (DLNR) to DHHL and paid DHHL $12 million for 
uncompensated use of those lands.   
B. 1999 Litigation 
On December 29, 1999, representative plaintiffs Leona 
Kalima, Diane Boner, and Joseph Ching filed a class action 
complaint against the State alleging breaches of the HHCA’s 
trust obligations between 1959 and 1988 and claiming that the 
plaintiffs were entitled to damages under HRS Chapter 674.   
On August 29, 2000, following Plaintiffs’ motion for 
class certification  as to Count I of the Plaintiffs’ complaint, 
the circuit court  entered an order granting the motion and 
defining the class in Count I:  1
All Hawaiian home land trust beneficiaries who timely filed a 
claim with the Hawaiian Home Lands Trust Individual Claims 
Review Panel, gave notice of intent to sue by October 1, 1999 
and filed suit by December 31, 1999, excluding any 
beneficiaries whose claims were either approved by the 
Legislature or settled.  
 
                                                 
1 The Honorable Victoria S. Marks presided.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
7 The circuit court also granted Plaintiffs’ motion for partial 
summary judgment as to Count 1.    
  The State brought an interlocutory appeal of the circuit 
court’s order granting partial summary jud gment before this 
court.  Kalima I, 111 Hawai i 84, 137 P.3d 990 (2006).  In Kalima  
I, this court held that sovereign immunity did not bar 
Plaintiffs’ right to sue under HRS Chapter 674.  Id. at 112-13, 
137 P.3d at 1018-19.  This court affirmed in part and vacated in 
part the circuit court’s 2001 judgment , and held : 
(1) [we] affirm the circuit court’s determination that the 
plaintiffs are entitled to pursue their claims under HRS 
chapter 674; (2) [we] reverse the circuit court’s 
determination that Act 14 is a settlement agreement and that 
the plaintiffs have a right to sue under HRS chapter 661; and 
(3) [we] remand this case to the circuit court for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
 
Id. 
In addition, this court held that Chapter 674 should 
be “liberally construed to suppress the perceived evil and 
advance the enacted remedy” and should not be narrowly 
interpreted to “impede rather than advance the remedies” 
provided by the statute.  Id. at 100, 137 P.3d at 1006 (quoting 
Flores v. United Air Lines, Inc., 70 Haw. 1, 12, 757 P.2d 641, 
647 (1988)).   
C. Post-Kalima I Litigation 
The subject of this appeal is the litigation that 
followed this court’s holding in Kalima I that Plaintiffs were  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
8 permitted to sue for damages under HRS Chapter 674.  
1. Class Certification on Liability 
Following Kalima I, Plaintiffs moved for certification 
of various subclasses on the issue of liability (Motion for 
Class Certification on Liability).   The circuit court granted 
the Motion for Class Certification on Liability on June 6, 2007 
and certified the following subclasses for purposes of liability 
– Subclass 1: Waiting List Subclass, Subclass 2: Ultra Vires 
Qualifications Subclass, Subclass 3: Uninhabitable Awards 
Subclass, Subclass 4: Lost Application Subclass , Subclass 6: 
Successor Rights Subclass.  The circuit court defined the 
waitlist subclass as “[a]ll Chapter 674 plaintiffs who were on 
the [DHHL] waiting list for a homestead and who submitted a 
claim to [the Panel] because they were not awarded a homestead 
in a prompt and efficient manner.”  The waitlist subclass 
comprised 65.9% of the total class members.   2
2. Liability Trial 
The circuit court conducted a five- week trial on 
liability  from August 4, 2009 to  September 11, 2009, during 
which, as the circuit court stated in its ensuing liability 3
                                                 
 2 The circuit court did not certify a “Subclass 5.”  
 
3 On October 2, 2007, the circuit court granted in part and denied in 
part Plaintiffs’ Motion to Bifurcate and ordered that it would try the waitlist 
subclass’s liability case only.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
9 order, “the parties litigated whether any of the trust breaches 
found by the court were a legal cause (a substantial factor) in 
waitlist applicants experiencing compensable harm (out-of -pocket 
expenses) through the failure or inordinate delay in receiving 
homestead awards of any kind.”   
At the liability trial, former DHHL deputy director 
Benjamin Henderson (Henderson) testified about the process for 
awarding homesteads.
  Henderson testified that in order to 
qualify to apply for a homestead, a person must show only that 
the person is over 18 years of age  and meets the Native Hawaiian 
Qualification, i.e.,  that he or she is at least fifty percent 
Native Hawaiian.  According to Henderson, a person need not show 
any financial information to qualify to apply for a homestead.  
Henderson stated that when homestead lands are 
developed, DHHL sends an “orientation notice” to many applicants 
on the waitlist.  Henderson testified that the orientation 
notice invites recipients to an orientation meeting and may 
indicate that at some point the applicant might need to meet 
other requirements to receive a homestead.  If the applicant 
does not respond or responds indicating that the applicant is 
not interested, the applicant is “deferred” from receiving a 
homestead in that round of offerings, but does not lose 
their 
place on the waitlist.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
10 At the orientation meeting, the applicant is given 
more information about the particular homesteads available and 
may be informed that the applicant will need to financially 
qualify to be “invited to participate  in the offering,” i.e., to 
lease the homestead.  Often, lenders attend orientation meetings 
to enable applicants to determine if they will be
 able to meet 
the financial qualification requirements.   
If an applicant expresses interest in obtaining a 
homestead, attends the orientation meeting, and is able 
to show 
that they meet the financial qualification requirements, the 
applicant will be “invited to participate in the offering,” 
select an available lot, and begin to lease it.   
Henderson also gave  a deposition, the following 
testimony from which was read into the record at trial on August 
14, 2009: 
Question: 
 
. . . . 
 
What is DHHL’s position on [what constitutes placement 
on the land in a prompt and efficient manner, specifically, 
the number of years between an application and an award]?  
 
Answer: DHHL’s position is that certainly, again, assuming 
you had the resources available to them, the normal 
development process is probably five to six years.  I mean, 
that’s not, you know – I mean, yeah, you talk to any 
developer in the private market, in the private sector, they 
would probably tell you the same thing.   
I mean, planning, permitting, engineering plans, offsite, 
onsite construction, et cetera, home reconstruction, we are 
looking at a period of five to six years.  
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
11 3. Liability Order 
On November 3, 2009, the circuit court issued a 
decision regarding liability and causation (Liability Order).  
In the Liability Order, the circuit court found that the State 
breached the following four duties as trustee during the claims 
period: (1) the duty to keep and render accounts; (2) the duty 
to exercise reasonable care and skill; (3) the duty to 
administer the trust; and (4) the duty to make the trust 
property productive.   The circuit court specifically found that 
the State breached the Trust as follows: 
Defendant State’s failure for 25 years (1959 -1984) to correct 
its own and t he predecessor trustees’ illegal “set asides” by 
cancellation or withdrawal of those executive orders or 
proclamations together with Defendant  State’s failure 
throughout the claims period to restore lands to the trust 
and to compensate the trust for fair rent during the period 
of non-beneficiary State use of trust lands were breaches of 
trust and trust duties as set forth in Sections 170, 174, 
175, 176, 177, 179, 181, 223 [of the Restatement (Second) of 
Trusts]. 
 
The circuit court also found that “[t]he State’s witness Mr. Ben 
Henderson, former deputy of DHHL , credibly testified that the 
normal site development time is 5 to 6 years and that would be 
the logical, optimal waiting list time for eligible applicants.”   
The circuit court concluded: 
Plaintiffs have proven by clear and convincing evidence 
breaches of trust by Defendants State and DHHL during the 
claims period and that the individual and/or cumulative 
effects of such breaches caused by acts or omissions by 
employees of the State in the management and disposition of 
trust resources were a legal cause of harm to the Plaintiffs 
herein which are compensable as defined by Sections 674 -1, -
17 of Hawaii Revised Statutes, thus necessitating further  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
12 proceedings to determine the amount of damages,  if any, each 
subclass member proves s/he sustained as a result of the 
breaches during the claim period.  
 
In other words, the Liability Order determined liability, 
causation, and the fact of damages, but specifically identified 
the need for further proceedings to determine the amount of 
damages.   
4. Motions on Methods for Calculating Damages 
In March 2011, the parties filed simultaneous motions 
proposing distinct methods for calculating damages.   
The circuit court  rejected both models and ordered 
Plaintiffs and the State to submit new damages model proposals.   4
The parties filed new motions on July 22, 2011.   The 
Plaintiffs proposed calculating the FMRV of an improved 
residential homestead, adjusted for inflation.   This proposal 
conformed each class membe r’s loss to the lost value of a 
developed residential lot.  As a secondary option, Plaintiffs 
proposed that claimants whose individual damages extended beyond 
the base amount could show out- of-pocket expenses (the cost of 
replacement leases obtained in the area in which they resided).  
The State proposed a four- step model which was 
substantially the same as the model the circuit court had 
previously rejected.   
                                                 
4 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided over all damages model 
litigation from this point forward.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
13 5. January 24, 2012 Order Re Parties’ Damages Models  
On January 24, 2012, the circuit court entered an 
order granting in part and denying in part Plaintiffs’ and the 
State’s motions to adopt damages calculation models (Order Re 
Parties’ Damages Models).  Based upon the November 3, 2009 
Liability Order’s finding that “normal site development time is 
5 to 6 years,” the circuit court found that damages did not 
begin to accrue until six years after a plaintiff was placed on 
the waitlist. 
 
The circuit court also ordered the parties to present 
new motions on the “individualized circumstances” that the 
parties wished to raise, which could be determined on a class-
wide basis.  These “individualized circumstances” included “a 
subclass member’s d eferring or rejecting lease offerings or 
opportunities, a subclass member’s financial ability or 
qualifications, date of application, or DHHL policies and rules 
including any applicable priorities.”   
Finally, the circuit court ordered that “after 
resolution of the [individualized circumstances] motions . . . 
the Court will determine the model to be used to calculate 
damages and whether referral to a Special Master to make such 
calculations is appropriate.”   
On February 10, 2012, Plaintiffs filed a Motion 
for  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
14 Partial Summary Judgment arguing that “‘deferred status’  imposed 
by DHHL is not a bar to damages in this case, or alternatively 
that DHHL must prove it strictly followed its regulations before 
it can invoke ‘deferred status’ as a defense to damages.”   
That same day, the State filed two motions “for 
adoption of specific rules to govern computation of damag es.”  
The State proposed twenty- four “rules”  which limited or barred 
certain claimants’ damages.   5
The circuit court resolved those motions, in pertinent 
part, as follows.  
6. February 4, 2013 Order Re Financial Qualification  
 Requirements  
 
On February 4, 2013, the circuit court denied 
Plaintiffs’ 2012 Motion for Partial Summary Judgment on 
Financial Qualification Requirements Imposed on Beneficiaries 
Seeking Homestead Awards (Order Re Financial Qualification 
Requirements) and ordered that if a claimant was deferred due to 
financial disqualification, the State could present evidence of 
that deferral to limit the claimant’s damages period.   
In the same order, the circuit court ruled: 
 Defendant’s motion to adopt proposal number 4, “A 
claimant is barred from obtaining any damages for any period 
of time during which he or she would have turned down a 
homestead offer for any reason at all,” is GRANTED IN PART 
AND DENIED IN PART, AS FOLLOWS: If an offering of a homestead 
                                                 
5 The circuit court later referred to the State’s proposed rules as 
both “rules” and “proposals.”   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
15 lease was made to a member of the Waiting List Damages 
Subclass and the member declined that offering, then the 
member is barred from recovering damages from that time 
forward. 
 
The circuit court also ordered that  “Waiting L ist Damages 
Subclass members bear the burden of proving the amount of their 
damages, utilizing the damages model ultimately adopted for the 
Waiting List Damages Subclass by the Court.”    
7. February 14, 2013 Order Re FMRV Damages Model 
On February 14, 2013, the circuit court entered an 
Order Granting in Part Plaintiffs’ Second Motion to Determine 
What Model Should Be Used to Establish the Amount of Damage 
Class Members Suffered as a Result of the Breaches Committed by 
Defendants (Order Re FMRV Damages Model).  The Order Re FMRV 
Damages Model detailed, in four parts, the FMRV- based damages 
model that would be used to calculate damages.   
The circuit court ordered that (1) the model should 
measure annual FMRV for comparable land; (2) damages would begin 
to accrue six years after the date the claimant’s application 
was accepted by DHHL and end on the date of award or date of 
trial, whichever is earliest; (3) damages would be discounted by 
the one dollar annual rental payment; and (4) class members were 
provided with an alternative option “to prove his/her actual 
direct monetary out of pocket expenses exceeded fair market 
rental value,” in lieu of accepting damages produced by the  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
16 following formula:  
a.  Based upon available data sources and other evidence, 
including, but not limited to (a) evidence of actual sales of 
homesteads; (b) evidence of valuation of homestead lots 
determined by the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands, if any; 
(c) sales data of comparable fee lots (residential,  
agricultural, and pastoral)[;]  and (d) actual rental values 
of comparable lots, which could be used to determine the fair 
market rental value of the three types of DHHL leasehold 
lots, a model or models will be developed to help determine 
damages based upon fair market rental value of such lots from 
1960 to the present (the “Damages Period”).  The Court, 
however, need not consider each factor listed above if it 
finds them to be irrelevant or unnecessary.  
 
b.  Fair market rental values will be calculated on a class -
wide basis using the following procedure:  
 
i. First, calculate the market value of comparable 
lots (residential, agricultural and pastoral), exclusive of 
residences or other structures, in specified locations as of 
1960 based upon the above available data sources and 
evidence, and based upon that evidence, estimate fee simple 
values for each type of homestead lot . 
 
ii[.] Second, based upon relevant real estate  
data, compute the estimated fee simple value of the lots for 
each year of the Damages Period, including, without  
limitation, referring to empirical data (including market 
sales) at various points in time, including regression 
analysis to fill in missing data points.  
 
iii.  Third, calculate annual fair market rental  
values from the fee simple values  based upon a methodology 
the Court determines is most accurate, after reviewing the 
evidence and the testimony or declarations of the parties’ 
experts. 
 
OR 
 
in lieu of first calculating fee simple values and converting 
them as prescribed in paragraphs ( i)-(iii), calculate the 
annual fair market rental values for each year directly  from 
rental values of comparable lots, and other relevant 
evidence, including regression analysis to fill in missing 
data points .*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
17 iv.Fourth, subject to applicable defenses, compute
the potential loss to each claimant based upon the time 
period running from six years after a beneficiary’s 
application was accepted by DHHL until a homestead award was 
made, or date of trial.  Specifically: (1) the annual fair 
market rental value for each year would be computed, 
beginning six years from the date the application was 
received; (2) then $1 for each year of homestead rent a 
homesteader would have paid would be subtracted; and (3) the 
losses for each year then would be summed .
Any applicable defenses may limit the years to be 
summed. 
c. For O‘ahu  residential lease applicants, fair market 
rental values will be calculated on a class -wide basis using 
the following procedure:  
i.Fee simple values, or annual fair market rental
values (depending upon methodology chosen), for sales or 
leases of a 5,000 square foot lot (or other appropriate size) 
in Maili (or other appropriate homestead area), will be used 
to establish the annual fair market rental value of an 
improved residential homestead lot on O ahu during each year 
of the Damages Period  . . . . 
d.A plaintiff may choose to prove his/her actual direct
monetary out of pocket expenses exceeded fair market rental
value, and may submit additional individual proof of actual
direct monetary out of pocket expenses for the period of
loss, and add that additional increment to fair market rental
value (minus $1), subject to Defendants establishing defenses
or mitigation.
(Some emphases added; some formatting altered.) 
In the Order Re FMRV Damages Model, the circuit court 
also granted or denied several of the rules that the State 
proposed in its “individualized circumstances” motions.  
First, the circuit court ruled,  
Defendants’ proposed rule 5: “A claimant is barred from 
obtaining any damages for any period of time during which he 
or she did not spend any money directly out of pocket on 
alternative land,” is GRANTED.  HRS §§ 674 -2 & -16 require 
proof of direct monetary out of pocket loss by Plaintiffs.  
Second, the circuit court ruled,  
Defendants’ proposed rule 6: “A claimant is barred from  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
18 obtaining any damages for any portion of out of pocket 
rental or other payments attributable to houses or other 
structures on alternative land.  Damages must be restricted 
to only the portion of out of pocket rental payments 
attributable to the land alone,” is GRANTED, based on the 
court’s understanding that Plaintiffs’ model is based on 
rental value of the land only, exclusive of value or 
expenses incurred for residences or other structures.  
 
Third, the circuit court ruled,  
Defendants’ proposed rule 7: “A claimant buying rather than  
renting alternative land, shall not be awarded damages for 
her mortgage payments (or down or cash payments), but only 
what it would cost to rent that land.  In addition, any 
increase in the value of the purchased land must be 
subtracted from a claimant’s damages,” is DENIED, WITHOUT 
PREJUDICE, and may be raised on an individual basis by 
Defendants as a defense or as failure to mitigate damages for 
plaintiffs who seek to recover damages in excess of the fair 
market rental  value.  In addition, Defendants may seek to 
prove as an offset to damages any increase in value of 
purchased (as opposed to rented) alternative land.  
 
 (Emphases in original.) 
Finally, the circuit court ruled,  
Defendants’ proposed rule 8: “If a claimant rents or 
purchases alternative land of a higher quality or value as 
compared with the quality or value of typical or average 
homestead land, her damages must be limited to the rental 
payments on typical or average homestead land,” is DENIED, 
WITHOUT PREJUDICE, and may be raised on an individual basis 
by Defendants as a defense or as a failure to mitigate 
damages for plaintiffs who seek to recover an increment of 
damages in excess of the fair market value of a typical or 
average homestead lot.  
 
In sum, the circuit court largely adopted Plaintiffs’ proposed 
FMRV model, but included certain qualifications proposed by the 
State which were designed to limit damages to actual damages.  
8. 
Trial on Methodological Issues Regarding FMRV Model 
Between October 1, 2013,  and October 3, 2013, a three-
day trial took place on methodological issues to determine how  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
19 to calculate the FMRV.  Essentially, the circuit court sought a 
statistical model that would derive the rental value of the 
Maʿili lot from the fee simple value of the lot over time.   
Plaintiffs’ expert Andrew Rothstein (Rothstein) and 
the State’s 
expert James Hallstrom, Jr. (Hallstrom) testified 
that different methodologies could be used to derive the rental 
values of a given lot.  Based on the circuit court’s February 
14, 2013 Order Re FMRV Damages Model, which stated,  
[f]ee simple values, or annual fair market rental values 
(depending upon methodology chosen), for sales or leases of a 
5,000 square foot lot (or other appropriate size) in Maili 
(or other appropriate homestead area), will be used to 
establish the annual fair market rental value of an improved 
residential homestead lot on O ʿahu during each year of the 
Damages Period [,] 
 
the experts demonstrated how their proposed methodologies 
derived rental values from the 5,000-square-foot Maʿili lot.  
The experts proposed three methodologies that could be 
used to calculate annual fair market rental values: (1) the 
market value curve; (2) the compound curve; and (3) the best fit 
curve.  At trial, Hallstrom described the best fit curve as 
follows: 6
The best fit curve is a mathematical equation we used 
in Excel, a computer program , in which we entered all of the 
122 sales.  We entered the dates in which they occurred.  And 
we determined the exponential curve that best fit all of the 
data. 
[T]here’s a – there’s a test or an indication called a 
                                                 
6 These methodologies are referred to interchangeably in the record as 
“curves” and “models.”  The selected curve or model provides the basis for 
calculating fair mark et rental value and is only one part of the circuit court’s 
overall damages model.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
20 coefficient, a confidence coefficient, and it tells you how 
accurate that is.  And in this case, it was .8, meaning that 
it has a reasonably high level of confidence and pretty well 
explains the variance throughout the period and is – we would
consider it very reliable if you were looking for the point 
of central tendency trend through the study period.   
 
. . . . 
 
As there are changes in the market, the best fit curve 
– once you have all of the transactions plotted, the best fit 
curve basically goes between all of those data points to best 
explain them.  It doesn’t necessarily start off at the very 
first point, and it doesn’t necessarily end at the very last 
point, but it best explains what’s happening during the 
period.   
 
Hallstrom opined that the market value model is the most 
accurate model, followed by the best fit model.  Hallstrom 
stated, however, that a disadvantage of the market value model 
is that it creates the potential for wide disparity in 
individual damages based on market fluctuation.  Hallstrom 
testified that, unlike the market value model,  
[the best fit model] gives you the overall central tendency 
of exactly where the market is, but without the spikes in the 
market that are the natural phenomena of the real estate 
market.  So at least it measures the growth and gives you a 
consistent application of what actually happened when you 
look at all of the transactions.  
 
9. Adoption of the Best Fit Curve 
On October 7, 2014, the circuit court issued a Trial 
Order (October 7, 2014 Trial Order) in which, in its discretion 
as finder of fact, it adopted the best fit model.   
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that for purposes 
of calculating damages for claimants who applied for Oahu 
residential leases under the February 14, 2013, Order, the 
“Best Fit” model as set forth in Exhibit D -40 shall be used 
to determine the fee simple values to calculate annual fair 
market rental values.  This model comprises ( i) annual rental 
values based on four percent (4%) of the fee simple value of  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
21 the land area of a 5,000 square foot lot in Maili for any 
given year; (ii) rents adjusted annually; and (iii) a “best 
fit” model d erived from actual fee simple Maili valuations 
from 1959 through July 8, 2013 (as shown on Exhibit D -2); 
(iv) with no increases for the consumer price index (“CPI”) 
or present value adjustments.  
 
Also in the October 7, 2014 Trial Order, the circuit court ruled 
that the damages model does not provide for “increases for the 
consumer price index (“CPI”) or present value adjustments.”   
At a September 18, 2015 hearing, the circuit court 
orally ruled that the O ahu residential best fit model would be 
applied to the residential homesteads across the entire state.  
The circuit court entered  an order pursuant thereto on September 
22, 2016, which stated, “the Best Fit model adopted in this 
Court’s October 7, 2014 Trial Order [] shall be used to 
calculate annual fair market rental values used to calculate 
damages for all claimants who applied for residential leases on 
Hawaii, Kauai, Lanai, Maui, and Moloka i.”   
In other words, the circuit court ruled that the best 
fit model, which is based on a 5,000-square-foot lot in Ma ili7 
on O
ahu, would be used as the basis for residential homestead 
claimants’ damages statewide.  
                                                 
7 Plaintiffs assert that “the 5,000 square foot lot in Maili was 
selected because it was the most conservative value of an Oahu residential 
lot[.] [C]ompared . . . to other  locations like Waimanalo and Papakolea this was
the most conservative value to determine what the fair market value will 
ultimately be.”     
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
22 10. Order Re Damages Computation  
On July 26, 2017, the circuit court issued an Order 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part Plaintiffs’ Motion for 
Summary Judgment to Compute the Amount of Damage for Waiting 
List Subclass O
ahu Residential Group A (Order Re Damages 
Computation).  In that order, the circuit court found that a 
subclass member’s duty to mitigate damages did not arise until 
1995, the deadline for a beneficiary to file a claim with the 
Panel under HRS § 674- 7.  The circuit court also found that 
damages are suspended from the date that the applicant was 
“deferred” from the homestead offering to the date of the first 
lease awarded for the offering from which the applicant was 
deferred.  However, subclass members may “prove by rebuttal 
evidence that mitigation was excused because the claimants self-
selected out for financial reasons or did not participate for 
other reasons that would excuse their duty to mitigate.”  Put 
differently, the circuit court ruled that if a claimant was 
forced to self-select out of the offering because the claimant 
was not financially qualified to accept an offering, the 
claimant’s  failure to mitigate was excused.   
11. Order Re Native Hawaiian Blood Quantum 
On June 19, 2017, the circuit court issued an Order 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part the State’s Cross-Motion to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
23 Establish Procedures and Legal Evidence for Confirming Native 
Hawaiian Blood Quantum for Waiting List Damages Subclass Members 
(Order Re Native Hawaiian Blood Quantum) .  The circuit court 
ordered, “[t]o receive an award for damages, Waiting L ist 
Damages Subclass members must meet the [Native Hawaiian 
Qualification ] requirement and must demonstrate through evidence 
in this case that they applied for a homestead lease and were on 
the waiting list.”  8
12. Order Re Claims Administration Process
On July 26, 2017, the circuit court issued an Order
Granting Plaintiffs’ Motion to Establish Claims Administration 
Process to Resolve All Claims (Order Re Claims Administration 
Process).  The Order Re Claims Administration Process 
established a claims administration process to calculate 
specific damages awards and ordered that a Special Master 
supervise the claims administrative process.  The circuit court 
explained, 
[t]he Special Master shall supervise the Claims
Administration Process and have authority to appoint a Claims
Administrator to perform the ministerial work of processing
all Waiting List Damages Subclass members’ damages claims.
The Special Master shall resolve any disputed legal or
factual issues, which then may be appealed to the Court.
The circuit court ordered that the Special Master’s duties would 
8 The Native Hawaiian Qualification provides that an applicant is 
“native Hawaiian” if the applicant is “any descendant of not less than one-
half 
part of the blood of the races inhabiting the Hawaiian Islands previous to 
1778.”  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
24 include, among other things,  
2. Receiv[ing] all proofs of claim from members of the 
Waiting List Damages Subclass;  
3. Determin[ing] whether claimants meet the criteria to 
qualify as a member of the Waiting List Damages 
Subclass;  
4. Rul[ing] on discovery requests and disputes between the 
parties;  
5. Conduct[ing] evidentiary hearings on claims, if 
necessary; [and]  
6. Calculat[ing] damages, if any, for any individual 
member of the [subclass] according to the rules, 
valuation methods and applying any defenses established 
by the Court.  
 
The circuit court ordered that each Waitlist Subclass member 
must submit a “Claim Form” demonstrating their prima facie right 
to damages.  The Claim Form requires disclosure of the date each 
claimant submitted a homestead application, evidence of each 
claimant’s Native Hawaiian Qualification, confirmation of prior 
homestead awards, the time period during which each claimant 
paid to rent alternative land, and each claima nt’s marital 
status.   
The circuit court ruled that after each claimant 
submitted their Claim Form, the State was required to disclose 
its affirmative defenses, if any, and identify and produce all 
evidence in support of its defenses to each claimant’s prima 
facie case.   
13. HRCP Rule 54(b) Final Judgment 
On January 9, 2018, the circuit court entered an HRCP 
Rule 54(b) final judgment as to the wait list subclass’s claims.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
25 The circuit court ordered:  
1. All claims of the Waiting List Subclass have been decided 
by the Court in favor of the Waiting List Subclass 
Plaintiffs . . . ; and  
2. All claims in the Supplemental Complaint For Waiting List 
Damages [Filed December 19, 2013] regarding the amount of 
damages, if any, each Waiting List Subclass plaintiff 
representative or member is entitled to recover under the 
orders establishing the model, rules, and claims 
administration process previously entered for that purpose, 
have been decided by the Court.  
In accordance with HRCP Rules 54(b) and 58, the Court 
EXPRESSLY FINDS that there is no just reason for delay and 
EXPRESSLY DIRECTS entry of judgment in favor of the Waiting 
List Damages Subclass.  All claims of the Waiting List 
Damages Subclass have been resolved and only ministerial 
functions are necessary to administer those claims.  
 
D. ICA Proceedings and Subsequent Transfer 
The State filed a notice of appeal on February 6, 
2018.  Plaintiffs filed a notice of cross- appeal on February 19, 
2018.  Plaintiffs filed an application for transfer to this 
court on December 31, 2018, to which the State filed a response 
of no opposition.  This court granted Plaintiffs’ application 
for transfer on February 5, 2019.   
IV.  DISCUSSION 
In resolving this case, we bear foremost in mind our 
admonition in Kalima I that HRS Chapter 674, a remedial statute, 
should be “liberally construed to suppress the perceived evil 
and advance the enacted remedy” and should not be narrowly 
interpreted to “impede rather than advance the remedies” 
provided by the statute.  111 Hawaiʿi at 100, 137 P.3d at 1006 
(quoting Flores, 70 Haw. at 12, 757 P.2d at 647).  
That is to  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
26 say – it is in the interests of justice to construe HRS Chapter 
674 in a manner that permits the advancement of this case to the 
final stages of its resoluti
on and to thereby afford a fair 
remedy to the beneficiaries who have for decades been deprived 
of the opportunity to lease their native land from the State.  
A. The circuit court did not err by adopting the FMRV model. 
 
The central issue in this case is whether the circuit 
court’s FMRV damages model calculates individual damages in a 
method permitted by HRS Chapter 674.  Plaintiffs, who proposed a 
similar FMRV model in their initial damages model proposal, 
assert that the FMRV model does not contravene Chapter 674 
because, they argue, “out-of-pocket loss,” as contemplated by 
HRS § 674-2, means the value of the lost benefit, i.e., the 
value of a homestead.  The State maintains that the FMRV model 
contravene
s Chapter 674’s “actual damages” requirement, which, 
the State argues, limits damages to the amount that subclass 
members actually spent to rent alternative land during the 
breach-caused delay period. 
Courts often face challenges when attempting to 
calculate damages in complicated class action cases.  This 
difficulty should not, however, bar recovery for those entitled 
to damages, particularly when the difficulty of calculating 
damages is compounded by the failures of the wrongdoer.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
27 This principle is widely reflected in the common law.  
The United States Sup reme Court explained that “[w]here the tort 
itself is of such a nature as to preclude the ascertainment of 
the amount of damages with certainty, it would be a perversion 
of fundamental principles of justice to deny all relief to the 
injured person, and thereby relieve the wrongdoer from making 
any amend for his acts.”  Story Parchment Co. v. Paterson 
Parchment Paper Co., 282 U.S. 555, 563  (1931).  The Court 
resolved this predicament by holding that, when damages cannot 
be measured with exactness due to the nature of the wrongdoer’s 
tort, damages may be approximated through “just and reasonable 
inference[.]”  Id.; see also Anderson v. Mt. Clemens Potter Co., 
328 U.S. 680, 687 (1946) (where employees could not establish 
the time spent doing uncompensated work 
due to violations by 
employers with respect to keeping proper records, the “remedial 
nature of [the Fair Labor Standards Act] and the great public 
policy which it embodies . . . militate against making” the 
burden of proving uncompensated work “an impossib le hurdle for 
the employee.”). 
This court has long- echoed this concept.  In Coney v. 
Lihue Plantation Co., 39 Haw. 129, 136 (Haw. Terr. 1951), this 
court explained, 
[t]he damages to be awarded should be such as adequately  to 
compensate the actual loss or injury sustained.  This is an 
obvious principle of justice from which we see no reason to  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
28 depart.  But in the application of the principle, 
difficulties often arise in ascertaining, with anything like 
accuracy, the actual damages which the plaintiff has suffered 
from the injury; or what sum will produce adequate 
compensation.   
 
We concluded that “[t]he law never insists upon a higher degree 
of certainty as to the amount of damages than the nature of the 
case admits, and [] where, as here, the fact of damages is 
established, a more liberal rule is allowed in determining the 
amount.”  Id. at 139.  This is true “particularly where the 
uncertainty was caused by the defendant’s own wrongful acts.”  
Exotics Hawai i-Kona
, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 
Hawaii 277, 292, 172 P.3d 1021,  1036 (2007) (emphasis added).   
We apply the foregoing principle here.  It is 
undisputed that the State breached its duties to keep and render 
accounts, to exercise reasonable care and skill, to administer 
the trust, and to make the trust property productive, to the 
significant detriment of the Native Hawaiian people for whom the 
Trust was created.  The State’s decision to continue to litigate 
this case for decades has compounded the challenges resultant 
from its own failure to keep adequate records – many of the 
beneficiaries have been unable to keep their own records over 
the years, particularly with respect to the amount that they 
paid to rent alternative land.   
This court has not previously reviewed a trial court’s  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
29 adoption of a damages calculation methodology.  B oth parties 
acknowledge, and we agree, that the question of which 
methodology best calculates damages is either a question of fact
or a mixed question of fact and law.   In either case,  the 
circuit court’s ad option of the FMRV model is reviewed under the
“clearly erroneous” standard.  See Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai i 
43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 
158 and Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber 
Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 119, 839 P.2d 10, 29 (1992).  A finding of
fact or a finding of fact that presents mixed questions of fact 
and law is clearly erroneous when, “despite evidence to support 
the finding, the appellate court is left with the definite and 
firm conviction in reviewing the entire evidence that a mistake 
has been committed.”  104 Hawaii at 51, 85 P.3d at 158.     
 
 
The Fair Market Rental Value model does not provide a 
perfectly accurate measure of actual damages.  However, the 
State has failed to supply  a more accurate model.  Moreover, the
State’s own wrongful acts, most notably the State’s failure to 
keep adequate records, have brought about the uncertainty of the
actual damages caused by its breaches.  Here, the circuit court,
in its discretion as factfinder, crafted a damages model which 
measures actual damages as accurately as is practicable.  We 
hold that the circuit court did not clearly err in creating the 
FMRV model as the controlling method 
for calculating damages.   
 
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
30 (continued. . .)  We affirm in part the circuit court’s Order Re FMRV Damages 
Model and hold that the FMRV Model is an adequate method for
estimating actual damages under HRS Chapter 674.  
HRS Chapter 674 clearly limits recovery to actual 
damages.  The express purpose of HRS Chapter 674 is to 
“provid[e] an individual beneficiary claimant the right to bring
an action to recover actual damages for a breach of trust[.]”  
HRS § 674-1(2).  HRS § 674-2 defines actual damages as  
direct, monetary out -of-pocket loss, excluding noneconomic 
damages as defined in section 663 -8.5 and consequential 
damages, sustained by the claimant individually rather than 
the beneficiary class generally, arising out of or resulting 
from a breach of trust, which occurred between August 21, 
1959, and June 30, 1988, and was caused by an act or omission
by an employee of the State with respect to an individual 
beneficiary in the management and disposition of trust 
resources.   
 
HRS § 674-16(a) states that “[t]he State waives its immunity
from liability for actual damages[.] ”  HRS § 674 -16(a).    
Here, we must reconcile HRS Chapter 674 with the 
general rules of class action damages.  The United States 
Supreme Court has held that, for purposes of Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure (FRCP) Rule 23(b)(3),  the common question 9 
                                                 
9 FRCP Rule 23(b) provides,  
 
(b) Types of Class Actions.  A class action may be maintained 
if Rule 23(a) is satisfied and if:  
 
. . . . 
 
(3) the court finds that the questions of law or fact  
common to class members predominate over any questions  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
31 (continued. . .)  requirement, class action damages must be capable of being 
measured across the entire class or subclass.  Comcast v. 
Behrend, 569 U.S. 27, 35 (2013).  If no common method can be 
established for determining damages, damages assessments may 
impermissibly predominate over questions common to the class.  
See Id.  FRCP 23(b)(3)’s analog ue in the Hawai i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) is HRCP Rule 23(b)(3).   Implicit in the Hawai i10  
                                                 
affecting only individual members, and that a class 
action is superior to other available methods for 
fairly and efficiently adjudicating the controversy.  
The matters pertinent to these findings include:  
(A) the class members’ interests in individually 
 controlling the prosecution or defense of 
 separate actions;  
(B) the extent and nature of any litigation 
 concerning the controversy already begun by
 or against class members;   
(C) the desirability or undesirability of 
 concentrating the litigation of the claims
 in the particular forum; and   
(D) the likely difficulties in managing a class
 action.  
 
10 HRCP Rule 23(b) provides,  
 
(b) Class Actions Maintainable . An action may be maintained 
as a class action if the prerequisites of subdivision (a) are
satisfied, and in addition:   
 
. . . . 
 
(3) the court finds that the questions of law or fact 
common to the members of the class predominate over any
questions  affecting only individual members, and that a
class action is superior to other available methods for
the fair and efficient adjudication of the controversy.
The matters pertinent to the findings include: (A) the 
interest of members of the class in individually  
controlling the prosecution or defense of separate 
actions; (B) the extent and nature of any litigation 
concerning the controversy already commenced by or 
against members of the class; (C) the desirability or 
undesirability of concentrating the litigation  of the  
 
 
   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
32 statute, therefore, is the same requirement that class action 
damages must be capable of measurement across the entire class.
See Comcast, 569 U.S. at 35.    
The class action damages requirement appears to be at 
odds with the definition of actual damages set forth in 
HRS § 674-2.  However, as it would be unjust to decline to 
apportion damages to injured parties because the wrongdoer’s 
tortious action renders actual damages difficult to measure, a 
model must be created to reconcile the actual damages definition 
with the class action damages requirement.  
See Tyson Foods, 
Inc. v. Bouaphakeo, 136 S.  Ct. 1036, 1046 (2016) (“In a case 
where representative evidence is relevant in proving a 
plaintiff’s individual claim, that evidence cannot be deemed 
improper merely because the claim is brought on behalf of a 
class.”).  Put differently, the appropriate damages model must 
be designed to calculate actual damages, as required by HRS 
Chapter 674, and must enable damages calculation class-wide, as 
required by HRCP Rule 23(b). 
This model need not be exact.  “The wrongdoer is not  
entitled to complain that [damages] cannot be measured with the 
exactness and precision that would be possible if the case, 
                                                 
claims in the particular forum; (D) the difficulties 
likely to be encountered in the management of a class
action.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
33 which he alone is responsible for making, were otherwise . . . 
the risk of the uncertainty should be thrown upon the wrongdoer 
instead of upon the injured party.”  Story Parchment Co., 282 
U.S. at 563.  Indeed, “[t]he law never insists upon a higher 
degree of certainty as to the amount of damages than the nature 
of the case admits, and where, as here, the fact of damages is 
established, a more liberal rule is allowed in determining the 
amount.”  Coney, 39 Haw. at 139-40. 
The circ uit court’s FMRV model envisions calculating 
the fair market rental value on a class-wide basis using a four-
part procedure.  First, the court will calculate the market 
value of comparable residential, agricultural, and pastoral lots 
and estimate fee simple values for each type of lot .  Second, 
the court will compute the estimated fee simple value of each 
type of lot for each year of the damages period.  T hird, the 
court will either calculate annual fair market rental values 
from the best fit curve or calculate annual fair market rental 
values for each year directly from the rental values of 
comparable lots.  Fourth, the court will sum the potential loss 
to each claimant for the time period beginning six years after 
the claimant’s application was accepted by  DHHL until either a 11
                                                 
11 We vacate the circuit court’s Order Re FMRV Damages Model to the 
extent that the FMRV model adopts the “six -year rule.”  See infra at section 
III(C).   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
34 homestead award is made or until the date of trial.  Each 
claimant’s FMRV damages calculation will be subject to 
applicable defenses by the State.   
While the FMRV model may not measure actual damages 
with exactitude, exactitude is not required under the 
circumstances.  The circuit court as factfinder found that the 
FMRV model was a reasonable method to determine actual damages 
as defined under HRS § 674 -2, and we find no basis to interfere
with that determination.  We therefore find no error with the 
general method adopted by the circuit court.  As discussed 
infra, we hold that the circuit court erred with respect to 
specific findings within the Order Re FMRV Damages Model.  We 
therefore affirm in part the circuit court’s Order Re FMRV  
Damages Model.    
1. The circuit court did not err in adopting the best fit 
curve. 
 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it
determined that the best fit curve represents the best way to 
calculate the FMRV of the Ma ili lot.    
Plaintiffs argue that the circuit court improperly 
adopted the State’s expert’s best fit damages model because the 
model arbitrarily reduces damages for the waitlist subclass.  
Plaintiffs allege that both sides’ experts initially agreed that 
the market value model will most accurately measure damages.   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
35 According to Plaintiffs, the best fit model proposed by the 
State and adopted by the circuit court “is a device used to 
eliminate variations in data; it is not an actual measure of 
data.”  The best fit model, Plaintiffs assert, reduces damages 
for individual class members and aggregate damages for the 
subclass as a whole.   
At the 2013 bench trial on d amages, Plaintiffs’ expert 
Rothstein and the State’s expert Hallstrom stated that different 
methodologies can be used to derive the Ma ili lot FMRV.  The 
experts proposed three different methodologies:  the market value 
curve, the compound curve, and the b est fit curve.  Both experts 
testified at length about the strengths and limitations of each 
methodology.  After the trial, the circuit court, in its 
discretion as finder of fact, adopted the best fit curve.    
The issue of which curve best derives the Ma il
i lot 
FMRV falls within the question of which methodology best 
calculates overall damages.  Therefore, we review the circuit 
court’s determination that the best fit  model will be used to 
calculate damages under the “clearly erroneous” standard.  See 
supra p. 29 (citing Bremer , 104 Hawaii at 51, 85 P.3d at 158;  
Amfac, 74 Haw. at 119, 839 P.2d at 29) .   
The circuit court’s determination that the best fit
curve will be used to calculate damages was not clearly   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
36 erroneous.  According to both parties’ expert  testimony, the 
market value model is  the most accurate model.  However, the 
circuit court did not err in selecting the best fit model 
because the experts also agreed that there are disadvantages to 
using the market value model.  The testimony of both experts 
indicated that the market value model creates the potential for 
wide disparity in individual damages awards based on 
appreciating land values and housing market fluctuations.  As 
such, it appears that the best fit model is the second most 
accurate of the three models, but that it also best provides for 
the calculation of class- wide damages.   
In light of the evidence presented by both parties’ 
experts on the various potential damages curves, the circuit 
court did not clearly err in selecting the best fit curve, which 
appears to be less exact but more fair than Plaintiffs’ proposed 
market value model.  
2. The circuit court correctly applied the O ahu FMRV model
for residential leases to the entire state.  
 
The circuit court did not err in applying a statewide 
measure of residential damages based on a homestead lot in Ma ili 
on the island of Oahu.   
The State argues that the Ma ili lot is not a fair lot 
on which to base class
-wide damages because O ahu land values are   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
37 higher than those of neighbor islands.    
Plaintiffs contend that “[t]he court properly 
recognized that a statewide damages class requires a statewide 
measure of damages” and that , in any case, the State provides no
evidence that O ahu land values are higher than neighbor island 
land values.    
Class action damages must be measurable  across the 
entire class or subclass.  See  supra pp. 31-32.  If no common 
method can be established for determining damages, damages 
assessments may impermissibly predominate over questions common
to the class.  See Comcast, 569 U.S. at 35.  
In order to establish a common method for determining 
damages here, the circuit court selected a 5,000-square-foot lot 
in Maili as the basis for determining the rental value, of which
claimants were deprived,  for each year during the claims period.  
  
The record reflects that the circuit court chose the 
5,000-square-foot Ma ili lot because Plaintiffs’ expert Rothstein 
selected that lot as a conservative example of an Oahu 
residential homestead for purposes of calculating O ahu 
residential homestead applicant damages using the methods 
proposed by the Plaintiffs in their first and second proposed 
damages models.  Rothstein referenced the 5,000-square-foot 
Maili lot in his Declaration attached to Plaintiffs’ firs t  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
38 motion proposing a damages model.  Rothstein again referenced 
the Maili lot in his Declaration attached to Plaintiffs’ second
motion proposing a damages model, stating,   
[f]or the purpose of this valuation, I have assumed a 5,000 
square foot lot in Maili.  I have used this assumption based 
upon the most conservative estimates, i.e., the smallest lot 
size noted by Judge Hifo in her opinion and in the area where
the market values are lowest.  These data are additionally 
conservative, as Maili lots were  less expensive than lots in 
urban Honolulu.   
 
In his Declaration, Rothstein referred  to Judge Hifo’s
2009 Liability Order, which stated, citing DHHL witness Darrell 
Yagodich’s testimony, “[t]he residential homesteads likewise 
have been trimmed from 7,500 square feet on Oahu in 1983 to a 
smaller 5,000 square feet[.]”    
The circuit court’s overall damages model uses FMRV as
the basis for calculating each residential claimant’s overall 
damages.   The circuit court did not err in using the FMRV of 
the Maili lot as the basis for calculating the entire subclass’s12 
 
                                                 
12 In the October 7, 2014 Trial Order, the circuit court ordered,   
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that for purposes 
of calculating damages for claimants who applied for Oahu 
residential leases under the February 14, 2013, Order, the 
“Best Fit” model as set forth in Exhibit D -40 shall be used 
to determine the fee simple values to calculate annual fair 
market rental values.  This model comprises (i) annual rental
values based on four percent (4%) of the fee simple value of 
the land area of a 5,000 square foot lot in Maili for any 
given year; (ii) rents adjusted annually; and (iii) a “best 
fit” model derived from actual fee simple Maili valuations 
from 1959 through July 8, 2013 (as shown on Exhibit D -2); 
(iv) with no increases fo r the consumer price index (“CPI”) 
or present value adjustments.   
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
39 damages.  The circuit court chose a representative lot on which
to base damages to satisfy the HRCP Rule 23(b) requirement that
class action damages be capable of being measured class-wide.  
Nothing in the record indicates that a 5,000- square-foot lot in
Maili is inappropriate for purposes of calculating class- wide 
damages.  The State presented no evidence that compares land 
values in Maili to land values in other homestead locations on 
Oahu or the neighbor islands.   13 
 
 
Based on the record before this court, we hold that 
the circuit court did not err in selecting the Ma ili lot as the
sample residential lot on which class- wide damages will be 
based.  
3. All waitlisted beneficiaries are entitled to damages
pursuant to the FMRV Model, subject to the State’s 
rebuttal.  
 
The HHCA envisioned the creation of a public land 
trust that would return Native Hawaiians to the land and prevent
further displacement of the Hawaiian people.  Hawaiian Homes 
Commission Act, ch. 42, sec. 101, 42 Stat. 108, 8-9 (1920).  
However, the federal government, and later the state government,
which took over the role of trustee in 1959, mismanaged the  
 
                                                 
13 In addition, the State has not appealed the circuit court’s rulings 
that applied a statewide measure of agricultural and pastoral damages based on 
lots on the islands of Maui and Hawaii, respectively.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
40 Trust by misappropriating home lands for non-beneficiary use, 
failing to restore the lands or compensate the trust, and 
failing to keep adequate records.  Rather than placing 
beneficiaries on homestead lots, the State placed beneficiaries
on a long waitlist.  The waitlist for leasing h ome lands grew 
and continued to grow.  
In 2009, the circuit court found that the State 
breached its trust duties to keep and render accounts, exercise 
reasonable care and skill, administer the trust, and make the 
trust property productive.  The circuit court also found that 
these breaches caused eligible Native Hawaiians to remain on the
waitlist and suffer damages as a result.  The circuit court 
specifically identified the need for further proceedings to 
determine the amount of damages, however, and the State now 
contests the method for determining damages that the circuit 
court established.   
It is clear to us that the State, by mismanaging the
Trust, failing to keep adequate records, and continuing to 
litigate this case for decades, is responsible for creating a 
situation in which it will be difficult to accurately assess 
damages.  
Classic principles of trust law shift the burden to 
the trustee, once a beneficiary has proven that breach of trust   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
41 duties occurred and that loss resulted, to prove that the amount
of damages should be limited as a result of the beneficiary’s 
action or circumstance.  See George Gleason Bogert et al., 
Bogert’s The Law of Trusts and Trustees § 871 (2020) (“If the 
beneficiary makes a prima facie case, the burden of 
contradicting it or showing a defense will shift to the 
trustee.”); 
see also Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 172 cmt. b
(Am. Law Inst. 1959) (“The burden of proof is upon the trustee 
to show that he is entitled to the credits he claims, and his 
failure to keep proper accounts and vouchers may result in his 
failure to establish the credit he claims.”).  Indeed, Hawai i 
has recognized that the nature of the case may warrant a lesser 
degree of certainty with respect to the amount of damages and 
that, if the fact of damages is established, “a more liberal 
rule is allowed in determining the amount.”  Coney, 39 Haw. at 
139.  
 
In addition to the t raditional principles of burden-
shifting in the context of damages on which we base our holding,
we are mindful of our previous holding in Kalima I  that Chapter 
674 should be “liberally construed to suppress the perceived 
evil and advance the enacted remedy” and should not be narrowly 
interpreted to “impede rather than advance the remedies” 
provided by the statute.  111 Hawaiʿi at 100, 137 P.3d at 1006    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
42 (continued. . .)  (quoting Flores, 70 Haw. at 12, 757 P.2d at 647).    
We adopt the FMRV Model and hold that every trust 
beneficiary is entitled to damages, pursuant to that model, for
the years during which the beneficiary was on the waitlist.  We
hold that the State bears the burden of proving that individual
beneficiaries are entitled to reduced damages for any reason.   
 
 
The State has argued that individual beneficiaries 
must show, for example, that the beneficiary spent money out of
pocket renting alternative land, that the beneficiary did not 
refuse a homestead offer, that the beneficiary mitigated their 
damages, and that the beneficiary is part of the defined 
subclass.    
Establishing this proof will be prohibitively 
difficult for beneficiaries, who are not at fault for the time 
that has passed or the Sta te’s failure to administer the T rust.
Instead, the State must shoulder this burden by proving to the 
Special Master that individual beneficiaries’ damage awards 
should be reduced after damages are calculated by the FMRV 
damages model.  14  
                                                 
 14 The parties raise numerous issues surrounding mitigation, including
what it means for a beneficiary to have deferred from participation in a 
homestead offering  and to what extent beneficiaries mitigated their damages.  
Each beneficiary’s  factual scenario surrounding these issues will be different 
based on the beneficiary’s individual experience attempting to secure a 
homestead from the State.  “In contract or in tort, the plaintiff has a duty to
make every reasonable effort to mitigate his damages.  The burden, however, is  
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
43 B. The circuit court correctly ruled that adjusting damages to 
present value constitutes an award of prejudgment interest in 
violation of HRS § 661-8.  
 
The circuit court adhered to the HRS Chapter 674 
actual damages requirement by ruling that damages will not be 
adjusted to present value.  The circuit court correctly ruled 
that the damages model does not provide for “increases for the
consumer price index (‘CPI’) or present value adjustments.”    
The adjustment of damages to present value to account 
for inflation would impermissibly award Plaintiffs prejudgment 
interests in violation of HRS § 661-8 (2016) .  HRS § 661- 8, 
which precludes prejudgment interest against the State, 
provides, “[n]o interest shall be allowed on any claim up to the
time of the rendition of judgment thereon by the court, unless 
upon a contract expressly stipulating for the payment of 
interest, or upon a refund of a payment into the ‘litigated 
claims fund’ as provided by law.”    
                                                 
upon the defendant to prove that mitigation is possible, and that the injured 
party has failed to take reasonable steps to mitigate his damages.”  Malani v. 
Clapp, 56 Haw. 507, 517, 542 P.2d 1265, 1271 (1975)  (internal citations 
omitted).  As such, the State bears the burden of proving a that a beneficiary 
failed to mitigate damages and that the beneficiary’s damages should therefore 
be reduced.  The Special Master shall make the final damages calculation.  
Plaintiffs concede that “[t]he only event that would legally limit a class 
member’s claim to damages for ‘failure to mitigate’ consistent with the rules 
would be the Beneficiary’s refusal to select a lot after being offered an award 
and a lease.”  Accordingly, we hold that, in order to carry its burden of 
proving that a beneficiary failed to mitigate damages, the State must prove that
it specifically offered a homestead award and lease to that beneficiary and that
the beneficiary thereafter refused to select a lot.  
 
  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
44 This court has defined prejudgment interest as 
“compensation for the delay in payment of money damages which is
measured from accrual of the claim for relief until final 
judgment[.]”  Rodrigues v. State, 52 Haw. 156, 169, 472 P.2d 
509, 518 (1970).  Adjusting for inflation, or bringing damages 
up to present value, would compensate P laintiffs for the passage
of time between the moment they suffered loss to the time of 
final judgment.  As such, adjusting for inflation constitutes 
prejudgment interest.    
 
In Library of Congress v. Shaw, 478 U.S. 310 (1986) 
(superseded by statute), the United States Supreme Court 
confirmed that inflation adjustment is not a separate damages 
principle, but is part of calculating prejudgment interest.  
There, evaluating damages against the government where a pre -
judgment interest prohibition similar to HRS § 661- 8 existed, 
the Court held that “whether the loss to be compensated . . . 
stems from an opportunity cost or from the effects of inflation,
the increase is prohibited by the no-interest rule.  In essence,
the inflation factor adjustment is a disguised interest award .” 
Id. at 322 (emphasis added) (internal quotations and citations 
omitted).    
 
 
This court’s definition of prejudgment interest,
viewed together with the United States Supreme Court’s   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
45 observation about the relatedness of inflation and prejudgment 
interests, indicate that the adjustment of Plaintiffs’ damages  
to account for inflation in this case would impermissibly 
constitute prejudgment interest.  See
 Rodrigues , 52 Haw. at 169,
472 P.2d at 518 and Library of Congress, 478 U.S. at 322.   
Moreover, prejudgment interest does not constitute 
actual damages and is therefore precluded by HRS Chapter 674.  
Actual damages do not include the amount that a beneficiary 
would have paid toward renting alternative land had they rented
that land now.  Plainly, awarding beneficiaries more than what 
they actually paid toward alternative lands would result in 
awards that exceed beneficiaries’ actual damages.  Therefore, 
adjusting beneficiaries’ damages for inflatio n would also run 
afoul of HRS Chapter 674.
  
The circuit court correctly ruled that damages may not
be adjusted to present value, as doing so would constitute the 
award of prejudgment interest in violation of HRS § 661- 8 and 
would contravene the express actual damages limitation of HRS 
Chapter 674.  
C. The circuit court erred in ruling that damages will not begin
to accrue until six years after DHHL received a  beneficiary’s
homestead application.    
 
 
Both parties argue that the circuit court incorrectly 
ruled that a beneficiary’s damages did not begin to accrue until  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
46 six years after DHHL received that beneficiary’s homestead 
application.  
On January 24, 2012, the circuit court entered an 
Order Re Parties’ Damages Model.  In the Order, the circuit 
court found, inter alia , “for purposes of the computation of 
damages[,] the time to run would start at the earliest six years 
from the date a beneficiary’s application is accepted for 
placement on the list to receive homesteads.”  The circuit court  
based its ruling on the following testimony of Henderson, 
“assuming [they] had the resources available to them, the normal 
development process [] probably [takes] five to six years.”  
Henderson also testified:  
DHHL’s position [on what constitutes placement on the la nd in 
a prompt and efficient manner, specifically, the number of 
years between an application and an award] is that certainly, 
again, assuming you had the resources available to them, the 
normal development process is probably five to six years.  I 
mean, that’s not, you know – I mean, yeah, you talk to any 
developer in the private market, in the private sector, they 
probably would tell you the same thing.  
I mean, planning, permitting, engineering plans, 
offsite, onsite construction, et cetera, home reconstruction, 
we are looking at a period of five to six years .” 
 
While the court may be liberal in its determination of 
the amount of damages after liability is established, especially 
where the uncertainty was caused by defendant’s wrongdoing, see 
Exotics Hawai i-Kona
, 116 Hawai i at 292, 172 P.3d at 1036, “ [t]he
extent of plaintiff’s loss must be shown with reasonable 
certainty and that excludes any showing or conclusion founded   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
47 upon mere speculation or guess.”  Ferreira v. Honolulu Star-
Bulletin, Ltd., 44 Haw. 567, 576, 356 P.2d 651, 656 (1960).   
Here, there is not a sufficient basis in the record to 
support the circuit court’s ruling, as it appears that 
Henderson’s testimony amounts to “mere speculation or guess.”  
See id.  First, Henderson’s testimony assume s that DHHL had 
access to all necessary
 resources .  In fact, the circuit court 
specifically found that “the major drawback to awarding 
homesteads was insufficient DHHL funds to complete site 
development, compounded by the poor quality or relatively remote 
locations of land thus requiring greater development expenses.” 
(Emphasis added).  Henderson’s testimony does not, therefore, 
reflect the conditions under which DHHL actually operated.  
Second, while Henderson testified on behalf of DHHL at trial, he 
is not an expert on land development and did not proffer 
concrete reasons to support his estimate.  Henderson simply 
asserted that a private market developer would agree with his 
estimate and cited various factors that could delay the 
development process.  Hend erson’s assertions are based on 
speculation and false assumption.  
In addition, nothing in the record indicates that the 
development process timeline is in any way connected to the 
timing of when an applicant was placed on the waitlist.  In  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
48 other words, the State did not begin to develop a homestead plot 
each time a new beneficiary applied for a homestead.  Even if 
six years is an accurate development delay estimate, that delay 
did not commence each time a claimant was placed on the 
waitlist.  Therefore, there is no logical reason why the State 
should be allotted a six- year grace period between when the 
applicant was placed on the waitlist and when damages began to 
accrue. 
The circuit court adopted the six-year  rule based on 
Henderson’s “mere speculation or guess.”  See Ferreira, 44 Haw. 
at 576, 356 P.2d at 656.  In addition, the homestead development 
process timeline appears to be unrelated to the timing of when 
claimants filed their applications.  In light of t he foregoing, 
the circuit court erred in adopting the six- year rule.  We 
vacate the Order Re FMRV Model to the extent that it adopted the 
six-year rule.  
D. The circuit court did not err in finding that the State 
breached its trust duties by failing to recover lands that 
were withdrawn from the Trust before statehood. 
 
The circuit court correctly found that the State 
breached its trust duties by failing to recover lands that were 
withdrawn from the Trust prior to statehood.  
The State argues that the circuit court erred in 
finding that the State breached its trust duties by not  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
49 recovering lands that were withdrawn from the Trust by the 
federal government prior to Statehood.  The State asserts that 
it would have been “a legal impossibility for the State to  
recover those lands from the federal government” because the 
federal government did not waive its sovereign immunity against 
suits to resolve title issues to land until the passage of the 
Quiet Title Act (QTA) in 1972 and because “[p]ost -1972, claims 
to recover the trust lands would have faced the QTA’s 12 -year 
statute of limitations.”  (citing 28 U.S.C. 2409a(i) (as amended 
by Pub. L. 99-598, November 4, 1986)).  As such, the State 
argues that it “had no duty to pursue a futile action against 
the federal government.”   
Plaintiffs counter that the State “wrongfully assumes
that the only means of remedying its trust breaches was 
litigation against the federal gover nment.”  Plaintiffs further
contend that, in light of undisputed facts in the record, the 
circuit court correctly found that the State “breached its 
duties to compensate the trust for wrongfully taken lands or 
return the lands to the trust at the assumption of its trust 
duties.”
    
 
Between 1922 and 1969, the federal government and 
later the State alienated or “set aside” trust lands –  that is, 
the State used Hawaiian home lands for purposes not permitted by  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
50 the Trust.  When the Territory of Hawai i became a state in 1959, 
the State of Hawai i took over the management and disposition of 
the Hawaiian home lands, including those that had been set aside 
by the federal government.  Kalima I  at 87, 137 P.3d at 993.  
The State thereafter breached its trust duty either to restore 
those lands to the Trust or compensate the Trust.  
The circuit court found that the State breached the 
Trust as follows: 
Defendant State’s failure for 25 years (1959 -1984) to correct 
its own and the predecessor trustees’ illegal “set asides” by 
cancellation or withdrawal of those executive orders or 
proclamations together with Defendant  State’s failure 
throughout the claims period to restore lands to the trust 
and to compensate the trust for fair rent during the period 
of non-beneficiary State  use of trust lands were breaches of 
trust and trust duties set forth in Sections 170, 174, 175, 
176, 177, 179, 181, 223 [of the Restatement [Second] of 
Trusts]. 
 
In other words, the State breached the Trust by failing to 
correct the ongoing dispossession of trust lands, which it could 
have done by cancelling and withdrawing executive orders.  
Accord Ching v. Case, 145 Hawai i 148, 170, 449 P.3d 1146, 1168 
(2019) (“The most basic aspect of the State’s trust duties is 
the obligation ‘to protect and maintain the trust property and 
regulate its use.’”) (quoting State ex rel. Kobayashi v. 
Zimring, 58 Haw. 106, 121, 566 P.2d 725, 735 (1977)).  The State 
also breached its trust duties by failing to restore those lands 
to the Trust and by failing to compensate the Trust for the  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
51 lands’ rental value while in use by non-beneficiaries.  
Contrary to the implication of the State’s position, 
the circuit court did not rule that the State was required to 
sue the federal government to recover those 
trust lands in order 
to avoid breaching the Trust.  Accord Ching, 145 Hawai i at 171, 
449 P.3d at 1169 (holding that the State had a trust d
uty to 
monitor the federal government ’s noncompliance with its lease of 
public lands but did not have a trust duty to initiate an 
enforcement action).  In fact, the State has previously restored 
alienated trust lands and compensated the Trust for non-
beneficiary use without suing the federal government.  In 1994, 
with the passage of Act 352, the State transferred 16,518 acres 
of trust lands from DLNR to DHHL and paid DHHL $12 million for 
uncompensated use of those lands.  Essentially, the circuit 
court found that the State breached its trust obligation by 
failing to restore lands or compensate the Trust sooner.  
Under the basic principles of trust law, a successor 
trustee is liable to a  beneficiary for breach of trust if the 
trustee (a) knows or should know of a situation constituting a 
breach of trust committed by the trustee’s predecessor and 
improperly permits it to continue; (b) neglects to take proper 
steps to compel the predecessor to deliver the trust property to 
the trustee; or (c) neglects to take proper steps to redress a  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
52 breach of trust committed by the predecessor.  Restatement 
(Second) of Trusts § 223 (Am. Law Inst. 1959).  The State knew 
of the federal government’s misuse of trust lands and improperly 
permitted it to continue.  In addition, the State neglected to 
take proper steps to
 redress the breach committed by the federal 
government as original trustee.  The State is clearly, then, 
liable to the beneficiaries for breach of trust.  See  Rest. of 
Trusts § 223.   
As a result, the circuit court correctly found that 
the State breached its trust duties by failing to take action to 
restore recovered land to the Trust upon Statehood in 1959. 
E. The circuit court did not err in establishing the subclass 
 list. 
 
The State argues that the circuit court erred in 
establishing an overbroad subclass list.  The State alleges that 
the circuit court found it liable to “numerous individuals who 
never had a viable claim against the State” because the circuit 
court “adopted Plaintiffs’ list of subclass members in its 
entirety, despite the fact that it contains a large number of 
people who are categorically not entitled to relief, and despite 
the fact that it conflicts with the court’s own class and 
subclass definitions.”  These individuals include claimants who 
settled with the Panel, claimants who failed to submit written 
notice of intent to sue by October 1, 1999, claimants who were  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
53 not on the homestead waitlist or who did not submit a waitlist 
claim, and claimants who do not satisfy the Native Hawaiian 
blood quantum requirement.    
Plaintiffs argue that including these individuals was 
proper because “[e]xclusion of these individuals from the class 
adjudication process means that they would be free to pursue 
their own claims against [the State] and that there would be no 
res judicata effect on these claims[.]”  In addition, Plaintiffs 
note that until each claimant presents the claimant’s  evidence 
to the Special Master, there is no way for the circuit court to 
make factual determinations as to which claimants lack viable 
claims.   
The June 6, 2007 subclass certification for purposes 
of liability defined the wait list subclass as “[a]ll Chapter 674
plaintiffs who were on the [DHHL] waiting list for a homestead 
and who submitted a claim to [the Panel] because they were not 
awarded a homestead in a prompt a nd efficient manner.”    
On July 26, 2017, the circuit court granted 
Plaintiffs’ Motion to Establish Claims Administration Process 
and appointed a Special Master to perform the ministerial work 
of processing all subclass members’ damages claims.  The order 
also stated, “[a]n amended 54(b) judgment shall be entered on 
each claim after the completion of the periods set by the Court  
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
54 for review of the returned claim by the Claims Administrator and 
Special Master, if any.”  
The circuit court adopt ed Plaintiffs’ p roposed 
waitlist subclass list, which was compiled “from a print out of 
an Excel spreadsheet prepared by the Hawaiian Claims Office 
(HCO) listing every individual who filed a claim with the HCO 
Panel.”   
The circuit court correctly adopted the list in order 
to bind all persons who could pursue a claim as a waitlist 
member to the judgment in this case.  Importantly, the class 
list includes all persons who filed a claim with the Panel.  Now 
that the class has been established, each person on the class 
list will go through the claims administration process, where 
the Special Master will determine whether that person does or 
does not have a viable claim.  The claim of any persons who fail 
to meet the subclass definition, for example, because they 
already settled their claim, or are excluded by statute, for 
example, because they do not meet the Native Hawaiian blood 
quantum requirement, will be excluded.  At that time, individual 
judgment will be entered against disqualified claimants and they 
will be precluded from relitigating their non-viable claims.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
55 HRCP Rule 23(c)(3) (2011)  provides that a judgment 
can only bind and preclude persons who are members of a class.  
As Plaintiffs note, “exclusion of these individuals from the 
class adjudication process means that they would be free to 
pursue their own claims against Defendants and that there would 
be no res judicata effect on these claims because they were not 
litigated and reduced to judgment.”  Therefore, although some of 
these class members may not have  viable claims, it is 
appropriate to include them in the class in order to preclude 
them from attempting to relitigate their non- viable claims.   15
Moreover, inclusion in the subclass list does not mean 
that a claimant is entitled to damages.  Claimants bear the 
burden of proving that they are qualified to receive damages.  
The court appointed a Special Master to make factual 
determinations, based on evidence, as to which claimants are 
                                                 
15 HRCP Rule 23(c)(3) provides,  
 
(c) Determination by Order Whether Class Action to be 
Maintained; Notice; Judgment; Actions Conducted Partially as
Class Actions.   
 
. . . . 
 
(3) The judgment in an action maintained as a class 
action under subdivision (b)(1) or (b)(2), whether or 
not favorable to the class, shall include and describe 
those whom the court finds to be members of the class. 
The judgment in an action maintained as  a class action 
under subdivision (b)(3), whether or not favorable to 
the class, shall include and specify or describe those 
to whom the notice provided in subdivision (c)(2) was 
directed, and who have not requested exclusion, and 
whom the court finds to be members of the class.    
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
56 entitled to damages.  Any subclass member whose claim is 
excluded because it is not viable will not be entitled to 
damages.  
The circuit court did not err in establishing the 
subclass list.  The class has been certified, and the class list 
is established.  Each class member’s individual entitlement to 
damages will be determined, and no subclass member who is 
“categorically not entitled to relief” will obtain damages or a 
favorable judgment. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
We resolve the foregoing issues as follows.  We 
(1) affirm the February 14, 2013 Order Re FMRV Damages Model in 
accordance with the preceding analysis; (2) affirm the October 
7, 2014 Trial Order adopting the best fit curve and denying 
increases for CPI or present value adjustments; (3) affirm the 
September 22, 2016 order selecting the Ma ili lot as the sample 
residential lot to be used statewide; (4) vacate the January 24, 
2012 order establishing the “six -year rule;”  (5) affirm the 
November 3, 2009 liability order finding that the State breached 
its trust duties by failing to correct ongoing dispossession of 
trust lands; and (6) affirm the June 6, 2007 order certifying 
   
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’ S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
57 
 
the waitlist subclass.  We further hold that the State bears the 
burden of proving that a beneficiary failed to mitigate damages. 
Clyde J. Wadsworth,  
Kimberly T. Guidry, 
Robert T. Nakatsuji, and  
Kalikoonalani D. Fernandes
for Defendants-Appellants/
 
Cross-Appellees  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
 
  /s/ Richard W. Pollack  
       /s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 Carl M. Varady and  
 Thomas R. Grande for  
 Plaintiffs-Appellees/ 
 Cross-Appellants   /s/ Matthew J. Viola  