** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________  
 
OCEAN RESORT VILLAS VACATION OWNERS ASSOCIATION,  
a domestic nonprofit corporation; OCEAN RESORT VILLAS NORTH 
VACATION OWNERS ASSOCIATION, a domestic nonprofit corporation;
VIC H. HENRY; and PETER A. BAGATELOS, Plaintiffs-Appellees, 
 
vs. 
 
COUNTY OF MAUI and MAUI COUNTY COUNCIL, 
Defendants -Appellants.   
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCAP-18-0000578 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-18 -0000578; 2CC181000848)  
 
JUNE 19, 2020 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.,  
WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING ,
WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.   
I.  Introduction  
 This interlocutory appeal from the Circuit Court of the 
Second Circuit (“circuit court”)1 involves a taxpayer challenge 
 
1   The Honorable Peter T. Cahill preside d. Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-18-0000578
19-JUN-2020
02:42 PM** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
2 
 to the timeshare real property tax classif ication created by the 
County of Maui and Maui County Council (collectively, the 
“County”)  in 2004.  Plaintiffs -Appellees are timeshare owners of 
Westin Kaʻanapali Ocean Resort Villas (“ORV”) and Ocean Resort 
Villas North  (“ORVN”) (collectively , “Taxpayers” ).  Taxpayers  
initially filed a Complaint in 2013 and First Amended Complaint 
(“FAC”) in 2014 seeking declaratory relief pursuant to Hawaiʻi 
Revised Statutes ( “HRS”) § 632-1 regarding the legality and 
constitutionality of the County’s timeshare real property tax 
classification and whether its method of promulgation violated  
the Hawaiʻi Sunshine Law  (Counts I through IV) .   
 In preparing its defense  to the initial Complaint , the 
County discovered it had not assessed Taxpayers over $10 mi llion 
in timeshare real property taxes before 2009.  The County then 
issued “amended assessments” to the Taxpayers  for tax years 
2006, 2007, and 2008 for ORV , and 2008 for ORVN , who paid the 
taxes under protest and appealed to the Maui County  Board of 
Review (“BOR”), then on to the Tax Appeal Court  (“TAC”).  The 
Taxpayers  then also filed a Second Amended Complaint (“SAC”) 
alleging the County issued the “amended assessments” in 
retaliation for the  Taxpayers’  lawsuit.  The  SAC added Counts V 
through VII  again seeking declaratory relief pursuant to HRS    
§ 632-1 alleging  illegality and unconstitutionality as well as 
seeking damages and attorneys ’ fees pursuant to 42 U.S.C.      ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
3 
 §§ 1983 and 1988 in Count VIII for the alleged constitutional 
violations .  
 On cross -motions for partial summary judgment, the circuit 
court voided the timeshare real property tax classification as 
illegal, and it ordered the County to refund the Taxpayers the 
$10 million+ in “amended assessments” plus general excise tax  
and interest, as well as approximately $83,000 in fees paid to 
the County BOR, and $111,000 in appeal fees paid to the TAC.  
The circuit court also awarded the Taxpayers over $455,000 in 
attorneys
’ fees and over $18,000 in costs in Count VIII.  The 
County timely appealed, and this court accepted transfer of the 
appeal from the Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) .   
 The County raises seven points of error:  (1) the circuit 
court improperly exercised subject matter jurisdiction over the 
case, as exclusive subject m atter jurisdiction lay with the T AC; 
(2) the voiding of the timeshare real property tax 
classification violated the separation of powers doctrine; (3) 
the circuit court’s ruling that the timeshare real property tax 
classification may only be established th rough “actual use” of 
the property was contrary to the Maui County real property tax 
code; (4) the circuit court’s ruling that the Taxpayers  are 
entitled to tax refunds threatens the County’s fiscal health; 
(5) the circuit court was incorrect in ruling that the “amended 
assessments” were illegal and retaliatory; (6) the circuit ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
4 
 court’s order for a refund of the “amended assessments” and 
related tax appeal fees was an abuse of discretion; and (7) the 
circuit court’s award of attorney’s fees and costs was an abuse 
of discretion.   According to the parties, points of error 1 
through 4 relate to the initial constitutional challenge to the 
timeshare real property tax classification, and points of error 
5 through 7 relate to the SAC’s additional challenges to the 
“amended assessments.”   
 During the course of briefing before this court, the 
parties participated in  voluntary mediation and entered into a  
partial settlement with respect to the “amended assessment” 
points of error  (i.e., Points of Error 5, 6, and 7) .  They then 
stipulated to partially dismiss this appeal and remand the case 
to the circuit court for vacatur of the final judgment and 
various orders on the “amended assessment” Counts (Counts V, VI, 
VII, and VIII of the SAC).   The County also contemporaneously 
filed a motion for partial dismissal of the appeal, again based 
on the parties’ partial settlement , and asked this court to 
directly order vacatur of the circuit court’s final judgment and 
orders on the “amended assessments” counts.   The Taxpayers filed 
a notice of no opposition .   
 A majority of this court disapproved of the stipulation  
and denied the motion to dismiss.  As further explained below, 
we noted, “This court has adopted the United States Supreme ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
5 
 Court’s holding in U.S. Bancorp Mortg. Co. v. Bonner Mall 
P’ship, 531 U.S. 18, 29 (1994), that , in general,  ‘mootness by 
reason of settlement does not justify vacatur of a judgment 
under review.’  See Goo v. Arakawa , 132 Hawaiʻi 302, 314, 321 
P.3d 655, 665 (2014).”   We further observed that , as a practical 
matter, the parties had stipulated to vacate one of the  circuit 
court’s orders that contained an issue still under review in the 
present appeal.   
 In examining this appeal, we now note that the first point 
of error, challenging the circuit court ’s subject matter 
jurisdiction , is dispositive  in our review  of the circuit court  
decisions certified for interlocutory appeal , which involved 
Counts I and V through VIII of the SAC.  We hold that the 
circuit court was without subject matter jurisdiction over 
Counts I and V through VII  of the Taxpayer s’ SAC.  Although 
there is a right to jury trial for declaratory judgment actions 
under HRS § 632 -1, In re Marn Family  Litig., 141 Hawaiʻi 1, 8, 
403 P.3d 621, 628 (2016) , Taxpayers  sought declaratory relief in 
those counts pursuant to HRS § 632 -1, which explicitly provides 
that “declaratory relief may not be obtained . . . in any 
controversy with respect to taxes[.] ”  The partial ruling as t o 
Count I and the final judgment as to Counts V through VII 
certified for interlocutor y appeal were based on declaratory 
rulings regarding such “controvers[ies] with respect to taxes. ”   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
6 
  With respect to those counts, t he Taxpayers  were instead 
required to  challenge the legality and constitutionality of Maui 
County’s real property timeshare classification and rates 
through the procedures set forth in HRS chapter 232 and Maui 
County Code  (“MCC”) chapter 3.48 , which require an appeal to the 
county BOR, then to the TAC.  
 In addition, with respect to the final judgment for Count 
VIII (the 42 U.S.C § 1983 count requesting a jury trial and 
damages due to alleged federal constitutional violations, for 
which attorneys ’ fees and costs were awarded by the circuit 
court pursuant to 42 U.S.C § 1988 ), the circuit court ’s judgment 
was dependent on the federal constitutional violations declared 
by the circuit court to have existed in counts over which it 
lacked subject matter jurisdiction.2  Therefore, the final 
judgment on Count VIII must also be set aside.   
 We therefore vacate the circuit court’s orders and judgment 
giving rise to this interlocutory appeal and remand this case to 
the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. 
 
 
 
 
2  See also infra note 19.  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
7 
 II.  Procedural history  
A.  Complaint, FAC, and SAC  
 On August 19, 2013, the Taxpayers  filed a Complaint 
challenging the constitutionality of Maui County Ordinance No. 
3227, which created the County’s timeshare real proper ty tax 
classification  in 2004, and demanded  a jury trial .  With respect 
to “jurisdiction, ” Taxpayers specially alleged that 
“[j]urisdiction  in this Court is proper pursuant to          
[HRS §] 632 -1.”   
 According to the Taxpayers, immediately prior to the 
establishment of a separate real property tax classification for 
timeshares, timeshares  had been  included in the “hotel and 
resort” real property tax classification  and therefore taxed at 
the hotel and r esort rate .  The Taxpayers  alleged that the 
County’s creation of a separate real property timeshare tax 
classification, and its accompanying high er rate, was intended 
to make up for losses in revenue from the transient 
accommodations tax (“TAT”), which is a state tax shared with the 
counties .  They also alleged that Maui County Resolution      
No. 13-60, which established the 2014 timeshare real property 
tax rate, was adopted in violation of Hawaiʻi’s Sunshine Law.  
The Taxpayers represented that they paid their real property 
taxes for the 2014 fiscal year under protest.   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
8 
  Count I of the Complaint alleged an equal protection 
violation  under the United States Constitution and the Hawaiʻi 
State Constitution .  The Taxpayers alleged that the timeshare  
real property tax rate was the highest real property tax rate in 
the county, although timeshare use does not differ from hotel 
and resort use.  They also alleged that the tax 
disproportionately impacted nonresidents, who are the 
overwhelming majority of t imeshare owners in the county of Maui.  
Count II alleged a Sunshine Law violation.  The Taxpayers  
alleged that some Maui County Councilmembers “sought to secure 
other Councilmembers’ commitment to vote on the timeshare tax 
rate” through communications  that violated the Sunshine Law .  
Thus, the Taxpayers requested relief in the form of a 
declaration that (1) the timeshare classification and tax rate 
violated the equal protection clauses of the United States 
Constitution and Hawaiʻi State Constitution,  and (2) Maui County 
Resolution No. 13 -60, establishing the fiscal year 2014 real 
property timeshare tax rate, was void as violative of the 
Sunshine Law.   
 On August 28, 2014, the Taxpayers filed their FAC.  
Taxpayers agai n asserted jurisdicti on pursuant  to HRS § 632 -1.  
The FAC added another Sunshine Law violation count , alleging 
that some Maui County Councilmembers communicated improperly 
with other Councilmembers to secure their votes for Maui County ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
9 
 Resolution No. 14-54, which established the fiscal year 2015 
timeshare real property tax rate.  The FAC also alleged that the 
fiscal year 2014 and 2015 Sunshine Law violations deprived the 
Taxpayers of due process under the United States Constitution 
and Hawaiʻi State Co nstitution.  As a result of the addition of 
these two new counts, the four total counts were renumbered as 
follows:  Count I (equal protection), Count II (due process), 
Count III (Sunshine Law violation for fiscal year 2014), and 
Count IV (Sunshine Law vio lation for fiscal year 2015) .  The 
Taxpayers again requested relief in the form of a declaration  
that (1) the timeshare classification and tax rate s violated the 
equal protection clauses of the United States and Hawaiʻi 
Constitutions,  and that  (2) Maui Cou nty Resolution Nos. 13 -60 
and 14-54, establishing the fiscal year 2014 and 2015 real 
property timeshare tax rates, respectively, were void as 
violative of the Sunshine Law, and, therefore, also violated the 
Taxpayers’ procedural due process rights under th e United States 
Constitution and Hawaiʻi State Constitution.   
 Taxpayers were later granted leave to file the SAC.3  Once 
again, Taxpayers alleged jurisdiction pursuant to HRS § 632 -1.  
In the SAC, filed August 12, 2016, they alleged that the County 
 
3  The County unsuccessfully opposed the Taxpayers’ motion for leave to 
file the SAC.  The County argued that the circuit court lacked subject matter 
jurisdiction over the tax disputes involving the “amended assessments,” as 
exclusive subject matter jurisdict ion lay with the TAC.   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
10 
 had issued to them “amended assessments” in 2016 for tax years 
2006, 2007, and 2008 for ORV, and for 2008 for ORVN , in 
retaliation for the Taxpayers’ lawsuit .  For those years, the 
County had taxed the land and buildings in ORV and ORVN but had 
not assessed the timeshare real property tax.  The County’s 
“amended assessments” totaled over $10  million and were due in 
30 days.  T he Taxpayers st ated they paid the taxes under protest 
and appealed the “amended assessments” to the County BOR , paying 
a $75 filing fee for each of the 1,115 appeals brought by 
timeshare owners.  In response to these “amended assessments,” 
the Taxpayers  added four more counts to their Complaint:  Count 
V (declaratory judgment as to the illegality of the “amended 
assessments”), Count VI ( violations of the right to free speech 
and the right to petition the government for redress under the 
United States Consti tution and Hawaiʻi State Constitution ), Count 
VII (violation of procedural due process  under the United States 
Constitution and the Hawaiʻi State Constitution ), and Count VIII 
(42 U.S.C. § 1983 claim  for damages based on the constitutional 
violations ).  
 The Taxpayers again requested a declaration  that (1) the 
real property timeshare classification and fiscal year 2014 and 
2015 rates were unconstitutional, (2) the Maui County 
resolutions establishing the fiscal year 2014 and 2015 real 
property timeshare tax  rates were void as violative of the ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
11 
 Sunshine Law  and, therefore, violated Taxpayer’s procedural due 
process rights, and  that (3) the “amended assessments” were 
invalid and unenforceable because they violated the Maui County 
Code; the rights to free speech , to petition the government for 
redress, and to procedural and substantive due process under the 
United States Constitution and the Hawaiʻi State Constitution ; 
therefore, the Taxpayers were entitled to refunds of real 
property taxes and appeal fees paid .4    
B.   The County’s motion for summary judgment as to Counts I and 
 II of the FAC  
 
 On July 1, 2016, the County moved for summary judgment on 
Counts I and II of the FAC, arguing that the circuit court 
lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the case, as  the TAC had 
exclusive jurisdiction over tax disputes.   They quoted HRS      
 
4  On August 12, 2015, the Taxpayers’ filed a complaint against the County 
in Civ. No. 15 -1-0435 before Second Circuit Court Judge Rhonda I. L. Loo.  In 
it, they alleged that the County set the fiscal year 2016 timeshare real 
property tax rate in County Resolution No. 15 -52 in violation of the Sunshine 
Law (Count I), which violated their due process rights under the United 
States Constitution and the Hawaiʻi State Constitution (Count II).  The 
Taxpayers again sought a declaration to that effect from the circuit court.   
 A month later, the County filed its answer and a counterclaim for set -
off and/or damages against the Taxpayers.   The County counterclaimed for set -
off, against any damages claimed by the Taxpayers, the amount of real 
property timeshare taxes owed by the Taxpayers due to the County’s erroneous 
underassessment of real property taxes before 2009.   
 In November 2015, the Taxpayers moved to dismiss the counterclaim.  
They argued that the circuit court lacked subject matter jurisdiction because 
the MCC “vests the [BOR] and [TAC] with exclusive jurisdiction over appeals 
of contested tax liability. . . .”   The Taxpayers then moved to consolidate 
the matter before Judge Loo with the instant proceeding before Judge Cahill.  
Judge Cahill denied the motion to consolidate.  Judge Loo then agreed with 
the Taxpayers, and granted their motion to dismiss the County ’s counterclaim.  
According to the County, the Taxpayers ultimately dismissed, with prejudice, 
the lawsuit before Judge Loo.     
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
12 
 § 232-12, which states that the T AC “shall determine all 
questions of fact and all questions of law, including 
constitutional questions. . . .”  The circuit court denied the 
motion.   
C.  Disposition of Counts V, VI, VII, and VIII of the SAC   
 On December 1, 2016, the Taxpayers  filed four separate 
motions for partial summary judgment as to Counts V, VI, VII, 
and VIII of the SAC.  On December 12, 2017, the County filed its 
own motion for partial summary judgment as to Count V of the 
SAC.  The County also filed an opposition to th e Taxpayers’ 
motion for partial summary judgment as to Count V, arguing that 
the circuit court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over Count 
V, as exclusive subject matter jurisdiction lay with the T AC 
over this  tax dispute . 
 On January 26, 2017, the circu it court filed the “Court’s 
Sua Sponte Order.”   In it, the circuit court stated as follows 
with respect to  subject matter jurisdiction:  
 On the issue of the Court’s jurisdiction to hear the 
issues related to real property taxes, it is noted that the 
Constitution of the State of Hawaiʻi preserves any party’s 
right to a trial by jury.  One or more party in this case 
has requested jury trial.  Once it has been demanded, the 
jury demand applies to all unless a mutual waiver has been 
agreed upon.  
 The statute creating a “TAX COURT” states that the 
Tax Court shall decide all issues of fact and law.  HRS    
§ 232-13.  The statute does not authorize the Tax Court to 
empanel a jury for any purpose or to decide those issues 
that a party would otherwise h ave a right to be determined 
by a jury.  Although the statutes creating the Tax Court 
discuss a party’s ability to raise “constitutional issues,” 
the statute appears to be devoid of a mechanism whereby a ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
13 
 person’s right to trial by jury on those issues is 
preserved.  HRS § 232 -15.  In addition, the precise 
question that the Tax Court has jurisdiction to decide is 
set forth in HRS § 232 -13. 
 
The question of the circuit court’s subject matter jurisdiction 
had come up  because the Taxpayers had  challenged the “a mended 
assessments” b oth in circuit court and by bringing appeals 
before the County BOR and TAC.  The circuit court therefore  
invited the parties to submit further briefing  addressing “(1) 
whether the Court’s view of the statutes and law is accurate; 
(2) if accurate discuss how does such a view comports [sic] with 
each party’s rights; and (3) assuming this court exercises 
jurisdictions [sic] what if any impact does that have on the 
current status of any pending tax appeal, and how should this 
Court handle t hose issues. ”   
 The principal argument in t he Taxpayers’ further briefing 
was that the circuit court had jurisdiction over the case 
because they challenged the legality of the “amended 
assessments ,” not just the ir amount.  For this proposition, 
Taxpayers cited Kingdom and Territory of Hawaiʻi cases, most of 
which predated the tax appeal provision s in HRS chapter 232  and 
MCC chapter 3.48 .  See infra note 13.   
 The County argued that the Taxpayers’ challenge to the  
legality of the  “amended assessments” was a challenge to the 
“change in valuation of the same property,” or the amount of the 
assessments.  It contended that exclusive subject matter ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
14 
 jurisdiction over the contested amount of taxes lay with the 
TAC.  
 On August 9, 2017, t he circuit court  ruled in the 
Taxpayers’ favor on the “amended assessment” counts in the SAC  
(Counts V, VI, VII, and VIII) .5  It ordered the County to refund 
the Taxpayers  the over $10 million in “amended assessments,” as 
well as $83,325.00 in appe al fees to the BOR they had paid.  By 
further order, the  circuit court directed  the County to pay 
$540,545.94 (representing $111,400.00 in appeal fees the 
Taxpayers  paid to the T AC, and $429,145.94 in general excise 
taxes the Taxpayers  paid to the State).  The ci rcuit court later 
granted the Taxpayer s’ request for $455,749.56 in attorneys’ 
fees and $18,177.43 in costs  in Count VIII .  
 The circuit court concluded i t could assert subject matter 
jurisdiction over the “amended assessment” counts , Counts V 
through VIII of the SAC,  because HRS § 232 -13 does not empower 
the TAC to empanel a jury.  It went on to conclude that “circuit 
courts are courts of general jurisdiction, and their subject 
matter jurisdiction extends to all matters properly brought 
before them, unless precluded by constitution or statute.”   The 
 
5  The circuit court ’s August 9, 2017 order is titled “Court’s Findings of 
Fact, Conclusions of Law; Order Granting Plaintiffs’ Motions for Partial 
Summary Judgment on Counts V, VI, VII and VIII of the Second Amended 
Complaint Filed August 12, 2016, filed on December 1, 2016; and Denying 
Defendants County of Maui and the Maui County Council’s Motion for Partial 
Summary Judgment as to Count V of the Plaintiffs’ Second Amended Complaint 
Filed 2016 -08-12, Filed on December 12, 2016. ”  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
15 
 circuit court further stated that the “TAC does not have 
exclusive jurisdiction over [the Taxpayers’ claims] in this 
case, which specifically challenge the legality of the Amended 
Assessments, not th eir amount.”  The circuit court stated that 
the TAC had no power to grant the Taxpayers’ requested relief, 
which was a declaration that the taxes were unconstitutional.   
Lastly, the circuit court concluded that it had asserted 
jurisdiction over the “amende d assessment” claims first; 
therefore, it would retain jurisdiction through the conclusion 
of the case.   
D.  Disposition of Count I of the SAC  
 The Taxpayers then turned to Count I of the SAC, which 
alleged an equal protection violation under the United S tates 
Constitution and the Hawaiʻi State Constitution.  On September 
29, 2017, the Taxpayers  filed a “Motion for Partial Summary 
Judgment, Based on Use, as to Count 1 (Equal Protection) of the 
Second Amended Complaint Filed August 12, 2016.”  They argued 
there was no rational basis supporting different real property 
taxation rates for timeshares versus hotels, where there was no 
difference in actual use of the two types of properties.   
 On December 19, 2017, the Taxpayers  filed a “Motion for 
Partial Summary Judgment Re: Illegality of the Timeshare Real 
Property Tax Classification ,” also as to Cou nt I.  They argued  
that the County had no authority  to create a tax on timeshares ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
16 
 to remedy disparities in state TAT revenues.  They elaborated 
that the M CC authorizes real property tax classifications based 
on distinctions in use only .  Further, they cont ended that the 
Hawaiʻi State Constitution gives the state, not counties, power 
over remedying any disparities in assessing or distributing the  
TAT.   
 In its memorandum in opposition, the County countered  that 
the Taxpayers’ arguments that timeshare and hotel use are 
identical, and that the timeshare real property tax is a de 
facto TAT, are factually erroneous.   The County asserted that 
the rational bas es behind the timeshare real property tax 
classificati on included collecting a more equitable share of 
taxes for County services used by timeshare owners, eliminating 
the tax disparity between hotels and timeshares, and 
disincentivizing hotel conversion to timeshares.    
 On March 23, 2018, the circuit court ruled in the 
Taxpayers’ favor .6  The circuit court found that the County’s 
purpose in establishing the timeshare real property tax 
classification was to remedy a perceived disparity in TAT 
assessments.   The circuit court concluded that such purpose 
 
6  The circuit court ’s ruling was titled “Findings of Fact, Conclusions of 
Law; Order Granting Plaintiffs’ Motion for Partial Summary Judgmen t Re: 
Illegality of the Timeshare Real Property Tax Classification, Filed December 
19, 2017, and Denying as Moot Plaintiffs’ Motion for Partial Summary 
Judgment, Based on Use, as to Count I (Equal Protection) of the Second 
Amended Complaint Filed August 12 , 2016, Filed September 29, 2017.”   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
17 
 violated the MCC, which requires that tax classifications of 
real property be based on actual use.  The circuit court 
concluded that the timeshare real property tax classification  
was “illegal and void.”   
E.  Appeal  
 On June 25, 2018, the circuit court entered orders allowing 
interlocutory appeals of its rulings in Counts I and V through 
VIII of the SAC.7   
 The County then timely filed its Notice of Appeal from the 
June 25, 2018 orders certifying the interlocutory appeals.  This 
case was subsequently transferred from the ICA to this court .  
The County raises the following points of error, the first of 
which is dispositive of this appeal : 
(1) The circuit court’s assertion of subject matter 
jurisdiction over this case was wrong because s pecial and 
exclusive subject matter jurisdiction lay with the [TAC];  
 
(2) the circuit court’s ruling voiding the Timeshare real 
property taxation classification was contrary to the 
constitutional doctrine of separation of powers;  
  
(3) the circuit court’s ruling that the Timeshare real 
property taxation classification may only be established 
upon consideration of the “actual use” of property was 
 
7  The circuit court ’s orders are entitled (1) “Order Certifying for 
Interlocutory Appeal the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law; (Illegality) 
Order, Filed March 23, 2018, Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes Section  
641-1(b) and Staying Proceedings under Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure 
Rule[s] 62(d) and (e),” its partial ruling as to Count I, and (2) “Order 
Certifying for Interlocutory Appeal Counts V, VI, VII, and VIII of the Second 
Amended Complaint, Filed August 12, 2016, Pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Civil 
Procedure Rule 54(b), and Staying Proceedings under Hawaii Rules of Civil 
Procedure Rule[s] 62(d) and (e).”  On July 2, 2018, the circuit court entered 
final judgment on Counts V, VI, VII, and VIII of the Second Amended 
Complaint.   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
18 
 wrong and contrary to the Maui County real property tax 
code;  
 
(4) the circuit court’s r uling that the [Taxpayers]  are 
entitled to as much as $34,000,000 in tax refunds was 
wrong, an abuse of discretion, and threatens the County’s 
bond credit rating and the fiscal security of its 
residents;  
 
(5) the circuit court’s ruling (that the County’s decision 
to assess back taxes upon the Taxpayers  for Timeshare real 
property taxes that were inadvertently not previously 
taxed, was unconstitutional as “illegal” and “retaliatory”) 
was wrong;  
 
(6) the circuit court’s order for a refund for [Taxpayers]  
of the paid back taxes and appeal fees, pending an Appeal 
in [the TAC] , was an abuse of discretion; and  
 
(7) the circuit court’s award of attorneys’ fees and costs 
to [Taxpayers]  was an abuse of discretion.   
 
F.  Partial settlement on appeal 
 The partie s then voluntarily submitted their appeal to  the 
Center for Alternative Dispute Resolution’s Appellate Mediation 
Program (“ CADR AMP ”).  Six months later, the CADR  AMP filed a 
report informing the court that “[t]he parties partially settled 
or narrowed issu es, but were unable to resolve the entire 
appeal” and “case returned to appellate docket).”  In a status 
report, t he parties represented that mediation had resolved 
points of error 5, 6, and 7, and that only the first four points 
of error remain to be reso lved by this court.  The parties 
stated that they entered into a Settlement and Release Agreement  
in which they agreed to seek vacatur of the circuit court’s 
orders and judgments concerning the “amended assessments .”   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
19 
  The parties contemporaneously filed a “Stipulation for 
Partial Dismissal of Appeal with Prejudice and for Remand .”  The 
parties stipulated to dismiss with prejudice, pursuant to HRAP 
Rule 42(b),8 that part of the appeal involving points of error 5, 
6, and 7 .  To that end, they agreed to seek vacatur of those 
circuit court orders and judgment giving rise to points of error 
5, 6, and 7, including the circuit court’s August 9, 2017 order .9  
To the extent that order contained rulings regarding the circuit 
court’s subject matter jurisdiction, however, the parties asked 
this court not to vacate the order.  In other words, on the face 
of the Stipulation and Order, the parties agree to dismiss an 
order that they acknowledge may contain an issue still before 
this court.   
 The parties further stipulated “that . . . this Court 
remand the matter in part, only as to the dismissed Points of 
Error, to the [circuit court] for further action as separately 
agreed by the parties in their settlement agreement.”  Under the 
 
8  HRAP Rule 42(b) is titled “Dismissal in the appellate courts,’ and it 
provides the following:  
 
If the parties to a docketed app eal or other proceeding 
sign and file a stipulation for dismissal, specifying the 
terms as to payment of costs, and pay whatever fees are 
due, the case shall be dismissed upon approval by the 
appellate court, but no mandate or other process shall 
issue wit hout an order of the court.  Upon motion and 
notice, the appellate court may dismiss the appeal upon 
terms fixed by the appellate court.  
 
9  See supra note 5. 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
20 
 parties’ Settlement and Release Agreement, the “further action” 
referred to was an agreement  to “jointly request that the Hawaiʻi 
Supreme Court dismiss the Amended Assessment Appeal from SCAP 
No. 18-0000578 . . . [and] remand this matter in part to the 
Second Circu it Court, for further action,” namely the joint 
filing of a “Stipulation and Order Partially Lifting Stay”  in 
order to vacate the circuit court’s orders and final judgment on 
the “amended assessment” counts.10      
 A week later, the County filed a “Motion  for Partial 
Dismissal of Appeal with Prejudice and Remand for Vacating of 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Orders and Partial Final 
Judgment” (“Motion to Dismiss”).   Although the Motion to Dismiss 
and the Stipulation and Order both seek a dismissal of the part 
of this appeal stemming from the orders and final judgment on 
the “amended assessment” counts, the Motion to Dismiss went 
further than the Stipulation and Order and directly asked this 
court to “direct the circuit court on remand to v acate” the 
orders and final judgment on the “amended assessment” counts, 
“if this court deems it appropriate.”    
 
10  Under the Settlement and Release Agreement, the County refunded to the 
Taxpayers  the over $10 million in amended assessments they paid, plus 
interest, as well as the BOR fees totaling over $83,000.00.  The Taxpayers  
will keep this refunded amount.   The County will also pay the Taxpayers  
$585,326.99 (attorneys’ fees and costs and T AC appeal fees).  The parties 
will work out GET taxes owed after the 2020 tax season.    ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
21 
  A majority of this court disapproved of the Stipulation and 
Order and denied the Motion to Dismiss.  The majority noted , 
“This court has adopt ed the United States Supreme Court’s 
holding in U.S. Bancorp Mortg. Co. v. Bonner Mall P’ship , 531 
U.S. 18, 29 (1994), that ‘mootness by reason of settlement does 
not justify vacatur of a judgment under review.’  See Goo v. 
Arakawa, 132 Hawaiʻi 302, 314, 3 21 P.3d 655, 665 (2014).”  The 
majority further observed that the parties had stipulated to 
vacate one of the circuit court’s orders that may still be at 
issue in the present appeal.  
III. Standards of review 
A.  Jurisdiction  
 “The existence of jurisdiction is a question of law that we 
review de novo under the right/wrong standard.  Questions 
regarding subject matter jurisdiction may be raised at any stage 
of a cause of action. . . .  A judgment rendered by a circuit 
court witho ut subject matter jurisdiction is void.”  Amantiad v. 
Odum, 90 Hawaiʻi 152, 159, 977 P.2d 160, 167 (1999) (citations 
omitted).  
B.  Interpretation of statutes and ordinances  
 Statutory interpretation is a question of law 
reviewable de novo.  This court’s statutory construction is 
guided by established rules:  
 
First, the fundamental starting point for 
statutory interpretation is the language of the 
statute itself.  Second, where the statutory 
language is plain and unambiguous, our sole ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
22 (continued. . .)  
 duty is to gi ve effect to its plain and obvious 
meaning.  Third, implicit in the task of 
statutory construction is our foremost 
obligation to ascertain and give effect to the 
intention of the legislature, which is to be 
obtained primarily from the language contained 
in the statute itself.  Fourth, when there is 
doubt, doubleness of meaning, or 
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an 
expression used in a statute, an ambiguity 
exists. 
 
 When interpreting a municipal ordinance, we apply the 
same rules of construction that w e apply to statutes.  
 
Rees v. Carlisle , 113 Hawaiʻi 446, 452, 153 P.3d 1131, 1137 
(2007) (citations omitted).   
IV.  Discussion  
A.   The circuit court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over 
 the Counts I and V through VIII of the Taxpayers’ SAC  
 
 1.  The parties’ arguments11 
 
11  We note that the Hawaiʻi Tax Foundation was given leave to file a  brief 
of amicus curiae in this appeal.  The Tax Foundation states it is a “non -
partisan, non -political IRC § 501(c)(3) organization whose mission is to 
educate taxpayers and lawmakers on taxation and public finance.”   
 The Tax Foundation acknowledges that “HRS § 632 -1, the declaratory 
judgment statute on which [the Taxpayers] premised circuit court jurisdiction 
in their original and first amended complaints, forbids declaratory judgments 
in tax controversies.”  The Tax Foundation goes on, however, to argue that 
circuit court jurisdiction “is allowed whe n the lawsuit is not attempting to 
keep government from assessing and collecting taxes, so there is no bar when 
the taxes in question have already been paid.”  In the Tax Foundation’s view, 
the Taxpayers are not attempting to keep the government from asses sing or 
collecting taxes because they paid their timeshare real property taxes under 
protest.  The Tax Foundation cites to Grace Bus. Dev. Corp. v. Kamikawa , 92 
Hawaiʻi 608, 613 n.5, 994 P.2d 540, 545 n.5 (2000) , for this proposition.  
This case does not a pply to the present appeal, as it held that there was no 
“actual dispute ” before over which the TAC could have had jurisdiction under 
HRS § 40 -35, the “Payment to state under protest ” statute, and that a “formal 
administrative decision, such as a notice of  assessment, denial of refund, or 
an adverse ruling ” was required before such a suit could be brought.  92 
Hawaiʻi at 612, 613,  994 P.2d at 544, 545.  Thus, that case is clearly 
distinguishable, as Taxpayers here are contesting “assessments. ”   
 The Tax Foundation also acknowledges that “[s]tatutes and ordinances 
relating to tax appeals have established specialized procedures for 
contesting tax assessmen ts and specialized bodies such as the Boards of 
Review and the Tax Appeal Court,” citing HRS chapter 232 and MCC chapter 
3.48.  In other words, “tax controversies in court are usually handled by the ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
23 
  
 The County’s first point of error is that the circuit court 
lacked subject matter jurisdiction over this case because 
special and exclusive subject matter jurisdiction lay with the 
TAC.  The County supports its position by citing  to the tax 
appeal provisions in HRS chapter 232  and MCC chapter 3.48, as 
well as Kinkaid v. Bd. of Rev. , 106 Hawaiʻi 318, 104 P.3d 905 
(2004).12  The County argues that there is no “identifiable 
constitutional provision, statute, or code provision pursuan t to 
which the [c]ircuit [c]ourt could have asserted general subject 
matter jurisdiction over an area of law specifically carved out 
by statute and recognized by this Court as the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the [TAC]. . . .”  The County therefore asks us 
to void the circuit court’s final judgment; as well as its 
orders on Counts I, V, VI, VII, and VIII; and to dismiss this 
 
(continued . . .) 
[TAC].”  Although the Tax Foundation urge s this court to uphold the circuit 
court’s exercise of jurisdiction over this case, due to the five years’ worth 
of work that went into litigating it, ultimately the Tax Foundation expresse s 
doubt that the circuit court could award the Taxpayers damages in the form of 
tax refunds without “subvert[ing] the prescribed tax appeal processes. . . .”   
  
12  The County relies heavily upon Kinkaid for the proposition that special 
and exclusive subject matter jurisdiction over tax matters lay with the TAC.  
Kinkaid’s holding was not that broad.  In Kinkaid, taxpayers had already 
appealed their real property assessments to the BOR and brought dueling  
appeals from the BOR to both the TAC and the circuit court.  Kinkaid, 106 
Hawaiʻi at 320, 104 P.2d at 907.  We held only that the TAC has exclusive 
jurisdiction over appeals from the BOR , to the exclusion of the circuit 
court.  Kinkaid, 106 Hawaiʻi at 324, 104 P.2d at 911.  Thus, Kinkaid does not 
aid us in addressing the issue in this appeal, which is whether the circuit 
court had original subject matter jurisdiction to entertain this tax 
challenge, to the exclusion of the BOR and TAC.   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
24 
 case, without prejudice, for lack of subject matter 
jurisdiction.       
 The Taxpayers disagree, asserting that the circuit court 
had jurisdiction over their case.  They contend  that their 
challenge to the County’s real property timeshare tax 
classification was to the constitutionality and legality, and 
not the amount, of the assessment.  Therefore, they argue, they 
could not have brought their claims to the BOR, which cannot 
decide questions of constitutionality or illegality.  
Consequently, they argue, they could not have brought their 
claims to the TAC, because an appeal to the TAC must come from 
the BOR.  The Taxpayers then assert that circuit courts exercise 
general jurisdiction, and that their subject matter extends to 
all matters properly brought before them unless precluded by 
constitution or statute, citing State v. Kotis , 91 Hawaiʻi 319, 
326 n.9, 984 P.2d 78, 85 n.9 (1999).  By contrast, they state, 
the TAC is a court of limited jurisdiction, hearing and 
deciding, without a jury, direct appeals from tax assessors’ 
assessments or decisions made by a county BOR, citing Lewis v. 
Kawafuchi , 108 Hawaiʻi 69, 73, 116 P.3d 711, 715 (App. 20 05).  
Lastly, the Taxpayers cite to cases primarily from the Kingdom ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
25 (continued. . .)  
 and Territory of Hawaiʻi13 to support the proposition that there 
is a distinction between “challenges to the legality of a tax, 
 
13  The Taxpayers  cite to McBryde v. Kala , 6 Haw. 529 (Haw. King. 1884); 
Hilo Sugar Co. v. Tucker , 8 Haw. 148 (Haw. King. 1890); Shaw v. Booth , 14 
Haw. 117 (Haw. Terr. 1902); Hill v. Yee Chan & Co. , 31 Haw. 809 (Haw. Terr. 
1931); In re Taxes Maui Agr. Co. , 34 Haw. 515 (Haw. Terr. 1938); In re Smart , 
54 Haw. 250, 505 P.2d 1179 (1973); and Grace Bus. Dev. Corp. v. Kamikawa , 92 
Hawaiʻi 659, 994 P.2d 591 (App. 1999).  None of these cases have retained 
their vitality on the issue of the circuit court’s subject matter 
jurisdiction.   The first five cases ( McBryde, Hilo Sugar Co. , Shaw, Hill, and 
In re Taxes Maui Agr. Co. ) all involve the old distinction between the 
regular courts, which could address the illegality of an assessment, and the 
specialty tax boards an d courts, which could not.  See McBryde, 6 Haw. at 530 
(holding tax court was without authority to decide whether double taxation 
was illegal, because double taxation was not among the enumerated issues the 
tax court was authorized by statute to address); Hilo Sugar Co. , 8 Haw. at 
150 (holding circuit court “may interfere where the assessment is illegal,” 
but not “to review the judgment of the Assessor in estimating values); Shaw, 
14 Haw. at 119 (“In general, questions of judgment and fact are for the 
assessors and the specially constituted tax courts and questions of 
constitutionality . . . are for the regular courts.”); Hill, 31 Haw. at 812 
(holding that a taxpayer could collaterally attack, in circuit court, an 
updated assessment as an “unauthorized and i nvalid” exercise of power by the 
assessor); In re Taxes Maui Agr. Co. , 34 Haw. at 551 (holding that the tax 
courts lacked jurisdiction to determine the validity of an assessment).  In 
re Taxes of Maui Agr. Co.  appears to have been overruled by In re Valley  of 
Temples Corp. , 56 Haw. 229, 230 -31, 533 P.2d 1218, 1219 (1975), which held, 
“We hold that In re Taxes Maui Agr. Co. , supra, decided in 1938, is no longer 
applicable authority in the determination of the Tax Appeal Court’s 
jurisdiction in real property tax appeals.  Since 1939 the Legislature has 
expressly provided that an appeal from a final decision of the Board to the 
Tax Appeal Court ‘shall bring up for determination all questions of fact and 
all questions of law, including constitutional questions  involved in the 
appeal.’ 1939 S.L.H. c. 208, § 7; HRS § 232 -17 (Supp. 1974).”  ( Emphasis 
added; footnote omitted).  In re Valle y of the Temples Corp.  thus implicitly 
overruled the pre -1938 cases, McBryde, Hilo Sugar Co. , Shaw, and Hill, as 
well.  Similarly, In re Smart , 54 Haw. 250, 505 P.2d 1179, appears to have 
been superseded by the statute cited in In re Valley of Temples, Cor p., HRS  
§ 232-17.  In re Smart  held that “where Taxpayer’s suit contests the 
valuation placed upon the real property by the tax assessor rather than the 
legality of the assessment, we are of the opinion that the language of HRS    
§ 246-46 [requiring appe als of assessments to come before the BOR or TAC] 
applies exclusively,” and remanding the case to the circuit court for 
dismissal.  54 Haw. at 252, 505 P.2d at 1181.  Lastly, it is true that the 
Taxpayers’ last case, Grace Bus. Dev. Corp. v. Kamikawa , 92 Hawaiʻi at 669, 
994 P.2d at 601 held that “[w]here . . . the dispute is not over the amount 
of the taxes, but over their basic validity, HRS § 40 -35 [which allowed suit 
in the circuit court] is the avenue for taxpayer relief.  Where the dispute 
is over the amount of the value or tax assessed, chapter 232 [requiring 
appeal to the BOR and TAC] appl[ies].”  The case was reversed by this court 
in Grace Bus. Dev. Corp. , 92 Hawaiʻi 608, 994 P.2d 504, because there was no ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
26 
 which may be raised initially in a court of original 
jurisdiction, from challenges to the amount of a valuation or 
tax, which may not.”14    
 
(continued . . .) 
“actual dispute,” since the taxpayers were not assessed any taxes before they 
brought their challenge to the TAC.   
 
14  The Taxpayers also argue that the County “conflates the jurisdictional 
considerations underlyi ng the Illegality Order and the [“Amended 
Assessments”] Order; however, we note that the Taxpayers’ arguments 
concerning subject matter jurisdiction as to both aspects of this case are 
largely the same.   Thus, we treat the issue of the circuit court’s subj ect 
matter jurisdiction as pertaining to all of the orders and the judgment that 
are the subjects of this interlocutory appeal . 
 We note that the only additional reasons the circuit court gave for 
exercising jurisdiction over the “amended assessments” counts w ere that (1) 
the Taxpayers had made a jury demand in their complaint, FAC, and SAC, and 
the TAC is not empowered to empanel a jury under HRS § 232 -13, and (2) that 
the circuit court had exercised jurisdiction first.  These reasons do n ot 
support an exercise of the circuit court’s jurisdiction over this real 
property tax appeal.  
 First, the right to a jury trial presupposes jurisdiction in the 
circuit court to begin with.  The right alone is not an independent basis for 
jurisdiction in t he circuit courts.  Hawaiʻi State Constitution article I, 
section 13 states , “In suits at common law where the value in controversy 
shall exceed five thousand dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be 
preserved. ”  In determining whether a suit is “at co mmon law,” the test is 
“whether the cause of action seeks legal or equitable relief.”  In re Marn 
Family Litig ., 141 Hawaiʻi at 8, 403 P.3d at 628.  Thus, courts look to “the 
nature of the remedy to determine whether a jury trial is warranted.”  Id.  
Generally, where the remedy requested is legal, there is a right to jury 
trial; by contrast, where the remedy requested is equitable, there is no 
right to jury trial.  Id.  In this case, the Taxpayers requested declaratory 
relief, for which there is generally a right to jury trial.  Id.  However, 
HRS § 632 -1 precludes declaratory relief in tax controversies.  Therefore, 
there is no relief requested b y Taxpayers that would afford them the right to 
a jury trial  in Counts I and V through VII certified for interlocutory 
appeal.  And although there would also be a right to jury trial under Count 
VIII, the 42 U.S.C. § 1983 count, liability under that count was based on the 
circuit court ’s declaration of federal constitutional violations in other 
counts over which it lacked subject matter jurisdiction.  Therefore, t he 
right to a jury trial does not provide a basis for subject matter 
jurisdiction in the circui t court as to the counts before us . 
 Second, lack of subject matter jurisdiction can be raised at any point 
in the proceedings, regardless of whether the circuit court “exercised 
jurisdiction first.”  Questions regarding subject matter jurisdiction “may be 
raised at any stage of a cause of action. . . .  A judgment rendered by a 
circuit court without subject matter jurisdiction is void.”  Amantiad , 90 
Hawaiʻi at 159, 977 P.2d at 167.  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
27 
  This first point of error concerning the circuit court’s 
subject matter jurisdiction is dispositive of the entire 
interlocutory appeal.  As a preliminary matter, we note that the 
Taxpayers consistently sought declaratory relief in their 
Complaint, FAC, and SAC  pursuant to HRS § 632 -1.15  As further 
discussed below, d eclaratory relief under HRS § 632 -1 is not 
available  for “any controver sy with respect to taxes ” that seeks 
to interfere with the County’s authority to assess and collect 
real property timeshare taxes.  Rather, the Taxpayers should 
have proceeded through the tax appeal procedures set forth in 
HRS chapter 232 and MCC chapter 3.4 8, which require an appeal of 
assessments to the County BOR and TAC, even for questions 
 
15  As noted, Taxpayers specifically  referenced HRS § 632 -1 in their  
Complaint, FAC, and SAC.  T he Taxpayers’ initial Complaint requested relief 
in the form of a declaration that (1) the timeshare classification and tax 
rate violated the equal protection clauses of the United States Constitution 
and Hawaiʻi State Constitut ion, and (2) Maui County Resolution No. 13 -60, 
establishing the fiscal year 2014 real property timeshare tax rate, was void 
as violative of the Sunshine Law.  The Taxpayers’ FAC again requested relief 
in the form of a declaration that (1) the timeshare cla ssification and tax 
rates violated the equal protection clauses of the United States and Hawaiʻi 
Constitutions, and that (2) Maui County Resolution Nos. 13 -60 and 14 -54, 
establishing the fiscal year 2014 and 2015 real property timeshare tax rates, 
respecti vely, were void as violative of the Sunshine Law, and, therefore, 
also violated the Taxpayers’ procedural due process rights under the United 
States Constitution and Hawaiʻi State Constitution.  The Taxpayers’ SAC again 
requested relief in the form of a de claration that (1) the real property 
timeshare classification and fiscal year 2014 and 2015 rates were 
unconstitutional, (2) the Maui County resolutions establishing the fiscal 
year 2014 and 2015 real property timeshare tax rates were void as violative 
of the Sunshine Law and, therefore, violated Taxpayer’s procedural due 
process rights, and that (3) the “amended assessments” were invalid and 
unenforceable because they violated the Maui County Code; the rights to free 
speech, to petition the government for redress, and to procedural and 
substantive due process under the United States Constitution and the Hawaiʻi 
State Constitution; therefore, the Taxpayers were entitled to refunds of real 
property taxes and appeal fees paid.   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
28 
 involving the constitutionality or illegality of an assessment.16  
As to Counts I and V through VII  certified for interlocutory 
appeal, w e therefore agree with the Coun ty that the circuit 
court lacked subject matter jurisdiction to address the 
assessments challenged by the Taxpayers in this case .  In 
addition, a s Count VIII, the 42 U.S.C. § 1983 count, is 
dependent on alleged constitutional violations declared in other 
counts certified for interlocutory appeal, that part of  the 
judgment must be set aside on that basis also.17   
 2. HRS § 632-1 precludes declaratory relief in  
  “any controversy with respect to taxes ” 
 
 We address HRS § 632 -1 first.  As specially stated in the 
Complaint, FAC, and SAC, this case was brought seeking 
 
16  We note that equal protection challenges to County tax assessments have 
come to this court through the County BORs and the TAC .  See, e.g. , Corboy v. 
Louie, 128 Hawaiʻi 89, 283 P.3d 695 (2011) (county taxpayer suit alleging 
denial of exemption from real property taxes equal to the exemption granted 
to Hawaiian homestead lessees under the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act 
violated their right to equal protection under the United States Constitution 
and Hawaiʻi State Constitution, and seeking a refund of real property taxes 
paid).  Similarly, cases like the Taxpayers’ , challenging County real 
property tax classifications  as illegal or violative of constitutional equal 
protection, have also come to this court through the County BORs and the TAC.  
See, e.g. , Gardens at West Maui Vacat ion Club v. Cty . of Maui, 90 Hawaiʻi 334, 
978 P.2d 772 (1999) (county taxpayer suit alleging that re -classification of 
Maui timeshares from “apartment” to “hotel/resort” classification violated 
equal protection under the United States Constitution and the Hawaiʻi State 
Constitution);  Kinkaid, 106 Hawaiʻi 318, 104 P.3d 905 (county taxpayer suit 
alleging that re -classification of their residential units from “apartment” 
to “hotel and resort” was “unlawful”).  The legal challenges raised in the 
Taxpayers’ case  are of the kind that the TAC is authorized and able to 
address.  
   
17  See also infra note 19. ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
29 
 declaratory relief under HRS § 632-1, which provides the 
following:  
In cases of actual controversy, courts of record, within 
the scope of their  respective jurisdictions, shall have 
power to make binding adjudications of right, whether or 
not consequential relief is, or at the time could be, 
claimed, and no action or proceeding shall be open to 
objection on the ground that a judgment or order mere ly 
declaratory of right is prayed for; provided that 
declaratory relief may not be obtained  in any district 
court, or in any controversy with respect to taxes , or in 
any case where a divorce or annulment of marriage is 
sought.   
 
(Emphasis added.)   
 The instant case is a “controversy with respect to taxes. ”  
We recently interpreted that phrase in Tax Foundation v. Hawaiʻi, 
144 Hawaiʻi 175, 439 P.3d 175 (2019) .  In that case, the Tax 
Foundation brought a complaint for declaratory relief under HRS 
§ 632-1.  144 Hawaiʻi at 181, 439 P.3d at 133.  It  brought claims 
under the Hawaiʻi State Constitution challenging  the Department 
of Budget and Finance ’s practice of r etaining, for 
administrative costs, a portion of the City and County of 
Honolulu’s rail surcharge on general excise and use taxes.  Id.   
The circuit court granted the State’s motion to dismiss the 
complaint, which asserted, inter alia,  that the circuit co urt 
lacked subject matter jurisdiction because HRS § 63 2-1 prohibits 
declaratory relief in any controversy with respect to taxes.  
144 Hawaiʻi at 182, 183, 439 P.3d at 134 , 135.    ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
30 
  We concluded that the circuit court erred in dismissing the 
Tax Foundation’s complaint for lack of subject matter 
jurisdiction, because the Tax Foundation’s complaint was not a 
“controversy with respect to taxes” under HRS § 632 -1.  144 
Hawaiʻi at 188, 439 P.3d at 140.   We explained that the Tax 
Foundation was not “dis put[ing] its liability to pay general 
excise and use tax, or the Honolulu County surcharge.”  Id.  
Rather, it contested “only the ‘administration and allocation’ 
of the Honolulu County surcharge after it is assessed and 
collected.”  Id.  We therefore  adopted the holding in Hawaiʻi 
Ins. Council v. Lingle , 117 Hawaiʻi 454, 184 P.3d 769 (App. 
2008), that declaratory relief “may be obtained in tax matters 
under HRS § 632-1 where such relief does not interfere with the 
assessment o r collection of taxes .”  Id. (emphasis added).     
 In this case, however, the Taxpayers’ Complaint, FAC, and 
SAC all sought declaratory relief in the form of voiding the 
County’s real property timeshare tax, a result which would 
“interfere with the assessm ent or collection of taxes.”  
Therefore, in this case, the Taxpayers’ suit is a “controversy 
with respect to taxes,” for which declaratory relief under HRS  
§ 632-1 is not allowed.  For that reason, the circuit court 
lacked jurisdiction over the Taxpayers’  suit.   
 This is not to say that Taxpayers were without recourse in 
challenging the legality or constitutionality of the real ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
31 
 property timeshare tax classification , rates, or assessments .  
Their recourse was through the county procedures for appealing 
tax assessments.  We note that the Hawaiʻi State Constitution, 
article VIII, section 3 sets forth the counties’ authority over 
real property taxes as follows:  “ The taxing power shall be 
reserved to the State, except so much thereof as may be 
delegated by the  legislature to the political subdivisions, and 
except that all functions, powers and duties relating to the 
taxation of real property shall be exercised exclusively by the 
counties , with the exception of the county of Kalawao.”  
(Emphasis added.)  HRS chapter 232 , titled “Tax Appeals,”  
reinforces the primacy of the tax appeal procedures set forth in  
County codes like  MCC chapter 3.48 , titled “Real Property Tax .”  
HRS § 232 -3 is titled “Grounds for appeal, real property taxes,” 
and it states that a taxpayer aggrieved by an assessment must 
show a “[l]ack of uniformity or inequality, brought about by 
illegality of the methods used or error in the application of 
the methods to th e property involved ,” HRS § 232 -3(2), or 
“[i]llegality, on any ground arising under the Constitution or 
laws of the United States or the laws of the State (in addition 
to the ground of illegality in the methods used, mentioned in 
[HRS § 232 -3(2)],”  HRS § 232-3(4).  Similarly, MCC § 3.48.605, 
titled “Grounds -- Real property taxes,” provides that a 
taxpayer aggrieved by an assessment must show:  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
32 
 B.  Lack of uniformity or inequality, brought about by 
inability [sic] of the methods used or error in the 
application of the methods to the property involved; or  
. . . .  
E.  Illegality, on any ground arising under the 
Constitution or laws of the United States or the laws of 
the State or the ordinances of the County in addition to 
the ground of illegality of the met hods used, mentioned in 
subsection B of this section.  
 
 In this case, portions of Count I as well as Counts V 
through VII have been certified for interlocutory appeal.  I n 
Count I, the Taxpayers allege d that the County’s real property 
timeshare tax classification and rates violated the equal 
protection clause s of the United States Constitution and the 
Hawaiʻi State Constitution , because timeshares were taxed at a 
much higher rate than hotels and resorts , even though the actual 
use of both classifications of real property was similar.   
Likewise, Count V sough t a declaratory judgment as to the 
illegali ty of the “amended assessment,"  Count VI alleged  
violations of the right to free speech and the right to p etition 
the government for redress under the United States Constitution 
and Hawaiʻi State Constitution , and Count VII alleged  a violation 
of procedural due process under the United States Constitution 
and the Hawaiʻi State Constitution .  Also, the attorney s’ fees 
and costs awarded under Count VIII, the 42 U.S.C § 1983 count, 
were dependent upon the constitutional violations found by the 
circuit court in other counts; therefore  Count VIII was 
dependent on the rulings regarding unconstitutionality in other ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
33 (continued. . .)  
 counts, so the award of attorneys’ fees and costs must be set 
aside.18  Taxpayers alleged they were not liable for taxes, and 
they requested and obtained an order from the circuit court 
ruling the taxes illegal and unconstitutional and ordering a 
refund of t axes already paid.  Thus, as HRS § 632 -1 precludes 
declaratory judgments for “controvers[ies] with respect to 
taxes” that “interfere [] with the assessment or collection of 
taxes,” the circuit court lacked subject matter jurisdiction  as 
to Counts and V through VII and as to the liability portion of 
Count VIII, which was dependent on the other counts .19   
 
18  See also infra note 19. 
 
19  With respect to Count VIII asserting a 42 U.S.C. § 1983 violation, w e 
note that i n National Private Truck Council, Inc., v. Oklahoma Tax 
Commission , 515 U.S. 582 (1995), the United States Supreme Court explicitly 
held as follows:  
 
In determining whether Congress has authorized state courts 
to issue injunctive and declaratory relief in state tax 
cases, we must interpret  § 1983 in light of the strong 
background principle against federal interference with 
state taxation.   Given this principle, we hold that  § 
1983 does not call for either federal or state courts to 
award injunctive and declaratory relief in state tax cases 
when an adequate lega l remedy exists. Petitioners do not 
dispute that Oklahoma has offered an adequate remedy in the 
form of refunds. Under these circumstances, the Oklahoma 
courts’ denial of relief under  § 1983 was consistent with 
the long line of precedent underscoring the federal  
reluctance to interfere with state taxation.  
 
 This holding expanded on the Court ’s previous holding in Fair 
Assessment in Real Estate Ass ’n, Inc. v. McNary , 454 U.S. 100 (1981), in 
which the Court held that 42 U.S.C.  § 1983 does not permit federal courts to 
award damages in state tax cases when state law provides an adequate remedy. 
454 U.S. at 116.  
  
 In National , the Court went on to state:  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
34 (continued. . .)  
  We note that Taxpayers are not without remedies to obtain 
the relief they request .  A taxpayer aggrieved by an assessment 
can appeal to the County BOR under HRS § 232 -15 (titled “Appeal 
to board of review”).20  The taxpayer can raise questions 
 
(continued . . .) 
Of course, nothing we say prevents a State from empowering 
its own courts to issue injunctions and declaratory 
judgments even when a legal remedy exists.  Absent a valid 
federal prohibition, state courts are free to issue 
injunctions and declaratory judgments under  state law.  
When a litigant seeks declaratory or injunctive relief 
against a state tax pursuant to  § 1983, however, state 
courts, like their federal counterparts, must refrain from 
granting federal relief under  § 1983 when there is an 
adequate legal remedy.  
 
515 U.S. at 592.   
 
 Based on  National  and Fair Assessment , some state courts of last resort 
have held that st ate courts cannot entertain 42 U.S.C §  1983 claims brought 
by taxpayers where state law provides an adequate remedy.  See, e.g., Francis 
v. City of Columbus , 676 N.W.2d 346 ( Neb. 2004) (holding that where state law 
provides an adequate legal remedy, state courts cannot entertain a § 1983 
claims); Kowenhoven v. County of Allegheny , 901 A.2d 1003 ( Penn. 2006) 
(holding that taxpayers challenging county assessment practices had adequate 
state law remedy that precluded claim for § 1983 money damages); Jade 
Aircraft Sales, Inc. v. Crystal , 674 A.2d 834 (Conn. 1996)  (holding that 
because taxpayer challenging use tax in connection with taxpayer ’s in-state 
use of airplane purchase d out-of-state had an opportunity to receive an 
adequate legal remedy, trial court did not have jurisdiction to entertain the 
§ 1983 action); General Motors Corp. v. City of Linden , 671 A. 2d 560 (N.J. 
1996) (holding in taxpayer case alleging due process vi olation for alleged 
discrimination by city in assessing automobile assembly plant, adequacy of 
state law remedies barred state courts from providing relief under § 1983 for 
tax claim); and Camps Newfound/Owatonna Corp. v. Town of Harrison , 705 A.2d 
1109 (Maine 1998)  (requiring dismissal of § 1983 claim brought by taxpayer 
challenging constitutionality of statute denying property tax exemption for 
nonprofits operated principally for out -of-state residents because state law 
provided adequate remedy).   
 
 Because this issue was not briefed by the parties, we do not further 
address this issue at this time.   
 
20  HRS § 232 -16, titled “Appeal to tax appeal court,” allows direct 
appeals to the TAC, but not where taxpayers are appealing a real property tax 
assessment.  In appeals from real property tax assessments, the taxpayer 
“shall first obtain a decision from an administrative body established by 
county ordinance, prior to appealing to the tax appeal court, if county ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
35 
 involving the United States Constitution, which the BOR is not 
authorized to entertain, but which preserve s the issues for a 
later appeal to the TAC:  
The appeal  shall be considered and treated for all purposes 
as a general appeal and shall bring up for determination 
all questions of fact and all questions of law, excepting 
questions involving the Constitution or laws of the United 
States, necessary to the determi nation of the objections 
raised by the taxpayer in the notice of appeal.   Any 
objection involving the Constitution or laws of the United 
States may be included by the taxpayer in the notice of 
appeal and in such case the objections may be heard and 
determined by the tax appeal court on appeal from a 
decision of the board of review; but this provision shall 
not be construed to confer upon the board of review the 
power to hear or determine such objections.   
 
HRS § 232 -15 (emphasis added) .  See also MCC § 3.48 .625 (“The 
[BOR] shall have the power and authority to decide all questions 
of fact and all questions of law, excepting questions involving 
the Constitution or laws of the United States, necessary to the 
determination of the objections raised by the taxpay er . . . in 
the notice of appeal; provided, that the [BOR] shall not have 
power to determine or declare an assessment illegal or      
void. . . .”).   
 A taxpayer dissatisfied with the decision of the County BOR 
may appeal to the TAC , at which time the con stitutional 
questions can be addressed:  
 
(continued . . .) 
ordinance requires a taxpayer to do so.”  In this case, MCC § 3.48.595 is a 
county ordinance requiring a taxpayer to “first appeal to the County board of 
review, pursuant to section 232 -16, Hawaii Revised Statutes.”  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
36 
 An appeal shall lie to the tax appeal court from the 
decision of a state board of review, or equivalent 
administrative body established by county ordinance.  
. . . . The appeal shall bring up for determination all 
questions of fact and all questions of law, including 
constitutional questions involved in the appeal . 
      
HRS § 232 -17 (Emphasis added.)   The TAC “shall have the power 
and authority . . . to decide all questions of fact and all 
questions of law, including constitutional questions, involved 
in any such matters, without the intervention of a jury.”  HRS  
§ 232-11; see also HRS § 232 -13 (“[T]he [tax appeal] court shall 
determine all ques tions of fact and all questions of law, 
including constitutional questions, involved in the appeal .”).   
See also  MCC § 3.48.655 ( “The appeal [to the TAC] shall be 
considered and treated for all purposes as a general appeal and 
shall bring up for determination all questions of fact and all 
questions of law, excepting questions involving the Constitution 
or laws of the United S tates, necessary for the determination of 
the objections raised by the taxpayer in the notice of appeal.  
Any objection invo lving the Constitution or laws of the United 
States may be included by the taxpayer in the notice of appeal, 
and in such case, the objections may be heard and determined by 
the tax appeal court on appeal from a decision of the board of 
review.”).  Appeals of TAC decisions go to the ICA (HRS          
§ 232-19), then on to this court (HRS § 602-59), for further 
review of any constitutional rulings.   Contrary to the 
Taxpayers’ assertions, the circuit court was without authority ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
37 
 to exercise general jurisdiction  over this matter, where doing 
so was precluded by HRS chapter 232 and MCC chapter 3.48.  
 In short, the circuit court lacked subject matter 
jurisdiction over th e Taxpayers’ challenges to their real 
property tax assessments , because (1) they raised  a “contr oversy 
with respect to taxes” under HRS § 632 -1, which the circuit 
court was not authorized to entertain, and (2) HRS chapter 232 
and MCC chapter 3.48 provided the process by which Taxpayers 
could bring their challenges to the legality and 
constitutionalit y of the real property timeshare tax 
classification and rates.    
B.   The parties’ stipulation and order was properly 
 disapproved, and the County’s motion for partial dismissal 
 of this appeal was properly denied.   
 The parties asked this court to order the circuit court to 
vacate certain of its orders and its judgment, related to the 
“amended assessments”  counts solely due to their partial 
settlement of the “amended assessment s” points of error.  Had 
this court so acted, the circuit court would hav e vacated the 
very order containing its erroneous assertion of subject matter 
jurisdiction , before this court would have had a chance to 
review it .21   
 
21  See text accompanying note 9 as well as supra note 5. ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
38 
  Moreover,  there are grave concerns posed by adopting a 
process by which an appellate court, based solel y on settlement 
of the parties on appeal, approves a stipulation to dismiss an 
appeal, where the parties’  end goal is vacating a trial court’s 
orders or judgments.  This process, known as a “stipulated 
reversal” or “stipulated vacatur” was discussed in Neary v. 
Regents of Univ . of California , 834 P.2d 119, 131 (Cal. 1992).  
In that case, the California Supreme Court held that its 
“appellate courts have the legal authority to reverse (or 
otherwise vacate) a trial court’s judgment when the parties 
stipulate t o such action as a condition of a proposed settlement 
pending appeal,” absent a showing of extraordinary 
circumstances.  Neary, 834 P.2d at 120, 125.  The Neary court 
supported its holding with the following policy pronouncements:  
(1) settlement agreement s are highly favored, and even a post -
judgment settlement will spare the parties, as well as the 
judiciary, future expenditures of time and money; (2) denying a 
stipulated reversal is unfair to the parties as it does not 
carry out their interests in ending  litigation; and (3) trial 
court judgments can be reversed or vacated by stipulation, as 
trial court judgments are not binding authority in any event.  
834 P.2d at 121 -25.   
 The dissent in Neary presented the following policy reasons 
against adopting the stipulated reversal procedure: (1) ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
39 
 stipulated reversals erode public confidence in the judiciary 
due to the perception that a party with enough financial means 
can “purchase the nullification of the adverse judgment”; (2) 
stipulated reversals discourage pretrial settlements; (3) trial 
court judgments should be preserved for their public value; (4) 
parties should not be allowed to dictate an appellate courts’ 
actions.  Neary, 834 P.2d at 127-33 (Kennard, J., dissenting).  
 The Neary decision has been roundly criticized by legal 
scholars.  See, e.g. , Judith Resnik, Whose Judgment?  Vacating 
Judgments, Preferences for Settlement, and the Role of 
Adjudication at the Close of the Twentieth Century , 41 UCLA L. 
Rev. 1471 (1994); Steven R. Harmon, Unsettling Settlements:  
Should Stipulated Reversals be Allowed to Trump Judgments’ 
Collateral Estoppel Effects Under Neary , 85 Cal. L. Rev. 479 
(1997); Daniel Purcell, The Public Right to Precedent:  A Theory 
and Rejection of Vacatur , 85 Cal. L. Rev. 867 (1997); Michael W. 
Loudenslager, Erasing the Law:  The Implications of Settlements 
Conditioned upon Vacatur or Reversal of Judgments , 50 Wash. & 
Lee L. Rev. 1229 (1993).   One scholar highlighted the “tangible 
but frequently undetectable social costs” of allowing courts to 
consider vacaturs based solely on  the parties’ settlement  during 
the pendency of an appeal :  
These costs include the public cost of forgoing the 
collateral estoppel and res judicata effects of the prior 
judgment.  This cost is borne directly by third party ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
40 
 litigants but shared by the public interest in preventing 
duplicative and piecemeal litigati on.  The costs also 
include the erasure of collateral consequences of an 
adverse judgment, the loss of precedential value for 
judicial decisions, and a diminished respect for the 
judicial process.  Moreover, rather than encouraging the 
settlement process, a judicial rule encouraging routine 
grants of vacatur disrupts the process.  A procedure which 
allows parties to obtain vacatur as a matter of right by 
conditioning a postjudgment settlement on vacatur will 
encourage parties to delay settlement until after  trial 
because the effects of an adverse judgment can be avoided 
at little or no cost by postjudgment settlement.  The 
procedure will also permit the prevailing party to obtain 
as a private windfall the public costs of vacatur, and will 
place the defense o f the integrity of judicial decisions in 
the hands of litigants who are not in a position to 
safeguard the public values inherent therein.  
  
Accordingly, the settlement of a case pending appeal should 
not entitle the litigants to vacatur as a matter of ri ght.  
Rather, the courts should review motions to vacate with the 
presumption that vacatur is not an appropriate tool for 
erasing an unfavorable trial court decision.  The standard 
motion to vacate after a postjudgment settlement, motivated 
solely by the l osing party ’s desire to avoid the collateral 
consequences of that judgment, should be routinely denied.  
Though the litigants should retain the opportunity to 
persuade the court that there is particular prejudice in an 
individual case, such as the unfairne ss presented by the 
Munsingwear [22] doctrine, the litigants should bear the 
burden of convincing the court that this dilemma is not of 
their own making.  Absent such a showing, the judgment in a 
case which has been resolved through settlement should 
enjoy the same vitality as that in any other case in which 
the losing litigant chooses not to appeal.   
  
Jill E. Fisch,  Rewriting History:  The Propriety of Eradicating 
Prior Decisional Law Through Settlement and Vacatur , 76 Cornell 
L. Rev. 589, 641 -42 (1991) (emphasis added) . 
 The United States Supreme Court rejected the stipulated 
reversal process for federal courts in U.S. Bancorp Mortg. Co. 
v. Bonner Mall P’ship , 513 U.S. 18 (1994).  One commentator  
 
22  See United States v. Munsingwear , 340 U.S. 36, 39 -40 (1950) (allowing 
an appellate court to vacate or reverse a trial court judgment during the 
pendency of an appeal when the case is mooted  through “happenstance”).  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
41 
 characterized Bancorp as “having dealt perhaps the most 
significant blow to Neary” without even mentioning it by name.   
Harmon, Unsettling Settlements , 85 Cal. L. Rev. at 481.  In 
Bancorp, the United States Supreme Court addressed “whether 
appellate courts in the federal system should vacate civil 
judgment s of subordinate courts in cases that are settled after 
appeal is filed or certiorari sought.”  Bancorp, 513 U.S. at 19.  
In other words, the issue was “whether courts should vacate 
where mootness results from a settlement.”  513 U.S. at 23.  The 
Bancorp court answered in the negative : 
We hold that mootness by reason of settlement does not 
justify vacatur of a judgment under review.  This is not to 
say that vacatur can never be granted when mootness is 
produced in that fashion.  As we have described, the 
determination is an equitable one, and exceptional 
circumstances may conceivably counsel in favor of such a 
course.  It should be clear from our discussion, however, 
that those exceptional circumstances do not include the 
mere fact that the settlement agreement provides for 
vacatur —- which neither diminishes the voluntariness of 
the abandonment of review nor alters any of the policy 
considerations we have discussed.  Of course even in the 
absence of, or before considering the existence of, 
extraordinary circumstances, a court of appeals presented 
with a request for vacatur of a district -court [sic] 
judgment may remand the case with instructions that the 
district court consider the request, which it may do 
pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Pro cedure 60(b).  
  
Bancorp, 513 U.S. at 25 (emphasis added).  In terms of policy 
considerations against vacatur following settlement on appeal, 
the Bancorp court noted, “Where mootness results from settlement 
. . . the losing party has voluntarily forfeited h is legal 
remedy by the ordinary processes of appeal or certiorari, 
thereby surrendering his claim to the equitable remedy of ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
42 
 vacatur.”  Bancorp, 513 U.S. at 25.  The Court continued, “To 
allow a party who steps off the statutory path to employ the 
secondar y remedy of vacatur as a refined form of collateral 
attack on the judgment would -- quite apart from any 
consideration of fairness to the parties -- disturb the orderly 
operation of the federal judicial system.”  Bancorp, 513 U.S. at 
27.   
 Thus, Bancorp strongly discouraged stipulated vacaturs and 
reversals based solely on settlement on appeal.  The Bancorp 
court, however,  retained an exception to this rule, previously 
articulated in dictum in Munsingwear , 340 U.S. 36 , that 
“mootness by happenstance provid es sufficient reason to vacate.”  
Bancorp, 513 U.S. at 25 n.3.  Happenstance includes 
circumstances unattributable to any of the parties , and it does 
not include settlement, which the parties enter into 
voluntarily.  Bancorp, 513 U.S.  at 23-27.   
 In Goo, this court generally adopted the United States 
Supreme Court’s holding  and policy reasons23 from Bancorp, 531 
U.S. at 29, that “mootness by reason of settlement does not  
 
23 Goo also noted a further undesirable unintended co nsequence of allowing 
parties to stipulate to vacatur after settlement on appeal as follows:  “This 
practice had led to a situation where ‘repeat litigants,’ such as insurance 
companies, were settling cases after losing at the trial level against ‘one -
time litigants,’ such as policy -holders, but only on the condition that 
judgments adverse to the interests of the repeat litigant were vacated,” thus 
enabling insurance companies to “eradicate or reduce the number of pro -policy 
holder decisions and then argue that the weight of authority [was] in their 
favor.”  Id. (citation omitted, brackets in original).   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
43 (continued. . .)  
 justify vacatur of a judgment under review.”  See Goo, 132 
Hawaiʻi at 314-15, 321 P.3 d at 665-66.  Goo characterized Bancorp 
as holding “that appellate courts could no longer vacate lower 
court judgments based solely on a settlement agreement, which 
represents a voluntary abandonment of the right to appellate 
review, absent ‘exceptional’ o r ‘extraordinary’ circumstances.”  
132 Hawaiʻi at 314, 321 P.3d at 665.24   
 Goo went on, however, to observe that where a fact -
intensive inquiry is required in order to determine, in the 
first instance, whether mootness on appeal was the result of 
happenstance or a party’s voluntary action, then it is 
appropriate for the appellate court to remand the case  to the 
trial court for its evaluation.  132 Hawaiʻi at 317-18, 321 P.3d 
at 667-68.25  Under those circumstances, Goo held, “[W]hen a case 
 
24  Respectfully, the dissent therefore misapprehend s the holding  of Goo 
when it states “this court  . . . examined this issue  . . . and . . . 
concluded that, when parties to a case on appeal seek vacatur of the trial 
court’s order pursuant to settlement, the appropriate course is to remand the 
case so that the trial court may consider the equities of the motion for 
vacatur. ”   
  
25  In Goo, real property developers had had their preliminary plat 
approval rescinded after Maui County changed its height restriction 
ordinance.  132 Hawaiʻi at 307, 321 P.3d at 659.   The developers then met 
privately with the Maui mayor and secured his permission to con tinue 
developing the project.  Id.  Neighboring homeowners then successfully sued 
the developers, the mayor, and the county planning director seeking 
declaratory and injunctive relief requiring the county to enforce the new 
height restriction ordinance.  132 Hawaiʻi at 308, 321 P.3d at 659.  Upon the 
denial of their motion for attorney’s fees, the homeowners appealed to the 
ICA.  132 Hawaiʻi at 309, 321 P.3d at 660.   On appeal, the case was mooted 
when the Maui County Council passed an ordinance essentially grandfathering 
in the development at its planned height, as part of a “global settlement” of 
various lawsuits concerning the new height restriction ordinance.  132 Hawaiʻi ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
44 (continued. . .)  
 becomes moot on appeal and the trial court has not had an 
opportunity to evaluate a motion for vacatur, the appellate  
court, in the absence of exceptional circumstances, should 
remand the case to the trial court to give the court  the first 
opportunity to evaluate the cause of the mootness based on a 
complete record” instead of the appellate court itself vacating 
the judg ment.  132 Hawaiʻi at 317, 321 P.3d at 668.  Goo did not 
in any way preclude an appellate court from declining a request 
to vacate a trial court judgment.  Goo’s further statement, that 
“when a case is mooted while on appeal, the appellate court 
should, absent e xceptional circumstances, remand the case to the 
trial court for a consideration of the vacatur issue,”26 
 
(continued . . .) 
at 310, 312, 321 P.3d at 66 1, 663.  The developers persuaded the ICA to 
vacate the circuit court’s judgment due to mootness.  132 Hawaiʻi at 311, 321 
P.3d at 662.   On certiorari, this court vacated the ICA’s judgment and 
remanded the case to the circuit court to determine whether va catur of its 
order was appropriate, because it was unclear whether mootness occurred by 
happenstance or through the voluntary action of a party (the County).  132 
Hawaiʻi at 318, 321 P.3d at 66 9.  
 In this case, no fact -intensive inquiry is required, as th is settlement 
was the result of the parties ’ voluntary action.  The dissent would instead  
presumptively  allow remand s for the trial court to consider the equities of 
vacatur even without circumstances requiring a fact -intensive inquiry . 
 
26  The context of this sentence in Goo differs from the dissent ’s 
characterization .  Goo stated that where a fact -intensive inquiry is required 
in order to determine whether mootness on appeal was the result of 
happenstance or a party’s voluntary action, then i t is appropriate for the 
appellate court to remand the case to the trial court for its evaluation.  
132 Hawaiʻi at 317-18, 321 P.3d at 667 -68.  The dissent would instead make 
remand for trial court consideration of the equities of vacatur the 
presumption  rather than the exception.  We disagree with the dissent ’s 
assertion that “the trial court is best equipped to make the equitable 
determination of whether vacatur is appropriate .”  Respectfully, this court ’s 
function and role differs from that of trial courts.  This court ’s 
“jurisdiction and powers ” include “mak[ing] . . . such . . . mandates  and ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
45 
 similarly applies only where the cause of mootness on appeal is 
unclear and the inquiry into it fact -intensive  and the appellate 
court has concluded that vacatur may be an appropriate 
disposition in the case .  In short , Goo held that mootness 
solely by reason of settlement does not  justify vacatur of a 
judgment under review , but, where the cause of mootness is 
unclear (i.e., whether it i s the result of happenstance or some 
voluntary action of a party or parties), remand to the trial 
court for its evaluation is appropriate.   Goo, 132 Hawaiʻi at 
314-15, 317, 321 P.3d at 665-66, 668.  The instant case 
represents a clear example of mootness o n appeal solely by 
reason of the voluntary settlement of the parties; therefore, 
remand to the circuit court for its evaluation of vacatur was 
not necessary or desirable.  Rather, disapproval of the parties’ 
stipulation and order, and the County’s motion f or partial 
dismissal, were appropriate.  
V.  Conclusion  
 For the foregoing reasons, the circuit court lacked subject 
matter jurisdiction over the Taxpayers’ challenges to their real 
 
(continued . . .) 
tak[ing] such other steps  . . .  for the promotion of justice . . . . ”  HRS  
§ 602-5(a)(6).  The Neary dissent cited above by  former Justice Joyce Kenn ard 
of the California Supreme Court, who served on that court for thirty -five 
years, succinctly explains why the “promotion of justice” dictates against 
procedures that facilitate stipulated reversals .  
 
   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
46 
 property timeshare tax assessments .  We therefore vacate the 
orders and judgment giving rise to this interlocutory appeal and 
remand this case to the circuit court for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion .   
Brian A. Bilberry 
for appellants  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 /
/
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
s/ Richard W. Pollack    
s/ Michael D. Wilson     
Robert G. Klein 
(Lisa W. Cataldo, 
Becky T. Chestnut, 
Kurt W. Klein, and 
David A. Robyak, 
with him on the briefs)
for appellees 
 
Thomas Yamachika 
for amicus curiae 
Tax Foundation of Hawai ʻi 
