***FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAP-30420 13-APR-2012 
11:09 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
PULUMATA' ALA ELI, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
NO. SCAP-30420
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(ICA NO. 30420; FC-CR NO. 07-1-0066)
 
April 13, 2012
 
ACOBA, DUFFY, AND MCKENNA, JJ.; WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J. CONCURRING
AND DISSENTING, WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS; AND WITH NAKAYAMA,
J., DISSENTING, WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J.
 
We hold in this case that after arrest the police
 
practice of inviting an arrestee to make a statement and to give
 
his or her “side of the story” or similar entreaties in a “pre­interview” before Miranda warnings are given, violates the
 defendant’s right against self-incrimination, article I, section
         
      
           
         
          
        
        
        
        
           
          
          
         
 
       
         
         
          
        
        
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1 2
 10,  and right to due process, article I, section 5 of the
Hawai'i Constitution. 
Further, we hold that under the 
circumstances of this case the Mirandized statement offered into
 
evidence at trial resulted from the exploitation of the said pre­interview practice. The Miranda warnings subsequently given did
 not remove the “taint” of such practice. Accordingly, on the
 grounds set forth herein, we vacate the March 4, 2010 judgment of
 conviction and sentence filed by the circuit court of the first
 
3
circuit (the court)  adjudging Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant
Pulumata' ala Eli (Defendant) guilty of attempted manslaughter, and 
remand for a new trial. 
I. 
The following essential matters, some verbatim, are
 
from the record and the submissions of the parties. 
1 Haw. Const. art I, § 10 provides:
 
No person shall be held to answer for a capital or otherwise
infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a
grand jury or upon a finding of probable cause after a
preliminary hearing held as provided by law or upon
information in writing signed by a legal prosecuting officer
under conditions and in accordance with procedures that the
legislature may provide, except in cases arising in the
armed forces when in actual service in time of war or public
danger; nor shall any person be subject for the same offense
to be twice put in jeopardy; nor shall any person be
compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against
oneself.
 
2 Haw. Const. art I, § 5 provides:
 
No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property
without due process of law, nor be denied the equal
protection of the laws, nor be denied the enjoyment of the
person's civil rights or be discriminated against in the
exercise thereof because of race, religion, sex or ancestry.
 
3 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
2
         
  
        
           
        
    
     
     
     
    
     
     
      
     
    
       
            
         
      
        
       
          
   
        
        
    
         
          
         
         
       
          
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Defendant was arrested on October 27, 2007, for
 
assaulting and seriously injuring his seven-month-old daughter on
 
October 24, 2007, while inside a minivan at Ala Moana Beach Park. 
He was transported to the police station, where he gave a
 statement about the incident. He was indicted on October 31,
 2007, by Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (the 
prosecution or the State) for attempted murder in the second
 degree, with the special circumstance that his daughter was eight
 years of age or younger, Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 705-500 
4 5	  and 706-656 (Supp. 2007).6
(1993), 707-701.5 (1993), 
4	 HRS § 705-500 provides in its entirety as follows.
 
§ 705-500. Criminal attempt. (1) A person is guilty of an
 
attempt to commit a crime if the person:
(a)	 Intentionally engages in conduct which
would constitute the crime if the
 attendant circumstances were as the person
believes them to be; or
 
(b)	 Intentionally engages in conduct which,
under the circumstances as the person
believes them to be, constitutes a
substantial step in a course of conduct
intended to culminate in the person’s
commission of the crime.
 
(2) When causing a particular result is an element
of the crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the
crime if, acting with the state of mind required to
establish liability with respect to the attendant
circumstances specified in the definition of the crime, the
person intentionally engages in conduct which is a
substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known to
cause such a result.
 
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial step
under this section unless it is strongly corroborative of
the defendant’s criminal intent.
 
5
 HRS § 707-701.5 provides in its entirety as follows.
 
§ 707-701.5. Murder in the second degree. (1)
Except as provided in section 707-701, a person commits the
offense of murder in the second degree if the person
intentionally or knowingly causes the death of another
 person.
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for which
the defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment as provided
 
3
         
 
  
        
         
        
    
       
       
       
        
        
       
        
       
    
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
On June 9, 2009, the prosecution filed a “Motion to
 
Determine Voluntariness of Defendant’s Statement,” so that
 
Defendant’s statement could be used at trial. The prosecution’s
 
motion stated, inter alia, that “[a] defendant’s statement may
 not be received into evidence until the prosecution shows that
 the defendant was warned of his Miranda rights, that the
 defendant waived these rights, and that the statement was
 voluntarily made.” (Citing State v. Kreps, 4 Haw. App. 72, 76­77, 661 P.2d 711, 714-15 (1983).)
7 A hearing was held on June 12,
 
2009, in which the interviewing Detective (Detective) of the
 Honolulu Police Department (HPD) testified, as follows, about the
 circumstances in which Defendant gave his statement. 
Defendant had agreed to turn himself in on October 26,
 
2007, but, instead of doing so, left a message with Detective,
 stating that he would turn himself in the next afternoon at
 
in section 706-656.
 
6 HRS § 706-656 provides in relevant part as follows.
 
§ 706-656. Terms of imprisonment for first and second
degree murder and attempted first and second degree murder.
 
. . . .
 
(2) Except as provided in section 706-657, pertaining
to enhanced sentence for second degree murder, persons
convicted of second degree murder and attempted second
degree murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment with
possibility of parole. The minimum length of imprisonment
shall be determined by the Hawaii paroling authority;
provided that persons who are repeat offenders under section
706-606.5 shall serve at least the applicable mandatory
minimum term of imprisonment.
 
7
 Defendant did not file a motion to suppress the statement.
 
4
         
      
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Kapiolani Hospital.8 Defendant was met at the hospital the next
 
day by the police, arrested, and brought to the main police
 
station. 
At the station, Detective met Defendant in an interview
 
room at the central receiving desk and explained to him that he
 was under arrest for assaulting his daughter. Detective
 testified that during this encounter he asked Defendant if he
 wanted to give a statement and “may have mentioned to him that,
 you know, it’s a chance to give me his side of the story.” 
Detective stated that he did not imply to Defendant that by
 hearing his side of the story things might change. Apparently,
 Defendant agreed to make a statement at this point.
 
Detective then activated his tape recorder and used an
 
HPD-81 form to advise Defendant of his constitutional rights. 
Defendant had a copy of the form in front of him as Detective
 read it out loud. Detective testified that he informed Defendant
 of his right to remain silent, his right to terminate the
 interview at any time, his right to stop answering questions, his
 right to an attorney, his right to have an attorney appointed by
 the court if he could not afford one, his right to consult with
 an attorney and have an attorney present during the questioning,
 and that anything he said could be used against him at trial. 
According to Detective’s testimony, Defendant responded to the
 
8
 Defendant’s daughter was apparently hospitalized at Kapiolani
 
Hospital.
 
5
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
questions asked and did not seem to have any problem
 
understanding what was occurring. Detective stated that he asked
 Defendant if he wanted an attorney, to which Defendant responded,
 “No, not now[.]” Defendant filled out the HPD-81 form and waived
 his Miranda rights. 
Detective then began questioning Defendant, and
 
obtained a taped statement from Defendant. In the taped
 statement, Defendant told Detective that on the day of the
 incident, he had been “trying to work things out” with his
 girlfriend in their minivan at Ala Moana Beach Park. Defendant
 said he was frustrated at the time, and that his daughter, who
 was sitting in the back seat, would not stop crying. He stated
 that he hit his daughter on the feet and slapped her on the head
 four times. Defendant then told Detective that he took his
 daughter out of her car seat and dropped her by accident. He
 subsequently admitted to throwing his daughter on the car seat
 “[f]ace first” two times. 
After hearing Detective’s testimony, the court
 
determined Defendant’s statement was “voluntarily, intelligently,
 and knowingly made,” rendering Defendant’s statement admissible
 at trial. Following the voluntariness hearing, Defendant’s jury
 trial began. 
On June 19, 2009, during the proceedings, defense
 
counsel notified the court that there was a second HPD-81 form
 
completed on October 28, 2007, the day after Detective first
 
6
         
 
 
       
          
              
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
interviewed Defendant, in which Defendant refused to waive his
 
Miranda rights.9   Defense counsel asked the deputy prosecuting
 
attorney (DPA) for a recording of the event on October 28, 2007,
 
but the DPA informed defense counsel that no recording existed. 
The court excused the jury and held a hearing to allow defense
 
counsel to question Detective, in court, about the second HPD-81
 
form. 
Detective again testified that, on October 27, 2007,
 
prior to obtaining the taped statement referred to supra, he had
 
a conversation with Defendant before giving Defendant his Miranda
 warnings. During that conversation, “[Detective] asked
 [Defendant] if he wanted to give [Detective] a statement[,]” and
 Defendant “agreed to give [Detective] a statement[.]” When asked
 by Defendant’s counsel, “But the whole purpose of giving the
 Miranda warning is so that he can decide whether he wants to give
 you a statement or not[,]” Detective replied that he “didn’t ask
 [Defendant] any questions about the case.” Detective
 acknowledged that on October 27 he had explained to Defendant
 that it was “[Defendant’s] chance to give his side of the story.”
 
Also, Detective agreed he had obtained “a waiver”
 
before administering the Miranda warnings. The relevant
 testimony is as follows: 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL:] Did you have any conversation with
 
9
 Defense counsel appears to have had received the HPD -81 form in
 
discovery, but “didn’t pick up on the fact” that it was a different one from
 
that which Defendant had filled out on October 27 , 2007.
 
7
         
         
          
             
       
  
     
[DEFENSE  COUNSEL:]  Why  do  you  not  tape  that  part  of  this?
 
So  he  agreed  basically  prior  to  the  time  you  ever  warned  him
of  h is  right  to  remain  silent.
  
[DETECTIVE:]  He  agreed  to  give  me  a  statement  when  I  asked
him  if  he  wanted  to  give  me  a  statement  after  I  informed  him
why  he  was  here,  why  he  was  under  arrest.
  
[DEFENSE  COUNSEL:]  But  the  whole  purpose  of  giving  the
Miranda  warning  is  so  that  he  can  decide  whether  he  wants  to
give  you  a  statement  or  not.
 
[DETECTIVE:]  I  didn’t  ask  him  any  questions  about  the  case.
 
[DEFENSE  COUNSEL:]  Now,  let’s  go  back  to  the  night  before.
  
You  got  him  to  agree  to  give  you  a  statement  before  you  ever
gave  him  the  warnings  of  his  right  to  remain  silent?
  
[DETECTIVE:]  I  asked  him  if  he  wanted  to  give  a  statement.
  
It’s  his  chance  to  give  his  side  of  the  story.
 
[DEFENSE  COUNSEL:]  Is  that  what  you  told  him?
[DETECTIVE:]  Yes,  I  think  -- I  believe  so.
  
[DEFENSE  COUNSEL:]  And  so  at  that  time  you  gave  him  the
Miranda  warnings,  you  had  already  got  an  answer  out  of  him,
a  waiver  that  he  was  going  to  give  a  statement?
  
[DETECTIVE:]  Yes.
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
[Defendant] prior to turning on the tape recorder on the
statement that you took between 1825 hours to 1900 hours on
the 27th or did you ask him whether he was willing to give a
statement before you turned on the tape recorder?
[DETECTIVE:] Yes. Yes.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL:] And he said yes?
[DETECTIVE:]  Yes,  he  was  willing  to  give  a  statement.
  
(Emphases added.) 
Detective stated that subsequently, on October 28,
 
2007, he saw Defendant about injuries discovered on his daughter. 
“Prior to any questioning” and without activating his tape
 recorder, Detective advised Defendant of his 
Miranda rights. At
 
that point, Defendant “elected not to give a statement.” 
Defendant then executed an HPD-81 form reflecting his refusal to
 answer any questions. Although Detective also testified that it
 is HPD standard procedure to tape record the Miranda warnings
 given to suspects in a felony investigation, he did not tape
 record the October 28 “follow-up interview” because he had “asked
 [Defendant] if he was willing to give . . . a statement[,]” and
 “[Defendant] elected not to give a statement.” 
8
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
After Detective testified, Defendant moved to exclude
 
the October 27 Miranda statement on the ground that Detective
 
“obtained the waiver of his right to remain silent prior to
 giving the Miranda warning[,]” and moved for a mistrial, arguing
 that this evidence had not been disclosed. According to
 Defendant, Detective “obtained [Defendant’s] waiver of [his]
 right to remain silent without ever providing Miranda
 warnings[,]” and that mandated that the October 27 statements be
 suppressed. 
In Defendant’s view, “the whole purpose of giving the
 
Miranda warning[s is] so that [the defendant] can decide whether
 he wants to give . . . a statement[.]” Thus, according to
 Defendant, a waiver of silence before being apprised of the
 Miranda rights cannot be a knowing and voluntary waiver of the
 right to remain silent. The court denied Defendant’s motion for
 exclusion of the evidence and for a mistrial, determining that
 “[D]efendant knew he could make a statement or not make a
 statement[,]” and the court had “already determined that the
 statement was made voluntarily.” 
On June 22, 2009, before Defendant’s taped statement
 
was played to the jury, Defendant again moved to suppress the
 October 27 statement and moved for a mistrial. According to
 defense counsel, the Miranda warning could not “undo the taint”
 of the pre-Miranda waiver because Detective “got the mind set of
 [D]efendant . . . to talk rather than not to talk.” These
 
9
         
         
       
        
           
              
        
        
       
        
  
         
         
        
  
         
          
        
        
          
          
     
       
           
  
   
        
     
        
     
      
        
            
 
           
         
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
motions were denied in the following ruling by the court:
 
[Defendant] clearly understood he was arrested for a crime.
The detective identified himself, indicated why he was
talking to the defendant, namely, he was arrested, and
merely asked, would you like to tell me your side of the
story? . . . [T]his was not securing a waiver of . . . his
Miranda [rights] , but merely asking the defendant whether or
not he wanted to make a statement or not.
 
(Emphasis added). The taped recording of Defendant’s statement
 
was then played to the jury. 
On June 30, 2009, the court issued its “Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Finding Voluntariness of
 Defendant’s Statement.” The court made the following relevant
 findings:
 
3. Based on the police investigation, Detective
arranged to have [Defendant] surrender himself to [HPD] on
October 26, 2007.
4. On October 26, 2007, [Defendant] failed to appear
as scheduled and instead, left a phone message to the
detective indicating that he would turn himself in on
October 27, 2007.
5. On October 27, 2007, [Defendant] was arrested by
[HPD] . . . and transported to the main police station.
6. [Defendant] was met by [Detective] who identified
himself, informed [Defendant] that he was arrested for the
assault on his seven-month-old daughter, . . . and may have
asked [Defendant] whether he would like to speak to him and
tell his side of the story.
7. [Detective] testified that [Defendant] stated that
he wanted to speak to him and that he brought [Defendant] to
an interview room[.]
 
. . . .
 11. [Detective] proceeded to warn [Defendant] of his
Miranda rights using HPD 81 form.
 
The court made the following relevant conclusions:
 
2. [Defendant] claims that the statement was not
voluntarily, intelligently or knowingly made since
[Detective] failed to read [Defendant] his constitutional
rights under Miranda prior to asking [Defendant] whether he
would like to speak to him and tell him his side of the
story.
 
. . . . 
5. . . . [A]n individual being subjected to custodial
interrogation must not be asked any questions without being given
Miranda w
arnings. . . .
 
. . . . 
10
         
         
        
       
          
          
   
         
         
      
      
      
           
       
           
        
      
       
        
         
          
         
          
           
           
          
          
         
       
   
        
        
         
        
  
         
         
       
             
        
        
    
         
        
         
       
        
        
       
        
           
         
        
          
        
      
        
    
    
       
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
8. The test to determine if a custodial interrogation
has taken place, for purposes of determining whether Miranda
warnings are required, is whether the investigating officer
should have known that his or her words or conduct were
 reasonably likely to evoke an incriminating response . . . .
 
. . . .
 11. Here, [Defendant] contends that his statement to
[Detective] was involuntarily made and should not be allowed
into evidence. Specifically, [Defendant] claims that,
[Detective]’s failure to advise [Defendant] of his
constitutional rights under Miranda prior to asking
[Defendant] if he wanted to speak to him and tell his side
of the story, rendered the recorded statement inadmissible.
12. In State v. Luton , 83 [Hawai 'i] 443, 927 P.2d 844 
(1996), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court addressed a similar type
of issue presented in this case.
13. In Luton,[], the defendant waived his
constitutional rights under Miranda , and made a statement to
the police after the detective advised the defendant that it
would be in his best interest to give a statement .
14. Following the reasoning in State v. Kelekolio , 74
Haw. 479, 849 P.2d 58 (1993), and Commonwealth v. Meehan , .
. . 387 N.E.2d 527 (Mass. 1979), the Hawaii Supreme Court in
Kelekolio , [74 Haw. at 505, 849 P.2d at 70,] found that the
“‘[m]ere advice from the police that it would be better for
the accused to tell the truth when unaccompanied by either a
threat or a promise does not render a subsequent confession
involuntary.’” [(quoting State v. Amaya-Ruiz , 800 P.2d
1260, 1273 (Ariz. 1990)].
15. Finding that there were no coercive threats,
promises used to extract a confession from the defendant,
the Hawaii Supreme Court held that the statements made by
the defendant were not obtained in violation of the
 defendant’s constitutional rights.
16. Applying the reasoning expressed in Luton, [] to
the evidence in this case, the [c]ourt finds and concludes
that [Detective]’s statement where he asked [Defendant] if
he wanted to speak to him and tell his side of the story did
not rise to the level of advising, threatening and/or
promising the Defendant anything in order to obtain his
statement.
 
. . . .
 18. The [c]ourt finds and concludes that [Detective]
never asked [Defendant] anything about the alleged offense
and his conduct was not designed to elicit a spontaneous
incriminating statement from [Defendant].
19. The [c]ourt finds that [Detective]’s conduct was
preliminary in nature and was made merely to inform
[Defendant] why he was arrested, identify himself and
explain why he was meeting with [Defendant]. Obviously,
since [Defendant] and his girlfriend . . . were the only two
people in the van that could possibly have injured the
infant, [Detective] merely asked [Defendant] if he wanted to
speak to him about the events surrounding the alleged crime.
[Detective] never advised [Defendant] that he should make a
statement, never coerced, threatened or promised [Defendant]
anything for his statement and [Defendant] could have chosen
not to make a statement.
 
. . . .
 23. [Defendant] was read his Miranda rights through
the use of a HPD 81 form, he initial [sic] each statement on
 
11
         
          
          
        
         
     
        
      
      
 
 
        
         
           
          
           
          
           
           
             
            
           
          
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the HPD 81 form indicating that his rights were explained to
him, he understood his rights, and that he elected to waive
his rights and make a statement. [Defendant] indicated he
understood his rights, did not want an attorney, and wanted
to tell [Detective] what happened.
24. The [c]ourt further finds and concludes that
since [Defendant] had effectively waived his constitutional
rights, his statements were made voluntarily, intelligently,
and knowingly.
 
(Some emphasis in original and some emphasis added.)
 
The jury found Defendant guilty of attempted
 
manslaughter. The jury also answered affirmatively two special
 
interrogatories inquiring whether it found Defendant inflicted
 serious bodily injury on a person eight years or younger, and
 whether Defendant knew or should have known that the person was
 eight years or younger. An amended judgment of conviction and
 
sentence was entered on March 4, 2010.
  
II.
 
Notice of appeal to the ICA was filed by Defendant on
 
April 5, 2010. Defendant filed his opening brief on November 30,
 
2010. In connection with Defendant’s statement to Detective, the
 following point of error was raised:
 
A.	 The.  .  .  court  committed  prejudicial  error  by
ignoring  the  suppression  of  the  Miranda
violation,  by  refusing  to  allow  further
proceedings  on  voluntariness, [ 10
]  and  by  denying
10 Defendant maintains that the court “refus[ed]” to allow further
 
proceedings on voluntariness. However, neither Defendant nor the prosecution
point to where in the record Defendant asked for further proceedings on
voluntariness, or argued that the court should conduct additional proceedings.
A review of the record indicates that Defendant did not seek further
 proceedings, but argued that the October 27 statement should have been
suppressed due to a Miranda violation, and moved for a mistrial. Additionally,
the opening brief focuses on the court’s error as denying suppression, and,
other than the question, does not address any refusal by the court to conduct
additional proceedings. Insofar as Defendant did not object to the failure to
conduct further proceedings, and Defendant does not argue in his opening brief
that the court’s refusal to allow further proceedings on voluntariness was
error, this assertion is not addressed further.
 
12
         
 
          
            
          
 
        
          
         
            
         
          
        
             
            
             
            
           
            
            
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
a mistrial. [ 11
]
 
(Capitalizations ommitted.) 
On March 14, 2011, Defendant applied for mandatory and
 
discretionary transfer of his appeal from the ICA to this court.
 
Transfer was accepted on April 15, 2011.
 
III.
 
In connection with the first point of error,12
 
Defendant contends that his statement to Detective must be
 excluded because (1) it was obtained after an unrecorded waiver
 when recording was feasible, and (2) he was subjected to
 interrogation during a “pre-interview” without being advised of
 his Miranda rights.
13 The prosecution answers that Defendant’s
 
statement is admissible because it was knowingly, intelligently,
 and voluntarily made, as concluded by the court. 
In relation to his first contention, Defendant argues
 
(1) that Detective was required by (a) State v. Kekona, 77
 
11 Although the denial of a mistrial is one of Defendant’s stated
 
points of error, Defendant does not directly support it in his argument.
Instead, Defendant makes the contentions set out in the analysis provided
herein.
 
12 Defendant raised three other questions with respect to his
 
extended term sentence. The disposition herein moots those questions.
 
13 Defendant also contends, in the argument section of the opening 
brief, that Defendant was denied a full and fair hearing due to “prosecutorial misconduct[.] He appears to refer to the prosecution’s purportedly“questionable compliance” with Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 16 
(2007), and Detective’s purported “evasive” answers to Defendant’s questions during the June 12 hearing. To the extent that Defendant refers to the October 28 HPD form in connection with any HRPP Rule 16 violation, Defendant’scounsel stated that he had received the HPD form in discovery, but did notrecognize that it was different from the one Defendant filled out on October27. Thus, it is unclear how the prosecution “questionabl[y]] compli[ed]” with
 
HRPP Rule 16. As to Detective’s purported “evasive” answers, inasmuch as a
 finding of “evasiveness” or credibility is not for this court to make, this
argument is not addressed further.
 
13
         
          
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Hawai'i 403, 886 P.2d 740 (1994), and (b) HPD policy, to record 
the encounter with Defendant on October 27, 2007 through which he 
allegedly obtained an unrecorded waiver of Defendant’s constitutional rights, and (2) that as a matter of public policy, any statements obtained after an unrecorded waiver should be per se inadmissible where recording was feasible. 
Defendant relies on Kekona to argue that recording of 
custodial interrogations is required by due process. Kekona held 
that the due process clause of the Hawai' i Constitution does not 
require the recording of custodial interrogations. Id. at 408­
09, 886 P.2d at 745-46. This court stated that “whether the failure of the police to create a record of the defendant’s confession undermines its accuracy and detracts from the credibility of later testimony is an issue uniquely left to the sound discretion of the trier of fact.” Id. at 409, 886 P.2d at 
746. In the present case, the court did not find that
 
Detective’s failure to record his pre-Miranda conversation with
 Defendant undermined the accuracy of Defendant’s statement or
 detracted from the credibility of later testimony.
 
In light of Kekona, we must reject Defendant’s
 
assertion that a violation of the HPD policy on recording renders
 a statement inadmissible
14 and that this court should, as a
 
matter of public policy, exclude statements obtained after an
 
14
 The specific HPD policy on recording is not reproduced by the
 
parties or reflected in the record.
 
14
         
  
    
          
      
          
         
        
       
        
    
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
unrecorded waiver. As noted in Kekona, defendants have the 
opportunity to cross-examine the police officers who conducted their interrogations, and to set forth their own account of events through testimony. Id. After utilizing these tools, 
“[i]t is for the trial judge as fact-finder to assess the credibility of witnesses and to resolve all questions of fact.” State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai' i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996) 
(citing Lono v. State, 63 Haw. 470, 473, 629 P.2d 630, 633 (1981)). Kekona also concluded that even if this court were to 
adopt an exclusionary rule for statements obtained after an unrecorded waiver, the problems with reliability and deception asserted by Defendant would not be resolved.
15
 
IV. 
In connection with his second contention, Defendant
 
argues that his statement must be excluded because he was
 questioned prior to being advised of his Miranda rights. 
Defendant maintains that without being so advised, it cannot be
 determined whether Defendant’s initial agreement to make a
 statement was knowing, therefore tainting his subsequent
 
15
 This court stated in Kekona:
 
[E]ven if we were to hold that the due process clause
mandates the recording of station house interrogations,
there would still be a “hush all over the [state] tonight.”
This time, however, the silence in the station houses would
come from the new police policy of conducting all
interrogations out in the field where, the minority
apparently concedes, the due process clause does not require
that interrogations be recorded.
 
77 Hawai 'i at 409, 886 P.2d at 746 (emphasis in original). 
15
         
          
           
        
           
                
           
              
              
             
            
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Mirandized statement. According to Defendant, Detective 
bifurcated his interrogations, “effecting a pre-Miranda and then a post-Miranda process of interrogation[,]” which constitutes “evasive pre-interviews recently condemned in State v. Joseph, 109 Hawai' i 482, 128 P.3d 795 (2006).” 
A.
 
Article I, section 10 of the Hawai' i Constitution 
provides that “[n]o person shall . . . be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself.” State v. Pau' u, 
72 Haw. 505, 509, 824 P.2d 833, 835 (1992) (quoting article 1, section 10). It is established that “[w]hen a confession or other evidence is obtained in violation of [this right], the prosecution will not be permitted to use it to secure a defendant’s criminal conviction.” Id. (citing State v. Russo, 67 
Haw. 126, 681 P.2d 553 (1984)). 
In State v. Santiago, 53 Hawai' i 254, 266, 492 P.2d 
657, 664 (1971), this court held that “the protections which the United States Supreme Court enumerated in Miranda have an independent source in the Hawai' i Constitution’s privilege 
against self incrimination.”
16 Article I, section 10 of the 
16
 As the United States Supreme Court has said, “[u]nder [ Michigan v.
 
Long, 463 U.S. 1032 (1983)], state courts are absolutely free to interpret
state constitutional provisions to accord greater protection to individual
rights than do similar provisions of the United States Constitution.” Arizona
 
v. Evans, 514 U.S. 1, 8 (1995). “If a state court chooses merely to rely on
federal precedents as it would on the precedents of all other jurisdictions,
then it need only make clear by a plain statement in its judgment or opinion
that the federal cases are being used only for the purpose of guidance, and do
not themselves compel the result that the court has reached.” Long, 436 U.S.
 at 1041. Thus, “[i]f the state court decision indicates clearly and expressly
that it is alternatively based on bona fide separate, adequate, and
 
16
         
          
      
       
          
           
         
            
          
  
             
           
           
             
             
         
         
           
          
            
            
              
        
           
           
          
           
           
          
              
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Hawai'i Constitution requires that, 
before reference is made at trial to statements made by the
accused during custodial interrogation, the prosecutor must
first demonstrate that certain safeguards were taken before
the accused was questioned . . . . [T]he prosecutor must
show that each accused was warned that he had a right to
remain silent, that anything said could be used against him,
that he had a right to the presence of an attorney, and that
if he could no[t] afford an attorney one would be appointed
for him.
 
Id. (emphasis added). Thus, under article I, section 10, the
 
Miranda rule, “a constitutionally prescribed rule of evidence[,]”
 “requires the prosecution to lay a sufficient foundation” being
 “that the requisite warnings were administered and validly
 waived” “before it may adduce evidence of a defendant's custodial
 statements that stem from interrogation during his or her
 criminal trial.” State v. Ketchum, 97 Hawai' i 107, 117, 34 P.3d 
1006, 1016 (2001).
17 If there has been a Miranda violation,
 
“statements made by the accused may not be used either as direct
 evidence . . . or to impeach the defendant’s credibility during
 
independent grounds, [the decision will not be reviewed by the Court.]” Id. 
The decision in this case rests on “bona fide separate, adequate, andindependent state [constitutional] grounds.” See id. Federal law is being
used only for the purpose of guidance, and does not compel the result thatthis court has reached. See id. Rather, the Hawai 'i Constitution and the 
case law thereunder are the bases for this decision. 
17 It must be emphasized that the Miranda requirement, based on 
article 1, section 10 of the Hawai 'i Constitution, requires warnings to be
given prior to questioning in a custodial setting, while constitutional dueprocess, based on article 1, section 5 of the Hawai 'i Constitution, requires a 
statement to be “voluntary” in order to be admissible. See Ketchum , 97 
Hawai'i at 117 n.18, 34 P.3d at 1016 n.18. “Put differently, if a defendant's
Miranda rights against self-incrimination have been violated, then any
resulting statement will be inadmissible at trial as a per se matter,
obviating the need for any [voluntary] due process inquiry into whether thedefendant’s confession has been coerced[.]” State v. Naititi , 104 Hawai 'i 
224, 237, 87 P.3d 893, 906 (2004). “Correlatively, having been properlyMirandized , if a defendant who is subjected to custodial interrogation makes a
statement, then, depending on the circumstances, an inquiry into whether thedefendant’s right to due process of law has been violated via coercion, . . .may be warranted.” Id. 
17
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
rebuttal or cross-examination.” Id. at 116, 34 P.3d at 1015. 
Indeed, “[i]t is a fundamental tenet of criminal law that ‘the 
prosecution may not use statements, whether exculpatory or inculpatory, stemming from custodial interrogation of the defendant unless it demonstrates the use of procedural safeguards effective to secure the privilege against self-incrimination.’” State v. Wallace, 105 Hawai' i 131, 137, 94 P.3d 1275, 1281 (2004) 
(quoting Naititi, 104 Hawai' i at 235, 87 P.3d at 904). 
Therefore, absent Miranda warnings, any statements made in the course of custodial interrogation without a valid waiver are inadmissible at trial. Id. 
To reiterate, Defendant argued before the court that
 
Defendant’s October 27 Mirandized statement must be suppressed
 because Defendant’s agreement to make that statement was obtained
 after Detective’s inquiry but before any Miranda warnings were
 given. In evaluating Defendant’s Miranda claim, however, the
 court determined that Detective’s pre-Miranda question was
 “preliminary” and “was not designed to elicit a spontaneous
 incriminating statement” from Defendant. It appears that the
 court was wrong, as explained infra, and, thus, Miranda warnings
 were required before Detective asked Defendant if he wanted to
 relate his side of the story. 
B.
 Under Miranda, warnings must be provided when a
 
defendant is (1) in custody, and (2) under interrogation. State
 
18
         
  
 
 
        
             
            
              
           
         
  
            
          
           
            
            
            
               
               
          
          
             
          
             
            
              
        
          
           
               
           
            
         
            
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
v. Ah Loo, 94 Hawai' i 207, 210, 10 P.3d 728, 731 (2000). At the 
outset, it must be noted that the court erred in characterizing
 
Detective’s question and statement as “preliminary” in
 
determining that Defendant’s statement was admissible.18 Whether
 
a question is or is not “preliminary” is not determinative of
 whether Miranda warnings were required. Cf. Naititi, 104 Hawai' i 
at 237, 87 P.3d at 906 (noting that, “[b]y no stretch of the
 
imagination could . . . preliminary ‘yes-or-no’” questions of
 whether the defendant wished to make a statement and be afforded
 the assistance of an attorney be construed as the type that were
 “reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response”);
19 See
 
18 To reiterate, the court determined that “[Detective]’s conduct was
 
preliminary in nature and was made merely to inform [] Defendant that he was
arrested, identify himself and explain why he was meeting with [] Defendant.”
The court did not support its statement with any case law, and did not explain
how, or why, a statement responding to a “preliminary” question, if that
question constituted interrogation, is admissible in the absence of Miranda
warnings.
 
19 In Naititi , the defendant, who was deaf and mute, was taken to an 
interview room and an interpreter was provided. The interpreter testifiedthat, before the defendant was asked any questions, in sign language, thedefendant stated that he was “sorry”. The interpreter testified that when thedetective told the defendant that he was going to ask the defendant somequestions, and explained that the defendant had a right to a lawyer, thedefendant “ continued to talk as if he just was not responding to what . . .
the detective was saying to him.” Naititi , 104 Hawai 'i at 228, 87 P.3d at 897 
(emphasis added). The interpreter explained that the defendant “did not understand [the interpreter’s] gestures and signs and that [the defendant] wasdefinitely not responsive.” Id. at 228, 87 P.2d at 897. The detective 
stopped the interview. This court determined that the defendant’s statements were “volunteered [.]” Id. at 238, 87 P.2d at 907 (emphasis added). According
to this court, if the defendant could not understand the questions posed tohim, then he could not have intended his statements to be responsive to them.Id. at 238, 87 P.2d at 907.
In contrast to Naititi , in the instant case, asking Defendant if
he wanted to give a statement was combined with Detective’s explanation that
in doing so it was Defendant’s chance to give his side of the story and that
in doing so the detective obtained “a waiver” for the Mirandized statement
 before the Miranda warnings were given. This could not be considered anything
but interrogation, and objectively was designed to elicit an incriminating
response from Defendant after his arrest, i.e., an explanation of his side of
the story with respect to the incident. Furthermore, Defendant’s statements
 
19
         
           
         
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Ketchum, 97 Hawai' i at 121 n.21, 34 P.3d at 1020 n.21 (declining 
to adopt, as an exception to the required warnings, that if an 
officer expressly asks an arrestee for biographical data, the arrestee’s response is not suppressable, and instead noting that the better rule is “requiring police to preface all interrogation of a suspect with Miranda warnings if they want his or her responses to be admissible at trial”) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted) (emphasis added). If a defendant was in custody and subjected to interrogation without having been advised of his Miranda rights, statements from that person “are inadmissible in a subsequent criminal proceeding brought against that person.” Joseph, 109 Hawai' i at 498, 128 P.3d at 811. Thus, 
in the instant case, the issue is whether Defendant was in custody and whether the question and statement constituted interrogation. See State v. Amorin, 61 Haw. 356, 362, 604 P.2d 
45, 49 (1979) (“[B]efore any questions are asked of an in-custody suspect, the required warnings must be given and unless and until such warnings are proven by the prosecution, no statements obtained as a result of custodial interrogation may be used.”). 
V. 
A. 
As to custody, it has been established that this
 
element is satisfied if the defendant has been “taken into
 
were not unresponsive or “volunteered[,]” id. insofar as they were given in
direct response to Detective’s questions, and Defendant clearly understood the
question posed by Detective. Thus, Naititi is inapplicable.
 
20
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom . . . in any 
significant way.” State v. Hoey, 77 Hawai' i 17, 33, 881 P.2d 504, 
520 (1994) (internal quotation marks omitted). This was plainly the case here. Defendant was in custody when Detective asked whether Defendant wished to make a statement. Defendant had been placed under arrest, and therefore was deprived of his freedom in a significant way. 
B. 
As to interrogation, this court has held that it 
“involves any practice reasonably likely to invoke an incriminating response without regard to objective evidence of the intent of the police[.]” Joseph, 109 Hawai' i at 495, 128 P.3d 
at 808. The interrogation element depends on “‘whether the police officer should have known that his or her words or actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response’ from the person in custody.” Ketchum, 97 Hawai' i at 119, 34 P.3d at 
1018 (quoting State v. Ikaika, 67 Haw. 563, 698 P.2d 281 (1985)). As stated before, an “incriminating response” “refers to both inculpatory and exculpatory responses.” Joseph, 109 Hawai' i at 
495, 128 P.3d at 808. 
In Joseph, a Miranda violation was found during a
 
recorded pre-interview between the defendant and police where the
 defendant had not yet been informed of his Miranda rights. Id.
 
at 496, 128 P.3d at 809. Due to his arrest and detainment, we
 concluded that the defendant was in custody at the time of the
 
21
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
pre-interview. Id. It was also decided that the following pre­
interview exchange included interrogation:
 
MR.  JOSEPH:   The  car  was  into  the  bluff  like  this,  and  the
door  was  open  like  this.
 
[DEFENSE  COUNSEL]:   Right,  right,  you  shooting  up  the  bluff
 
or  —
 
MR.  JOSEPH:   No,  I’m  leaning  my  back  into  the  vehicle.
 
[DETECTIVE]:   So,  he’s  leaning  with  his  back  against  the
 
bluff.
 
MR.  JOSEPH:   Yeah,  yeah.
  
Id. (emphases in original). In Joseph, the detective’s statement
 
about the defendant leaning his back against the bluff “sought
 confirmation of Joseph’s previous statement and was intended to
 illicit [sic] a response.” Id. As a result, it was concluded
 
that the detective should have known that his statement was
 reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response. Id. 
State v. Pebria, 85 Hawai' i 171, 174, 938 P.2d 1190, 
1193 (App. 1997), is also instructive. There, the defendant was seated in the lobby area of Queen’s Medical Center with two security guards standing by him, and a female was speaking to a police officer in the lobby area. Id. at 173, 938 P.2d at 1192. 
The officer who was speaking to the female pointed to the defendant, identified him as “the other person involved in the incident,” and asked Officer Rodriguez, who had just arrived after being dispatched to investigate an initial report of assault, to obtain the defendant’s information. Id. 
Officer Rodriguez then asked the defendant, “Do you
 
know why you're being detained?” to which the defendant
 responded, “I went grab the girl.” Id. After being told that he
 
22
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
was now a suspect in a kidnapping case, the defendant informed
 
the officer that he “like rape” the victim. Id. The ICA
 
determined that the officer’s initial question to the suspect,
 “Do you know why you're being detained?” constituted a statement
 “reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response” insofar
 as the question “in essence asked [the defendant], ‘Do you know
 that you are being detained because the woman talking to [another
 police officer] is accusing you of assaulting her?’” Id. at 174,
 
938 P.2d at 1193. Thus, the defendant’s answer was ruled
 inadmissible at trial. 
As related, Detective explained that Defendant was
 
under arrest for assaulting Defendant’s daughter, and then “asked
 [Defendant] if he wanted to give a statement[,]” as it was “his
 chance to give his side of the story.” By asking for Defendant’s
 “side” of the story, Detective implied that the other “side” of
 the story supported Defendant’s arrest for assault and that
 Defendant was invited to respond to it. 
Given that Defendant was advised he was under arrest
 
for assault, and his child was in the hospital allegedly due to
 his acts, Detective should have known that asking Defendant for
 his side of the story and indicating that it was his chance to
 give that story was “reasonably likely” to elicit an
 incriminating response; in other words, it was reasonably likely
 that the detective’s question and statement solicited Defendant
 to speak about the circumstances of the case that had resulted in
 
23
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
his arrest. Similar to Joseph, the detective’s pre-interview 
invitation to Defendant to give his “side of the story” was a “practice reasonably likely to invoke an incriminating response [even] without regard to . . . the intent of the police[.]” 
Joseph, 109 Hawai' i at 495, 128 P.3d at 808. Moreover, in this 
case the detective concurred that by his prior questions he had 
already obtained an answer from Defendant--a “waiver” that he was going to “give a statement,” although Defendant had yet to be informed of his Miranda rights. Hence, under the circumstances, “it is evident that Miranda warnings, as independently grounded in the Hawai' i Constitution, [were] required prior to [this] pre­
interview.” Id. at 495, 128 P.3d at 808. 
C.
 
The police’s custodial solicitation of Defendant’s side
 
of the story without first informing Defendant that he had the
 right to remain silent is prohibited under Miranda. It must be
 reemphasized that “Miranda recognizes a waiver of rights only if
 those rights are known to the defendant[,]” and “[n]othing but
 mischief would flow from a rule that would permit a defendant to
 waive the right to be informed of the rights embodied in the
 Miranda warnings.” Id. at 497, 128 P.3d at 810 (internal
 
quotation marks and citation omitted) (emphases added). 
By asking Defendant if he wanted to give his side of
 
the story without first stating the Miranda warnings, Detective
 violated Defendant’s right to be informed of his right to remain
 
24
          
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
silent before making the decision and commitment to give a
 
statement. In inviting Defendant to speak and in obtaining his
 commitment to do so before Miranda warnings were given, the
 police elicited statements without informing Defendant of the
 consequences of his waiving his right to remain silent and the
 entire panoply of rights such a commitment involved. In effect,
 in getting Defendant to agree to give a statement before being
 informed of his rights, the police invoked a practice that would
 permit a defendant to waive the right to be informed of his
 Miranda rights when Miranda recognizes a waiver of rights only if
 those rights are known to the defendant. See id. Accordingly,
 
in this case there could be no valid waiver of Defendant’s right
 
to remain silent. 
In similar circumstances, this court has said, “[T]he 
due process clause [Haw. Const. Art I, sec. 5] serves to ‘protect the right of the accused in a criminal case to a fundamentally 
fair trial.’ Implicit in a ‘fundamentally fair trial’ is a right to make a meaningful choice between confessing and remaining silent.” Id. at 494, 128 P.3d at 807 (quoting State v. Bowe, 77 
Hawai'i 51, 59, 881 P.3d 538, 546 (1994)). In the absence of the 
Miranda warnings, no meaningful choice could be made by Defendant to remain silent or to agree to make a statement. Thus, in violation of Defendant’s due process right to a fair trial, the court also erred in determining that the question and statement by the detective were merely “preliminary.” 
25
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
VI.
 
The remaining issue is whether Defendant’s Mirandized 
statement is admissible at trial because Miranda warnings were 
given before the statement was taken. In that regard, “the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine prohibits the use of [a statement] at trial which [has] come [] to light as a result of the exploitation of a previous illegal act of the police.” Joseph, 
109 Hawai' i at 498, 128 P.3d at 811 (internal quotation marks and 
citations omitted). 
Luton and Joseph are instructive in this regard. In 
Luton, the defendant was arrested and thought to be involved in a stabbing. Luton, 83 Hawai' i at 446, 927 P.2d at 847. Shortly 
thereafter, before the defendant was informed of his rights, an officer heard the defendant say, “I needed the money,” and that he “didn’t do it, it was someone else.” Id. The day after his arrest, two detectives advised the defendant of his constitutional rights. Id. The defendant “indicated that he 
understood his rights, and agreed to waive them and to make a videotaped statement[,]” wherein he admitted being in the victim’s hotel room at the time of the stabbing. Id. Following 
the interview, the defendant was again advised of his Miranda rights, and, after waiving his rights, the defendant “made several incriminating statements[.]” Id. at 447, 927 P.2d at 
848. 
26
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
After he was charged with murder in the second degree
 
and burglary in the second degree, the defendant filed a motion
 
to suppress the pre-Miranda statements to the officer that the
 defendant “needed the money” and that he “didn’t do it,” as well
 as the post-Miranda statements, arguing that they were not
 voluntary and were made in violation of his Fifth and Sixth
 Amendment rights. The circuit court suppressed the statements. 
Id. at 449, 927 P.2d at 850. Inasmuch as the State did not
 appeal the circuit court’s determination that the pre-Miranda
 statements had to be suppressed, the issue on appeal was whether
 the defendant’s post-Miranda statements were admissible. 
This court rejected the defendant’s argument that his
 
waivers were “the fruit of prior police illegality” because
 statements elicited “from him during his arrest, but before
 reading him his Miranda rights[,]” “tainted” his subsequent
 confessions. Id. at 454-55, 927 P.2d at 855-56. According to
 
this court, the defendant’s “waiver was not predicated on the
 [pre-Miranda] statements” inasmuch as “there [wa]s no indication
 in the record that HPD detectives exploited [the defendant’s]
 illegally obtained statements[,]” “[n]or [wa]s there evidence to
 support a claim that officers used those statements to induce
 [the defendant] into making a confession[,]” and the transcripts
 and the videotaped interview of the defendant were “devoid of any
 mention” of the defendant’s previous admissions. Id. at 455, 927
 
P.2d at 856. 
27
         
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Contrastingly, it is apparent that Defendant’s
 
purported “waiver” of his right to remain silent, made after
 
Miranda warnings, was directly “predicated” on his agreement,
 pre-Miranda, to make a statement. That commitment was preceded
 by the inquiry and statement from Detective before Defendant was
 informed of his right to remain silent. In light of Detective’s
 pre-Miranda question and statement, the Miranda warnings given
 thereafter became merely an interlude between the un-Mirandized
 solicitation for Defendant’s side of the story and the post-
Miranda statement, that Defendant had already agreed to make. 
Inasmuch as Defendant had already waived his right to remain
 silent by agreeing to make a statement, as indicated by the
 
circumstances in the record and the testimony of Detective, the
 
recitation of rights that followed the pre-interview was only a
 
formality. 
Under these circumstances, the Mirandized statement was
 
obtained by exploiting the illegality of the pre-interview
 
procedure. Similarly, there were no intervening circumstances
 from which it can reasonably be said that the taint from the pre­interview violation had dissipated preceding the Miranda
 statement. As noted, Detective’s testimony confirms this,
 inasmuch as he indicated that at the time he gave Defendant the
 Miranda warnings, he had already obtained an alleged waiver of
 Defendant’s Miranda rights, since Defendant had agreed to make a
 statement. 
28
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In Joseph, this court concluded that the post-Miranda 
statements had to be suppressed. There, the defendant, before 
being given Miranda warnings, told police officers that he was in his vehicle shooting at the “Pali Golf Course” clubhouse. 109 Hawai'i at 485, 128 P.3d at 798. Subsequent to the pre­
interview, “a formal interview was conducted, (the post-Miranda interview),” where, after being advised of his rights, the defendant gave a statement. Id. The circuit court suppressed 
the post-Miranda statement, and this court affirmed the suppression. Id. at 491, 128 P.3d at 804. We said, “The 
pre-interview statements were exploited in that [the defendant] was subsequently questioned on the same matter in order that he would repeat his earlier statement.” Id. at 499, 128 P.3d at 
812. Additionally, the defendant’s post-Miranda statement was
 
not sufficiently attenuated from the pre-interview Miranda
 violation because “[t]he post-interview was conducted by the same
 two detectives in the same interrogation room with no lapse in
 time between it and the pre-interview.” Id.
 
Likewise, Defendant’s pre-Miranda statement was
 
“exploited” in that Defendant “was subsequently questioned” on
 the same matter he had agreed to talk about before being informed
 of his Miranda rights. Both the pre-interview and post-Miranda
 interview were conducted by the same detective, and the statement
 was obtained after the pre-interview. The statement was the
 product of the un-Mirandized pre-interview inquiry and statement
 
29
         
         
           
          
               
         
            
           
         
              
              
     
         
          
              
             
           
          
          
             
             
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
by the detective. The taint of the pre-interview violation,
 
then, had not dissipated at the time of the statement. 
In the instant case, the State has not demonstrated
 
that Defendant’s post-Miranda statement was obtained without
 exploiting the Miranda violation, and that the statement was
 sufficiently attenuated from the Miranda violation to dissipate
 the taint of the violation. Inasmuch as the incriminating
 statement given by Defendant on October 27 was obtained in
 violation of the Miranda rule, the statement should not have been
 admitted in evidence and must be excluded.
 
VII. 
For the reasons stated, we vacate the (1) June 30, 2009
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Finding
 Voluntariness of Defendant’s Statement” of the court; and (2) the
 March 4, 2010 judgment of conviction and sentence.
20 We instruct
 
20 It is well established that, “[w]here there exists a reasonable
 
possibility that a constitutional error of the trial court contributed to the
conviction of the defendant, the error necessitates reversal.” Amorin, 61
 
Haw. at 362, 604 P.2d at 49-50. In other words, if the error “raised the
 reasonable possibility of having contributed to the conviction below[,]” it
 cannot be “harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id. Defendant was charged
with attempted murder in the second degree which required proof that Defendant
“intentionally engage[d] in conduct” that would constitute murder. His
 statement that he struck and threw the baby out of frustration and that he was
angry because the baby would not stop crying is evidence of his conduct and of
his state of mind.
 
Thus, the error in admitting the statements “raised the reasonable
 
possibility of having contributed to the conviction[,]” id., inasmuch as the
statement indicated his act and intent at the relevant time. See id. at 358,
362, 604 P.2d at 47, 50 (determining that the circuit court's admission of the
defendant's statement, in violation of Miranda , that he stole the car in
defendant’s trial for unauthorized control of a propelled vehicle “raised the
 reasonable possibility of having contributed to the conviction below” and this
 court could not “say that it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt”). Hence,
in the instant case, it cannot be said that the court’s error in admitting
Defendant’s statement was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
30
         
 
 
  
         
           
            
            
           
           
          
       
           
         
           
         
          
             
          
         
          
         
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the court to enter an order suppressing the October 27, 2007
 
statement of Defendant, and remand the case to the court for a
 new trial.
21
 
David Glenn Bettencourt,
for petitioner/
defendant-appellant. /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ James E. Duffy, Jr.
 
Donn Fudo, Deputy
Prosecuting Attorney,
for respondent/
plaintiff-appellee.
  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
21 As noted, Defendant was charged with attempted murder in the
 
second degree, with the special circumstance that his daughter was eight years
of age or younger, HRS §§ 705-500 (1993), 707-701.5 (1993), and 706-656 (Supp.
2007). However, he was found guilty of attempted manslaughter under HRS §§
705-500 and 707-702(2). HRS § 707-702(2) (1993) provides in relevant part
 that:
 
(2) In a prosecution for murder or attempted murder in the first
and second degrees it is an affirmative defense, which reduces the
offense to manslaughter or attempted manslaughter, that the
defendant was, at the time the defendant caused the death of the
other person, under the influence of extreme mental or emotional
disturbance for which there is a reasonable explanation. . . . .
 
Because Defendant was found guilty of attempted manslaughter, he was
impliedly acquitted of attempted murder in the second degree, and double
jeopardy bars retrial for that offense. See State v. Kalaola , 124 Hawai 'i 43, 
52, 237 P.3d 1109, 1118 (2010) (“Consistent with the prohibition againstreprosecution following an acquittal, double jeopardy presents an absolute barto retrial where, inter alia, the defendant has been acquitted, whetherexpressly or impliedly, notwithstanding a subsequent reversal of the judgmenton appeal[.]”) (internal citation and quotation marks omitted). 
31
 