 
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAP-15-0000022 03-NOV-2016 
10:35 AM 
---o0o---
A.A.,
Petitioner/Petitioner-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
B.B.,
Respondent/Respondent-Appellee. 
SCAP-15-0000022 

APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-15-0000022; FC-M NO. 14-1-0034K) 

NOVEMBER 3, 2016 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
Petitioner A.A. and Respondent B.B. decided together 
to bring a child into their home. 
Although only B.B. legally 
adopted the child, A.A. and B.B. co-parented the child and 
shared physical custody of her, even after their separation as a couple. A.A. brought a petition for joint custody in the Family Court of the Third Circuit (family court) based solely on the de 
facto custody provision of Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571­	
 
 
	  
  A.A. and B.B. entered into a committed relationship in 
March 2009 and lived together continuously until October 2013. 
Child was born in September 2011, and B.B. is the biological grandfather and legal adoptive father of Child. 
  The decision to adopt and raise Child was a joint 
decision made by B.B. and A.A. Together they determined a first and last name for the baby, giving her each of their last names separated by a hyphen. A.A., B.B., Child, and B.B.’s teenage son lived together as a family unit from October 2011 until 
October 2013. During this time, A.A. and B.B. jointly shared 
all parental care, duties, and responsibilities for Child. From the time she could talk, Child referred to B.B. as “Papa” and A.A. as “Daddy.” A.A. and B.B. discussed and intended that A.A. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
46(a)(2), which was denied. A.A. appealed the family court’s denial of his petition and applied for a transfer to this court, which we granted. 
The main issue on appeal concerns the interpretation 
and application of Hawaii’s statutory de facto custody provision and whether it infringes on B.B.’s parental rights. Because we conclude that the family court misinterpreted and misapplied the de facto custody provision, we vacate the family court’s decision and remand the case for further proceedings. 
I. BACKGROUND 
A. Factual Background 
2
 	
 
 
	  
 
 A.A. filed a petition for joint custody in the family 
court in May 2014, seeking joint legal and joint 50/50 actual 
physical custody of Child pursuant to HRS § 571-46(a)(2).1   
																																								
																
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
would adopt Child, and they retained an attorney to accomplish the adoption. However, A.A.’s planned adoption of Child never occurred, and although A.A. and B.B. discussed entering into a civil union or marriage, that also never occurred. 
After their separation in October 2013, B.B. and A.A. 
entered into a written 50/50 co-parenting agreement for Child. Under the co-parenting agreement, A.A. and B.B. each had actual care and custody of Child from Sunday to Wednesday and then Sunday to Thursday in alternating weeks. During the period of the co-parenting agreement, A.A. and B.B. communicated through email to discuss Child. B.B. indicated to A.A. by email that he wanted A.A. to have custody of Child should anything ever happen 
to him. In April 2014, B.B. sent A.A. a letter declaring that 
the written 50/50 co-parenting agreement was revoked on the ground that it was B.B.’s “parental right” to do so. 
B. A.A.’s Petition for Joint Custody 
1 HRS § 571-46(a)(2) (Supp. 2013) provides, 
(a) . . . . In awarding the custody, the court shall be
guided by the following standards, considerations, andprocedures: 
. . . . 
(continued . . .) 
3
 	
 
 
	  
  
																																																																																																																																																																																			
  
	 	
	 	***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A.A.’s petition alleged that he had de facto joint custody of 
Child “in a stable and wholesome home” and that he was “a fit and proper person to have care, custody, and control of the minor child.” 
The family court held an initial hearing on A.A.’s 
petition for joint custody in June 2014.
2 At the June hearing, 
the court noted that there were no disputed facts in the case and that the issue was whether B.B. has the absolute right to dictate who can have custody of the minor child. 
During the evidentiary hearing held in October, B.B. 
offered Dr. Jennifer L. De Costa as “an expert in the field of family behaviors and in the relationship of children with their 
families.”
3 A.A. objected to Dr. De Costa’s qualification as an 
expert, asserting that she should be qualified as a marriage and 
family counselor; the family court concluded that Dr. De Costa 
(2) Custody may be awarded to persons other than the
father or mother whenever the award serves the best interest of the child. Any person who has had de factocustody of the child in a stable and wholesome home and isa fit and proper person shall be entitled prima facie to
an award of custody . . . . 
2 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided. 
3 Dr. De Costa testified that she was a behavior health specialist
at Innovative Hawai ʻi Community Hospital and possessed a bachelor’s degree in
psychology from the University of Hawai ʻi, a master’s degree in science from
Western Washington University, a master’s degree in marriage and family
therapy from University of Oregon, and a doctorate degree from Oregon StateUniversityin family counseling and gerontology.  
4
 	
 
 
	 
  
																																																								
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
was an expert in the field of family behavior and relationships 
as it relates to children and families. 
On direct examination, Dr. De Costa testified 
extensively about B.B.’s teenage son. Dr. De Costa was 
permitted to testify over A.A.’s objection that she saw a 
correlation between depressive symptoms exhibited by B.B.’s son and interactions with A.A.; she discussed this correlation in reference to B.B.’s son’s performance on tests used to measure depression and anxiety. Dr. De Costa also testified regarding her counseling and treatment of Child. B.B.’s counsel requested Dr. De Costa to assume that A.A. had an anger management problem and asked her to offer an opinion as to whether she would have 
any concerns of Child having a custodial relationship with A.A. 
A.A. objected to the testimony on the basis that the hypothetical question assumed facts not in evidence.
4 Dr. De 
Costa was permitted to opine that she would have concerns about Child having a relationship with A.A. Dr. De Costa was also asked whether Child would be harmed from termination of the relationship with A.A.; she testified, “This is a hard one. But I don’t--right now, where she’s at, I don’t think so.” 
4 A.A. later testified that he had an anger management problem that
interfered with his relationship with B.B.. 
5
 	
 
 
	  
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A.A. offered Dr. Jamuna Wyss, a clinical psychologist, 
as an expert on parent-child psychological relationships and 
parenting styles. Dr. Wyss indicated that A.A. and B.B. attended couples therapy with him beginning in October 2013 and 
that A.A. continued to be his client in individual therapy. Dr. 
Wyss gave a favorable opinion regarding A.A. as a parent and the home he provided for Child. Dr. Wyss also testified regarding the consequences when parent-child relationships are terminated, opining that there was a likelihood that termination of the relationship between A.A. and Child would result in “immediate­term and long-term damaging psychological consequences” to Child. 
A.A.’s counsel also attempted to enter into evidence a 
clinical note of Dr. Wyss’s related to sex-abuse allegations involving A.A. The court did not accept the note into evidence and did not allow Dr. Wyss to testify regarding the allegation because it was outside the scope of Dr. Wyss’s report. However, Dr. Wyss was permitted to testify that he was aware of sex-abuse allegations involving A.A. and that he did not believe that A.A. posed a threat of abuse to Child, “be it sexual, physical, or 
emotional abuse or neglect.” 
On December 11, 2014, the family court entered its 
“Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law; Order/Final Judgment” 
denying A.A.’s petition for joint custody. The family court 
6
 	
 
 
	 
  
																																																								
  
	
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
characterized the main issue as follows: “[I]n a State where the 
parties can get married or can become a civil union partnership, if they choose not to, . . . should [A.A.] be afforded standing to claim what is known as a ‘psychological father.’” The court 
concluded that A.A. did not have standing as Child’s 
“psychological father” because the parties were not married. Although the family court determined that HRS § 571-46 applied, which allows a custody award to a person who demonstrates de facto custody of a child, the court concluded that A.A. failed to demonstrate “by strict scrutiny a compelling state interest as to why this ‘de facto’ section should apply to him when in fact the parties were not married, and when the options of civil 
union or marriage were available.”
5 
II. DISCUSSION 
A.A.’s petition requested joint custody of Child 
pursuant to HRS § 571-46(a)(2), asserting that A.A. “is a person 
who has had de facto joint custody of the child in a stable and 
wholesome home” and that joint custody was in the best interests 
of Child.6 Although the family court determined that HRS § 571­
5 The family court also found, “In this case the Court will find
compelling the testimony of the child’s therapist, Jennifer De Costa, in the
sense that she testified that in her opinion that the child would not be
harmed and in fact that she did see some regression once the Court allowed
supervised visitation between [Child and A.A.].” 
6 A.A. sought custody of Child based solely on the de facto
provision of HRS § 571-46(a)(2). Additionally, in his opening brief, A.A. 
(continued . . .) 
7
 	
 
 
	  
																																																																																																																																																																																			
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
46(a)(2) was applicable, the court declined to apply this 
statutory provision, reasoning that A.A. failed to demonstrate “by strict scrutiny a compelling state interest” to support the application of the statute under the circumstances of this case. 
Thus, the primary issues on appeal are whether the family court 
properly interpreted and applied HRS § 571-46(a)(2) and whether its application in this case would infringe on B.B.’s constitutionally protected parental rights. A.A. also challenges several evidentiary rulings regarding the expert testimony presented at the hearing. 
A. Interpretation and Application of HRS § 571-46(a)(2) 
In cases involving child custody, it is well 
established that the guiding consideration is the best interests 
of the child. E.g., Doe v. Doe, 98 Hawai ʻi 144, 155, 44 P.3d 
1085, 1096 (2002); Fujikane v. Fujikane, 61 Haw. 352, 354, 604 
cites only to HRS § 571-46(a)(2)--and not HRS § 571-46(a)(1)--as a basis for
his claim for custody of Child. Although A.A. references the “parent by
estoppel” doctrine of other jurisdictions in his opening brief, he does so insupport of his argument that the trial court erred in its determination thatA.A. was required to show by strict scrutiny a compelling state interest asto why HRS § 571-46(a)(2) should apply to him. Thus, it appears that to the
extent that A.A. argues that he satisfies the doctrine adopted by the
Wisconsin Supreme Court, it is to support his argument that the applicationof this statute is constitutional. 
Accordingly, we do not consider whether A.A. is a “parent”
eligible to seek custody pursuant to HRS § 571-46(a)(1) or on any otherbasis. 
It is noted that at least one jurisdiction has expanded the
definition of “parent” in a similar statute to include a partner of adomestic partnership that agrees to conceive a child and to raise the childtogether. 
See Brooke S.B. v. Elizabeth A. C.C. , No. 91, 2016 WL 4507780
(N.Y.
 Aug. 30, 2016). 
8
 	
 
 
	  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
P.2d 43, 45 (1979) (per curiam). The trial court possesses 
broad discretion in making custody decisions and in its determination of what is in the best interests of the child. Fujikane, 61 Haw. at 354, 604 P.2d at 45 (“It is clear that the 
court below possesses wide discretion in making custody decisions . . . .”). 
HRS § 571-46(a) provides standards that 
apply to a court’s custody decision in proceedings involving a dispute as to the custody of a minor child: 
In awarding the custody, the court shall be guided by the
following standards, considerations, and procedures: 
(1) Custody should be awarded to either parent or to both
parents according to the best interests of the child, and
the court also may consider frequent, continuing, andmeaningful contact of each parent with the child unlessthe court finds that a parent is unable to act in the bestinterest of the child; 
(2) Custody may be awarded to persons other than the
father or mother whenever the award serves the best interest of the child. Any person who has had de factocustody of the child in a stable and wholesome home and isa fit and proper person shall be entitled prima facie to
an award of custody; 
(3) If a child is of sufficient age and capacity to
reason, so as to form an intelligent preference, thechild’s wishes as to custody shall be considered and begiven due weight by the court . . . . 
HRS § 571-46(a)(1)-(3) (Supp. 2013). 
Subsection (a)(1) of this statute concerns the 
awarding of custody to the child’s parents and provides that 
custody “should be awarded” to either or both parents according to the best interests of the child. Additionally, the court may consider continuing and meaningful contact of each parent with the child unless the parent is unable to act in the best 
9
 	
 
 
	  
  
																																																								
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
interests of the child.7 In his petition for custody, A.A. does 
not seek custody based on alleged parental status under 
subsection (a)(1). 
Subsection (a)(2), upon which A.A. relies, provides 
that custody “may be awarded to persons other than the father or mother whenever the award serves the best interest of the child.” Subsection (a)(2) also creates a presumption in favor of a person under certain circumstances: “Any person who has had de facto custody of the child in a stable and wholesome home and is a fit and proper person shall be entitled prima facie to an award of custody.” Although “de facto custody” is not defined, we interpret it to mean sole or shared physical custody in 
combination with an assumption of incidents of legal custody 
enumerated in HRS § 571-2, which include “the duty to protect, train, and discipline the minor and to provide the minor with food, shelter, education, and ordinary medical care.” In other words, de facto custody is consistent with a parental role. 
Accordingly, a person may establish a prima facie case 
of de facto custody, by showing that the person (1) is a fit and proper person (2) who has had de facto custody of the child (3) 
7 “‘Meaningful contact’ means parent and child interactions,
activities, and experiences, performed together, which nurture the parent-
child attachment and relationship, while contributing to the child’sdevelopment in a positive and effective manner.” HRS § 571-2 (2006 & Supp.2011). 
10
 	
 
 
	  
																																																								
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
in a stable and wholesome home. HRS § 571-46(a)(2). If a 
person is able to establish these three elements, then the person has adduced prima facie evidence that awarding custody to that person is in the best interests of the child. Nonetheless, 
the family court ultimately has the discretion to determine the 
custody award that would serve the best interests of the child based on the entirety of the evidence presented. 
Although the family court determined that HRS § 571­
46(a)(2) applies to this case, the court did not determine whether or not A.A. established a prima facie case to an award of custody based on de facto custody.
8 However, the family court 
did not make any particular findings that would contradict 
A.A.’s claim of de facto custody pursuant to subsection (a)(2), 
and A.A. provided evidence to support all three elements of subsection (a)(2) in addition to evidence from Dr. Wyss that it would be beneficial to Child to have contact with him. On the 
8 Although we express no opinion as to whether A.A. established
prima facie that he had de facto custody of child pursuant to HRS § 571­
46(a)(2), it is noted that the record was sufficient to support a findingthat A.A. had de facto custody of Child because B.B. shared all parentalcare, duties, and responsibilities with respect to Child with A.A. from
October 2011 to October 2013 and then continued to have actual joint custody
of Child until April 2014, pursuant to the written co-parenting agreement.The family court’s findings would also support a determination that A.A.provided a stable and loving home for Child, based on, inter alia, thecourt’s findings regarding the period of joint custody and Dr. Wyss’stestimony that termination of the attachment bond between A.A. and Child
would be psychologically harmful to Child. The findings that would support
the first two elements may also support a finding that A.A. was a fit andproper person to have custody of Child given that he was involved in co-parenting Child for the majority of Child’s life. 
11
 	
 
 
	  
																																																								
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
other hand, B.B. produced evidence, including through Dr. De 
Costa’s testimony, that could be construed to support a finding that A.A. is not a fit and proper person and that it would not be in Child’s best interests for custody to be jointly awarded 
to A.A. 
In declining to apply subsection (a)(2), the family 
court reasoned that A.A. did not adequately demonstrate by 
strict scrutiny a compelling state interest that the statute was constitutional as applied to him.
9 The burden, however, is not 
on A.A. to demonstrate the constitutionality of HRS § 571­46(a)(2). Indeed, “every enactment of the legislature is presumptively constitutional,” and the “party challenging the 
statute has the burden of showing unconstitutionality.” State 
v. Mueller
, 66 Haw. 616, 627, 671 P.2d 1351, 1358 (1983) 
(quoting Schwab v. Ariyoshi , 58 Haw. 25, 31, 564 P.2d 135, 139 
(1977)). Thus, in this case, if joint custody were awarded to 
A.A., then B.B. would be considered the challenger to HRS § 571­46(a)(2), and B.B. would have the burden of establishing the statute’s infringement on his constitutionally protected parental rights. 
Id. 
9 We review the family court’s conclusions of law, including
constitutional questions of law, de novo under the right/wrong standard. See 
Doe v. Doe , 116 Hawai ʻi 323, 326, 172 P.3d 1067, 1070 (2007); In re Doe, 95
Hawaiʻi 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001). 
12
 	
 
 
	  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The family court’s analysis was directly contrary to 
this widely accepted presumption that statutes are valid. 
Accordingly, the family court erred in requiring that A.A. establish the constitutionality of HRS § 571-46(a)(2) before its 
application. The family court should have made findings and 
conclusions with regard to whether A.A. satisfied the de facto custody test of subsection (a)(2) and whether granting of joint custody was in the best interests of Child. 
B.B. argues that HRS § 571-46 prefers that custody be 
awarded to the parents of a child and that a non-parent may only be considered for custody if the court finds that the parent is unable to act in the best interests of the child. We do not 
agree with this rigid interpretation of HRS § 571-46, which is 
contrary to the well-settled principle that “the paramount consideration” in child custody cases is the best interests of 
the child. Doe, 98 Hawai ʻi at 155, 44 P.3d 1085 at 1096. While 
a preference inheres in HRS § 571-46(a)(1) that custody “should” 
be awarded to the parents, nevertheless custody may be awarded to persons other than a parent and the court “shall” consider the child’s wishes if the child is of sufficient age and capacity to reason. HRS § 571-46(a)(1)-(3). Implicit in B.B.’s proffered interpretation is the concept that custody will be given either to a parent or nonparent. However, in reality, 
there may be instances where the child’s best interests are 
13
 	
 
 
	  
	
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
served by joint custody where a fit parent and nonparent share 
responsibilities for the child. 
The court must always determine what would serve the 
best interests of the child. HRS § 571-46 provides guidance to 
the courts by way of standards, considerations, and procedures, 
and ultimately, the court has the flexibility to fashion a custody award that is in the best interests of the child. In this case, the family court erred in concluding that A.A. was required to establish, as a threshold matter, that the application of HRS § 571-46(a)(2) to his claim for custody would be constitutional. Because the court did not make a determination as to whether A.A. established a prima facie case 
of de facto custody under HRS § 571-46(a)(2) and did not make 
findings of fact and conclusions on this ultimate issue, the record is insufficient for appellate review of the custody decision. Accordingly, the case must be remanded to the family court for further proceedings. 
B. B.B.’s Constitutionally Protected Parental Rights 
In his answering brief, B.B. argues that HRS § 571­
46(a)(2) “is being utilized by [A.A.] to attempt to interfere with [B.B.’s] right to raise his child and protect his child from the conduct, belief, opinions, language, personality, and 
14
 	
 
 
	   
  
  
																																																								
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
demeanor of [A.A.].”10 In light of the remand of this case to 
the family court, we address B.B.’s constitutional challenge to 
HRS § 571-46(a)(2).11 
B.B.’s constitutional argument raises questions 
regarding whether HRS § 571-46(a)(2) unreasonably interferes with B.B.’s decision as a parent to no longer share custody with A.A.. Accordingly, we consider whether Hawaii’s de facto custody provision--which uses a “best interests of the child standard”--unconstitutionally infringes on a person’s parental rights where the nonparent has had actual custody of the child in a stable and wholesome home, is a fit and proper person, the parent has voluntarily incorporated the nonparent into the 
family unit sharing parental responsibilities and duties, and 
the parties subsequently shared custody pursuant to a written co-parenting agreement. 
The Fourteenth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution and article I, section 5 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution 
provide that no person shall be deprived of “life, liberty, or property without due process of law.” U.S. Const. amend. XIV, § 
10 The record does not indicate whether B.B. notified the Attorney
General of the State of Hawai ʻi of his challenge to the constitutionality of
HRS § 571-46(a)(2) pursuant to his duty under Hawai ʻi Rules of Appellate
Procedure Rule 44. 
11 For purposes of considering the constitutional issue raised by
B.B., we assume that A.A. satisfies the de facto custody provision. However,
as mentioned, we express no opinion as to whether A.A. satisfied the threeelements necessary to raise the de facto presumption. 
15
 	
 
 
	  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1; Haw. Const. art. I, § 5. Under the Hawai ʻi Constitution, we 
conduct a two-step inquiry in analyzing procedural due process 
claims. We first consider whether a liberty or property interest has been interfered with by the State, and second, we determine what specific procedures are required to satisfy due 
process. 
State v. Guidry , 105 Hawai ʻi 222, 227, 96 P.3d 242, 247 
(2004). Similarly, when the Due Process Clause “is invoked in a 
novel context,” the Supreme Court of the United States “begin[s] the inquiry with a determination of the precise nature of the private interest that is threatened by the State.” 
Lehr v. 
Robertson , 463 U.S. 248, 256 (1983); see Washington v. 
Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702, 720 (1997) (noting that the court has required “‘a careful description’ of the asserted fundamental liberty interest” (quoting Reno v. Flores, 507 U.S. 292, 301 (1993))). It is only after that interest has been identified that the court can “properly evaluate the adequacy of the State’s process.” Lehr, 463 U.S. at 256. 
Whether a parent has a constitutionally protected 
liberty interest in deciding that a person who has “de facto custody” of the child should no longer have custody is a matter of first impression in this jurisdiction. 
It has long been 
recognized that the due process clause protects certain liberty interests that parents have in maintaining relationships with their children and in directing their upbringing. See, e.g., 
16
 	
 
 
	  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Troxel v. Granville , 530 U.S. 57, 65 (2000). Independent of the 
United States Constitution, parents have a substantive liberty 
interest in the care, custody, and control of their children protected by the due process clause of article I, section 5 of 
the Hawai ʻi Constitution and the right to privacy of article I, 
section 6 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution. 
See Doe v. Doe
, 116 
Hawaiʻi 323, 334, 172 P.3d 1067, 1078 (2007) (“Parents’ right to 
raise their children is protected under article I, section 6 of 
the Hawai ʻi Constitution . . . .”); In re Doe , 99 Hawai ʻi 522, 
533, 57 P.3d 447, 458 (2002) (“We affirm, independent of the 
federal constitution, that parents have a substantive liberty interest in the care, custody, and control of their children protected by the due process clause of article 1, section 5 of 
the Hawai ʻi Constitution.”). 
Although due process jurisprudence recognizes a 
substantive liberty interest in directing the upbringing of 
one’s child without state interference, the right is largely undefined. 
In Troxel v. Granville,  the United States Supreme 
Court reviewed the Washington Supreme Court’s determination that 
a Washington visitation statute violated the United States 
Constitution. A majority of the Court agreed to affirm the Washington Supreme Court’s decision. The plurality opinion, written by Justice Sandra Day O’Connor, found that the Washington visitation statute was “breathtakingly broad” because 
17
 	
 
 
	***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
its language effectively permitted “any third party seeking 
visitation to subject any decision by a parent concerning visitation of the parent’s children to state-court review.” 530 U.S.
 at 67-68. The plurality opinion did not define the scope 
of the parental right at issue in that case, and one common thread that runs through nearly all of the six opinions written in the 
Troxel case is that the parental right with respect to 
visitation decisions remained undefined. See id. at 73 (“We do 
not, and need not, define today the precise scope of the parental due process right in the visitation context.”); id. at 78 (Souter, J., concurring) (“Our cases, it is true, have not set out exact metes and bounds to the protected interest of a 
parent in the relationship with his child . . . .”); id. at 88 
(Stevens, J., dissenting) (“While this Court has not yet had occasion to elucidate the nature of a child’s liberty interests in preserving established familial or family-like bonds, it seems to me extremely likely that, to the extent parents and families have fundamental liberty interests in preserving such intimate relationships, so, too, do children have these interests, and so, too, must their interests be balanced in the 
equation.” (citation omitted)); id. at 91-93 (Scalia, J., 
dissenting) (arguing that the constitution does not recognize the right of a parent to direct the upbringing of their children and indicating that he would not extend the theory of the cases 
18
 	
 
 
	  
																																																								
	 	
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
recognizing any such right “to this new context”); id. at at 
100-01 (Kennedy, J., dissenting) (“In short, a fit parent’s right vis-à-vis a complete stranger is one thing; another parent or a de facto parent may be another. The protection the 
Constitution requires, then, must be elaborated with care, using 
discipline and instruction of the case law system.”). But see 
id. 
at (Thomas, J., dissenting) (arguing that “parents have a 
fundamental constitutional right to rear their children, including the right to determine who shall educate and socialize them”). 
Similarly, the scope of the parental right in the 
context of custody proceedings between a parent and a nonparent who has “de facto custody” of the child has not been defined by 
the Supreme Court. 
The Supreme Court’s cases regarding the interests of 
parents in the care, custody, and control of their children may 
be grouped into two categories: (1) cases involving a natural parent’s right to parent a child and maintain the parent-child relationship
12 and (2) cases involving state interference with a 
12 See Santosky v. Kramer , 455 U.S. 745, 768 (1982) (holding that a
state’s use of a “fair preponderance of the evidence” standard at a parental
rights termination proceeding violated the Due Process Clause); Quilloin v.
Walcott, 434 U.S. 246, 255 (1978) (holding that the natural father’ssubstantive due process rights were not violated by application of the “bestinterests of the child” standard where natural father had not previously
sought actual or legal custody of child); Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U.S. 645,
(1972) (holding that natural father “was entitled to a hearing on his fitnessas a parent before his children were taken from him and that, by denying hima hearing and extending it to all other parents whose custody of their 
(continued . . .) 
19
 	
 
 
	 
																																																																																																																																																																																			
		
	 	
		
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
parent’s decision regarding the child.13 This case does not call 
into question the potential termination of B.B.’s parental 
rights, but rather, it involves B.B.’s right to determine who has custody and access to Child. Because the Court did not 
define the parental right in 
Troxel, there are no Supreme Court 
opinions discussing circumstances analogous to this case. See 
supra
 notes 12-13.14 
children is challenged, the State denied [father] the equal protection of the
laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment”). 
13 See Troxel,  530 U.S. at 67-68 (holding as facially
unconstitutional a statute allowing any third party seeking visitation tosubject any decision by a parent concerning visitation of the parent’s
children to state-court review); 
Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205, 234 (1972)
(holding that the First and Fourteenth Amendments prevented the State of
Wisconsin from compelling Amish parents to “cause their children to attendformal high school at age 16”); Prince v. Massachusetts, 321 U.S. 158, 443-44(1944) (holding that a state statute prohibiting children from distributing
magazines on the street did not violate child’s First Amendment rights or
child’s custodian’s First and Fourteenth Amendment rights to give childreligious training); Pierce v. Soc’y of the Sisters, 268 U.S. 510, 535 (1925)(holding that a state statute requiring children to attend public school“unreasonably interfere[d] with the liberty of parents and guardians to
direct the upbringing and education of children under their control”); see
also Parham v. J. R., 442 U.S. 584, 603 (1979) (holding that a state statute,
which allowed voluntary admission of minor children to mental hospitals by
parents or guardians, did not per se violate the children’s substantive dueprocess rights). 
14 The Massachusetts Supreme Court observed that the following
principles clearly emerged from the Troxel plurality decision: 
(i)
 reaffirmation that a parent’s liberty interest in child
rearing is indeed fundamental, and is certainly fundamentalin this context; 
(ii) “any third party” should not be permitted to seek
visitation; 
(iii) in determining whether grandparent visitation should
occur, there exists a “presumption that a fit parent willact in the best interest of his or her child,” and the
decision of a fit parent concerning grandparent visitation
is entitled to considerable deference; and 
(continued . . .) 
20
 	
 
 
	  
																																																																																																																																																																																			
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In Doe, this court considered the constitutionality of 
a statute allowing for any grandparent residing in the same 
state of their grandchild to petition for visitation and allowing the court to grant the petition so long as it was in 
the best interests of the 
child.15 116 Hawai ʻi at 325, 172 P.3d 
at 1069. Applying strict scrutiny, the court concluded that 
“proper recognition of parental autonomy in child-rearing 
decisions requires that the party petitioning for visitation 
demonstrate that the child will suffer significant harm in the absence of visitation before the family court may consider what degree of visitation is in the child’s best interests.” Id. at 
335-36, 172 P.3d at 1079-80. Accordingly, the court held that the statute was facially unconstitutional because it did not include the “harm to the child” standard required by the right 
to privacy under the Hawai ʻi Constitution.
16 Id. at 336; 172 P.3d 
(iv) in determining whether grandparent visitation should
occur, the potential impact to the parent-childrelationship should be considered. 
Blixt v. Blixt , 774 N.E.2d 1052, 1058-59 (Mass. 2002) (citations omitted)
(quoting Troxel, 530 U.S. at 67, 69). 
15 The court also suggested that the statute was not facially
unconstitutional under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. 
See Doe,  116 Hawai ʻi at 333, 172 P.3d at 1077 (concluding that the grandparent
visitation statute “comport[ed] with the limited requirements expressed in
Troxel”). 
16 Doe ruled that the statute was unconstitutional under article I, 
section 6 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution only. See 116 Hawai ʻi at 335-36, 172
P.3d at 1079-80. 
21
 	
 
 
	  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
at 1080. Thus, a parent’s fundamental right to direct the 
upbringing of his or her child was implicated “where a nonparent third party petitione[d] for visitation,” and the State could not interfere with the parent’s decision absent a finding that 
the parent’s decision to deny access to the child would result 
in harm to the child. Id. 
Subsequently, the ICA considered whether the 
application of the doctrine of equitable estoppel in a custody proceeding infringed on a mother’s parental rights. See Inoue 
v. Inoue, 118 Hawai ʻi 86, 101, 185 P.3d 834, 849 (App.), cert. 
denied, 118 Hawai ʻi 194, 186 P.3d 629 (2008). 
 In Inoue,  the 
family court equitably estopped the biological mother of a child from denying that her husband was the father of her child for the purposes of determining custody. 
Id. at 88, 185 P.3d at 
836. The mother and her husband in Inoue
 met when she was 
pregnant with the child. Id. at 88-89, 185 P.3d at 836-37. The 
mother did not identify any father on the child’s original birth certificate, but at some point after the birth of the child, the 
child’s birth certificate was changed to reflect the husband as 
the child’s father. 
Id.
 at 89, 185 P.3d at 837. The mother and 
husband were subsequently married, had two additional children, and lived together as a family until their separation seven years later. Id. 
The family court in Inoue awarded husband 
sole legal and physical custody of all three children, while 
22
 	
 
 
	  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
granting mother visitation rights. Id. at 91, 185 P.3d at 839. 
The mother appealed the family court’s decision to the ICA 
arguing that the family court could not award husband custody of the oldest child because he was not the child’s legal father and 
she was not unfit. Id.
 at 92, 185 P.3d at 840. 
The ICA concluded that the family court did not err in 
holding that the husband was the legal father of the child under 
Hawaii’s presumption of paternity statute and that the mother was estopped from challenging her husband’s parentage of the child. Id. at 94, 185 P.3d at 842. The ICA also considered 
whether the application of the doctrine of equitable estoppel infringed on the mother’s parental rights under a plain error 
standard of review. Id.
 at 99-101, 185 P.3d at 847-49. The ICA 
concluded that the application of the doctrine of equitable 
estoppel did not infringe on the mother’s liberty interests because she voluntarily rendered her parental rights with respect to the child “less exclusive and less exclusory” with regard to her husband. 
Id. at 101, 185 P.3d at 849 (quoting 
Rubano v. DiCenzo, 759 A.2d 959, 976 (R.I. 2000)). The ICA reasoned, 
By marrying Egan and then adding his name to Child One’s
birth certificate, Gina created the circumstances under
which Egan became Child One’s “legal father.” Byrepresenting to him that he had adopted Child One when heallowed his name to be added to the certificate, Gina ledEgan to take no action to further investigate or establish
his status as Child One’s father. Finally, Gina allowed
Egan to assume the role of Child One’s father and to becomeChild One’s psychological parent. 
23
 	
 
 
Id. 
	  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
at 100-01, 185 P.3d at 848-49 (footnote omitted). 
Inoue relied on the Rhode Island Supreme Court’s 
decision in Rubano, which concerned two women who agreed to 
become the parents of a child. 759 A.2d at 961. They arranged 
for one of them to conceive via artificial insemination, and 
they raised the child together for four years while living together as a family in Massachusetts. 
Id. They gave the child 
both of their last names separated by a hyphen on the child’s birth certificate and sent out printed birth announcements identifying both of them as the child’s parents, although the parental status was never legally settled by adoption. Id.
 
When the couple separated, the biological mother took the child 
with her to Rhode Island, and, initially, the biological mother 
agreed to a visitation schedule for her former partner to see the child. Id.
 at 961. Later, when the biological mother was 
resistant to the visitation arrangements, the former partner initiated legal proceedings seeking to establish her de facto parental status and obtain court-ordered visitation. Id.
 at 
961-62. The parties negotiated a compromise that was embodied in a consent order, specifying that the former partner would 
have permanent visitation with the child on a periodic basis in 
exchange for waiving any claim to parent the child.
 Id. 
at 962. 
In later proceedings, the biological mother asserted that the court lacked jurisdiction to enter the consent order. Id.
 
24
 	
 
 
	  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The Supreme Court of Rhode Island considered whether 
the biological mother had a protected liberty interest under the 
Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to terminate the relationship between her former partner and child. The Rhode 
Island court concluded that the biological mother rendered her 
own parental rights with respect to her child “less exclusive and less exclusory” than they otherwise would have been had she not “by word and deed” allowed her former partner to establish a parental bond with the child and also agreed to allow visitation. Id. at 976. The court reasoned that “the mere fact 
of biological parenthood, even when coupled with the biological parent’s ongoing care and nurture of the child and that parent’s 
fundamental right . . . , does not always endow the biological 
parent with the absolute right to prevent all third parties from ever acquiring any parental rights vis-à-vis the child.” Id. 
The Inoue and Rubano
 decisions are consistent with the 
United States Supreme Court’s cases defining the parental liberty interest. Constitutionally protected parental rights are not based solely on legal or biological ties, and the Supreme Court has recognized “that the rights of the parents are 
a counterpart of the responsibilities they have assumed.” 
Lehr, 
463 U.S. at 257. Stated another way, “A parent’s rights with 
respect to her child have thus never been regarded as absolute, but rather are limited by the existence of an actual, developed 
25
 	
 
 
	  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
relationship with a child, and are tied to the presence or 
absence of some embodiment of family.” Troxel, 530 U.S. at 88 
(Stevens, J., dissenting). The Supreme Court has recognized that “[t]he importance of the familial relationship, to the 
individuals involved and to the society, stems from the 
emotional attachments that derive from the intimacy of daily association, and from the role it plays in ‘promot[ing] a way of life’ through the instruction of children as well as from the fact of blood relationship.’” Lehr, 463 U.S. at 261 (second 
alteration in original) (quoting Smith v. Org. of Foster Families for Equality & Reform, 431 U.S. 816, 844 (1977)); see 
also Quilloin v. Walcott,  434 U.S. 246, 255 (1978) (holding that 
“best interests of the child standard” did not violate a natural father’s parental rights in adoption proceedings that terminated his parental rights where natural father did not marry the mother and had not at any time sought actual or legal custody of his child). 
The scope of parental rights is also defined in 
reference to the State’s authority and duty to protect children in addition to the rights of children. 
See Troxel , 530 U.S. at 
88 (Stevens, J., dissenting) (observing that limitations on parental rights “have arisen, not simply out of the definition of parenthood itself, but because of [the Supreme Court’s] assumption that a parent’s interests in a child must be balanced 
26
 	
 
 
	***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
against the State’s long-recognized interests as parens patriae  
and, critically, the child’s own complementary interest in 
preserving relationships that serve her welfare and protection” (citations omitted)). Indeed, with regard to the Troxel 
decision, a majority of the court contemplated that even where 
the parent has a developed, legal parent-child relationship with the child, there may be special factors that justify state interference. See Troxel, 530 U.S. at 68, 73 (plurality) 
(declining to define the precise scope of the parental due process right, relying instead on the “sweeping breadth” of the statute and application of “broad, unlimited power,” and noting the absence of “special factors that might justify the State’s 
interference”); id. at 89 (Stevens, J., dissenting) (“The 
constitutional protection against arbitrary state interference with parental rights should not be extended to prevent the States from protecting children against the arbitrary exercise of parental authority that is not in fact motivated by an interest in the welfare of the child.”); id. at 99 (Kennedy, J., dissenting) (“In the design and elaboration of their visitation laws, States may be entitled to consider that certain 
relationships are such that to avoid the risk of harm, a best 
interests standard can be employed by their domestic relations courts in some circumstances.”); 
cf. id. at 92 (Scalia, J., 
27
 	
 
 
	  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
dissenting) (stating that he would not extend the theory of 
parental rights to extend to visitation decisions). 
Relying on the plurality in Michael H. v. Gerald D., 
491 U.S. 110 (1989), the Rhode Island Supreme Court noted that 
“under certain circumstances, even the existence of a developed 
biological parent-child relationship . . . will not prevent others from acquiring parental rights vis-à-vis the child.” Rubano, 759 A.2d at 974; see also Troxel , 530 U.S. at 87-88 
(Stevens, J., dissenting) (discussing Michael H.). Indeed, as 
Justice Kennedy stated in his dissenting opinion in 
Troxel, 
“Cases are sure to arise--perhaps a substantial number of cases­-in which a third party, by acting in a caregiving role over a 
significant period of time, has developed a relationship with a 
child which is not necessarily subject to absolute parental veto.” 530 U.S. at 98 (Kennedy, J., dissenting) (citing Michael H., Quillon, and Lehr); see also id. at 64 (plurality) (“[P]ersons outside the nuclear family are called upon with increasing frequency to assist in the everyday tasks of child rearing.”). Accordingly, “a fit parent’s right vis-à-vis a complete stranger is one thing; her right vis-à-vis another 
parent or a de facto parent may be another.” Id. at 100-101 
(Kennedy, J., dissenting). 
In this case, the parties made a joint decision to 
adopt and raise Child. 
Together, the parties named Child, 
28
 	
 
 
giving her each of their last names, and they lived together 
with B.B.’s teenage son as a family unit for a two-year period. From the time she could talk, Child referred to B.B. as “Papa” and A.A. as “Daddy,” and they jointly shared all parental care, 
duties, and responsibilities for Child from the time she was one 
month old. Although A.A. and B.B. intended that A.A. would adopt Child and retained an attorney to accomplish the adoption, the adoption never occurred. Additionally, following their separation, the parties continued to attend counseling together and entered into a 50/50 written co-parenting agreement. Accordingly, it appears from the family court’s findings that B.B. voluntarily incorporated A.A. into the family unit and 
encouraged him to share parental responsibilities and custody of 
Child. 
	  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
As the mother in 
Inoue facilitated the “circumstances 
under which [her husband] became [her oldest child’s] ‘legal father,’” B.B. voluntarily shared custody of Child with A.A. and, thus, made his own parental rights less exclusive vis-à-vis 
A.A. See Inoue, 118 Hawai ʻi at 101, 185 P.3d at 849; see also 
530 U.S. at 98 (Kennedy, J., dissenting) (“[A] fit parent’s 
right vis-à-vis a complete stranger is one thing; her right vis­
29
 	
 
 
	  
																																																								
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
à-vis another parent or a de facto parent may be another.”).17 
The circumstances of this case are entirely distinguishable from 
those governed by the grandparent visitation statute considered 
in Doe. See 116 Hawai ʻi at 325, 172 P.3d at 1069. In this case, 
B.B. voluntarily allowed A.A. to share physical custody of Child 
in addition to sharing the duties and responsibilities for parenting child, and thus the circumstances do not implicate the 
17 Cf. Smith v. Guest , 16 A.3d 920, 931 (Del. 2011) (holding that de
facto parent statute did not violate the due process rights of child’s other
legal parent because a de facto parent would also be a “legal ‘parent’” thatwould share a “co-equal ‘fundamental parental interest’” in raising the childwith the other parent);
 C.E.W. v. D.E.W. , 845 A.2d 1146, 1152 (Me. 2004)
(holding that person’s status as the de facto parent of a child authorized
the court to consider an award of parental rights and responsibilities to the
person as a parent based on its determination of the best interest of thechild); Rubano, 759 A.2d at 974 (“[U]nder certain circumstances, even theexistence of a developed biological parent-child relationship . . . will notprevent others from acquiring parental rights vis-à-vis the child.”); Brooke
S.B. v. Elizabeth A. C.C., No. 91, 2016 WL 4507780 (N.Y. Aug. 30, 2016)
(expanding the definition of “parent” to include a partner of a domesticpartnership that agrees to conceive a child and to raise the child together);
In re Parentage of L.B., 122 P.3d 161, 177 (Wash. 2005) (“We thus hold that
henceforth in Washington, a de facto parent stands in legal parity with an
otherwise legal parent, whether biological, adoptive, or otherwise.”); In re 
Custody of B.M.H., 315 P.3d 470, 478 (Wash. 2013) (en banc) (“The de facto
parentage doctrine incorporates constitutionally required deference toparents by requiring that the biological or legal parent consent to andfoster the parentlike relationship. Once a petitioner has made the threshold
showing that the natural or legal parent consented to and fostered the
parent-like relationship, the State is no longer ‘interfering on behalf of athird party in an insular family unit but is enforcing the rights andobligations of parenthood that attach to de facto parents.’” (quoting In reParentage of L.B., 122 P.3d 161 (Wash. 2005) (en banc))); Randy A.J. v. NormaI.J., 655 N.W.2d 195, 201 (Wis. 2002) (noting that under Wisconsin’s
equitable parent doctrine, “[o]nce a court determines that a party is an
equitable parent, there is no distinction between the equitable parent andany other parent; each is endowed with the same rights and responsibilitiesof parenthood”), aff’d, 677 N.W.2d 630. 
30
 	
 
 
	   
  
																																																								
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Hawaiʻi Constitution’s right to privacy as the grandparent 
statute in Doe did.18 
Additionally, we cannot conclude that B.B. has 
established the statute is facially unconstitutional. See 
United States v. Salerno , 481 U.S. 739, 745 (1987) (“A facial 
challenge to a legislative Act is, of course, the most difficult 
challenge to mount successfully, since the challenger must 
establish that no set of circumstances exists under which the 
Act would be valid.”). The de facto custody provision of HRS § 
571-46(a)(2) simply does not have the broad sweep that the grandparent visitation statute in 
Doe had. Indeed, HRS § 571­
46(a)(2) is one of several “standards, considerations, and procedures” that HRS § 571-46 provides for family courts tasked with handling custody and visitation disputes; it is but one tool in a court’s toolbox for navigating the varying and complex 
circumstances that may arise when custody to a child is in 
dispute. Additionally, HRS § 571-46 includes subsection (a)(1), which provides custody 
should be awarded to either parent or to 
both parents according to the best interests of the child, and 
18 Our decision is based on the circumstances presented by this
case. We note that a parent does not relinquish his or her parental rights
by merely relying on childcare assistance from others. 
As stated, de facto
custody is not established by mere physical custody of a child. Nonetheless,
we decline to adopt a bright line rule regarding the extent of a parent’s
protected liberty interest as “the constitutional protections in this areaare best ‘elaborated with care’” on a case-by-case basis. See Troxel, 530
U.S. at 73 (plurality) (quoting 
id. at 101 (Kennedy, J., dissenting)). 
31
 	
 
 
	***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
importantly, HRS § 571-46(a)(2) may also apply under 
circumstances where no parent or no fit parent seeks custody of the child. HRS § 571-46 is therefore notably distinguishable from the grandparent visitation statute in 
Doe. Indeed, the 
apparent purpose of the statute in Doe was to provide grandparents a means to circumvent the decisions of parents based on the legislature’s finding that “grandparents play a significant role in the lives of minor children and should be allowed reasonable visitation rights so long as it is in the 
best interests of the child.” 
Doe
, 116 Hawai ʻi at 332 n.6, 172 
P.3d at 1076 n.6 (quoting Sen. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1053, in 
1993 Senate Journal, at 1154). The grandparent visitation statute was facially invalid as it undermined a parent’s judgment to not allow grandparents access to one’s child based merely on a finding that grandparent visitation was in the 
child’s best interests. 
Id. (“Indeed, there can be no doubt 
that the legislature intended that visitation, if found by a 
court to be in the best interests of the child, may be ordered over a parent’s objection”); see Troxel, 530 U.S. 57, 67, 120 S. Ct. 2054, 2061, 147 L. Ed. 2d 49 (2000) (“[I]n practical effect, in the State of Washington a court can disregard and overturn any decision by a fit custodial parent concerning visitation whenever a third party affected by the decision files a 
visitation petition, based solely on the judge’s determination 
32
 	
 
 
	  
																																																								
  
 A man is presumed to be the natural father of a child if: 
. . . 
 After the child’s birth, he and the child’s natural mother
have married, or attempted to marry, each other by a marriage
solemnized in apparent compliance with law, although the
attempted marriage is or could be declared invalid, and: 
. . . 
 With his consent, he is named as the child’s father on the
child’s birth certificate . . . . ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of the child’s best interests.”). While there certainly may be 
situations where a family court’s application of HRS § 571­46(a)(2) may violate a parent’s constitutionally protected liberty interests, we do not conclude that the statute is 
facially invalid as the grandparent visitation statute in Doe 
was. 
In distinguishing Inoue, the family court placed great 
emphasis on the fact that the parties never married or entered into a civil union. While it is true that the Inoue opinion discusses the fact that the parties were married in its analysis, it was important only because marriage was relevant to the paternity statute that was specifically challenged by the 
mother in Inoue.
19 See Inoue, 118 Hawai ʻi at 94, 185 P.3d at 842. 
In that case, the biological mother’s husband and the child had 
a presumptive “parent child relationship” pursuant to HRS § 584­
4(a)(3)(B) because of the subsequent marriage of the parties and 
19HRS § 584-4(a)(3)(B) (2006) provides, 
33
 	
 
 
	 
																																																								
  
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
inclusion of husband on the birth certificate. Id. Thus, 
marriage was an essential element of the statute challenged by 
the mother in  Inoue, and her voluntary creation of the 
circumstances giving rise to the presumptive parent-child 
relationship was important to the ICA, not the existence of a 
marriage itself. See id. at 100, 185 P.3d at 848. Indeed, 
Inoue found the reasoning of the Rubano case persuasive, see id., although the parties were not married and the relationship of the parties was not discussed as an essential fact. 
See 
Rubano
, 759 A.2d at 976. The heart of the Rubano decision 
concerned the relationship of the parties with the child--not the relationship between the parties. See id. at 974. In any 
event, marriage is not an element of the de facto presumption of HRS § 571-46(a)(2), the provision on which A.A. bases his claim for joint custody of Child.
20 
20 Application of the family court’s marriage requirement would mean
that a grandparent or other family member, such as a h ānai parent, would
never be able to establish a de facto custodial relationship with a child so
long as the biological parent remains in the child’s life, even where the
child views the third party as his or her only parental figure. 
By extension, we do not agree with B.B.’s contention that
application of the de facto custody provision would create significantburdens that would apply to all domestic relationships where a single parent
is involved as this is not a case where the parties simply lived together
with a child. See State v. Sturch
, 82 Hawai ʻi 269, 274, 921 P.2d 1170, 1175
(App. 1996) (“A person to whom a statute may be constitutionally applied
cannot challenge the statute on the ground that it may conceivably be appliedunconstitutionally to others.” (quoting 
State v. Kaneakua , 61 Haw. 136, 143,
597 P.2d 590, 594 (1979)). Indeed, we do not believe a person would beconsidered a “proper” person to have custody of the child under HRS § 571­46(a)(2) where the person’s sole connection to the child is a relationshipwith the parent. Additionally, we note that living in a household with a 
(continued . . .) 
34
 	
 
 
	  
  
																																																																																																																																																																																			
  
	***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Therefore, because B.B. permitted A.A. to share 
physical custody of Child in addition to the parenting 
responsibilities and duties with regard to Child, B.B. does not have a protected privacy interest in excluding A.A. from Child’s 
life under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment or 
the Hawai ʻi Constitution’s due process and privacy protections. 
As such, B.B. has not demonstrated that the application of HRS § 
571-46(a)(2) under the circumstances of this case would 
implicate his parental rights protected under the federal or 
Hawaiʻi constitutions. 
Given B.B. has not established that HRS § 571-46(a)(2) 
impacted a protected liberty interest nor a privacy interest under the Hawai ʻi Constitution, the statute’s prima facie de 
facto provision, which includes the best interests of the child 
standard, satisfies due process. 
See HRS § 571-46(a)(2). 
Indeed, HRS § 571-46(a)(2) provides B.B. with ample protections as he has not demonstrated the implication of a protected liberty interest. HRS § 571-46(a)(1) favors the awarding of custody to the child’s parents, providing that custody “should be awarded to either or both parents,” and it also provides for 
child is not equivalent to having custody of a child although it may be
relevant to the issue. 
Additionally, B.B.’s contention that the absence of a legal
financial responsibility upon A.A. to support Child renders him ineligible to
be awarded custody is unsupported by HRS § 571-46(a)(2). 
35
	
 
 
																																																									
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the maintenance of meaningful contact between the parent and 
child unless the parent “is unable to act in the best interest of the child.” HRS § 571-46(a)(2) states that custody “may” be awarded to a person who is not a parent “whenever the award 
serves the best interest of the child,” and it also creates a 
presumption in favor of awarding custody under limited circumstances to a person who has de facto custody. Accordingly, the de facto presumption, which is also subject to the best interests of the child standard, would only apply when the nonparent custodian is able to demonstrate that he or she (1) has had “de facto custody” of the child (2) in a stable and wholesome home and that (3) the custodian is a fit and proper 
person. Given that no protected liberty interest is 
demonstrated by B.B., the statute satisfies due process as applied in this case.
21 B.B. has therefore not established that 
an award of custody to A.A. under HRS § 571-46(a)(2) would 
21 The adequacy of the statute is evaluated in reference to whether
a significant liberty interest is implicated. See Guidry , 105 Hawai ʻi at 227,
96 P.3d at 247; 
see also Lehr
, 463 U.S. at 256. The Due Process Clause 
“provides heightened protection against government interference with certain
fundamental rights and liberty interests.” Troxel, 530 U.S. at 65
(plurality). As we conclude that B.B.’s fundamental parental rights are not
implicated under the circumstances of this case, we need not apply aheightened scrutiny in evaluating whether HRS § 571-46(a)(2) satisfies due 
process. Cf. Doe, 116 Hawai ʻi at 335, 172 P.3d at 1079 (applying strict
scrutiny in determining that grandparent visitation statute was faciallyunconstitutional under the Hawai ʻi Constitution’s right to privacy). 
36
 	
 
 
	 
 
 For the reasons discussed, the family court 
misapprehended the law when it required A.A. to establish that 
the application of HRS § 571-46(a)(2) would be constitutional if applied to his request for joint custody of Child. The plain 
language of HRS § 571-46(a)(2) contemplates standing to seek 
custody when a person has had “de facto custody” of a child and meets the other requirements of HRS § 571-46(a)(2). Further, we hold that B.B. failed to establish that the application of HRS § 571-46(a)(2) to this case would infringe on his fundamental liberty interests or otherwise violate his right to privacy 
under the Hawai ʻi Constitution.
23 Accordingly, we remand the case 
																																								
																
  
	 	
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
impair his parental rights under the federal or Hawai ʻi 
constitutions.22 
III. CONCLUSION 
22 Although it is not necessary to address in this case, it is noted
that the State has a compelling state interest in maintaining the presence of
a child in a stable and wholesome home with fit and proper persons. The State’s compelling interest and duty with regard to the welfare of childrenhas long been recognized in this jurisdiction. 
See In re Guardianship of
Thompson, 32 Haw. 479, 486 (1932). In addition, HRS § 571-46(a)(2) protectsthe interests and rights of children. See Troxel, 530 U.S. at 89 n.9
(collecting cases demonstrating that children have constitutionally protectedrights). 
23 We reject A.A.’s evidentiary challenges to the expert testimony
presented at the hearing. Given her education and experience, Dr. De Costawas qualified to testify as an expert in the field of family behaviors and inthe relationship of children with their families. 
See HRS § 571-46(a)(5)
(providing that the court may decide that qualified “expert’s testimony isrelevant to a just and reasonable determination of what is for the best
physical, mental, moral, and spiritual well-being of the child whose custody
is at issue”). The hypothetical opinion elicited from Dr. De Costa was
admissible under Hawai ʻi Rule of Evidence (HRE) Rule 703. 
See
 HRE Rule 703 
cmt (1993). Dr. De Costa’s opinions regarding the potential harm to Child as 
(continued . . .) 
37
 	
 
 
	  
 
																																																																																																																																																																																			
 
	***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
for proper application of HRS § 571-46(a)(2), including a 
determination as to whether A.A. satisfies the three elements of HRS § 571-46(a)(2) and, if so, for a custody award in Child’s best interests. 
Accordingly, the family court’s December 11, 2014 
“Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law; Order/Final Judgment” is vacated, and the case is remanded to the family court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
Michael S. Zola 
for petitioner 
Brian J. De Lima, 
Francis R. Alcain and 
Justin P. Haspe 
for respondent /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna/s/ Richard W. Pollack
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
a result of the termination of the relationship between A.A. and B.B. and the
doctor’s concerns about Child having a continued relationship with A.A. wererelevant, within the doctor’s expertise, and would assist the court indetermining Child’s best interests. 
See HRS § 571-46(a)(5). Dr. De Costa’s 
testimony regarding the mental health of B.B.’s son, including her diagnosis,
was admissible as a proper foundation was laid, and it was relevant to the
court’s consideration of the best interests of Child and whether A.A. was a fit and proper person for purposes of applying the de facto custodypresumption of HRS § 571-46(a)(2). Dr. De Costa’s testimony regarding B.B.’sson’s test scores was admissible under HRE Rule 703 without their 
introduction into evidence. And, the family court’s finding of fact
regarding Dr. De Costa’s testimony did not misstate her testimony and wassupported by the record. 
With regard to Dr. Wyss’s testimony, it appears that the court
considered the testimony of Dr. Wyss, but it found Dr. De Costa’s testimony
more compelling, which is within the province of the trial court.  See Exotics
Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co.
, 116 Hawai ʻi. 277, 299, 172
P.3d 1021, 1043 (2007). Lastly, any error by the family court in restricting
Dr. Wyss’s testimony to the contents of his report, or in not admitting hisprogress notes, was harmless because Dr. Wyss was permitted to testify that
he was aware of the sex-abuse allegations against A.A. and that he did not
believe that A.A. posed a threat of abuse to Child. However, if furtherevidentiary proceedings are held on remand, the family court may revisit itsruling regarding the proffered evidence. 
38
 