***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I,  
Plaintiff- Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
KOMA KEKOA TEXEIRA, JR.,  
Defendant -Appellant, 
 
and 
 
CLAYTON KALANI KONA,  
Defendant -Appellee. 
 
 
SCAP-18-0000632 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-18- 0000632; CR. NO. 5PC161000398) 
JUNE 19, 2020 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH NAKAYAMA, J., CONCURRING
AND DISSENTING,  WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.  
  The defendant in this case was convicted of murder in 
the second degree.  At trial, he sought to introduce evidence Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-18-0000632
19-JUN-2020
12:36 PM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
2 
 tending to show that a third- party committed the offense, but 
the trial court excluded the evidence.  This appeal contends 
that the evidence was im properly excluded.  The defendant also 
challenges the trial court’s admission into evidence of a 
confession letter allegedly written by him  because of its late 
disclosure to the defense, arguing that the State had control 
over the letter through a cooperating co
-defendant nine months 
before the disclosure was made.  Lastly, the d efendant argues 
that DNA results showing his presence  at the crime scene were 
improperly admitted at trial, as the State failed to show that 
the instruments used to conduct the DNA analyses were operated 
in compliance with the manufacturer ’s recommendations .   
  Upon review, we hold that the timing of the State’s 
disclosure did not require the exclusion of the letter at trial.  
We also conclude that a sufficient foundation to admit the 
results of the DNA analyses was established to allow their 
admission into evidence.  Finally, we hold that third- party 
culpability evidence was erroneously excluded, but the error was 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt under the circumstances of 
this case. 
 BACKGROUND
 I.
A. Arrest and Pre- Trial Motions  
 
 On the night of October 31, 2016, Jon Togioka was 
fatally shot by a .22- caliber firearm near Hanap ēpē on the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
3 
 island of Kaua‘ i.  Kaua‘i Police Department (KPD) officers later 
arrested Koma Texeira Jr., Trish Flores, Brandon Pagala, Robert 
“Bobby” Dela Cruz, and Clayton Kona in connection with Togioka’s 
death.  Texeira was subsequently indicted for murder in the 
second degree in violation of Hawai ‘i Revised Statu tes (HRS) 
§ 707-701.5,1 carrying or u se of a firearm in commission of a 
separate felony in violation of HRS § 134- 21,2 and two counts  of 
ownership of possession prohibited in violation of HRS § 134-
7(b).3  Kona was also charged in the same indictment with 
multiple offenses.4  Prior to trial, Kona entered into a plea 
                     
 1 HRS § 707 -701.5(1) (2014) provides as follows:  
 
(1) Except as provided in section 707 -701, a person commits 
the offense of murder in the second degree if the person 
intentionally or knowingly causes the death of another 
person. 
 
 2 HRS § 134 -21 (2011) provides in relevant part as follows:  
 
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly carry on 
the person or  have within the person’s immediate control or 
intentionally use or threaten to use a firearm while 
engaged in the commission of a separate felony, whether the 
firearm was loaded or not, and whether operable or not[.]  
 
 3 HRS § 134 -7 (2011) provides in relevant part as follows:  
 
(b) No person who is under indictment for, or has waived 
indictment for, or has been bound over to the circuit court 
for, or has been convicted in this State or elsewhere of 
having committed a felony, or any crime of violence, or an  
illegal sale of any drug shall own, possess, or control any 
firearm or ammunition therefor.  
 
 4 Kona was charged as an accomplice to murder in the second degree 
in violation of HRS § 707 -701.5, carrying or use of firearm in commission of 
separate felony in violation of HRS § 134 -21, two counts of ownership or 
possession prohibited in violation of HRS § 134 -7(b), and place to keep 
pistol or revolver in violation of HRS § 134 -25. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
4 
 agreement with the State in which he pleaded guilty only to 
hindering prosecution in the first degree in violation of HRS § 
710-1029 and ownership or possession prohibited in violation of 
HRS § 134-7(b), in exchange for, inter alia, testifying at 
hearings, trials, re- trials following appeal, or other 
proceedings connected with Togioka’s death .   
1. Motion to Determine Voluntariness of Confession Letter 
Allegedly Written by Texeira 
 
  
On February 13 , 2018, the State filed a motion in the 
Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit court) to determine 
the voluntariness of statements that Texeira allegedly wrote in 
a letter while in jail.5  In a declaration accompanying its 
motion, the prosecutor stated that Texeira wrote a letter saying 
he shot Togioka in self
-defense and gave that letter to Kona.6  
Texeira filed a memorandum in opposition in which he argued, 
inter alia, that the State had violated Hawai ‘i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 16 because the State had not produced the 
letter to the defense until February 9, 2018, which was one 
month before trial and 280 days after the State was informed of 
                     
 5 The Honorable Judge Randal G.B. Valenciano presided over all 
proceedings in this case.   
 
 6 The letter stated that Togioka found a gun belonging to Texeira 
under the driver’s seat of Texeira’s car and began threatening him with the 
weapon.  A struggle ensued and resulted in Texeira fatally shooting Togioka.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
5 
 (continued . . .)  its existence.7  Texeira maintained that on May 5, 2017, Kona 
gave a statement to KPD in which he stated that Texeira wrote 
                     
 7 HRPP Rule 16 (2012) provides in pertinent part as follows:  
 
(b) Disclosure by the prosecution.  
(1) Disclosure of Matters Within Prosecution’s 
Possession.  The Prosecutor shall disclose to the 
defendant or the defendant’s attorney the following 
material and information within  the prosecutor’s 
possession or control:  
 . . . . 
(ii) any written or recorded statements and the 
substance of any oral statements made by the 
defendant, or made by a co -defendant if 
intended to be used in a joint trial, together 
with the names and last known addresses of 
persons who witnessed the making of such 
statements;  
  . . . . 
(e) Regulation of Discovery.  
(1) Performance of Obligations.  Except for matters 
which are to be specifically designated in writing by 
defense counsel under this rule, the prosecution 
shall disclose all materials subject to disclosure 
pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this rule to the 
defendant or the defendant’s attorney within ten (10) 
calendar days following arraignment and plea of the 
defendant.  The parties may perform their obligations 
of disclosure in any manner mutually agreeable to the 
parties or by notifying the attorney for the other 
party that material and information, described in 
general terms, may be inspected, obtained, tested, 
copied or photographed at specified reasonable times 
and places.   
(2) Continuing Duty to Disclose.  If subsequent to 
compliance with these rules or orders entered 
pursuant to these rules, a party discovers additional 
material or information which would have been subject 
to disclosure pursuant to this Rule 16, that party 
shall promptly disclose  the additional material or 
information, and if the additional material or 
information is discovered during trial, the court 
shall also be notified.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
6 
 two letters confessing to Togioka’s murder while they were both 
in jail.  Subsequently, Kona’s attorney discussed the contents 
of the letter purportedly written by Texeira in a May 19, 2017 
interview with investigating officers.  Accordingly, Texeira 
argued that the State was aware of the letter and its nature on 
that date.   
  Additionally, Texeira contended that Kona was 
negotiating a plea deal prior to his interview s and thus was an 
agent of the State before  May 19, 2017.  Because  the letter was 
in the possession of a State agent as of May 19, 2017,  Texeira 
argued, the State had an obligation to obtain the letter in a 
timely manner and disclose its contents to the defense.  
Alternatively, Texeira maintained  that Kona became a state agent 
as soon as he entered into a plea deal on June 2, 2017, and thus 
the State had control over the letter at that time .  The State’s 
failure to produce the letter until a month before trial was a 
violation of HRPP Rule 16, Texeira concluded, and therefore the 
State should be precluded from introducing the letter into 
evidence.   
  The State responded  that it provided the transcript of 
Kona’s interview to the defense on May 23, 2017,  and provided 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
HRPP Rule 16 (2012) (some formatting omitted).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
7 
 the second letter allegedly written by Texeira upon receiving it 
and thus did not violate HRPP Rule 16(b)
(1)(ii).  The State 
further argued that Kona was not a government agent under its 
control.   
  On February 27, 2018, the circuit court heard 
arguments and testimony on the State’s motion.  In addition to 
the arguments made in his memorandum in opposition, Texeira 
contended that he did not write t he letter and that it was 
actually written by Kona.  Texeira maintained  that the signature 
was suspect because it was at the top of the page and had 
hesitation marks 
that indicated it was someone trying to copy a 
signature.  Texeira also maintained that there was no way to 
determine the letter’s authenticity or have fingerprint or 
handwriting analysis  conducted  because it was too close to trial 
to retain an expert,  and that he should not  be compelled to 
choose between a fair trial and his right to a speedy trial.  
The State responded that
 it provided the letter as soon as 
Kona’s attorney provided it to the State, and that Kona would 
testify during the hearing as to the letter’s  authenticity.   
  Kona  testified at the hearing t hat, after being 
arrested in connection with  the death of Togioka, he had been 
placed in the same cell as Texeira i n November 2016.  During 
this time, Texeira wrote a letter confessing to the murder and 
stating that Kona had nothing to do with it.  Kona s aid that he ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
8 
 personally saw Texeira write and mail the letter to Texeira’s  
attorney.  According to Kona, this letter was apparently not 
useful for Kona’s  defense, so Texeira wrote a second letter.  
Kona stated that he also saw Texeira write the  second letter and 
that he did not force him to write the letter.  Texeira gave him  
a copy of the second letter, which Kona  gave to his own 
attorney.  When shown a copy of the second letter, Kona said  
that it was a true and accurate copy of the letter he saw 
Texeira write.  He believed the second letter was written about 
a month after he had been arrested .  Kona further testified that 
neither the police nor the prosecution asked him to get Texeira 
to confess to Togioka’s murder  and he told the State about the 
letter prior to signing a plea deal on June 2, 2017 .   
  F ollowing the hearing, the circuit court issued an 
order granting the State’s motion to determin e voluntariness.   
The court found that i n December 2016,  Texeira voluntarily wrote 
a second letter, witnessed but not directed by Kona,  after 
discovering that his first letter would not help Kona.  The 
court found Kona was not an agent of the State when Texeira gave 
him the second letter and was not directed to obtain a 
confession from Texeira.  The court thus permitted the second ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
9 
 letter to be admitted into evidence.8  The court did not rule 
upon Texeira’s contention that the second letter had been 
untimely disclosed.   
2. Texeira’s Motion in Limine to Exclude DNA Evidence 
  
Prior to trial, Texeira filed a motion in limine 
seeking the exclusion of DNA evidence at trial  based on the 
unreliability of the procedures that the State’s DNA expert had 
used to obtain the DNA results .  At the hearing, the State 
called Emily Jeskie, an employee of Sorenson Forensics 
(Sorenson), a  private DNA testing laboratory that had conducted 
DNA tests on buccal swabs and cigarette butts recovered at the 
crime scene.9  Jeskie testified that each Sorenson lab employee 
is proficiency tested every six months by an outside agency and 
Sorenson is accredited by the American Society of Crime 
Laboratory Directors International (ASCLD) accreditation board.  
Jeskie explained that the accreditation process entails ASCLD 
auditing the laboratory, ensuring that the tests are performed 
to standard, and verifying that the employees are competent to 
perform the tests.  The competency testing is conduc
ted by 
                     
 8 The court redacted two lines in the letter, starting with the 
sentence “I lied to detectives.”  Further, the court permitted the State to 
reference that the first letter was written, but it excluded the contents of 
any communications between Texeira and his attorney.   
 
 9 Jeskie, who testified via videoconference, stated that she had a 
bachelor of science in molecular biology from Brigham Young University, had 
participated in a six -month training program in forensic DNA casework, and 
had testified in approximately 48 cases as an expert in DNA testing.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
10 
 Collaborative Testing Services (CTS).  Sorenson has never lost 
its accreditation, been placed on probation, or had its 
accreditation withheld or suspended, Jeskie testified.   
  Jeskie further explained that each test is subject to 
a “control,” which confirms  that the testing process worked 
correctly and did not have contamination.  Sorenson has positive 
controls used in each step of its testing process to indicate  
what the results should be and if the control “doesn’t type 
correctly,” then it shows  there was a problem in the testing.   
  
A second hearing  on Texeira’s motion was conducted to 
allow the State to supplement the record regarding the 
reliability of the DNA evidence .10  Jeskie testified that every 
machine used by Sorenson is required to be “validated” under the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation’s ( FBI) quality assurance 
standards.  Validation entails a study conducted to ensure that 
the machine is reliable and its results are reproducible.  T he 
validation process shows whether each test was done correctly 
and if there was contamination.  Validation is done at each step 
of the testing to ensure that the control was passed.  T he FBI 
quality assurance standards require Sorenson to validate its 
equipment and train its  employees using certain methods.  Jeskie 
explained that all employees are required to complete a standard 
                     
 10 All of the witnesses at the second hearing testified via 
videoconference.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
11 
 training program on the equipment and that the training program 
and validation method Sorenson uses is reviewed as part of the 
ASCLD accreditation process.   
  Each machine and piece of equipment i s subject to 
controls to ensure they are working properly and are regularly 
maintained, Jeskie testified.  Logs are kept of the maintenance 
and if a machine is not in working order,  it is taken out of 
commission.  The State introduced into evidence a certificate of 
authenticity and a maintenance record for the machines used to 
test the DNA evidence to show that they  were in proper working 
order at the time the analyses of the evidence in this case were 
conducted.  The maintenance record  was a 48-page log that 
detailed equipment maintenance on several machines dating as far 
back as June 24 , 2011, and through February 2018.  The log 
recorded daily, weekly, monthly, and annual maintenance, 
performance checks, error corrections , adjustments, preventative 
maintenance, calibrations, and time periods when the machines 
were removed from and placed back into service. 
  The State called several other Sorenson employees that 
were involved in analyzing  the DNA evidence in this case.  All 
of the witnesses  testified  that the machines utilized to conduct 
the DNA tests were in working order and that they conducted the 
testing in compliance with Sorenson’s standard training program 
and operating procedures.   Several Sorenson employees testified ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
12 
 that Sorenson did not itself manufacture any of the machines 
they used and that they did not know the manufacturer’s 
identity.  The witnesses also testified that the machines were 
not manufactured by ASCLD, CTS, or the FBI.   
  Texeira maintained that the DNA evidence should not be 
admitted at trial because  the State could not lay a proper 
foundation establishing that the equipment used to conduct the 
analyses produced accurate results, unless the user was trained 
to operate it in the manner recommended by the machine’s 
manufacturer.  Since the State had not adduced any evidence that 
the machines Sorenson used to analyze the DNA evidence were 
operated in compliance with the manufacturer’s recommendations, 
Texeira contended that none  of the results were proven to be 
reliable.   
  In its written order  denying the motion,  the circuit 
court found that the Sorenson employees used valid and reliable 
techniques to obtain DNA profiles, the instruments were in 
proper working order, and the employees were trained to use, and 
did use, accepted procedures.  The court recognized Jeskie as an 
expert in DNA testing and profiling and additionally found that 
the use of DNA evidence to generate a DNA profile and identify a 
person is reliable science, the DNA test results were relevant 
to the issue of the identity of the perpetrator, and the results 
would assist the trier of fact.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
13 
 B. Trial Proceedings 
  Leana Contrades, Kona’s girlfriend and the mother of 
his daughter, testified that at the time of the events in 
question she was living at Kona’ s house along with five other 
people, including Texeira
.  Contrades stated  that at about 9:00 
a.m. on October 30, 2016, she went to Wailua with Kona and 
Roberta Bactad, a relative of Kona’s,  and they returned  to their 
home sometime that evening.  The next day, October 31, Kona 
slept until about 6:00
 p.m.  Contrades testified that Texeira 
attempted to speak to Kona several times that day but was unable 
to do so while he was sleeping.  When Kona woke up, she told him 
that Togioka had stolen a 
cell phone from Kona’s house.  Kona 
was upset by this,  and he asked her to “find out where [Togi oka 
was] and tell him to come over.”   Contrades called Texeira on 
Kona’s cell phone and told him that Kona wanted Togioka to come 
to their house and “settle it.”   
  Togioka arrived at the house shortly after, and 
Contrades heard Kona say, “Where’s the phone?”  She saw Kona 
“have [Togioka] against the wall, ches t against the wall and his 
hand behind his back,” while Togioka repeatedly said that he did 
not steal the phone.  Contrades 
then went into her bedroom, and 
Kona came in upset and angry.  According to Contrades, Texeira 
entered the room and asked Kona , “So what do you want to do 
about it?” and Kona said , “just get him out of here.”  After ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
14 
 this exchange, Kona, Contrades, and their infant daughter went 
to a Halloween party around 7:00  p.m.11  They stayed at the  party 
until around 10:00 p .m., dropped Kona’s cousin off in Kekaha, 
and then went home.12  Kona left for 20 minutes to return 
Bactad’s car, which they had borrowed.   
  
Contrades stated that Kona kept a firearm in the 
house.  Specifically, she saw one gun and three different types 
of bullets in the house
 prior to October 31, 2016.  Also, a 
couple of days after October 31, Trish Flores and Brandon Pagala 
came to Kona’s house around 3:00  a.m.  Contrades described 
Flores as “paranoid” and  stated that she “didn’t seem herself.”  
  Kapena Wilson, a KPD police officer who investigated 
Togioka’s murder, testified on behalf of the State.  During 
cross-examination, defense counsel asked, “do you know if Trish 
Flores was arrested i n connection with this case?”  The State 
objected on the grounds of “legitimate tendency,” arguing that 
Texeira was “starting to put it on somebody else without any 
                     
 11 Dina Akutagawa, who was living with Kona’s brother during October 
and November 2016, testified that Kona was at the Halloween party from 8:00 
to 10:00 p.m.  At the beginning of the Halloween party, Akutagawa stated, 
Kona had a scrape on his middle right hand knuckle which Kona said came from 
punching Togioka.   
 
 12 Bactad testified that on October 31, 2016, Kona borrowed her car 
around 7:00 p.m. and returned it around 10:30 p.m.  Kona stayed at her house 
until 11:00 or 11:30 p.m. and then went straight home.  Texeira came to her 
house while Kona was there but left after sa ying “he had something to do.”  
Bactad testified that it would only take about ten minutes to walk between 
her house and Kona’s, and that she knew Kona went straight home because she 
talked to Contrades that evening.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
15 
 connection to this.”  Defense counsel responded that Flores 
“gave a fake motive and was arr ested with .22- caliber bullets,” 
which were the same caliber as the bullets that killed Togioka, 
and Contrades had testified that Flores came over to Kona’s 
house soon after the killing and was acting strangely.  The 
court sustained the objection but added that if Flores became a 
suspect, Texeira could recall Wilson.   
  Brandon Pagala was also called as a witness by the 
State.  During cross- examination, defense counsel attempted to 
ask Pagala about his arrest on November 2, 2016, but the State 
objected, arguing “there’s been no established legitimate 
tendency . . . . [h]e’s getting into the area of [Pagala] having 
a firearm and bullets.”  Defense counsel responded, “we’re not 
saying he shot him.  We’re saying he’s part of a group of people 
covering up who shot him.  And the fact that they had 
.22-caliber bullets, which is the caliber used in this case, the 
day after the body was found is relevant to show that.”  The 
State replied, “it’s already an inference that [] he’s been 
arrested for something.  But we d on’t need to get into what the 
reasons why he was arrested is.”  The court ruled that Texeira 
would be allowed to show “that [Pagala] was arrested,” but the 
inquiry would have to end there.   
  Pagala testified that he had been friends with Kona 
for over 18 years but did not hang out with him.  He was friends ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
16 
 with Flores, Pagala explained, and hung out with her regularly.  
Defense counsel attempted to ask Pagala if “some people 
fear[ed]” Flores or if she “can get violent,” but the court 
sustained the State’ s objection.  Counsel argued that he should 
be allowed to ask these questions: 
Well, that all goes to the fact that these people do fear 
certain people, and it’s not my client, and that those 
people were involved with having .22 caliber bullets at the 
time, had a problem with Jon Togioka, and all associated 
with Clayton Kona, who was the one who punched Jon Togioka 
before his death, and that if they’re -- so who they blame 
is going to be away from their group and blame the new guy, 
the smallest guy, the -- or the youngest guy anyway.  And 
that there are certain people who are feared -- my client’s 
not one of them -- and that that’s why they would do all of 
this.   
 
The court ruled that defense counsel could ask Pagala if he was 
involved in the conspiracy, and if Pagala admitted involvement, 
then counsel could ask further questions.13   
  
Dela Cruz testified that in October  and November 2016, 
he was actively using crystal methamphetamine.  O n October 31, 
2016, Texeira asked Dela Cruz to ride with him to “go see [] 
Togioka.”  Texeira told him to bring a bat, but he did not do 
so.  Dela Cruz rode in the front passenger side of Texeira’s 
vehicle, and when they found Togioka he got into the backseat.  
The three smoked methamp hetamine  and cigarettes before going to 
Kona’s house.  When they arrived, Texei ra and Togioka went in , 
but he did not after Kona told him not to.    
                     
 13 Defense counsel commented that no one would admit they were in a 
conspiracy, and counsel did not ask Pagala if he was in one.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
17 
   Texeira then drove the three of them to Burns Field, 
an area near the airport in Hanap ē
pē.  Togioka said he wanted to 
go home, but Dela Cruz encouraged him to stay with them and 
“just cruise.”  Dela Cruz testified that around 8 or 9 p.m., 
Texeira and Togioka got out of the car; he stayed in because 
“[Texeira] wanted to talk to [Togioka] only.”  Dela  Cruz turned 
the stereo up loudly because he didn’t want to listen to the 
conversation, but he was still able to hear Togioka say,  “[I] 
never do anything.”  He then heard a gunshot coming from in 
front of the vehicle towards the driver’s side , followed by two 
or three more.  Immediately after the first gunshot, Dela Cruz 
heard Togioka yell “don’t shoot me” and “you shot me.”  He saw 
Togioka was face down on the ground, 15 to 20 feet in front of 
the car.  Dela Cruz admitted that he did not tell the police or 
grand jury about Togioka’s statements prior to trial .  He stated 
that he did not shoot Togioka nor did he see Texeira shoot 
Togioka.   
 
 Dela Cruz testified  that he did not see Texeira or 
Togioka with a gun when they exited the vehicle, but when 
Texeira came back to the car he placed a “revolver with a long 
barrel
” on the driver side floor.  They then drove away, and 
Texeira told Dela Cruz that he shot Togioka because “he had to.”  
Dela Cruz stated that he did not know Texeira was going to shoot ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
18 
 Togioka and that he didn’t go to the police because he was 
scared.   
  Kona testified that Texeira was living with him on 
October 29, 2016, when Togioka came to his house.  Togioka got 
into a fight with a housemate that Kona broke up, but he later 
learned that Togioka re- incited the fight away from Kona’s 
house.  This upset Kona because he thought he had settled 
everything, so he asked Texeira to bring Togioka back to the 
house.  When asking him to do this, Kona admitted, he “probably” 
said something along the line s of “I like shoot this fucker” to 
Texeira.  Kona testified that he told Texeira to bring Togioka 
to the river behind his house.  As he went to meet Texeira, he 
received a text message from him stating, “I wouldn’t shoot just 
yet.  He get interesting thing s to say.”  Kona testified that he 
had a .22-caliber revolver belonging to Texeira on him at the 
time, which  he shot into the air.  The shot scared Togioka, but 
they settled their problems and went fishing together.  Kona 
stated that he put the gun on a shelf at his house.   
  On October 31, 2016, Kona woke up to learn that 
Togioka was accused of taking a housemate’s phone.  He doubted 
that Togioka had the phone because they had been fishing 
together all night.  He asked Contrades to contact Texeira in 
order for him to bring Togioka back to “clear up this phone 
situation.”  Texeira bro ught Togioka to the house and Togioka ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
19 
 attempted to lie and say the phone was his, so Kona punched and 
wrestled with him.  Contrades broke up the fight, Kona stated, 
and Texeira made Togioka leave the house.  Texeira then asked 
him “if I seen his gun or if I knew where his gun was,” and he 
told Texeira where to find it.  Later that evening at the 
Halloween party, Texeira called Kona and asked what he wanted 
done about Togioka.  K ona testified that he said, “I don’t 
care,” and hung up without giving any directions.  Later, but 
still at the Halloween party, he received a text message from 
Texeira saying,  “Aw pau,” which meant “done.”  After the party, 
he returned the car to Bactad’s  house and then went home with 
Texeira, who arrived at Bactad’s house around the same time.  
Texeira “started to say something about the gun was– -misfired at 
first,” Kona explained, but he cut Texeira off.  Kona stated 
that the revolver tends to “jam from time to time.”   
  Kona testified that he first learned that Togioka had 
been killed on November 1, 2016.  That day, Texeira told Kona 
that he hid the gun under the hood of a white Ford truck on 
Kona’s property.  Kona retrieved the gun and hid it i n a pipe  
down by the river.  Kona said that he didn’t initially go to the 
police because he was afraid of Texeira.  He  was questioned by 
the police on November 3, 2016, and denied any involvement with 
Togioka’s death.  Kona admitted that he lied to the officers; 
specifically he told them that he hadn’t seen Togioka on October ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
20 
 31, 2016, that he did not hit Togioka on October 31, 2016, and 
that he did not own or possess a firearm and one was not on his 
property.  On November 4, 2016, after he had been arrested and 
charged as an accomplice to the murder charge, Kona showed the 
police where the firearm was hidden on his property.  Kona 
stated that he subsequently signed a plea agreement in which he 
pled guilty to hindering prosecution in the first degree and 
ownership or possession prohibited of a firearm.  Kona admitted 
that at the time he made the plea agreement he was facing a 
possible life sentence, but the sentence was reduced to a 
maximum of ten years; it ultimately could be five years or even 
probation based on his cooperation with the State.   
 
 While he was incarcerated at Kauaʻi Community 
Correctional Center (KCCC) 
with Texeira, Pagala, and two other 
men, Kona stated that Texeira confessed to killing Togioka.  
Texeira said that he, Togioka, and Dela Cruz were looking to buy 
drugs but were unsuccessful.  Texeira stated that he had asked 
Togioka about the phone, but Togioka denied having it.  Kona 
testified that Texeira said that he then shot at Togioka but the 
gun misfired, so Texeira said he was joking.  Texeira told him  
that he pulled the trigger again, shooting Togioka in the arm 
and causing him to collapse to the ground.  Texeira said that 
Togioka yelled to Dela Cruz for help but Dela Cruz stayed in the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
21 
 car, and that he shot Togioka in the head.  According to Kona, 
Texeira told  this story several times in a bragging manner. 
  Kona also testified that Texeira wrote two letters 
containing these details, the first of which Texeira sent to his 
attorney to help Kona in  his case.  Texeira was neither forced 
nor told to write the letters, Kona said.  Texeira gave him the 
second letter, which Kona  passed on to his own attorney.  
Texeira knew this letter would be given to his attorney, Kona 
testified, and Texeira wrote the letter “because he felt bad 
that I was in there for something I didn’t even do.”  Kona 
stated that Texeira made the statements about killing Togioka 
and wrote the letters before he had a cooperation agreement with 
the prosecution.   
  During his direct examination, Pagala  testified about 
his confinement in the same cellblock as Texeira and Kona at 
KCCC.  While they were in jail, Texeira casually told him and 
Kona several times what occurred.  According to Pagala, Texeira 
told him that he attempted to shoot Togioka but that the gun 
would not fire.  Texeira then told him  that he shot Togioka in 
the hand and head.  After being shot in the hand , Togioka asked 
Dela Cruz,  who was in the car,  for help.  Pagala did not 
remember when Texeira made these  statements, but he told the 
police about them several months after they were made.  H e never 
discussed the killing with Kona, but he did see Texeira write ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
22 
 letters about the case while in jail.  Pagala said that he 
couldn’t remember what he and Kona talked about wh en they were 
in jail and only remembered some of the things Texeira said to 
him.  He stated that he does not have memory problems, but he 
does forget things and did not remember saying some of the 
things he said in his police interview.  
 
  
Ronnie Schmidt, a friend of Kona, testified that he 
was working on Kona’s house on October 31, 2016 , around 4 or 5 
p.m.  He was working in an area behind the house whe re he found 
a .22-caliber revolver on a shelf.  He played with the gun 
before wrapping it in a cloth and putting it down on a table 
near his work crew.  Texeira came out of Kona’s house looking 
for the weapon, so he gave it to him.  Texeira then got into 
a 
car with Togioka and Dela Cruz, Schmidt stated, and the three 
drove off.14   
  
FBI Special Agent Edwin Nam testified as an expert in 
the field of historical cell site analysis.  He testified about 
data collection techniques used to determine where a cell phone 
was at various points in time, including cell tower coverage and 
call detail records.  Nam testified that he received Verizon 
                     
 14 Flores was granted transactional immunity and was initially 
expected to testify.  During the course of trial the State filed an ex parte 
motion to withdraw Flores’ immunity, which the court granted.  Flores’ 
attorney then informed the court that she would invoke her right against 
self-incrimination if she were called to testify.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
23 
 call detail records for phones belonging to Texeira and Kona and 
text messages from Texeira’s phone number.  The records, which 
contained the contents of certain text messages, indicated that 
a text message from Texeira’s phone was sent at 6:19 p.m. on 
October 31, 2016, which said “ [g]rab a bat.”  There was also a 
message sent from Texeira’s phone to Kona’s phone at 8:22 p.m., 
which said, “all pau.”15  KPD provided Nam with the latitude and 
longitude of where Togioka’s body was recovered and the address 
of Kona’s house.  Based on phone calls made by Kona’s phone 
between 7:55 and 9:10 p.m. on October 31, 2016, Kona’s phone 
could not have been near Togio ka’s body because it was near 
Kona’s house.  Nam further testified that Texeira’s phone was in 
the same area as Togioka’s body at 7:54 p.m., and that it 
remained there for at least 16 to 18 minutes and potentially up 
to 30 minutes.  By 8:55 p.m., Texeira’s  phone was moving in a 
way consistent with it leaving Kekaha and going towards Waimea.  
Between 8:59 and 10:29 p.m., Texeira’s phone was in a position 
consistent with it being at Kona’s residence based on its 
interaction with cell phone towers.   
  
Stephanie Regan, a crime scene and laboratory 
supervisor for the KPD, testified that she was the KPD ParaDNA 
                     
 15 Nam’s testimony regarding this message is consistent with Kona’s 
testimony as to a message he received from Texeira that evening with the 
exception that Kona stated the messag e was spelled, “Aw pau.”   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
24 
 administrator, a position in which she conducts presumptive 
screening of DNA evidence that gives a partial, but not full, 
DNA profile.16  In addition to analyzing DNA evidence, Regan 
stated that she conducts digital forensics for KPD, using the 
Cellebrite Universal Forensic Extraction Device (UFED) to 
extract digital evidence from cell phones, tablets, or external 
drives.   
  
Regan testified that she used Cellebrite UFED on a 
blue colored Verizon Samsung Galaxy phone, identified as 
Texeira’s phone.  She was able to extract text messages, 
including the contacts  to whom the messages were sent and the 
times of sending.  On October 30, 2016, at 3:16 a.m., Texeira 
sent, and later deleted, a text message to Kona’s phone stating, 
“I get Jon”
.  This was followed by a further deleted message 
from Texeira, “I bringing him,” and a response from Kona’s phone 
stating, “To the back.  Crispy.”  Texeira sent, and deleted, a 
text message to Kona at 3:30 a.m., “I wouldn’t shoot just yet.  
He get interesting things to say. ”  On October 31, 2016, at 6:06 
p.m., Texeira received a text message from a contact identified 
in the phone as “Lei,” asking, “You know where [Togioka] stay?”   
                     
 16 Regan testified that she has a bachelor’s degree in human 
development and biology from Harvard University, was pursuing a master’s 
degree in digital forensics from the University of Central Florida, was a 
certified crime scene investigator, and had been with the KPD for 
approximately three and a half years.  The court recognized Regan as an 
expert in the field of digital forensics.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
25 
   Regan stated that on November 2, 2016, she 
investigated the scene of Togioka’s death.  She observed several 
cigarettes next to his body.  In order to perform DNA testing, 
these cigarettes, along with buccal swabs from Texeira, Kona, 
Pagala, and Flores were collected .  Regan personally conducted 
ParaDNA tests on several of these cigarettes before sending the 
cigarettes, Texeira and Kona’s buccal swabs, and a blood sample 
from Togioka to Sorenson.   
  
Regan stated that on November 4, 2016, she recovered a 
.22-caliber revolver hidden in a drainage pipe by the river 
behind Kona’s house.  Six rounds, five of which were spent, were 
recovered from the revolver.  KPD was not able to test the 
revolver to determine if it was the weapon used to kill Togioka.  
Regan stated that she also observed an injury on Kona’s middle 
right hand knuckle, which appeared to be a few days old as of 
November 4, 2016.   
  
Jeskie, the Sorenson employee who testified at the 
pretrial HRE Rule 104 hearing, testified as an expert in DNA 
forensic testing.17  She analyzed the cigarette butt found near 
Togioka’s calf against a DNA reference from Texeira.  The 
cigarette butt had a single source of DNA, which was matched to 
                     
 17 Defense counsel objected to Jeskie’s expert testimony at trial, 
incorporating by reference  the grounds asserted in Texeira’s motion in limine 
to exclude DNA evidence.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
26 
 Texeira and no other individuals.  Jeskie testified that the 
odds that the DNA would come from someone other than Texeira was 
one in 24.1 octillion for Caucasians, one in 4.16 octillion for 
African-Americans, and one in 1.63 octillion for Hispanics.18  
Even if Texeira was not Caucasian, African, or Hispanic, the 
results would not change drastically.  Jeskie stated that she 
did not receive DNA samples from Dela Cruz or Flores.  DNA tests 
were also conducted on swabs taken from the .22- caliber 
revolver.  The grip area DNA result was inconclusive, Jeskie 
stated, and the barrel end had no DNA.  Jeskie did not analyze 
the trigger, hammer area, ejector rod, or cylinder area of the 
revolver. 
  
Detective (Det.) Christopher Calio, an officer with 
KPD, testified that no bullet casings were found at the location 
of Togioka’s body .  This was consistent with either a weapon 
that did not eject its casings, such as a revolver, or with 
someone picking up the casings.  He recovered a firearm with the 
help of Kona, but attempts to test fire it were unsuccessful.  
Det. Calio also testified that on November 7, 2016, he assisted 
Texeira with filling out some paperwork.  The detective 
identified a document as one of the forms that Texei ra filled 
                     
 18 Jeskie explained that an octillion is “a one with 27 zeros after 
it.” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
27 
 out and signed at that time.  Det. Calio knew that Texeira had 
signed the document because  he personally saw him do so.   
  Det. Eric Caspillo, an officer with the KPD, testified 
that he went over some paperwork with Texeira shortly after 
Texeira was arrested and observed him sign multiple forms.  Det. 
Caspillo identified two exhibits as copies of those forms and 
stated that he recognized Texeira’s signature on the exhibits.  
KPD Lieutenant (Lt.) Darren Rose  also testified that he observed 
Texeira sign and write on several documents.  When asked to 
compare Texeira’s signature on those docu ments with the one on 
the second confession letter, Lt. Rose testified that they were 
the same signature.   
  Lt . Christian Jenkins of the KPD testified that he 
interviewed Texeira on November 4, 2016,  at the police 
substation in Waimea.  A recording of the interview was played 
before the jury.  In the interview, Texeira stated that on 
October 31, 2016, he went to Kona’s house in the morning, spent 
the day with his grandfather, and stopped at Kona’s house again 
around 9:00  or 10:00  p.m.  He left because no one was home,  and 
he went to pick up his brother at “Shark’s Bay.”  Texeira 
estimated that he picked his brother up between 9:00 and 10 :00 
p.m.  He took his brother back to Shark’s Bay on November 1, 
2016, around 8:00 a.m., because his brother had left his car 
there.  Texeira stated that he had not been near the Burns  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
28 
 Field-side of Shark’s Bay , but that instead he was on the other 
side of the bay near the tennis courts.   
  D r. Lindsey Harle, a forensic pathologist,  conducted 
the autopsy on Togioka.   She observed a gunshot entry wound on 
Togioka’s head and on his right forearm.  The shooter was facing 
Togioka when he shot him in the forearm, but the right forearm 
wound was not fatal.  Based on the nature of the forearm and 
head wound s, Dr. Harle explained, she was unable to determine 
how far away the gun had been from Togioka’s forearm or head 
when he was shot.  I t could have been a distant shot, or it 
could have been a close shot that passed through an intervening 
material like a hat or a T- shirt.  In addition to the gunshot 
wounds, Togioka had multiple injuries across his body indicating  
blunt force trauma and falling onto rocks.  Dr. Harle stated 
that the condition of Togioka’s  body was consistent with his 
having died between 8:00 and 9:00 p.m. on October 31, 2016. 
  At the end of the State’s case -in-chief, Texeira moved 
for a judgment of acquittal,  which the court denied.  Texeira 
also filed a Trial Memorandum Regarding Witness Trish Flores in 
which he elucidated the evidence he would present  to show there 
was a legitimate tendency in the evidence to show that Flores  
killed Togioka and was intimidating the other witnesses into 
testifying falsely.  Texeira cited statements that an individual 
named Shannon Breen made to KPD officers, Kona’s statements to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
29 
 the police during interviews on  November 3 and November 6, 2016, 
Flores’ statements to the police  during interviews on Novem ber 2 
and November 5, 2016,  certain evidence obtained by KPD, and 
Flores’ actions around the time of the murder.   
  Texeira argued  that, during a police interview,  Breen 
stated that she saw Flores and Pagala in Pagala’s  residence on 
October 31, 2016, around 3:00 a.m., and they were in possession 
of a box of .22-caliber bullets.  Breen heard Flores ask Pagala 
if he had the bullets she “gave him,”  and Pagala said that he 
did.  Breen further stated that she had heard that Togioka owed 
Flores money,  and that she saw Flores and Pagala watching a 
video on Flores’ p hone in which  Flores had tied up a man who 
owed her money and was shocking him for up to ten minutes at a 
time with an electroshock weapon.   
  Texeira also proffered a statement Flores gave to the 
police on November 2, 2016, in which she stated that Togioka had 
assaulted a friend of hers on October 29, 2016.   Flores told the 
police that she learned on October 30 that Togioka had claimed 
to be in a sexual relationship with her at some time in the past 
and she had confronted him about his claims that day .  
Additionally, Flores acknowledged she and Pagala had a .22-
caliber rifle in her car on either the night of October 31 or 
November 1 , but when pressed for details she claimed that she 
could not recall which day it was and could not recall her ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
30 
 whereabouts on the evening of October 31.19  Texeira also pointed 
to the facts that Flores and Pagala were in possession of .22-
caliber bullets when they were arrested two days after Togioka’s 
murder; KPD had observed Pagala arrive at a residence with 
Flores on the morni
ng of November 2 and Pagala had entered the 
residence carrying a small caliber rifle; and Flores was a 
person of interest in KPD’s investigation of Togioka’s death .  
Texeira asserted that Flores gave a false alibi to the police 
about her whereabouts on the evening of October 31, 2016, and 
her whereabouts remained unverified.   
                     
 19 Texeira pointed to the following exchange in particular:  
 
DETECTIVE: You have a rifle.  What caliber  is it?  Okay.  
Let me say it again.  Jon’s dead.   
 
FLORES: Yeah  
 
DETECTIVE: Now, before you say anything to me again, think 
about it.  Okay?  I want you to think about it.  Why is 
Detective Calio asking you this?  Why?  Okay.  I want you 
to think hard be cause, right now, you’re – you’re kind of 
cloudy on Monday evening, Halloween.  I want you to think 
about it, yeah.  So do you need me to step out so you can 
think? 
 
FLORES: No.  
 
DETECTIVE: Okay.  Now, I just want to say to you again, Jon 
Togioka is dead, you have a .22 -caliber rifle in your car.   
 
FLORES: I don’t know what for say.  I don’t know.  I don’t 
know what for say.   
 
DETECTIVE: Where were you the evening that Jon died?  
 
After repeatedly saying she could not recall her whereabouts that evening, 
Flores ultimately stated that she and Pagala were alone at her house.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
31 
   Texeira further noted that Kona or someone else would 
call or go see Flores after “almost every incident with [] 
Togioka.”  Texeira cited numerous incidents, including one Kona 
described in a police interview on November 6, 2016, in which  
Kona told the police that he called Flores immediately after 
shooting at Togioka on October 29, 2016, and Flores said 
something about wanting to shoot Togioka at that time.20  
Finally, Texeira pointed to the fact that Flores had come to 
Kona’s house the night after Togioka’s death and was acting 
paranoid.  These facts, Texeira contended, established a 
legitimate tendency that Flores had killed Togioka, and he 
should therefore be  permitted to argue at trial that Flores was 
the culprit.   
  
Texeira moved to introduce at trial the proffered 
evidence outlined in the memorandum.  The State  opposed the 
introduction, maintaining that since the evidence did not 
indicate Flores could have committed the crime, such evidence 
was irrelevant.  The court denied Texeira’s motion, finding that 
there could be evidence of motive  for Flores,  but there was no 
                     
 20 After telling the interviewing officers that he called Flores 
immediately after firing the shot, the officers asked Kona what exactly she 
said to him on the phone and specifically whether she said anything about 
wanting to shoot Togioka.  Kona responded that she “did say something there” 
but could not recall the exact words, and he suggested that she was not 
serious. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
32 
 direct connection.   The court thus excluded  the evidence Texeira 
proffered.  
  
Texeira recalled Det. Caspillo in his case -in-chief.  
Det. Caspillo testified that there were no shell casings around 
the body, which meant that the gun used could have been a 
revolver or a rifle.   The shooter also could h ave used a 
semiautomatic pistol and then picked up the shells.  Det.  
Caspillo further testified that on November 3, 2016, he took 
Kona’s statement, and Kona denied having a gun.  On November 4, 
2016, Det. Caspillo executed a search warrant on Kona’s 
residence where he discovered one round of .22 -caliber 
ammunition, one .250 SAV caliber round, one 7-millimeter live 
ammunition round, gun cleaning solution, a handgun holster, 
over 
seven cell phones, three of which were associated with Kona, and 
SIM cards in an interior bedroom.  The defense rested after Det. 
Caspillo’s testimony.   Texeira moved for a judgment of 
acquittal, which the court denied.   
  
The jury found Texeira guilty of murder in the second 
degree, carrying or use of firearm in the commission of a 
separate felony, and ownership or possession prohibited.21  
Texeira was sentenced to life imprisonment with the possibility 
                     
 21 The parties stipulated that Texeira was prohibited from owning, 
possessing, or controlling any firearms or ammunition, and that Texeira knew 
of this prohibition.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
33 
 of parole with a mandatory minimum of 15 years in c ount one , 20 
years imprisonment in  count two, and an extended term of ten 
years in count three, all terms to run concurrently.   
C. Appellate Proceedings 
  Texeira appealed the July 25, 2018 Judgment and 
Sentence of Conviction to the Intermediate Court of Appeals 
(ICA).  On August 26, 2019, Texeira filed an application for 
transfer of the appeal to this court, which this court granted.    
  Tex eira raises three  points of error on appeal.  He  
argues that the circuit court erred by (1) admitting the 
confession letter allegedly written by Texeira into evidence; 
(2) admitting DNA evidence that allegedly placed Texeira at the 
crime scene; and 
(3) excluding evidence that a third-party, 
Flores, killed Togioka.   
 STANDARDS OF REVIEW II.
A. Questions of Law 
  Questions of law are reviewable de novo, under the 
right/wrong standard.  Ass’n of Apt. Owners of Royal Aloha v. 
Certified Mgmt., Inc., 139 Hawai‘ i 229, 233, 386 P.3d 866, 870 
(2016) (citing Ditto v. McCurdy, 90 Hawai ‘i 345, 35 1, 978 P.2d 
783, 789 (1999)).   
B. Findings of Fact 
 
 We review a circuit court’s findings of fact under a 
“clearly erroneous standard.”  State v. Rodrigues, 145 Hawai ‘i ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
34 
 487, 494, 454 P.3d 428, 435 (2019).  “A finding of fact is 
clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence 
to support the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in 
support of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left 
with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been 
made.”  State v. Kaneaiakala, 145 Hawai ‘i 231, 240, 450 P.3d 761, 
770 (2019). 
 DISCUSSION  III.
A. The Trial Court Did Not Abuse Its Discretion i n Admitting the 
Second Confession Letter at Trial . 
  Under HRPP Rule 16, the State must disclose to the 
defendant or defendant’s attorney “any w ritten or recorded 
statements . . . made by the defendant” that the State has in 
its “possession or control. ”  HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(ii).  Texeira 
contends that the State violated its obligations under HRPP Rule 
16 by failing to timely produce the second confession letter to 
the defense.  He maintains the State had possession or control 
of the letter as early as May  19, 2017, when it became aware of 
the letter’s existence.  Alternatively, Texeira argues that Kona 
was an agent of the State after entering into a plea agreement  
on June 2, 2017, and thus the State had control over Kona and 
any documents in Kona’s possession, including the second 
confession letter.  Under either alternative,  contends Texei ra, 
the fact that the second letter was not turned over to the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
35 
 defense until ten months later, which was one month before 
trial, meant that the State had not met its HRPP Rule 16 
obligations.  Texeira notes that the circuit court did not 
expressly rule on his  contention that the letter had not been 
timely disclosed to the defense pursuant to HRPP Rule 16.  
  This court discussed the prosecution’s disclosure 
obligations under HRPP Rule 16 in State v. Moriwaki,  71 Haw. 
347, 354, 791 P.2d 392, 396 (1990).  In Moriwaki , the defendant 
was charged with  murder for fatally stabbing his sister’s 
boyfriend.  Id . at 349, 791 P.2d at 393- 94.  At trial, the 
defendant argued that he acted  in self- defense after the 
boyfriend initiated an altercation with him.  Id.  at 350-51, 791 
P.2d at 394- 95.  In rebuttal, the prosecution adduced evidence 
of the boyfriend ’s peaceful character.  Id.  The jury found the 
defendant guilty of manslaughter .  Id. at 349, 791 P.2d at 393-
94.  Subsequently, the defendant moved to set aside the verdict 
or, alternatively, for a new trial based on newly discovered 
evidence and prosecutorial misconduct.  Id. at 351, 791 P.2d at 
394.  The d efendant presented testimony from his sister that 
prior to testifying at trial she had told the prosecutor that a 
week before her boyfriend ’s death, he had assaulted a neighbor 
whom she believed had been looking in her bedroom window.  Id.  
at 353-54, 791 P.2d at 396.  The sister testified that the 
prosecutor told her not to mention it so as to not make the  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
36 
 boyfriend look bad.  Id.  The circuit court denied the 
defendant’s motion.  Id. at 351, 791 P.2d at 394.   
  On appeal, this court concluded that the prosecution 
had a duty to disclose its knowledge of the incident of violence 
under HRPP Rule 16, and the failure to make such a disclosure 
was a violation of that rule.  Id.  at 355-56, 791 P.2d at 396-
97.  Since the violation substantially prejudiced the 
defendant’s self -defense  argument  and it was not discovered 
until after the completion of trial, we vacated the defendant’s 
conviction and remanded the case for a new trial.  Id.   
  In this case, it appears the State became aware of the 
second confession letter during a May 5 , 2017 interview of Kona 
by investigating officers.22  The State disclosed the existence 
of the letter and its nature to the defense on May 23, 2017, 
when it provided defendant with the transcript of Kona’s 
interview.  Accordingly, Texeira was aware of the second 
confession letter once he received  Kona’s interview statements .  
The State then came in physical possession of the letter upon 
receiving it from Kona’s counsel, and it appears t he State 
promptly provided a copy of the letter to the defense upon 
receipt. 
                     
 22 At minimum, the State was aware of the letter after the May 19, 
2017 interview in which Kona’s attorney discussed the contents of the letter 
with investigating officers.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
37 
   Texeira contends, however, that the State had 
constructive possession of the letter and therefore an 
obligation to disclose it as soon as Kona began negotiating a 
plea deal with the prosecution. 
 The issue of whether the 
prosecution is in possession of documents that are in the 
possession of other individuals involved in the prosecution of a 
defendant was considered, under Federal Rules of Criminal 
Procedure Rule 16,  in United States v. Smukler.23  No. 17-563-02, 
2018 WL 3632148 (E.D. Pa. July 31, 2018).  The defendant in 
Smukler relied solely on the fact that the relevant witnesses 
were cooperating with the prosecution to support the conclusion 
that the witnesses, and thus the documents they possessed, were 
under the prosecution’s control.  Id. at *3.  The Smukler court 
                     
 23 Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure Rule 16 (2013) provides in 
relevant part as follows:  
 
(a) Government’s Disclosure.  
(1) Information Subject to Disclosure.  
. . . . 
(B) Defendant’s Written or Recorded Statement. Upon a 
defendant’s request, the government must disclose to 
the defendant, and make available for inspection, 
copying, or photographing, all of the following:  
(i) any relevant written or recorded statement by 
the defendant if: 
• the statement is within the government’s 
possession, custody, or control; and  
• the attorney for the government knows --or 
through due diligence could know--that the 
statement exists[.]  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
38 
 rejected this contention and found that the mere fact that a 
witness was cooperating with the government did not place the 
witness or any docume nts in the witness’s possession  under the 
government’s control.24  Id. at *3-4.   
  Whether the prosecution has constructive possession of 
a document will depend on the factual circumstances of each 
case.  See United States v. Reyeros, 537 F.3d 270, 281-82 (3d 
Cir. 2008) (noting that a case- by-case analysis is appropriate 
when considering the prosecution’s constructive knowledge of 
exculpatory evidence under Brady ).  In United States v. Graham, 
for example, the Sixth Circuit considered the particular facts 
of the case and concluded that the prosecution’s constitutional 
                     
 24 The court in Smukler determined that the analysis for whether 
documents in the possession of other government agencies or individuals 
involved in the prosecution of a defendant were in the possession of the 
prosecution under Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963), was applicable to 
the prosecution’s possession of documents for purposes of Federal Rule of 
Criminal Procedure Rule 16.  No. 17- 563-02, 2018 WL 3632148, at *3 (citing 
United States v. Graham, 484 F.3d 413, 417 -18 (6th Cir. 2007)).   
  The Brady  rule has been incorporated into the Hawai ‘i due process 
jurisprudence and applied by this court.  See, e.g., State v. Estrada , 69 
Haw. 204, 215, 738 P.2d 812, 821 (1987).  Under this rule, “[t]he suppression 
by the prosecution of evidence favorable to the accused violates due process 
where the evidence is material to guilt or punishment, regardless of the good 
faith or bad faith of the prosecution.”  State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai ‘i 462, 
479, 946 P.2d 32, 49 (1997) (quoting State v. Matafeo, 71 Haw. 183, 185, 787 
P.2d 671, 672 (1990)).  There is no contention by Texeira that the letter 
provided favorable evidence to him.  We do not, however, restrict our 
interpretation of HRPP Rule 16 to the Brad y standard.  In some cases, for 
example, due process will require the State to disclose evidence beyond the 
disclosures required by the rules of penal procedure.  See State v. Tetu, 139 
Hawai‘i 207, 214, 386 P.3d 844, 851 (2016) (“[T]he HRPP Rule 16 discov ery 
right does not purport to set an outer limit on the court’s power to ensure a 
defendant's constitutional rights.” (citing United States v. Yoshimura, 831  
F. Supp. 799, 805 (D. Haw. 1993)). 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
39 
 disclosure obligations did not extend to a cooperating witness 
who “remained an independent actor.”   United States v. Graham, 
484 F.3d 413, 417- 18 (6th Cir. 2007).  The court noted that the 
prosecution had to obtain approval from the witness’s counsel 
before interviewing the witness, the prosecution had to serve 
the witness with a subpoena to compel production of documents, 
and the witness refused to produce materials covered by the 
attorney- client privilege to the prosecution.  Id.  The State’s 
possession of documents for purposes of HRPP Rule 16 will 
similarly depend on multiple factors and the specific facts of 
each case.  Cf.  Reyeros, 537 F.3d at 282 (noting that a relevant 
factor is whether the entity charged with constructive 
possession had “ ready access” to the evidence) .   
  In this case, the record does not demonstrate that the 
State exerted any control  over Kona’s actions in relation to 
other witnesses or matters related to the case, other than he 
was a cooperating witness.  Texeira cites the fact that Kona had  
negotiated  for and ultimately received a plea deal, but the mere 
fact that a witness is cooperating with the prosecution does not 
show that the witness or the documents in the  witness’s 
possession are under the prosecution’s control for purposes of 
the prosecution’s disclosure obligations under HRPP Rule 16.  
Therefore, we hold that Texeira has not shown that the State had  
possession of the second confession letter for purposes of HRPP ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
40 
 (continued . . .)  Rule 16, and the State was not obligated to obtain the letter 
from Kona’s counsel before it received the letter.25 
  Accordingly, Texeira has not demonstrated  that the 
timing of the State’s disclosure of the confession letter  was a 
violation of HRPP Rule 16, and therefore exclusion was not shown 
to be the appropriate remedy.  Cf.  Moriwaki , 71 Haw. at 356, 791 
P.2d at 397 (concluding that a new trial was the proper remedy 
for an HRPP Rule 16 violation when it was the only remedy 
available to cure the prejudice defendant suffered).  
 
B. The Circuit Court Did Not Err by Permitting the 
Introduction of DNA Evidence  Without a Showing that the DNA  
Tests Were Conducted in Accordance with Manufacturer 
Specifications.  
 
  
The admissibility of scientific evidence under HRE 
Rules 70226 and 70327 is governed by five factors: whether (1) the 
                     
 25 Additionally, the record does not show that the timing of the 
State’s disclosure of the letter was prejudicial such that it compelled 
Texeira to elect between waiving his right to a speedy trial and conducting 
fingerprint or handwriting analysis on the let ter.  During the State’s motion 
to determine voluntariness, Texeira did not state that he had retained or 
made an effort to retain an expert to analyze the authenticity of the second 
confession letter, indicate the length of time needed to obtain an analysis 
by an expert, or make any showing that the analysis could not be completed 
before the trial date.  Consequently, the record does not show that the 
timing of the State’s disclosure of the letter impaired Texeira’s ability to 
present his defense.  See Tetu, 139 Hawai‘ i at 220, 386 P.3d at 857 (“Due 
process requires that a defendant be given a meaningful opportunity to 
present a complete defense and that discovery procedures provide the maximum 
possible amount of information and a level -playing field in the adversarial 
process.”).   
 
 26 HRE Rule 702 (2016) provides as follows:  
Testimony by experts.  If scientific, technical, or other 
specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to 
understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
41 
 evidence will assist the trier of fact to understand the 
evidence or to determine a fact in issue; (2) the evidence will 
add to the common understanding of the jury; (3) the underlying 
theory is generally accepted as valid; (4) the procedures used 
are generally accepted as reliable if performed properly; and 
(5) the procedures were applied and conducted properly in the 
present instance.  State v. Montalbo, 73 Haw. 130, 140, 828 P.2d 
1274, 1280-81 (1992).  This court has previously taken judicial 
notice of the fact that DNA evidence is not controversial and is 
“widely accepted in the relevant scientific community ” and that 
the “basic techniques underlying the analysis ” are also widely 
accepted.  Id. at 141, 828 P.2d at 1281.  DNA evidence has also 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, 
experience, training, or education may testify thereto in 
the form of an opinion or otherwise.  In determining the 
issue of assistance to the trier of fact, the court may 
consider the trustworthiness and validity of the scientific 
technique or mode of analysis employed by the proffered 
expert. 
 27 HRE Rule 703 (2016) provides as follows:  
Bases of opinion testimony by experts.  The facts or data 
in the particular case upon which an expert bases an 
opinion or inference may be those perceived by or made 
known to the expert at or before the hearing.  If of a type  
reasonably relied upon by experts in the particular field 
in forming opinions or inferences upon the subject, the 
facts or data need not be admissible in evidence.  The 
court may, however, disallow testimony in the form of an 
opinion or inference if the underlying facts or data 
indicate lack of trustworthiness.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
42 
 been recognized as adding to the common knowledge of the jury 
and will assist the trier of fact to understand evidence.  Id.    
  Texeira argues that the State was required to show 
that the DNA analyses of the evidence in this case w ere 
conducted in accordance with the  manufacturer ’s recommended 
procedures in order to establish a proper foundation for 
admission of the test results
.  Accordingly, the pertinent 
inquiry in this case is Montalbo’s fifth element:  whether 
Sorenson’s DNA analyses were  “applied and conducted properly. ”  
73 Haw. at 140, 828 P.2d at 1281.   
  When considering Montalbo ’s fifth element, we have 
held that a “foundational prerequisite for the reliability of a 
test result is a showing that the measuring instrument is in 
proper working order.”  State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai ‘i 382, 407, 
910 P.2d 695, 720 (1996) (internal quotation marks omitted).  
“Therefore, a proper foundation for the introduction of a 
scientific test result would necessarily include expert 
testimony regarding: (1) the qualifications of the expert; (2) 
whether the expert employed valid techniques to obtain the test 
result; and (3) whether the measuring instrument is in proper 
working order.”  State v. Long , 98 Hawai‘i 348, 355, 48 P.3d 595, 
602 (2002) (internal quotation marks omitted) (holding that the 
State failed to establish a sufficient foundation that a 
laboratory instrument was in proper working order when it did ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
43 
 not ask any questions regarding the instrument’s accuracy) .  
This court has previously considered, in certain contexts,  
whether the State must show that a measuring device was used  in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommended procedures before 
allowing the measurement into evidence
.  Wallace, 80 Hawai ‘i  at 
412, 910 P.2d at  725 (calibration of electronic balance for 
measuring the weight of narcotics); State v. Manewa, 115 Hawai ‘i 
343, 167 P.3d 336 (2007) (electronic balance and gas 
chromatograph mass spectrometers used to measure and identify 
controlled substances) ; State v. Assaye, 121 Hawai‘ i 204, 210 -14, 
216 P.3d 1227, 1233-37 (2009) (calibration of laser gun for 
measuring a vehicle’s speed ); State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai ‘i 
354, 227 P.3d 520 (2010) (calibration of speedometers for speed 
check results).   
  In Wallace, we held that the State failed to lay a 
sufficient foundation as to the accuracy of an electronic 
balance that was used to weigh the amount of cocaine found in 
the defendant’s car.  80 Hawai ‘i at 411-12, 910 P.2d at 724-25.  
We noted that the expert witness through which the State 
introduced the results of the electronic balance into evidence
 
lacked personal knowledge as to whether the balance  was properly 
calibrated at the time it was used to weigh the cocaine.  Id. at 
412, 910 P.2d at 725.  The manufacturer’s service 
representative, who conducted annual calibrations of the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
44 
 balance, did not testify regarding maintenance of the device, 
and the State did not offer any “business record of the 
manufacturer reflecting proper calibration of the balance.”  Id.  
Accordingly, we held that the State had failed to establish that 
the balance measured weight accurately at the time it was used 
to measure the cocaine, and thus  the admission of the expert’s 
testimony regarding its  weight was erroneous.  Id. 
  In Manewa, we similarly held that the prosecution had 
laid an inadequate foundation for the introduction of an 
electronic balance’s measurement of methamphetamine purchased 
from the defendant by an undercover officer.  115 Hawai ‘i at 355, 
167 P.3d at 348 (“Moreover, as in Wallace , [the State] did not 
offer any business records of the manufacturer indicating a 
correct calibration of the balance.”).  Also at issue was the 
reliability of gas chromatograph mass spectrometers (GCMSs ) that 
the State’s expert witness used to identify the substance as 
methamphetamine.  Id.  at 350, 167 P.3d at 343.  We concluded 
that the expert ’s testimony  that the devices were operating 
within the manufacturer’s specifications  “supported the 
conclusion that the GCMSs were in proper working order at the 
time the evidence was tested.”  Id. at 354, 167 P.3d at 347 
(citing Wallace , 80 Hawai‘i at 407, 910 P.2d at 720).  As such, 
the State had laid an adequate foundation as to the identity of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
45 
 the methamphetamine, and the testimony was properly admitted.  
Id. 
  We again considered the relevance of manufacturer-
recommended procedures for the operation of a measuring device 
in Assaye.  121 Hawai ‘i at 210 -14, 216 P.3d at 1233-37.  The 
defendant in Assaye was convicted of excessive speeding after a 
bench trial at which the citing police officer testified that he 
used a laser gun to determine that the defendant was speeding.  
Id. at 205, 216 P.3d at 1228.  T he officer testified that he was 
certified to use the laser gun through a one hour class taught 
by another police officer and he performed four tests to ensure 
the accuracy of the laser gun before using it.  Id. at 212, 216 
P.3d at 1235.   There was no expert testimony that the tests the 
officer performed were reliable, and the State did not show that 
the laser gun’s manufacturer recommended usin g these tests to 
ensure the reliability of the laser gun’s measurements.  Id.  
The defendant objected that there was an insufficient foundation 
for the officer’s testimony , but the circuit court overruled the 
objection.  Id. at 207-09, 216 P.3d at 1230 -32. 
  On appeal, we held that there was an inadequate 
foundation to show the laser gun’s measurements were reliable.  
Id. at 214, 216 P.3d at 1237.  Additionally, we noted that with 
regard to our conclusion that the GCMSs  in Manewa were reliable, 
it was “[c]r ucial” that the record indicated the  device ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
46 
 manufacturer had established parameters to ensure the machine 
was in working order, and the expert testimony indicated that 
the devices were operating within those parameters.   Id. at 212-
13, 216 P.3d at 1235-36.  In contrast, the Assaye court stated 
that the record in that case was silent as to what procedures 
the laser gun’s manufacturer recommended, and there was no 
expert testimony that the procedures the officer had used were 
reliable.  Id. at 213, 216 P.3d at 1236.  After observing that 
courts in other jurisdictions had considered evidence as to the 
manufacturer-recommended procedures to maintain a laser gun and 
ensure its accuracy
, we concluded that the State had not laid an 
adequate foundation to show that the laser gun’s measurement was 
reliable because the State had not adduced any evidence as to 
the procedures the manufacturer recommended to ensure the 
device’s accuracy.   Id. at 213-14, 213 n.7,  216 P.3d at 1236- 37, 
1236 n.7; accord State v. Apollonio, 1 30 Hawai ‘i 35
3, 359-62, 311 
P.3d 676, 682-85  (2013); see also  Fitzwater, 122 Hawai‘i at 375 , 
227 P.3d at 541 (noting that because the record did not indicate 
what kind of test was performed to ensure the speedometer in the 
officer’s vehicle was reliable , the foundational requirements 
set forth with respect to the electronic balance in Wallace and 
Manewa were applicable).   
  Texeira contends  that these prior holdings require d 
the State to demonstrate that the analyses conducted in this ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
47 
 case were done in accordance with the manufacturer’s established 
recommendations.  First, this is not a case where the expert 
witness lacked personal knowledge as to whether the device was 
properly calibrated at the time it was used, as was the 
situation with the electronic balances discussed in Wallace and 
Manewa.  Furthermore, our holding in Manewa with respect to the 
GCMSs does not require that the State prove calibration in 
compliance with the manner recommended by the manufacturer.   115 
Hawai
‘i at 354, 167 P.3d at 347.  T he Manewa court held that the 
expert’s testimony established that the devices were in working 
order according to the manufacturer’s specifications, and 
accordingly an adequate foundation was laid.  Id.  Nor is this 
case similar to Assaye, where the only evidence as to the 
reliability of the laser gun’s measurement was the officer’s lay 
testimony.  121 Hawai‘i at 214, 216 P.3d at 1237.  Here, the 
State sought to demonstrate the reliability of the instruments 
used to conduct the DNA analyses by presenting expert testimony 
as to the operating procedures  employed by Sorenson , the 
training requirements for its employees, its accreditation 
process, and by introducing a business record to prove the 
devices were in working order at the time they were used.   
 
 As stated, the test for determining whether a party 
has laid a sufficient foundation for the admissibility of an 
expert’s testimony as to scientific test results is that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
48 
 established in Long.  98 Hawai ‘i a
t 355, 48 P.3d at 602.  The 
proponent of the evidence must present expert testimony as to 
the qualifications of the expert, whether the expert employed 
valid techniques to obtain the test result, and whether the 
measuring instrument was in proper working order at the time it 
was used.  Id.   
  In this case, Jeskie testified that all of the 
instruments used to analyze the samples in this case were 
validated.  She explained that validation is a process used to 
ensure that the data produced by the device is reliable and 
reproducible.  Jeskie further testified tha
t the validation 
process used by Sorenson was consistent with the validation 
process required by the FBI’s quality assurance standards.  
Sorenson’s compliance with the FBI’s quality assurance standards 
is necessary for its accreditation by ASCLD, and Soren son’s 
laboratory and equipment were subject to regular audits by ASCLD 
in order for 
Sorenson’s accreditation to be maintained.  
Additionally, Jeskie testified that all the Sorenson laboratory 
employees are required to complete a training program on the 
proper use of the laboratory equipment, and that the program is 
reviewed as part of the ASCLD accreditation process.  Jeskie 
indicated that Sorenson had never lost its ASCLD accreditation 
or had its accreditation withheld or suspended.  Jeskie also 
explained that each machine used in this case was subject to a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
49 
 control, which would have revealed whether there was a mistake 
or error in the test.  Finally,  the State presented a certified 
business record at the pretrial HRE Rule 104 hearing to prove 
the machines were properly maintained at the time of testing by 
showing that they underwent daily, weekly, monthly, and annual 
maintenance, and they were properly calibrated to ensure the 
test results were accurate.   
  
Based on the foregoing, we conclude the State has 
proven by a preponderance of the evidence that the machines used 
to analyze the DNA evidence in this case were in proper working 
order at the time they were used, and thus the State laid a 
sufficient factual foundation
 for Jeskie’s testimony as to the 
results of those analyses.  Long, 98 Hawai ‘i at 355, 48 P.3d at 
602; State v. Gano, 92 Hawai‘ i 161, 172, 988 P.2d 1153, 1164 
(1999) (noting that when the facts necessary for admissibility 
are contested, the proponent of the evidence must show it is 
admissible by a preponderance of the evidence); accord State v. 
Martin, No. SCWC-14 -0001090, 2020 WL 1934475,  at *14 (Haw. Apr il 
22, 2020) ( noting that this court “adopted the preponderance of 
the evidence standard for foundation factfinding in HRE Rule 
104(a) admissibility hearings” ) (alterations omitted) (quoting 
State v. McGriff, 76 Hawai ‘i 148, 871 P.2d 782 (1994)). 
  A review of decisions from other jurisdictions that 
have addressed the admissibility of DNA test  results from ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
50 
 laboratories that operate under ASCLD and FBI standards lends 
support to the reliability of the standards used in this case.  
For example, in State v. Powell, the Tennessee Court of Criminal 
Appeals concluded that an expert was properly allowed to testify 
regarding the laboratory’s DNA analysis because the laboratory 
had “complied with the rigorous protocols necessary to obtain 
and maintain ASCLD accreditation.”28  Powell, No. W2013-00844-
CCA-R3-CD, 2014 WL 1329233 (Tenn. Crim. App. April 3, 2014).  
Similarly, Nebraska courts have found that the Daubert framework 
was satisfied by a DNA expert’s testimony that the laboratory in 
question was (1) accredited by ASCLD, (2) complied with the 
FBI’s testing requirements, and (3) the expert was “required to 
pass a proficiency exami nation twice a year.”  State v. Warner, 
No. A-15- 858, 2016 WL 4443559, at *5 (Neb. App. Aug. 23, 2016); 
see also State v. Tolliver, 689 N.W.2d 567, 576 (Neb. 2004); 
State v. Fernando- Granados , 682 N.W.2d 266, 281- 82 (Neb. 2004).   
The Ohio Court of Appeals addressed the issue in State v. Bruce, 
concluding that an expert was qualified to testify regarding a 
                     
 28 In United States v. Morgan, the court detailed the extensive 
process a laboratory must engage in to receive ASCLD accreditation.  53 
F.Supp.3d 732, 738- 39 (S.D. N.Y. 2014).  The court noted that a laboratory is 
required to submit an application to ASCLD, who conducts an on -site 
assessment that entails interviewing all relevant employees, observing the 
employees perform their job functions, reviewing records accompanying the 
application, and analyz ing case records to determine whether the laboratory’s 
results are accurate and appropriate.  Id.  at 738.  ASCLD then issues a 
report detailing whether the laboratory has met accreditation requirements; 
if accreditation is granted, the laboratory is required to provide records 
demonstrating conformity with accreditation requirements and submit an annual 
report detailing compliance.  Id.  at 739.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
51 
 DNA analysis after not ing that the laboratory  in that case was 
ASCLD accredited and that the expert passed FBI proficiency 
tests.  Bruce, No. 2006- CA-45, 2008 WL 4801648, at *12 (Ohio 
App. Oct. 31, 2008).  A New Mexico district court similarly 
found that a machine’s DNA test results were admissible because 
the laboratory was ASCLD accredited, followed FBI Quality 
Assurance Standards, and established “rigoro us standards for 
technical procedures and policies, undergoing proficiency 
testing, internal validation, and performance checks. ”  United 
States v. McCluskey, 954 F.Supp.2d 1224, 1256 (D. N.M. 2013). 
  In addition to caselaw, California and Indiana have 
passed statutes mandating that DNA laboratories either use 
quality assurance standards approved by ASCLD or meet FBI 
Quality Assurance Standards.  See  Cal. Penal Code § 297(a)(1) 
(2007) (requiring DNA laboratories to meet the FBI Quality 
Assurance Standards)
; Ind. Code Ann. § 10- 13-6-14 (2003) 
(requiring a “ laboratory conducting forensic DNA analysis ” to 
“implement and follow nationally recognized standards for DNA 
quality assurance and proficiency testing, such as those 
approved by the American Society of Crime Laboratory Directors 
Laboratory Accreditation Board”).29  In sum,  several 
                     
 29 Texeira argues that State v. Tankersley  stands for the 
proposition that a laboratory must comply with a manuf acturer’s specification 
in order for its tests to be admissible.  However, the Tankersley  court held 
(continued . . .)  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
52 
 jurisdictions consider ASCLD accreditation  as foundational 
evidence that DNA tests conducted in the accredited laboratory  
are reliable.30   
  Here, as discussed above, the record establishes by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the machines Sorenson used to 
conduct the DNA analysis in this case were reliable.  The State 
laid a proper foundation to the introduction of this evidence by 
proving that Jeskie was properly  qualified , the techniques 
Sorenson used were valid, and the machines were in proper 
working order at the time they were used
.  Long, 98 Hawai ‘i at 
355, 48 P.3d at 602 (2002).  Accordingly, the circuit court did 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
that the “appropriate inquiry is whether a lab’s techniques have deviated so 
far from generally accepted practices that the tests results cannot be 
accepted as reliable.” 956 P.2d 486, 493 (Ariz. 1998), abrogated on other 
grounds by State v. Machado, 246 P.3d 632 (Ariz. 2011).  The Tankersley  court 
specifically noted that ASCLD accreditation can “provide a useful gauge of 
reliability, but it is not required”  as a “prerequisite for admitting any 
lab’s test results.”  Id. (citation omitted).  The court then noted that the 
trial court did not abuse its discretion by qualifying expert witnesses and 
admitting laboratory test results at issue where they complied sufficiently 
with “the protocols of [the laboratory in question], other labs, and the 
kit’s manufacturer.”  Id.  Thus, Tankersley  does not appear to require 
compliance with a manufacturer’s protocols as a prerequisite to admission of 
the test results.   
 
 30 We note, however, that the ASCLD/LAB accreditation process has 
been subject to criticism, namely that (1) “inspectors can be employed by 
crime labs that are themselves reviewed by ASCLD/LAB,” (2) the “ASCLD/LAB 
relies on annual self -audits” between inspections, (3) “ASCLD/LAB procedures 
permit each analyst to select five cases for review during an audit” and (4) 
ASCLD/LAB “require[s] inspectors to destroy their notes of inspections.”  
Paul C. Giannelli, Regulating DNA Laboratories: The New Gold Standard?, 69 
N.Y.U. Ann. Surv. Am. L. 617, 636 -37 (2014).   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
53 
 (continued . . .)  not err in permitting Jeskie to testify as to the results of the 
DNA tests. 
C. Evidence of Flores’ Culpability Was Improperly Excluded by 
the Trial Court but the Exclusion Was  Harmless Beyond a 
Reasonable Doubt.  
 
1. Portions of Texeira’s Third -Party Culpability Evidence Were 
Admissible Under HRE Rules  401 and 403.  
 
  Texeira asserts that the circuit court erred by 
precluding him from 
adducing third-party culpabil ity evidence 
showing that Flores killed Togioka.  The circuit court 
determined that the evidence should be excluded because 
Texeira 
had not proven there was a “legitimate tendency” that Flores 
could have committed the crime, as required by our holding in 
State v. Rabellizsa.  79 Hawai ‘i 347, 903 P.2d 43 (1995).  This 
court recently determined in State v. Kato, No. SCWC-15- 0000329 
(Haw. June 18, 2020), that  the admissibility of  third-party 
culpability evidence is governed by the HRE Rule 401 relevancy 
standard and the limitations provided by HRE Rule 403 and is not 
subject to a legitimate tendency test
.31  
                     
 31 Justice Nakayama’s concurring and dissenting opinion ( dissent) 
states that “motive alone is collateral and irrelevant,” citing several cases 
for this proposition.  Dissent at 9 -10.  This was not our decision in Kato 
nor is it our decision today.  As we explained in Kato,     
 
The dissent misapprehends the holding of this opinion, 
contending that our decision would allow “third -party 
motive evidence alone” to establish relevancy.  Instead, 
our opinion appli es HRE Rule 401’s relevancy standard to 
proffered third -party culpability evidence in the same 
manner as that rule applies to all other evidence.  It 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
54 
   Texeira argues that Flores either killed  Togioka 
herself or ordered another person to kill him.32  Texeira 
contends the following evidence that Flores killed Togioka was 
relevant and admissible
: (1) Flores, while on the phone with 
Kona two days before Togioka’s death, made a comment about 
wanting to shoot Togioka; ( 2) Flores was upset at Togioka,  after 
learning the day before his death , that he had previously 
claimed to be  in a sexual relationship with her; (3) Flores was 
in possession of a .22- caliber rifle that could have been used 
to kill Togioka before his death; (4) Flores was arrested two 
days after the killing with .22 -caliber bullets; ( 5) Flores went 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
rejects the higher burden adopted in Rabellizsa, which is 
not consistent with the Hawai ʻi Rules of Evidence. . . .  As 
stated, we do not hold that evidence of a third party’s 
motive on its own will ipso facto allow admissibility of 
such evidence, instead HRE Rule 401 and Rule 403 govern.  
 
No. SCWC- 15-0000329, at 40 n.29 (citations omitted).  
 
 32 At trial, defense counsel argued that Kona, Pagala, or Flores 
killed Togioka.  On appeal, Texeira only challenges the circuit court’s 
refusal to admit evidence tending to show Flores killed Togioka.  Texeira was 
not precluded from introducing evidence that  Kona killed Togioka, so we do 
not consider whether evidence of his culpability should have been admitted.  
Additionally, defense counsel expressly stated at trial that he was not 
claiming that Pagala killed Togioka, and he thus did not preserve this 
contention.  Even under a plain error review, Texeira does not identify on 
appeal evidence he would have used to show Pagala killed Togioka.  As part of 
the proffer of Flores’ culpability, Texeira stated that Flores gave Pagala 
.22-caliber bullets, Pagala was arrested the day after the murder with Flores 
and in possession of a .22 -caliber rifle and bullets, and Pagala came to 
Kona’s house the night of the murder with Flores.  As this evidence was 
actually proffered as evidence of Flores’ culpability, the determi nation of 
whether the evidence should have been admitted ultimately depends on the 
resolution of the admissibility of the third -party culpability evidence 
regarding Flores, and this evidence is thus considered in that light.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
55 
 to Kona’s home the night after Togioka’s death and was 
“paranoid” and “did not seem herself” ; (6) Flores’ lawyer stated 
that the evidence implicated her in Togioka’s killing; ( 7) 
Flores had previously tortured a person who owed her money; and 
(8) Flores gave a false alibi to the police and her whereabouts 
were not verified.33  We first consider the relevance of each 
proffered piece of evidence.   
  “‘Relevant evidence’ means evidence having any 
tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of 
consequence to the determination of the action more probable or 
less probable than it would be without the evidence.”   HRE Rule 
401 (2016).   The evidence that Flores told Kona she wanted to 
shoot Togioka a few days before he died is probative of her 
motive to kill Togioka and is therefore relevant to a fact of 
consequence to the determination of the action: that Flores was 
responsible for killing Togioka, making it less probable that 
Texeira committed the offense of which he was charged.  See 
Tibbs v. State, 59 N.E.3d 1005, 1011 (Ind. Ct. App. 2016) 
(“Evidence which tends to show that someone else committed the 
crime makes it less probable that the defendant committed the 
                     
 33 The KPD reviewed surveillan ce footage from a McDonald’s in Ele ʻele 
to corroborate a statement Flores made during her November 2 interview 
regarding her whereabouts on the night that Togioka  was killed, and the 
police report noted that she was not shown in the footage.  However, Flores 
had told the interviewing officers that she was at the McDonald’s on the 
night of either October 29 or 30, 2016, and it appears KPD mistakenly 
reviewed the footage from October 31.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
56 
 crime and is therefore relevant under [Evidence] Rule 401. ”) 
(alteration in original);  see also State v. Pepin , 940 A.2d 221 
(N.H. 2007) (upholding trial court’s finding that defendant’s 
prior threat was relevant to show his intent when directed at 
the same victim).  Similarly, the evidence that Flores was angry 
with Togioka at that time and had confronted him because s he had 
recently learned that he had claim ed to be in a sexual 
relationship with her would tend to make it more probable that 
Flores had a motive to kill Togioka.   Thus, it is relevant 
evidence under HRE Rule 401.   
  Texeira also argued that Flores had access  to a gun 
that was potentially the murder weapon and was arrested with 
.22-caliber bullets that could have been used to kill Togioka 
two days after Togioka’s death .  Generally, the mere fact that 
an allegedly culpable third- party possessed a weapon of the same 
caliber as the one used in the crime has minimal probative 
value, but this value is significantly enhanced if the 
surrounding circumstances permit the jury to infer that the gun 
was in fact used in the crime.  See, e.g., People v. Brown, 697 
N.Y.S.2d 892 (N.Y. App. Div. 1999) (defendant’s possession of a 
silver .380- caliber handgun four days before the charged crime 
was properly admitted in view of evidence that one of the 
participants in the crime carried a silver .380- caliber 
handgun); People v. Sheriff, 652 N.Y.S.2d 916, 917 (N.Y. App. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
57 
 Div. 1996) (holding that defendant’s possession of a distinctive 
chrome-plated handgun subsequent to alleged murder was 
admissible).  Here, although the .22- caliber rifle and 
ammunition in Flores’ posses sion were not distinctive,  the fact 
that evidence indicated Flores was in possession of the weapon 
the day before Togioka’s death , coupled with the other pr offered 
evidence, has “a tendency, either directly or circumstantially ,” 
to show that Flores may  have been the person who killed Togioka,  
and thus the evidence is relevant under HRE Rule 401.34  Kato, 
No. SCWC-15- 0000329, at 41.  
  The evidence that Flores was acting “paranoid” and 
“did not seem herself” shortly after Togioka’s death also has a 
tendency to show the existence of a fact of consequence--that 
Flores killed Togioka
--and thus is relevant under HRE Rule 401.  
See Brunson v. State, 245 S.W.3d 132, 141 (Ark. 2006) (evidence 
showing defendant’s strange behavior towards victim was relevant 
to his murder conviction); Horton v. State, 217 So.3d 27, 57- 58 
(Ala. Crim. App. 2016) (stating that evidence of strange 
                     
 34 Although Texeira’s argument that Flores gave a false alibi was 
not substantiated by the KPD, Texeira correctly notes that her whereabouts on 
the night of Togioka’s death were unverified.  The only evidence of Flores’ 
whereabouts on that evening is Flores’ statement to the police in which she 
repeatedly stated she could not recall where she was or what she was doing on 
the evening of October 31, 2016.  After repeatedly denying any recollection, 
Flores finally stated that she was at  her home alone with Pagala that evening 
after the officers told her that the evidence implicated her in Togioka’s 
death. 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
58 
 behavior before and after the murder was relevant, but 
concluding the specific evidence at issue was properly excluded 
as it was collateral); Harris v. State, No. 14-16-00282-CR, 2018 
WL 1004879, at *3 (Tex. Ct. App. 2018) (finding that appellant’s 
strange behavior before a murder contributed to the sufficiency 
of the evidence in his conviction).35 
  Texeira also appears to argue on appeal that he should 
have been able to introduce into evidence a declaration that 
Flores’ counsel attached to 
the notice of i ntent to claim the 
privilege against self -incrimination, which  Flores filed after 
the State revoked her immunity.  However, a personal opinion by 
Flores’ counsel as to whether or not the evidence implicated 
Flores does not tend to make it more or less likely that Flores 
killed Togioka or was responsible for his death.  Accordingly, 
Flores’ counsel’s statement is not relevant.   
                     
 35 The dissent asserts that Flores’ paranoid behavior is not 
probative of a guilty mind because Flores was acquainted with Togioka and 
speculates that her paranoid behavior was merely an expression of grief.  
Dissent at 16 n.11 .  The dissent’s speculative explanation for Flores’ 
conduct is unsupported by any evidence and, more importantly, the fact that 
evidence is consistent with more than one narrative does not mean that it is 
irrelevant.  To be relevant, evidence need only have any tendency to make the 
existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the 
action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence.  
HRE Rule 401.  The evidence does not need to conclusively demonstrate the 
existence of a fact to the exclusion of all other possible explanations, as 
the dissent essentially asserts.  The dissent also appears to argue that 
evidence of Flores’ guilty mind is measured differently because she was a 
third party.  Dissent at 16 n.1 1.  As explained, however, evidence of a third 
party’s culpability is not a special species of evidence and is governed like 
other evidence by the Hawai ʻi Rules of Evidence.  Kato, No. SCWC- 15-0000329, 
at 34. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
59 
   Finally, Texeira  maintains the evidence that Flores 
had previously  tortured  a person who owed her money is relevant 
to show that Flores had a motive to kill Togioka or intimidated 
other witnesses into testifying falsely.  Breen, who allegedly 
saw a video of Flores torturing someone, would have testified 
that in the video Flores used an electroshock weapon to torture 
a debtor.  Standing alone, this testimony is not relevant.  
Because of the absence of evidence connecting Breen’s statements 
about the video to the other witne
sses at trial, this evidence 
is not relevant to whether Flores intimidated any of the 
witnesses into testifying falsely.   
 
 The dissent maintains that “third-party culpability 
evidence is a different species than evidence of the defendant’s 
own guilt.”  Dissent at 8 ; see also dissent at 12-13.  We 
rejected this categorization of evidence in Kato, noting that 
the Hawai
ʻi Rules of Evidence “govern proceed ings in the courts 
of the State of Hawaii.”  No. SCWC-15 -0000329, at 33 (quoting 
HRE Rule 101 (2016)) .  We further explained that “the basic 
precondition for admissibility of all evidence is that it is 
relevant as that term is defined in HRE Rule 401.”  Id. (quoting 
Medeiros v. Choy, 142 Hawai ʻi 233, 245, 418 P.3d 574, 586 
(2018)); People v. Hall, 718 P.2d 99, 104 (Cal. 1986) (“[C]ourts 
should simply treat third
-party culpability evidence like any 
other evidence: if relevant it is admissible (§ 350) unless its ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
60 
 probative value is substantially outweighed by the risk of undue 
delay, prejudice, or confusion (§ 352).”  (emphasis added)) ; see 
also People v. Young, 445 P.3d 591, 614 –15 (Cal. 2019) (“In 
other words, cour ts treat third party culpability evidence ‘like 
any other evidence: if relevant it is admissible, . . . unless 
its probative value is substantially outweighed by the risk of 
undue delay, prejudice, or confusion.’” (quoting People v. 
Lewis, 28 P.3d 34 (Cal. 2001))). 
  As stated, we reconsidered the appropriateness of the 
legitimate tendency test in Kato  and held that the admissibility 
of third-party culpability evidence is governed by HRE Rule 401 
and HRE Rule 403.  No. SCWC -15-0000329, at 3 4-40.  Under HRE 
Rule 401, the standard is whether the evidence has any tendency, 
“either directly
 or circumstantially,” to show the third person 
was responsible for the charged 
offense.36  Id. at 37. 
  Evidence that is relevant under HRE Rule 401 may still 
be excluded under HRE Rule 403 if its probative value is 
                     
 36 The dissent relies upon State v. R.Y., No. 081706, 2020 WL 
2182230 (N.J. May 6, 2020), dissent at 14, which held that, for third -party 
culpability evidence to be relevant, “[s]omewhere in the total circumstances  
there must be some thread capable of inducing reasonable men to regard the 
event as bearing upon the State’s case.”  R.Y., No. 081706, 2020 WL 2182230, 
at *9 (alteration in original) (emphasis added) (holding that the trial court 
erred in excluding third -party culpability evidence because the proffered 
evidence was not “mere conjecture” and pertained to an essential feature of 
the State’s case).  Rather than importing a standard from another 
jurisdiction for one species of evidence, we apply the relevancy standard set 
forth in the Hawaiʻ i Rules of Evidence to ensure consistent application of our 
rules to all categories of evidence, as indeed HRE Rule 101 requires.  
Medeiros, 142 Hawaiʻ i at 245, 418 P.3d at 586.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
61 
 (continued . . .)  substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, 
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by 
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless 
presentation of cumulative evidence.37  HRE Rule 403; Medeiros , 
142 Hawai‘ i at 248, 418 P.3d at 589 .  When weighing probative 
value versus prejudicial effect in this context, a court must 
consider a variety of factors, including “the need for the 
evidence, the efficacy of alternative proof, and the degree to 
which the evidence probably will rouse the jury to overmastering 
hostility.”  State v. Renon, 73 Haw. 23, 38, 828 P.2d 1266, 1273 
(1992).  As stated in Kato, a trial court should resolve a close 
question of admissibility in favor of the defendant.  No. SCWC -
15-0000329, at 36 (citing Winfield v. United States, 676 A.2d 1, 
6-7 (D.C. 1996)).   
  E vidence that Flores told Kona she’d like to shoot 
Togioka a few days before  his death is  highly probative because 
it demonstrates Flores’ desire to have Togioka  killed.38  State 
                     
 37 HRE Rule 403 (2016) provides as follows: “ Although relevant, 
evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed 
by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the 
jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless 
presentation of cumulative evidence.”   
 
 38 The dissent criticizes our consideration of Kona’s statement that 
Flores said something to him about wanting to shoot Togioka during a 
telephone conversation two days before the killing because, according to the 
dissent, Texeira did not draw “the circuit court’s attention” to Kona’s 
statement in his trial memorandum.  Dissent at 11 n. 7.  Contrary to the 
dissent’s assertion, Texeira attached Kona’s statement to the police as an 
exhibit to his trial memorandum, cited the precise  page on which Kona related 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
62 
 v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai ‘i 390, 417, 56 P.3d 692, 719 (2002) 
(threats to shoot victim were highly probative where murder 
weapon wasn’t recovered).  The evidence that Flores was upset at 
Togioka for claiming to be in a sexual relationship with her is 
also probative of Flores’ motive .  See Renon, 73 Haw. at 39, 828 
P.2d at 1274 (“[B]ecause  a motive is ordinarily the incentive 
for criminal behavior, its probative value generally exceeds its 
prejudicial effect[.]”  (alterations in original)).  The 
probative value of the proffered evidence is increased by the 
fact that Flores learned of Togioka ’s claim and made a 
threatening type of statement  only two days before Togioka’s 
death.  Martin , No. SCWC- 14-0001090, 2020 WL 1934475 , at *18 
(Haw. April 22, 2020) (noting that the challenged statement was 
made only an hour before the charged crime occurre
d).  
Conversely, the State would not be prejudiced  by this evidence 
because there is minimal concern that it  would constitute a 
waste of time or confuse the jury.  Thus, the probative value of 
this evidence is not substantially outweighed by its prejudicial 
effect, and its exclusion wa s not supported by HRE Rule 403.   
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
Flores’ comment, and sought the admission of Kona’s statement into evidence.  
Accordingly, the statement was presented to the circuit court for its 
consideration, and the dissent’s contention is unavailing.     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
63 
   As noted, Flores’ possession of a .22 -caliber rifle 
and bullets is only mildly probative in and of itself.  However, 
when considered in light of the other evidence, namely that 
Togioka was killed by a .22- caliber firearm, the fact that the 
murder weapon is contested, and that there is evidence Flores 
possessed the weapon the day of Togioka’s death  and was still in 
possession of .22- caliber ammunition two days later, the 
probative value of Texeira’s proffered evidence is heightened 
and is not substantially outweighed by its  prejudicial effect.39 
  Evidence that Flores was acting “paranoid” and “not 
herself” the night after Togioka was killed arguably may be  
probative as evidence of a guilty state of mind.  The timing of 
when the observation of Flores was made and that it was observed 
in Kona’s home--where the gun was taken from and returned--lends 
probative value to the evidence and it posed little risk of 
wasting time or confusing the jury.  Thus, the admission of this 
evidence would not be substantially more prejudicial than 
probative.   
                     
 39 The probative value of this evidence is further enhanced by the 
fact that Flores was unable to recall her whereabouts on the night Togioka 
was killed and the only alibi she offered, after multiple denials of any 
recollection of her whereabouts, was that she was alone at  home with Pagala.  
Kato, No. SCWC- 15-0000329,  at 35-36 (“A defendant need not place the third 
party at or near the scene of the crime; it is sufficient for relevancy 
considerations that the defendant has provided direct or circumstantial 
evidence tending to show that the third person committed the crime.”).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
64 
   Finally, although we have already concluded that the  
evidence that Flores tortured a debtor with an electroshock 
weapon is irrelevant, we note that even assuming marginal 
relevance of this evidence, its probative value is exceedingly 
low because it is unclear when the alleged incident occur red, 
the debtor was not Togioka, the motive to harm may have been 
different, and the weapon used is not the same type of weapon 
used in this case.  Admitting this evidence would also require 
consideration of ancillary evidence, such as circumstances 
relating to the reliability and the contents of the video, which 
would involve confusion of the issues.  The probative value is 
thus substantially outweighed by the factors set forth in HRE 
Rule 403.   
 
 Accordingly, the circuit court erred  in excluding the 
evidence that Flores (1) told Kona she  would like to shoot 
Togioka two days before his death;  (2) was angry and upset at 
Togioka shortly before his death because she found out that he 
had claimed previously to be in a sexual relationship with her;  
(3) was in possession of a .22-caliber rifle the day of 
Togioka’s death, ( 4) was arrested two days after Togioka’s death 
with .22-caliber bullets;  and (5) went to Kona’s home the 
following evening after Togioka’s death and was “paranoid” and 
“did not seem herself .”  See Medeiros, 142 Hawai ‘i 
at 248, 418 
P.3d at 589. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
65 
 2. The Exclusion of Texeira’s Third -Party Culpability Evidence 
Was Harmless Beyond a Reasonable Doubt.   
 
“In applying the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
standard, the court is required to examine the record and 
determine whether there is a reasonable possibility that the 
error complained of might have contributed to the conviction.”  
State v. Souza, 142 Hawai ‘i 390, 4
02, 420 P.3d 321, 333 (2018) 
(brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Mundon, 121 Hawai ‘i 339, 
368, 219 P.3d 1126, 1155 (2009)) .  
  This is a case where there appears to be a  “wealth of 
overwhelming and compelling evidence tending to show the 
defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.”  State v. Rivera, 
62 Haw. 120, 127, 612 P.2d 526, 532 (1980).  Dela Cruz testified 
that he and Texeira picked up Togioka,  they drove together to 
Kona’s house, and Togioka and Te xeira went into the home.  Kona 
testified that Texeira asked him if he knew where Texeira’s gun 
was at that time, and he told Texeira where to find it.  Schmidt 
testified that Texeira retrieved the gun from the shelf behind 
the house and then Texeira, Dela Cruz, and Togioka left Kona’s 
house together in a car.  Dela Cruz testified that after they 
parked near Burns Field, Texeira and Togioka left the car and 
walked a short distance away.   Dela Cruz then heard gunshots and 
heard Togioka yell,  “you shot me.”  He saw Togioka face down on 
the ground, only 15- 20 feet in front of the vehicle.  Dela Cruz ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
66 
 stated that he saw Texeira return to the car with a .22-caliber 
revolver, then he and Texeira drove away, and  Texeira told Dela 
Cruz that he shot Togioka.   
  
Kona and Pagala testified that Texeira confessed to 
killing Togioka.  Kona testified that Texeira told him in prison 
that he shot Togioka in the arm and the head, accurately 
identifying where the bullet wounds on Togioka were found.  
Pagala similarly testified that Texeira said he shot Togioka in 
the head and arm.   
  
The State introduced a confession letter, as well as 
evidence that indicated that Texeira was its author.  The 
confession letter stated that Texeira had wrestled his gun away 
from Togioka and then shot Togioka twice.40  Texeira’s cell phone 
was shown to be in the area where Togioka was killed at the time 
of his death.  Texeira also acknowledged being in the general 
area at that time during his November 4, 2016 interview with Lt. 
Jenkins.  Texeira sent a text 
message stating “A ll pau” to Kona 
about the time that the evidence indicated Togioka’s death 
occurred.  Most significantly, DNA evidence on a cigarette 
recovered next to To gioka’s right calf matched Texeira’s DNA 
                     
 40 Although the writer of the letter stated that the killing of 
Togioka was an act committed in self -defense, this defense was not raised or 
argued at trial; instead Texeira contended the killing was committed by Kona, 
Pagala, or Flores. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
67 
 profile with the odds that the DNA belonged to a different 
individual being in the octillions.   
  
On this record, there is no reasonable possibility 
that the exclusion of the third- party culpability evidence 
contributed to Texeira’s conviction .  Accordingly, the circuit 
court’s error in excluding the third-party culpability evidence 
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.   
 CONCLUSION IV.
  For  the foregoing reasons, the circuit court’s 
Judgment and Sentence of Conviction is affirmed.  
 
Craig A. De Costa 
Daniel G. Hempey 
for appellant 
 
Tracy Murakami 
for appellee /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
