    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I
---o0o---
DW AINA LE #A DEVELOPMENT, LLC, 
Respondent/Co-Petitioner-Appellant-Appellee,
vs.
BRIDGE AINA LE #A, LLC.,
Respondent/Co-Petitioner-Appellant-Appellee,
and
STATE OF HAWAI# I LAND USE COMMISSION,
Petitioner/Appellee-Appellant,
and
STATE OF HAWAI# I OFFICE OF PLANNING,
COUNTY OF HAWAII PLANNING AGENCY,
Respondents/Appellees,
(CIV. NO. 11-1-112K)
----------------------------------------------------------------
BRIDGE AINA LE #A, LLC.,
Respondent/Appellant-Appellee,
vs.
STATE OF HAWAI# I LAND USE COMMISSION,
Respondent/Appellee-Appellant,Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-13-0000091
25-NOV-2014
09:52 AM   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I OFFICE OF PLANNING and COUNTY OF HAWAI 'I,
Respondents/Appellees,
 
and
 
DW AINA LE' A DEVELOPMENT, LLC.,
Respondent/Appellee-Appellant.
(CIV. NO. 11-1-0969-05)
 
SCAP-13-0000091
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CAAP-13-0000091; CIV. NOS. 11-1-112K and 11-1-0969-05)
 
NOVEMBER 25, 2014
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, MCKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.,
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE LEE, IN PLACE OF ACOBA, J., RECUSED
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
This appeal turns on whether the Land Use Commission 
(the LUC) properly reverted land to its former land use 
classification pursuant to Hawai' i Revised Statutes § 205-4(g) 
(2001 & Supp. 2007). 
We hold that the LUC erred in reverting the 
land without complying with the requirements of HRS § 205-4 because the land owners had substantially commenced use of the land in accordance with the representations they had made to the Commission. 
The instant dispute concerns the classification of land 
in Waikoloa on Hawai' i Island. In 1989, the land was 
reclassified from agricultural to urban, in order to allow for the development of a residential community. The reclassification 
-2­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was made subject to numerous conditions, including a condition
 
that at least sixty percent of the residential units be
 affordable. Over time, the land changed hands several times and
 the LUC granted requests to amend the affordable housing
 condition. 
By 2005, the condition required the landowner, Bridge 
Aina Le'a, LLC (Bridge), to construct no fewer than 385 
affordable units, i.e., twenty percent of the total units to be constructed. It further required Bridge to provide certificates of occupancy for all of these units within five years, and submit a joint venture agreement and mass grading contract within a year. 
In December 2008, the LUC issued an order to show cause 
(OSC) why the land should not revert to its former agricultural land use classification. The LUC stated that it had reason to believe that Bridge and its predecessors in interest had “failed to perform according to the conditions imposed and to the representations and commitments made to [the LUC] in obtaining reclassification of the Subject Area and in obtaining amendments to conditions of reclassification.” Soon thereafter, Bridge informed the LUC that it intended to assign its interest in the land to DW Aina Le' a Development, LLC (DW) through an installment 
sale. DW subsequently invested more than $20 million in developing the site. Nevertheless, after proceedings over the 
-3­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
course of several years, the LUC issued an order reverting the
 
land to the agricultural use district. Bridge and DW each sought
 judicial review of the LUC’s decision and order, and their cases
 were consolidated in the circuit court.
 
The circuit court reversed and vacated the LUC’s
 
decision and order. The circuit court concluded that the LUC: 
(1) exceeded its statutory authority and violated HRS chapter 205; (2) violated HRS §§ 205-4(h), 205-17, and 205-4(g); (3) violated HRS chapters 91 and 205 and Hawai' i Administrative Rules 
(HAR) chapter 15; and (4) violated Bridge’s and DW’s due process and equal protection rights. 
On appeal, the LUC raises three arguments. First, the
 
LUC argues that HRS § 205-4(g) expressly authorizes it to issue
 an OSC why reclassified land should not revert to its former land
 use classification. Second, the LUC argues that the circuit
 court erred in denying its motion to strike certain documents
 from other LUC cases, which had been included in the record on
 appeal. Third, the LUC argues that the circuit court erred in
 considering Bridge’s and DW’s constitutional arguments, and that
 those arguments were unfounded.
 
We hold that the LUC erred in reverting the property
 
without complying with the requirements of HRS § 205-4 that are
 generally applicable when land use boundaries are changed. See
 
infra at 64-65. Once the LUC issues an OSC, the procedures it
 
-4­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
must follow before reverting land depend upon whether the
 
petitioner has substantially commenced use of the land. Once use
 of the land has substantially commenced, the LUC is bound by the
 requirements of HRS § 205-4. Here, by the time the LUC reverted
 the property to the agricultural land use district, Bridge and DW
 had substantially commenced use of the land in accordance with
 their representations. Specifically, they had constructed
 sixteen townhouses on the property, commenced construction of
 numerous other townhouses, and graded the site for additional
 townhouses and roads. At that point, more than $20 million had
 been spent on the project. Although Bridge and DW had
 substantially commenced use of the land, the LUC failed to comply
 with the requirements of HRS § 205-4. The circuit court
 therefore correctly concluded that the LUC erred in reverting the
 property.
 
The circuit court erred, however, in denying the LUC’s
 
motion to strike. The disputed documents are portions of dockets
 from other cases in the LUC. Because these documents were not
 part of the administrative record, and neither Bridge nor DW
 sought to supplement the record in the circuit court, these
 documents should not have been included in the record on appeal. 
The circuit court also erred in concluding that
 
Bridge’s and DW’s procedural and substantive due process rights
 and equal protection rights were violated. With respect to
 
-5­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
procedural due process, both Bridge and DW had notice of the OSC
 
and that the LUC might revert the property. They also each had a
 meaningful opportunity to be heard on the proposed reversion. 
With regard to substantive due process, the LUC’s reversion was
 not “clearly arbitrary and unreasonable,” given the project’s
 long history, the various representations made to the LUC, and
 the petitioners’ failure to meet deadlines. With respect to
 Bridge’s and DW’s equal protection arguments, the record does not
 establish that the LUC’s imposition of a condition and subsequent
 reversion of the property constituted a violation of the
 petitioners’ equal protection rights. 
We therefore affirm the circuit court’s second amended
 
judgment in part because the LUC failed to comply with the
 requirements of HRS § 205-4. We vacate the second amended
 judgment to the extent it is based on the circuit court’s
 conclusion that the LUC violated Bridge’s and DW’s constitutional
 rights. 
I. Background
 
The following factual background is taken from the
 
record on appeal.
 
A. Land Use Commission proceedings
 
This appeal arises out of a dispute over the
 
classification of approximately 1,060 acres of land in Waikoloa. 
In 1989, the LUC granted a petition to reclassify the land from
 
-6­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the agricultural to the urban land use district to allow for the
 
development of a residential community. The original proposal,
 submitted by Signal Puako Corporation (Signal), included
 approximately 2,760 residential units. Signal offered to provide
 thirty percent of the units at prices which families with an
 income range of 80-120% of the County of Hawaii’s median income
 could afford. 
On January 17, 1989, the LUC reclassified the land
 
subject to eleven conditions, including the following relevant
 condition related to the affordable housing units:
 
1. Petitioner shall provide housing opportunities for low,
low-moderate, and moderate income Hawaii residents by
offering for sale at least thirty percent (30%) of the units
at prices which families with an income range up to one
hundred twenty percent (120%) of the County of Hawaii’s
median income can afford, and thirty percent (30%) of the
units at prices which families with an income range of one
hundred twenty to one hundred forty percent (120-140%) of
the County of Hawaii’s median income can afford.
 
This condition may be fulfilled through projects under
such terms as may be mutually agreeable between the
Petitioner and the Housing Finance and Development
Corporation of the State of Hawaii.  This condition may also
be fulfilled, with the approval of the Housing Finance and
Development Corporation, through construction of rental
units to be made available at rents which families in the
 
specified income ranges can afford.
 
This affordable housing requirement shall be
implemented concurrently with the completion of the market
units for the residential project.  The determination of
 median income, as that term is used in this condition, shall
be based on median income figures that exist at the time
that this condition must be implemented.
 
In 1991, Puako Hawaii Properties (PHP), Signal’s 
successor-in-interest, filed a motion to amend the LUC’s findings
 
of fact, conclusions of law, and decision and order. PHP’s
 
-7­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
revised proposal included two “world class championship golf
 
courses,” and 1,550 residential units, including multi-family
 units and single-family lots. PHP offered to construct
 affordable units off-site, in a number equal to sixty percent of
 the unit count on the property. 
On July 9, 1991, the LUC issued amended findings of
 
fact, conclusions of law, and decision and order, which included
 the following fifteen conditions:
 
1. Petitioner shall provide housing opportunities for low,
low-moderate, and moderate income Hawaii residents by
offering for sale at least thirty percent (30%) of the units
at prices which families with an income range up to one
hundred twenty (120%) of the County of Hawaii’s median
income can afford, and thirty percent (30%) of the units at
prices which families with an income range of one hundred
twenty to one hundred forty percent (120-140%) of the County
of Hawaii’s median income can afford, provided, however, in
no event shall the gross number of affordable units be less
than 1,000 units.
 
This condition may be fulfilled through projects under
such terms as may be mutually agreeable between the
Petitioner and the Housing Finance and Development
Corporation of the State of Hawaii.  This condition may also
be fulfilled, with the approval of the Housing Finance and
Development Corporation, through construction of rental
units to be made available at rents which families in the
 
specified income ranges can afford.
 
This affordable housing requirement shall be
implemented concurrently with the completion of the market
units for the residential project.  The determination of
 median income, as that term is used in this condition, shall
be based on median income figures that exist at the time
that this condition must be implemented.
 
2. P
etitioner shall develop, at its expense and in
coordination with the State Department of Land and Natural
Resources and the County of Hawaii Department of Water
Supply, the necessary water source, storage, and
transmission facilities to provide an adequate supply of
potable water to the Property.  Petitioner shall develop the
necessary water source prior to development of the Property.
 
3. Petitioner shall ensure that a buffer area along the
boundary of the Property fronting the Queen Kaahumanu
Highway right-of-way will be preserved to protect natural
 
-8­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
open space and scenic views.  This buffer area shall be
 
preserved in perpetuity either through the establishment of
a conservation easement pursuant to Chapter 198, HRS, as
amended, or such other means as shall be reviewed and
approved by the Office of State Planning of the State of
Hawaii.
 
The buffer area shall be comprised of approximately
two hundred twenty-five (225) acres and shall extend inland
from the Queen Kaahumanu Highway right-of-way to a depth of
approximately one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet.  The
 depth of the buffer area may meander to a lesser or greater
depth to accommodate the Project’s development plan and
preservation of natural open space and scenic views. 
Exceptions shall be made for infrastructure improvements or
corridors that may be necessary to service the developed
portions of the Property.  The approximate boundaries of the
natural open space buffer area are reflected in Petitioner’s
Exhibit 11 which is attached hereto and incorporated herein
as Exhibit B.
 
4. Petitioner shall participate in the funding and
construction of present and future transportation
improvements at project access points as identified and
deemed necessary by the State Department of Transportation. 
Such improvements may include a highway overpass or
underpass.  Petitioner shall also participate in the funding
and construction of other on-site and off-site
 transportation improvements necessitated by proposed
development and in designs and schedules accepted by and
coordinated with the State Department of Transportation,
provided that the extent of Petitioner’s participation shall
not exceed its share of the increased community traffic
impacts in the region and, provided further that, in the
event the County adopts an impact fee for transportation
improvements, the foregoing requirements shall not include
or double-count the cost of any specific traffic
improvements which may also be included in the County’s
impact fee computation.
 
5. Petitioner shall design, locate and construct a sewage
treatment plant as may be required by the County of Hawaii
and the State Department of Health as to minimize adverse
impacts on adjoining properties.
 
6. Petitioner shall immediately stop work on the impacted
area and contact the State Historic Preservation Office
 
should any archaeological resources, such as artifacts,
shell, bone, or charcoal deposits, human burial, rock or
coral alignments, paving or walls be encountered during the
Project’s development.
 
7. Petitioner shall provide a maximum of sixteen (16) acres
within the Property for public school site(s), as the State
Department of Education may determine to be necessary to
service the Property, at no cost to the State of Hawaii. 
These school site(s) shall be provided, if there is a need
for such site(s), in location(s) designated for community
 
-9­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
facilities on Petitioner’s master plan, or in location(s) as
may be mutually agreeable to the Petitioner and the State
Department of Education.
 
8. Prior to the development or transfer of any interests
whatsoever in and to the Project, Petitioner shall provide
community benefit assessments as agreed between Petitioner
and the Office of State Planning and shall file it with the
Commission within 30 days of the execution of the agreement.
 
9. Petitioner shall comply with “The Eight (8) Conditions
Applicable to This Gold Course Development”, prepared by the
State Department of Health dated April, 1990 (Version 3) and
attached hereto.
 
10. Petitioner shall engage the services of a qualified
golf course manager to oversee the irrigation of the golf
course and application of fertilizers and pesticides to the
golf course and who shall be certified by the State
Department of Agriculture in the application of fertilizers
and pesticides.
 
11. Petitioner shall make available adequate golf tee
times, no less than forty (40) percent of total daily golf
tee times, at affordable rates for public play by Hawaii
State residents.
 
12. Petitioner shall provide annual reports to the Land Use
Commission, The Office of State Planning and the County of
Hawaii Planning Department in connection with the status of
the Project and Petitioner’s progress in complying with the
conditions imposed.
 
13. Petitioner shall develop the Property in substantial
compliance with the representations made to the Commission. 
Failure to so develop the Property may result in reversion
of the Property to its former classification, or change to a
more appropriate classification.
 
14. Petitioner shall give notice to the Land Use Commission
of any intent to sell, lease, assign, place in trust, or
otherwise voluntarily alter the ownership interest in the
Property covered in the petition, prior to development of
the Property.
 
15. The Commission may fully or partially release these
conditions as to all or any portion of the Property upon
timely, and upon the provision of adequate assurance of
satisfaction of these conditions by the Petitioner.
 
In 2005, Bridge (who had acquired the land at issue in
 
1999) filed a motion with the LUC to amend the 1991 decision and
 
order, including the affordable housing condition. Specifically,
 
-10­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Bridge sought to have the affordable housing condition (condition
 
#1) amended to read as follows:
 
Petitioner shall provide affordable housing opportunities
for low, low moderate and moderate income residents of the
State of Hawaii, which shall be consistent and coincide with
County of Hawaii affordable housing requirements. The
 location and distribution of the affordable housing or other
provision for affordable housing shall be under such terms
as may be mutually agreeable between the Petitioner and the
County of Hawaii.
 
Bridge explained that the scope of the project had
 
changed significantly from the time of the original order, and
 
that Bridge was proposing to build 1,924 residential units, 384
 of which would be for affordable housing. Bridge further
 explained that the then-existing sixty percent affordable unit
 requirement was “not economically feasible because the cost of
 compliance effectively prevent[ed] the Petitioners from going
 forward with the development of the Project.” Bridge also
 explained that the proposed 384 affordable housing units were in
 line with the County of Hawaii’s twenty-percent affordable
 housing requirement. 
On November 25, 2005, the LUC granted Bridge’s motion
 
to amend the affordable housing condition. The LUC amended that
 condition to provide the following:
 
1. Petitioner shall provide housing opportunities for low,
low-moderate, and moderate income residents of the State of
Hawai'i by offering for sale at least twenty percent (20%)
of the Project’s residential unit prices determined to beaffordable by the County of Hawai 'i Office of Housing and
Community Development, provided, however, in no event shallthe gross number of affordable housing units within thePetition Area be less than 385 units.  The affordable housing units shall meet or exceed all applicable County ofHawai'i affordable housing standards, and shall be completed 
-11­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in substantial compliance with the representations made to
the Commission.
 
1b. Petitioner shall obtain, and provide copies to the
Commission, the certificates of occupancy for all of the
Project’s affordable housing units within five (5) years of
November 17, 2005.
 
1c. Petitioner shall submit to the Commission the
 
Petitioner’s signed joint venture agreement and a mass
grading contract within a reasonable amount of time, not to
exceed one (1) year from November 17, 2005.
 
During 2006 and 2007, Bridge periodically appeared 
before the LUC to provide updates on the project. On October 11, 
2007, the County Planning Department informed Bridge that an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) was required for the project, pursuant to this court’s decision in Sierra Club v. Department of Transportation, 115 Hawai' i 299, 167 P.3d 292 
(2007). 
During a meeting held by the LUC on September 18, 2008,
 
commissioners expressed concern that annual progress reports
 submitted by Bridge in 2005, 2006, and 2007 showed “no activity”
 with respect to the conditions imposed by the 1991 decision and
 order, as amended in 2005. Specifically, Commissioner Lisa M.
 Judge stated:
 
I mean it’s clear they have not, I believe, or we have
reason to believe, that they’re failing to perform on the
condition that was imposed, specifically this affordable
housing condition.
 
I would say that the Commission should issue an Order
to Show Cause to say why the property classification -- that
the property should not revert to its former land use
classification.
 
I would set forth a motion that the Commission issue
 
an Order to Show Cause why the petition area should not
revert to its former classification or more appropriate
 
-12­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
classification.
 
The LUC voted 6-0 to issue an OSC. 
On October 2, 2008, Bridge submitted to the LUC its
 
annual progress report for 2008. In the report, Bridge stated
 that it “was proceeding with its efforts to develop and complete
 the affordable housing units,” but that “progress has been set
 back by the determination by the [Planning Director of the County
 of Hawai' i] that an accepted EIS will be required before the 
Planning Department accepts the Project District Application for
 review and processing and by the denial of the [Nonsignificant
 Zoning Change Application], presently on appeal with the Board of
 Appeals.” 
On December 9, 2008, the LUC issued an OSC, pursuant to
 
1 HRS § 205-4(g), and HAR § 15-15-93 (2000),
2
 
1 HRS § 205-4(g) provides:
 
Within a period of not more than three hundred sixty-five
days after the proper filing of a petition, unless otherwise
ordered by a court, or unless a time extension, which shall
not exceed ninety days, is established by a two-thirds vote
of the members of the commission, the commission, by filing
findings of fact and conclusions of law, shall act to
approve the petition, deny the petition, or to modify the
petition by imposing conditions necessary to uphold the
intent and spirit of this chapter or the policies and
criteria established pursuant to section 205-17 or to assure
substantial compliance with representations made by the
petitioner in seeking a boundary change. The commission may
provide by condition that absent substantial commencement of
use of the land in accordance with such representations, the
commission shall issue and serve upon the party bound by the
condition an order to show cause why the property should not
revert to its former land use classification or be changed
to a more appropriate classification.  Such conditions, if
any, shall run with the land and be recorded in the bureau
of conveyances.
 
(continued...)
 
-13­   
 2     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1(...continued)
 
(Emphasis added).
 
HAR § 15-15-93 provided:
 
(a) Any party or interested person may file a motion with
the commission requesting an issuance of an order to show
cause upon a showing that there has been a failure to
perform a condition, representation, or commitment on the
part of the petitioner.  The party or person shall also
serve a copy of the motion for an order to show cause upon
any person bound by the condition, representation, or
commitment.  The motion for order to show cause shall state:
 
(1) The interest of the movant;
 
(2) The reasons for filing the motion;
 (3) A description and a map of the property 
affected by the condition;
 
(4) The condition ordered by the commission 
which has not been performed or satisfied;
 
(5) Concisely and with particularity the facts, 
supported by an affidavit, giving rise to a 
belief that a condition ordered by the 
commission has not been performed or satisfied; 
and
 
(6) The specific relief requested.
 
(b) Whenever the commission shall have reason to believe
that there has been a failure to perform according to the
conditions imposed, or the representations or commitments
made by the petitioner, the commission shall issue and serve
upon the party or person bound by the conditions,
representations, or commitments, an order to show cause why
the property should not revert to its former land use
classification or be changed to a more appropriate
classification.   The commission shall serve the order to
 
show cause in writing by registered or certified mail with
return receipt requested at least thirty days before the
hearing.  A copy shall be also sent to all parties in the
boundary amendment proceedings.  The order to show cause
 shall include:
 
(1) A statement of the date, time, place, and
nature of the hearing;
 
(2) A description and a map of the property to 
be affected;
 
(3)
 A statement of the legal authority under 
(continued...)
 
-14­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
why the land “should not revert to its former land use
 
classification or be changed to a more appropriate
 classification.” The LUC stated that it had reason to believe
 that Bridge and its predecessors in interest had “failed to
 perform according to the conditions imposed and to the
 representations and commitments made to [the LUC] in obtaining
 reclassification of the Subject Area and in obtaining amendments
 to conditions of reclassification.” Specifically, the LUC noted
 the following:
 
1. Condition 1a and 1b of the Findings of Fact, Conclusions
of Law and Decision and Order, dated July 9, 1991, as
amended on November 25, 2005 (“Decision & Order”) requires
Petitioner, by November 17, 2010, to provide no fewer than
385 affordable housing units within the Petition Area that
meet or exceed all applicable County of Hawaii affordable
housing standards and substantially comply with
 
2(...continued)
which
 the hearing is to be held;
 
(4) The specific sections of the statutes, or
rules, or both, involved; and
 
(5) A statement that any party may retain 
counsel if the party so desires.
 
(c) The commission shall conduct a hearing on an order to
show cause in accordance with the requirements of subchapter
7, where applicable.  Any procedure in an order to show
cause hearing may be modified or waived by stipulation of
the parties and informal disposition may be made in any case
by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order, or
default.
 
(d) Post hearing procedures shall conform to subchapter 7 or
subchapter 9.  Decisions and orders shall be issued in
 accordance with subchapter 7 or subchapter 9.
 
(e) The commission shall amend its decision and order to
incorporate the order to show cause by including the
reversion of the property to its former land use
classification or to a more appropriate classification.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
-15­   
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
representations made to the Commission.
 
2. Condition 1c of the Decision & Order requires Petitioner
to submit to the Commission by November 17, 2006: 1) the
Project’s signed joint venture agreement, and 2) a mass
grading contract.
 
3. Petitioner has represented that the infrastructure and
concrete pad for the affordable housing portion of the
Project will be the first part of the Project to be
constructed, thereby enabling the market units and the
affordable housing units to be constructed concurrently.
 
4. Petitioner has committed to building the Project’s
affordable units instead of paying an in-lieu fee to the
County of Hawaii.
 
5. Petitioner represented that all contracts with the
general contractor, subcontractors and other construction
related consultants have been fully negotiated and will be
executed within 30 days following the Commission’s decision
[in November 2005].
 
6. Petitioner has represented that no additional
discretionary governmental approvals remain outstanding,
with the sole exception of the highway access approval by
the State Department of Transportation.
 
(Brackets in original).
 
The LUC held a hearing on the OSC on January 9, 2009.3
 
During the hearing, several Commissioners expressed concern over
 
the project’s lack of progress. For example, Commissioner Judge
 stated the following:
 
And in 2005 the Petitioner promised to provide 385
affordable housing units to the Kona community within three
years.  They promised that the development would providejobs and the very much needed workforce housing for WestHawai'i. 
. . . .
 
Unfortunately, here we are today and there are no
affordable homes on that development.  Worse yet, there’s
 
3
 In the meantime, Bridge had filed another motion to amend the
 
affordable housing condition.  In this motion, Bridge requested that the
affordable housing condition be amended to require Bridge to provide up to one
hundred workforce housing units within three years of the filing of the
amended condition.  Bridge subsequently withdrew this motion. 
-16­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
not even a glimmer of them coming any time soon.  There’s no
 
building permits, there’s no infrastructure.
 
But the real cause or the real reason that we are here
 
today
 I think is much bigger.  It’s a much larger issue. 
Because in my mind the hearing for the Order to Show Cause
is when I looked back this petition started back in November
25th, 1987, more than 20 years ago when the first
Petitioner, Signal Puako Corporation, filed their district
boundary [] amendment petition.
 
. . . . 
So the affordable housing condition in my mind is
reall
y just the straw that broke the camel’s back.  The
 
real[] reason I made the Motion for the Order to Show Cause
is there’s a state statu[t]e, [HRS § 205-4(g)] that states
that, “The Commission may provide by condition that absent
substantial commencement of use of the land in accordance
 with such representations the Commission shall issue and
serve upon the party bound by the condition an Order to Show
Cause why the property should not revert to its former land
use classification or be changed to a more appropriate
classification.”
 
So in my mind there’s been 20 years that have gone by
and nothing has happened.  There were representations made
 to the community.  There are several conditions attached to
 those decision and orders.
 
. . . . 
So in my mind it’s not only the affordable housing
condi
tion that needs to be amended.  In my mind it’s every
condition needs to be revisited, discussed and amended.
  
Then a decision can be made.
 
The LUC ultimately continued the hearing. In closing,
 
the LUC chairman stated the following:
 
During this period the Petitioner is urged to prepare
and present an updated description of its projects with
timetables and critical paths, and to review the existing
LUC conditions and commitments, and to determine whether a
further motion is necessary in order to obtain relief from
conditions that cannot be met, and, if necessary, to request
changes to conditions necessary to harmonize the Project
with the LUC conditions.
 
In February 2009, Bridge informed the LUC that it
 
intended to assign “all of its right, title, and interest” in the
 
land to DW through an installment sale. DW, in turn, filed a
 
-17­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
petition to be a co-petitioner with Bridge or, alternatively, to
 
be given party status or to intervene. 
The LUC resumed the hearing on the OSC on April 30,
 
2009. For purposes of the hearing, Bridge was treated as the
 sole petitioner. DW did not participate in the hearing because
 the LUC had not yet ruled on DW’s request to be a co-petitioner. 
During the hearing, the County Planning Department argued that
 “the current Urban District designation is appropriate and that
 the public interest would be best served by allowing [Bridge] to
 maintain its current classification.” The State Office of
 Planning argued, however, that “reversion of the property to its
 original classification of Agriculture would be appropriate under
 the facts and circumstances of this case.” Specifically, the
 State Office of Planning argued the following:
 
The issue today is whether the Petitioner has complied
with their representations in developing the property and
whether they are able to build [385] affordable units on
site and obtain Certificates of Occupancy by November 2010.
 
In our view they have not developed in accordance with
their representations. . . . 
Our only comments would be that in our view the change
in ownership is irrelevant to the initial and only question
which is whether they will be able to comply with the
condition.
 
We would not support any change, any amendment, any
extension.  This matter has gone on for many years.  You may
remember that the affordable housing requirement was amended
to reduce those requirements in 2005.  That amendment, that
reduction in the requirements was based upon a variety of
representations.  
In order to preserve the integrity of this process we
cannot allow developers to come back before you repeatedly
each time they cannot comply with those representations,
each time they cannot comply with a condition and simply ask
 
-18­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that a condition be changed or removed.
 
At the end of the hearing, the LUC voted 7-0 to revert
 
the land to agricultural use. DW then moved to stay entry of
 
decision and order on the LUC’s April 30 action, pending
 consideration of additional evidence. In its motion, DW argued
 that its evidence included “facts that were not available to the
 Land Use Commission at the April 30, 2009 meeting and include[d]
 certain key facts which [would] allow the development to proceed
 and which [would] allow fulfillment of the affordable housing
 condition applicable to this docket.” 
On June 5, 2009, the LUC took under advisement DW’s
 
request to be a co-petitioner, granted DW’s motion to stay entry
 of a decision and order on the OSC, and decided to schedule a
 one-day hearing for the submission of additional evidence on the
 OSC. Bridge filed a motion to rescind the OSC, arguing that it
 had made “substantial commencement of use of the land.” 
The LUC held the one-day evidentiary hearing on
 
August 27, 2009. Bridge designated DW as its agent for purposes
 of presenting evidence on the progress of the project and
 compliance with the decision and order of the LUC. During the
 hearing, DW’s president, Robert Wessels, testified that DW and
 Bridge were prepared to close on the sale of approximately 61
 acres of the 1,060 acre parcel for the development of the
 affordable housing units. Wessels explained that grading of this
 
-19­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
site had begun, and that a second access road to the site had
 
been prepared so that infrastructure work and construction of the
 townhouses could occur simultaneously. Wessels explained that a
 “package” sewage treatment plant would be used for the affordable
 housing units. 
During cross-examination by the State Office of
 
Planning, the following exchange occurred:
 
Q: Mr. Wessels, you are familiar with the requirements
for a certificate of occupancy? 
A: Yes, I am. 
Q: In order to get a certificate of occupancy do you knowwhether or not you need to have a working electricalhookup? 
A: I believe you do, yes.  You have to meet the life safety standards.  And electrical would be one of the requirements. 
Q: You would also need to have sewage hookup, correct? 
A: That’s correct. 
Q: You would also need to have the water hookup, correct? 
A: Yes. 
Q: And you would need to have access to the road such asQueen Ka 'ahumanu Highway, correct? 
A: That’s correct. 
Q: You would need all of that before a certificate of occupancy could be issued, correct? 
A: That’s correct. 
And later, the following exchange occurred:
 
Q:	 Your current construction plan would have the vertical
construction [i.e., townhouse construction] going on
while horizontal construction [i.e., infrastructure
construction] is continuing, is that right?
 
A:	 That’s correct.
 
-20­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Q: Would the vertical construction begin before the
infrastructure connections to that pad or that pod iscompleted? 
A: Yes.  It has to in order to meet the schedule. 
Q: So you build the house before you have a connection tothe sewer, water, and electrical lines. 
A: That’s correct. 
In response to questions from the commissioners, Wessel
 
testified that DW had already spent approximately $4.5 million on
 
the project. The following exchange also occurred:
 
COMMISSIONER WONG:	 Another question.  On the affordable
 
housi
ng, once you start vertical
construction how many homes would
you be able to build say, per month?
 
A:	 We ar
e starting 32 houses a month,
basically.  And as we build to begin
with, we build so we will be
delivering and finishing roughly 30­40 houses a month, roughly one[­]and-a-half a day.
 
COMMISSIONER WONG:	 
So let us say by March 31st how many
homes would you be able to finish,
31st of next year?
 
A:	 (off 
mic) By the 31st of March
according to our schedule we had
roughly 32 units.
 
CHAIRMAN PLITZ:	 
Could you repeat that with the
mic[?]
 
A:	 Yes. 
 According to our construction
schedule as lined out we will have
 one pad completed by the 31st of
March, which is 32 town homes.
 
By a 6-3 vote, the LUC rescinded and vacated the OSC
 
“provided that as a condition precedent, [Bridge] completes 16
 
affordable units by March 31, 2010. Further, that the County of
 Hawai'i shall provide quarterly reports to the [LUC] in 
connection with the status of [Bridge’s] progress in complying
 
-21­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
with this condition.” The LUC also voted 8-1 to accept DW as a
 
co-petitioner. The LUC issued a written order rescinding the OSC
 and accepting DW as co-petitioner. 
On December 16, 2009, the LUC received DW’s annual
 
report. The report detailed how DW was progressing on satisfying
 each of the conditions. With respect to the affordable housing
 condition, the report provided the following:
 
DW Aina Le 'a Development, LLC (“DW”) is working to
satisfy condition 1.  As previously reported to the
Commission in the Commission’s hearing in the docket earlier
this year, DW subdivided a portion of the Petition area
(Parcel D-1-B) in which the initial affordable housing units
will be built as part of Phase 1.  Phase 1 involves the
 construction of fifty four (54) 8 unit multiple family
structures.  Two structures will be located on each of 27
 
pads.  The individual units which will be provided to meet
the affordable housing requirements will be either three
bedroom units or four bedroom units.  DW has previously
submitted to the Commission its financing commitments for
Phase 1.
 
Not less than 385 of these units will conform to the
 
affordable housing requirements in the affordable housing
agreement with the County Office of Housing Agency.  The
 actual number of affordable housing units may be increased
to conform to County of Hawaii affordable housing
requirements.
 
The Phase 1 scheduling is designed to produce
certificates of occupancy for the 385 Phase 1 affordable
housing units by November 17, 2010.
 
DW has entered into a joint development agreement with
Bridge Aina Le 'a LLC which provides the development with
rights to access over the agriculturally classified land,
rights to obtain water for the Project and to establish a
school site acceptable to the State Department of Education
on Bridge Aina Le 'a’s agriculturally classified land. 
DW has a mass grading and design build contract with
Goodfellow Brothers which has been previously submitted to
the Commission.  The grading plans for Phase 1 were approved
by the County Department of Public Works and appropriate
grading permits were issued.  Mass grading has been ongoing
to create the building sites and the access roads.  Although
the grading plan review and approval process took longer
than DW initially anticipated, mass grading design drawings
for the affordable units are 90% complete and all required
 
-22­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
permits have been obtained to allow grading to proceed.
Schedule adjustments are being made to allow the Project to
retain its schedule.
 
The following has been completed:
 
a.	 About 90% of the mass grading for the affordable
housing townhouse sites has been completed;
 
b.	 Finish grading for 18 affordable housing
foundation pads is complete (foundation slabs
are scheduled to begin in mid-December 2009);
 
c.	 The immediate access roadway has been graded;
 
d.	 About 80% of the internal roadways have been
graded;
 
e.	 The initial engineering for the roads and
utilities has been completed;
 
f.	 The water supply tank sites and service
corridors have been identified;
 
g.	 Improvements have been made to the existing
water well and a 750,000 gallon collection
reservoir for dust control during construction
has been built;
 
h.	 The necessary utility easements have been
identified and topographic maps have been
completed (Installation of site utilities to
begin about 1/1/2010);
 
i.	 Plan Approval by the Planning Department for the
affordable housing component was issued on
November 30, 2009;
 
j.	 Groundbreaking for the affordable housing phase
was held on September 22, 2009;
 
All necessary permits, including vertical construction
permits for the affordable housing site have been prepared
and were recently submitted.  DW is working with the County
to [ensure] that the applications for permits will be
processed to meet the development schedule.
 
DW is working with the Office of Housing and Community
Development on the terms of the affordable housing
agreement.  The affordable housing units will be in
buildings which have 16 units in each pad area.  The 25 pad
areas will accordingly produce 400 units of which at least
385 will be affordable housing units.  For the affordable
 housing units, the mix will be 289 three bedroom units and
96 four bedroom units.  A revised affordable housing
agreement was presented to the Office of Housing for its
review and approval.  The affordable housing units will be
fee simple condominium units.  DW is processing [sic] to
create the condominium units so that specific affordable
housing units can be identified for the affordable housing
agreement.
 
On May 4, 2010, the State Office of Planning submitted
 
a letter to the LUC commenting on DW’s progress. With respect to
 
-23­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the condition precedent that sixteen units be completed by March
 
31, 2010, the letter noted that “any vertical construction which
 occurred was not accompanied by any utility connections, and the
 units cannot be occupied. The Commission has not addressed
 whether a unit which has no electricity, water, sewage connection
 or roadway infrastructure can be deemed ‘complete.’” The State
 Office of Planning further noted that DW was behind schedule in
 seeking approval of the EIS, and that the EIS needed to be
 approved before DW could secure approval for required road
 improvements and installation of the wastewater treatment plant. 
The State Office of Planning also stated that Capital
 
Asia Group, one of the investors in the project, was using a
 “troubling advertisement” guaranteeing a thirty percent return on
 investment over the course of thirty months. The State Office of
 Planning explained that the advertisement was troubling because
 “it indicates that financing is likely not secure.” 
The LUC visited the construction site on May 6, 2010. 
The following month, the LUC mailed a letter to DW, requesting a
 written status report in preparation for a hearing scheduled for
 July 1, 2010. The LUC requested that DW comment on the status of
 its compliance with the condition precedent that sixteen units be
 completed by March 31, 2010, and to address the concerns raised
 by the State Office of Planning in its May 4, 2010 letter. The
 LUC also asked DW to provide an update on its compliance with
 
-24­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
each of the conditions under the 1991 decision and order, as
 
amended in 2005. 
The LUC received DW’s status report on June 14, 2010. 
In its report, DW stated the following:
 
DW understood the requirement to be that it needed to
complete construction of at least 16 of the affordable
housing units by March 31, 2010.  Since these units are in 8
 unit buildings, this required the completion of construction
of two buildings.
 
DW completed the first two buildings with 8 affordable
housing units each by March 31, 2010.  These buildings have
 completed exteriors and interiors.  The electrical and
 plumbing for the units in these buildings is completed and
ready to hook up.  The units have cabinets and appliances
 installed.
 
. . . . 
The condition precedent did not require that DW obtain
certificat
es of occupancy for the 16 affordable units by
March 31, 2010.  The presentation to the Commission and the
proceedings on August 27, 2009 show that it was understood
construction work would be proceeding even if the
certificates of occupancy could not be obtained until a
later time.
 
DW had submitted to the Commission its schedules for
 
construction of the . . . 385 affordable housing units
required by Condition 1 of the Decision and Order filed on
November 25, 2005.  Those schedules described the site work
 needed to create access to building sites, the establishment
of the building pads for the structures for the affordable
housing units and the vertical construction of the
structures.
 
. . . . 
I had submitted a July 30, 2009 status report in
respo
nse to your July 10, 2009 letter for a status report on
how Petitioners would comply with conditions for
reclassification.  The July 30, 2009 status report included
a Phase 1 schedule for vertical construction of Phase 1[.] 
In the status report, I had indicated “[t]he goal for Phase
1 is to obtain occupancy permits for the affordable housing
units by November 17, 2010[.]”
 
The condition was imposed after the Commissioners had
expressed concerns over the lack of action to implement
representations made by prior owners in the past. The
 imposition of the condition precedent was a means of holding
DW to actually constructing affordable housing improvements.
  
-25­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Given the testimony that was submitted before the Commission
imposed its condition precedent, the record showed that a
number of facts, including the completion of this EIS
process and the approval of Queen Kaahumanu Highway
intersection and wastewater treatment plans would be needed
. . . before occupancy permits could be obtained.
 
DW’s plans as presented to the Commission were to
start with construction of the affordable housing units as
soon as appropriate grading and building permits were
obtained and not to wait for the EIS, intersection plan or
wastewater treatment plant approvals.
 
DW believes that it has complied with the condition
precedent and has demonstrated by actions its commitment to
proceed with this project.  As noted below, DW has not
limited its construction efforts to these two buildings. 
The site grading for all of the Phase 1 building is
completed. . . . DW has also had 5 more buildings erected
which are under construction. . . . Other efforts by DW to
further work on this project are also described below.
 
To da
te, DW and its contractors have spent more than
$19,000,000 in proceedings with this project.
 
During the July 1, 2010 hearing, Commissioners
 
expressed concern that DW had not yet secured title to the
 
remaining 1,000 acres of land, the lack of communication with the
 LUC, and the availability of financing for the project. The
 State Office of Planning also stated that it was concerned
 because the condition precedent was not satisfied, the EIS was
 behind schedule, the pace of construction had slowed, the
 representations made by Capital Asia were problematic, the
 failure to provide the LUC with notice of changes in ownership,
 Bridge’s continuing interest in the project, and November 17,
 2010 should be considered a deadline, not a goal. 
At the end of the hearing, Commissioner Devens moved to
 
keep the OSC pending, to schedule a hearing on or after
 September 17, 2010 to consider the OSC, to affirm that
 
-26­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
November 17, 2010 was a deadline, and that the condition
 
precedent had not been satisfied. The motion passed by a vote of
 8-0. The LUC also issued a written order finding that DW had
 failed to meet the condition precedent for rescinding the OSC. 
On August 31, 2010, DW filed a motion to amend
 
conditions 1, 5, and 7. Specifically, DW moved to amend the
 affordable housing condition to allow it to complete “the minimum
 385 affordable housing units on the following schedule: 190 units
 by December 31, 2011, 195 units by December 31, 2012”; to modify
 condition 5 “to allow the waste water treatment plant which will
 service the entire project to be located outside the urban
 classified area”; and to amend condition 7 “to require either
 that [DW] provide to the State Department of Education (“DOE”) 16
 acres of land within the urban classified area for a public
 school or provide to DOE 32 acres of land outside the urban
 classified area at such location and upon such terms as are
 acceptable to DW and to the DOE.” The County Planning Department
 took no position on DW’s motion, the State Office of Planning
 opposed the motion, and Bridge concurred in the motion, but
 argued that the LUC should “eliminate any artificial, arbitrary
 ‘deadlines,’ and instead base [the affordable housing condition]
 upon a revised development schedule that reasonably and credibly
 reflects demand, absorption, and financing in the current
 market.” DW later submitted a supporting exhibit, i.e., a letter
 
-27­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
from the County Planning Department indicating that it had
 
accepted the final EIS for the project. 
DW later moved to amend its motion. Specifically, DW
 
sought to have condition 1 amended to read as follows:
 
a.	 A requirement that an updated master plan covering all
5 phases of the development be submitted to the Land
Use Commission (hereinafter referred to as “LUC”) for
its review and approval;
 
b.	 That the phasing be adjusted to be consistent with the
current requirements of the LUC.  The phasing
requirements would therefore be adjusted to fit within
10 year development periods.  The phasing would also
include requirements that infrastructure benefitting
more that one phase be completed before development of
later phases which would be dependent on when such
infrastructure can begin;
 
c.	 That DW Aina Le’a will continue to complete the
affordable housing units in Phase I and related
infrastructure as the priority of the development.  DW
 Aina Le’a will not proceed with the development of
units after Phase I until the updated Master Plan has
been reviewed and approved by the LUC and the first 56
affordable housing units have been completed and the
affordable housing sales program has been started, DW
Aina Le’a will maintain its sales program for such
units and will continue to build affordable housing
units so as to maintain an inventory of such units for
sale to qualified residents with a minimum inventory
of 16 units; and
 
d.	 The current conditions of approval would be amended to
be consistent with the current practices and
requirements of the LUC.
 
On November 12, 2010, Bridge filed a motion requesting 
an order providing the following: (1) the LUC shall not act on
 
the OSC scheduled on the agenda for November 18, 2010; (2) the
 LUC is required to strictly follow HRS Chapter 91, HRS Chapter
 92, HRS Chapter 205, and Hawai' i Administrative Rules (HAR) 
Chapter 15 with respect to the OSC; (3) the OSC is null and void
 because the LUC did not follow the applicable statutes and rules;
 
-28­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and (4) the LUC is estopped from proceeding with or taking any
 
further action on the matters set forth in the OSC. DW joined
 Bridge’s motion. 
The following week, the LUC held a hearing on the OSC. 
Due to “the limited number of Commissioners available,” however,
 the LUC heard “evidence and argument on the Show Cause Order,”
 but deferred ruling on the order. 
The State Office of Planning then filed a motion for an
 
OSC. The Office of Planning argued that Bridge and DW “clearly
 violated the LUC’s terms and conditions,” and that “[i]n order to
 preserve the integrity of LUC decisions and the LUC decision-
making process, Petitioner must be held accountable, and must
 come forward to explain why the Petition Area should not be
 reclassified to its former more appropriate classification.” 
The LUC scheduled a January 20, 2011 hearing on the
 
OSC, Bridge’s November 12, 2010 motion, the State Office of
 Planning’s motion, and Bridge’s August 31, 2010 motion to amend. 
Following the hearing, the LUC voted 5-3 to revert the property
 to the agricultural land use district. The LUC also voted 8-0 to
 deny as moot the State Office of Planning’s motion for an OSC,
 and Bridge’s November 12, 2010 motion. The LUC did not rule on
 DW’s motion to amend. 
On February 17, 2011, DW submitted a request for a
 
hearing on its motion to amend. On the same day, DW also
 
-29­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
submitted a request to comment on any proposed findings of fact
 
and conclusions of law. The LUC scheduled a March 10, 2011
 hearing on the adoption of proposed findings of fact, conclusions
 of law, and decision and order, and on the motion to amend. 
The day before the hearing, DW moved for a continuance. 
During the hearing, the LUC voted 6-2 to adopt the proposed
 findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision and order,
 with amendments.
4 By a 6-2 vote, the LUC also granted a
 
continuance on DW’s motion to amend. 
On March 17, 2011, DW filed a motion to reconsider and
 
to defer entry of final findings of fact, conclusions of law, and
 decision and order. Bridge joined DW’s motion. The State Office
 of Planning took no position on the motion. 
Following a hearing on April 8, 2011, the LUC deferred
 
acting on DW’s motion to reconsider, and deferred acting on the
 proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision and
 order. During a subsequent hearing, Commissioner Kanuha moved to
 grant in part and deny in part DW’s motion to amend. 
Commissioner Kanuha’s motion was defeated 3-5. With respect to
 DW’s motion to reconsider and defer entry of final findings of
 fact, conclusions of law, and decision and order, the LUC voted
 5-3 to deny the motion. The LUC also voted 6-2 to adopt the
 
4
 Bridge subsequently filed exceptions and objections to the
 
proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision and order, and
filed its own proposed findings, conclusions, and decision.  DW also filed
 exceptions to the proposed findings, conclusions, and decision and order.  
-30­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision and
 
order, with amendments. Finally, on May 13, 2011, the LUC voted
 6-0 to deny DW’s motion to amend. 
On April 25, 2011, the LUC entered an order adopting
 
the proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision
 and order. The LUC made the following relevant findings of fact:
 
G. Violations
 
57. As of November 17, 2010, Petitioners had failed to
provide certificates of occupancy for at least 385
affordable dwelling units, and violated Condition 1 of the
2005 Order.
 
58. As of January 20, 2011, over 22 years since the
reclassification was first granted, Petitioners had failed
to obtain a certificate of occupancy for even one affordable
dwelling unit within the Petition Area.
 
59. Of the 385 affordable dwelling units, Petitioners have
approximately 40 dwelling units in various stages of
vertical construction all in the same area.
 
60. There is no infrastructure connection to any of the
affordable dwelling units, including electrical lines,
sewage lines, water lines, and finished roads.  Current
 construction and preliminary infrastructure development has
been limited to a 62-acre portion of the 1,060 acre Petition
Area, including temporary access roads.
 
61. As of July 1, 2010, Petitioners owed approximately 5.5
million dollars to the General Contractor, Goodfellow
Brothers for work previously done.
 
62. Petitioners continue to be in violation of Condition 1
 
of the 2005 Order, and are unlikely to complete 385
affordable units in the near future.
 
63. Petitioners have not substantially commenced use of the
Petition Area in conformance with the representations made
in 2005 or in conformance with the applicable
representations and conditions as of January 20, 2011. 
Furthermore, Petitioners have failed to substantially comply
with representations made to the Commission.
 
64. Through multiple status hearings and the issuance of the
December 9, 2008 Order to Show Cause, the Commission has
clearly informed Petitioners of the importance of complying
with their representations and all conditions of approval,
including but not limited to Conditions 1 and 13.
 
-31­   
 
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
65. It is important to the integrity of the State land use
process that Petitioners comply with the conditions imposed
by the Commission and with the representations made by the
Petitioners.
 
66. Under the facts and circumstances of this case,
Petitioners have failed to show cause why the Petition Area
should not be reverted to its original classification. 
Petitioners have continually violated Condition 13, which
requires them to substantially comply with representations
made to the Commission, including but not limited to the
following:
 
• On September 30, 2005, Mr. Paoa represented that
Petitioner Bridge would build 385 affordable housing units
on-site within the Petition Area (2005 Order, FOF 9); that
the homes would be built and certificates of occupancy
obtained within three years (2005 Order, FOF 12); that no
additional discretionary governmental approvals were needed,
with the sole exception of the highway access approval (2005
Order FOP 26); and that all Petitioner Bridge’s contracts
with contractors and consultants have been negotiated and
would be executed and construction site work started within
 30 days of the Commission’s decision (2005 Order, FOF 24 and
25).
 
• On April 30, 2009, Petitioner Bridge represented the
capabilities, particularly the experience and financialcapability of DW 'Aina Le 'a to step into Bridge’s shoes and
meet all the conditions the Commission had set down. Further, Mr. Paoa represented that Petitioner Bridge had thecapabilities to meet the timeline for construction of theaffordable housing. 
• On June 5, 2009, in response to a question by the
Commission prior to being accepted as a co-petitioner, arepresentative of DW 'Aina Le 'a represented that they had
reviewed the conditions imposed by the Commission and thatthey were prepared to comply with the conditions. The representative of DW 'Aina Le 'a also represented that they
had no intent to seek to amend conditions in the 2005 Order. 
• On August 27, 2009, Mr. Wessels, a representative of DW
'Aina Le 'a, represented that DW 'Aina Le 'a was familiar with 
the Commission’s July 10, 2009 letter to Petitioner Bridgerequesting information on compliance with conditions, thesubsequent response letter by Petitioner Bridge on July 30,2009, DW 'Aina Le 'a’s response letter on July 31, 2009, and 
that DW 'Aina Le 'a was prepared to comply with the conditions
imposed by the Commission in their 2005 Decision and Order. 
• On December 16, 2009, Co-Petitioner DW 'Aina Le 'a submitted 
an annual report that represented that all necessary
permits, including vertical construction permits for theaffordable housing site had been prepared and recentlysubmitted; that they planned to construct the wastewatertreatment plant in the Agricultural District which wouldrequire a State Special Permit and amendments to the 
-32­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conditions; that they intend to provide 32 acres in the
Agricultural District to the Department of Education which
would require amendments to the conditions; that they would
comply with DOH conditions; and that they will provide the
Commission with notice of any intent to sell, lease, assign,
place in trust, or otherwise voluntarily alter the ownership
interest of the Property.
 
• On November 18, 2010, Co-Petitioner DW 'Aina Le 'a admitted 
not meeting a deadline by a “very major amount” in reference
to the requirement to provide certificates of occupancy for385 affordable units by November 17, 2010; and furtheradmitted that they could not provide a firm date by whichthe 16 units that had been constructed could be occupied. 
• On November 18, 2010, in response to questioning by the
Commission, Co-Petitioner DW 'Aina Le 'a represented that
condominium documents had not been submitted, the packagewastewater treatment plant had not been delivered and plansnot submitted to the State Department of Health for reviewand approval, no application had been made to the PublicUtilities Commission for approval of wastewater or waterutilities, no plans for landscaping had been submitted forreview and approval by the County, and Co-Petitioner DW Leahad not authorized anything to facilitate the constructionof the intersection to provide access to the Property. 
The LUC also made the following conclusions of law:
 
1. Any conclusions of law herein improperly designated as a
finding of fact should be deemed and construed as a
conclusion of law; any finding of fact herein improperly
designated as a conclusion of law should be deemed and
construed as a finding of fact.
 
2. The Commission has the authority to revert a Petition
Area to its original land use classification for failure tocomply with the conditions imposed by the Commission. Lana'i Co. Inc. v. Land Use Commission, 105 Hawai 'i 296, 318 
(Haw. 2004), and HRS Section 205-4(g). 
3. Under the facts and circumstances of this case,
Petitioners have failed to satisfy Condition 1 and have
failed to substantially comply with representations made to
the Commission, in violation of Condition 13.
 
4. Under the facts and circumstances of this case, reversion
of the Petition Area to its original agriculturalclassification does not violate any applicable rule orstatutory provisions,including Hawai 'i Administrative Rules (HAR) subchapter 7 of
Chapter 15-15, and HRS Chapters 91, 92, and 205. 
5. The Commission does not rule upon questions of
constitutional law.
 
6. Under the facts and circumstances of this case, reversion
 
-33­    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of the Petition Area to its original agricultural
classification for violation of conditions, including
Condition 1 and Condition 13, is not precluded by the
doctrine of estoppel.
 
The LUC therefore ordered that the property be reverted
 
to its prior agricultural land use classification. 
B. Circuit court proceedings
 
Bridge appealed the LUC’s order to the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit (Civil No. 11-1-0969-5), and DW appealed to the
 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Civil No. 11-1-0112K). The
 parties later stipulated to transfer venue of Bridge’s appeal
 to the Third Circuit, where the two appeals were consolidated.
5
 
DW filed a motion to stay the LUC’s April 25, 2011
 
order. DW argued it was likely that it would prevail on the
 merits, it would sustain irreparable harm absent a stay, and the
 public interest would be served by a stay. The circuit court
 denied DW’s motion to stay. The circuit court concluded that the
 LUC had not violated HRS § 205-4(h) because the reversion was
 made pursuant to HRS § 205-4(g), but that there was insufficient
 evidence to determine whether DW would prevail on its argument
 that the LUC had violated HRS § 205-4(g). The circuit court also
 concluded that it could not assess the merits of DW’s vested
 rights, estoppel, and constitutional arguments. The circuit
 court further concluded that the threat of irreparable harm was
 
5
 The parties also stipulated to dismissing without prejudice all 
claims against the State of Hawai 'i Office of State Planning, County of 
Hawai'i, and County of Hawai 'i Planning Department. 
-34­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
speculative, and that it could not determine whether the public
 
interest would be served by a stay. The LUC filed a motion to
 strike a portion of the record on appeal. Specifically, the LUC
 sought an order:
 
striking that portion of the Designation of Record on Appeal
designating the following dockets as part of the record on
appeal:  Land Use Commission dockets: “A93-701; Kaupulehu
Developments; A00-730, Lanihau Properties; A03-744,
Hiluhilu; A06-770, The Shopoff Group, L.P.; A06-767,
Waikaloa Mauka, LLC; and A10-788, HHFDC Forest City”.
 
In a memorandum in support of its motion, the LUC
 
argued that “[t]he additional 6 dockets designated by Appellant
 
are not part of the evidentiary record in [this case].” DW
 opposed the motion to strike, arguing that the additional dockets
 demonstrated that the LUC violated DW’s equal protection rights. 
DW also argued that the First Circuit Court had denied a
 substantially similar motion during Bridge’s appeal to that
 court. Specifically, Bridge had requested that documents from
 eighteen LUC cases be included in the record on appeal in the
 First Circuit Court, and the First Circuit Court denied the LUC’s
 motion to strike those documents. The Third Circuit Court denied
 the LUC’s motion to strike. 
Bridge made the following six main arguments in the
 
circuit court: (1) the LUC violated HRS Chapters 205 and 91; (2)
 “zoning estoppel” prevented the LUC from enforcing the boundary
 amendment; (3) the LUC violated its equal protection rights; (4)
 the affordable housing condition was an “unconstitutional land
 
-35­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
development condition”; (5) the LUC’s final order was not
 
supported by the record; and (6) the LUC violated its due process
 rights. 
DW raised the following six arguments: (1) the LUC’s 
final order violated HRS Chapter 205 and HAR Chapter 15-15; (2) the LUC exceeded its statutory authority in enforcing the affordable housing condition; (3) equitable estoppel barred the LUC from reverting the property to the agricultural land use district because DW’s development rights in the property were vested; (4) its equal protection rights under the United States and Hawai' i Constitutions were violated; (5) its procedural and 
substantive due process rights were violated under the United States and Hawai' i Constitutions; and (6) the reversion amounted 
to an unlawful taking under the United States and Hawai' i 
Constitutions. 
The LUC filed a consolidated answering brief, advancing
 
seven arguments.
6 Those arguments were that: (1) HRS § 205-4’s
 
requirements relating to district boundary amendments do not
 
apply to reversions; (2) the affordable housing condition was
 
6 The County Planning Department also filed an answering brief.  The
 
County Planning Department explained that it relied on the LUC’s
reclassification of the land in adopting a rezoning ordinance, granting
subdivision approval, and issuing building permits.  The County Planning
Department explained that the LUC’s reclassification of the property back to
the agricultural land use district “raises significant questions as to whether
the [County’s] rezoning action, pursuant to the January 8, 1993, Ordinance No.
93-1, amending the County’s Zoning Code for the project area from Unplanned to
Residential, Multi-Family, and Village Commercial uses, is still valid.”  The
 County Planning Department, however, did not suggest how the circuit court
should decide the case.
 
-36­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
constitutional; (3) Bridge’s and DW’s equal protection and due
 
process arguments were unfounded; (4) the doctrine of zoning
 estoppel did not apply because the classification was made
 subject to conditions; (5) its procedures were proper; (6) its
 decision was supported by the record and was neither arbitrary
 nor capricious; and (7) there was no unconstitutional taking. 
The circuit court entered its amended findings of fact,
 
conclusions of law, and order reversing and vacating the LUC’s
 final order on June 15, 2012. The circuit court did not address
 
individual findings of fact and conclusions of law in its order.
 
Instead, the circuit court’s order provided that the LUC’s April
 
25, 2011 order was “reversed and vacated in its entirety.” 
The circuit court first concluded that the LUC exceeded
 
its statutory authority and violated HRS Chapter 205. The
 circuit court explained that HRS Chapter 205 “granted the LUC
 authority to establish land use regulations for the major classes
 of uses and to establish the boundaries of the districts for
 these uses,” but that the “responsibility of enforcing the land
 use classification districts adopted by the LUC was expressly
 delegated to the counties.” The circuit court further noted that
 HRS Chapter 205 “expressly delegates the power to enforce land
 use conditions, and zoning, to the counties.” The circuit court
 therefore concluded that the LUC lacked “the authority to
 sanction Bridge and DW with reclassification of the Property to
 
-37­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the Agricultural land use district without consideration of the
 
factors required for land use district boundary changes pursuant
 to HRS §§ 205-16
[7] and 205-17[8] .” 
7
 Section 205-16 provides: “No amendment to any land use district
 
boundary nor any other action by the land use commission shall be adopted
unless such amendment or other action conforms to the Hawaii state plan.”  HRS
 § 205-16 (2001).
 
8	 Section 205-17 provides:
 In its review of any petition for reclassification of
district boundaries pursuant to this chapter, the commission
shall specifically consider the following:
 
(1) The extent to which the proposed reclassification
conforms to the applicable goals, objectives, and policies
of the Hawaii state plan and relates to the applicable
priority guidelines of the Hawaii state plan and the adopted
functional plans;
 
(2) The extent to which the proposed reclassification
conforms to the applicable district standards;
 
(3) The impact of the proposed reclassification on the
following areas of state concern:
 
(A) Preservation or maintenance of important natural
systems or habitats;
 
(B) Maintenance of valued cultural, historical, or
natural resources;
 
(C) Maintenance of other natural resources relevant to
Hawaii’s economy, including agricultural resources;
 
(D) Commitment of state funds and resources;
 
(E) Provision for employment opportunities and
economic development; and
 
(F) Provision for housing opportunities for all income
groups, particularly the low, low-moderate, and gap groups;
 (4) The standards and criteria for the reclassification or
rezoning of important agricultural lands in section 205-50;
 
(5) The county general plan and all community, development,
or community development plans adopted pursuant to the
county general plan, as they relate to the land that is the
subject of the reclassification petition; and
 
(6) The representations and commitments made by the
petitioner in securing a boundary change.
 
(continued...)
 
-38­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The circuit court expressly stated that it was not
 
concluding that the LUC could never impose specific dates and
 
benchmarks, only that “if the LUC is going to enforce these
 conditions, it must do so within a much broader context, and that
 context is found in HRS §§ 205-16 and -17.” In this regard, the
 circuit court noted that “one of the stated purposes of
 imposition of conditions under HRS Chapter 205 is to hold
 petitioners to their word of representations.” 
The circuit court next concluded that the LUC violated
 
HRS § 205-4(h). The circuit court explained that the LUC
 violated HRS § 205-4(h) by failing to “find upon the clear
 preponderance of the evidence that the proposed boundary is
 reasonable, not violative of HRS § 205-2 and part III of HRS
 Chapter 205, and consistent with the policies and criteria
 established pursuant to HRS §§ 205-16 and 205-17[,]” and “by
 failing to obtain six affirmative votes to amend the land use
 district boundary.” 
Third, the circuit court concluded that the LUC
 
violated HRS § 205-16 because “there are no findings of fact or
 conclusions of law in the Final Order, nor any evidence in the
 record, indicating that the LUC considered the Hawaii State
 Plan.” The circuit court next concluded the LUC also violated
 
8(...continued)
 
HRS §
 205-17 (Supp. 2008)
 
-39­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRS § 205-17 because it failed to consider the factors listed
 
therein. Fifth, the circuit court concluded that the LUC
 violated HRS § 205-4(g) because the OSC was not resolved within
 365 days of its issuance. 
The circuit court further concluded that the LUC
 
violated HRS Chapters 91 and 205, and HAR Chapter 15 based on
 improper procedures. Specifically, the circuit court concluded
 that “instead of following these statutes and rules, the LUC
 implemented a rolling and continuing OSC procedure that not only
 extended far beyond the 365-day period required by HRS § 205­4(g), but also ignored the required procedures, and created new
 procedures that were not already established.” 
Sixth, the circuit court concluded that the LUC
 
violated Bridge’s and DW’s procedural and substantive due process
 rights. The circuit court specifically noted “(1) [the LUC’s]
 rolling and continuing OSC that extended far beyond the time
 period allowed by law; (2) the LUC’s conduct that was in
 derogation of the statute and rules established to protect Bridge
 and DW; and (3) the LUC’s attempt to create a new procedure that
 was not already established.” The circuit court concluded that
 the LUC denied Bridge and DW their right to a meaningful
 opportunity to be heard, and that the final order was “arbitrary
 and unreasonable, having no substantial relation to the public
 health, safety, morals, or general welfare.” 
-40­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The circuit court also concluded that the LUC violated
 
Bridge’s and DW’s equal protection rights. The circuit court
 
explained that the LUC treated “Bridge, DW and this Project
 differently, and less favorably, than other petitioners in cases
 involving facts and circumstances substantially similar to this
 case.” The circuit court noted “at least six other major project
 dockets” where the LUC has taken no action to revert, even though
 “the petitioners have failed to fulfill their representations to
 the LUC; have failed to meet their projected development
 timeframes; and have failed to build any housing units, much less
 any affordable housing units.”
9
 
The circuit court reversed and vacated the LUC’s final
 
order in its entirety, declaring that the April 25, 2011 order,
 
violates constitutional and statutory provisions, exceeds
the LUC’s authority and jurisdiction, was made upon unlawful
procedures, was affected by other errors of law, was clearly
erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and
substantive evidence on the whole record, and was arbitrary,
capricious, or characterized by abuse of discretion or
clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.
 
Finally, the circuit court ordered that the OSC and all
 
other orders issued by the LUC that were inconsistent with the
 
circuit court’s decision were rescinded and voided. 
The circuit court entered an amended final judgment,
 
from which the LUC timely filed a notice of appeal. The ICA
 
9
 The circuit court did not reach the zoning estoppel and vested
 
rights arguments advanced by Bridge and DW, and they are not at issue on
appeal.  The circuit court also did not address DW’s unconstitutional taking
argument.  We therefore do not consider these arguments.
 
-41­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
dismissed the appeal for lack of jurisdiction, however, because 
the amended final judgment neither entered judgment on nor dismissed the administrative appeals as to the State Office of Planning, the County Planning Department, and the County of Hawai'i. The circuit court thereafter entered a second amended 
final judgment, which stated that all claims against the County of Hawai' i, the County of Hawai' i Planning Department, and the 
State Office of Planning had been dismissed, and the LUC timely filed a notice of appeal. 
The LUC timely filed an application for transfer of the
 
appeal from the ICA to this court, and Bridge filed a joinder to
 the LUC’s motion. This court granted the LUC’s application for
 transfer. 
On appeal, the LUC raises three points of error:
 
1.	 Haw. Rev. Stat. § 205-4(g) (2001) and Supreme Court
case law specifically affirm [the issuance of] “an
order to show cause why the property should not revert
to its former classification or be changed to a more
appropriate classification.”  The circuit court erred
 by ruling to the contrary[.]
 
. . . .
 
2.	 Haw. Rev. Stat. § 91-14(f) (2012) and Haw. Rev. Stat.
§ 91-9(e) (2012) provide that the court’s review
“shall be confined to the record.”  The circuit court
 erred by considering matters not part of the record.
 
. . . .
 
3. The circuit court erred in ruling in an agency appeal
— without any opportunity for presentation of evidence
and without regard to the right to trial by jury —
that the LUC and individual commissioners violated
 developers’ constitutional rights to equal protection
and due process.
 
. . . .
 
-42­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
II. Standard of Review
 
A. Secondary appeal
 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon its
review of an agency’s decision is a secondary appeal.  The
 standard of review is one in which this court must determine
 whether the circuit court was right or wrong in its
decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91–14(g)
. . . to the agency’s decision.
 
Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of City &
 
Cnty. of Honolulu, 114 Hawai' i 184, 193, 159 P.3d 143, 193 
(2007).
 
Section 91-14(g) provides the following:
 
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the decision
of the agency or remand the case with instructions for
further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:
 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions;
or
 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of
the agency; or
 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
 (4) Affected by other error of law; or
 (5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative,
and substantial evidence on the whole record; or
 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse of
discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.
 
HRS § 91-14(g).
 
“‘[U]nder HRS § 91–14(g), conclusions of law are
 
reviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions
 
regarding procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of
 fact under subsection (5); and an agency’s exercise of discretion
 
-43­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
under subsection (6).’” Citizens Against Reckless Dev., 114 
Hawai'i at 193, 159 P.3d at 152 (quoting In re Hawaiian Elec. 
Co., 81 Hawai' i 459, 465, 918 P.2d 561, 567 (1996)) (brackets in 
original). 
III. Discussion
 
A.	 The circuit court correctly concluded that the LUC erred in
reverting the property to the agricultural land use district
without complying with the requirements of HRS § 205-4
 
The LUC argues that the circuit court’s “fundamental
 
error was to equate the reclassification process [under HRS
 
§ 205-4(a)], with reversion pursuant to [HRS § 205-4(g)].” 
Specifically, the LUC argues that pursuant to HRS § 205-4(g), it
 is authorized to impose conditions on a petition seeking to amend
 a district boundary, to issue an OSC, and to revert property to
 its former land use classification. In the LUC’s view, because
 reclassification is different than reversion, it was not required
 to consider the factors set forth in HRS §§ 205-16 and 205-17, it
 did not have to satisfy the requirements of HRS § 205-4(h), and
 it did not have to satisfy the 365 day deadline set forth in HRS
 § 205-4(g). 
DW and Bridge argue that the LUC may only revert
 
property pursuant to an OSC if the petitioner has not
 substantially commenced use of the property. DW and Bridge
 further argue that, upon issuance of an OSC, the LUC must follow
 the same procedures applied in considering any other district
 
-44­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
boundary amendment petition. Thus, according to DW and Bridge,
 
pursuant to HRS § 205-4(h), the LUC must find by a clear
 preponderance of the evidence that the proposed boundary is
 reasonable, not violative of HRS § 205-2, and consistent with the
 policies and criteria established under HRS §§ 205-16 and 205-17. 
They also argue that at least six affirmative votes are required
 to revert property. 
To the extent DW and Bridge argue that the LUC must
 
comply with the general requirements of HRS § 205-4 anytime it
 seeks to revert property, they are mistaken. The express
 language of HRS § 205-4(g) and its legislative history establish
 that the LUC may revert property without following those
 procedures, provided that the petitioner has not substantially
 commenced use of the property in accordance with its
 representations. In such a situation, the original
 reclassification is simply voided. 
Thus, once the LUC issues an OSC, the relevant
 
considerations to be taken into account by the LUC and the
 procedures it must follow turn on whether the petitioner has
 substantially commenced use of the land in accordance with its
 representations. When the LUC reverts property before the
 petitioner has substantially commenced use of the land, the LUC
 may do so without following the procedures otherwise applicable
 under HRS § 205-4. However, if the LUC seeks to revert property
 
-45­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
after use of the land has substantially commenced, then the LUC
 
is bound by the requirements of HRS § 205-4. Applying these
 principles to the facts of this case, the circuit court correctly
 concluded that the LUC erred in reverting the property to
 agricultural use without complying with the requirements of HRS
 § 205-4 because, by the time the LUC reverted the property, DW
 and Bridge had substantially commenced use of the land in
 accordance with their representations. 
1.	 Amendments to district boundaries pursuant to HRS §
205-4 
There are four major land use districts in which all
 
lands in the state are placed: urban, rural, agricultural, and
 
conservation. HRS § 205-2. The LUC generally sets the standards
 for determining the boundaries of each district. Id. 
Section 205-4 generally sets forth the procedures the
 
LUC must follow in amending a district boundary. Section 205­4(a) provides that any department or agency of the State, any
 department or agency of the county in which the land is situated,
 or any person with a property interest in the land sought to be
 reclassified may petition the LUC for a boundary change. HRS
 § 205-4(a). Not less than sixty days and not more than one
 hundred eighty days after the proper filing of a petition, the
 LUC must conduct a hearing on the petition. HRS § 205-4(b).
 
Section 205-4(h) provides that no amendment to a
 
-46­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
district boundary shall be approved unless the LUC “finds upon
 
the clear preponderance of the evidence that the proposed
 boundary is reasonable, not violative of section 205-2 and
 consistent with the policies and criteria established pursuant to
 section 205-16 and 205-17.” HRS § 205-4(h). Section 205-4(h)
 further provides that “[s]ix affirmative votes of the commission
 shall be necessary for any boundary amendment under this
 section.” HRS § 205-4(h).
 
Section 205-4(g) is particularly relevant here. That 
section provides that within a period of not more than three hundred sixty-five days after the filing of a petition for a boundary amendment, the LUC shall act to approve, deny, or modify the petition, by filing findings of fact and conclusions of law. HRS § 205-4(g). This section further provides that the LUC may modify a petition by imposing conditions necessary to uphold the intent and spirit of HRS Chapter 205, the policies and criteria established pursuant to HRS § 205-17, or to assure substantial compliance with representations made by the petitioner in seeking a boundary change. HRS § 205-4(g). In other words, HRS § 205–4(g) gives the LUC broad authority to impose conditions on boundary amendment petitions. Lanai Co. v. Land Use Comm’n, 105 
Hawai'i 296, 317, 97 P.3d 372, 393 (2004). 
In general, however, enforcement of these conditions is
 
-47­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
left to the counties under HRS § 205-12,10 and not the LUC. 
Lanai Co., 105 Hawai' i at 394-95, 97 P.3d at 318-19. For 
example, in Lanai Co., the LUC reclassified land from the rural 
and agricultural land use districts to the urban land use district to allow for the construction of a golf course. 105 Hawai'i at 298, 97 P.3d at 374. The LUC reclassified the land 
subject to a condition prohibiting the landowner from utilizing potable water from the high-level groundwater aquifer for golf course irrigation use, and another condition requiring the landowner to develop its own sources of water to service the property. Id. at 300, 97 P.3d at 376. The reclassification was 
also made subject to the condition that the landowner “shall develop the property in substantial compliance with representations made to the [LUC]” and that “[f]ailure to do so may result in reclassification of the property to its former land use classification.” Id. at 300-01, 97 P.3d at 376-77. 
After the land was being used as a golf course, the LUC
 
issued an OSC why the land should not revert to its former
 classifications or be changed to a more appropriate
 
10 Section 205-12 provides: 
The appropriate officer or agency charged with the
administration of county zoning laws shall enforce
within each county the use classification districts
adopted by the land use commission and the restriction
on use and the condition relating to agricultural
districts under [HRS § 205-4.5] and shall report to
the commission all violations.
 
HRS § 205-12 (2001).
 
-48­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
classification, based on a claim that the landowner had
 
impermissibly used water from the high-level groundwater aquifer,
 and had failed to develop and utilize alternative sources of
 water. Id. at 302, 97 P.3d at 378. The LUC concluded that the
 
landowner failed to perform according to the groundwater aquifer
 condition, and issued an order requiring the landowner to comply
 with this condition, to cease and desist any use of water from
 the high-level aquifer, and to file a detailed plan specifying
 how it would comply with the order. Id. at 306, 97 P.3d at 382. 
The circuit court concluded that the LUC’s finding that the
 landowner had violated the groundwater aquifer condition was
 clearly erroneous and the LUC exceeded its authority in issuing
 the cease and desist order. Id.
 
This court affirmed the circuit court’s ruling that 
the LUC’s finding regarding the alleged violation of the
 groundwater aquifer condition was clearly erroneous, but remanded
 the question of whether the landowner was using potable water
 from the high-level aquifer to the circuit court, with
 instructions to remand the issue to the LUC. Id. For purposes
 
of remand, this court explained that whether there had been a
 breach of a condition was a determination to be made by the LUC. 
Id. at 317, 97 P.3d at 393. 
This court explained that HRS § 205-4(g) empowers the
 
LUC to use conditions to uphold the intent and spirit of HRS
 
-49­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Chapter 205, uphold the policies and criteria established
 
pursuant the HRS § 205-17, and assure substantial compliance with
 representations made by a petitioner seeking a boundary change. 
Id. This court further explained, however, that HRS Chapter 205
 
does not expressly authorize the LUC to issue cease and desist
 orders. Id. at 318, 97 P.3d at 394. Thus, this court concluded,
 
although “the LUC must necessarily be able to order that a
 condition it imposed be complied with, and that a violation of a
 condition cease,” the “power to enforce the LUC’s conditions and
 orders . . . lies with the various counties.” Id. 
This court explained that “[t]here is no provision in
 
HRS § 205-12 that expressly delegates enforcement power to the
 LUC,” and that “[i]f the legislature intended to grant the LUC
 enforcement powers, it could have expressly provided the LUC with
 such power.” Id. Thus, this court observed, “looking to the
 
express language of HRS § 205-12, it is clear and unambiguous
 that enforcement power resides with the appropriate officer or
 agency charged with the administration of county zoning laws,
 namely the counties, and not the LUC.
11 Id.
 
11 The Lanai Co. court also stated that “the legislature granted the 
LUC the authority to impose conditions and to down-zone land for the violation
of such conditions[.]”  105 Hawai 'i at 318, 97 P.3d at 394.  As DW and Bridge 
observe, this passage was dictum.  Moreover, elsewhere in the opinion, thecourt noted that the power to revoke was dependent on whether substantialcommencement of use of the land had occurred.  See Lanai Co. , 105 Hawai 'i at 
317, 97 P.3d at 393 (“Moreover, ‘absent substantial commencement of use of theland in accordance with such representations made . . . in seeking [the]boundary change[,]’ the LUC is expressly authorized to order a reversion ofland to the prior classification.” (ellipsis and brackets in original)
(continued...)
 
-50­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The one exception to this general rule is found in HRS
 
§ 205-4(g). That section provides in relevant part that, “The
 
commission may provide by condition that absent substantial
 commencement of use of the land in accordance with such
 representations [made to the LUC by the petitioner], the
 commission shall issue and serve upon the party bound by the
 condition an OSC why the property should not revert to its former
 land use classification or be changed to a more appropriate
 classification.”
12
 
This sentence was added to HRS § 205-4(g) in 1990. 
1990 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 261 § 1 at 563-64. The legislative
 history indicates that the legislature sought to empower the LUC
 to void a district boundary amendment where the petitioner does
 not substantially commence use of the land in accordance with
 representations made to the LUC. In this regard, the Senate
 Committee on Energy and Natural Resources explained in its report
 that the purpose of adding this sentence was “to allow the Land
 Use Commission to attach a condition to a boundary amendment
 decision which would void the boundary amendment when substantial
 commencement of the approved land use activity does not occur in
 
11(...continued)
(foot
note and emphasis omitted)).  Thus, this passage is not dispositive of
 
the issue here.
 
12
 Although HRS § 205-4(g) provides that the LUC may either revert
 
the land or change it to “a more appropriate classification,” the latter
alternative is not at issue in the instant case.
 
-51­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
accordance with representations made by the petitioner.” S.
 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2116, in 1990 S. Journal, at 915 (emphasis
 added). The House Committee on Planning, Energy, and
 Environmental similarly stated in its report that the purpose of
 the bill was to “strengthen existing statutes by permitting the
 Land Use Commission further control over a proposed development
 by voiding a change in zoning if the petitioner does not make a
 substantial commencement of the approved land use activity.” H.
 Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1086-90, in 1990 H. Journal, at 1265
 (emphasis added). 
The legislative history further indicates that the
 
legislature added this language in order to empower the LUC to
 address a particular situation, namely, where the landowner does
 not develop the property in a timely manner. The Senate
 Committee on Energy and Natural Resources specifically noted that
 “[v]acant land with the appropriate state and county land use
 designation is often subjected to undesirable private land
 speculation and uncertain development schedules[,]” and that
 “[s]uch speculation and untimely development inflates the value
 of land, increases development costs, and frustrates, federal,
 state, county, and private coordination of planning efforts,
 adequate funding, public services, and facilities.” S. Stand.
 Comm. Rep. No. 2116, in 1990 S. Journal, at 915. 
The fact that the legislature sought to address
 
-52­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
situations where the petitioner has not substantially commenced 
use of the land is further evidenced in the testimony presented to both the Senate and House committees. In both the Senate and the House, the Office of State Planning offered testimony that “[a] positive approach to comprehensive land use planning and a strong preventive measure to land speculation, necessitates this bill which will require that successful applicants for land use boundary amendments either ‘use it, or lose it.’” Letter from Office of State Planning, to S. Comm. on Energy & Natural Res. (Feb. 7, 1990) (on file with the Hawai' i State Archives) 
(emphasis added); Letter from Office of State Planning, to H. Comm. on Planning, Energy & Envtl. Protection (Mar. 8, 1990) (on file with the Hawai' i State Archives) (emphasis added). The LUC 
also offered testimony to both the Senate and the House, stating that “the proposed amendment will clarify the Commission’s authority to impose a specific condition to downzone property in the event that the Petitioner does not develop the property in a timely manner.” Letter from Land Use Comm’n, to S. Comm. on Energy & Natural Res. (Feb. 7, 1990) (on file with the Hawai' i 
State Archives) (emphasis added); Letter from Land Use Comm’n, to H. Comm. on Planning, Energy & Envtl. Protection (Mar. 8, 1990) (on file with the Hawai' i State Archives) (emphasis added). 
Thus, the legislative history establishes that by adding this sentence to HRS § 205-4(g) in 1990, the legislature sought to 
-53­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
empower the LUC to void a boundary amendment, after giving the
 
landowner the opportunity for a hearing, if the landowner failed
 to substantially commence use of the land in accordance with its
 representations.
 
The proper procedure to be followed by the LUC in 
ruling on the OSC therefore depends on whether the petitioner has substantially commenced use of the land in accordance with its representations. Section 205-4(g) represents a limited exception to the general principles set forth in HRS Chapter 205, which require consideration of whether the boundary change violates HRS § 205-2 (setting forth general considerations in districting and classifying land), is consistent with the policies and criteria set forth in HRS § 205-16 (compliance with the Hawai' i state 
plan) and HRS § 205-17 (setting forth decision-making criteria for the LUC). 
Where the LUC issues an OSC and seeks to revert
 
property based on a petitioner’s failure to substantially
 commence use of the land in accordance with its representations,
 the LUC is not required to follow the procedures otherwise
 applicable to boundary changes under HRS Chapter 205. A
 reversion in such circumstances simply restores the status quo
 ante, prior to the original reclassification. Following the
 general procedures set forth in HRS § 205-4 would serve no
 
-54­   
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
purpose under these circumstances.13
 
Indeed, as noted above, the legislative history of HRS
 
§ 205-4(g) indicates that the legislature intended to empower the
 
LUC to void a boundary change where the petitioner failed to
 substantially commence use of the property in accordance with its
 representations. S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2116, in 1990 S.
 Journal, at 915 (“The purpose of this bill is to amend section
 205-4(g), Hawaii Revised Statutes, to allow the Land Use
 Commission to attach a condition to a boundary amendment decision
 which would void the boundary amendment when substantial
 commencement of the approved land use activity does not occur in
 accordance with representations made by the petitioner.”
 (Emphasis added)); H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1086-90, in 1990 H.
 Journal, at 1265 (“The purpose of this bill is to strengthen
 existing statutes by permitting the Land Use Commission further
 control over a proposed development by voiding a change in zoning
 if the petitioner does not make substantial commencement of the
 approved land use activity.” (Emphasis added)). In other words,
 the legislative history of HRS § 205-4(g) indicates that
 
13
 DW and Bridge argue that the LUC violated HRS § 205-16.  Section
 
205-16 provides that “[n]o amendment to any land use district boundary
amendment nor any other action by the land use commission shall be adopted
unless such amendment or other action conforms to the Hawaii state plan.”  HRS
 § 205-16 (emphasis added).  However, as noted above, the legislature expressly
granted the LUC the authority to revert land where the petitioner has not
substantially commenced use of the property in accordance with its
representations under HRS § 205-4(g).  There is no indication that the LUC’s
 authority to void a boundary amendment pursuant to HRS § 205-4(g) is
conditioned on a finding under HRS § 205-16. 
-55­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
compliance with all of the procedures of HRS § 205-4 is
 
unnecessary when the petitioner has not substantially commenced
 use of the land because the prior reclassification is simply
 voided. Thus, when the petitioner has not substantially
 commenced use of the land, the LUC may revert the land without
 following the procedures set forth in HRS § 205-4.
14
 
On the other hand, if the LUC seeks to revert land
 
after the petitioner has substantially commenced use of the land,
 the LUC is required to follow the procedures set forth in HRS
 § 205-4. After the petitioner substantially commences use of the
 land, the circumstances have changed and it may no longer be
 appropriate to revert the land to its prior classification. 
Having the LUC follow the procedures set forth in HRS 
§ 205-4 after the petitioner has substantially commenced use of the land is also consistent with the division of authority between the LUC and the counties of Hawai' i. As this court noted 
in Lanai Co., the power to enforce the LUC’s conditions and orders generally lies with the various counties. 105 Hawai' i at 
318, 97 P.3d at 394. The one exception to this general rule, of course, is the LUC’s express grant of authority to revert land if the petitioner has not substantially commenced use of the land in 
14
 Of course, this is not to say that the LUC is free of any
 
procedural constraints when it seeks to revert land in such circumstances. 
The LUC is bound by the procedures it has set forth in HAR § 15-15-93,
including the specific requirements relating to the information to be included
in the order to show cause, the necessity that a hearing be held on the
motion, and the LUC’s post-hearing procedures.
 
-56­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
accordance with its representations. See HRS § 205-4(g). 
Thus, where the petitioner has substantially commenced
 
use of the land, the LUC is required to follow the procedures set
 
forth in HRS § 205-4 that are generally applicable when
 boundaries are changed. The LUC is therefore required to find by
 a clear preponderance of the evidence that the reclassification
 is reasonable, not violative of HRS § 205-2, and consistent with
 the policies of HRS §§ 205-16 and 205-17. HRS § 205-4(h). The
 LUC is also required to obtain six votes in favor of the
 reclassification. HRS § 205-4(h). Finally, the LUC must resolve
 the reversion or reclassification issue within three hundred
 sixty-five days. HRS § 205-4(g). On the other hand, if the
 petitioner has not substantially commenced use of the property,
 then the LUC may revert the property without following the
 strictures of HRS § 205-4, so long as it otherwise complies with
 HAR § 15-15-93.
 
2.	 The LUC erred in reverting the property to the
agricultural land use district without complying with
the requirements of HRS § 205-4 because Bridge and DW
substantially commenced use of the property
 
We therefore consider as a threshold matter whether
 
Bridge and DW substantially commenced use of the land in
 
accordance with their representations. If Bridge and DW did not
 substantially commence use of the property, then the LUC was not
 required to follow the procedures of HRS § 205-4. If, however,
 
-57­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Bridge and DW did substantially commence use of the property in
 
accordance with their representations, then the LUC was required
 to follow the procedures of that section.
 
Section 205-4(g) does not include a definition of 
“substantial commencement,” and the LUC’s April 25, 2011 order does not explain how the LUC interpreted that term. The interpretation of a statute is a question of law which is freely reviewable by this court. See Univ. of Haw. v. Befitel, 105 
Hawai'i 485, 488, 100 P.3d 55, 58 (2004). “Substantial” is, 
according to Blacks’s Law Dictionary, “considerable in amount or value; large in volume or number.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1656 
(10th ed. 2014). In drafting HRS § 205-4(g), the legislature did not require that the use be substantially completed, but rather that it be substantially commenced. This is consistent with the concerns identified by the legislature in the legislative history of the statute, i.e., that it was trying to deter speculators who obtained favorable land-use rulings and then sat on the land for speculative purposes. 
In its April 25, 2011 order, the LUC found that
 
“Petitioners have not substantially commenced use of the Petition
 Area in conformance with the representations made in 2005 or in
 conformance with the applicable representations and conditions as
 of January 20, 2011.” The LUC contends that Bridge and DW did
 not challenge that finding and are accordingly bound by it. DW,
 
-58­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
however, challenged this finding in the circuit court,15 and the
 
circuit court reversed and vacated the April 25, 2011 order in
 
its entirety. 
To the extent the circuit court concluded that the
 
LUC’s finding as to whether DW and Bridge had substantially
 commenced use of the land in accordance with their
 representations was clearly erroneous, that conclusion was
 correct. As the circuit court found, after the LUC rescinded the
 OSC on September 24, 2009, DW “continued to actively proceed with
 preparation of plans and studies, including building plans and
 studies for the EIS.” Moreover, “DW also continued work on
 infrastructure and proceeded forward with building the affordable
 housing townhomes for the Project.” 
Specifically, DW had constructed sixteen townhouses on
 
the property by March 31, 2010. DW explained that the units had
 “completed exteriors and interiors,” with “cabinets and
 appliances installed,” and with “electrical and plumbing . . .
 ready to hook up.” DW also offered testimony that an additional
 24 townhouses had been constructed up to the roof, with 32 more
 townhouses in various stages of completion. In a status report
 submitted to the LUC, DW also stated that mass grading for the
 
15
 In the circuit court, DW explicitly argued that the LUC finding
 
“that ‘Petitioners have not substantially commenced use of the [Property] in
conformance with [their] representations,’” was “clearly erroneous in view of
th reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the record.” (Brackets in
original).
 
-59­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
affordable housing sites had been completed, foundation slabs for
 
eight buildings (64 townhouses) were complete, and the immediate
 access and internal roadways were graded. In a later filing, DW
 also informed the LUC that by July 2010, “more than $20,000,000
 had been expended for plans and construction work on the
 project.” 
Rather than holding the land undeveloped for
 
speculative purposes — the result which the legislature sought to
 avoid in HRS § 205-4(g) — Bridge and DW invested a considerable
 amount of money and effort, by any reasonable measure, to develop
 the affordable housing. In these circumstances, Bridge and DW
 substantially commenced use of the land.
16 This is particularly
 
clear when Bridge’s and DW’s actions in 2009 and later are viewed
 in the context of the events that occurred prior to the initial
 issuance (and subsequent conditional recision) of the December 9,
 2008 OSC. 
The 1991 order amending the original reclassification
 
order included a condition providing that “Petitioner shall
 develop the Property in substantial compliance with the
 representations made to the Commission[,]” and that “[f]ailure to
 so develop the Property may result in reversion of the Property
 
16
 In the absence of both a statutory definition of “substantial
 
commencement” and an expression of LUC’s interpretation of “substantial
commencement” for a particular project, a determination of whether a party has
substantially commenced use of the land will turn on the circumstances of each
case, not on a dollar amount or percentage of work completed. 
-60­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to its former classification, or change to a more appropriate
 
classification.”17 The LUC initially issued Bridge an OSC
 
stating that it had reason to believe that Bridge and its
 “predecessors in interest have failed to perform according to the
 conditions imposed and to the representations and commitments
 made to the Commission in obtaining reclassification of the
 Subject Area and in obtaining amendments to conditions of
 reclassification.” The LUC did not err in issuing the OSC. See
 
HAR § 15-15-93(b) (“Whenever the commission shall have reason to
 believe that there has been a failure to perform according to the
 conditions imposed, or the representations or commitments made by
 the petitioner, the commission shall issue . . . an [OSC].”). 
Bridge and DW do not contend otherwise. 
In this regard, during a January 9, 2009 hearing on the
 
OSC, Commissioner Judge noted that despite the representations
 made by Bridge, “there are no affordable homes on that
 development. Worse yet, there’s not even a glimmer of them
 coming any time soon. There’s no building permits, there’s no
 infrastructure.” Commissioner Kanuha expressed similar concerns,
 noting that “thus far there has been no progress, no nothing
 
17
 Bridge argues that the affordable housing condition was an 
“unconstitutional land development condition.”  However, as noted above, HRS §
205-4(g) gives the LUC broad authority to impose conditions, including those
necessary “to assure substantial compliance with representations made by the
petitioner.”  Given this broad authority and Bridge’s representations to the
LUC, the affordable housing condition and its included deadline were valid.
Bridge cites no authority that would prevent the LUC from imposing benchmarks
or deadlines on development schedules.
 
-61­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
related to the Project.” Commissioner Constrades later stated,
 
“I don’t see anything happen when I go by that place. You can
 tell me ‘I spent millions of dollars.’ Where? What has
 happened? Why four years ago when they’re begging for housing
 and there’s still nothing there? Now you guys come back and say
 ‘Please, we need the housing.’ Nothing’s happening.” Following
 a subsequent hearing on April 30, 2009, the LUC voted 7-0 to
 revert the property to its former agricultural land use district. 
Despite the LUC’s vote to revert the property, the
 
Commission never entered a corresponding written order. Instead,
 the LUC later rescinded the OSC, provided that as a condition
 precedent, sixteen affordable units be completed by March 31,
 2010. In this regard, DW notes that the “LUC did not define the
 term ‘complete[.]’” This is correct. In its order, the LUC
 stated that the OSC was rescinded “provided that as a condition
 precedent, the Petitioner completes 16 affordable units by
 March 31, 2010,” but the order did not make it clear what would
 qualify as a “complete” unit. 
This court has observed that “[p]arties subject to an 
administrative decision must have fair warning of the conduct the government prohibits or requires, to ensure that the parties are entitled to fair notice in dealing with the government and it agencies.” Lanai Co., 105 Hawai' i at 314, 97 P.3d at 390. Thus, 
“[a]n administrative agency, such as the LUC, has the 
-62­   
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
responsibility of stating with ascertainable certainty what is
 
meant by the conditions it has imposed.” Id. Here, the LUC
 
failed to state what level of completion would satisfy the
 
March 31, 2010 deadline.
 
Moreover, during the August 27, 2009 hearing, DW made
 
it clear that the townhouse structures would be completed before
 
utilities could be installed. In this regard, the following
 exchange occurred between DW’s president and an attorney for the
 State Office of Planning:
 
Q Your current construction plan would have the vertical
construction going on while the horizontalconstruction is continuing is that right? 
A That’s correct. 
Q Would the vertical construction begin before theinfrastructure connections to that pad or that pod iscompleted? 
A Yes.  It has to in order to meet the schedule. 
Q So you build the house before you have a connection tothe sewer, water, and electrical lines. 
A That’s correct. 
Thus, DW made it clear to the LUC that vertical and 
horizontal construction would be occurring simultaneously, and 
that townhouses would be completed before they would have connections to sewer, water, and electrical lines. The LUC failed to state with “ascertainable certainty” that in addition to completing the physical townhouse structures, certificates of occupancy were also required in order to satisfy the March 31, 2010 deadline. See Lanai Co., 105 Hawai' i at 314, 97 P.3d at 
-63­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
390. Thus, to the extent the LUC kept the OSC pending because
 
“[s]ixteen affordable units have been constructed, but no
 
certificates of occupancy have been obtained,” it erred in doing
 so. 
In any event, regardless of whether the sixteen
 
townhouses were “complete” by March 31, 2010, the record is plain
 that by the time the LUC held its July 1, 2010 hearing, DW had
 substantially commenced use of the property in accordance with
 its representations to the LUC. At that point, the LUC could no
 longer revert the property without following the requirements of
 HRS § 205-4.
 
In this regard, before the LUC could revert the
 
property, its was required to find by a “clear preponderance of
 the evidence” that the reversion was reasonable, not violative of
 HRS § 205-2, and consistent with the policies and criteria
 established pursuant to HRS §§ 205-16 and 205-17. HRS § 205­4(h). The LUC was also required to resolve the OSC within 365
 days. HRS § 205-4(g). These requirements were not met here. 
In its order reverting the property to the agricultural
 
land use district, the LUC explained how DW and Bridge had failed
 to comply with representations made to the commission. The LUC
 made no specific findings, however, relating to whether reversion
 was “reasonable,” not violative of HRS § 205-2, and consistent
 with the policies and criteria established under HRS §§ 205-16
 
-64­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and 205-17. At most, the LUC concluded that “[u]nder the facts 
and circumstances of this case, reversion of the Petition Area to its original agricultural classification does not violate any applicable rule or statutory provisions, including Hawai' i 
Administrative Rules (HAR) subchapter 7 or Chapter 15-15, and HRS Chapters 91, 92, and 205.” The LUC’s conclusion, without more, fails to demonstrate that the commission considered the requisite factors under HRS § 205-4(h). 
Moreover, the circuit court correctly concluded that
 
the LUC violated HRS § 205-4(g) in failing to resolve the OSC
 within 365 days. The circuit court concluded that the OSC had to
 be resolved by December 9, 2009, i.e., 365 days after the initial
 OSC was issued on December 9, 2008. The LUC’s findings of fact
 and conclusions of law were not filed until April 25, 2011. 
Although the LUC had rescinded the OSC on September 28, 2009,
 that recision was conditioned upon the completion of sixteen
 affordable housing units by March 31, 2010. On July 26, 2010,
 the LUC entered an order finding that the condition precedent was
 not satisfied, and that the OSC remained pending. Thus, the OSC
 was not resolved until April 25, 2011, well beyond the 365 days
 allowed under HRS § 205-4(g).
 
The circuit court therefore correctly concluded that
 
the LUC erred in reverting the property without complying with
 the requirements of HRS § 205-4.
 
-65­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B.	 The circuit court erred in denying the LUC’s motion to
strike documents not in the administrative record
 
The LUC next argues that the circuit court erred in
 
considering materials not part of the record. Specifically, the
 
LUC argues that the circuit court erred in denying its motion to
 strike from the record on appeal documents from other cases
 before the LUC. DW argues that the circuit court did not err in
 allowing supplementation of the record with documents from other
 dockets before the LUC. Because the additional documents were
 not part of the record before the LUC, they should have been
 
stricken.
 
In an agency appeal, judicial review is generally
 
confined to the administrative record. See HRS § 91-14(f) (“The
 
review shall be conducted by the appropriate court without a jury
 
and shall be confined to the record, except that in the cases
 where a trial de novo . . . is provided by law and also in cases
 of alleged irregularities in procedure before the agency not
 shown in the record[.]” (Emphasis added)). Section 91-14(e),
 however, provides in pertinent part that 
If, before the date set for hearing, application is made to the
court for leave to present additional evidence material to the
issue in the case, and it is shown to the satisfaction of the
court that the additional evidence is material and that there were
 good reasons for failure to present it in the proceeding before
the agency, the court may order that the additional evidence be
taken before the agency upon such conditions as the court deems
proper. 
HRS § 91-14(e).
 
Here, neither DW nor Bridge moved to supplement the
 
-66­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
record pursuant to HRS § 91-14(e). The circuit court was 
therefore “confined to the record” under HRS § 91-14(f). See 
Diamond v. Dobbin, 132 Hawai' i 9, 24, 319 P.3d 1017, 1033 (2014) 
(“Pursuant to HRS § 91–14(f), a review of an agency decision ‘shall be conducted by the appropriate court . . . and shall be confined to the record.’”). 
Under HRS § 91-9(e), for purposes of agency decisions,
 
the record includes: (1) all pleadings, motions, intermediate
 rulings; (2) evidence received or considered, including oral
 testimony, exhibits, and a statement of matters officially
 noticed; (3) offers of proof and ruling thereon; (4) proposed
 findings and exceptions; (5) report of officer who presided at
 the hearing; and (6) staff memoranda submitted to members of the
 agency in connection with their consideration of the case.
 
The LUC argues that the circuit court erred in denying
 
its motion to strike portions of the record on appeal designated
 by DW and Bridge. Specifically, the LUC argues that the circuit
 court erred in allowing 9,917 pages of documents from the dockets
 of six other cases before the LUC to be included in the record. 
To the extent these specific documents were not before the LUC,
 the LUC is correct that the circuit court erred in denying its
 motion to strike. 
On numerous occasions before the LUC, Bridge and DW
 
argued that they were being treated differently than other
 
-67­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
petitioners before the LUC. In support of this argument, DW and
 
Bridge cited specific cases both in writing and during hearings. 
They did not, however, present documents from those other cases
 to the LUC to consider. Moreover, to the extent Commissioner
 Kanuha referred to the six cases during the April 21, 2011
 hearing, neither DW nor Bridge presented the actual dockets to
 the LUC. Also, they did not move to supplement the record on
 appeal once the case was in the circuit court, and did not
 request that the circuit court take judicial notice of the
 dockets.
18
 
Although the LUC argues that the circuit court erred in
 
“considering” the additional materials designated by Bridge and
 DW, it is unclear whether the circuit court in fact relied on the
 documents in issuing its order. In the LUC’s opening brief, it
 states that the circuit court “may have considered the material
 in its ultimate ruling but does not specifically refer to it.” 
Thus, although the circuit court erred in denying the LUC’s
 motion to strike, there is no indication that the circuit court
 in fact relied on the disputed documents. 
18
 Hawai'i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 201(d) (1993) provides that a 
“court shall take judicial notice if requested by a party and supplied with
the necessary information.”  Cf. Williams v. Aona, 121 Hawai 'i 1, 11 n.6, 210
P.3d 501, 511 n.6 (2009) (court takes judicial notice of terms of collectivebargaining agreement).  However, there is no indication that DW requested thatthe circuit court take judicial notice of the documents from the other LUCcases, nor does the record demonstrate that the circuit court in fact did so. Additionally, DW and Bridge do not request that this court take judicialnotice of the records. 
-68­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C.	 The circuit court erred in concluding that the LUC violated
DW’s and Bridge’s constitutional rights to due process and
equal protection
 
The LUC’s final argument is that the circuit court
 
erred in determining that the LUC violated DW’s and Bridge’s
 
constitutional rights to due process and equal protection. On
 the merits, the LUC argues that it violated neither DW’s nor
 Bridge’s substantive or procedural due process rights. The LUC
 further argues that DW’s and Bridge’s equal protection arguments
 are unfounded. Both DW and Bridge argue that the LUC violated
 their procedural and substantive due process rights, and equal
 protection rights. 
This court has observed that, “‘if a case can be 
decided on either of two grounds, one involving a constitutional question, the other a question of statutory construction or general law, . . . [this court] will decide only the latter.’” State v. Lo, 66 Haw. 653, 657, 675 P.2d 754, 757 (1983) (ellipsis and brackets in original) (quoting Ashwander v. Tenn. Valley Auth., 297 U.S. 288, 347 (1936) (Brandeis, J., concurring)). Here, however, Bridge has a suit pending against the LUC and its Commissioners in federal court, raising many of the same issues presented in the instant appeal. The federal district court stayed that case pending resolution of this appeal. See Bridge 
Aina Le'a, LLC v. Haw. Land Use Comm’n, No. 11-00414 SOM-BMK, 
2012 WL 1109046, at *1 (D. Haw. Mar. 30, 2012). The LUC filed an 
-69­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
appeal and Bridge a cross-appeal from the district court’s order
 
(9th Cir. Nos. 12-15971 and 12-16076). The United States Court
 of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit heard oral argument on the
 cross-appeals on June 10, 2014, and thereafter issued an order
 withdrawing submission of the appeal, pending our decision in
 this case. In the interest of judicial economy, we therefore
 also consider the constitutional claims decided by the circuit
 court.
 
1.	 The circuit court may decide constitutional issues in
an administrative appeal
 
As a preliminary matter, the LUC argues that the
 
circuit court erred in ruling on DW’s and Bridge’s due process
 
and equal protection arguments because the LUC had no opportunity
 to present evidence and did not have the benefit of a trial by
 jury. The LUC argues that it was “inappropriate” for the circuit
 court to rule on these constitutional claims under such
 circumstances, and that in doing so, the court “deprived the LUC
 and Commissioners of any process whatsoever.” Section 91-14(g)
 explicitly provides, however, that the circuit court may reverse
 or modify an agency decision “if the substantial rights of the
 petitioners may have been prejudiced because the administrative
 findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders are . . . in
 violation of constitutional or statutory provisions[.]” 
(Emphasis added). Section 91-14(g) does not condition the
 
-70­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circuit court’s authority on either the opportunity of the
 
parties to present evidence or whether the case was tried before
 a jury, and the LUC does not cite any authority supporting its
 argument that a court’s power is limited in the absence of these
 conditions. Thus, the circuit court properly considered DW’s and
 Bridge’s constitutional arguments in reversing and vacating the
 LUC’s final order.
 
2.	 The circuit court erred in concluding DW’s and Bridge’s
due process rights were violated
 
The circuit court concluded that the LUC’s conduct 
constituted “a denial of procedural and substantive due process” 
under both the United States and Hawai' i Constitutions. 
Specifically, the circuit court noted the LUC’s “rolling and continuing [OSC] that extended far beyond the time period allowed by law,” “conduct that was in derogation of the statute and rules established to protect Bridge and DW,” and “attempt to create a new procedure that was not already established.” The circuit court also concluded that the LUC “denied Bridge and DW their rights to a meaningful opportunity to be heard,” and that its final order was “arbitrary and unreasonable, having no substantial relation to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare.” 
-71­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“The basic elements of procedural due process of law
 
require notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful
 
time and in a meaningful manner before governmental deprivation
 of a significant property interest.” Sandy Beach Def. Fund v.
 
City Council of City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 70 Haw. 361, 378, 773
 P.2d 250, 261 (1989) (citing Matthews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319,
 333 (1976)). 
Here, both Bridge and DW had notice and a meaningful
 
opportunity to be heard before the LUC reverted the property. 
With respect to notice, as early as September 2008, Bridge was
 aware that the LUC was considering issuing an OSC. The LUC
 issued the written OSC on December 9, 2008. This was two months
 before DW had obtained any interest in the property. Both Bridge
 and DW therefore plainly had notice that the LUC might revert the
 property.
 
With respect to a meaningful opportunity to be heard,
 
Bridge presented testimony on its behalf with respect to the OSC
 during hearings on January 9, 2009, and April 30, 2009. As noted
 above, after the LUC voted to revert the property, it did not
 issue a written order effecting the reversion. In fact, the LUC
 stayed entry of its decision and order, and allowed DW to present
 evidence during a hearing on June 5, 2009. DW also presented
 additional testimony during a hearing on August 27, 2009. After
 the March 31, 2010 deadline for the completion of the sixteen
 
-72­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
units had passed, DW was again heard by the LUC during a hearing
 
on July 1, 2010. The LUC held subsequent hearings on
 November 18, 2010, January 20, 2011, March 10, 2011, April 8,
 2011, April 21, 2011, and May 13, 2011. Bridge and DW were each
 represented by counsel during all of these subsequent hearings. 
Because both Bridge and DW had notice and a meaningful
 opportunity to be heard on the reversion issue, the circuit court
 erred in concluding that their procedural due process rights had
 been violated.
 
As this court has stated, “[d]ue process includes a 
substantive component that guards against arbitrary and capricious government action[.]” In re Applications of Herrick, 
82 Hawai' i 329, 349, 922 P.2d 942, 962 (1996). To establish a 
violation of substantive due process, “an aggrieved person must prove that the government’s action was clearly arbitrary and unreasonable, having no substantial relation to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare.” Lopez v. State, 133 
Hawai'i 311, 322, 328 P.3d 320, 331 (2014) (quoting In re 
Herrick, 82 Hawai' i at 349, 922 P.2d at 962). 
On this issue, the circuit court stated only that the
 
LUC’s final order “was by its terms arbitrary and unreasonable,
 having no substantial relation to the public health, safety,
 morals, or general welfare.” Although the circuit court echoed
 the language set forth by this court in Herrick, the facts of
 
-73­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
this case do not support such a conclusion. 
Here, the LUC first reclassified the land at issue from
 
the agricultural to the urban land use district in 1989. By the
 
time the LUC issued an OSC in December 2008, the land had changed
 hands numerous times and the LUC had amended the original
 reclassification order on multiple occasions. Moreover, as noted
 above, by the end of 2008, the landowners had done little to
 develop the property in accordance with representations made to
 the LUC. Given this history, the LUC was understandably wary of
 representations being made by Bridge and DW that they would be
 able to satisfy the 1991 order’s conditions, as amended in 2005. 
Nevertheless, Bridge and DW repeatedly assured the LUC that they
 would be able to complete the affordable housing units by
 November 2010. As it turned out, however, Bridge and DW did not
 satisfy the affordable housing condition, and did not comply with
 numerous other representations made to the LUC. Thus, although
 Bridge and DW may disagree with the process that ultimately
 resulted in the reversion, the LUC’s conduct was not “arbitrary
 and unreasonable,” given the long history of unfulfilled promises
 made in connection with the development of this property. In
 these circumstances, the circuit court erred in concluding the
 LUC violated Bridge’s and DW’s substantive due process rights. 
-74­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
3.	 The circuit court erred in concluding Bridge’s and DW’s
equal protection rights were violated
 
The circuit court also concluded that the LUC
 
“intentionally treated Bridge, DW, and this Project differently,
 
and less favorably, than other petitioners in cases involving
 facts and circumstances substantially similar to this case.” 
Specifically, the circuit court concluded that the LUC treated
 Bridge and DW “in a materially, adversely different manner than
 other similarly situated developers, and that the LUC did so
 intentionally and without any rational basis for the differential
 treatment.” 
In general, the equal protection clauses of the United 
States and Hawai' i Constitutions “mandate[] that all persons 
similarly situated shall be treated alike, both in privileges conferred and in the liabilities imposed.” State v. Freitas, 61 
Haw. 262, 271, 602 P.2d 914, 922 (1979). “[E]qual protection jurisprudence has typically been concerned with governmental classifications that ‘affect some groups of citizens differently than others.’” Engquist v. Oregon Dept. of Agric., 553 U.S. 591, 
601 (2008). The United States Supreme Court has nevertheless recognized that an equal protection claim may be brought by a “class of one,” “where the plaintiff alleges that [he/she] has been intentionally treated differently from others similarly situated and that there is no rational basis for the difference 
-75­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in treatment.” Vill. of Willowbrook v. Olech, 528 U.S. 562, 564
 
(2000). 
Bridge and DW do not argue that they are part of a 
group of persons that are being treated differently than others. 
Rather, Bridge and DW argue that their equal protection rights were violated because the LUC did not seek to revert the classification of properties owned by similarly situated developers that experienced similar delays. Their equal protection arguments are therefore dependent on the “class of one” theory. This court has not previously adopted that theory. Assuming arguendo that the “class of one” theory is applicable under Hawai' i law, the LUC did not violate Bridge’s and DW’s 
equal protection rights. 
DW argues that it was treated differently than others
 
who were similarly situated, citing the affordable housing
 condition and its November 2010 deadline, and the fact that the
 LUC reverted the property because DW failed to meet this
 deadline. Neither DW nor Bridge, however, have demonstrated that
 they were treated differently than other similarly situated
 developers because the documents from the LUC cases involving the
 other developers were not properly included in the record on
 appeal, supra at 86-89. In any event, even assuming Bridge and
 DW had demonstrated different treatment, their equal protection
 argument still fails because they did not establish that the LUC
 
-76­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was without a rational basis. As noted above, the LUC has broad 
discretion to attach conditions to orders granting reclassification petitions. Lanai Co., 105 Hawai' i at 317, 97 
P.3d at 393. Given the long history of this property and the LUC’s dealings with the landowners over the course of many years, we cannot say it was irrational for the LUC to exercise its broad discretion by imposing a completion deadline. Again, the LUC had good reason to be wary of any assurances being offered by Bridge and DW, given the history of the project. 
Moreover, the fact that the LUC enforced its conditions
 
did not violate Bridge’s and DW’s equal protection rights. As
 the Court has explained:
 
There are some forms of state action, however, which by
their nature involve discretionary decisionmaking based on a
vast array of subjective, individualized assessments. In
such cases the rule that people should be “treated alike,
under like circumstances and conditions” is not violated
 when one person is treated differently from others, because
treating like individuals differently is an accepted
consequence of the discretion granted.  In such situations,
allowing a challenge based on the arbitrary singling out of
a particular person would undermine the very discretion that
such state officials are entrusted to exercise.
 
Engquist, 553 U.S. at 603.
 
In short, the LUC had broad authority to impose 
conditions and the power to determine whether Bridge and DW 
breached those conditions. See Lanai Co., 105 Hawai' i at 317, 97 
P.3d at 393 (“Whether there has been a breach of [a condition] is a determination to be made by the LUC.”). Thus, Bridge’s and DW’s equal protection rights were not violated because the record 
-77­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
does not establish that the LUC lacked a rational basis for its
 
decisions.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
The circuit court’s second amended final judgment is
 
therefore affirmed in part and vacated in part. 
We affirm the
 
judgment to the extent it is based on the circuit court’s
 conclusion that the LUC erred in failing to comply with the
 requirements of HRS § 205-4, we vacate the judgment to the extent
 it is based on the circuit court’s conclusion that the LUC
 violated Bridge’s and DW’s constitutional rights, and we remand
 to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this
 opinion. 
William J. Wynhoff
for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
Bruce D. Voss and 
Matthew C. Shannon for respondentBridge Aina Le' a, LLC /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
David J. Minkin,
Dayna H. Kamimura-Ching,and Troy J.H. Andradefor respondent DW AinaLe'a Development, LLC /s/ Randal K.O. Lee
-78­