***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
   
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
RICHARD NELSON III, KALIKO CHUN, JAMES AKIONA, SR., 
SHERILYN ADAMS, KELII IOANE, JR., and CHARLES AIPIA, 
Plaintiffs- Appellees -Cross-Appellants,  
 
vs. 
 
HAWAIIAN HOMES COMMISSION, THE DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME 
LANDS, JOBIE MASAGATANI, in her official capacity as Chair of 
1the Hawaiian Homes Commission, WILLIAM K. RICHARDSON,  MICHAEL P. 
KAHIKINA, DOREEN NAPUA GOMES, GENE ROSS DAVIS, WALLACE A. 
ISHIBASHI, DAVID B. KAAPU, and WREN WESCOATT, in their official 
capacities as members of the Hawaiian Homes Commission, 
Defendants- Appellees -Cross-Appellees,  
 
and 
 
WESLEY MACHIDA, in his official capacity as the State Director 
of Finance, and the STATE OF HAWAI I, 
Defendants-Appellants-Cross-Appellees. 
________________________________________________________________
 
 
SCAP-16-0000496 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-16-0000496; CIV. NO. 07-1 -1663) 
 
FEBRUARY 9 , 2018 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND  POLLACK, JJ.,   
WITH WILSON, J., DISSENTING  
 
 
                     
1  Pursuant to Hawai ʻi Rules of Evidence Rule 201 (1980), this court takes 
judicial notice that William K. Richardson passed away  on November 10, 2017.     Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-16-0000496
09-FEB-2018
10:22 AM***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
2 
 OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
I. Introduction 
 This case is on appeal before this court for the second 
time.  In the first appeal, we determined that the political 
2question doctrine  did not bar a judicial interpretation of the 
meaning of “sufficient sums” for the Department of Hawaiian Home 
Lands’ (“DHHL”) administrative and operating expenses, pursuant 
to Article XII, Section 1 of the Hawai i Constitution.  Limited 
judicially discoverable and manageable standards existed to 
interpret the term “sufficient sums,”  based on the 1978 
Constitutional Convention delegates’ estimate  that DHHL’s 
administrative and operating costs were $1.3 to 1.6 million at 
that time, and, going forward, that figure could be adjusted for 
inflation.  Nelson v. Hawaiian Homes Comm’n , 127 Hawai ʻi 185, 277 
P.3d 279 (2012) (“ Nelson I ”). 
 On remand to the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
3(“circuit court”),  the circuit court held a bench trial and 
found, however, that DHHL’s actual need for its administrative 
and operating expenses was over $28 million.  It then concluded 
that the legislature was constitutionally obligated to make such 
an appropriation to DHHL for fiscal year 2015-16.  The circuit 
                     
2   Under the political question doctrine, “certain matters are political in 
nature and thus inappropriate for judicial review.”  Nishitani v. Baker , 82 
Hawaiʻi 281, 290, 921 P.2d 1182, 1191 (App. 1996) (citation omitted).   
 
3 The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
3 
 court also enjoined the defendants (the State of Hawai ʻi and its 
Director of Finance, collectively the “State Defendants”)  from 
violating the constitution or breaching their fiduciary duties 
to the Hawaiian Homelands trust beneficiaries.   
 The State Defendants filed a motion for reconsideration, 
which the circuit court granted in part and denied in part.  The 
circuit court granted the motion in part to modify those 
portions of the order that (1) called for the over $28 million 
appropriation and (2) enjoined the defendants from violating the 
constitution or breaching their fiduciary duties to Hawaiian 
Homelands trust beneficiaries.  In its amended order, the 
circuit court simply declared that (1) the State of Hawai i did 
not provide sufficient sums to DHHL, and (2) that the defendants 
must fulfill their constitutional and trust responsibilities.    
 This court accepted transfer of this appeal from the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”).   On appeal, the State 
Defendants argue that (1) the circuit court erred in declining 
to use the 1978 baseline of $1.3 to 1.6 million, adjusted for 
inflation, to calculate “sufficient sums” for DHHL’s 
administrative and operating expenses; and (2) the circuit court 
erred in ordering the State Defendants to fulfill their 
constitutional obligations under Article XII, Section 1.  The 
Hawaii State Legislature, as amicus curiae, filed a brief in 
support of the State Defendants.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
4 
  We hold that the circuit court erred by engaging in a 
comprehensive inquiry into the amount DHHL actually needed for 
its administrative and operating expenses.  Under Nelson I , the 
only judicially discoverable and manageable standard for 
determining “sufficient sums” for DHHL’s administrative and 
operating budget was established by the delegates of the 1978 
Constitutional Convention as $1.3 to 1.6 million, adjusted for 
inflation.  127 Hawai ʻi at 202-03, 277 P.3d at 296-97.  We 
observed that “consideration of [how many lots, loans, and 
rehabilitation projects (and their scope)] could provide the 
basis for increasing the required administrative funding above 
the 1978 baseline identified by the delegates”; however, we 
cautioned that such consideration “could also involve the courts 
in addressing issues . . . that involve political questions.”  
127 Hawai ʻi at 203, 277 P.3d at 297.   
 In this case, the circuit court exceeded our mandate in 
Nelson I when it determined the amount DHHL actually needed for 
its administrative and operating expenses.  Accordingly, we 
vacate the circuit court’s First Amended Final Judgment , Final 
Judgment, and underlying orders, and remand this case to the 
circuit court to determine the current value of $1.3 to 1.6 
million (in 1978 dollars), adjusted for inflation. 
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
5 
 II.  Background 
A.  Nelson I  
 In Nelson I, six individual plaintiffs (Richard Nelson III; 
Kaliko Chun; James Akiona, Sr.; Sherilyn Adams; Kelii Ioane, 
Jr.; and Charles Aipia; collectively, “ the Plaintiffs ”) filed a 
first amended complaint alleging that the State Defendants and 
DHHL had violated Article XII, Section 1 of the Hawai ʻi State 
Constitution.  That constitutional provision states the 
following:   
The legislature shall make sufficient  sums available for 
the following purposes: (1) development of home, 
agriculture, farm and ranch lots; (2) home, agriculture, 
aquaculture, farm and ranch loans; (3) rehabilitation 
projects to include, but not limited to, educational, 
economic, political, social and cultural processes by which 
the general welfare and conditions of native Hawaiians are 
thereby improved; (4) the administration and operating  
budget of the department of Hawaiian home lands; in 
furtherance of (1), (2), (3) and (4) herein, by 
appropriating the same in the manner provided by law.  
 
Hawaiʻi State Constitution, Article XII, Section 1.  In Count 1, 
the Plaintiffs alleged that the State had failed to make 
sufficient sums available to DHHL for the four purposes 
enumerated above.  In Count 2, the Plaintiffs alleged that DHHL 
breached its trust duties to its beneficiaries by failing to 
request sufficient sums from the State.  In Count 3, the 
Plaintiffs alleged that the DHHL Defendants breached their trust 
obligation to beneficiaries by leasing DHHL lands for commercial 
purposes to raise funds.  Lastly, in Count 4, the Plaintiffs 
alleged that the DHHL Defendants breached their obligation to ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
6 
 trust beneficiaries by failing to ascertain whether trust lands 
were necessary for general homestead purposes before offering 
them for commercial lease.  The parties stipulated to dismiss 
Counts 3 and 4 without and with prejudice, respectively.      
 The circuit court granted the State Defendants’ motion for 
summary judgment (in which the DHHL Defendants joined), 
concluding that Counts 1 and 2 raised non- justiciable political 
questions.  The circuit court concluded that there were “no 
judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving 
the dispute over the definition and determination of ‘sufficient 
sums’” under the Hawai ʻi Constitution “without making initial 
policy determinations of a kind clearly for nonjudicial 
discretion.”  In other words, the circuit court declined to rule 
on the Plaintiffs’ claims, leaving their resolution to th e 
political process.  See Nelson I, 127 Hawai ʻi at 19
4, 277 P.3d at 
288. 
 On initial appeal to the ICA, an ICA majority concluded 
Plaintiffs’ claims were not barred by the political question 
doctrine.  Nelson v. Hawaiian Homes Comm’n , 124 Hawai i 437, 246 
P.3d 369 (App. 2011).  Chief Judge Nakamura concurred with the 
majority’s holding that the political doctrine question did not 
preclude the justiciability of the dispute over whether the 
legislature provided DHHL with “sufficient sums.”  124 Hawai ʻi at 
447, 246 P.3d at 379 (Nakamura, C.J., concurring).  In his ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
7 
 opinion, the “pre -1978 levels and the framers’ intent, including 
their concern with the DHHL’s leasing of lands to the general 
public” provided the court with “judicially discoverable and 
manageable standards for evaluating whether the Legislature has 
satisfied the ‘sufficient sums’ requirement of Article XII, 
Section 1 without resort to nonjudicial policy determinations.”   
124 Hawai ʻi at 452, 246 P.3d at 384 (Nakamura, C.J., concurring). 
 On certiora ri, this court first traced the development of 
our political question jurisprudence.  We observed that the 
“political question doctrine is often considered the most 
amorphous aspect of justiciability.’”  Nelson I, 127 Hawai ʻi at 
194, 277 P.3d at 288 (quoting Nishitani , 82 Hawai ʻi at 299, 921 
P.2d at 1191) (brackets omitted).  We stated, “The doctrine is 
the result of the balance courts must strike in preserving 
separation of powers yet providing a check upon the other two 
branches of government.”  Nelson I,  127 Hawai ʻi at 194, 277 P.3d 
at 288 (citing Trustees of the Office of Hawaiian Affairs v.  
Yamasaki, 69 Haw. 154, 737 P.2d 446 (1987)).  In Yamasaki , this 
court adopted the test set forth by the United States Supreme 
Court in Baker v. Carr , 369 U.S. 186 (1962), which states 
Prominent on the surface of any case held to involve a 
political question is found:  (1) a textually demonstrable 
constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate 
political department; or (2) a lack of judicially 
discoverable and manageable standards for resolving it; or 
(3) the impossibility of deciding without an initial policy 
determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion; 
or (4) the impossibility of a court’s undertaking ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
8 
 independent resolution without expressing lack of respect 
due coordinate branches of government; or (5) an unusual 
need for unquestioning adherence to a political decision 
already made; or (6) the potentiality of embarrassment from 
multifarious pronouncements by various departments on one 
question. 
 
Nelson I, 127 Hawai ʻi at 194, 277 P.3d at 288 (citing Yamasaki , 
69 Haw. at 170, 737 P.2d at 455 (quoting Baker, 369 U.S. at 
217)) (brackets omitted).  In Nelson I , the issue was whether 
the determination of “sufficient sums” under Article XII, 
Section 1 presented a nonjusticiable political question due to 
“a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards” for
resolving the issue and/or “the impossibility of deciding 
without an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for 
nonjudicial discretion.”  Nelson I, 127 Hawai ʻi at 193-94, 277 
P.3d at 287-88.  
 We ultimately “affirm[ed] the ICA’s judgment, but only on 
the narrower ground that the determination of what constitutes 
‘sufficient sums’ for administrative and operating expenses 
under the Hawai ʻi Constitution’s Article XII, Section 1 is 
justiciable and not barred as a political question.”  127 Hawai ʻi 
at 206, 277 P.3d at 300.  We held judicially discoverable and 
manageable standards existed to determine “sufficient sums” for 
DHHL’s administrative and operating expenses , based on the 1978 
Constitutional Convention delegates’ estimate that those costs 
were $1.3 to 1.6 million at that time.  Nelson I, 127 H
awaii 
185, 277 P.3d 279.  This court did not judicially determine what ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
9 
 “sufficient sums” would be, and we imposed no funding 
requirements upon the legislature.  We held only that the 
political question doctrine did not bar justiciability of the 
case.   
 In arriving at this holding, we turned to the 1978 
Constitutional Convention history.  We quoted the spirited 
discussion among the delegates who were trying to “pin down a 
numerical figure” for DHHL’s funding generally.  127 Hawai i at 
202, 277 P.3d at 296.  We reproduced Delegates Burgess, De Soto, 
and Sutton’s dialogue, through which they “ultimately arrived at 
$1.3 to 1.6 million as a ‘sufficient sum’ . . . [as] to 
administrative and operating expenses” specifically, as follows:  
Delegate Burgess: [W]hat would be the estimated cost of 
these programs which are mandated?  
 
....
 
 
Delegate De Soto: What we propose with respect to “shall 
fund” is the administrative and costs of running the 
Hawaiian homes program, which would amount to operating and 
administrating  approximately $1.3 to $1.6 million, taking 
into consideration inflation, collective bargaining 
agreements that go into inflation with the pay.  
 
.... 
 
Delegate Burgess: I would ask — is the $1.3 to $1.6 million 
that was mentioned the total cost of the programs which are 
mandated to the legislature? Does that amount include the 
development of home, agriculture, farm and ranch lots, and 
the other aims that are cited on page 2 of the proposal?  
 
.... 
 
Delegate Burgess: Does the $1.3 to $1.6 million figure that 
was mentioned just a few minutes ago include the costs of 
the home developments, the loans and the other 
rehabilitation projects which are referred to on page 2? —
in other words, the development of home, agriculture, farm 
and ranch lots; the home, agriculture, aquaculture, ranch ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
10 
 and farms loans; and all of those programs. Are all of 
those included in the total estimate of the $1.3 million to 
fund this program, or is the total cost to the State 
different from that?  
 
.... 
 
Delegate Sutton: The $1.3 to $1.6 million is for 
administrative costs at present. Their need is more. The 
way the State itself can fund all the rest of the projects 
— and directly answering your question, delegate, is no, is 
not only $1.3 to $1.6 million — the way the State can find 
the funds is through mutual agreement with different parts 
of the government here in Hawaii; and that is, for the poor 
people who qualify, that is for HHA or Hawaiian Homes 
Commission Act properties, that there are similar needs and 
requirements for those to get  the land — that is, under 
$10,000 net assets. The State may fund these projects and 
come out with considerably more for the people at less of 
an expense, simply because the Hawaiian homes commission 
has land and does not need to condemn and purchase other  
land to fit the needy at that level.  
 
Id. (citation omitted).  Synthesizing these discussions, we 
concluded 
Thus, by the end of the Committee on the Whole Debates, 
what was certain was that the $1.3 to $1.6 [million] figure 
represented “sufficient sums” f or administrative and 
operating expenses only. As to that purpose under Article 
XII, then, the 1978 Constitutional Convention history does 
provide judicially discoverable and manageable standards 
that do not involve initial policy determinations of a kind 
clearly for nonjudicial discretion. At a minimum, funding 
at or above the $1.3 to $1.6 million envisioned in 1978 
would be required.8 Therefore, the determination of what 
constitutes “sufficient sums” for administrative and 
operating expenses is not barred by the political question 
doctrine. 
 
8 Presumably, this figure could be adjusted to reflect the 
impact of factors such as inflation or increased collective 
bargaining costs, both of which were acknowledged by 
Delegate De Soto as factors that could appropriately be 
taken into account in determining the required 
contribution.  
 
127 Hawai i at 202-03, 277 P.3d at 296-97  (citation omitted).  
This court thus ruled that judicially discoverable and 
manageable standards existed with respect to “sufficient sums” ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
11 
 for administrative and operating expenses, i.e., $1.3 to 1.6 
million in 1978 dollars, adjusted for inflation.  127 Hawai ʻi at 
202-03, 203 n.8, 277 P.3d at 296-97, 297 n.8.  We also stated 
that Delegate Sutton’s  statement (“Their need is more”) referred 
only to DHHL’s need for more money for another enumerated 
purpose under Article XII, Section 1.  127 Hawai i at 203, 277 
P.3d at 297 (inter preting “Their need is more” to refer to more 
money for the development of home, agriculture, farm, and ranch 
lots, not for administrative and operating expenses.) 
 We held , “Article XII, Section 1 and its constitutional 
history, however, do not shed light on what would constitute 
‘sufficient sums’ for the other three enumerated purposes,” lot 
development, loans, and rehabilitation projects.  127 Hawai ʻi at 
206, 277 P.3d at 300.  Thus, “the political question doctrine 
bars judicial determination of what wou ld constitute ‘sufficient 
sums’ for those purposes, and the ICA erred in concluding 
otherwise.”  Id.  
We noted that consideration of the other three 
purposes “could provide the basis for increasing the required 
administrative funding beyond the 1978 baseline identified by 
the delegates, but could also involve the courts in addressing 
issues (the development of lots, loans, and rehabilitation 
projects) that involve political questions.”  Id.  We rejected, 
however, the State’s argument that “challenges associ ated with 
determining the upper limit of the required administrative ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
12 
 funding render the calculation of the minimum required 
contribution nonjusticiable.”  Id.  We stated, “It is clear that 
the constitutional delegates intended to require appropriation 
of ‘sufficient sums’ to relieve DHHL of the burden of general 
leasing its lands to generate administrative and operating 
funds, and to that end, they identified the minimum funding 
necessary for such expenses.”  Id.  (footnote omitted). 
 Prior to the entry of this court’s judgment, the Plaintiffs 
requested an award of attorneys’ fees and costs under the 
private attorney general doctrine.  Nelson v. Hawaiian Homes 
Comm’n, 130 Hawai i 162, 307 P.3d 142 (2013).  In analyzing and 
ultimately denying the request, this court nonetheless 
recognized that the Plantiffs’ litigation produced the following 
result:  “DHHL will be able to shift the funds it was spending 
on administrative and operating expenses towards fulfilling its 
trust duties to its beneficiaries.”  130 Hawai i at 167, 307 P.3d 
at 147.  Once this court resolved the fees and costs request and 
issued its judgment, the case returned to the circuit court for 
further proceedings.    
B.  Remand Proceedings before the Circuit Court  
 1.  The Parties’ Motions for Summary Judgment (“MSJ”)  
  a.  Plaintiffs’ MSJ  
 On remand to the circuit court, the Plaintiffs filed a MSJ, 
arguing that there were no genuine issues of material fact, and ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
13 
 that the Plaintiffs were entitled to an order declaring that the 
State had failed to sufficiently fund DHHL, and that DHHL had 
breached its trust duty to vigorously seek sufficient funding.  
The Plaintiffs argued that DHHL requested from the State, and 
the State appropriated to DHHL, sums for administrative and 
operating expenses that were far less than DHHL’s actual need.   
In opposition to the Plaintiff’s MSJ, the State Defendants 
argued that “sufficient sums” should be calculated based on the 
4$1.3 million figure , drawn from the 1978 constitutional history 
of Article XII, Section 1, adjusted for inflation.    
  b.  DHHL’s MSJ  
 The DHHL Defendants also filed a MSJ, asking for Count II 
of the first amended complaint to be dismissed, on the basis 
that no genuine issue of material fact existed as to whether 
DHHL had requested sufficient funds for its administrative and 
operating expenses from the l egislature for the 2013-2015 fiscal 
biennium.  The  DHHL Defendants stated that they requested $25 
million per year for the 2013-2015 fiscal biennium for 
administrative and operating expenses, and were appropriated 
around $9 million per year by the legislature.  Therefore, they 
argued, they demonstrated that they fulfilled their trust duty 
                     
4  Before the circuit court, the State Defendants asserted that the $1.3 
million figure, adjusted for inflation, represented “sufficient sums.”   
Before this court, however, the State Defendants assert that the $1.3 to  1.6 
million figure, adjusted for inflation, represents “sufficient sums.”     
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
14 
 to seek sufficient sums for administrative and operating 
expenses from the State.  The State Defendants again counter-
5argued that “sufficient sums” for DHHL was $1.3 million , 
adjusted for inflation.    
  c.  The State Defendants’ MSJ  
 The State Defendants also filed a MSJ.  They argued that 
Article XII, Section 1 requires the legislature to make 
“sufficient sums” available for DHHL’s administrative and 
operating budget “in the manner provided by law.”   According to 
the State Defendants, the “manner provided by law” was throug h 
the legislature’s appropriation process, described in Article 
VII, Sections 5, 7, 8, and 9 of the Hawai i Constitution, and 
Section 213(f) of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, which 
governs the Hawaiian home administration account.  
  d.   The Circuit C ourt’s Orders Denying All Parties’ 
 MSJs  
 
 
 
 The circuit court denied all of the parties’ MSJs.  In its 
order denying the Plaintiffs’ and DHHL’s MSJs, the circuit court 
explained that it required a “fuller development of the facts” 
in order to determine whether the State violated its 
constitutional duty to make sufficient sums available to DHHL 
for its administrative and operating budget, and whether DHHL 
                     
5  Again, before the circuit court, the State Defendants asserted that the 
$1.3 million figure, adjusted for inflation, represented “sufficient sums.”  
Before this court, however, the State Defendants assert that the $1.3  to 1.6 
million figure, adjusted for inflation, represents “sufficient sums.”    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
15 
 breached its fiduciary duty to its beneficiaries by failing to 
request sufficient sums from the legislature.  The circuit court 
then issued an order summarily denying the State Defendants’ 
MSJ.    
 2.  Bench Trial  
 The case then proceeded to an eight- day bench trial.  DHHL 
relied principally upon Hawaiian Homes Commission Chair Jobie 
Masagatani and DHHL administrative services officer Rodney Lau 
to establish the $28 million figure as “sufficient sums” for 
DHHL’s administrative and operating budget for the 2015 -2016 
fiscal year.  These witnesses testified that DHHL arrived at the 
$28 million figure by starting with a base budget of moneys 
already appropriated for DHHL’s adm inistrative and operating 
budget in prior years.  From there, DHHL determined how many 
more administrative positions it needed to deliver quality 
services to its beneficiaries and meet its mission.  To that 
subtotal, DHHL added a 5% inflation factor, estimating that it 
needed $28.1 – 28.2 for its administrative and operating 
expenses.    
 The State Defendants relied upon Department of Budget and 
Finance administrator Neil Miyahir a to testify that “sufficient 
sums” needed to be determined through the typical legislative 
appropriation process.  Miyahira testified that he was familiar 
with the $1.3 to 1.6 million figure established at the 1978 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
16 
 Constitutional Convention as “sufficient  sums.”  Nevertheless, 
he testified that the Department of Budget and Finance evaluates 
DHHL’s budget requests in the normal course, as it does with any 
other State department, without regard to the mandate contained 
in Article XII, Section 1.  He also testified that he considered 
“administrative and operating expenses” to include only 
“salaries and operating expenses for [DHHL’s] offices.”    
 3.   The Circuit Court’s Findings of Fact, Conclusions of  
 Law, and Order  
 
 After trial, the circuit court issued its Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law, and Order (“FOFs, COLs, and Order”).   Key to 
this appeal, the circuit court’s Finding of Fact (“FOF”) 44 
states, “DHHL needs more than $28 million annually for its 
administrative and operating budget for fiscal year 2015-16, not 
including repairs.”   The circuit court then declared and ordered 
the following: 
1.  The State of Hawai i has failed to provide sufficient 
funds to the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands for its 
administrative and operating budget in violation of the 
State’s constitutional duty to do so under article XII, 
section 1 of the Hawai i Constitution.  
 
2.  The State of Hawai i must fulfill its constitutional 
duty by appropriating sufficient general funds to the 
Department of Hawaiian Home Lands for its administrative 
and operating budget so that the Department does not need 
to use or rely on revenue directly or indirectly from 
general leases to pay for these expenses.  
 
3.  Although what is “sufficient” will change over the 
years, the sufficient sums that the legislature is 
constitutionally obligated to appropriate in general funds 
for DHHL’s administrative and operating budget (not 
including significant repairs) is more than $28 million for 
fiscal year 2015 -2016. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
17 
  
4.  Prior to 2012, the DHHL Defendants  breached their trust 
duties by failing to take all reasonable efforts – 
including filing suit – to obtain all the funding it needs 
for its administrative and operating budget.  
 
5.  The defendants shall prospectively fulfill their 
constitutional duties and  trust responsibilities.  They are 
enjoined from violating these obligations.  
 
6.  Judgment on Counts 1 and 2 shall be entered in favor of 
Plaintiffs and against the State Defendants (as to Count 1) 
and the DHHL Defendants (as to Count 2).  
 
The circuit court then entered Final Judgment.   
 4.  The State Defendants’ Motion for Reconsideration  
 Ten days later, the State Defendants filed a motion for 
reconsideration.  The State Defendants argued that insufficient 
evidence supported the $28 million figure.  Consequently, they 
asked the circuit court to eliminate paragraph 3 in its order.  
The State Defendants also argued that paragraph 5 violated the 
constitutional principle of separation of powers.  Specifically, 
the State Defendants asserted, “[F]or reasons pr ovided in the 
State Defendants’ motion for summary judgment, filed 4/17/15, 
‘sufficiency’ within the meaning of art. XII, Section 1, is to 
be determined by the legislature, through its usual budgeting 
process, not by the courts.”  (Emphasis in original.)   The State 
Defendants argued that the separation of powers doctrine 
prohibited the court from compelling the legislature to 
appropriate any particular amount of money.  Consequently, they 
asked the circuit court to eliminate paragraph 5 in its order.      ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
18 
  The l egislature, as amicus curiae, was granted leave to 
file a memorandum in support of the State Defendants’ motion for 
reconsideration.  The legislature argued that the circuit 
court’s ruling usurped the legislature’s power to appropriate 
public funds.  The legislature asked the circuit court to amend 
its judgment and order to make it clear that the circuit court 
was not ordering an appropriation.    
 The court held a hearing on the motion for reconsideration, 
then reconvened the parties for its oral ruling three days 
later.  The circuit court first orally ruled that substantial 
evidence supported its finding that over $28 million constituted 
sufficient sums for DHHL’s administrative and operating expenses 
for fiscal year 2015- 2016.  The circuit court next addressed the 
State Defendants’ argument that the circuit court violated the 
separation of powers doctrine by ordering the legislature to 
appropriate funds, and that the circuit court’s authority was 
limited to providing declaratory relief only.  The circuit court 
orally ruled as follows: 
[W]hen the courts determine that the State has not met its 
constitutional duty to act and has not complied with the 
Constitution because the amount appropriated, as determined 
through the budgetary process, is insufficient and does not 
pass constitutional muster, the remedy can and should be 
compliance with the requirement to make sufficient sums 
available for DHHL’s administrative and operating budget.  
Otherwise, there is no effective remedy for the State’s 
violation of its constitutional duty to fund.  
 
The circuit court then concluded that “declaratory relief alone 
is not a sufficient remedy to the years of underfunding of the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
19 
 Department of Hawaiian Homelands that it has suffered and that a 
form of injunctive relief is appropriate and necessary for the 
State to comply with its constitutional mandate under Article 
XII, section 1.”   
 The circuit court’s written order granted in part and 
denied in part the State Defendant s’ motion for reconsideration.  
The circuit court denied the motion in part, declining to 
reconsider its finding that over $28 million constituted 
“sufficient sums” for DHHL’s administrative and operating 
expenses for fiscal year 2015- 2016.  The circuit court granted 
the motion in part, modifying paragraphs 3 and 5 so that the 
order would not be “construed in any form as an order for the 
Legislature to appropriate funds.”   Paragraph 3 was modified to 
eliminate language obligating the legislature to appropriate a 
sum certain to DHHL for its administrative and operating 
expenses, concluding instead that the legislature’s current 
appropriation was insufficient: 
Although what is sufficient will change over the years, the 
amount of general funds appropriated to DHHL for its 
administrative and operating budget for fiscal year 2015 -
2016 ($9,632,000) is not sufficient.  The State of Hawai i 
is required to comply with the Hawai i Constitution and must 
fund DHHL’s administrative and operating expenses by making 
sufficient general funds available to DHHL for its 
administrative and operating budget for fiscal year 2015 -
2016. 
 
Paragraph 5 was modified to eliminate language enjoining the 
defendants from violating their constitutional duties or 
breaching their trust responsibilities; as amended, paragraph 5 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
20 
 reads, “The Defe ndants must fulfill their constitutional and 
trust responsibilities.”    
 The circuit court then entered an “Order Amending Order 
Issued November 27, 2015” reflecting the changes to paragraphs 3 
and 5 in its order.    
 The Plaintiffs filed a motion for reconsideration of that 
order.  They asked the circuit court to again modify its order 
to explicitly state, “Sufficient sums for DHHL’s administrative 
and operating budget (not including significant repairs) is more 
than $28 million for fiscal year 2015- 16.”  The circuit court 
summarily denied the motion.   
 The circuit court then entered a First Amended Final 
6Judgment.  The State Defendants appealed.   This court accepted 
transfer of this case from the ICA.     
C.  Points of Error on Appeal 
 On appeal, the State Defendants raise the following points 
of error: 
1.  The circuit court erred, as a matter of law, when, 
notwithstanding firmly established principles of 
constitutional construction, it construed the provisions of
the amendment the delegates to the 1978 Constitutional 
Convention made to article XII, section 1 of the Hawai i 
Constitution and concluded that   
 
a.  The term “administration and operating budget”
includes and is the budget for all of DHHL’s 
administrative and operating expenses, including  
                     
6  The Plaintiffs also cross -appealed.  For reasons described in greater
detail in n.8 , we find the Plaintiffs’ points of error on appeal 
unpersuasive.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
21 
 “actual administrative and operating expenses,” 
“programmatic costs,” and “operating costs” as that 
term is defined in section 37 -62, Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS).  
. . . . 
b.  Despite  the availability of federal funds, and 
express authority in the HHCA to pay particular 
operating expenses with funds other than receipts 
from DHHL’s general leasing and other dispositions of 
“available land,” all of DHHL’s administration and 
operating budget must be funded by general funds.  
. . . . 
c.  DHHL Defendants have the first and last word as 
to which expenses and how much funding is needed for 
its annual administrative and operating expenses, and 
neither the director of finance, governor, nor the 
legislature may reduce or eliminate an expense DHHL 
includes in its administration and operating budget.7 
. . . . 
2.  The circuit court erred in finding and concluding and 
declaring that the State of Hawai i failed to provide 
sufficient funds to DHHL for its administrative and 
operating budget, and rejecting State Defendants’ position 
that article XII, section 1 of the Hawai i Constitution only 
requires funding for DHHL’s administration and operating 
budget of $1.3 -$1.6 million (the 1978 Baseline).  
. . . . 
3.  The circuit court erred in concluding that injunctive 
relief in favor of Plaintiffs and against State Defendants, 
particularly the legislature, is appropriate, and enjoining 
State Defendants, particularly the legislature, from 
violating their constitutional duties and trust 
responsibilities. . . .  
 
In short, the State Defendants challenge (1) whether the circuit 
court erred in declining to use the 1978 baseline of $1.3 to 1.6 
million, adjusted for inflation, to calculate “sufficient sums”; 
and (2) whether the circuit court erred in ordering the State 
                     
7  The State Defendants provide no argument on the first point of error 
and its three subparts.  These points are deemed waived.  See Hawaiʻi Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (“HRAP”) Rule 28(b)(7) (2015) (requiring the appellant’s 
opening brief to include “[t]he argument, containing the contentions of the 
appellant on the points presented and the reasons therefor, with citations to 
the authorities , statutes and parts of the record relied on,” and stating, 
“Points not argued may be deemed waived.”) Furthermore, as to point of error 
1.c, the circuit court did not actually conclude that DHHL has “the first and 
last word as to which expenses and how much funding is needed for its annual 
administrative and operating expenses. . . .”  There is no such conclusion of 
law so stating.  
   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
22 
 Defendants to fulfill their constitutional obligations under 
8Article XII, Section 1.    
III.  Standard of Review 
 The appellate court reviews “questions of constitutional 
law de novo , under the right/wrong standard.”  Jou v. Dai
-Tokyo 
Royal State Ins. Co. , 116 Hawai i 159, 164- 65, 172 P.3d 471, 476-
77 (2007) (citation omitted). 
 
 
                     
8  On cross- appeal, the Plaintiffs raise the following points of error:  
(1) “[t]he State Defendants’ motion for reconside ration was based on 
arguments that could have been, or were argued earlier”; and (2) “[t]he State 
Defendants waived their objections to the injunctive relief requested by 
[Plaintiffs].”  We find these points of error 
unpersuasive.  First, the 
Plaintiffs argue that the State Defendants raised their separation of powers 
argument initially in their MSJ and, therefore, could not raise that argument 
again in their motion for reconsideration.  See, e.g., Sousaris v. Miller , 92 
Hawaiʻi 505, 513, 993 P.2d 539, 547 (2000) (“Reconsideration is not a device 
to relitigate old matters or to raise arguments or evidence that could and 
should have been brought during an earlier proceeding.”) (footnote omitted).  
The State Defendants did raise the separation of powers argument in their 
MSJ, but that was for the purpose of preventing a judicial determination of  
“sufficient sums” altogether.  When the State Defendants raised the 
separation of powers argument again in their motion for reconsideration, it 
was in direct response to the circuit court’s order affirmatively obligating 
the State to fund over $28 million in administrative and operating expenses 
to DHHL.  The State Defendants assert, and we agree, that the separation of 
powers argument raised  in response to the circuit court’s order served a 
different purpose than the separation of powers argument raised in the State 
Defendants’ MSJ.  Therefore, the State Defendants could not have raised (and 
did not raise) the argument earlier.  The circuit court, therefore, did not 
err in granting, in part, the State Defendants’ motion for reconsideration.  
Further, in granting, in part, the State Defendants’ motion for 
reconsideration, the circuit court also properly modified its order so that 
it would not be “construed in any form as an order for the Legislature to 
appropriate funds.”    
 Second, the Plaintiffs argue that the State Defendants waived any 
objection to the circuit court’s imposition of injunctive relief.  As this 
opinion later notes, however, the circuit court erred in directing a $28 
million appropriation in its initial order; its amended order properly 
directed the State Defendants simply to fulfill their constitutional 
responsibilities.  Thus, there is no need to address this point of error.  
  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
23 
 IV.  Discussion 
 The State Defendants argue the circuit court erred in the 
manner in which it determined “sufficient sums.”  On remand for 
the determination of what constituted “sufficient sums” under 
Article XII, Section 1, the circuit court held a trial to 
establish the amount DHHL actually needed for its administrative 
and operating expenses for fiscal year 2015-2016.  The State 
Defendants insisted, on the other hand, that Nelson I  required 
only that “sufficient sums” be determined with reference to the 
$1.3 to 1.6 million figure established at the 1978 
Constitutional Convention, adjusted for inflation.      
 The State Defendants are correct.  Our Nelson I opinion 
clearly concluded that the only “judicially discoverable and 
manageable standard” for determining “sufficient sums” for 
DHHL’s administ rative and operating expenses was the $1.3 to 1.6 
million figure established by the C onstitutional C onvention 
delegates, adjusted for inflation: 
Thus, by the end of the Committee on the Whole Debates, 
what was certain was that the $1.3 to $1.6 million figure 
represented “sufficient sums” for administrative and 
operating expenses only.  As to that purpose under Article 
XII, then, the 1978 Constitutional Convention history does 
provide judicially discoverable and manageable standards 
that do not involve initial policy determinations of a kind 
clearly for nonjudicial discretion .  At a minimum, funding 
at or above the $1.3 to $1.6 million envisioned in 1978 
would be required.  Therefore, the determination of what 
constitutes “sufficient sums” for administrative and 
operating expenses is not barred by the political question 
doctrine.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
24 
 Nelson I, 127 Hawai i at 202-03, 277 P.3d at 296-97 (footnote 
9omitted, emphasis added).    
 There is no  suggestion in Nelson I  that what constitutes 
“sufficient sums” would be recalc ulated periodically by the 
10circuit court as “actual sums,”  because to do so would involve 
the judiciary in “initial policy determinations of a kind 
clearly for nonjudicial discretion. ”  That is what occurred in 
this case.  Instead, this court determined in Nelson I that the 
amount sufficient in 1978 for administrative and operating 
expenses ($1.3 to 1.6 million) could be adjusted for inflation.  
In other words, in 1978, the delegates established “sufficient 
sums” that would not be rec alculated in the future, but adjusted 
in a manner that could be mathematically determined, not 
judicially determined.  Further, were “actual sums” the 
                     
9  The delegates arrived at this numerical determination after extensive 
discussion of the 1976 DHHL General Plan, the increasing number of homestead 
applicants, the need for a bigger DHHL staff, and the need for automated 
record-keeping systems.  Nelson I , 127 Hawai ʻi at 200, 202- 03, 277 P.3d at 
294, 296 -97.  Therefore, we respectfully disagree with the Dissent, which 
posits that Nelson I  leaves open present judicial reconsideration of these 
factors.  Dissent  Sections II.A.3 and II.B.  
 
10  Therefore, we respectfully disagree with the Dissent that the circuit 
court was free to “affirmatively” determine, as “sufficient sums,” DHHL’s 
“actual” administrative and operational costs.  Dissent Section II.C .  
Respectfully, the Dissent misreads Nelson I, which concluded only that “a 
judicial determination of what affirmatively constitutes ‘sufficient sums’ 
for the other three constitutional purposes [in Article XII, Section 1] is 
nonjusticiable, based on the political question doctrine.”  Nelson I , 127 
Hawaiʻi at 206, 277 P.3d at 300.  The Dissent misinterprets this sentence to 
mean that this court expressly held that the circuit court could 
“affirmatively” determine “sufficient sums” as “actual” sums for DHHL’s 
administrative and operating expenses.  Nelson I  did not so hold.   
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
25 
 standard, there would be no need for Delegate De Soto to state 
that the $1.3 to 1.6 million figure could be adjusted for 
inflation, as periodically recalculating actual, present sums 
requires no adjustment for inflation.      
 The State Defendants also  argue that the $1.3 to 1.6 
million figure did not need to be adjusted for increased 
collective bargaining costs in addition to inflation, but 
increased collective bargaining costs were included in 
inflation.  To support this argument, they point to Delegate De 
Soto’s comment at the 1978 Constitutional Convention, which was, 
“What we propose with respect to ‘shall fund’ is the 
administrative and costs of running the Hawaiian homes program, 
which would amount to operating and administrating approximately 
$1.3 to 1.6 million, taking into consideration inflation, 
collective bargaining agreements that go into inflation with the 
pay.”  Debates in the Committee of the Whole on Hawaiian Affairs 
Comm. Prop. No. 11, in 2 Proceedings of the Constitutional 
Convention at 421-22.  To the State, Delegate De Soto 
acknowledged that increased pay due to collective bargaining 
agreements is one major contributor to inflation; it is not 
separate from inflation, but a key contributor to inflation.  
This interpretation appears to be faithful to Delegate De Soto’s 
floor speech.  In short, the State Defendants conclude that the 
State is constitutionally mandated to provide to DHHL, for ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
26 
 administrative expenses, a level of funding at or above $1.3 to 
1.6 million, adjusted for inflation.  This amount, they argue, 
is consistent with the framers’ intent.    
 The DHHL Defendants disagree with the State Defendants.  
They argue that this court in Nelson I  “instructed the Circuit 
Court to determine on remand ‘sufficient sums’ for DHHL’s 
administration and operating budget without limitation or 
restriction.”  There is no such remand instruction in the Nelson 
I opinion, which simply affirmed the ICA’s judgment.   127 Hawai i 
at 206, 277 P.3d at 300.  The DHHL Defendants point out that 
Nelson I  quoted the following 1978 Constitutional Convention 
history, which indicates that the $1.3 to 1.6 million figure 
identified by the delegates was not the upper limit and was 
insufficient even in 1978:    
Delegate Sutton: The $1.3 to $1.6 million is for [DHHL’s] 
administrative costs at present.  Their need is more .   
127 Hawaiʻ i at 202, 277 P.3d at 296 (emphasis added).  
. . . . 
“As demands on the department and staff grow, a much bigger 
staff will be required . . . Not only i s there a demand on 
the money for staff, but there is also other administrative 
demands that need to be met through funds, especially in 
the area of record -keeping.” 
127 Hawai i at 200, 277 P.3d at 294 (quoting 1 Proceedings 
at 414).  
 
However, as we made clear in Nelson I , the phrase “Their need is 
more” did not refer to more money than $1.3 to 1.6 million for 
administrative and operating expenses; it referred to more money 
for the “development of home, agriculture, farm and ranch lots.”  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
27 
 127 Hawai i at 203, 277 P.3d at 297.  We held that judicially 
calculating “sufficient sums” for that purpose was barred by the 
political question doctrine.  127 Hawai i at 205, 277 P.3d at 
299. 
 For their part, in support of their understanding that 
“sufficient sums” means “actual sums,” the Plaintiffs point to 
Nelson I ’s quotation of the definition of “sufficient” from 
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary as “marked by 
quantity, scope, power, or quality to meet with the demands, 
wants or needs of a situation or of a proposed use or end. . . 
.”  Nelson I, 127 Hawai ʻi at 198, 277 P.3d at 292.  This court, 
however, found these dictionary definitions too unclear to 
11apply.   Id.  (“Even with these popular definitions in mind, it 
is unclear what precisely the constitutional delegates intended 
when they used the term ‘sufficient sums.’”)  As a result, this 
court turned to the 1978 C onstitutional C onvention history to 
interpret the phrase “sufficient sums.”  Id.  The $1.3 to 1.6 
million baseline (adjusted for inflation) set by the 1978 
Constitutional Convention delegates was the only justiciable 
basis for determining “sufficient sums.”  Moreover, if “actual 
sums” were the standard, there would have been no need for  this 
                     
11  Therefore, we respectfully disagree with the Dissent that the 
dictionary definition of “sufficient” provides a judicially discoverable and 
manageable standard for determining “sufficient sums.”  Dissent Section 
II.A.3.  This court previously rejected that standard in Nelson I.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
28 
 court, in Nelson I , to hold nonjusticiable the determination of 
sufficient sums for the other three enumerated purposes in 
Article XII, Section 1.  There would also have been no need for 
Delegate De Soto to state that the $1.3 to 1.6 million figure 
could be adjusted for inflation, as any present calculation of 
“actual sums” would not need to be adjusted for inflation.   
Again, the Constitutional Convention history supports that the 
only “judicially discoverable and manageable standard” for 
determining “sufficient sums” for DHHL’s administrative and 
operating expenses in 1978 was the $1.3 to 1.6 million baseline 
identified by the delegates, adjusted for inflation.   
  In short, the Legislature and State Defendants are correct 
that the circuit court deviated  from Nelson I’s standard for 
determining “sufficient sums” for DHHL’s administrative and 
operating expenses:   the 1978 baseline level of $1.3 to 1.6 
million, adjusted for inflation.     
 Because the circuit court rejected this method of 
calculating sufficient sums, it made no finding as to what $1.3 
to 1.6 million, adjusted for inflation for the 2015- 2016 fiscal 
year, would be.  We note that, at various points during the 
remanded proceedings, the State Defendants calculated $1.3 to 
1.6 million adjusted for inflation to be over $4.9 million , 
while the  legislature calculated it to be $5.8 million.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
29 
  This court is not in a position to make the ultimate 
factual finding.  Rather, “[w]here findings are infirm because 
of an erroneous view of the law, a remand is the proper course 
unless the record permits only one resolution of the factual 
issue.”  Wilart Assocs. v. Kapiolani Plaza, Ltd. , 7 Haw. App. 
354, 360, 766 P.2d 1207, 1211 (1988) (citation omitted).  Here, 
the record does not permit only one resolution of the factual 
issue.   
 Therefore, we vacate the circuit court’s First Amended 
Final Judgment, Final Judgment, and underlying orders.  This 
case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings.  
On remand, the circuit court shall determine whether the State 
Defendants have provided “sufficient sums” for DHHL’s 
administrative and operating budget using the only judicially 
discoverable and manageable standard identified in Nelson I :  
the 1978 baseline of $1.3 to 1.6 million, adjusted for 
inflation.   
V.  Conclusion  
 For the foregoing reasons, the circuit court’s First 
Amended Final Judgment, Final Judgment, and underlying orders 
are vacated, and this case is remanded to the circuit court to 
determine whether the State Defendants have provided “sufficient 
sums” for DHHL’s administrative and operating budget for the 
2015-2016 fiscal year using the only judicially discoverable and ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORT AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
30 
 manageable standard identified in Nelson I :  the 1978 baseline 
of $1.3 to 1.6 million, adjusted for inflation.    
Sharla Ann Manley   
and Summer L.H. Sylva 
for plaintiffs-appellees/ 
cross-appellants   /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
 
  
    /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna   
Charleen M. Aina   
for defendants-appellants/ 
cross-appellees     
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
  
 
Melvyn M. Miyagi, Brian A. 
Kang, and Ross T. Shinyama 
for defendants-appellees/ 
cross-appellees 
 
Mark J. Bennett 
for amicus curiae 
Hawaiʻi State Legislature 
