***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
CHELSA-MARIE KEALOHALANI CLARABAL, individually and as next 
friend of C.M.K.C.
 and C.M.M.C., minors,  
Plaintiff- Appellant,  
 
vs. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I; BO
ARD OF 
EDUCATION OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I; CHRISTINA M. KISHIMOTO, in her 
official capacity as Superintendent of the Department of 
Education; CATHERINE PAYNE, in her official capacity as Chairman 
of the Board of Education; BRIAN J. DELIMA; DAMIEN BARCARSE; 
MAGGIE COX; NOLAN KAWANO; CHRISTINE NAMAU ‘U; DWIGHT TAKENO; 
KENNETH UEMURA; AND BRUCE VOSS, in their  official capacities as 
members of the Board of Education; HAWAI‘I TEACHER STANDARDS 
BOARD, Defendants- Appellees. 
 
 
SCAP-16-0000475 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-16-0000475; CIV. NO. 14-1 -2214) 
 
AUGUST 13, 2019 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J., 
CONCURRING IN THE JUDGMENT AND NAKAYAMA, J., CONCURRING AND 
DISSENTING 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J . 
  “The language of a people is an inextricable part of 
the identity of that people.  Therefore, a revitalization of a Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-16-0000475
13-AUG-2019
07:51 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
2 suppressed language goes hand in hand with a revitalization of a 
suppressed cultural and political identity. ”  Shari Nakata, 
Language Suppression, Revitalization, and Native Hawaiian 
Identity, 2 Chap. Diversity & Soc. Just. F. 14, 15 (2017).   
  Historically, the Hawaiian language played a 
fundamental role in all aspects of Native Hawaiian society.  It 
was utilized not only for practical communication in daily life, 
but also to express and preserve creation and genealogical 
chants, prayers, histories,
 narratives, proverbs, nā mele,1 and 
other knowledge that connected Native Hawaiians with each other 
and their ancestors through a shared cultural identity.  This 
common link was nearly severed as a result of Western 
colonialism, which sought to impose English as the exclusive 
medium of communication as part of a larger effort to  forcefully 
assimilate the Hawaiian people.  Central to this process was the 
banning of the use of the Hawaiian language in schools--an 
extremely effective tactic that had driven  the language to the 
brink of extinction by th e latter half of the twentieth century.   
  It was at this critical time that  a series of 
amendments aimed at revitalizing the Hawaiian language was  made 
to the Hawai‘ i Constitution, including a provision obligating the 
                     
 1 “Mele” is a Hawaiian word that may be translated as a “[s]ong, 
anthem, [] chant of any kind[,] poem, [or] poetry.”  Mele, Hawaiian 
Dictionary: Revised and Enlarged Edition  (Mary Kawena Pukui & Samuel H. 
Elbert eds., 1986).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
3 State to provide for a Hawaiian education program in public 
schools consisting of language, culture
, and history.  
Thereafter, a grassroots effort led the State to establish a 
number of Hawaiian immersion public schools in which Hawaiian is 
the standard language of instruction.  The children
 who attend 
these schools become fluent in the Hawaiian language, and the 
program has resulted in great progress toward reversing the 
decline in the number of Hawaiian language speakers. 
  
Today, there are Hawaiian immersion school s on five of 
the major Hawaiian Islands, but no such program exists on the 
island of Lāna‘ i
.  This case arises from a suit by a mother 
living on Lāna‘ i on behalf of herself and her two school- age 
daughters.  The mother argues that the provision of the Hawai‘i 
Constitution obligating the State to provide for a Hawaiian 
education program in public schools requires the State to 
provide her daughters with access to a public Hawaiian immersion 
education.  
  
On review, we hold that the Hawaiian education 
provision was intended to require the State to institute a 
program that is reasonably calculated to revive the Hawaiian 
language.  Because the uncontroverted evidence in the record 
demonstrates that providing reasonable access to Hawaiian 
immersion education is currently essential to reviving the 
Hawaiian language, it is a necessary component of any program ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
4 that is reasonably calculated to achieve that goal.  The State 
is therefore constitutionally required to make all reasonable 
efforts to provide access
 to Hawaiian immersion education.  We 
remand for a determination of whether it has done so.
 
I. BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
A. The History of ‘ Ōlelo Hawai‘i and Hawaiian Language Education 
1. Early Developments 
  ‘Ōlelo Hawai ‘i
, the Hawaiian language, has long been 
used by the indigenous inha bitants of the Hawaiian Islands to 
communicate and pass down the customs and traditions that 
underlie their culture.  Paul F. Nahoa Lucas, E Ola Mau Kākou I 
Ka ‘Ōlelo Makuahine: Hawaiian Lan guage Policy and the Courts, 34 
Haw. J. Hist. 1, 1 (2000).  A  “poetic, expressive language” 
consisting of over 25,000 words, it is considered by linguists 
to “belong[] to the family of Austronesian (Malayo-Polynesian)  
languages.”  Id.  The makeup of ‘ ōlelo Hawai‘i is reflective of 
the history and cultural priorities of the people who speak it; 
for example, the language includes 
approximately 130 words for 
types of rain, 160 words for types of wind, and 133 words for 
house.2  Id. at 2; Mary Kawena Pukui & Sa muel H. Elbert, New 
                     
 2 Another example of this diversity of subtle meaning may be found 
in the recent naming of a black hole 54 million light -years from earth.  
After an image of the extrastellar body was in -part created through the use 
of two Hawai‘ i-based telescopes, astronomers named the black hole “Powehi,” a 
word taken from a Native Hawaiian creation chant that means “the adorned 
fathomless dark creation” or “embellished dark source of unending creation.”  
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
5 Pocket Hawaiian Dictionary 225 (1992).  ‘Ōlelo Hawai ‘i also 
utilizes and incorporates figurative meaning “ to an extent 
unknown in English.”3  Lucas, supra, at 2 (quoting Albert J. 
Schütz, The Voices of Eden: A History of Hawaiian Language 
Studies 209-10 (1994)).   Further, the spoken word aided in the 
formation and perpetuation of a shared Hawaiian identity.  In 
the words of Kiowa novelist, poet, and essayist N. Scott 
Momaday, 
Oral tradition is the other side of the miracle of 
language.  As important as books are--as important as 
writing is, there is yet another, a fourth dimension of 
language which is just as important, and which, indeed, is 
older and more nearly universal than writing: the oral 
tradition, that is, the telling of stories, the recitation 
of epic poems, the singing of songs, the making of prayers, 
the chanting of magic and mystery, the exertion of the 
human voice upon the unknown —in short, the spoken word.  In 
the history of the world nothing has been more powerful 
than that ancient and irresistible tradition vox humana.  
N. Scott Momaday, Man Made of Words 81 (1997). 
  In 1795, th e Kingdom of Hawai‘i was established, and 
King Kamehameha I completed the unification of the islands under 
his rule in 1810.  Native Hawaiian Law: A Treatise 10  (Melody 
Kapilialoha MacKenzie et al. eds., 2015) .  Thereafter, Western 
missionaries traveled to the k ingdom intending to educate the 
                                                                        
(. . . continued)  
 
Timothy Hurley, Black Hole Named Powehi, Star Advertiser, Apr. 11, 2019, at 
B1. 
 3 Many words  and expressions in ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i have “kauna,” which 
are hidden layers of meanings in addition to their literal definition.  See  
The Pacific Islands: Environment & Society  168 (Moshe Rapaport ed., 1999).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
6 local populace about Christianity.  
Ka‘ano‘i Walk, Comment, 
“Officially” What? The Legal Rights and Impl ications of ‘Ōlelo 
Hawai‘i, 30 U. Haw. L. Rev. 243, 244 (2007).  The missionaries 
set about standardizing a written form of oral ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i in 
order to provide more effective instruction and facilitate the 
dissemination of their lessons among the islands’ inhabitants .  
Lucas, supra, at 2.  In 1822,  they published the Pī ‘ā pā, the 
first written primer on the Hawaiian language.  Id. 
  The Hawaiian people quickly mastered the written word.  
Newspapers were published in ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i as earl
y as 1834,4 and 
nearly three-quarters of the adult Hawaiian population were 
literate in their native language by 1853.5  Id.   
  ‘Ōlelo Hawai ‘i came to coexist in many contexts with 
English, which was often employed “[o] f necessity . . .  to 
record transactions of the government in its various branches, 
because the very ideas and principles adopted by the government 
[came] from countries where the English language [was] in use.”  
                     
 4 The two earliest Hawaiian language newspapers  were Ka Lama Hawaii 
and Ke Kumu Hawaii. Joan Hori, Hamilton Library , Univ. of Hawaii at M ānoa, 
Background and Historical Significance of Ka Nupepa Kuokoa  1 (2001), 
https://libweb.hawaii.edu/digicoll/nupepa_kuokoa/  
kuokoa_htm/Kuokoa_Essay.pdf  [https://perma.cc/4EPY- 88DA].  The Hawaiian 
newspaper Ka Nupepa Kuok oa had a sixty -six year publication history that 
began in 1861 and continued to 1927.  Id. at 4. 
 5 Other sources report literacy rates as high as ninety -one to 
ninety-five percent by 1834.  See Ka‘ano‘i Walk, King Liholiho Led the 
Hawaiians’ Amazing Rise to Literacy in the 1820s , Kamehameha Schools 
Ka‘iwakīlouimoku  Hawaiian Cultural Center  (Feb. 2014), 
https://apps.ksbe.edu/kaiwakiloumoku/node/606 [https://perma.cc/K2G9 -R9W3].   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
7 In re Ross, 8 Haw. 478, 480 (Haw. Kingdom 1892).  The two 
languages were generally viewed as interchangeable for official 
business, and the “ use of the Hawaiian language in any instance ” 
was “perfectly regular and legal.”   Id.  Indeed, beginning in 
1846, the Hawaiian legislature declared that all laws enacted 
would be published in both English and ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i.  Lucas, 
supra, at 3 (citing Act of Apr. 27, 1846, ch. 1, art. 1, sec. 
5).  Early decisions by this court “ reaffirmed the supremacy of 
Hawai‘i’s indigenous language as the governing law of the 
Islands,” by holding that it was the ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i version of a 
statute that was controlling in the event of a conflict between 
the two publications.  Lucas, 
supra, at 3 (citing Metcalf v. 
Kahai, 1 Haw. 225, 226 ( Haw. Kingdom 1856) ; Hardy v. Ruggles, 1 
Haw. 255, 259 (Haw. Kingdom 1856)).6   
  It is thus unsurprising that when King Kamehameha III 
first established Hawai‘i’s centralized public education system 
in 1841, the curriculum was primarily delivered through the 
medium of the Hawaiian language.  Haw. State Dep ’t of Educ ., 
                     
 6 Advocates of establishing English as Hawai ‘i’s primary language 
successfully lobbied the Hawaiian legislature to overturn these decisions, 
and in 1859 a new law was enacted declaring that the English version of a 
statute “shall be held binding” in the event of a “radic al and irreconcilable 
difference” between the two versions.  Lucas, supra, at 4 (citing Haw. Civil 
Code of 1859, sec. 1493) (emphasis omitted).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
8 History of Hawaiian Education.7  Foreign political  and economic 
influence led to the founding of competing English-standard 
schools over the next half century.   Lucas, supra, at 4 -8.  
However, Hawaiian language schooling remained widely available 
when in 1893 a group of “ American and European sugar planters, 
descendants of missionaries, and financiers ” conspired with the 
United States Minister to cause the invasion  of United States 
armed forces, ultimately “depos[ing] the Hawaiian monarchy and 
proclaim[ing] the establishment of a Provisional Government .”  
Pub. L. No. 103 –150, 107 Stat. 1510 (1993).   
2. Post-Overthrow Suppression 
  Three years after the overthrow
, the newly formed 
Republic of Hawai ‘i enacted legislation officially declaring that 
“[t]he English language shall be the medium and basis of 
instruction in all public and private schools . . . . Any 
schools that shall not conform to the provisions of this section 
shall not be recognized by the Department. ”  Lucas, supra, at 8 
(quoting Act of June 8, 1896, ch. 57, sec. 30 (codified in 1897 
Haw. Comp. Laws at sec. 123)).  Contemporary sources suggest 
that the law was specifically intended to eradicate knowledge of 
‘ōlelo Hawai‘ i in future generations.  See id.  The number of 
                     
 7 https://www.hawaiipublicschools.org/TeachingAndLearning/  
StudentLearning/HawaiianEducation/Pages/History -of-the-Hawaiian -Education-
program.aspx [https://perma.cc/69PK -X4TB]. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
9 Hawaiian-medium schools dropped precipitously as a result of the 
legislation; 150 such institutions existed in 1880, and none 
remained by 1902.
  Id. at 9.  Simultaneously, Hawaiian children 
and teachers were disciplined for speaking ‘ōlelo Hawai‘ i in 
public school, with teachers in some instances even being 
dispatched to Hawaiian-speaking homes to reprimand parents for 
employing the language to speak to their children.  Id.    
  The law  was largely successful at achieving its 
apparently intended effect.  Although the government instituted 
by the overthrow was replaced when Hawai‘i was annexed 
by the 
United States and again when the islands achieved statehood, 
‘ōlelo Hawai‘ i newspapers, church services, and other cultural 
touchstones all but disappeared as native -speaking communities  
continued to dwindle.  Id. at 9-10.  Minor efforts to 
reintroduce ‘ ōlelo Hawai‘ i into the public school curriculum as a 
supplemental foreign language course did little to arrest its 
decline.  Id.  At its lowest point, there were as few as fifty 
native speakers of the language under the age of 18.  Native 
Hawaiian Law, supra, at 1274.  ‘Ōlelo Hawai ‘i was thus in danger 
of becoming a dead language when,  in the 1970s,  civil and 
indigenous rights movements across the nation coincided with a 
period of renewed interest in Native Hawaiian culture that 
became known as the Hawaiian Renaissance.  Id.; Courtenay W. 
Daum & Eric Ishiwata, From the Myth of Formal Equality to the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
10 Politics of Social Justice: Race and the Legal Attack on Native 
Entitlements, 44 Law & Soc ’y Rev. 843, 860 –61 (2010).  During 
this period, a traditional Hawaiian proverb became popularized 
among advocates for the revitalization of ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i: “E ola 
mau ka ‘ōlelo Hawai‘i,” which has been translated as “ the 
Hawaiian language must live on .”8   
3. The 1978 Constitutional Convention 
  It was against the  backdrop of th e Hawaiian 
Renaissance that Hawai‘i convened its 1978 Constitutional 
Convention.  The records of the convention are replete with the 
delegates’ expressions of remorse that they had not learned more 
about Native Hawaiian cultural heritage
 during their upbringing, 
as well as their fear that such information would soon be lost 
as community elders died without passing on their knowledge.  
See, e.g., II Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of 
Hawai‘i of 1978, at 4 27-30 (1980) (II Proceedings).   The 
convention adopted a number of measures aimed at embracing and 
revitalizing the Native Hawaiian culture, including a proposal 
containing several provisions specifically addressing ‘ōlelo 
Hawai‘i.   
                     
 8 C. Kanoelani Nāone, ‘O Ka ‘Āina, Ka ‘ Ōlelo, A Me Ke Kaiāulu , 5 
Hūlili: Multidisc. Res. on Hawaiian Well -Being 315, 322 (2008), 
https://www.ksbe.edu/_assets/spi/hulili/hulili_vol_5/O_ka_aina_ka_olelo_a_me_
ke_kaiaulu.pdf [ https://perma.cc/2TS2 -MWC6].  Other translations include “the 
Hawaiian language lives on,” or “long live the Hawaiian language.”  Id. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
11   First, seeking to “overcome certain insults of the 
past where the speaking of Hawaiian was forbidden in the public 
school system, and of [the day] where Hawaiian [was] listed as a 
foreign language in the language department at the University of 
Hawaii,” the fram ing delegates  adopted an amendment giving  ‘ōlelo 
Hawai‘i formal recognition as one of the S tate’s official 
languages.9  Comm. of the Whole Rep. No. 12 in I Procee dings of 
the Constitutional Convention of Hawai ‘i of 1978, at 1016 (1980) 
(I Proceedings).   Second, the delegates  sought to remedy the 
lack of opportunity to learn about Hawaiian language and culture 
through an amendment requiring the State to “provide for a 
comprehensive Hawaiian education program consisting of language, 
culture[,] and history as part of the regular curriculum of the 
public schools.”  Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 57 in I Proceedings , at 
637.  Specifically, the delegates stated that they intended this 
latter provision to, inter alia , “revive the Hawaiian language, 
which is essential to the preservation and perpetuation of 
Hawaiian culture.”  Id.  The measure was combined with a 
proposal for a broader mandate that the S tate “promote the study 
of Hawaiian culture, history and language, ” and together they 
were adopted as a single amendment.  I Proceedings, at 273-74.    
                     
 9 Today, the University of Hawai ‘i system classifies its Hawaiian 
language courses as part of its Hawaiian Studies department.  See generally  
Hawaiinuiākea  School of Hawaiian Knowledge , https://manoa.hawaii.edu/hshk/ 
[https://perma.cc/5AFN -WJ8U]. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
12   Both the official language and the Hawaiian studies 
and education provisions were ratified by the electorate, and 
today they are respectively codified as article XV, section 410 
and article X, section 411 of the Hawai‘i Constitution. 
4. Hawaiian Immersion Education 
  During the early 1980s, a group of Hawaiian language 
teachers formed ‘Aha Pūnana Leo, Inc.  (
‘Aha Pūnana Leo) , a non-
profit organization dedicated to the revival of ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i.  
‘Aha Pūnana  Leo, Inc., A Timeline of Revitalization.12  Seeking to 
replicate the success of a similar program instituted by the 
Māori of New Zealand , ‘Aha Pūnana  Leo founded a number of “ Kula 
Kaiapuni Hawai‘ i” preschools throughout the state.   Id.  As in 
the school system established  by King Kamehameha III, 
instruction in the preschools  was delivered entirely in ‘ōlelo 
Hawai‘i.  Id.  T he goal of these “l anguage nests” was to instill 
                     
 10 Article XV, section 4 provides as follows: “English and Hawaiian 
shall be the official languages of Hawaii, except that Hawaiian shall be 
required for public acts and transactions only as provided by law.”  
 11 Article X, section 4 provides as follows:  
The State shall promote the study of Hawaiian culture, 
history and language.  
The State shall  provide for a Hawaiian education program 
consisting of language, culture and history in the public 
schools.  The use of community expertise shall be 
encouraged as a suitable and essential means in furtherance 
of the Hawaiian education program.  
 12 https://www.ahapunanaleo.org/en/index.php?/about/  
a_timeline_of_revitalization/ [ https://perma.cc/8D2P -Q7WV]. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
13 fluency in ‘ ōlelo 
Hawai‘i in a new generation at an age when 
children are most receptive to acquiring language skills.  See  
id. 
  Simultaneously, the organization lobbied the Hawai‘i 
legislature to grant formal status to the new Kula Kaiapuni 
Hawai‘i preschools and to amend the successor to the 1896 
English-only law in order to permit the use of ‘ōlelo Hawai‘ i as 
a medium of instruction in public schools.  Id.  The group ’s 
initial efforts were unsuccessful, and upon entering 
kindergarten many of the preschools ’ first graduates were placed 
in limited English proficiency programs designed to accommodate 
immigrant children.  Id.  This led to a boycott and other direct 
activism, and in 1986, ‘ Aha Pūnana  Leo successfully convinced t he 
legislature to remove  legal barriers to the preschools’ 
operation.  See 1986 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 79, § 1 at 104.   The 
committee reports for the measure indicate the legislature found 
“support for the exemption in Article X, Section 4 of the State 
Constitution, which states that the State shall promote the 
study of Hawaiian culture, history and language, and in Article 
XV, Section 4 of the State Constitution, which prescribes 
Hawaiian and English as the official languages of the State.”  
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 745- 86, in 1986 House Journal, at 1359.  
The reports further expressed in no uncertain terms the 
legislature’s view that Hawaiian immersion education should be ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
14 allowed to grow: “As the survival of a culture is linked to the 
survival of its language, restricting the establishment of 
Hawaiian language programs is cultural and linguistic genocide.”  
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 411 -86, in 1986 Senate Journal, at 955.  
  
During the same legislative session, ‘Aha Pūnana Leo  
successfully lobbied the legislature to authorize the Hawai‘i 
Board of Education (the Board) to undertake “special projects 
using the Hawaiian language”  that would be 
exempt from the 
normal requirements of English-language instruction.  See  1986 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 47, § 1 at 50 -51.  The following year, the 
Board launched the Hawaiian Language Immersion Project, a two-
year pilot program for children who wished to continue their 
education in 
‘ōlelo Hawai‘ i after graduating from ‘Aha Pūnana  Leo 
preschools.  Lucas, supra , at 11.  The program, which became 
known as Ka Papahana Kaiapuni (“Kaiapuni Educational  Program”) , 
was an immediate success; it was expanded to the second grade in 
1988 and through the sixth grade in 1989.  Id.  In 1992, the 
Board of Education further expanded the program through the  
twelfth grade, incorporating an hour of English education every 
day after fourth grade, and the first Kaiapuni Educational  
Program class graduated from high school in June of 1999.  Id.   
  Despite its success, funding for the Kaiapuni 
Educational P rogram remained static as the program grew, causing 
overall funding per student to decrease sharply.  MacKenzie et ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
15 al., supra, at 1276.  The decline led the Office of Hawaiian 
affairs to file a series of lawsuits against the Department of 
Education in the mid -1990s seeking redress for the Department’s 
failure to provide the Kaiapuni Educational P rogram with a 
“proper plan, resources, and teachers trained in Hawaiian -
immersion education.”  Id.  The litigation concluded in May 2000 
with a settlement in which the two agencies agreed to implement 
a five-year joint funding plan.  Id. at 1278.  In recognition of 
this agreement and in order to “ provide[] official legislative 
support to the Department’ s commitment to Hawaiian language 
immersion programs ,” the Hawai ‘i legislature in 2004 enacted a 
bill formally codifying a series of provisions governing the 
Kaiapuni Educational Program’s operations.   S. Stand. Comm. Rep. 
No. 3144, in 2004 Senate Journal, at 1567; 2004 Haw. Sess. Laws 
Act 133, §§ 1-5 at 577- 78.  Among other things, the law 
authorized the superintendent of education to provide either 
facilities for Hawaiian immersion education or transportation to 
the nearest schooling site at which Hawaiian immersion education 
is provided when fifteen or more qualified students in a school 
district wish to enroll in the Kaiapuni Educational Program.  
HRS § 302H-4 (2007). 
  
In 2014 and 2015, the Board enacted and began to 
implement several new policies concerning Hawaiian education, 
including one overarching policy intended to govern the Kaiapuni ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
16 Educational Program.  According to this policy, the goal of the 
Kaiapuni Educational Program is, inter alia, “[t]o provide 
parents and student[ s] a Hawaiian bicultural and bilingual 
education based upon a rigorous Hawaiian content and context 
curriculum.”  Haw. State Bd. of Educ., Policy 2105: Ka Papahana 
Kaiapuni (2014).13  The policy further states that “[e]very 
student within the State of Hawai ‘i’s public school system should 
have reasonable access to the Kaiapuni Educational Program.”  
Id.  An Office of Hawaiian Education was formed within the 
Department of Education to administer the new policies, which 
the Department’s website states are intended to help “ the 
Department meet its obligations to . . . the  Hawai‘i State 
Constitution (Article X, Section 4 and Article XV, Section 4) .”  
Haw. State Dep’ t of Educ ., Hawaiian Education.14 
  The  Kaiapuni Educational Program has continued to 
grow, and as of February 2016, Hawaiian immersion options 
existed at twenty- one sites throughout the state-- fifteen under 
the Board’s direct management and six at charter schools.15  
                     
 13 https://boe.hawaii.gov/policies/2100series/Pages/2105.aspx  
[https://perma.cc/97V8 -7C69]. 
 14 https://www.hawaiipublicschools.org/TeachingAndLearning/  
StudentLearning/HawaiianEducation/Pages/home.aspx  [https://perma.cc/4QXK -
TURU] (last visited  June 3, 2019). 
 15 Based on the Hawai ‘i State Department of Education website, it 
appears that two additional Board -administered immersion sites have opened 
since the filing of this case, bringing the total number of immersion sites 
in the state to twenty -three.  See Haw. State Dep’t of Educ.,  Hawaiian 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
17 Consequently, parents and children who wish to undertake 
schooling through the medium of ‘ōlelo Hawai‘i may seek 
enrollment in a 
K-12 immersion program on five of the major 
Hawaiian Islands: O‘ahu, Maui, Hawai‘i Island, Moloka‘i, and 
Kaua‘i.   
5. Hawaiian Immersion and Public Education on Lāna
‘i 
 
 Public school students on the
 island of Lāna‘i are 
required to take
 courses related to Hawaiian history and culture 
over the course of their education, including “Pre -Contact 
Hawai‘i History” in fourth -grade, “History of the Hawaiian 
Kingdom” in seventh -grade, and “Modern Hawaiian History” in high 
school.  A Hawaiian language summer program has also been 
offered in recent years.  However, there is currently no 
Kaiapuni Educational Program on Lāna
‘i.   
  In December 2013, a community meeting was held in the 
cafeteria of 
Lāna‘i High and Elementary  School (Lāna‘i School), 
the island ’s sole public school , to discuss implementing a 
Hawaiian language immersion program.  The meeting generated 
considerable community interest and was attended by over a 
hundred people.  A Hawaiian immersion stakeholders’ group was 
                                                                        
(. . . continued)  
 
Language Immersion Program, https://www.hawaiipublicschools.org/  
TeachingAndLearning/StudentLearning/HawaiianEducation/Pages/translation.aspx 
[https://perma.cc/NZ6M -KKAQ]. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
18 formed, and the group proceeded to engage with the school 
principal in the months following the meeting regarding the 
development of a Kaiapuni Educational Program  on the island .  
  During these exchanges, the principal agreed to commit 
resources and a teacher position to the creation of an immersion 
program while allowing the stakeholder s’ group to plan its 
structure, including the initial grade levels to be covered and 
the immersion model to  be adopted.   The stakeholders’ group 
originally made plans to establish one kindergarten and first -
grade immersion class, but in February 2014 the group responded 
to strong continued interest from the community by expanding its 
request to include
 an additional second-  and third- grade class .  
The principal expressed tentative support for the expanded 
proposal, pledging to seriously consider dedicating a second 
teacher position to the program.   
  
For two- weeks in April 2014, a  Lāna‘i immersion tea
cher 
position was advertised internally with the  Department of 
Education via the Teacher Assignment and Transfer Program.  The 
only applicant during this period was the president of the 
stakeholders’
 group, an immersion teacher living on Maui who had 
strong family ties to Lāna‘i and had for several years 
administered a Hawaiian language summer program on the island.  
In early May 2014, however, the applicant informed the principal 
by phone that she would be declining the position.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
19   The school’s subsequent efforts to recruit outside the 
Department were also unsuccessful; although the principal worked 
with the community to identify a number of possible teachers, 
each of the candidates 
either lacked the necessary skills and 
credentials to administer an immersion program or proved to be  
unwilling to relocate to Lāna‘i.  Because an immersion program 
did not commence as planned, the principal hired Simon Tajiri, 
the former program manager of the Lāna‘i Cultural and Heritage 
Center, as a long-term substitute teacher to provide 
supplemental lessons on Hawaiian language, culture, and history 
to elementary school students.  As of February 2016, recruitment 
efforts for a full-time immersion teacher 
remained ongoing. 
  
According to the school principal, recruiting teachers 
to Lāna‘ i is diff
icult due to the island’s location; many 
teachers are not interested in moving to a geographically 
isolated area with limited  access to housing, childcare, and 
other conveniences.  The principal also asserts that the school 
is limited in the incentives it can offer--teacher’s salaries 
are set by the collective bargaining agreement between the Board 
and the Hawaii State Teachers Association, as is statutorily 
required, and the school does not have the discretion to 
increase these amounts to attract new teachers.  Although the 
collective bargaining agreement does provide for an additional 
pay differential for teachers employed at hard- to-staff schools, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
20 this amount was limited  to $1,500 per year of employment at the 
time of the events in this case.16 
B. The Present Case  
1. The Clarabals’ Move to Lāna ‘i 
  Prior to August 2013, Chelsa -Marie Kealohalani 
Clarabal moved to Lāna‘i with her husband and children, including 
her two young school-age daughters.  In or around August 2013, 
the two Clarabal daughters respectively enrolled in second -grade 
and kindergarten at Lāna‘i School.   
  Although Clarabal is Native Hawaiian and states that 
her great grandmother was fluent in ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i, her 
grandmother was discouraged from speaking the language or 
teaching it to her children, and English 
is therefore the 
primary language spoken in the Clarabal family home.
  Because 
Clarabal viewed it as fundamental to her cultural identity that 
her daughters learn their ancestors’ language, the two daughters 
had been enrolled in the Kaiapuni Educational Program at Pā‘ia 
Elementary School on the i sland of Maui  prior to moving to 
Lāna‘i.  Consequently, both daughters were able to read and write 
                     
 16 The differential was increased to $3,000 per year of employment 
on July 1, 2015.  Also, HRS § 302A- 630 (2007), which was amended by the 2004 
Kaiapuni Educational Program legislation, authorizes the Department of 
Education to provide “additional benefits” to “[t]eachers in Hawaiian 
language medium education whose responsibilities are greater or unique and 
require additional language skills.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
21 only in ‘ ōlelo Hawai ‘i when they began attending Lāna‘i School at 
the beginning of the 2013-14 school year.   
  
The daughters faced difficulties at Lāna‘i School a
s a 
result of this language barrier, and Clarabal unsuccessfully 
requested that the school assign an educational assistant to 
assist one of her daughters after she was reprimanded for 
responding to a written assignment in ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i.17  Clarabal 
began attending some of the meetings between the school 
principal and the stakeholders’ group regarding the creation of 
a Hawaiian immersio
n program, and in late April 2014 she was 
informed that her younger daughter had been accepted into the 
school’s first immersion class, which would be held the 
following school year.  When the 2014- 15 school year began, 
however, no Hawaiian immersion class commenced.  Instead, the 
daughters were respectively assigned to first- and third -grade 
classrooms for which no permanent teachers were provided , with 
the vice-principal and various substitute teachers instead 
teaching the classes on a temporary basis.    
                     
 17 Additionally, one of Clarabal’s daughters was made to repeat a 
grade upon transferring to Lāna ‘i School.  The record is unclear as to whether 
this was the result of difficulties arising from the transition from Hawaiian 
immersion education to English standard schooling.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
22 2. Circuit Court Proceedings  
  On October 24, 2014, Clarabal filed a complaint in 
Circuit Court for the First Circuit18 (circuit court) on behalf 
of herself and her daughters against the Hawai ‘i Department of 
Education, the 
Board, and the members of the Board in their 
official capacities ( collectively, “ the State” ).19  In her prayer 
for relief, Clarabal sought a declaration that the failure to 
provide a Hawaiian immersion program and a stable teacher 
workforce on Lāna ‘i violated her children’s rights under the 
Hawai‘i Constitution, as well as an order compelling the State to 
develop a plan to implement a Kaiapuni Educational Program and 
ensure consistent staffing at Lāna‘i School.  Specifically, 
Clarabal alleged in Count 2 of her complaint that by failing to 
establish a Hawaiian immersion program on Lāna‘i that her 
daughters could attend, the State had breached the duty to 
provide a Hawaiian education program in public schools imposed 
by article X, section 4 of the Hawai‘i Constitution.20   
                     
 18 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.  
 19 During the pendency of this proceeding, many of the original 
defendants were succeeded in their official capacity by new  office holders.  
Thus, pursuant to Hawai ‘i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 43(c)(1) (2010), 
the new office holders have been substituted as parties to this case.  
 20 Clarabal also alleged in her complaint that the State’s failure 
to address the teacher shortage and provide instruction in ‘ōlelo Hawai‘ i 
violated the State’s obligation to provide a statewide system of public 
schools under article X, section 1 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution, as well as the 
same provision’s prohibition on discrimination in publi c education; [ROA v.1 
19:33] that the speaking of ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i is a traditional and customary 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
23   
On February 26, 2016, the State filed two  motions for 
partial summary judgment collectively covering all counts in 
Clarabal’s complaints .  On March 17, 2016, Clarabal filed a 
cross-motion for partial summary judgment on all counts 
requesting that the court declare as a matter of law that the 
State has a duty and obligation to provide access to a Hawaiian 
language immersion program to her daughters
. 
  With respect to Count 2 , the State argued that article 
X, section 4 does not on its face establish an individually 
enforceable right to Hawaiian immersion education.  This reading 
is confirmed by excerpts from the record
s of the 1978 
Constitutional Convention, the State contended, which suggest 
the provision was intended to preserve and perpetuate Hawaiian 
culture by ensuring Hawaiian history, culture, and language are 
integrated into the “regular curriculum ” of public schools that 
is typically taught in English.  (Citing Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 
57 in I Proceedings,  at 637-38.)  The State further argued that 
                                                                        
(. . . continued)  
 
Native Hawaiian right secured by article XII, section 7 of the Hawai ‘i 
Constitution, and that the State’s failure to provide a Lāna ‘i-based immersion 
program or to account for the costs of an immersion education when allocating 
funding violated the State’s duty to protect such rights; [ROA v.1 19:35 -36] 
that her children have a fundamental right to an adequate public school 
education protected by the due process 
clause of article I, section 5 of the 
Hawai‘i Constitution, and the State deprived them of this right by failing to 
maintain a stable teacher workforce at Lāna ‘i School; and that the high 
teacher turnover rate also violates article I, section 5’s equal pro tection 
clause due to its disparate negative impact on children living on Lāna ‘i. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
24 the text and history of article XV, section 4 of the Hawai ‘i 
Constitution, which establishes Hawaiian as an official language 
of the state, make clear that the delegates intended the State 
to have discretion to consider the budget and other constraints 
when determining which official services would be offered in 
‘ō
lelo Hawai‘ i.  (Citing Stan. Comm. Rep. No. 57 in I 
Proceedings, at 638.) 
 
 The State maintain ed that the standard Hawaiian 
history classes as well as the supplemental Hawaiian instruction 
by Tajiri are sufficient to spark students’ interests and 
inspire them to take Hawaii an language electives, and that the 
classes and instruction thus contribute to the revival of ‘ōlelo 
Hawai‘i as the co
nvention delegates intended.   The classes 
therefore meet the State’s article X, section 4 obligation to 
provide a Hawaiian education program in public schools, the 
State concluded. 
  In her opposition to the State’s motions and in her 
motion for partial summary judgment, Clarabal contended  that the 
convention history indicates the delegates intended article X, 
section 4 to require that the State provide a “ comprehensive  
Hawaiian education program” sufficient to revive the Hawaiian 
language.  (Citing, inter alia, Comm. of the Whole Rep. No. 11 
in I Proceedings,  at 274; Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 39 in I 
Proceedings, at 586, 590 ; Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 57 in I ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
25 Proceedings, at 637. )  Attached to Clarabal’s motion for partial 
summary judgment were 
a number of exhibits detailing the 
opinions of academics specializing in linguistics and Hawaiian 
studies regarding the importance of Hawaiian immersion 
education.   
  
These exhibits included a declaration by William 
O’Grady, a Professor of Linguistics of the  University of Hawai ‘i 
at Manoa who specializes in language revitalization
.  The 
declaration stated that the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization currently classifies ‘ōlelo 
Hawai‘i as a severely endangered language, meaning that immediate 
remedial action is needed to prevent its extinction.  Professor 
O’Grady further opined that relying on school -based language 
immersion programs in which children have the opportunity to 
hear and use the language for several hours a day is “ the only 
realistic course of action” to revive the language.  He stated 
that research on bilingualism indicates that children should 
receive at least twenty
-five to thirty percent of their language 
input in the second language to achieve fluency.  The “ modest 
program of instruction ” currently offered at Lāna ‘i School is not 
sufficient to reach this benchmark, Professor O’Grady concluded, 
and the chances of the children enrolled there achieving fluency 
through the current program are “negligible.”    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
26   Clarabal  attached a n additional deposition of 
Professor O’Grady to her reply brief in which he reiterated  the 
necessity of Hawaiian immersion education for reviving ‘ōlelo 
Hawai‘i.  Professor O’Grady state d that “[t] he only hope of 
saving [‘ ōlelo Hawai ‘i], preserving it, perpetuating it is to 
introduce it in the school,” and that the level of instruction 
required is “not 1 or 2 or 3 hours a week.  It ’s got to be full-
fledged exposure, the sort you get in an immersion program. ”  He 
estimated that four to four-and- a-half hours a day of Hawaiian 
language input in school is necessary for a child to become 
reasonably fluent in ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i.  He further elaborated that 
offering an immersion program is “the least we can do to try to 
revitalize language” and that w hile other measures can 
supplement an immersion program, they could not replace it.  The 
immersion program is not “the gold standard” for language 
revitalization, Professor O’Grady concluded, but rather “the 
minimum standard.”  Specifically addressing the supplemental 
lessons offered by Tajiri at Lāna‘i school, Professor O’Grady 
stated that they were not providing any movement toward 
revitalization because they are “not an ef fective way to make 
the children fluent in the Hawaiian language.”    
  Also attached to Clarabal’s motion for partial summary 
judgment was a second declaration made by Stanley H. “Kī
‘ope” 
Raymond II, a member of the Board of Directors of ‘ Aha Pūnana Leo  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
27 and an associate professor of Hawaiian S tudies at University of 
Hawai‘i Maui Coll
ege.  Professor Raymond state d that a well-
documented reemergence of ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i has occurred since the 
Kaiapuni Educational Program was first implemented in public 
schools.  Professor Raymond further declared that it is well 
accepted within his academic field that the offering of Hawaiian 
immersion programs in the public school system “is absolutely 
necessary to ensure the preservation of ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i for use by 
future generations.”    
  Following oral argument, the circuit court orally 
granted the State ’s motions for partial summary judgment and 
denied Clarabal’s motion for partial summary judgment .  With 
respect to Count 2, the court found that “ Article X, Section 4, 
the Hawaiian education clause does not establish a 
constitutional right to an immersion program.”  The court ruled 
that the reports from the 1978 Constitutional  Convention made it 
“clear that a comprehensive Hawaiian education program 
consisting of language, culture and history as part of the 
regular curriculum in the public schools is what is required.”   
The education offered by the State at 
Lāna‘i School, coupled with 
the State’s legitimate efforts to establish a Lāna‘i
-based ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
28 Hawaiian immersion program, were sufficient to meet this 
constitutional obligation, the court found.
   21
  The circuit court’s written order and final judgment 
were entered on June 7, 2016.  Clarabal filed a timely notice of 
appeal, followed by an application to this court for transfer.  
On January 26, 2017, this court accepted transfer. 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW  
  
This court reviews questions of law de novo .  Bank of 
Hawaii v. DeYoung, 92 Hawai ‘i 347, 351, 992 P.2d 42, 46 (2000).  
This includes a trial court’s grant or d enial of summary 
judgment.  Yoneda v. Tom
, 110 Hawai ‘i 367, 371, 133  P.3d 796, 800 
(2006).  Similarly, we exercise “our own ‘ independ ent 
constitutional judgment ’” when interpreting constitutional 
provisions.  Ka Pa ‘akai O Ka‘Aina v. Land Use Comm’ n, State of 
Hawai‘i, 94 Hawai ‘i 31, 41, 7 P.3d 1068, 1078 (2000) (quoting 
State v. Sua, 92 Hawai ‘i 61, 68, 9 87 P.2d 959, 966 (1999)).  
                     
 21 The court also determined that the State had met its article X, 
section 1 obligation to provide for a statewide system of public schools; 
that caselaw interpreting the traditional and customary rights clause of 
article XII, section 7 had applied it only to prevent the State from 
interfering with the exercise of certain Native Hawaiian practices on 
undeveloped land, which was not at issue in this case; and that the alleged 
teacher shortage on Lāna ‘i did not violate equal protection or substantive due 
process because there was no showing that Lāna ‘i School’s use of substitute 
teachers resulted in an inadequate education and various indicators of school 
performance in fact indicated the State had provided an adequate education.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
29 III. DISCUSSION 
  Before this court, Clarabal argues,  inter alia, that 
the circuit court erred in granting the State’s motion for 
partial summary judgment and denying her own because article X, 
section 4 of the Hawai‘i Constitution obligates the State to 
provide her daughters with access to a Hawaiian immersion 
program.22  As we have often stated, “[s]ummary judgment is 
appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, answers to 
interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the 
affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to 
any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to 
judgment as a matter of law.”  Hawaii Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. 
Keka, 94 Hawai‘ i 213, 221, 11 P.3d 1, 9 (2000) (quoting Amfac, 
Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 103, 839 P.2d 
10, 22 (1992)).  In making this evaluation, we view the evidence 
in the light most favorable to the non- moving party.  Id.  
(citing State ex rel. Bronster v. Yoshina, 84 Hawai ‘i 179, 186, 
932 P.2d 316, 323 (1997)).  
                     
 22 There is some discrepancy between the language used in Clarabal’s 
motion for partial summary judgment and that employed in the filings to this 
court.  While below Clarabal requested a declaration that the State is 
constitutionally obligated to provide her daughters with access to a Hawaiian 
immersion program, the briefs on appeal request a declaration that the State 
must provide reasonable  access to a Hawaiian immersion program.  As discussed 
infra, note 34, we interpret these requested remedies to have two distinct 
meanings.  We review the language of Clarabal’s motion for partial summary 
judgment for purposes of this appeal.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
30   “We have long recognized that the 
Hawai‘i Constitution 
must be construed with due regard to the intent of the framers 
and the people adopting it, and the fundamental principle in 
interpreting a constitutional provision is to give effect to 
that intent.”  Hirono v. Peabody, 81 Hawai‘ i 230, 232, 915 P.2d 
704, 706 (1996) (quoting Convention Ctr.  Auth. v. Anzai, 78 
Hawai‘i 157, 167, 890 P.2d 1197, 1207 (1995)).  The starting 
point for determining this intent is the text of “the instrument 
itself.”  State v. Kahlbaun, 64 Haw. 197, 201, 638 P.2d 309, 314 
(1981).   
  Article X, section 4 of the Hawai‘i Constitution 
provides as follows: 
The State shall promote the study of Hawaiian culture, 
history and language.  
The State shall provide for a Hawaiian education program 
consisting of language, culture and history in the 
public 
schools.  The use of community expertise shall be 
encouraged as a suitable and essential means in furtherance 
of the Hawaiian education program.  
  The State contends that the provision makes no direct 
mention of Hawaiian immersion education, but rather simply a 
“Hawaiian education program .”  Thus, the State argues, article 
X, section 4 requires only that the State provide public school 
students with “exposure to and some instruction in Hawaiian 
language, history and culture.”   The manner in which students 
are exposed to Native Hawaiian studies is a non- justiciable 
policy decision left to the State’s discretion, the State ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
31 continues, and the courses and instruction currently offered at 
Lāna‘i
 School are thus sufficient to fulfil l the State’s 
obligations. 
  T he initial two clauses of article X, section 4 are  
phrased in broad terms.  The first, the Hawaiian Studies clause, 
obliges the State to “promote the study of Hawaiian culture, 
history and language.”  A  conventional dictionary defines 
“promote” as “to help bring (something, such as an enterprise) 
into being.”23  The second, the Hawaiian Education clause, 
requires the State to “ provide for a Hawaiian education program 
consisting of language, culture and history in the public 
schools.”  “Program” is conventionally defined as “ a plan or 
system under which action may be taken toward a goal .”24  Thus, 
the plain text of th e provisions require the State to (1) 
actively bring about the growth of Hawaiian culture, history,  
and language studies; and (2) establish a  system in public 
schools that provides students an  education  consisting of 
Hawaiian language, culture, and history.  The clause s neither  
spell out the methods the State must use in achieving these 
ends, nor do they exp ressly leave this  determination to the 
                     
 23 Promote, Merriam– Webster, https://www.merriam -
webster.com/dictionary/promote  [https://perma.cc/CN54 -Z4UT]. 
 24 Program, Merriam– Webster, https://www.merriam -
webster.com/dictionary/program [ https://perma.cc/K4YV -E5XA]. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
32 State.  They are ambiguous in this regard, and “extrinsic aids 
may [therefore] be examined to determine the intent of the 
framers and the people adopting the proposed amendment.”  
Kahlbaun, 64 Haw. at 201 –02, 638 P.2d at 314.  
  The standing committee report by the Committee of 
Hawaiian Affairs on the proposal that would eventually become 
article X, section 4 contains several indications that the 
framers intended the provision to require the State to implement 
a Hawaiian education program in public schools that exceeds the 
minimum standards argued for by the State.  The report states 
that the “Committee decided to adopt this amendment to the 
Constitution in order to insure that there is a compreh ensive 
Hawaiian education program consisting of language, culture and 
history as part of the regular curriculum of the public 
schools.”  Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 57 in I Proceedings, at 637 
(emphasis added).  The Committee’s use of the word comprehensive 
is telling; the term is commonly defined as “ covering completely 
or broadly.”25  Later, the report refers to the program as an 
“intensive study .”  Id. at 638.  It is thus clear that the 
Hawaiian education program contemplated by the provision 
encompasses more than minimal “exposure to and some instruct ion 
in Hawaiian language, history and culture, ” as contended by the 
                     
 25 Comprehensive, Merriam– Webster, https://www.merriam -
webster.com/dictionary/comprehensive  [https://perma.cc/3KMA -843D].  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
33 State.  Rather, the framers intended the clause to ensure that 
students have the opportunity to study
 Hawaiian language, 
history, and culture in an in -depth and expansive manner if they 
so choose.    26
 
 Further, “a constitutional provision must be construed 
. . . in the light of the circumstances under which it was 
adopted and the history which preceded it.”  Hawaii State AFL -
CIO v. Yoshina, 84 Hawai ‘i 374, 376, 935 P.2d 89, 91 (1997) 
(quoting Carter v. Gear, 16 Haw. 242, 244 (Haw. Terr. 1904)); 
see also 
Nelson v. Hawaiian Homes Comm’n , 127 Hawai‘i 185, 198, 
277 P.3d 279, 292 (2012) (holding that this court must consider 
“the history of the times and the state of being when the 
constitutional provision was adopted” (quoting Kahlbaun , 64 Haw. 
at 202, 638 P.2d at 315))).  Specifically, “the object sought to 
be accomplished and the evils sought to be remedied should be 
                     
 26 The dissent reads much into  the fact that the terms 
“comprehensive” and “as part of the regular curriculum” were removed from the 
original text of article X, section 4 when the Committee of Hawaiian Affairs’ 
proposal was combined with the Committee on Educ ation’s proposal.  The 
dissent argues that this indicates the framers did not intend “to require the 
State to provide a specialized, intensive Hawaiian language immersion 
program” but rather wished to grant the State flexibility to implement the 
program as it saw fit.  Dissent at 10.  The deletion of the phrases appears 
to be a purely stylistic change, however.  There is no mention of the 
alteration in the floor debates or committee reports of the Convention.  
Moreover, the c ommittee reports accompanying article X, section 4  
specifically describe the envisioned program as “comprehensive” and 
“intensive. ”  Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 57 in I Proceedings, at 637 -38.  It is 
this concrete documentation of the framers’ intent that guide s our 
interpretation of article X, section 4 and not speculation regarding the 
hidden purpose of an effort by the drafters to use more concise language. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
34 kept in mind by the courts.”  Nelson, 127 Hawai ‘i at 198, 277 
P.3d at 292 (quoting Hawaii Gov’t Emps .’ Ass’n v. Cty . of Maui, 
59 Haw. 65, 81, 576 P.2d 1029, 1039 (1978)).    
  As discussed supra , the 1978 Constitutional Convention 
was convened during the Hawaiian Renaissance , a time  of renewed 
interest in Hawaiian culture following a long period in which 
learning about traditional Hawaiian language and history  in 
schools was at best shallow, sporadic, and undirected and at 
worst discouraged or forbidden.  See  II Proceedings, at 428 
(statement of Del. Nozaki).  The debates of the Committee of the 
Whole during this Convention provide clear evidence of the 
specific evil the delegates intended article X, section 4 to 
remedy; the delegates repeatedly and expressly stated that the 
proposal that would become article X, section 4 was 
designed to 
correct the lasting effects of the campaign of suppression that 
had deprived them and their families of the opportunity to 
become fluent in ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i.  Delegate Kaapu related the 
story of his father, who grew up in a small district served by a 
single school in which students “were prohibited from speaking 
the Hawaiian language” and were “ made to do detention . . . . 
pulling weeds” if they were caught.  Id. at 429 (statement of 
Del. Kaapu).  He then stated that during his own childhood, he 
did not have the chance to learn ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i, and that his own 
son was only then learning the language on his own from a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
35 “language book.”  Id. at 430.  Delegate Chung similarly related 
that, when he took Hawaiian as a freshman at the University of 
Hawai‘i, his class had “eight Kamehameha graduates and none of 
them knew Hawaiian.”  Id. at 431 (statement of Del. Chung).  
Delegate Hale stated that he had engaged in protest so that his 
son could go to “the only school located in the whole State of 
Hawai‘i that taught Hawaiian in the fourth  grade,” and that even 
in this school his son was unable to learn more than a 
superficial amount of the language.  Id.  at 431 (statement of 
Del. Hale).27 
  Ultimately, we need not speculate about the manner in 
which the framers sought to make amends for the historical 
campaign of suppression because the records of th e convention  
are explicit as to the goal s they intended the Hawaiian 
education program required by article X, section 4 to achieve : 
This section is intended to [] insure the general diffusion 
of Hawaiian history on a wider basis, to recognize and 
                     
 27 That the delegates sought to remedy the state of affairs brought 
about by the historical suppression of the Hawaiian language is further 
demonstrated by the history of article XV, section 4, the clause making 
Hawaiian an official language of the State of Hawai ‘i, which was part of the 
same proposal as article X, section 4.  As related, the Committee of the 
Whole report addressing the proposal states that the provision was adopted 
“to overcome certain insults of the past where the speaking of Hawaiian was 
forbidden in the public school system, and of today where Hawaiian is listed 
as a foreign language in the language department at the University of 
Hawaii.”  Comm. of the Whole Rep. No. 12 in I Proceedings, at 1016.  This 
history may guide our interpretation of article X, section 4 because, as we 
have long held, “a constitutional provision must be construed in connection 
with other provisions of the instrument, and also in the light of the 
circumstances under which it was adopted and the history which preceded it.”  
Yoshina, 84 Hawai ‘i at 376, 935 P.2d at 91 (quoting Carter, 16 Haw. at 244).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
36 preserve the Hawaiian culture which has contributed to, and 
in many ways forms the basis and foundation of, modern 
Hawaii, and to revive the Hawaiian language, which is 
essential to the preservation and perpetuation of Hawaiian 
culture. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 57 in I Proceedings, at 637 (emphase s 
added).  Article X, section 4 was thus adopted for the express 
purpose of, inter alia, reviving the Hawaii an language.28 
  Taken together, the records of the 1978 Constitutional 
Convention make clear that the framers intended article X, 
section 4 to require the State to provide a Hawaiian education 
program in public schools that is reasonably calculated to 
revive and preserve ‘ō lelo Hawai ‘i.  By doing so, they hoped to 
rectify the ill effects of the historic suppression of the 
language.29   
                     
 28 In this cont ext, we interpret the term “revive” to mean that the 
language is actively spoken and no longer in danger of extinction.  This 
generally parallels the standards that Professor O’Grady stated the United 
Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization and the Endangered 
Language Catalogue employ to identify “safe” languages.  These identifying 
characteristics include that intergenerational transmission of the language 
occurs without interruption and that the number of speakers is stable or 
growing. 
 29 The dissent implies that the language of article X, section 4 is 
unambiguous, obviating the need for this court to consult extrinsic evidence 
to determine the framers’ intent.  Dissent at 6.  The plain text of the 
provision requires only that the State must provide a Hawaiian education 
program consisting of language, culture, and history in public schools, the 
dissent maintains.  Dissent at 6.  Yet the dissent states that there is a 
role for courts in “evaluating the adequacy of the State’s Hawaiian Educ ation 
program” and posits that, if properly raised, “we could decide whether the 
State’s current program passes constitutional muster.”  Dissent at 1 3-14.  
The dissent avoids making such an evaluation by arguing that Clarabal’s 
motion for partial summary judgment requested only that the court rule on 
whether the State has an obligation to provide access to a Hawaiian immersion 
program.  Dissent at 14.  But  Clarabal challenges on appeal not only the 
circuit court’s denial of her own motion for partial summary judgment but 
also that court’s grant of the State’s motions for partial summary judgment.  
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
37   The State’s position --that any exposure to Hawaiian 
language, history
, and culture is sufficient to satisfy its 
constitutional obligations, and that the specific manner of 
exposure is left to the State’s discretion --is fundamentally 
incompatible with th e framers’  intention.  Indeed, under the 
State’s formulation, it could do away with the Kaiapuni  
Educational Program entirely and instead satisfy its 
constitutional obligations with a program that the record 
demonstrates is indisputably inadequate to revive and preserve 
‘ōlelo Hawai‘ i
.  This is precisely the outcome the delegates 
adopted article X, section 4 to prevent.   
                                                                        
(. . . continued)  
 
As the dissent acknowledges, Clarabal has repeatedly made reference to the 
inadequacy of the Hawaiian education program at Lāna ‘i school, thus making it 
necessary to consider this matter in determining whether summary judgment was 
properly granted to the State on all counts.  Dissent at 1 4. 
  In any event, the diss ent’s acknowledgment that some standard 
exists by which courts can evaluate the constitutional adequacy of the 
State’s Hawaiian education program is an implicit concession that article X, 
section 4 imposes unwritten requirements not enumerated in the ostensibly 
clear text of the provision.  Otherwise, any program that encompassed some 
trace of each of the three listed components would satisfy the State’s 
constitutional mandate regardless of whether it was otherwise adequate.  And, 
even were we to agree that  article X, section 4’s broad terms support the 
degree of discretion argued for by the dissent and claimed by the State, the 
“settled rule” that words in a constitutional provision are presumed to be 
used in their conventional sense applies “unless the con text furnishes some 
ground to control, qualify, or enlarge” the terms.  Pray v. Judicial 
Selection Comm’n of State , 75 Haw. 333, 342, 861 P.2d 723, 727 (1993) 
(quoting Cobb v. State, 68 Haw. 564, 565, 722 P.2d 1032, 1033 (1986)).  Given 
the historical context in which article X, section 4 was enacted, there is 
ample evidence that the framers did not intend that the constitutional 
provision would be satisfied by any exposure of school children to Hawaiian 
language, history, and culture, no matter how minimal . ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
38   The dissent disagrees with this analysis.  It contends 
that determining the details of the Hawaiian education program 
mandated by article X, section 4 is a “ responsibility []  best 
left to the Legislature, not the courts ,” and that the 
legislature has made such a determination by enacting HRS 
Chapter 302H.  Dissent at 11, 14 n.5 .  As a threshold matter, 
any implication that HRS Chapter 302H requires that the State 
maintain the Kaiapuni Educational Program is contradicted by the 
terms of the statutes
, which authorize the State to create a 
Hawaiian immersion program but do not mandate that it do so.30   
  
But more  importantly , although the dissent is correct 
that the legislature may play an important role in defining the 
specific details of the Hawaiian education program required by 
article X, section 4, the delegates did not draft the provision 
to allow legislative enactments to alter or qualify the central 
requirement that the State provide a  Hawaiian education program 
that is constitutionally adequate.   This approach directly 
                     
 30 See HRS § 302H -1 (2007) (“The Hawaiian language medium education 
program may be established as a complete educational program or schooling 
experience provided to students in the medium of the Hawaiian language.” 
(emphasis added)); HRS § 302H -3 (2007) (“The department of education may 
create a separate office of Hawaiian language medium education for the 
direction and control of the program.” (emphasis added)); HRS § 302H -4 (“When 
fifteen or more qualified children in any one departmental school district 
wish to enroll in the Hawaiian language medium education program, the 
superintendent of education may provide facilities for a Hawaiian language 
medium education program or provide transportation to the nearest schooling 
site providing the program, including a charter school site or laboratory 
school site.” (emphasis added)).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
39 contrasts with that taken by the delegates with regard to the 
constitutional provision that made Hawaiian an official language 
of the state, which was considered and enacted at the same time 
as article X, section 4.  That is, unlike in the Hawaiian 
Education clause, the framers expressly stated that “English and 
Hawaiian shall be the official languages of Hawaii, except that 
Hawaiian shall be required for public acts and transactions only 
as provided by law. ”  Haw. Const. art. XV, sec. 4 (emphasis 
added); see also, e.g. , Haw. Const. art. XI, sec. 9 (“E ach 
person has the right to a clean and healthful environment, as 
defined by laws relating to environmental quality . . . .” 
(emphasis added)).   
  Thus, the delegates did not intend that the 
requirements of the program would be solely defined by 
legislative enactments.  Instead, they intended the core 
requirement that the State provide a constitutionally adequate 
Hawaiian education program to be defined by this court’s 
interpretation, for it is “the courts, not the legislature, 
[who] 
are the ultimate interpreters of the Constitution.”  In re 
Application of Maui Elec. Co., 141 Hawai ‘i 249, 268 n. 33, 408 
P.3d 1, 20 n.33 (2017) (quoting State v. Bani , 97 Hawai ‘i 285, 
291 n.4, 36 P.3d 1255, 1261 n.4 (2001)).  And, as stated, “we 
have long recognized that the Hawaii Constitution must be 
construed with due regard to the intent of the framers and the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
40 people adopting it, and the fundamental principle in 
interpreting a constitutional provision is to give effect to 
that intent.”  Sierra Club v. Dep’t of Transp. of 
Hawai‘i, 120 
Hawai‘i 181, 196, 202 P.3d 1226, 1241 (2009) (quoting Hanabusa v. 
Lingle, 105 Hawai ‘i 28, 31 –32, 93 P.3d 670, 673 –74 (2004) ).   
  It is true that the delegates to the 1978 
Constitutional Convention lacked the benefit of subsequent 
academic research on the revitalization of languages, and they 
may not have anticipated the contours of a Hawaiian education 
program reasonably calculated to revive ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i under 
current circumstances.  Yet, as Justice Stone of the United 
States Supreme Court said in a passage that has been approvingly 
quoted by members of this court:
 
[I]n determining whether a provision of the Constitution 
applies to a new subject matter, it is of little 
significance that it is one with which the framers were not 
familiar.  For in setting up an enduring framework of 
government they undertook to carry out for the indefinite 
future and in all the vicissitudes of the changing affairs 
of men, those fundamental purposes which the instrument 
itself discloses.  Hence we read its words, not as we read 
legislative codes which are subject to continuous revision 
with the changing course of events, but as the revelation 
of the great purposes which were intended to be achieved by 
the Constitution as a continuing instrument of government.  
If we remember that it is a Constitution we are expounding, 
we cannot rightly prefer, of possible meanings of its 
words, that which will defeat rather than effectuate the 
Constitutional purpose.  
Emps.’ Ret. Sys. of Hawaii v. Ho , 44 Haw. 154, 170 –71, 352 P.2d 
861, 870 (1960) (opinion of Marumoto, J.) (quoting United States 
v. Classic, 313 U.S. 229, 316 (1941) (emphases added and 
internal quotes omitted); cf. State v. O ’Brien, 68 Haw. 38,  44, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
41 704 P.2d 883, 887 (1985) (“ [T]he mandate of the constitution 
must accord with the changing circumstances of modern times and 
the exigencies of life in a society dependent on technology such 
as the automobile. ”).   
  Thus, the specifics of the Hawaiian 
education program 
required by article X, section 4 have evolved through time and 
will continue to be refined as circumstances and the state of 
human knowledge about reviving and preserving language changes.  
What is key is that the program effectuates the constitutional 
purpose of article X, section 4 by being reasonably calculated 
to revive 
‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i
.31  
  The State and the trial court made much of the 
Committee of Hawaiian Affair’s statement that the instruction is 
to be “part of the regular curriculum of the public schools,” 
apparently interpreting “regular” as synonymous with “ordinary” 
                     
 31 The dissent’s repeated assertion that “the framers [did not] 
intend[] Hawaiian language immersion to be a required component of the 
Hawaiian Education program” is therefore ultima tely irrelevant to the outcome 
of this case.  Dissent at 6-7, 10-11; cf. McCleary v. State, 269 P.3d 227, 
251 (2012) (“While the [State] has long recognized these offerings as central 
to the basic education program, they are not etched in constitutional stone 
as part of the definition of ‘education.’  The [State] has an obligation to 
review the basic education program as the needs of students and the demands 
of society evolve.  From time to time, the [State] will need to evaluate 
whether new offerings must be included in the basic education program.  
Likewise, the importance of certain programs or offerings may prove less 
compelling over time.”).  As in McCleary, the State has a constitutional 
obligation to routinely review the details of the Hawaiian education program 
to ensure it is compliant with the mandates of article X, section 4 as 
society evolves, enacting such changes as may be needed for the program to be 
reasonably calculated to revive the Hawaiian language under circumstances as 
they then exist. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
42 or “standard.”  Yet “regular”  also means “recurring, attending, 
or functioning at fixed, uniform, or normal intervals,”  and 
further examination of the committee report indicates that it is 
this latter meaning that was intended.32  The Committee lamented 
that “[p]resently Hawaiian courses are part of a larger program 
called social studies” and, as part  of this program, “the 
required units of Hawaiian courses cast a small shadow which is 
soon lost in the wave of western standards.”  Stand. Comm. Rep. 
No. 57 in I Proceedings, at 637.  The Committee thus intended 
article X, section 4 to insure that Hawaiian studies were 
offered consistently throughout the course of schooling and not 
as special, one time units within a broader academic program.  
This is what was intended by the Committee’s reference to the 
“regular curriculum ” of public schools, and the prov ision does 
not require that Hawaiian studies be conducted in the same 
manner as other courses.33 
  This case comes before this court on a motion for 
summary judgment, and the undisputed evidence in the record 
                     
 32 Regular, Merriam– Webster, https://www.merriam -
webster.com/dictionary/regular [ https://perma.cc/U2C5 -6VKR]. 
 33 Indeed, under the State’s formulation, the Kaiapuni Educational 
Program would not be a valid method o f satisfying the State’s article X, 
section 4 obligations, as it is a nonstandard method of instruction.  This is 
contrary to the State’s acknowledgment that a Hawaiian immersion program 
“represents another means by which the State could introduce intensiv e 
instruction in Hawaiian language, history, and culture into the classroom[,] 
[b]ut it is not the only or exclusive means of satisfying Article X, Section 
4’s mandate.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
43 demonstrates that providing reasonable access to a Hawaiian 
immersion program in public schools is necessary to the revival 
of ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i.34  As related above, William O’Grady, a 
linguistics professor specializing in language revitalization, 
stated repeatedly and emphatically in his declaration and 
deposition that a language immersion program in which children 
receive at least twenty
-five to thirty percent of their language 
exposure in ‘ ōlel o Hawai ‘i is currently “ the only realistic 
course of action” to revive the language and preserve it for 
future generations.35  He explained that providing reasonable 
access to an immersion program is not “the gold standard” for 
language revitalization, but rather “the minimum standard.”  
This conclusion was echoed by Stanley H. “ Kī‘ope” Raymond II, a 
professor of Hawaiian Studies, who stated that it is well 
accepted within his field that offering a Hawaiian immersion 
                     
 34 We use the phrase “reasonable access,” which is employed by the 
Board in its policy governing the Kaiapuni Educational Program, to mean that 
the State must take all reasonable measures to provide access.  What 
constitutes reasonable access to a Hawaiian immersion program may vary based 
on the circumstances, but the State must consider any reasonable alternative 
and provide access if such an alternative exists.   
 35 Professor O’Grady stated that one reason immersion education is 
currently the only realistic option for reviving ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i is that the 
language is no longer being learned  by children in the home through 
intergenerational transmission and no ideal “language pill” exists.  A time 
may come where intergenerational transfer of ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i is restored or a 
more effective instructional technique is discovered and reasonable access to 
Hawaiian immersion education is no longer essential to the revival and 
preservation of the language.  As stated, what article X, section 4 requires 
is not specifically Hawaiian immersion  education, but rather a Hawaiian 
education program reasonably calculated to revive and preserve ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
44 education option in the public school system “is absolutely 
necessary to ensure the preserva
tion of ‘ ōlelo Hawa
i‘i for use by 
future generations.”   The State offered no testimony or 
declarations disputing this evidence.36 
  Rather, the State argued below  that exposing students 
to basic Hawaiian language, culture, and history through classes 
and instruction like those currently offered at Lāna‘i School  
could increase student interest in the Hawaiian language and 
induce some student to seek out additional instruction, thereby 
reviving ‘ ōlelo Hawai ‘i.37  But this claim is unsupported by the 
                     
 36 The State points to the declaration of the Director of the Office 
of Hawaiian Education stating that the “Hawaiian language can be taught 
through the medium of English the same way other foreign languages are 
taught.”  As an initial matter, the delegates to the 1978 Constitutional 
Convention specifically stated when making ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i an official language 
of the State that they were seeking to overc ome the “insult” of ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i 
being regarded as a foreign language in schools, and the language should 
receive due consideration for its special connection to the Hawaiian Islands 
even when taught through standard English instruction.  See supra note 27.  
Moreover, this misconstrues the State’s obligation under article X, section 
4.  The question is not whether ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i can be taught using techniques 
other than Hawaiian immersion  education.  It is whether a Hawaiian education 
program that does not include reasonable access to Hawaiian immersion 
education can result in the revitalization of ‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i.  The 
uncontroverted evidence in the record indicates it cannot.  See also William 
H. Wilson and Keiki Kawai ‘ae‘a, I Kumu; I  Lālā: “Let There Be Sources; Let 
There Be Branches”, 46 J. Am. Indian Educ. 37, 38 (2007) (“Over eighty years 
of teaching Hawaiian as a second/foreign language in English  medium 
educational structures have shown that Hawaiian cannot be revitalized in that 
way.  The life of a language exists in the system of structures, not in the 
instruction of content.”).  
 37 By contrast, the concurring opinion concludes that the Hawai‘i 
Constitution obligates the State to provide each student who wishes to learn 
‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i “with a reasonable opportunity to become fluent in the language 
during the course of the student’s public education.”  Concurrence at 12.  
But simply providing the  opportunity for students to become fluent in ‘ōlelo 
Hawai‘i does not on 
its own satisfactorily address the underlying purpose of 
article X, section 4 of the constitution--“to revive the Hawaiian language, 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
45 evidence in the record.  Professor O ’Grady specifically rejected 
the contention that the instruction currently offered at Lāna ‘i 
School is “moving towards revitalization.”  Indeed, he stated 
that the lessons 
may in fact be detrimental to the effort by 
misleading parents into believing that their child will become 
fluent from the lessons, causing them to forego more adequate 
instruction.   
  On the record before us, there is no disputed  issue of 
material fact that providing reasonable access to a Hawaiian 
immersion program is an essential component of any Hawaiian 
education program reasonably calculated to revive and preserve 
‘ōlelo Hawai‘ i, and it is thus required by article X, section 4.38  
                                                                        
(. . . continued)  
 
which is essential to the preservation and perpetu ation of Hawaiian culture.”  
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 57 in I Proceedings, at 637.  Under the concurring 
opinion’s formulation, the State might seek to provide a reasonable 
opportunity to become fluent by offering students access to computer 
programs, after-s chool instruction, traditional language classes, or various 
combinations thereof.  But the unrefuted expert testimony in this case 
established that these measures are not alone sufficient to revive the 
Hawaiian language and would thus fall short of accompl ishing the framers’ 
intent. 
 38 The dissent faults our holding for mandating only that the State 
undertake all reasonable efforts to provide access  to an immersion program,  
suggesting that such efforts may not be sufficient to revive and preserve 
‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i.  Dissent at 9 n.2.  But as  Professor O’Grady stated , 
“[t]here’s no specific number” of speakers that are required  to revitalize 
‘ōlelo Hawai ‘i, and rather, “[t]he question from a linguistic perspective is 
how can we produce any, or even better[,] many young people who speak the 
language fluently enough to be comfortable in it and don’t simply see it as a 
subject that you learn in school, but see  it as a mode of communication that 
can be used in all of their life activities.”  He explained that reviving the 
language is a “long -term” undertaking, and that the role of the education 
system is to “keep[] feeding people into the system” through “ongoin g efforts 
. . .to produce more and more fluent speakers.”   We thus do not share the 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
46 The circuit court therefore erred by granting the State ’s motion 
for partial summary judgment with respect to Count 2 of 
Clarabal’s complaint.39   
  What constitutes reasonable access is dependent on the 
totality of the circumstances of this case, and genuine issues 
of material fact exist as to whether the State has taken all 
reasonable measures to provide Clarabal’s daughters with access 
to a Hawaiian immersion program.  As with all of the State ’s 
constitutional obligations, article X, section 4 places an 
affirmative duty on the S tate to fulfil its mandate.  Se e Mauna 
Kea Anaina Hou v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 136 Hawai ‘i 376, 402, 
363 P.3d 224, 250 (2015) (Pollack, J., concurring, in which 
Wilson, J., joined, and McKenna, J., joined as to Part IV).   The 
State should thus act with the goal of reviving and preserving 
                                                                        
(. . . continued)  
 
dissent’s concern and are confident that faithful adherence to the “all 
reasonable efforts” standard will be a meaningful and necessary component of 
a Hawaiian e ducation program that is reasonably calculated to revive the 
Hawaiian language as  the framers intended.   See Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 57 in I 
Proceedings, at 637.  
 39 We decline to reach Clarabal’s claims that other constitutional 
provisions require the State to provide a Hawaiian immersion program on Lāna ‘i 
because we hold that any right they may grant is no greater than the 
reasonable access afforded by article X, section 4.  See  State v. Lo, 66 Haw. 
653, 657, 675 P.2d 754, 757 (1983) (“[W]e are by no means obliged ‘to pass 
upon a constitutional question although properly presented by the record, if 
there is also present some other ground upon which the case may be disposed 
of.’” (quoting Ashwander v. Tenn.  Valley Auth., 297 U.S. 288, 347 (1936) 
(Brandeis, J., concurring ))).  With respect to Clarabal’s claims related to 
the alleged teacher shortage, we hold that they are moot, as the evidence 
indicates that all but two full -time teacher positions were filled at the 
beginning of the latest school year for which information  is included in the 
record.  We therefore express no opinion as to the merits of these claims.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
47 ‘ōlelo Hawai‘ i
 and the shared culture  to which it is inextricably 
linked when determining whether it is reasonable to take 
additional steps to provide access to a Hawaiian immersion 
program.  These steps might include provid ing greater financial 
or other incentives to attract immersion teachers to Lāna‘i, 
furnishing transportation for a teacher to commute to Lāna ‘i, 
using multiple instructors to share teaching duties, partnering 
with community members knowledge able in ‘ ōlelo Hawai ‘i, modifying 
school days or hours of instruction to accommodate the 
availability of a teacher, or adopting  any other alternative 
method of providing access to a Hawaiian immersion program.  
Ultimately, all reasonable alternatives are to be considered to 
determine whether access to a Hawaiian immersion program is 
feasible, and the State is constitutionally obliged to take a 
reasonable course of action that would afford access to 
Clarabal’s daughters if any exists.  Cf. In re Conservation 
Dist. Use Application HA- 3568, 143 Hawai ‘i 379, 414, 431 P.3d 
752, 787 (2018) (Pollack, J., concurring) (requiring a showing 
of a lack of practicable alternatives to the use of 
constitutionally protected public trust conservation land). 
  We therefore affirm the circuit court’s denial of 
Clarabal’s motion for partial summary judgment , which requested 
a declaration that the State has a duty and obligation to 
provide her daughters with actual access to a Hawaiian immersion ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
48 program, and remand for a determination of whether the State has 
taken all reasonable steps to afford Clarabal’s daughters access 
to Hawaiian immersion education 
in light of the circumstances 
associated with providing greater access
ibility.  
IV. CONCLUSION 
  A well known Hawaiian proverb states “I ka wā ma mua, 
ka wā ma hope,” or, “In the past, lies the future .”40  The spirit 
of this adage motivated the framers ’ adoption of a rticle X, 
section 4 of the Hawai‘i Constitution, which  imposes on the State 
a duty to provide for a Hawaiian education program in public 
schools that is reasonably calculated to revive the Hawaiian 
language.  Because the evidence in the record demonstrates that 
providing reasonable access to Hawaiian immersion education is 
currently essential to reviving the language, it is an essential 
component of any such program.   
  We therefore vacate in part the circuit court’s Ju ne 
7, 2016 “Order: (1) Granting Defendants’ Motion for Par tial 
Summary Judgment as to Counts 1 and 2 of the Complaint Filed 
February 26, 2016; (2) Granting Defendants’ Motion for Partial 
Summary Judgment as to Counts 3 and 4 of the Complaint filed 
                     
 40 Liberty Peralta, PBS Hawai ‘i, Hōkūle ‘a Programming (Aug. 2, 2017), 
https://www.pbshawaii.org/hokulea/ [ https://perma.cc/9XX2 -URG2].  Literally, 
“the time in front, . . . the time in back,” the phrase has also been 
translated as “through the past is the future.”  Natalie Kurashima, Jason 
Jeremiah, & Tamara Ticktin, I K a Wā Ma Mua: The Value of a Historical Ecology 
Approach to Ecological Restoration in Hawai ‘i, 71 Pac. Sci. 437, 440 (2017).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
49 February 26, 2016; and (3) Denying Plaintiff’s Motion for 
Partial Summary Judgment Filed March 17, 2016.”  The order is 
vacated insofar as it granted the State’s motion for partial 
summary judgment with respect to Count 2 of the complaint.  The 
order is affirmed in all other respects.  We also vacate the 
circuit court’s J une 7, 2016 “Final Judgment Re: Order: (1) 
Granting Defendants’ Motion for Par tial Summary Judgment as to 
Counts 1 and 2 of the Complaint Filed February 26, 2016; (2) 
Granting Defendants’ Motion for Partial Summary Judgment as to 
Counts 3 and 4 of the Complaint filed February 26, 2016; and (3) 
Denying Plaintiff’s Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Filed 
March 17, 2016.”  We remand for a determination of whether, 
under the circumstances, the State has taken all reasonable 
measures to provide access to a Hawaiian immersion program to 
Clarabal’s two daughters.  
Sharla A. Manley 
Camille Kaimālie Kalama 
David Kaulia Kopper 
for petitioner 
 
Kimberly Tsumoto Guidry 
Kaliko‘onalani Fernandes 
For respondent /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 