 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI  
 
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
 ROSEMARY H. STOUT, Appellant
-Appellant,  
 
vs.  
 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM,  
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI,  Appellee-Appellee.  
_________________________________
_______________________________  
 
 
 
 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., M
cKENNA, POLLACK, WILSON, JJ.,
  
WITH NAKAYAMA, J., DISSENTING  
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAP-15-0000582 10-JUL-2017 08:07 AM 
---oOo---
SCAP-15-0000582  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
  
(CAAP-15-0000582; CIV. NO. 14-1-2428-11)
 
JULY 10, 2017 
  
OPINION OF THE COURT  BY McKENNA, J.  
I. Introduction 
This case concerns whether a public school teacher who is a 
member of the Employees’ Retirement System of the State of 
Hawaiʻi (“ERS”) t hrough her regular full-time position is 
eligible for “service -connected disability retirement ” benefits  
 
 
 
    
  
  
                         
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
under HRS § 88-79 (Supp. 2004)  after being shot in the chest  
while serving as a public summer school teacher, which is a 
position that, when held on its own, does  not provide   ERS 
membership eligibility.  Rosemary H. Stou t (“Stout”), a regular 
school year teacher employed by the State of Hawaiʻ i Department  
of Education (“DOE”) , applied for benefits  under HRS § 88 -79 on 
August 3, 2004 based on   injuries suffered as a result of a June  
30, 1988 shooting.  Despite a determination by the Medical Board   
to the ERS (“Medical Board”) that Stout  was incapacitated  from 
teaching due to the shooting  , on October 27, 2014, the Board of 
Trustees of the ERS (“ERS Board”)  issued a Final Decision 
denying Stout’s  application on the threshold basis that  although 
she was an ERS member, she was not entitle d to “service-
connected disability  retirement” under HRS § 88 -79 because the  
shooting occurred while she served  as a part-time summer school 
teacher, which was not employment that qualified for ERS  
membership.      
On July 28, 2015, the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(“circuit court”)1 affirmed the ERS Board and entered Final 
Judgment. Stout timely appealed to the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (“ICA”). This court accepted a transfer of this case 
from the ICA. 
The Hon. Rhonda A. Nishimura presiding. 
2
 1 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
We hold that Stout is eligible for “service-connected 
disability retirement ”  under applicable law.  HRS § 88-79 
provides that an ERS member may be retired by the ERS for 
“service-connected disability  retirement ” if she is “permanently 
incapacitated for duty as the natural and proximate result of an accident occurring while in the actual performance of duty  at 
some definite time and place . . . .”  The issue is whether 
Stout’s injury is “service -connected .”   HRS § 88-21 (Supp. 2004)   
defines “service” to include any “service as an employee pa id by 
the State or county ,” and contains additional language 
indicating that “connected”  service  includes non-ERS-membership 
State or county service,  as long as the member makes  ERS 
contributions during the time of such non-ERS-membership State 
or county service. Stout was making ERS contributions on June 
30, 1988. HRS § 88-21 also separately   defines “membership 
service” as “all service rendered by a member for which the 
member had made the required contributions to the system.” 
Therefore, although Stout’s summer school employme nt at ʻAiea 
High School was not “membership service,” it was nevertheless 
“service,”  and HRS § 88 -79 provides for “service -connected 
disability retirement, ” not “membership service -connected 
disability retirement.” Accordingly, under HRS § 88-79, Stout  
is eligible to apply for  “service-connected disability 
3
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
benefits.” This conclusion is also supported by legislative 
history and the statutory scheme of HRS Chapter 88. 
We therefore vacate the judgment of the circuit court and 
remand this case to the ERS Board for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion. 
II. Background 
A. Stout’s Employment and ERS Membership History 
Stout first began working for the DOE  in the early   1980s, 
teaching at various locations including Waialua Intermediate and 
High School, ʻ Aiea Intermediate School, and on Kaua ʻi. Stout 
became tenured in  1985.  During the 1987 to 1988 academic year, 
Stout taught at Radford High School   (“Radford”). During the 
summers of 1985 through 1988, the DOE offered a summer school 
program to students at ʻ Aiea High School  (“ʻAiea”) and employed  
Stout each summer to teach an English class there.     
By 1984, Stout was 
a member of ERS.  She contributed to the 
ERS fund year-round through deductions taken from her academic-
year salary, which was paid by the DOE over the course of twelve 
months. Stout’s summer school earnings were paid by the DOE 
based on an hourly rate by way of separate checks.  No 
deductions from summer school earnings were made for ERS 
contributions. 
4
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
   
 
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
B. Stout’s Injury: the June 30, 1988 Shooting 
Stout was shot on June 30, 1988 by Romel Castro  (“Castro”)  
—  a then-eighteen-year-old student of Stout’s  —  while she was 
teaching summer school at ʻAiea.  See  Tradewind Ins. Co. v. 
Stout, 85 Hawaiʻ i 177, 181, 938 P.2d 1196, 1200 (App. 1997) 
(stating facts elicited at Castro’s criminal trial). On 
February 2, 1990, Castro was convicted of attempted second 
degree murder and a firearms violation. See id.    He was 
sentenced to life imprisonment with the possibility of parole. 
See id.      
C.   
Application for Benefits to the ERS Board 
Stout filed an “Application for Disability Retirement 
Contributory Plan” (“Application”) with the  ERS Board on   August 
3, 2004, requesting “s ervice-connected disability retirement.” 
She indicated that the accident which caused her  disability was 
“shot by student in chest” on June 30, 1988 at  ʻAiea  High School.   
On October 4, 2004, an “Employer’ s Statement Concerning 
Service-connected Disability” was completed by the DOE. 
Specifically, the DOE identified itself as, “Department of 
Education – Radford High School,” and declared that it did not 
employ Stout on the date of the shooting, and that it lacked records of any accident. Despite this, the “Department of 
Education – Radford High School” stated the place of Stout’s 
accident as “Aiea High School – Summer Session,” Stout’s work 
5
  
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
                         
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
performed as “language arts teacher –  Summer Session at Aiea 
High School,” and that Stout was “‘on duty’ at the time of the 
accident . . . at Aiea High School.”    
The Medical Board 
of the ERS interviewed Stout and reviewed 
her Application and various employment and medical records, 
including the October 2004 statement from “Department of 
Education – Radford High School.” It issued a report dated 
February 17, 2006, finding that Stout was occupationally 
incapacitated, likely permanently, due to psychiatric conditions 
which precluded a return to work as a teacher, but that evidence 
did not show that she was incapacitated for gainful employment 
in other occupations. The Medical Board further found the June 
30, 1998 shooting to have been an “accident” that was the 
“natural and proximate cause” of Stout’s incapacitation, and 
that the accident occurred when Stout was “in the actual 
performance of duty at some definite time and place.” The 
Medical Board determined t hat Stout’s incapacity was not the 
result of her “willful negligence ,” which would preclude 
recovery under HRS § 88-79. The Medical Board ultimately 
recommended that Stout be granted “Service-Connected 
Occupational Disability Retirement, ”2 but that her request for 
“Service-Connected Total Disability Retirement ” be denied. 
“Upon retirement for service -connected disability, a member shall receive 
the amount of the member’s accumulated contributions and a retirement 
(continued . . .) 
6
 2  
 
 
 
     
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
                                                                               
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
HRS § 88-79 permits the ERS Board to accept as conclusive 
the Medical Board’s finding that Stout’s “ disability [wa]s the 
result of an accident occurring while in the actual performance 
of duty at some definite time and place and that the disability 
was not the result of wilful negligence on [Stout’s] part ,” and 
approve the member’s eligibility for a service -connected 
disability retirement benefit. HRS § 88-79(d)(2).3 Here, 
however, after reviewing the Medical Board’s report, t he ERS 
Board issued an April 19, 2006 “Order Remanding Report to Medical Board,” indicating that in its view, Stout was not 
entitled to benefits: 
4 [ ] [S]ection 88 -42.5,  Hawaii Revises [sic] Statutes, and 
5 [ ] section 6 -21-14(2),  Hawaii Administrative Rules, exclude 
(. . . continued) 
 
allowance which 
shall consist of fifty per cent of the member’s average final 
compensation.” HRS § 88 -80 (Supp. 2004).
 
3	 The board may determine whether or not the disability is 
the result of an accident occurring while in the actual performance of duty at some definite time and place and 
that the disability was not the result of wilful negligence 
on the part of the member. The board may accept as 
conclusive: 
(1) The certification made by the head of the agency 
in which the member is employed; or 
(2) A finding to this effect by the medical board. 
HRS § 88- 79(d). 
4 Membership of employees holding more than one 
position, appointment, or office.  (a) The membership of 
any employee holding more than one full -time position, 
appointment, office, or any combination thereof shall be 
limited to the position, appointment, or office of the 
employee’s option; provided that the employment in the 
position, appointment, or office shall meet the minimum membership eligibility requirements as provided in this 
part. Any contributions made based on the compensation, 
pay, or salary of the employee’s position, appointment, or 
(continued . . .)  
7
  
 
 
 
  
 
                                                                               
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
teaching summer school from a public school teacher’s 
Employees’ Retirement System membership. An accident 
resulting in injury to a public school teacher while the 
teacher is teaching summer school is therefore not “an 
accident occurring while in the actual performance of duty” 
under sections 88 -77 and 88- 79, Hawaii Revised Statutes.  
On this basis, the ERS Board remanded the report to the Medical 
Board for further proceedings.   
The chair of the Medical Board, Patricia L. Chinn, M.D., 
J.D. (“Dr. Chinn”), issued a memorandum dated May 19, 2006, 
acknowledging the ERS Board’s Order Remanding Report to Medical 
Board. Dr. Chinn continued, however:   
The Medical Board respectfully declines to revise its 
recommendation. The Medical Board does not believe it has 
sufficient information concerning this Member’s employment 
status and is unfamiliar with and has no expertise on the 
requirements concerning membership.  It also appears to the 
Medical Board that this case involves an interpretation of 
the statute and rule regarding the exclusion from 
membership and the performance of duty, an interpretation 
that is best left to the Trustees.  
(. . . continued)  
office other than that on which the e
mployee's membership 
is based shall be returned to the employee.
 The foregoing shall not apply to any employee holding 
two part- time positions of the same class if each position 
meets the minimum eligibility requirements for membership, and the sum total of the compensation, pay, or salary 
received for both positions does not exceed the higher of 
the full- time compensation, pay, or salary for either 
position.  
HRS § 88
-42.5 (Supp. 2003). 
Employees excluded from membership.  The following classes 
of employees shall be excluded from membership in the 
system: . . . ; (2) Persons employed on short -term or 
temporary appointments of three months or less; (3) Persons employed as substitute teachers; . . . ; (5) Persons in any 
position requiring less than one -half or fulltime 
employment . . . . 
HAR § 6- 21-14. 
8
 5  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Dr. Chinn issued a follow-up memorandum on July 15, 2007 adding: 
“The only possibility of granting the Member benefits [on the 
basis of the June 30 shooting] is if she is considered a member 
for the purposes of qualifying for retirement benefits but not 
for the purpose of service credit while teaching summer school. 
We believe this is a ma tter for the Board to decide.” 
An ERS administrator, David Shimabukuro,  subsequently 
issued an October 9, 2007  memo to the ERS Board that echoed the  
ERS Board’s interpretation of HRS § 88 -42.5 and HAR § 6-21-
14(2). He concluded:  
[ERS] Staff therefore believes that services rendered in a 
position that is excluded from ERS membership should not be considered “an accident occurring while in the actual 
performance of duty” for the purposes of determining an 
individual’s eligibility for accidental disability benefits 
and recommends that the Board deny Ms. Stout’s applications 
for service -connected occupational and total disability 
retirement benefits.  
Subsequently, a letter was issued to Stout on October 11, 2007 
indicating the ERS Board’s preliminary determination to deny her 
application for both service-connected occupational disability retirement benefits and service-connected total disability 
retirement benefits.  The letter acknowledged that the ERS Board 
proposed to approve and accept the certifications, findings, and 
recommendations contained in the Report, except for the Medical 
Board’s finding that Stout’s disability was the “result of an 
accident occurring while in the actual performance of duty. ” 
The ERS Board opined that an accident incurred by a public 
9
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                         
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
school teacher while teaching summer school is not “an accident 
occurring while in the actual performance of . . . duty. ” 
On December 7, 2007, Stout timely filed an appeal of the 
ERS Board’s proposed decision to deny both service -connected 
occupational disability retirement benefits and service-
connected total disability retirement benefits. 
D. 	Administrative Proceedings Regarding Cross-motions for 
Summary Judgment 
On February 25, 2009 , Stout’s appeal was assigned to a 
hearing officer. The parties agreed to address the threshold 
issue of whether Stout was eligible to apply for service-
connected disability retirement, given that she was shot while 
teaching summer school for the DOE.  Cross-motions for summary 
judgment were filed. A hearing on the motions was held on 
January 10, 2013. 
On March 6, 2013, the hearing officer issued a Recommended 
Decision, determining that the main issue on appeal “is simply 
whether the summer school program at Aiea High School on June 
30, 1988 was a covered employment under the Employees’ 
Retirement System[.]” The hearing officer quoted the relevant 
statute that provides service-connected disability retirement, HRS § 88-79,
6 and concluded: “It goes without saying that this 
Upon application of a member, or the person appointed by  
the family court as guardian of an incapacitated member, 
any member who has been permanently incapacitated for duty 
(continued . . .) 
10
 6  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
   
 
  
                                                                               
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
requirement[, “while in the actual performance of duty,”] refers 
to employment that made contributions to the ERS in order to 
establish ERS coverage.” Because Stout did not contribute any 
of her summer school earnings to the ERS (nor did the DOE contribute to the ERS based on Stout’s summer school earnings), 
the hearing officer concluded that she did not satisfy the “while in the actual performance of duty” requirement.  The 
hearing officer also noted that Stout was not “a member of ERS 
when she was injured on June 30, 1988 while a part-time summer school teacher” as “ she was excluded from membership under HAR § 
6-21-14.” Lastly, the hearing officer commented that he agreed 
with the ERS Board’s argument that “ it would be unfair to all 
other members of the ERS to have retirement benefits taken by 
[Stout] out of ERS funds when neither the DOE nor [Stout] made 
the requisite contributions for such retirement benefits from 
her part-time temporary summer school e arnings.” 
On July 15, 2013, the ERS Board issued a Proposed Decision, 
which adopted the Recommended Decision and incorporated the hearing officer’s findings of fact and conclusions of law as its 
(. . . continued)
  
as the natural and proximate result of an accident 
occurring while in the actual performance of duty  at some 
definite time and place, or as the cumulative result of some occupational hazard, through no wilful negligence on 
the member’s part, may be retired by the board [] for 
service- connected disability . . . .  
HRS § 88
-79 (emphasis added). 
11
  
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
proposed decision, and denied Stout’s application for service -
connected disability retirement benefits. 
Stout timely filed exceptions to the proposed decision.  
She took issue with the hearing o fficer’s failure to explain why 
the statement by “Department of Education –  Radford High School” 
that Stout was “‘on duty’ at the time of the accident” was 
“unimportant.” Stout  also pointed out   the hearing officer  
failed to indicate whether the standard  of review for summary 
judgment motions were followed,  did not discuss several cases  
she had cited to in her briefs such as Hua v. Board of Trustees 
of the Employees’ Re tirement System, State of Hawai ʻi, 112 
Hawaiʻi 292, 145 P.3d 835 (App. 2006), and Kikuta v. Board of 
Trustees of the Employees’ Retirement System, State of Hawai ʻi, 
66 Haw. 111, 657 P.2d 1030 (1983), and inappropriately relied on  
declarations submitted by the State.  
The ERS Board held a hearing on September 23, 2014.  After 
the parties presented their arguments, the ERS Board elicited 
the following information from counsel: summer school teachers 
generally are DOE teachers because most DOE teachers are 
certified and there is a preference that summer school teachers 
have teacher’s certificates ; summer school employment is not 
required of tenured DOE teachers and is voluntary; and funding  
for summer school is paid out of a separate fund composed of 
student summer school tuition.      
12
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
At the hearing, one of the board members suggested that had 
Stout been shot during school hours during the academic year,  
there would have been no issue as to whether or not Stout’s 
injury was a service-connected disability.   Another board 
member, who worked for the DOE, stated that she “d[id]  know that 
summer school needs to be self supporting  [sic]”  based on 
student tuition. That board member also stated: “I’m really 
clear . . . in the fact that I know that teachers, if they 
choose to teach summer school, they’re just at risk becau se 
they’re not covered . . . even though they’ re DOE employees .” 
She went on to express concern that the record lacked much  
information regarding Stout’s incapacity, and suggested that had that been looked at more closely in the case, “it would have 
made things much easier for this board to be able to look at 
something like granting.” Stout’s counsel then clarified  that  
based on an agreement  with opposing counsel and the hearing 
officer, the record was focused on the threshold issue of whether Stout was legally entitled to apply for benefits, and 
not  on Stout’s medical condition.     
On October 27, 2014, the  ERS Board issued its Final  
Decision. The ERS Board explained that the “threshold issue in 
this appeal . . . is whether an accident that occurs in a non-member position can be the basis for service-connected 
disability retirement benefits.” It explained, therefore, that 
13

  
 
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Hua and Kikuta  were inapplicable to the case because they did 
not concern this issue. The ERS Board    acknowledged that Stout  
was granted workers’ compensation benefits , including ERS  
credits, based on the June 30, 1988 shooting; however, it  
stated: “The ERS’s uniform practical construction of the 
statutes and rules[, e.g., HRS §§ 88-42.5, 88-43, 88-77, 88-79; 
HAR § 6-21-14,] involved in this appeal has been that ERS  
members are not entitled to service-connected disability 
retirement based on accidents that occur when they are 
performing duties in non-membership employment positions.” 
Accordingly, the ERS Board affirmed the Proposed Decision and 
adopted the Recommended De cision, and therefore denied Stout’s 
applications for service-connected occupational disability 
retirement benefits and service-connected total disability 
retirement benefits.    
E. Circuit Court Proceedings 
Stout timely filed a notice of appeal to the circuit court.  
Oral argument was held on July 10, 2015 after the parties 
submitted their briefs. Stout argued that the court should 
“keep in mind” the “obvious remedial social purpose of any 
public employee retirement system” and the borrowed use of 
workers’ compensation tests  in ERS cases such as Hua  and Kikuta. 
Stout argued that key facts supporting Stout’s eligibility for 
benefits were that she was on St  ate property, and that she was 
14

  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
doing something related to her State employment. Specifically, 
at the time she was shot, Stout was “doing what she was supposed 
to do: Public school teacher, helping her students, teaching her 
students, benefiting the [S]tate of Hawaii.” Stout also 
asserted that the declaration given by DOE employee Wilfred 
Keola, Jr. (“Keola”) regarding the operations and funding of 
summer school and interpretation of Stout’s paystubs (“Keola 
Declaration”), should not have been admitted because it was not based on the declarant’s personal knowledge. 
The circuit court orally dismissed the appeal and affirmed 
the decision by the ERS at the end of the hearing. In its 
written order, the circuit court found it dispositive that 
because no ERS contributions were made with respect to Stout’s 
summer school employment, “when . . . Stout was in jured on June 
30, 1988, she was performing duties in a part-time temporary 
employment position that was excluded from and not covered by 
ERS membership and benefits.” 
F. Appellate Review 
Stout timely filed her Notice of Appeal with the ICA on 
August 17, 2015, and filed an Application for Transfer on April 
4, 2016. This court granted the Application for Transfer and 
held oral argument. 
15
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
   
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
1. Stout’s Position 
Stout presents five points of error: the circuit court 
erred by (1) failing to determine that Stout was injured in the 
“actual performance of duty,” (2) disregarding the application 
to her case of Kikuta and Hua, (3)-(4) failing to determine the 
ERS Board erred by considering improperly admitted evidence and DOE Regulation 5105, and (5) improperly considering HRS §§ 88 -
42.5, 88-43 (Supp. 2004), and HAR § 6-21-14 in determining that 
Stout was not covered by ERS membership and benefits when she 
was shot on June 30, 1988. 
We focus on Stout’s fi rst point of error, as it is 
dispositive. With respect to this issue, Stout asserts the 
following evidence was not properly considered by ERS, the 
hearing officer, or the circuit court: (1) that the DOE had 
acknowledged that Stout was “on duty” “at Aiea High School” at 
the time of the shooting, and that the Medical Board concluded the shooting was an accident occurring “in the actual 
performance of duty at some definite place and time”; (2) that, 
on June 30, 1988, Stout was a continuously employed, permanent, year-round public school teacher; (3) that, on June 30, 1988, 
Stout was a contributing ERS member; and (4) that Stout received 
workers’ compensation benefits associated with the injuries she 
suffered following the June 30, 1988 shooting, and that ERS 
16
  
 
 
 
  
                         
    
  
 7 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
contributions were taken from those benefits such that she would 
continue earning “retirement credits.” 
Stout also points out  that on June 30, 2008,  the DOE was  
her sole employer and that the DOE benefited from the   work she  
performed on the date of the accident.  She argues she was shot  
while teaching an English class on DOE premises, which benefited  
the public education system and the State of Hawai ʻi. She also 
observes that nothing  in the applicable HRS chapters indicates 
that a public school teacher is an employee of a particular 
campus instead of being a State of Hawai ʻi employee.   She asserts 
that because the DOE had  acknowledged that Stout was on duty  at 
one of its campuses at the time of the shooting,  and because the 
Medical Board had determined she was “in the actual performance 
of duty at some definite place and time” when she was shot,  
pursuant to HRS § 88-79(d), ERS could have, and should have,  
7  adopted that conclusion.  
With respect to the other points of error, in summary, Stout argues that 
the “liberal, remedial focus [of service -connected disability] reflected in” 
Kikuta and Hua 
provide the correct mode of analysis for Stout’s circumstances 
and that the distinctions drawn by the ERS between Stout’s situation and 
those in Kikuta  and Hua  are irrelevant.  Stout also argues the Keola 
Declaration was inadmissible and should not have been relied upon by the 
hearing officer or the ERS because Keola lacked personal knowledge of the DOE 
summer school program as it had operated in 1988. She also asserts that the 
copy of the DOE internal poli cy, “Regulation 5105,” attached to Keola’s 
declaration, was inadmissible and should not have been considered by the hearing officer. Regulation 5105 states that part -time temporary employees, 
such as summer school teachers, are “[n]ot eligible for membership” for “[r]etirement.” Finally, Stout also argues that HRS §§ 88 -42.5, 88 -43, and 
HAR § 6- 21-14 were improperly construed so as to deny Stout service -connected 
disability benefits. Stout asserts the ERS should not be allowed to “blow hot and cold” by: (1) on the one hand, stating that because Stout did not 
(continued . . .) 
17
  
 
 
 
   
 The State asserts substantial evidence supports the  ERS 
Board’s finding that Stout’s summer school teaching position was 
not an ERS membership position, and characterizes the issue on 
appeal as: 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                     
(. . . continued)
                                                            
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
2. The State’s Position 
whether Stout can claim service -connected disability 
retirement under [HRS] section 88 -79 . . . based on an  
accident that occurred while she was performing duties in a 
part-time temporary employment position excluded from and 
not covered by the Employees’ Retirement System (“ERS”), 
and for which no contribution s  were paid to the ERS either 
by Stout or her employer the Department of Education[.]  
The State asserts that Stout’s position is flawed as to the 
applicability of Hua and Kikuta, and whether evidence and 
certain sections of Chapter 88 of the Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes 
and Hawaiʻ i Administrative Rules were appropriately considered, 
which were Stout’s second through fifth points of error.  With 
respect to the dispositive first point of error, the State 
argues that HRS § 88-79, which provides for service-connected 
disability retirement benefits, implicitly requires the accident 
that caused the member’s disability to have occurred while the 
member was performing duties in an employment position covered 
contribute to the ERS with her summer school earnings, she was ineligible for 

benefits, and (2) on the other hand, preclude her from membership (and, 
therefore, making additional contributions) based on her summer school 
position. As Stout’s first point of error is dispositive, we need not 
address these other issues.
 
18
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
  
                         
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
by ERS membership, i.e., “membership service. ”8 The State 
asserts that such a requirement is obvious from a consideration 
of the entire ERS statute, general legislative scheme and 
purposes, and to give the statute a rational and sensible 
interpretation and avoid absurd and unjust results.   The State 
argues that interpreting HRS § 88-79 in a manner contrary to its proposed interpretation would lead to the absurd result that  
academic-year school teachers “could claim service -connected 
disability retirement for accidents that occurred while they were working in part-time or temporary jobs including those for 
private employers, e.g., working as a part-time salesperson for 
a department store or teaching in a private summer school 
program.”     
The State further argues that the entire legislative scheme 
of Chapter 88 should be examined.  The State asserts that the 
general legislative scheme in HRS Chapter 88 ties both the 
funding of ERS retirement benefits and payment of those benefits to ERS members’ performance of services covered by ERS 
membership and the payment of contributions for such service. 
The State cites to the following sections in support: HRS §§ 88-
21 (definitions), 88-42.5 (membership of employees holding more 
than one position, appointment, or office), 88-45 (employee 
“Membership service” is “ all service rendered by a member for which the 
member had made the required contributions to the system.” HRS § 88 -21. 
19
 8  
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
    
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
contributions), 88-46 (deducting employee contributions from 
salary and employer pick up of employee contributions), 88-51 
(membership service generally), 88-74 (allowance on service 
retirement), 88-75 (ordinary disability retirement), 88-76 
(allowance on ordinary disability retirement), 88-80 (allowance 
on retirement for service-connected disability), 88-81(a) 
(average final compensation), 88-122 (determination of employer 
normal cost and accrued liability contributions). Moreover, the 
State asserts that to the extent HRS § 88-79 is ambiguous, the 
court should defer to the ERS Board’s expertise and follow its 
interpretation and application of the statute. 
III. Standards of Review 
A. Interpretation of a Statute 
Statutory interpretation is a question of law reviewable de 
novo. See Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of 
Appeals, 114 Hawai ʻi 184, 193, 159 P.3d 143, 152 (2007) (citation 
omitted). When construing statutes, the court is governed by 
the following rules:  
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory 
interpretation is the language of the statute itself. 
Second, where the statutory language is plain and 
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain 
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of 
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the 
language contained in the statute itself.  Fourth, when 
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness 
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an 
ambiguity exists. 
20
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 It is undisputed that  at all relevant times,  Stout’s sole 
employer was the DOE. In 1988, she served the DOE in two 
capacities: first, she was employed year-round to teach at 
Radford High School during the academic year; second, she was 
hired to teach during the summer at ʻAiea High Scho ol.   Stout  
received her year-round salary semi-monthly, and made ERS 
contributions with each payment.  She was paid separately for  
her summer school work and did not contribute  —  nor was she 
9   permitted by law to contribute —  to the ERS from those earnings.  
                         
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
When there is ambiguity in a statute, the meaning of 
the ambiguous words may be sought by 
examining the context, 
with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may 
be compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.   
Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids in determining legislative intent, such as  legislative history, 
or the reason and spirit of the law.  
114 Hawaiʻ i at 193-94, 159 P.3d at 152-53 (citations omitted). 
B. Administrative Agency Appeals 
Ordinarily, deference will be given to decisions of 
administrative agencies acting within the realm of their expertise. The rule of judicial deference, however,  does 
not apply when the agency’ s reading of the statute 
contravenes the legislature’s manifest purpose. Consequently, we have not hesitated to reject an incorrect 
or unreasonable statutory construction advanced by the 
agency entrusted with the statute’s implementation.  
Coon v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu , 98 Hawai ʻi 233, 2 45, 47 P.3d 
348, 360 (2002) (citations and brackets omitted).  
IV. Discussion 
9 See HRS § 88- 42.5 (“Any contributions made based on the compensation, pay, 
or salary of the employee’s position, appointment, or office other than that 
on which the employee’s membership is based shall be returned to the 
employee.”). 
21
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
The parties further agree that Stout was a contributing 
member of ERS at the time of the June 30, 1988 shooting.  
Additionally,  Stout’s  disability is a natural and proximate 
result of that shooting, which occurred while Stout was  in the 
actual performance of duty at  ʻAiea High School.  At issue is 
whether Stout is eligible for “service -connected disability 
retirement” benefits pursuant to HRS § 88-79, which is a matter 
of statutory interpretation.   
A.	 Stout Is Eligible for Benefits under the Plain Language of 
HRS § 88-79 
HRS § 88-79 states in relevant part: 
Service- connected disability retirement.  (a) Upon 
application of a member, or the person appointed by the 
family court as guardian of an incapacitated member, any 
member who has been permanently incapacitated for duty as the natural and proximate result of an accident occurring 
while in the actual performance of duty at some definite 
time and place, or as the cumulative result of some 
occupational hazard, through no wilful negligence on the 
member’s part, may be retired by the board for service -
connected disability; provided that:
 (1) In the case of an accident occurring after July 
1, 1963, the employer shall file with the system a copy of the employer ’s report of the accident submitted to the 
director of labor and industrial relations;
 (2) An application for retirement is filed with the 
system within two years of the date of the accident, or the date upon which workers ’ compensation benefits cease, 
whichever is later;
 (3) Certification is made by the head of the agency 
in which the member is employed, stating the time, place, and conditions of the service performed by the member resulting in the member’ s disability and that the 
disability was not the result of wilful negligence on the part of the member; and
 (4) The medical board certifies that the member is 
incapacitated for the further performance of duty at the 
22
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
time of application and that the member’ s incapacity is 
likely to be permanent . 
. . . . 
(d) The board may determine whether or not the disability 
is the result of an accident occurring while in the actual 
performance of duty at some definite time and place and 
that the disability was not the result of wilful negligence 
on the part of the member. The board may accept as 
conclusive:
 (1) The certification made by the head of the agency 
in which the member is employed; or
 (2) A finding to this effect by the medical board. 
. . . .  
HRS § 88-79.   
HRS § 88-79, in both its text and its title, allows for  the 
retirement of a member  for “service- connected disability.”   
Additionally, one of the four statutory requirements to obtain 
service-connected disability retirement is: “ Certification is 
made by the head of the agency in which the member is employed, stating the time, place, and conditions of the service  performed 
by the member resulting in the member’s disability and that the disability was not the result of wilful negligence on the part 
of the member.”   See  HRS § 88-79(a)(3).   As the statute 
10 consistently uses the term “service” and no other,  our 
statutory inquiry  necessarily turns on  whether the accident 
10 Notably, HRS § 88- 79(a)(3)’s requirement that certification be “made by 
the head of the agency in which the member is employed, stating the time, 
place, and conditions of the service performed by the member resulting in the 
member’s disability,” does n ot limit the disabling accident to have occurred 
in “the employment position covered by ERS membership.” Rather, it focuses 
on the “service performed by the member,” i.e., “service [(as an employee 
paid by the State or county)] performed by the member.” 
23
  
 
 
 
  
  
    
  
 
  
    
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
occurred when Stout was performing “service,” i.e., whether the 
accident was “service -connected.” 
HRS § 88-21  defines “service” as follows :  
“Service” :   service as an employee paid by the State 
or county , and also:   service during the period of a leave 
of absence or exchange if the individual is paid by the 
State or county during the period of the leave of absence  
or exchange; and service during the period of an unpaid leave of absence or exchange if the individual is engaged 
in the performance of a governmental function  or if the 
unpaid leave of absence is an approved leave of absence for 
professional improvement ;  provided that, for the period of 
the leave of absence or exchange without pay, the individual makes the same contribution to the system as the 
individual would have made if the individual had not been 
on the leave of absence.   Cafeteria managers and cafeteria 
workers shall be considered as paid by the State, 
regardless of the source of funds from which they are paid.  
(emphases added). Notably, regardless if an employee is paid or 
on unpaid leave, certain acts by the employee are “service” so 
long as their performance was “paid by the State or county,” of 
a “governmental function, ” or for approved professional 
improvement. Accordingly, HRS § 88-79 provides for the retirement of members due to disability “connected” to any such 
governmental “service.” 
Specifically, the disability must be a “ natural and 
proximate result of an accident occurring while in the actual performance of duty at some definite time and place, or as the 
cumulative result of some occupational hazard, through no wilful 
negligence on the member’s part.” HRS § 88 -79.  Thus, the plain 
language of the statute imposes a requirement that the disabling accident occur while the member is “in the actual performance of 
24
  
 
 
 
   
   
  
    
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
duty” to the State or county (or while performing a governmental 
function or pursuing professional improvement), and precludes 
service-connected disability benefits for a disabling accident 
at a member’s non-State or non-county second job. Accordingly, 
there is no merit to the State’s argument that the statute can 
be construed in a manner leading to the “absurd” result that HRS 
§ 88-79 coverage extends to accidents occurring while a full-
time public school teacher is working as a retail store clerk or 
private school teacher. 
In sum, there is nothing  ambiguous  regarding HRS § 88-79’s 
use of the terms,  “service” or “service  -connected.”   Thus, we  
reject a construction   of the statute that conflates “service” 
with “membership”  or “membership position ,”  when those words are 
not in the statute.  See Coon , 98 Hawai ʻi at 245, 47 P.3d at 360  
(“[W]e have not hesitated to reject an incorrect or unreasonable 
statutory construction advanced by the agency entrusted with the 
statute’s implementation.”).   Here, as stated in the record, at 
the time of the accident, Stout was an ERS member and the service she performed for the State  was “language arts teacher –  
Summer Session at Aiea High School.” As such, Stout is eligible 
for benefits under  the plain language of  HRS § 88-79.      
 
25

  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
B.	 The Legislative History Also Supports the Plain Meaning of 
HRS § 88-79 
Our plain language interpretation is bolstered by the 
lengthy legislative history of the statute, which shows: 1) when 
the legislature enacted the predecessor to the ERS in 1925, it sought to provide a pension to all members who became disabled 
“due to an accident in the performance of duty” ; 2) in 1963, the 
legislature specifically re-named and amended the “accidental 
disability benefit” statute to “service -connected” total and 
occupational disability benefit statutes; 3) the legislature has expanded the “service-connected disability benefit ” over time ; 
and 4) the legislature has revisited HRS § 88-79 or its predecessor statutes on numerous occasions, and it has 
consistently declined to limit “service -connected” disabling 
injuries to injuries that occur only in the course of 
“membership service.” 
Before 
1925, there was no “uniform and established method 
of taking care of the employees who [we]re unable to continue in 
service on account of old age or disability,” with the exception 
of some teachers who were covered by a plan established in 1915. 
Joint Comm. on Pensions of the Senate and House of 
Representatives (“Joint Committee”) , Report on the Bill to 
Establish a Retirement System for Territorial Employees of the 
Territory of Hawaii  3–4 (1925) (“ 1925 Joint Report ”). By 1925  
26  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
     
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
the Territorial Legislature enacted Act 55, “An Act to Establish 
a Retirement System to Provide for the Retirement of Employees 
of the Territory of Hawaii and Teachers in the Public Schools,” 
so that all government employees, including teachers previously 
covered under the 1915 plan,  would be  covered under the same  
retirement plan.   See  1925 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 55  (H.B. 396); 
1925 Joint Report at 4.   See also  Panado v. Bd. of Trs., Emps. 
Ret. Sys., 134 Hawai ʻi 1, 14, 332 P.3d 144, 157 (2014) 
(discussing the history of the ERS and citing the 1925 Joint 
Report).   
As noted in the 1925 Joint Report  that was submitted to the 
Territorial Legislature regarding H.B. 396, the plan’s disability benefit distinguished between “cases of permanent 
disability that occur as the result of accidents in the 
performance of duty ” [(“accidental disability”)] and those due 
to ordinary causes for which the government is not directly responsible [(“ordinary disability”)].”  1925 Joint Report at 
27; 
compare
 
1925 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 55, § 6(3) at 59, with id.   
§ 6(5) at 59–60; see also  Panado
, 134 Hawai ʻi at 14, 332 P.3d at 
157 (quoting 1925 Joint Report  at 27). 
With respect to 
cases of ordinary disability “for which the 
government [wa]s not . . . responsible,” a ten-year minimum 
service requirement was imposed to “reduce[] the cost to the government and protect[] the fund against early disabilities.” 
27
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
                         
    
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
1925 Joint Report  at 28; 1925 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 55, § 6(3).    
In contrast, there was no minimum service require  ment for the 
receipt of benefits due to accidental disability, as the Joint 
Committee “believed that a pension should always be payable 
regardless of the age or length of service of the member” if the 
employee became disabled due to accidental causes in the 
“performance of duty. ”   1925 Joint Report  at 27; see also  id.  at 
37.  The Joint Committee elaborated: “[f]or an example of the 
application of this benefit we may consider the case of an 
employee who, in an explosion occurring while at work for the 
government, loses his eyesight. In such a case, the government would provide him with a pension  . . .”  and a return of all 
11 contributions as an additional annuity.   Id.  at 27 (emphasis 
added).  
In other words, the 
legislature recognized that in cases 
where but for an emplo yee’s service to the government the 
employee would not have become disabled and unable to continue 
to work, that employee should receive some kind of retirement 
benefit regardless of the employee’s duration of service and 
amounts contributed to the retirement system. See Panado , 134 
11 Any employee that left service prior to retirement age — including those 
who became disabled while at work for the government — was entitled to a 
return of all contributions. See  1925 Joint Report  at 8 (“Employees’ 
contributions are placed in a distinct 
and separate fund, called the Annuity 
Savings Fund. Each employee’s contributions are credited to his own account 
and may be withdrawn if he leaves the service without a retirement 
allowance.”);  id.  
at 7 (stating that contributions are returned with interest 
or as an annuity in cases of disability, death, resignation, or dismissal). 
28
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Hawaiʻi at 14, 332 P.3d at 157 (“ The key question reiterated by 
the [1925 Joint] [C]ommittee at several points was whether the accident occurred ‘in the performance of duty.’”). The Joint 
Report gave no indication that the position in which a member 
became disabled was at all relevant; of foremost concern was 
whether the member was in service to the government when the 
disabling injury occurred. 
In 1963, the legislature specifically re-named and amended 
the “accidental disability benefit”  to the “service-connected  
total disability benefit ” and “service -connected occupational 
disability benefit.”   See  1963 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 127, §§ 6 –7 
at 145–47; Revised Laws of Hawai ʻi (“RLH”) §§ 6 -46, 6-46.1 (Supp. 
1963).   The change was intended to “[p]rovide for a distinction 
in benefits as between service-connected total disability and 
service-connected occupational disability (incapacity for the 
purpose of duty).” S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 21, in 1963 Senate 
Journal, at 685. The use of the term “service -connected” in RLH 
§§ 6-46, 6-46.1 appears intentional, as at the time of the  
amendments, the definition  of “service” was clear:   “service as 
an employee paid by the State or county, and also service during 
the period of a leave of absence or exchange if the individual 
is paid by the State or county during the period of the leave of 
absence or exchange . . . .” RLH § 6 -20 (Supp. 1963).    
29

  
 
 
 
   
 
 
RLH § 6-46 (1955).  By 1963, the statute was amended to provide 
both a “service-connected total disabilit y benefit” and a 
“service-connected occupational disability benefit.” RLH §§ 6 -
46, 6-46.1 (Supp. 1963)  ; see  discussion supra. In 1965, the 
legislature added that “any member who has been . . . incapacitated . . . as the cumulative result of some 
occupational hazard, through no wilful negligence on his part” 
may also be retired for service-connected disability.  See RLH  
§§ 6-46, 6-46.1 (Supp. 1965).  In 1974, the legislature “create[d] a presumption for retirement purposes that a fire[fighter] or sewer worker who is disabled . . . due to any 
disease of the heart, lungs or respiratory system is presumed to 
have been injured [or] diseased . . . while in the performance 
of [the employee’s] duty and to grant disability retirement . . 
. benefits.” S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 919, in 1974 Senate Journal, at 1114; see 1974 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 182, at 391 –95. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Notably, the legislature  has expand ed the service -connected  
disability benefit  over time, instead of  restricting it.   In 
1955, the benefit read:  
Accidental disability benefit. Upon application of a 
member, or of the head of his department, any member who 
has been totally and permanently incapacitated for duty as 
the natural and proximate result of an accident occurring 
while in the actual performance of duty at some definite 
time and place, through no negligence on his part, shall be 
retired by the board if the medical board certifies that such member is mentally or physically incapacitated for 
further performance of duty, that such incapacity is likely 
to be permanent, and that such member shall be retired. 
30

  
 
 
 
    
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
In 1987, police officers were added to the list. See  1987 Haw. 
Sess. Laws Act 81, § 81 at 137 –38. 
The expansion 
of benefits provided under HRS § 88-79 over 
the years has been concurrent with the absence of statutory 
language limiting benefits to accidents occurring only in ERS-
membership positions.  Indeed, throughout the consideration of 
the aforementioned amendments, the definitions of “membership 
service” and “service” remained unaltered.12 As recently as in 
2002, the legislature reconsidered the entire text of HRS § 88 -
79 and did not alter the use of the t erm “service-connected,” 
redefine it, or insert other terms.  See 2002 Haw. Sess. Laws 
Act 128, § 6, at 353 –54. Thus, that HRS § 88-79 uses the term 
“service-connected disability retirement” instead of “membership 
service-connected disability retirement” appears purposeful.  
All considered, this demonstrates that a restrictive 
interpretation of HRS § 88-79 in the manner suggested by the 
State and the Dissent would be contrary to the legislature’s manifest purpose. 
12 See 1969 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 110, § 1, at 94, 99 (amending and recodifying 
Parts I and II of Chapter 6, Revised Laws of Hawai ʻi 1955) (defining 
“membership service” as “a ll service rendered by a member for which he had 
made the required contributions to the system”) (defining “service” as, in 
part, “service as an employee paid by the State or county”). 
31
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
  
 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
C.	 Stout’s Inability to Contribute to the ERS as a Summer 
School Teacher Does Not Detract from Her Performance of 
Service to the State While a Summer School Teacher or Alter 
Her Status as an ERS Member 
Despite the plain language of HRS § 88
-79 and the foregoing 
legislative history analysis, the Dissent nevertheless asserts 
that there is an additional  requirement that “logically follows” 
from HRS §§ 88-42.5 and 88-43: that the disabling accident occur only while the employee-member is working in the position that 
provides the employee’s ERS membership eligibility . According 
to the Dissent, “[t]he fact that Stout was employed by the State 
for the summer session while contributing to ERS for another 
State job at the time of her injury is merely coincidental and 
should not be a factor when considering whether Stout was 
eligible for benefits.” 
We respectfully disagree with the Dissent.  At the outset, 
we note that contrary to the Dissent’s assertion that “Stout did not make any contributions to the ERS while in this position,” 
Stout did in fact make contributions to the ERS year-round 
through deductions from her academic year salary, which was paid 
by the DOE over the course of twelve months. Although HRS § 88-
42.5 concerns  the limitation of an employee’s ERS contributions 
(and therefore calculated distributions on retirement) and HRS § 
88-43 concerns the denial of  membership eligibility  to part-time 
employees, they do not address the distribution of ERS benefits 
32

  
 
 
 
   
    
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
to already existing members, such as Stout, or modify the 
definition of “service -connected.” Thus, these statutes do not 
support the Dissent. 
To illustrate, if HRS § 88-79 benefits were limited to  
“membership service-connected”  injuries  as interpreted by the 
Dissent, ERS members with two full-time State or county jobs,  
required to choose one full-time position pursuant to HRS § 88-
42.5, would not be entitled to service -connected disability 
retirement for accidental injuries suffered during the non  -
membership position.   The Dissent agrees with this 
hypothetical’s conclusion, noting, “however harsh it appears on 
paper and in practice, this  is the rule that is provided for 
under the law.”    
We do not agree that the legislature intended such a result.  
Simply because one full-time position is not the basis for ERS membership does not detract from the fact that the member 
continues to serve the State or county in that position.  In other words, nothing in HRS § 88-42.5 or its legislative history  
shows that the legislature intended the statute to  re-
characterize the un-selected position from “service” to “non -
service,”  or to create the harsh results suggested by the 
Dissent as legislatively intended.   Rather, the sole express  
purpose of HRS § 88-42.5 was to limit the calculated amount of 
33
  
 
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
   
  
 
 
                         
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
an employee’s ERS contributions and benefits to that based on 
the chosen position ’s pay. 13 
As noted above, the language of HRS § 88-79 and its 
legislative history do not support the Dissent’s interpretation 
of HRS § 88-79. The following two reasons also support Stout’s 
eligibility for benefits. 
First, the definition of “service” in HRS § 88 -21, quoted 
above, includes service during a paid leave of absence as well as service during an unpaid leave of absence, as long as the 
employee is a member who is engaged in the performance of a 
governmental function or professional improvement, and as long 
as the employee continues making contributions to the ERS 
system. Stout was making such contributions on June 30, 1988. 
Teaching public summer school would be the performance of a 
governmental function or approved professional improvement. 
Thus, even if “service ,” as that term is used in HRS § 88-79, 
were limited to Stout’s service as a full -time public school 
teacher, she remains eligible for HRS § 88-79 benefits. 
Second, the hearing officer expressed the concern 
reiterated by the ERS Board at oral argument in the circuit 
court, that “it would be unfair to all other members of the ERS 
to have retirement benefits taken by Applicant out of ERS funds 
13 See supra   n.9  (quoting HRS § 88- 42.5). 
34
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
when neither the DOE nor Applicant made the requisite 
contributions for such retirement benefits from her part-time 
temporary summer school earnings.” However, as is evident by 
other sections within HRS Chapter 88, as explained above, the  
legislature’s primary concern with respect to the issuance of benefits under HRS § 88-79 appears to be  service to the State or  
county, and not additional  contributions to the ERS, as long as  
the member is making ERS contributions during the time of the additional government service.   Thus, the Dissent’s  suggestion 
that our holding would mean that “a large class of people –  all 
those who work at public summer school across the State, 
including teachers, administrators, and various support staff –  
to receive benefits without paying into the retirement syst em,”  
is an unfounded alarm, as it wholly disregards that only 
existing ERS members  would be eligible for  service-connected 
disability benefits.   The Dissent’s assertion that our holding 
“creates a tremendous financial burden and unfunded liability for the ERS because the ERS is now responsible for paying 
benefits to an unknown number of employees who become injured on 
the job but who have not contributed into the system,” is also 
without merit for this reason. In addition, there is no 
evidentiary support i n the record for the Dissent’s sweeping 
assertions, including the suggestion that our holding will have negative far-reaching effects and consequences.                
35

  
 
 
 
    
    
  
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Also, HRS § 88-132 (Supp. 2011) provides that the State or 
county pay all contributions to the ERS when members must leave 
active service of the State or any county for military service 
in times of war or national or state emergencies.  Yet, despite 
such continuing contributions to the ERS, the member is not 
entitled to benefits under HRS § 88- 79 if “incapacitated for 
duty by accident, act of war, or otherwise, occurring while the 
member is not in the service of the State or any county.” HRS § 
88-136 (Supp. 2004).  Thus, the legislature’s framework for 
“fairness” as to who is entitled to benefits under HRS § 88-79 
is not based on the amount of money contributed by or on behalf 
of a member, but rather if the disabling accident occurs while 
in service to the State or county, as long as ERS contributions 
are being made during the non-membership service.  
In sum, HRS Chapter 88 provides for a retirement benefit to 
members who become disabled due to the occurrence of an accident 
while in the service of the State or any county, regardless if that service is “membership service.” For the foregoing 
reasons, even if Stout’s service as a summer school teacher to the DOE at the time of the shooting may not have been 
“membership service,” she is eligible for benefits under HRS § 
88-79.  
Based on our analysis, we need not and do not address 
Stout’s additional points on appeal, including whether or not 
36
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
    
  
                         
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Hawaii’s pension and retirement benefits law, i.e., Chapter 88, 
should be “liberally construed” in favor of beneficiaries .14 
For all of these reasons, again, we respectfully disagree 
with the Dissent. The Dissent’s reliance on HRS §§ 88 -42.5 and 
88-43 is misplaced because, as discussed, although these 
statutes permit the ERS board to limit membership and 
contributions, they do not restrict the benefits of existing 
members, such as Stout. Moreover, what the Territorial 
Legislature noted in 1925 when it created the ERS remains true 
today: regardless  of an employee’s age or length of service, 
should the employee become disabled as a result of a service-connected accident, he or she is eligible for accidental or 
service-connected disability retirement benefits. 
See HRS §§ 
88-79, 88-80 (imposing no age or length or service requirement for the receipt of an allowance on retiremen
t for service-
connected disability);  1925 Joint Report  27 (same); 
id. at 8 
(“The government will provide the total pension payable in the case of accidental death or accidental disability of the 
employee.”); see also , e.g.
, Emps.’ Ret. Sys., Questions &  
Answers About Your Employees’ Retirement System Contributory 
14 Several states, including Mississippi, have interpreted their government 
workers’ pension laws in a manner so as “to carry out, and pr operly 
recognize, their beneficent policy and purpose, and to confer the benefits 
intended.” Smith v. Bd. of Gen. Ret. Sys. of Meridian,  224 Miss. 13, 23, 79 
So. 2d 447, 451 (Miss. 1955). 
37  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Plan 5 (2012) (“Regardless of credited service , if you are 
permanently disabled as a result of a job
-related (service-
connected) accident, you are entitled to a 100% refund of your 
contributions (including interest) and a pension of 35% of your 
AFC for life.”  (emphasis added)).  Clearly, so long as an 
employee is a current ERS member, the amount of the member’s 
contributions is irrelevant to the employee’s receipt of  a  
service-connected disability benefit.  
The Dissent acknowledges the plain language of HRS § 88-79 
“might suggest” the Majority’s conclusion , yet the Dissent 
nevertheless suggests 
the Majority arrived at its decision out 
of pity. In actuality, the rule of law controls. This is made 
clear by the plain text of HRS § 88-79 within the context of the 
entirety of chapter 88 and its legislative history, 
demonstrating a long-standing legislative goal to provide for 
governmental employees who become disabled in connection with 
their State or county governmental service as long as ERS contributions were being made during the non-membership service. 
V. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the ERS Board ’s 
October 27, 2014 Final Decision and the circuit court’s July 28, 
2015 “Final Judgment and Decision and Order Affirming the Final 
Decision of Appellee Board of Trustees of the Employees’ 
Retirement System of the State of Hawaii and Dismissing 
38
                
 
 
 
      
 
   
 
 
                                
 
                                
  
                           
                         
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  *** 
Appellant Rosemary H. Stout’s Appeal.” This matter is remanded 
to the ERS Board for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.15 
John C. McLaren 
for petitioner /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
Brian Aburano for respondent  
 /
s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
15  The court observes that the Board had previously acknowledged that it 
would “approve and accept  the certifications, findings and recommendations 
contained in the [Medical Board’s] Report,” except for the Medical Board’s 
“finding that [Stout’s] disability is the ‘result of an accident occurring 
while in the ‘actual performance of duty.’[’]” 
39
 