 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I  
 
 
 
 
 
 
SCAP-13-0002266
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     ***  
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAP-13-0002266 22-DEC-2015 
08:33 AM 
---oOo--­
THE SIERRA CLUB and SENATOR CLAYTON HEE,
  
Petitioners/Appellants-Appellants,
  
 
vs.
  
 
D.R. HORTON-SCHULER HOMES, LLC, a Delaware limited liability 
company, d.b.a. D.R. HORTON-SCHULER DIVISION; THE LAND USE 
COMMISSION OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I; OFFICE OF PLANNING, STATE OF 
HAWAII; DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND PERMITTING,  
Respondents/Appellees-Appellees.  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
  
(CAAP-13
-0002266; CIV. NO. 12-1-2000-07)
 
DECEMBER 22, 2015
  
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA AND McKENNA, JJ., 
  
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE CHANG, IN PLACE OF ACOBA, J., RECUSED;   
WITH POLLACK, J., DISSENTING  
 
OPINION  OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
I. Introduction 
This appeal involves a long
-standing issue in this state:  
balancing agricultural and urban land uses. Appellants Sierra         
 
  Appellants argue that the reclassification violated Article  
XI, Section 3 of the Hawai i State Constitution, which provides 
the following:  
 
 
 
 Appellants also argue that the reclassification violated 
Act 183, codified at Hawai i Revised Statutes (“ HRS”)  §§ 205 -41 
through -52 (Supp. 2005), and als  o known as Part III of HRS 
                     
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Club and Clayton Hee challenge the Land Use Commission’s (“LUC”) 
reclassification of approximately 1525.516 acres of Appellee 
D.R. Horton-Schuler Homes’ (“D.R. Horton -Schuler”) land from the 
agricultural state land use district to the urban state land use 
district.   The land is slated for development of the Ho opili 
project.   On transfer from the Intermediate Court of Appeals, 
Appellants seek review of  the Decision and Order of the Circuit 
1  Court of the First Circuit (“circuit court”) affirming the LUC’s 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order  
(“D&O”) and dismissing their appeal.  
     
The State shall conserve and protect agricultural lands, 
promote diversified agriculture, increase agricultural 
self
-sufficiency and assure the availability of 
agriculturally suitable lands. The legislature shall provide standards and criteria to accomplish the foregoing. 
Lands identified by the State as important agricultural 
lands needed to fulfill the purposes above shall not be reclassified by the State or rezoned by its political 
subdivisions without meeting the standards and criteria 
established by the legislature and approved by a two- thirds 
vote of the body responsible for the reclassification or rezoning action. 
The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
2
 1         
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Pursuant to Save Sunset Beach Coalition v. City & County of 
Honolulu, 102 Hawai i 465, 476, 78 P.3d 1, 12 (2003), Article XI, 
Section 3, standing alone,  is not self-executing; rather, its 
mandate is carried out through the provisions of Part III. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
chapter 205 (“Part III”). Part III implements Article XI, 
Section 3’s mandate and governs land use on important 
agricultural lands (“IALs”). Appellants contend that the LUC 
should not reclassify lands that the City and County of Honolulu could potentially designate as IALs in the future, pursuant to  
HRS § 205-47 (Supp. 2005).  
Lastly, Appellants argue that the reclassification violated 
Hawaii Administrative Rules (“HAR”) § 15-15-77(a) (effective 
2000-2013), which requires reclassifications to conform to the 
Hawaii State Plan. They also contend that the reclassification 
violated HAR § 15-15-77(b)(6) (effective 2000-2013), which 
requires the LUC to consider whether taking land in “intensive 
agricultural use for two years prior to the date of a filing of 
a petition [for a district boundary amendment] or lands with a 
high capacity for intensive agricultural use” out of the 
agricultural district “[w]ill not substantially impair actual or 
potential agricultural production in the vicinity of the subject 
property or in the county or State; or . . . [i]s reasonably 
necessary for urban growth. . . .” 
3
         
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Therefore, the plain language of Article XI, Section 3 does not 
require the LUC to stay reclassification of agricultural land 
while the formal county-initiated IAL designation process runs 
its course. Pursuant to the policies underlying Part III, state 
and county government should consider the “compelling state 
interest in conserving the State’s agricultural land resource 
base assuring the long term availability of agricultural lands 
for agricultural use,” see HRS § 205-41 (Supp. 2005); however, 
the plain language of Part III contains no provision requiring a 
stay. Further, the constitutional history of Article XI, 
Section 3, as well as the legislative history of Part III, does 
not reveal an intent to require the LUC to delay reclassifying 
agricultural land pending formal designation of IALs.  Second, 
reliable, probative, and substantial evidence supported the 
LUC’s finding that the reclassification of the land at issue in 
this case was consistent with the Hawai i State Plan, would not 
substantially impair agricultural production, and was necessary 
for urban growth. We therefore affirm the circuit court’s 
decision and order, whi ch affirmed the LUC’s D&O. 
4
         
 
    
 
  
 
 On January 24, 2007, D.R. Horton-Schuler filed a Petition 
for Land Use District Boundary Amendment (“Petition”) before the 
LUC. D.R. Horton-Schuler described the Ho opili project as 
follows: 
 
The Hoopili project is scheduled to be developed in two ten-year 
phases, the first phase from 2013-2020, and the second phase 
2from 2020-2030.    
                     
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
II. Background 
A. Land Use Commission Proceedings 
1.	 D.R. Horton-Schuler’s Petition for Land Use 
District Boundary Amendment 
Petitioner is currently proposing the development of a 
mixed-use, transit -ready community, including residential, 
business, and commercial areas, transit  stops, schools, 
parks and open space. Petitioner is proposing to develop 
approximately ll,750 residential units (including 
affordable units) ranging from an estimated $200,000 to 
$700,000 based upon 2006 market prices, a minimum of five 
(5) school sites (subject to continued negotiations with 
the Department of Education), approximately two hundred ten 
(210) acres for parks and open space, and approximately one 
hundred forty -five (145) acres for business and commercial 
spaces that would sell for approximately $35 to $45 per sq. 
ft. in today’s market. Both the residential and commercial 
space selling prices are estimates and are subject to 
change according to fluctuating market conditions, as well 
as unanticipated costs incurred during construction. The Proposed Project is being designed as a mixed -use community 
ready to provide high -capacity transit stops to further 
encourage walking/bicycling and the use of public 
transportation to supplement that which already underpins 
Hoopili’s traditional neighborhood d esign. Infrastructure 
facilities to be expanded or improved include access and 
circulation roadways, drainage systems, water distribution 
and wastewater collection lines, and 
electrical/communication systems.  
Under HAR § 15-15-78 (effective 2000- 2013), the LUC can reclassify 
lands incrementally if “full development of the subject property cannot 
(continued. . .) 
5
 2         
 
   
  
    
 
  
 
 
  
  
                                                                  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The Petition stated that the land was “currently leased for 
agricultural purposes,” including “diversified agriculture; 
pasturage; grazing for livestock; cultivation of seed corn and 
other agricultural crops; and agricultural research.” The Final 
Environmental Impact Statement (“FEIS”) prepared in conju nction 
with the Petition represented that D.R. Horton-Schuler would be 
relocating the agricultural tenants onto replacement lands. 
The FEIS also noted that the proposed project conformed to 
the Hawai i State Plan. The FEIS pointed out that the Petition 
lands were “located within (and makai of) the Urban Growth Boundary of the Ewa Development Plan Urban Lan d Use Map.” The 
FEIS represented that the project “is consistent with the 
State’s goal to insure [sic] economic stability, diversity, and 
growth for present and future generations,” because the project “will provide various housing and employment opportunities for 
the rapidly growing Ewa region, which will in turn, relieve 
development pressures from other areas of O ahu, particularly the 
Primary Urban Center, and rural areas such as Wai anae, North 
Shore, Ko olau Loa and Ko olau Poko.” The FEIS noted, “The 
agricultural policies [of the Hawai i State Plan] are 
predominantly not applicable to the Ho opili project.” 
(. . .continued) 
substantially be completed within ten years after the date of” the LUC’s 
approval. 
6
         
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2. Intervenors and Other Parties to the Petition 
Proceedings and Their Positions 
When an “[a]mendment[] to district boundaries invo lving 
land areas greater than fifteen acres” is filed with the LUC, 
the State Office of Planning (“OP”) and the county planning 
department, here the City and County of Honolulu’s Department of 
Planning and Permitting (“DPP”), must appear as parties and 
“make recommendations relative to the proposed boundary change.” 
HRS § 205-4(e)(1) (2001). The DPP supported the Petition because 
it found the project to be consistent wit h the City’s General 
Plan, which “encourages development and growth and directs economic activity within the secondary urban center and urban 
fringe area in Ewa.” The DPP noted that the project is located 
within the Urban Growth Boundary of the Ewa Development Plan, 
where urban development is “allowed and consistent with the 
long-range vision, policies, principles and guidelines in the 
Ewa Development Plan regarding land use and the plan’s vi sion of 
building master planned residential communities that allow residents to live and work in the Ewa region.” The OP generally 
supported the orderly development of Kapolei as Oahu’s second 
city but did not initially take a position on the Petition, 
citing insufficient information. Four years into the Petition 
proceedings, the Sierra Club and Clayton Hee, in his individual 
capacity only, were permitted to intervene. Both opposed the 
7
         
 
  
    
 
 
      
    
 
  
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Petition, arguing it proposed inappropriate uses for productive 
agricultural land. 
3. Evidentiary Hearings 
The LUC held evidentiary hearings on the Petition on March 
19, 2009; March 20, 2009; May 15, 2009; June 25, 2009; June 26, 
2009; October 20, 2011; October 21, 2011; November 17, 2011; 
November 18, 2011; January 5, 2012; January 19, 2012; March 1, 
2012; March 2, 2012; March 15, 2012; and March 16, 2012. 
a. Evidence and Testimony on Agricultural Impacts 
D.R. Horton-Schuler called Bruce Plasch, who was admitted 
as an “expert in the field of agricultural economics.” D.R. 
Horton-Schuler also submitted Plasch’s written direct testimony 
and supplemental written direct testimony.  First, Plasch 
described the agronomic conditions of the Petition area as 
follows, starting with soil conditions: 
About 1,340 ± 65 acres  of the Petition Area are comprised 
of higher- quality soils (I and II for the NRCS ratings, 
Prime for ALISH, and A and B for the LSB). This is about 
2.4% of the 55,563 acres of Prime agricultural lands that 
Oahu had in 1977, and about 2.5% of the 53,039 acres of A 
and B lands that O ahu had in 1972.  
   
In his supplemental written testimony he described agricultural 
productivity at Ho
opili as follows: 
In 2010, the primary crops grown at Ho opili were bananas, 
basil, snap beans, broccoli, cabbage, seed corn, sweet 
corn, cucumbers, eggplant, lettuces, melons, dry onions, 
bell peppers, squash, pumpkin, and tomatoes. This includes 
crops grown for the local market as well as for export. For vegetables, melons and fruits, about 1,027 acres were 
harvested with an estimated yield of 15.3 million pounds. 
8
         
 
  
 
 Second, Plasch testified that the contraction of plantation 
agriculture has released hundreds of thousands of acres of 
farmland:  
 
In actual acreages, the contraction of plantation 
agriculture released about 263,000 acres of farmland from 
1968 to 2009. However, despite the availability of such 
farmland, the demand for land for diversified crops over 
the same period increased only by about 26,800 acres (about 10% of the land released from plantation agriculture).  
 
 
 Third, Plasch estimated that about 177,000 ± 5,000 acres of  
farmland remains available statewide for diversified 
agriculture, with 30,000 acres available on O ahu.  
 Fourth, Plasch explained that the Wahiawa wastewater 
treatment plant was in the process of being upgraded to provide 
North Shore agricultural land with a water source:  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
This represented about 6% of Hawaii’s production of these 
crops. 
During the past four decades, a vast amount of farmland has 
become available for diversified crop farming due to the 
contraction of plantation agriculture. In 1980, we had 17 
large plantations in Hawaii that produced sugar and pineapple for export: 14 sugar plantations  and 3 pineapple 
plantations. Now we have just one, the HC&S sugar 
plantation on Maui (Dole’s pineapple operation remains on 
Oahu, but it is no longer a large plantation growing 
pineapple for export, but a farm that grows pineapple 
primarily for the Hawaii  market.)  
Oahu experienced a similar trend. Since 1960, plantation 
agriculture released about 73,500 acres on Oahu, while 
acreage in diversified crops increased only by about  2,300 
acres (about 3% of the land released from plantation 
agriculture). 
   
[A]  $30 million upgrade to the Plant is under construction, 
and is slated for completion in October 2012. The decision 
to upgrade the Plant is the result of a 1998 Consent Decree 
with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”).  
 
The purpose of the recommendation is to allow farmers to 
use R
-l water from the Wahiawa Reservoir to irrigate any 
type of crop using any type of irrigation system. The 
9
         
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are many ways to increase yields, including:
  
 
 
 
 
 
Plasch also noted that although the capital costs are higher,  
there are many benefits to hydroponics, including year-round 
production, higher yields, higher quality produce, fewer pest 
problems, less energy and water use, and lower transportation 
costs.  Plasch opined that intensive farming practices could 
increase agricultural production without requiring more land.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
upgrade to the R -l water- quality standard will open up the 
mid-level and high -level fields on the North Shore for 
growing vegetable crops. Under the current R -2 water-
quality rating, water from the Reservoir can be used to 
irrigate orchards and some other crops, but not vegetable 
and melon crops. As a result, most vegetables and melon crops on the North Shore must be grown at lower elevations 
where they can be irrigated using groundwater which has no 
restrictions on use. 
In the meantime, landowners and some farmers on the North 
Shore have reactivated and improved groundwater wells so 
that more fields can be irrigated with groundwater only. 
This has allowed some farmers to move some of their 
operations to the North Shore. 
Fifth, Plasch testified that existing agricultural lands 
could be farmed more intensively: 
The large diversified farmers on Oahu generally harvest 
one, and sometimes two, crops per year from a given field. 
As a result, land is in crop for about a third of the year, 
and fallow for about two -thirds of the year.
 
¨ Farming two or more crops per year.

 
¨ For certain crops, going vertical using trellises, cages 
or sticks to support plants.
  
¨ Growing plants using hydroponic farming in greenhouses. 
For certain vegetable crops, a number of farmers are 
already implementing more intens
ive farming that greatly 
increases yields, and as a result, greatly reduces land requirements. In particular, many of the tomatoes, cucumbers, peppers, and lettuces sold in our supermarkets 
are grown hydroponically in greenhouses by Hawaii and 
mainland farmers. 
10

         
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seventh, as to Hoopili’s impact on the current agricultural 
tenants at the Petition area, Plasch testified that  the farms 
currently operating in the Petition area had all found 
sufficient lands outside of the urban growth boundary to 
continue their operations.   In Plasch’s professional opinion,  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Sixth, Plasch testified that 100% self-sufficiency was 
possible but unlikely in Hawai i: 
Hawaii has ample farmland to achieve 100% self- sufficiency, 
with or without Ho opili and other projects that are 
consistent with City plans. But as I mentioned above, 100% 
self-sufficiency in fresh vegetables, melons and fruits is 
not achievable given competition from low -cost imports, and 
would not provide food security. 
Currently, approximately 15,000 acres of land is farmed 
statewide to produce approximately 33% of our fresh 
vegetables, melons and fruits. Therefore, achieving 100% self-sufficiency in these crops would require about 45,000 
acres of farmland. That would be 30,000 additional acres statewide. It should be noted that this figure is high, 
considering the fact that more intensive farming than is 
currently the case would greatly reduce the amount of land required. The additional land required is small compared to 
the estimated 177,000 acres ± 5,000 acres of good farmland 
that is available statewide. In addition, another 70,000+ 
acres could become available if shipping is interrupted to 
such an extent that exporting crops becomes unfeasible. 
A similar situation would apply to Oahu. About 23,000 
additional acres would be required for 100% self -
sufficiency in fresh produce (45,000 acres for statewide self-sufficiency x 67% for Oahu’s share of the population ­
the existing 7,300 acres used to grow food crops on Oahu). 
Again this estimate is high given inter -island shipping and 
reduced land requirements from intensive farming. As 
aforementioned, even if all of the farms within the Growth 
Boundaries relocate to land outside the Growth Boundaries, there would still be 30,000 acres of good farmland 
available on Oahu outside the Growth Boundaries, plus about 
4,700 acres used for export and non -food crops that could 
come available if needed. 
the Project will have little or no adverse impact on 
Hawai
i’s agricultural production because farmland is 
available in upper Kunia and the North Shore to accommodate 
the relocation of existing farms in Ewa. Also the 
11
         
 
  
  
 Agricultural tenants Aloun Farms and Sugarland Farms also 
submitted letters in support of the Ho opili project.   Alec Sou 
of Aloun Farms stated that he  had already secured “rights to 400 
acres of farm land outside of the urban growth boundary with the 
opportunity to acquire as much as 1,000 acres.”   Thus, Sou 
stated, “We do not view th e plans by D.R. Horton as the end of 
all farming in Honolulu, much less Hawaii. . . .  We believe there is more than sufficient land on Oahu to support our 
farming operations. . . .”   Larry Jefts of Sugarland Farms 
stated he  was “look[ing] forward to conti nu[ing] to farm as long 
as [D.R. Horton-Schuler] would allow [him] to [at Ho opili] . . . 
and [was] willing to move and cooperate with the development 
plan to the advantage of Horton, to [the farm] and to the entire 
community, who will benefit from the development, new schools, 
the rail lines, etc.”   Jefts stated that the development “will 
not hurt [his] business model,” as he had “planned for it since *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
development of the Petition Area and the resulting loss of 
agricultural land will not limit the growth of diversified 
crops since ample agricultural land is available on O ahu 
and the other islands.  
Plasch’s supplemental written direct testimony also opined 
Hoopili  will have little to no adverse impact on Hawaii’s 
agricultural production because ample farmland is available 
on Oahu and the other islands to accommodate the relocation 
of the existing Ewa farms as well as to accommodate the 
future growth of diversified crop farming.  Land is available because of the closure or severe contraction of 
all plantations in Hawai i with the single exception of one 
sugar plantation, HC&S on Maui.  
 
12

         
 
  
 The OP called Russell Kokubun, the Chair of the Board of 
Agriculture. He testified, “I understand that there will be a 
loss of some very, very good agricultural lands. But the 
Department is prepared to make available as much good 
agricultural land as possible. And  that’s part of our strategy 
to expand our agricultural industry in the state.”   On cross-
examination, Kokubun elaborated on the D epartment’s strategy as 
follows:  
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1994,” when he initially entered into a lease with the prior 
owner, the James Campbell Company. 
A: Well, there are a number of agricultural lands that 
are going to be made available, I think very good 
agricultural lands. 
Q: Such as? 
A: One of the issues that the Department is working on 
is there are –-there’s a proposed ag park on Kunia Road of 
150 acres. There’s a parcel again off of Kunia Road, that 
the DLNR will, is in the process of providing to the 
Department of Agriculture for agricultural purposes of 400 
acres. And we are on the threshold of completing the purchase of the Galbraith Estate or Galbraith Trust Lands. 
Q: Now, with respect to all of those, to your knowledge 
do they have adequate existing supplies of water to grow 
the kinds of crops that Aloun Farms is currently growing? 
A: The 150-acre ag park does -- it needs the 
infrastructure to get the water to the si te. But that’s 
something that the Department will do. The 400 acres also 
has access to Waiahole ditch water. That would also have to be a transmission line provided for that that we would be 
prepared to do. And the Galbraith Trust Lands have one 
well, but that’s not adequate to irrigate the entire 1700 ­
acre parcel. So we are working on getting some planning and design money to take a look at this. 
On cross-examination, Kokubun admitted that the Department did 
not currently have funds to make water improvements on these 
13
         
 
  
 Leon Stollenberger, who was admitted as an “expert on the 
characteristics of agricultural lands in the Central and North 
Shore areas of [O ahu],”  testified that the Ho opili lands were 
“one of the most suited to vegetable production literally in the 
world.”  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
other lands, but that his D epartment was “working on getting 
some planning and design money to take a look at” the 
infrastructure. 
The Sierra Club called Hector Valenzuela, who was admitted 
without objection as an expert in agriculture, in particular, vegetable crops. He did not support the Petition because of the 
loss of prime agricultural lands. He testified that the Petition lands were “among the most productive and valuable 
lands in the state because of their proximity to market and 
ideal growing conditions,” which included higher solar radiation 
and temperature, lower humidity, and ideal soil conditions 
resulting in little erosion. These conditions contributed to 
faster, earlier harvests and higher crop yields. Valenzuela 
also testified that the state needs “isolated sections of land . . . [to] grow crops competitively,” with these isolated 
sections contributing to the “overall self -sufficiency and 
sustainability of the state.” At Hoopili, Aloun Farms had been 
successful in growing certain crops, providing 40 to 70 percent 
of the entire production of those crops in the state. 
14
         
 
  
  
 The Sierra Club also submitted into evidence an undated 
scholarly article entitled “Agriculture” by C.N. Lee and H.C. 
“Skip” Bittenbender that opined that “near self -sufficiency [in 
Hawaii] would require an estimated  260,800 acres . . . to meet 
projected resident needs in 2007. . . .”  
 Hee called former Governor John Waihee, who testified that 
he was concerned that the replacement agricultural lands did not 
have the same water supply  that Hoopili enjoyed.   Hee himself  
testified that there may be available agricultural land, but it 
is not prime agricultural land, and would require water to grow crops productively and profitably.   He also testified that the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Valenzuela believed that “some of the crops that are grown in 
Hoopili . . . may be very difficult to grow . . . competitively 
in other parts of the stat e.”   He disagreed that hydroponics 
could replace the need for prime agricultural land on O ahu.  
According to Valenzuela, hydroponics is capital-intensive; he 
criticized D.R. Horton-Schuler’s lack of documentation 
supporting the idea that greenhouses or other hi-tech farming 
methods were “feasible and/or profitable in the proposed Ho opili 
development area.”  
The Sierra Club also called farmer Gary Maunakea
-Forth, who 
testified that finding available farmland for long-term lease 
was difficult, and it was costly to prepare land for farming. 
15
         
 
   
 
     
     
 
 D.R. Horton-Schuler called Ann Bouslog, who was admitted as 
an “expert in the field of market analysis and economics.”   D.R. 
Horton also submitted her written direct   testimony and 
supplemental written direct testimony.   Bouslog testified to the 
need for urban growth at the P etition area. Bouslog’s 
supplemental written direct testimony stated that, by 2030, 
there would be a 29,000-unit housing deficit  if there were no  
further residential entitlements.   In her supplemental written 
direct testimony, Bouslog opined that “Ho opili’s 11,750 units, 
if entitled, would make a significant contribution towards 
addressing this unmet need.”   According to Bouslog, Ho opili is 
“ideally situated” to help meet Oahu’s housing needs, as it is 
“[l]ocated near the emerging Second City of Kapolei and along 
the major transportation corridor between Kapolei and the 
existing urbanized areas of O ahu.”   Further, “the compact 
development style and primary resident-orientation of the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
state was “beyond the tipping point of food security.” Both 
Waihee and Hee believed that the Ho opili development was not 
reasonably necessary for urban growth, as tens of thousands of 
homes were already approved and permitted for the region, and 
because the Petition lands were among the most agriculturally 
productive in the state.  
b. 	Evidence and Testimony on the Need for the 
Project 
16
         
 
  
  
  
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Project suggest that it would appeal to a broad range of 
potential future buyers and renters, including substantial 
shares of affordable and workforce housing.”   Bouslog estimated 
that “the overall average absorption at Hoopili” would be “650 
unit sales per year,” with projected average sales of 725 units 
per year in the first ten-year phase of development, and 
projected “average sales of about 595 units per year” in the 
second ten-year phase of development.     
The DPP called Robert Stanfield, chief of the Development 
Plans and Zone Change Branch of the DPP. 
He testified that the 
“DPP supports the Petition to reclassify the land from 
Agricultural District to the Urban District ,” because “the 
Petition is consistent w ith all relevant city plans.” He 
testified that “an average of 1800 units a year will be needed in Central Oahu and Ewa to successfully divert growth away from 
the country areas and Windward Oahu and the East Honolulu 
Sustainable Community areas.” Stanfield also testified that the 
City estimated that about 34,000 units in the Ewa region were 
slated for construction as of July 2010. 
Bouslog believed that the DPP’s estimate of the number of 
homes coming online was too high, because it included units 
intended to be developed as second homes, timeshares, or resort 
units. She estimated that 24,000 potential primary housing 
17
         
 
  
 In her supplemental written  direct testimony, Bouslog 
stated that the following negative impacts would occur without 
development of the Ho opili project:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
      
 
 D.R. Horton-Schuler called Vincent  Shigekuni who was 
admitted without objection as an “expert in the field of 
planning.”   He testified that the Ho opili project was consistent 
with the Hawai i State Plan.  
 The OP called planning program administrator, Mary Lou 
Kobayashi. She testified that the “proposed reclassification 
generally conforms to the overall theme, goals, objectives and 
policies and priority guidelines of the Hawai i State Plan, 
particularly those relating to housing, the economy and *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
units were planned for the Ewa region, which still fell far 
below the number needed t o meet Ewa’s housing needs . 
1. Island’s population and economic growth would likely be 
constrained. In the medium - and long -term, this would 
raise significant concerns:  
a) Displacement of development activity away from the 
planned Kapolei region and back into other areas of Oahu 
or the neighbor islands – areas less suited to accommodate 
significant growth; 
b) Worsening shortage of primary housing on Oahu; 
c)
 Accelerated price pressures on housing, especially Ewa 
and Kapolei; 
d) Higher prices associated with commercial and industrial 
properties -possibly good for landlords, but a burden for 
tenants and consumers; and e) A less efficient and cost effective transit system, if 
built. 
2. Significant loss of potential jobs creation in East 
Kapolei area, along with the economic and fiscal impacts those would support. 
c.  	Evidence and Testimony on the Project’s 
Consistency with the Hawai i State Plan 
18
         
 
  
  
  
  
      
     
 
 
  
    
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
sustainability.”   Specifically, she testified that “the 
reclassification supports Hawai i State Plan policies to provide 
increased job opportunities, to effectively provide housing 
opportunities and address sustainability through energy and 
water conservation measure.”   
When cross-examined as to whether the Petition was 
inconsistent with the Hawai i State Plan’s agricultural 
objectives, Kobayashi answered, “No. . . [W]ith the fact that there are additional lands available for agricultural use 
. . . 
the reclassification would not necessarily adversely affect or impact the . . . various agricultural objectives.” This was 
because “there are other lands that are available within the Agricultural District for agricultural activities such that the 
State Plan policies with regard to agriculture as a whole are 
still being supported.” 
d. 	Evidence and Testimony on Important 
Agricultural Lands 
D.R. Horton-Schuler’s expert in the field of planning, 
Shigekuni, testified that the “Petition Area is not designated 
as Important Agricultural Land.” 
DPP’s chief planning division head, Kathy Sokugawa, also 
testified that DPP “would not be recommending [the Ho opili] area 
as a potential IAL area.” Sokugawa also explained that the City 
and County process for identifying IALs was supposed to start 
19
         
 
   
   
 On March 7, 2012, while the LUC was in the midst of 
evidentiary hearings on the Petition, counsel for Hee, Eric 
Seitz, wrote a letter to DPP’s counsel, Don Kitaoka, drawing his 
attention to the Honolulu City Council’s  Resolution 12-23, which 
he claimed “intended to expedite the classification of Important 
Agricultural Lands . . . including those agriculturally 
productive lands within the urban growth boundary classified as 
prime agricultural lands.”   Seitz contended that the Resolution 
“may have a critical impact” on the pending Ho opili proceedings; 
therefore, he asked that DPP “produce witnesses who will be able 
to testify as to the possible effects of the Resolution on 
testimony and opinions previously offered by individuals and 
officials whose support for the project[] was based upon the 
premise that the lands at issue could not and would not be 
classified as Important Agricultural Lands.”      
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
when the state gave funding to the counties for that purpose. 
Sokugawa testified that the state had not yet funded the 
counties, but that the City and County of Honolulu had set aside 
its own funds to begin the IAL designation process. 
Seitz enclosed Resolution 12-23 with the letter. The 
Resolution is entit led, “Urging the City’s Agricultural Liaison 
to Expedite the Identifying and Mapping of Important 
Agricultural Lands and Ensure that the City Works to Preserve 
the Availability of Agricultural Lands for Farming.” The 
20
         
 
   
 
   
  
 
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Resolution notes that “the City Admini stration has begun the 
process of identification and mapping of IALs[.]” The 
Resolution directed Laura Thielen, the then newly appointed city 
Agricultural Liaison, to expedite the identification and mapping 
of IALs and to report back to the City Council on the progress 
of the City’s efforts. The Resolution also stated that 
“agriculturally productive lands within urban growth boundaries 
that are classified as prime agricultural lands, provided 
adequate water supply is available” be “consider[ed]” in the IA L 
identification process. 
A week later, Kitaoka wrote a letter to the LUC alerting 
them to Seitz’s letter. Kitaoka represented to the LUC that the 
DPP’s position was “that production of any additional witnesses 
regarding this matter for the aforementioned dockets [i.e., Koa 
Ridge and Ho opili] is unnecessary,” but that additional 
witnesses would be provided if the LUC thought it was necessary.  
Further, Kitaoka noted that the City Council expressly did not 
intend for Resolution 12-23 to “influence the state Land Use 
Commission decision making process on any case pending before 
the Commission,” referring to Koa Ridge and Ho opili. Indeed, 
the City Council’s Committee on Zoning and Planning’s Report on 
Resolution 12-23, attached to Kitaoka’s letter, states, “[I]t is 
your committee’s intent that the City work within the parameters set forth by state law [in identifying IALs] and not influence 
21
         
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the state Land Use Commission decision-making process on any 
case pending before the Commission.”   
After Resolution 12
-23 entered the record, DPP re-called 
chief planning division head Sokugawa. When asked on direct 
examination whether the resolution “would impact or affect prior 
testimony or positions taken by [the DPP] in support of the 
pending Petition,” Sokugaw a answered in the negative. Sokugawa 
explained that the city’s development plans “designate [the 
Hoopili parcel] for urban development, not agriculture.” 
Sokugawa also highlighted “the last section of the committee 
report [on Resolution 12-23, which] . . . states [that it] ‘is 
not intended to influence the State Land Use Commission 
decision-making process on any case pending before the 
Commission.’” When the OP asked about the process of 
recommending IALs, Sokugawa explained that DPP was about to hire 
a consultant to help with the IAL designation process, and that 
when DPP has completed its IAL recommendations, the 
recommendations will go to the City Council, then on to the Land 
Use Commission. One of the LUC Commissioners, Commissioner Heller, also asked Sokugawa to provide a timeframe for the 
completion of the IAL identification process. Sokugawa 
testified that the process would begin later in 2012, and that 
her “optimistic guess would be that there’d be somethin g before 
the City Council in a year.” 
22
         
 
    
  
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
4. The LUC’s D&O 
The LUC reclassified the Petition lands from the state 
agricultural land use district to the state urban land use 
district, subject to conditions that are not relevant on appeal.  
The LUC’s D&O was 186 pages long and contained 666 findings of 
fact (“FOFs,” or “FOF” in the singular), 32 conclusions of law 
(“COLs,” or “COL” in the singular), and 26 conditions. Relevant 
to this appeal, the LUC rendered 8 FOFs concerning the need for 
the proposed project; 22 FOFs concerning the proposed project’s 
impact on agricultural resources in the area; 11 FOFs finding 
that the Petition area would not be designated as IAL; and 39 
FOFs addressing the proposed project’s consistency with the 
Hawaii State Plan. That left nearly 600 other FOFs detailing 
procedural matters; economic impacts; social impacts; impacts on 
flora, fauna, arthropods, archaeological and historical 
resources, cultural resources, groundwater resources, and scenic 
resources; environmental quality; public services and facilities 
such as highway and roadway facilities, parks and recreational 
facilities, water service, wastewater disposal, drainage, solid waste disposal, schools, police and fire protection, 
emergency/medical services, and electricity and telephone 
services; and conformance to other state and county plans such 
as the Hawai i State Functional Plan, the General Plan for the 
City and County of Honolulu, and the Ewa Development Plan, as 
23
         
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
                     
     
 
 
  
 
  
  
  3 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
well as the Coastal Zone Management Program. Clearly, these 
latter findings are not relevant on appeal. 
B. Circuit Court Appeal 
Appellants appealed the LUC’s D&O to the circuit court, 
alleging that the LUC violated Article XI, Section 3 of the 
Hawaii State Constitution (Count 1), violated Act 183 (Count 2), 
and violated HAR § 15-15-77 (Count 3). In their opening brief, 
they did not identify any particular FOFs as clearly erroneous 
or any COLs as wrong.  At oral argument, the circuit court asked 
the Appellants which particular FOFs they believed were in 
error. Initially their response was “all of them”; however, 
with further probing by the court Appellants clarified that they 
challenged FOFs 428, 430-434, 437, 444-448, 567-568, 571-572, 
and 574, which are discussed in greater detail infra, Section 
IV.C. The circuit court then asked Appellants which subsections 
of HRS § 91-14(g) (2012)3 applied to their agency appeal, as 
HRS § 91- 14(g) provides the following standards: 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm the 
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions 
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the 
decision and order if the substantial rights of the 
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the 
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders 
are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions; or 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the agency; or 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
(4)
 Affected by other error of law; or 
(continued. . .)  
24
         
 
   
  
   
 
  
  
 
  
  
                                                                  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
their Opening Brief did not specifically include that 
information. Appellants’ response was all six subsections 
applied; however, through further questioning, they clarified 
that subsection 3 (unlawful procedure)4 and 4 (other error of 
law) did not apply. The Appellants focused on subsection 1, arguing that the LUC’s reclassification was “[i]n violation of 
constitutional or statutory provisions,” spe cifically Article 
XI, Section 3, HRS chapter 205, and HAR § 15-15-77. When the 
circuit court asked for argument on subsection 5, in other 
words, whether the LUC’s D&O was “[c]learly erroneous in view of 
the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole 
record,” the Appellants did not point to a specific place in the 
record, besides their opening brief, where they challenged the 
evidence adduced before the LUC. 
After hearing argument from all the parties, the circuit 
court dismissed the appeal and affirmed the LUC’s D&O. The 
Appellants timely appealed, and this court accepted transfer of 
their case. 
(. . .continued) 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, 
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole 
record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by 
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise 
of discretion. 
At oral argument, counsel for Appellants represented, “We made it clear 
[to the circuit court] that we were appealing the [LUC’s] process. . . .” 
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/courts/oral_arguments/archive/oasc13_2266.htm 
at 15:09- 13.  The record reveals, however, that Appellants abandoned any 
challenge to the LUC’s D&O based on unlawful procedure. 
25
 4         
 
   
 
  
  
      
 
 Appellants argue that that the LUC should be required to 
stay reclassification of the potentially important agricultural 
land at issue pending formal designation of IALs by the 
counties, pursuant to the intent behind Article XI, Section 3 of 
the Hawai i Constitution. Constitutional intent is to be found *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
III. Standard of Review 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon its 
review of an agency’s decision is a secondary appeal. The standard of review is one in which this court must 
determine whether the circuit court was right or wrong in 
its decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91
14(g) . . . to the agency’s decision.  
  ­
Dep’t of Env. Servs. v. Land Use Comm’n , 127 Hawai i 5, 12, 275 
P.3d 809, 816 (2012)(citation omitted).   An agency’s conclusions 
of law are reviewed de novo  , while an agency’s factual findings 
are reviewed for clear error  .  Camara v. Agsalud , 67 Haw. 212, 
216, 685 P.2d 794, 797 (1984).  
In order to preserve the function of administrative 
agencies in discharging their delegated duties and the 
function of this court in reviewing agency determinations, 
a presumption of validity is accorded to decisions of 
administrative bodies acting within their sphere of 
expertise and one seeking to upset the order bears “the 
heavy burden of making a convincing showing that it is 
invalid because it is unjust and unreasonable in its 
consequences. ”   
 
In re Hawaii Elec. Light Co.,  60 Haw. 625, 630, 594 P.2d 612, 
617 (1979) (citations omitted). 
IV.
	 Discussion 
A.	 Article XI, Section 3 Does Not Require the LUC to Stay 
Reclassification Proceedings Pending the Completion of the County IAL Designation Process 
26
         
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in the language of the constitutional provision itself. See  
Malahoff v. Saito, 111 Hawai i 168, 181, 140 P.3d 401, 414  (2006) 
(“[T]he fundamental principle in interpreting a constitu tional 
provision is to give effect to [the] intent   [of the framers and 
the people adopting it].  This intent is to be found in the 
instrument itself.”). The plain language of Article XI, Section 
3 does not require the LUC to stay reclassification proceedings 
until the IAL mapping process is complete. Again, Article XI, 
Section 3 provides the following:  
The State shall conserve and protect agricultural lands, 
promote diversified agriculture, increase agricultural 
self-sufficiency and assure the availability of 
agriculturally suitable lands. The legislature shall provide standards and criteria to accomplish the foregoing. 
Lands identified by the State as important agricultural 
lands needed to fulfill the purposes above shall not be 
reclassified by the State or rezoned by its political 
subdivisions without meeting the standards and criteria 
established by the legislature and approved by a two -thirds 
vote of the body responsible for the reclassification or 
rezoning action. 
The provision requires on ly that any “[l]ands identified by the 
State as important agricultural lands . . . shall not be 
reclassified by the State . . . without meeting the standards 
and criteria established by the legislature and approved by a 
two-thirds vote of the body responsible for the reclassification 
. . . action.”  
To the extent the Appellants argue that this constitutional 
provision alone required the LUC to suspend reclassification 
proceedings pending formal identification of IALs in order to 
27

         
 
   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“conserve and protect” agr icultural land, that argument has been 
foreclosed by Save Sunset Beach , 102 Hawai i 465, 78 P.3d 1. In 
that case, this court held that Article XI, Section 3, standing 
alone, is “not self -executing, . . . has no effect and does not 
act as a barrier to recl assification.” 102 Hawai i at 476, 78 
P.3d at 12. This court explained that a non-self-executing constitutional provision is one that “merely indicates 
principles, without laying down rules by means of which those 
principles may be given the force of law .” 102 Hawai i at 475, 
78 P.3d at 11. Article XI, Section 3 by itself “merely 
indicates principles” of agricultural conservation and 
protection, and those principles do not have the force of law 
absent the legislature’s provision of “standards and criter ia to 
accomplish” agricultural conservation and protection. The legislature did not provide the necessary “implementing 
legislation” until 2005, upon the enactment of Act 183, which is described in greater detail in the next section.  
The Appellants 
also analogize their case to Ka Paakai O 
KaAina v. Land Use Comm’n , 94 Hawai i 31, 7 P.3d 1068 (2000).  
That case held that Article XII, Section 7 required the LUC to 
make specific findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding 
the protection of customary and traditional native Hawaiian 
rights when reclassifying land. 94 Hawai i at 47, 7 P.3d at 
28
         
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1084. Article XII, Section 7 provides, “The State reaffirms and 
shall protect all rights, customarily and traditionally 
exercised for subsistence, cultural and religious purposes and 
possessed by ahupua a tenants who are descendants of native 
Hawaiians who inhabited the Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778, 
subject to the right of the State to regulate such rights.” The 
language of Article XII, Section 7 expressly places an 
affirmative duty upon state agencies, unlike the language of 
Article XI, Section 3, which contains a mandate to conserve and 
protect agriculture and agricultural lands, pursuant to 
“standards and criteria” that the legislature shall provide.  
Due to differences in the language of the constitutional 
provisions,  Ka Paakai O Ka Aina  does not support the argument 
that Article XI, Section 3 places a free-standing affirmative 
duty upon the LUC to conserve and protect the agricultural land 
at issue in this case by staying reclassification until the 
county IAL designation process has been completed. Rather, 
Article XI, Section 3’s mandate is implemented with reference to 
the legislature’s “standards and criteria,” which were enacted 
via Act 183, which is discussed in greater detail in the next section of this opinion.  
As Article XI, Section 3 is not self
-executing, and as the 
plain language of Article XI, Section 3 expresses no intent to require the LUC to stay reclassification proceedings pending the 
29
         
 
    
  
  
    
  
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
formal identification of IALs, it is not appropriate to resort 
to constitutional history to divine such intent. See  Malahoff, 
111 Hawai i  at 181, 140 P.3d at 414 (“When the text of a 
constitutional provision is not ambiguous, the court, in 
construing it, is not at liberty to search for its meaning 
beyond the instrument.”). In any event, the constitutional 
history is silent on the issue of whether IALs must first be 
formally identified before the LUC can reclassify land.  While a 
few delegates expressed strong concerns that the LUC had allowed 
reclassification and urbanization of vast tracts of agricultural 
land, no delegate suggested that the LUC should be required to 
stay reclassification of land pending formal IAL designation.  See Committee of the Whole Report No. 18 in  1 Proceedings of the 
Constitutional Convention  of 1978, at 4  39-43.  Contrary to the 
Appellants’ assertion, this constitu tional history does not 
demonstrate that Article XI, Section 3 expresses such a “substantive mandate.”    
B. 
	Act 183 Does Not Require the LUC to Stay 
Reclassification Proceedings Pending the Completion of 
the County IAL Designation Process 
Save Sunset Beach  
held that Article XI, Section 3 was not 
self-executing.  102 Hawai i at 476, 78 P.3d at 12.  As such, 
Article XI, Section 3 required implementing legislation to 
effectuate its purpose of agricultural conservation and protection. The enactment of Act 183 of the 2005 Legislative 
30

         
 
  
     
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Session finally set forth the “standards and criteria” through 
which the constitutional mandate would be fulfilled. The plain 
language of Act 183 does not require the LUC to identify IALs 
before reclassifying land.   See  Silva v. City and Cnty. of 
Honolulu, 115 Hawai i 1, 6, 165 P.3d 247, 252 (2007) (“When 
construing a statute, our foremost obligation is to ascertain 
and give effect to the intention of the legislature, which is to 
be obtained primarily from the language contained in the statute 
itself.”)  
Act 183 set forth the procedures by which IALs are 
identified. 
There are two ways. Under the first method, a 
“farmer or landowner with lands qualifying under section 205 -44 
may file with the [LUC] a petition for declaratory order to 
designate the lands as important agricultural lands.” HRS 
§ 205-45(a) (Supp. 2005).  It is undisputed in this case that 
D.R. Horton-Schuler does not desire to designate the Petition 
lands as IAL. Rather, the dispute in this case centers upon the 
second method by which IALs are identified, i.e., the method 
initiated by the counties and culminating in the LUC’s formal identification of IALs statewide. 
Under the second method, “[e]ach county shall identify and 
map potential important agricultural lands within its 
jurisdiction based on the standards and criteria in section 
205-44 and the intent of this part, except lands that have been 
31
    
      
 
   
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
                     
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
designated, through the state land use, zoning, or county 
planning process, for urban use by th e State or county.” HRS 
§ 205-47(a) (Supp. 2005).  The counties must then submit 
“important agricultural lands maps . . . to the county council 
for decision-
making.” HRS § 205 -47(e) (Supp. 2005).  The county 
councils “shall adopt the maps, with or with out changes, by 
resolution,” then transmit the maps “to the land use commission 
for further action pursuant to section 205-48.” Id. HRS 
§ 205-48 (Supp. 2005) , in turn, states, “The land use commission 
shall receive the county recommendations and maps” recommending 
lands as IAL. Under HRS § 205-49(a) (Supp. 2005), the LUC 
“shall then proceed to identify and designate important 
agricultural lands. 
. . .” To date, although Kaua i and the 
City & County of Honolulu are currently in the process of 
identifying proposed IALs, the counties have not submitted to 
the county councils or the LUC their IAL recommendations. See  
http://mapoahuagland.com/abo
ut/faq (“At this time, only O ahu and 
Kauai Counties are conducting the Mandatory County Designation 
process.”)5 (last visited Dec. 15, 2015). 
Act 183 also amended HRS § 205-4, which sets forth the 
general procedures for reclassifying land, but only to add that 
Pursuant to Hawai i Rules of Evidence Rule 201(b)(2), this court takes 
judicial notice of the inform ation on DPP’s website, mapoahuagland.com, which 
was created to publically disseminate information about the county’s IAL 
identification process. 
32
 5         
 
   
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“lands designated or sought to be designated as important 
agricultural lands,” like conservation lands and any lands of 
greater than 15 acres, are to be reclassified by the LUC. 2005 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 183, § 4    at 588-89.  Had the legislature 
intended to suspend reclassification of land until IALs are identified, it could have further amended HRS § 205-4 to so 
state. Nothing in the plain language of Act 183, however, 
indicates an intent to have IALs designated first before 
reclassification of land may proceed.  
Act 183 sets forth methods for identifying IALs, and 
Article XI, Section 3 then mandates heightened protection of 
IALs so identified. 
Act 183 is not ambiguous, and there is no 
express requirement within it prohibiting the LUC from 
reclassifying land pending formal identification of IALs. As 
such, there is no need to resort to legislative history to 
divine such intent. See Silva, 115 Hawai i at 6, 165 P.3d at 252 
(holding that “the courts may resort to . . . the use of 
legislative history as an interpretive tool” in “construing an 
ambiguous statute. . . .”). 
Even if this court were to resort to legislative history, 
an examination of that history reveals silence on the issue of whether the LUC must stay reclassifica
tion proceedings until 
IALs are formally identified.  There is no suggestion in committee reports or floor speeches of such an intent.  
See 2005 
33

         
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 183, pp. 580-93; H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 
194, in 2005 House Journal, at 1127; H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 
531, in 2005 House Journal, at 1245; 2005 House Journal, at 298 
(floor speech); H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 968, in 2005 House 
Journal, at 1411-12; 2005 House Journal, at 993-99 (floor 
speeches); S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1281, in 2005 Senate 
Journal, at 1639-41; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1592, in 2005 
Senate Journal, at 1775-77; Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 175, in 2005 
House Journal, at 1818-19, 2005 Senate Journal, at 1080-81.  
Appellants also assert that the LUC must adopt rules and 
regulations regarding designation of Important Agricultural 
Lands. The LUC did, however, recently adopt the following rules 
and regulations regarding county designation of IALs, thus 
mooting the Appellants’ argument : HAR §§ 15-15-125 (effective 
2013) (“County identification of important agricultural lands”) 
and -126 (effective 2013) (“Criteria for designation of lands as 
important agricultural lands pursuant to county 
recommendation”). To the extent that the Appellants argue that 
there should be rules and regulations allowing the LUC to 
designate IALs independently of the processes described in HRS 
§§ 205-47 through -49, such argument is not supported by the 
plain language of those statutes. 
Lastly, one crucial fact severely undermines the 
Appellants’ argument th at the LUC should stay reclassification 
34
         
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of the Petition lands in this case because they would likely 
qualify as IALs. HRS § 205-47(a) exempts from IAL designation 
“lands that have been designated, through the . . . county 
planning process, for urban use  by the State or county.” The 
Petition area is located within the Urban Growth Boundary of the 
Ewa Development Plan.   The Petition lands have, therefore, been 
designated through the county planning processes for urban use 
and are, as a result, disqualified as IAL.  Although the  
Appellants argue that the land could be taken out of the Urban 
Growth Boundary upon the revision of the Ewa Development Plan, 
this court takes judicial notice of the recently amended Ewa 
Development Plan, which continues to include  Hoopili within the 
Urban Growth Boundary.   Further, at the hearing before the LUC, 
DPP also expressly testified that it would exclude the Petition 
land from its IAL recommendation  s.   Even after the City 
Council’s Resolution 12 -23 became part of the recor d, DPP’s 
witness testified that DPP’s  plan to exclude the Petition land 
as IAL would not change .   In fact, the DPP has  excluded the 
Petition lands from its current IAL recommendation.  See  
http://mapoahuagland.com/about/faq/  (“Can lands reserved for 
[the] Ho opili . . . development[] be designated as IAL? No, 
[this] project[ is] excluded from consideration as IAL because 
[it has] long been included in County land use plans for urban 
35

         
 
  
  
 
    
  
   
 
 The Appellants argue before this court that the circuit 
court erred in upholding the LUC’s decision and order, because 
the LUC “simply ignor[ed]” “overwhelming and dispositive 
evidence” that alternative agricultural lands were insufficient, 
that agriculture on O ahu would not be harmed by the 
reclassification, and that the Ho opili lands are needed for 
urban growth, all in violation of HAR § 15-15-77.     
 Preliminarily, we  note that, despite pinpointing specific 
challenged FOFs at oral argument before the circuit court, the 
Appellants’ Opening Brief once again pursues a global attack on 
the LUC’s D&O.  The Opening Brief before this court, like the 
opening brief before the circuit court, fails to identify which 
FOFs the Appellants view as clearly erroneous.  As such, this 
court is bound by all of the LUC’s unchallenged FOFs.   See  
Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai i 43, 63, 85 P.3d 150, 170 (2004) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
use. State law does not allow land identified for urban use by 
the State or county to be designated as IAL.”) (last visited 
Dec. 15, 2015). In short, even if the LUC were to stay the 
instant reclassification proceedings to allow the county-
initiated IAL designation process to run its course, it would 
make no difference for the particular lands at issue in this 
case. 
C. 	Reliable, Probative, and Substantial Evidence 
Supported the LUC’s Findings That the Reclassification 
Complied with HAR § 15-15-77 
36
         
 
                      
    
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(holding that “findings of  fact . . . that are not challenged on 
appeal are binding on the appellate court”)  (citations omitted).  
We remind counsel that Hawai i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
(“HRAP”) Rule 28(b)(4)(C) (2010) requires that an appellant’s 
opening brief concisely state points of error, and, “when the 
point involves a finding or conclusion of the . . . agency, 
either a quotation of the finding or conclusion urged as error 
or reference to appended findings and conclusions. . . .” This 
court has looked past violations of HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) to reach 
the merits of a case where issues of great importance are at 
stake. See, e.g., Morgan v. Planning Dep’t , 104 Hawai i 173, 
181, 86 P.3d 982, 990 (2004) (“[B]ecause the issues raised in the instant case are of great importance [i.e., the Hawai i  
constitution’s recognition of the significance of conserving and 
protecting Hawaii’s natural beauty and natural resources], we 
address the merits of the issues raised . . . notwithstanding the [Appellants’] technical violation of HRAP Rule 28(b)(4).”) 
In this case, we note that  the Appellants did specifically 
6 challenge FOFs 428, 430-434, 437, 444-448,  567-568, 571-572, and 
FOFs 444- 448 concern whether there is enough groundwater for the 
Hoopili development. These findings, however, are only tangentially related 
to the HAR § 15- 15-77 issue.  The Appellants brought up groundwater only to 
argue that “[r]emoving land from agricultural production will have grave 
impacts for this island, including potentially substantial impacts to the 
groundwater.”  Whether or not the future Ho opili residents will have enough 
groundwater, however, is an issue unconnected to whether the reclassification 
(1) will not impair agricultural production or (2) is necessary for urban 
(continued. . .) 
37
 6         
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
                 
(. . .continued)
                                                   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
574 before the circuit court, and due to the public importance 
of this case, we will consider the Appellants’ appeal as 
continuing to challenge these particular FOFs. Even given this 
latitude, however, the Appellants fail to carry their burden of 
showing why the LUC’s D &O should not be affirmed.  
1. HAR § 15-15-77(b)(6) 
HAR § 15-15-77(b)(6) provides the following: 
Lands in intensive agricultural use for two years prior to 
date of filing of a petition or lands with a high capacity 
for intensive agricultural use shall not be taken out of 
the agricultural district unless the commission finds 
either that the action: 
(A) Will not substantially impair actual or potential agricultural production in the vicinity of the subject 
property or in the county or State; or 
(B)
 Is reasonably necessary for urban growth. 
(Emphasis added). This regulation is stated in the disjunctive. 
Therefore, if the LUC’s reclassification satisfies one prong, 
the reclassification will be upheld.  
a. Reasonable Necessity of Urban Growth 
The LUC’s 
FOFs concerning the necessity of urban growth 
were numbered 356-363. Even giving Appellants the latitude of 
considering the particular FOFs challenged before the circuit 
court, the fact remains that the Appellants did not challenge 
these findings, and they are binding upon this court. Bremer, 
104 Hawai i at 63, 85 P.3d at 170. As such, this court must 
growth. 
In other words , the groundwater issue is separate from Appellants’ 
point of error concerning HAR § 15 -15-77, and is therefore not further 
discussed in this opinion .
 
38
         
 
      
     
 
 As this court is procedurally  bound by the LUC’s 
determination that the reclassification was reasonably necessary 
for urban growth due to Appellants’ failure to challenge that 
determination, there is no need to examine Appellants’ ch allenge 
to the LUC’s FOFs as to whether the reclassification will impair  
agricultural production. However, once again giving latitude 
due to the public importance of this case, we  note that the 
Appellants did challenge the following  FOFs on this issue:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
accept that the reclassification was necessary for urban growth. 
Further, that singular finding under HAR  § 15-15-77(b)(6) 
justifies the LUC’s reclassification, as HAR  § 15-15-77(b)(6) is 
stated in the disjunctive.  
b. 
	No Substantial Impairment of Agricultural 
Production 
428. The DOA, [sic] is working to make good agricultural 
land available as part of its strategy to expand our 
agricultural industry in the State, including land for the 
possible relocation of the tenants of the Petition Area. 
Such lands include the proposed 150 -acre agricultural park 
on Kunia Road, a 400 -acre parcel off of Kunia Road held by 
the DLNR, and the 1,700 -acre Galbraith Trust Lands 
currently in the process of being purchased by the DOA. The 
DOA is working to provide the infrastructure necessary to 
provide water to these lands. 
. . . . 
430. An increasing number of farmers in Hawaii are 
implementing intensive farming methods, such as farming two 
or more crops per year; using trellises, cages or sticks to 
support plants; and growing plants using hydroponic farming in greenhouses, which have resulted in increasing 
production without requiring more land. In particular, many 
of the tomatoes, cucumbers, peppers, and lettuces sold in 
our supermarkets are grown hydroponically in greenhouses by 
Hawaii and mainland farmers. 
39
         
 
  
 
 
 
432.  Estimates of the amount of acreage needed to increase 
food self- sufficiency vary widely. The Petitioner estimates 
that approximately an additional 23,000 acres on O ahu would 
be required for 100% self -sufficiency in fresh produce. 
Faculty researchers from the University of Hawai i 
calculated that “near self -sufficiency” for a range of 
vegetables, grains, fruits, other crops, meat, and dairy 
would require an estimated 260,800 acres statewide.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
431. There are disputing [sic] opinions as to whether good 
farm lands are or are not necessary because of hydroponics. 
According to some experts, hydroponics is highly capital 
intensive and its feasibility and profitability is unproven 
in Hawai i. 
433. Currently, approximately 15,000 acres of land is 
farmed statewide to produce approximately 33% of the 
State’s fresh vegetables, melons and fruits. Therefore, 
achieving 100% self -sufficiency in these crops would 
require about 30,000 additional acres of farmland 
statewide. The additional land required is small compared 
to the estimated 177,000 acres ± 5,000 acres of good 
farmland that is available statewide. In addition, another 
70,000+ acres could become available if shipping is 
interrupted to such an extent that exporting crops becomes unfeasible. 
434. For the Island of O ahu, approximately 23,000 
additional acres would be required for 100% self -
sufficiency in fresh produce. This estimate is high, given 
inter-island shipping and reduced land requirements from 
intensive farming. 
. . . . 437. The Project will have little or no adverse impact on 
Hawaii’s agricultural production, as other farmland is 
available on the island of O ahu to accommodate the 
relocation of the existing Ewa farms, as well as to 
accommodate the future growth of diversified crop farming. 
Land is available because of the contraction of statewide agriculture. 
The Appellants’ Opening Brief contains no argument or record 
citations referencing (1) how much land is necessary for 100% 
self-sufficiency; or (2) intensive farming methods, particularly 
hydroponics; therefore, “[p]oints not argued may be deemed 
waived.” HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) (2010).  Thus, Appellants have  
40

         
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  Turning to FOF  437, it is clear that this fact is the one 
the Appellants primarily challenge. They disagree with the 
premise that there is enough available agricultural land on O ahu 
to relocate the Ho opili tenants and accommodate the future 
growth of diversified farming. The Appellants contend that the 
LUC “simply ignor[ed]” their evidence that it was hard for 
farmers to find available agricultural land; to  secure long-term 
leases on agricultural land; and to economically prepare land 
for farming, particularly where water infrastructure must be 
developed or improved.   Additionally, Appellants argue that *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
waived review of FOFs 430-434.  Therefore, the only remaining 
FOFs not waived on the agricultural impact issue are FOFs 428 
and 437. 
As to FOF 428, the Appellants argue that Director Kokubun 
himself testified that the State does not yet have the funds to 
invest in water infrastructure improvement. The Appellants’ 
point is consistent with the FOF, which states that the State is 
“working to provide the infrastructure necessary to provide 
water to these lands. ” Kokubun’s testimony (that the Department 
of Agriculture was “working on getting some planning and design money to take a look at” the infrastructure needs of the 
available agricultural land) supports this FOF.  Consequently, 
this FOF is not clearly erroneous. 
41
         
 
  The LUC represented in its Answering Brief, however,  that 
it did not “simply ignore” testimony that “lands had been in 
cultivation, but considered the specific replacement lands as 
well as other evidence concerning agriculture in Hawaii in 
general.”   Indeed, the LUC  considered  testimony from Plasch that 
“the Project will have little or no adverse impact on Hawai i’s 
agricultural production because farmland is available in upper 
Kunia and the North Shore to accommodate the relocation of 
existing farms in  Ewa.”   Plasch also testified that “the 
development of the Petition Area and the resulting loss of 
agricultural land will not limit the growth of diversified crops 
since ample agricultural land is available on O ahu and the other 
islands.”   Plasch explained that 263,000 acres of farmland have 
been released statewide from 1968 to 2009 due to the contraction 
of plantation agriculture, with about 177,000 ± 5,000 acres  of 
good farmland now available for diversified agriculture.   On 
Oahu alone, Plasch testified, there  are 30,000 acres of high 
quality farmland available for diversified agriculture.   He 
further testified that the farms on Ho  opili have sufficient 
lands outside of the urban growth boundary to continue their operations.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
there was no “record of productivity” on replacement 
agricultural lands.      
42

         
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
For their part, Ho opili tenants Aloun Farms and Sugarland 
Farms attested to the suitability of the replacement lands. 
Director Kokubun also testified as to the thousands of acres in Kunia and Wahiawa that the Department of Agriculture was going 
to make available for agricultural production, with plans to 
improve water infrastructure. In summary, Plasch, Kokubun, Sou, 
and Jefts provided reliable, probative, and substantial evidence 
supporting the LUC’s FOF 437.  Substantial evidence is “credible 
evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to 
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.” 
In Re Water Use Permit Applications , 94 Hawai i 97, 119, 9 P.3d 
409, 431 (2000) (citations omitted). We are, therefore, bound 
by this finding. A court reviewing an agency’s decision cannot 
“consider the weight of the evidence to ascertain whether it 
weighs in favor of the administrative findings, or . . . review 
the agency’s findings of fact by passing upon the credibility of 
witnesses or conflicts in testimony, especially the finding of 
an expert agency in dealing with a specialized field.” 
Application of Hawaiian Elec. Co. , Inc., 81 Hawai i 459, 465, 918 
P.2d 561, 567 (1996) (citation omitted). 
Appellants have not shown how finding of fact number 437 
was clearly erroneous. In short, the Appellants have not met 
their burden of proving that the LUC’s finding that the 
43
         
 
  
      
   
 
  
   
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reclassification would not impair agricultural production was 
clearly erroneous. 
2. HAR § 15-15-77(a) 
HAR § 15-15-77(a) requires reclassifications to conform to 
the Hawai i State Plan. Although the Appellants challenged five 
FOFs (at oral argument before the circuit court) regarding the 
project’s conformance with the Hawai i State Plan, Appellants’ 
Opening Brief contains no supporting argument.  The Opening 
Brief states only, “The Hawaii State Plan provides that the 
state shall ‘assure the availability of agriculturally suitable 
lands with adequate water to accommodate present and future 
needs. HRS § 226-7.” Under HRAP Rule 28(b)(7), then, the 
argument that the LUC’s reclassification violated HAR § 15 -15­
77(a) is waived. 
D. The LUC’s Conclusions of Law 
We note that HRS § 205
-4(h) (Supp. 2005) requires the LUC 
to approve a proposed boundary amendment only after concluding, 
by a preponderance of the evidence, that it is “reasonable, not 
violative of section 205-2 and part III of this chapter,  and 
consistent with the policies and criteria established pursuant to sections 205-16 and 205-17.” (Emphasis added). HAR § 15 -15­
77 further requires that any approved boundary amendment be consistent with HRS § 205A-2 (Hawaii’s Coa stal Zone Management 
Program). In this case, in COL 12, the LUC concluded that the 
44

    
      
 
  
  
 
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reclassification “is reasonable, not violative of HRS § 205 -2, 
and is consistent with the policies and criteria established 
pursuant to HRS §§ 205-16, 205-17, and 205A-2,” omitting any 
conclusion regarding part III of HRS Chapter 205. The 
Appellants did not challenge COL 12, but this court may freely 
review the LUC’s COLs. Ka Paakai O Ka Aina, 94 Hawai i at 41, 7 
P.3d at 1078. We note that the LUC did render the following 
COL 7: 
The Commission, notwithstanding the agricultural use or 
agricultural classification of the Petition Area, has 
authority to entertain this Petition and render a decision 
thereon without consideration of the standards and criteria 
for the reclassification or rezoning of IAL set forth in HRS § 205- 50, because the Petition Area is not currently 
designated as IAL under Act 183 (2005) and HRS Chapter 205.  
 
This COL, however, merely states that the reclassification of 
the Petition lands was not being made pursuant to HRS § 205-50, 
which governs reclassification of 
IALs only.  This statement is 
true, in that the instant reclassification was made pursuant to HRS § 205-4, which governs all land reclassifications. This 
COL, however, does not fulfill the requirement under HRS § 205­4(h) that the LUC conclude, by a preponderance of the evidence, 
that the reclassification did not violate part III of Chapter 
205. Hence, the LUC erred in failing to conclude, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, that the reclassification was not 
violative of part III of Chapter 205. 
45
         
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Under the circumstances of this case, however, this error 
is harmless because the LUC made separate findings on Important 
Agricultural Lands that would have supported a conclusion that 
it had complied with part III of Chapter 205 to the extent that 
it could, given the unfinished state of the formal county IAL 
designation process. These FOFs were as follows: 
555. The City IAL Process is set forth in HRS § 205 -47. 
556. DPP is currently in the process of hiring a consultant 
to provide assistance in making its IAL designation 
recommendations to the City Council. The DPP is expected to start the recommendation process later in 2012. In doing 
so, DPP will work with the City Agricultural Liaison; 
however, the process is ultimately a DPP initiative. 
Moreover, with regard to the particular lands at issue, it would 
make no difference if the LUC awaited the completion of the 
formal IAL identification process, as the Petition lands were not designated IAL, were slated for urban development under 
county plans, and the county was not going to designate them as 
IAL, notwithstanding Resolution 12-23, which the following FOFs 
make clear: 
557. The Petition Area is currently not designated as IAL, 
and the DPP stated that it will not be recommending the 
Petition Area as a potential. 
558. On February 15, 2012, the City Council passed 
Resolution No. 1 2-23, entitled “Urging the City’ s 
Agricultural Liaison to Expedite the Identifying and Mapping of Important Agricultural Lands and Ensure that the 
City Works to Preserve the Availability of Agricultural Lands for Fa rming.” 
559. Resolution No. 12 -23 would not change DPP’s position 
on not including the Petition Area as a potential IAL area. 
560. HRS §§ 205 -44(c)(6) and 205- 47(a) and (d), requires 
DPP to consider consistency with the Ewa DP and with the 
46
         
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 The LUC in this case properly reclassified D.R. Horton
Schuler’s property from the agricultural land use district to 
the urban land use district. Article XI, Section 3 and Act 183 
reveal no intent to require the LUC to stay reclassification 
proceedings pending formal designations of IALs. Further, the 
Appellants did not provide persuasive argument that the LUC’s 
D&O violated HAR § 15-15-77.  First, the Appellants did not challenge the LUC’s findin g that the reclassification was 
reasonably necessary for urban growth; therefore, this court is bound by that finding. Even if it were not, substantial 
evidence supported the LUC’s additional findings  that the 
reclassification would not substantially impair agricultural *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Urban Boundary contained therein, in identifying IALs. HRS 
§§ 205-44, 205- 47. 
561. The City Council Committee Report No. 74, which was 
adopted by the Committee on Planning and Zoning in 
conjunction with Resolution No. 12 -23, specifically states 
that the resolution “is not intended to influence the state 
Land Use Commission decision -making process on any case 
pending before the Commission.” 
This court again takes judicial notice  of the fact that the 
DPP’s current recommended IALs do not include Ho opili.  See  
http://mapoahuagland.com/about/faq/
  (last visited Dec. 15, 
2015).    Thus, under the facts of this case, reclassification 
would not be “violative of part III” because this particular 
parcel was not, and would not be, identified as IAL.    
V.  Conclusion 
­
47
         
 
  We take this opportunity to reiterate, however, that 
pursuant to the first statute within Part III, HRS § 205-41, the 
legislature has declared as follows:  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
production. Second, the Appellants did not provide argument on 
the issue of whether the reclassification violated the Hawai i 
State Plan. Consequently, we cannot conclude that the LUC’s  D&O   
violated HAR § 15-15  -77.  For the foregoing reasons, the circuit 
court’s decision and order, which affirmed the LUC’s D& O and 
dismissed the Appellants’  appeal, is affirmed.  
Declaration of policy.   It is declare d  that the people of 
Hawaii have a substantial interest in the health and 
sustainability of agriculture as an industry in the State. 
There is a compelling state interest in conserving the 
State’s agricultural land resource base and assuring the 
long-term availability of agricultural lands for 
agricultural use to achieve the purposes of:  
(1)
 Conserving and protecting agricultural lands; 
(2) Promoting diversified agriculture; 
(3) Increasing agricultural self -sufficiency; and 
(4) Assuring the availability of agriculturally  
suitable lands,  
pursuant to article XI, section 3, of the Hawaii State 
Constitution.  
 
Accordingly, although there is no basis under the law to 
overturn this reclassification, the state and county governments 
are reminded of the importance of agriculture to the future of  
48

         
 
   
   
       
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
this state and of the need to effectuate the mandate of Article 
XI, Section 3 through the implementation of Act 183.  
Eric A. Seitz,   
Della A. Belatti, 
and Sarah R. Devine,  
for petitioners /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama   
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
Gregory W. Kugle 
and Matthew T. Evans  
for respondent D.R. Horton-Schuler  
Homes, LLC /s/ Gary W. B. Chang 
49
 