 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCAP-13-0005781 23-SEP-2015 09:22 AM 
---o0o--­
SURFRIDER FOUNDATION; HAWAII’S THOUSAND


FRIENDS; KA IWI COALITION; and KAHEA – THE
 
HAWAIIAN-ENVIRONMENTAL ALLIANCE,
 
Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellants, 
 
 
vs. 
 
 
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS, CITY & COUNTY OF HONOLULU;
 
DIRECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING & 
 
PERMITTING, CITY & COUNTY OF HONOLULU; KYO-YA
 
HOTELS & RESORTS LP; AND 20,000 FRIENDS OF LABOR,
 
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees. 
 
SCAP-13-0005781 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
 
(CAAP-13-0005781; CIV. NO. 13-1-0874-03) 
September 23, 2015 


NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.,
 
WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In 1976, the Honolulu City Council established the 
Waikiki Special Design District in response “to the rapid   
 
 
 
 
***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
development of the 1960s and 1970s, and the changes produced by 
that development.” The City Council found that “[t]o the world, 
Waikiki is a recognized symbol of Hawai i [] and the allure of 
Waikiki continues, serving as the anchor for the state’s tourist 
industry.” The Council concluded that while “Waikiki needs to 
maintain its place as one of the world’s premier resorts in an 
international market [], the sense of place that makes Waikiki 
unique needs to be retained and enhanced.” Accordingly, the 
City Council developed specific requirements and design controls 
“to guide carefully Waikiki’s future and protect its unique 
Hawaiian identity.” 
Among the provisions enacted to protect Waikiki’s 
Hawaiian identity is a limitation on development next to the shoreline. The Council established a coastal height setback 
requirement because of the “need to step back tall buildings 
from the shoreline to maximize public safety and the sense of 
open space and public enjoyment associated with coastal 
resources.” The Council also provided for a variance process 
when compliance with the Land Use Ordinance would result in 
unnecessary hardship. 
In this case, we are called upon to determine whether 
a variance granted for a proposed 26-story hotel and residential 
2 
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
                         
   
 
   
 
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
tower that permitted a 74 percent encroachment into the coastal 
height setback along the Waikiki shoreline was properly issued.1 
II. BACKGROUND 
A. The Waikiki Special District 
The Land Use Ordinance of the City and County of 
Honolulu (LUO) designates “certain areas in the community in need of restoration, preservation, redevelopment or 
rejuvenation” as special districts. Revised Ordinances of the 
City and County of Honolulu (ROH) § 21-9.20 (1990). For each 
special district, the LUO sets forth objectives, identifies prominent view corridors and historic properties, and outlines 
requirements and design controls to guide development to 
“protect [and] enhance the physical and visual aspects of [the 
district] for the benefit of the community as a whole.” ROH § 
21-9.20-1. 
The Honolulu City Council (City Council) designated 
the Waikiki Special District
2 “to guide carefully Waikiki’s 
future and protect its unique Hawaiian identity.” ROH § 21­
1 The quoted passages in the Introduction are from provisions of
the Land Use Ordinance of the City and County of Honolulu that will be
discussed later in this Opinion. 
2 The Waikiki Special Design District was renamed the Waikiki
Special District. The boundaries of the WSD are defined by a map accessible 
at: http://www.honolulu.gov/rep/site/ocs/roh/ROH_Chapter_21_Exh9.1­
9.18_art10__.pdf.pdf (last visited September 2, 2015). The WSD is bounded on the north and west by Ala Wai Blvd. (including the piers in the Ala Wai Yacht 
Harbor), on the south by the Pacific Ocean, and on the w est by Kapahulu Ave. 
3 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
                         
   
 
 
 
   	 
	 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
9.80. Within the Waikiki Special District (WSD), the City 
Council recognized the need to step back buildings from the 
shoreline in order to optimize “the sense of open space and 
public enjoyment along the beach.” ROH § 21-9.80-4(g)(2). To 
accomplish this objective, the City Council established the 
following minimum setbacks that “apply to all zoning lots along 
the shoreline” within the WSD: 
(A)	 There shall be a building height setback of 100 feet in
which no 
structure shall be permitted.  This setback shall 
be measured from the certified shoreline; [3] and 
(B)
	 Beyond the 100- foot line there shall be a building height 
setback of 1:1 (45 degrees) measured from the certified
shoreline. 
ROH § 21-9.80-4(g)(2) (Coastal Height Setback). 
The WSD requirements and design controls set forth in 
the LUO are “supplemented by a design guidebook” (WSD Design 
Guidebook) that “shall be used as a principal tool by the 
director to express those . . . elements which demonstrate 
consistency with the intent, objectives, guidelines, and 
3 The certified shoreline is depicted in ROH Exhibit 21- 1.15, and 
defined within the Hawai i Administrative Rules § 13-222-2 (adopted December 
13, 2002), as “a signed statement by the chairperson of the board of land and
natural resources that the shoreline is as located and shown on the map as ofa certain date.” “Shoreline” is defined as: 
the upper reaches of the wash of the waves, other thanstorm or seismic waves, at high tide during the season of 
the year in which the highest wash of the waves occurs,
usually evidenced by the edge of vegetation growth, or theupper limit of debris left by the wash of the waves. 
Id. 
4 
  
 
 
 
   
  
   
                         
   
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
standards of the [WSD].” ROH § 21-9.80-4. With respect to the 
Coastal Height Setback, the WSD Design Guidebook provides, “A 
setback from the shoreline is required to maximize public 
safety, the sense of open space, lateral access along the beach, 
and the public enjoyment associated with our coastal resources.”4 
Additionally, the Coastal Height Setback is designed to “contribute to a Hawaiian sense of place” by “reduc[ing] the 
perception of crowding, enhanc[ing] the aesthetics of Waikiki 
and impart[ing] a greater sense of Hawaiiana in the built environment.” 
WSD Design Guidebook  at 25. 
Although the City Council enacted the LUO to “provide 
reasonable development and design standards for the location, 
height, bulk and size of structures,” a party may apply for a 
variance on the basis of unnecessary hardship by submitting an 
application to the Honolulu Department of Planning and 
Permitting. 
Revised Charter of the City and County of Honolulu 
(RCCCH) § 6-1517 (2000 Edition, 2003 Supp.). In order to 
establish unnecessary hardship, the applicant must demonstrate 
that the following three requirements as prescribed in the City 
Charter have all been met: 
4 Dep’t of Planning and Permitting, City and Cnty. of Honolulu,   WSD 
Design Guidebook  (May 2002), 
http://www.honoluludpp.org/Portals/0/pdfs/zoning
/WSD.pdf (last visited September 2, 2015); ROH § 21
-9.80-4(g)(2).  
5 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  	 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(1) the applicant would be deprived of the reasonable use
of such land or building if the provisions of the zoningcode were strictly applicable; 
(2) the request of the applicant is due to unique 
circumstances and not the general conditions in the
neighborhood, so that the reasonableness of the
neighborhood zoning is not drawn into question; and 
(3) the request, if approved, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood nor be contrary to the intent
and purpose of the zoning ordinance. 
Id. Upon receipt of a variance application, the Director of the 
Department of Planning and Permitting must hold a public 
hearing. Id. If the variance application is granted, the 
Director, in its decision, “shall specify the particular evidence which supports granting of [the] variance.” Id. 
B.	 Kyo-ya’s Variance Application to Encroach into the Coastal
Height Setback 
Kyo-ya Hotels & Resorts LP (Kyo-ya) is the fee-simple 
owner of the Moana Surfrider hotel complex, which contains three hotel buildings--the Surfrider Tower, the Banyan Wing, and the Diamond Head Tower (DHT)--on a combined zoning lot located on 
Kalākaua Avenue along the Waikiki shoreline. In 2010, Kyo-ya 
submitted a land use permit to redevelop the existing 8-story 
DHT with a 26-story, 282 foot hotel and residential tower (the 
Project). Due to the Project’s size, location, and design, the 
Project required several permits and approvals, including a 
variance to allow the Project to encroach into the Coastal Height Setback. 
6 
  
 
 
 
   On March 19, 2010, Kyo-ya submitted variance 
application No. 2010/VAR-9 (variance application) to the 
Department of Planning and Permitting requesting that the 
Project be allowed to encroach into the Coastal Height Setback. 
As proposed, the Project would encroach about 40 feet into the 
100-foot coastal setback at the building’s ewa corner5 and about 
60 feet at the Diamond Head corner. Additionally, a significant portion of the building up to the 16th floor would encroach into 
the 1:1 height setback measured from the certified shoreline, and “from the 17th floor, the entire building encroaches into 
the coastal height setback.” In total, “about 74.3 percent of 
the building encroaches into the Coastal Height Setback”; 
“Conversely, only 25.7 percent of the building complies with the 
coastal height setback.” 
 
 
                         
   
 
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In its variance application, Kyo-ya maintained that 
although the Project was “unable to comply with the strict requirements of [the Coastal Height Setback],” the Project 
satisfied the three requirements for issuance of a variance. 
5 “Ewa” is defined as a “[p]lace name west of Honolulu, used as a
directional term.” M. Pukui & S. Elbert,  Hawaiian Dictionary  42 (rev. ed. 
1986). 
7 
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
                         
   
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
i.First Requirement: Deprived of the Reasonable Use of the
Applicant’s Land or Building 
Kyo-ya argued it would be deprived of the reasonable 
use of its land if the LUO was strictly applied because the 
ordinance would “reduce the buildable portion of the property to 
roughly 11,283 square feet, or approximately 33% of the whole 
lot area.” 
If the LUO “were strictly followed,” Kyo-ya 
contended that it “would not even be able to rebuild the existing [DHT].”
6 
Kyo-ya maintained that the State of Hawai i entered 
into an agreement in 1965 with the owners of certain beach front 
parcels under which the State committed to expand the beach and “[p]rotect and preserve all existing beach” in a designated area 
(1965 Beach Agreement).
7 Although the contemplated beach 
6 As discussed infra , the LUO allows for the renovation or
reconstruction of nonconforming uses and structures, subject to certain
conditions and approvals. See ROH § 21- 9.80-4(e). 
7 In the 1965 Beach Agreement, Line B represents the makai
property line and Line A designates the current certified shoreline. The text of the agreement states, in part, as follows: 
1. The State will use its best efforts to construct the beach seaward of Line B in the Surfrider- Royal Hawaiian 
Sector substantially in accordance with the Cooperative
Project. 
. . . 
3. The Owners will release and quitclaim to the State
forever all of their respective estate, right, title and
interest . . . in and to the Surfrider- Royal Hawaiian 
Sector of Waikiki Beach now or from time to time 
hereafter existing seaward of Line B, whether created by 
(continued . . .)
8   
 
 
 
  
 
                                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
expansion was never completed, Kyo-ya asserted that had “the 
beach been constructed by the State” pursuant to the 1965 Beach 
Agreement, “it is likely that the beach fronting the [DHT] site 
would be approximately 180 feet wider than it is today” and the 
shoreline would have been recertified to reflect the increased 
width. Additionally, if the beach had been extended, Kyo-ya 
submitted that “almost no portion of the [Project] would 
encroach into the coastal height setback.” 
ii. 
Second 
Requirement: Unique Circumstances 
Kyo-ya contended that the reasonableness of the 
neighborhood zoning was not drawn into question by its variance request because it was “forced” to apply for a variance due to 
unique circumstances, rather than as a result of general conditions in the neighborhood. For example, the Project site 
(continued . . .) 
construction or otherwise, reserving to the Owners . . .
full and free access between their respective abutting
lands and the sea across said beach and to use said beach for a bathing beach and foot passage. 
. . . 
5. The State will release and quitclaim to the respective
Owners . . . severally in proportion to their respective
frontages along Line A . . . contemporaneously with theOwners’ conveyance to the State . . . all the land of 
the Surfrider- Royal Hawaiian Sector of Waikiki Beach 
between Lines A and B . . . PROVIDED, HOWEVER, that saidland between lines A and B shall remain subject to the
public easement . . . until a beach at least seventy-five (75) feet wide shall have been created seaward of
Line B. 
9 
  
 
 
 
   
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“is bounded on the Ewa side by the historic Banyan Wing,” which 
is listed on the National and State Register of Historic Places. 
Kyo-ya argued that it had foregone considerable financial gain 
by choosing not to redevelop the Banyan Wing and that “[i]f Kyo­
ya chose to redevelop this portion of the complex, it could 
develop a hotel or residential tower that meets all LUO, WSD and 
[Planned Development-Resort (PD-R)] requirements.” 
Additionally, Kyo-ya contended the Project site “is 
among the narrowest parcels of land along Waikiki Beach” that is subject to the Coastal Height Setback.” The narrowness of the 
Project site “is exacerbated,” Kyo-ya argued, “by the absence of 
the substantial beach which was to have been built by the State 
per the 1965 Beach Agreement” in addition to the presence of the 
historic Banyan Wing. Kyo-ya further argued that the parcel’s 
“unique size and shape” caused the impact of the Coastal Height 
Setback to be “greater than on any other parcel along Waikiki Beach.” 
iii. 
Third 
Requirement: Essential Character of the Neighborhood
and Intent and Purpose of the Ordinance 
With respect to the third requirement, Kyo-ya 
submitted that the variance “will not alter the essential character of the locality nor be contrary to the intent and 
purpose of the zoning code.” Kyo-ya characterized Waikiki as “a 
densely developed, urbanized area, filled with large hotels, 
10 
  
 
 
 
   
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
condominiums, and mixed-use projects which push (and in many 
cases exceed) the limits of permitted heights, densities, and 
other zoning and building regulations.” Kyo-ya argued that many 
of the “existing hotels along Waikiki Beach already encroach 
into the coastal height setback” and that allowing the Project 
to similarly encroach would not alter the essential character of 
Waikiki. Kyo-ya contended the Project’s “mauka-makai 
orientation, increased public open space, improved beach access 
and addition of surfboard racks should go a long way toward restoring the character of Waikiki.” 
Additionally, Kyo-ya asserted the Project was 
consistent with WSD objectives to “[p]rovide for the ability to 
renovate and redevelop existing structures which might otherwise 
experience deterioration” and allow for “creative development 
capable of substantially contributing to rejuvenation and 
revitalization of the [WSD].” Kyo-ya maintained that the Project was consistent with the WSD objective to “improve where 
possible mauka views . . . and a visual relationship with the 
ocean” and the objective to “[p]rovide people-oriented, 
interactive, landscaped open spaces to offset the high-density 
urban ambience.” 
Finally, Kyo-ya argued that the impact of the 
encroachment into the Coastal Height Setback would be mitigated 
11 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
                         
   
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
by the State of Hawaii’s planned Waikiki Beach Maintenance 
Project (Beach Maintenance Project) that is “expected to add 
roughly forty-feet (40’) of dry beach to the beach fronting the 
[DHT].” 
C. Director’s Decision 
The Director held a public hearing on Kyo-ya’s 
variance application and subsequently issued Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order (Director’s Decision 
or Decision) granting “Partial Approval” of Kyo-ya’s variance 
application. 
In his Decision, the Director described the variance 
application as a request to allow the Project to encroach 
approximately 74 percent into the Coastal Height Setback. The Director noted that in addition to the variance request from the 
Coastal Height Setback, the Project required additional 
approvals and permits, including a Planned Development-Resort 
(PD-R) Permit.
8 
8 The purpose of a PD- R permit is described within the LUO as 
follows: 
[T]o provide opportunities for creative redevelopment not
possible under a strict adherence to the development
standards of the special district. Flexibility may be
provided for project density, height, precinct transitional
height setbacks, yards, open space and landscaping when
timely, demonstrable contributions benefiting the communityand the stability, function, and overall ambiance and
appearance of Waikiki are produced. 
(continued . . .)
12   
 
 
 
                                                                                
 
 
 
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The Director then set forth his analysis of the City 
Charter variance test. As to the first requirement--that the 
strict application of the zoning code would deprive Kyo-ya of 
the reasonable use of its land or building--the Director noted 
that Kyo-ya had argued the existing DHT is “extremely outdated” 
and if not allowed to be redeveloped, it “would contribute to 
the decline of the already aging structure.” Consequently, the 
Director found that “the proposal is necessary to maintain 
economic viability.” The Director also found that the proposal was consistent with the WSD objectives “to provide opportunities 
for creative development that contribute to the rejuvenation and 
revitalization of the special district,” “to provide the ability 
to renovate and redevelop existing structures which otherwise 
might experience deterioration,” and “to facilitate the desired 
character of Waikiki for areas susceptible to change.” 
The Director noted Kyo-ya had indicated that if it 
complied with all “required yard, height, and transitional 
(continued . . .) 
Reflective of the significance of the flexibility
represented by this option, it is appropriate to approve
projects conceptually by legislative review and approval
prior to more detailed review and approval by the
department.      
ROH § 21- 9.80-4(d).  Kyo- ya’s PD- R application requested flexibility in 
WSD standards to allow the Project to have greater density, increasedheight, and less open space than otherwise would be required. 
13 
  
 
 
 
                          
   
 
 
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
height setbacks,”9 the “building would have to take the form of a 
massive monolithic wall.” The Director concluded that in 
comparison, the Project “offers some important design advantages 
that are more conducive to the WSD design objectives, but that 
can only be accomplished by a trade-off in terms of coastal 
setback encroachments.” 
The Director addressed the physical constraints of the 
site that restrict development along the shoreline. The 
Director found that if the zoning code was strictly applied, the buildable area of the DHT Lot “would be reduced to less than 35 
percent” with a maximum height limit of about 170 feet. 
Consequently, the Director found that if Kyo-ya were not granted 
the requested variance, Kyo-ya “would not be able to develop in 
accordance with the [PD-R] permit.” 
Next, the Director found that the extent of Kyo-ya’s 
requested 74 percent encroachment into the Coastal Height Setback would have been significantly reduced “[i]f the beach 
9 “Precinct transitional height setbacks” is a distinct requirement
under the LUO and separate from the Coastal Height Setback at issue in this
appeal. As set forth in ROH Table 21- 9.6(B) and ROH § 21- 9.80-6(c)(2), 
precinct transitional height setbacks are as follows: 
Transitional Height Setbacks. For any portion of astructure above 40 feet in height, additional front, side
and rear height setbacks equal to one foot for each 10 feet
in height, or fraction thereof, shall be provided. Within the height setback, buildings with graduated, stepped forms 
shall be encouraged (see Figure 21- 9.2). 
14 
  
 
 
 
 
***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
had been constructed and/or maintained as agreed to by the State 
[under the 1965 Beach Agreement, because] the certified 
shoreline would probably be located much farther seaward than 
the existing shoreline.” The Director reasoned, “The proposal, 
viewed in [the context of the 1965 Beach Agreement], is not 
excessive.” The Director additionally found that under the 
Waikiki Beach Maintenance Project, the beach would be increased 
by 40 feet and that the certified shoreline “would likely 
reflect the beach expansion.” 
The Director concluded that “[f]or these and other 
reasons,” Kyo-ya “would be denied reasonable use of the site if not allowed to encroach into the present 100-foot coastal 
setback and the coastal height setback.” However, the Director 
also concluded that “the proposed setback encroachment exceeds 
what would be allowed if the beach width were increased by 180 
feet”; therefore, “the height of the [Project] should be reduced to comply with the . . . coastal height setback as measured from 
. . . (the beach width intended in the 1965 [Beach] Agreement).” 
With regard to the second requirement of the variance 
test, the Director found Kyo-ya’s application to be “supported 
by unique circumstances” including that the Project lot is “one 
of the narrowest lots along the shoreline in [the] area except 
15 
  
 
 
 
                          
   
 
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
for the public beach park lots.”10 The Director noted that 
compliance with the 20-foot front yard setback and the 100-foot 
coastal setback effectively reduces the buildable area of the 
DHT lot by 33 percent. 
The Director found the shoreline to be another “unique 
circumstance [of the site].” The Director stated that while the 
“variance and/or encroachments are based on the existing 
[certified] shoreline,” “the shoreline along the site is subject 
to drastic change by artificial means, and, in fact, may move seaward by roughly 40 feet under the planned [Waikiki Beach 
Maintenance Project].” In light of the restoration plan, the 
Director concluded, “It would be reasonable to allow full 
development to proceed at this time, considering that the 
encroachments will be reduced substantially once the beach 
restoration is done.” 
As to the third requirement of the variance test, the 
Director concluded the Project would not alter the essential character of the neighborhood. The Director found the 
10 The Director noted that Kyo- ya’s Special Management Permit 
required Kyo- ya to preserve the historic Banyan Wing for a minimum of 25 
years and that “[t]he proposed encroachments would permit [Kyo- ya], in 
effect, to transfer some of the development potential from the Banyan Wing
site to the DHT site.” The Director maintained this “transfer” would “be a 
fair trade- off, since the proposal would also promote several important WSD 
goals and objectives.” However, the Director also noted that Kyo- ya 
“indicated that [it has] no intention of removing the historic Banyan Wing.” 
16 
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“established character of Waikiki” to be “a densely populated 
and highly developed, urbanized area, which includes a wide mix 
of land uses.” Further, the Director noted that “[m]any 
existing structures are nonconforming and exceed the height 
limit and maximum density [], encroach into required yards and 
setbacks, and lack the minimum open space and landscaping.” 
The Director additionally found the Project to be 
“consistent with several important WSD objectives.” The 
Director determined that “the new building is necessary to replace an aging, declining structure with a new, more 
attractive and functional structure, which will enhance Waikiki 
as a visitor destination”; allow Kyo-ya to preserve the historic 
Banyan Wing; and “provide[] public access to the beach, view 
channels from Kalākaua Avenue to the ocean, as well as other 
significant public benefits.” 
After analyzing the variance test’s three 
requirements, the Director made the following Conclusions of Law: 
1)  There is evidence that the Applicant would be deprived
of a reasonable use of the land or building if theprovisions of the zoning code were strictly applied. 
2)  The request of the applicant is due to unique circumstances and not to general neighborhood
conditions, and it does not question the reasonableness
of the neighborhood zoning. 
3)  The request will not alter the essential character of 
the neighborhood nor be contrary to the intent and
purpose of the zoning ordinance. 
17 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
                         
   
 
  
  
   
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Accordingly, the Director granted partial approval of Kyo-ya’s 
variance application to allow the Project to encroach 
approximately 74 percent into the Coastal Height Setback. The 
Director’s partial approval was conditioned on, inter alia, 
submission of revised plans “which show the [Project] shall 
comply with the 1-to-1 (45-degree angle) coastal height setback 
as measured from . . . (the approximate beach width intended in 
the [1965 Beach Agreement]).”11 
III. Appellate Proceedings 
A. Zoning Board of Appeals12 
Surfrider Foundation, Hawaii’s Thousand Friends, Ka 
Iwi Coalition, and KAHEA--The Hawaiian Environmental Alliance 
(collectively, Surfrider) filed a petition (Petition) to the 
Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) challenging the Director’s 
findings and conclusion that Kyo-ya’s request for a variance 
from the Coastal Height Setback met the requirements for 
issuance of a variance as set forth by the City Charter.13 In 
11 According to Kyo- ya, the Director’s condition effectively reduced 
the height of the Project by approximately six floors. 
12 The ZBA held a hearing to decide motions to intervene filed by
numerous parties at which the ZBA granted intervenor status to Kyo- ya, 20,000 
Friends of Labor, Hawaii’s Thousand Friends, Ka Iwi Coalition, Surfrider
Foundation, and KAHEA--The Hawaiian Environmental Alliance. 
13 Kyo-ya filed a motion to dismiss Surfrider’s appeal, arguing that 
Surfrider’s appeal was substantively and procedurally insufficient underRCCCH § 6- 1516. 
(continued . . .)
18   
 
 
 
   
                                                                               
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
its position statement, Surfrider argued that the Director’s 
conclusion that the Project satisfied the three requirements of 
RCCCH § 6-1517 was based on erroneous findings of material 
facts. 
Surfrider maintained that Kyo-ya did not meet the 
first requirement for issuance of a variance because “the record 
indicates that [Kyo-ya] would not be deprived of reasonable use 
of the property if the variance is denied.” Surfrider contended 
that the “property is already occupied by a non-conforming, 8­story hotel building that can be fully renovated without the 
need for a variance under the [LUO],” that Kyo-ya was not 
entitled to achieve all of the applicable maximum development 
standards in the LUO, and that the 1965 Beach Agreement had not 
been realized. 
(continued . . .) 
RCCCH § 6- 1516 provides, in relevant part, as follows: 
Section 6- 1516. Zoning Board of Appeals – 
. . . An appeal shall be sustained only if the board finds
that the director’s action was based on an erroneous 
finding of a material fact, or that the director had acted
in an arbitrary or capricious manner or had manifestlyabused discretion. 
The ZBA granted in part, and denied in part Kyo- ya’s motion.  The ZBA found 
that Surfrider “asserted in [its] Petition that the Director’s action in 
partially approving the Variance Application was based upon one or more
erroneous findings of material fact” but that Surfrider “did not allege orargue in the Petition that any aspect of the Director’s action . . . was
arbitrary or capricious or a manifest abuse of the Director’s discretion.” 
19 
  
 
 
 
   
  
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Surfrider argued that Kyo-ya failed to meet the second 
requirement because the property is not particularly unique and 
is typical of the general conditions of ocean-front property in 
that part of Waikiki.” Thus, Surfrider maintained that the 
reasonableness of the neighborhood zoning is in fact drawn into 
question by the variance request. 
Surfrider argued the third requirement was also not 
met because “the request, if approved, will alter the essential 
character of the locality and is contrary to the intent and purpose of the zoning code.” Surfrider pointed out that the 
Director’s findings “did not even address whether the project is 
contrary to the intent and purpose of the WSD, whose objectives 
center on maintaining Waikiki’s unique Hawaiian identity and 
reducing the apparent height of buildings.” 
Kyo-ya, the Director, and 20,000 Friends of Labor 
(Friends of Labor) each filed a position statement with the ZBA. Kyo-ya argued that Surfrider “fail[ed] to allege a single 
finding of material fact to have been in error let alone 
‘clearly erroneous.’” Kyo-ya maintained that the Director 
specified the particular evidence that supported his granting of 
the variance and properly concluded that all three requirements 
for a zoning variance had been satisfied. 
20 
  
 
 
 
   
  
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
As to the first variance requirement, Kyo-ya contended 
that it would be denied reasonable use of its property if it 
were not allowed to encroach into the Coastal Height Setback. 
Kyo-ya asserted that the 1965 Beach Agreement conferred on it 
“rights and expectation granted by the state” that must be 
considered in determining what reasonable use it could expect of 
its property. Kyo-ya additionally argued that it “has the right 
under the current WSD and its PD-R to construct the 
density/floor area it proposes” but that without the variance the resulting building would be materially inconsistent with the 
WSD objectives and guidelines. 
With regard to the second requirement, Kyo-ya asserted 
that the Moana Parcel has the greatest width-to-depth ratio of 
any parcel along Waikiki Beach and includes a historic 
structure. Thus, Kyo-ya argued the Director properly concluded 
that the Moana Parcel has unique circumstances that do not call into question the general zoning code. 
In addressing the third requirement, Kyo-ya 
maintained, “It cannot be disputed that Waikiki is a highly 
urbanized area [] with many large and tall buildings in close 
proximity to the Moana Parcel.” Kyo-ya therefore contended the 
“essential character of the neighborhood is a dense urban area 
full of tall hotel and condo buildings.” 
21 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 	 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The Director in his position statement argued the 
record demonstrates that his partial approval of Kyo-ya’s 
variance application was based on clearly established facts and 
was a reasonable exercise of his discretion. The Director 
restated his findings and analysis as to the requirements of the 
variance test from his Decision. He also reiterated his 
conclusion that the Project satisfied the variance test with the 
condition that the Project’s height should be reduced to comply 
with the 1:1 coastal height setback measured from the beach width intended by the 1965 Beach Agreement because the agreement 
provided a basis to determine the parameters of a reasonable 
height limitation. 
The ZBA issued its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of 
Law, and Decision and Order (ZBA Order) on February 14, 2013. 
The ZBA found Surfrider “offered insufficient competent, 
reliable and probative evidence to establish that the Director’s Decision was clearly erroneous” or that any material fact relied 
upon by the Director was clearly erroneous. The ZBA also found 
that Surfrider “offered no competent, reliable and probative 
evidence” to demonstrate the following: 
103.	 That the 1965 Beach Agreement . . . was without legal
effect, had terminated by its terms, or had been
terminated by the parties or operation of law, [or]
that the Director was precluded from considering, orin error for considering, the 1965 Beach Agreement to
aid in his determination of what would be reasonable 
limits to the extent of the variance. 
22 
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
                         
   
 
   
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Accordingly, the ZBA denied Surfrider’s appeal of the 
Director’s Decision.14 Surfrider timely filed a notice of appeal 
to the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) from 
the ZBA Order. 
B. Circuit Court 
In its opening brief,15 Surfrider argued that the 
Director breached his duty to enforce the LUO when he granted Kyo-ya a partial variance “contingent upon compliance with a 
hypothetical certified shoreline 180 feet out to sea from the 
current certified shoreline.” Surfrider contended that 
“variances must be based on the current certified shoreline, not 
some undetermined future shoreline.” 
Surfrider next addressed the requirements for issuance 
of a variance. As to the first requirement of the variance test, Surfrider reasserted the following: (1) the Director did 
not provide evidentiary support for its conclusion that Kyo-ya 
would be deprived of the reasonable use of its land if it was 
required to comply with the Coastal Height Setback; (2) the 
Director erroneously found that the failure of the State to 
14 The ZBA additionally noted Surfrider waived any argument that the
Director acted in an arbitrary or capricious manner or had manifestly abused
his discretion. 
15 In its opening brief, Surfrider presented seventeen points of
error and identified nine erroneous findings with respect to the ZBA Order. 
23 
  
 
 
 
   
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
implement the 1965 Beach Agreement amounts to a deprivation of 
reasonable use; and (3) the other findings in the Director’s 
analysis are not relevant to whether Kyo-ya would be denied 
reasonable use. Surfrider further argued that reasonable use of 
the land, within the meaning of the City Charter does not 
necessarily mean “the use most desired by the owner” and the 
fact that Kyo-ya might make a greater profit by using its 
property in a manner prohibited by the ordinance is irrelevant. 
Next, in regard to the second requirement of the 
variance test, Surfrider argued that the Director addressed only the unique circumstances aspect and did not address whether the 
reasonableness of the neighborhood zoning would be drawn into 
question “by the granting of a variance of unprecedented 
magnitude.” 
With respect to the third requirement, Surfrider 
argued that, while the Director addressed the essential character of the neighborhood in his Decision, he did not 
address whether the Project is contrary to the intent and 
purpose of the zoning ordinance. Surfrider conceded the Project 
may be in conformity with the non-conforming buildings in the 
neighborhood built before the WSD was adopted”; however, 
Surfrider argued it is not in conformity with the historic 
character of the neighborhood. 
24 
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
                         
  
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In his answering brief, the Director restated his 
findings of fact and analysis contained within his Decision and 
reasserted his conclusions. The Director contended that, 
contrary to Surfrider’s argument, he did not rely upon the 1965 
Beach Agreement to determine whether Kyo-ya would be denied 
reasonable use under RCCCH § 6-1517, but rather to consider the 
reasonableness and impose a limit on the extent of the variance 
permitted. 
Kyo-ya and Friends of Labor argued in their respective 
answering briefs that none of the alleged erroneous facts Surfrider identified were actually erroneous or material to the 
Director’s Decision.
16 Kyo-ya asserted that contrary to 
Surfrider’s contention, the ZBA’s findings of fact were “more than adequate” to support its conclusion. 
Kyo-ya also contended that Surfrider “misconstrue[d] 
the Director’s Decision,” which “did not grant a variance that is ‘conditioned upon compliance with a hypothetical certified 
shoreline.’” Kyo-ya further argued that Surfrider’s 
interpretation of case law as requiring the applicant to prove 
that it “would have been denied ‘any reasonable use’ but for” 
16 In its reply brief to Friends of Labor, Surfrider maintained that
the Director did not evaluate the “economic viability of the proposed
structure as compared to other structural options” but rather based hisdecision on “a series of hypothetical scenarios that amount to erroneous
facts.” 
25 
  
 
 
 
   
  
   
  
  
                         
   
 
  
 
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the variance is misleading, would eliminate the Director’s 
discretion, and “would bring an end to land use in Hawai i as it 
has been practiced since statehood.” 
After a hearing on Surfrider’s appeal, the circuit 
court entered its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and 
Decision and Order Affirming the Decision and Order of the ZBA 
(circuit court’s Order). The circuit court concluded that 
Surfrider “failed to satisfy [its] burden to demonstrate that 
the Director’s action in partially approving the [Zoning] 
Variance Application was based on any erroneous findings of 
material fact.” 
Surfrider filed a notice of appeal from the circuit 
court’s Order affirming the ZBA Order.17 
C. Supreme Court18 
In its opening brief, Surfrider reiterates that it was 
Kyo-ya’s burden to prove that its project satisfies all three requirements of the variance test and that the Director’s 
17 On April 10, 2014, Surfrider filed an application to transfer its
appeal to this court, which was granted on May 15, 2014. 
18 Additionally, Surfrider contends the Director failed to
adequately support his findings and that evidence of insufficient material
support for a required factual finding that a variance requirement has been 
met is evidence of an erroneous finding, not evidence of abuse of discretion.
Kyo-ya argues that Surfrider’s challenge to the Director’s reliance on the 
1965 Beach Agreement, as well as to the Director’s determination of whether
the Project meets the three requirements of the variance test, involves the
Director’s discretion, and was thus waived. 
26 
  
 
 
 
   
                         
   
   

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Decision “plainly indicate[s] that neither [Kyo-ya] nor the 
Director met [their] burden.”19 Surfrider again points out that 
the 1965 Beach Agreement “does not provide a legal basis for a variance” from the LUO “which requires building setbacks to be 
measured from the current certified shoreline.” Surfrider asks 
that this court reverse the circuit court’s Order and the 
Director’s Decision and deny Kyo-ya’s variance application. 
Kyo-ya responds that the Director did not rely on the 
1965 Beach Agreement to justify the variance, but rather looked to the agreement after the Director determined “a variance was 
warranted” to determine the extent of the variance to grant. 
In 
any event, Kyo-ya argues that “even if Surfrider could somehow show that consideration of the 1965 Beach Agreement was 
improper, this would not be sufficient to reverse the ZBA.” 
With respect to finding deprivation of “reasonable use,” Kyo-ya 
argues “this was not a situation where Kyo-ya was simply trying to make a ‘greater profit’; instead, the Director found that the 
variance was ‘
necessary  to maintain economic viability.’” Kyo­
19 Surfrider additionally argues that the Director does not have
discretion to grant variances from “mandatory zoning code requirements.”
Because Surfrider did not previously raise this argument, it is notconsidered. 
Mizoguchi v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co.,  66 Haw. 373, 383,
663 P.2d 1071, 1077 (1983). 
27 
  
 
 
 
      
 
 
  
  
                         
  
   

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
ya additionally reasserts arguments that it previously made in 
prior proceedings.20 
IV. Standards of Review 
A. Findings and Conclusions 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon 
its review of an agency’s decision is a secondary appeal. Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of Hawaii v. Sullivan, 87 
Hawaii 217, 229, 953 P.2d 1315, 1327 (1998). The standard of 
review is one in which this court must determine whether the 
circuit court was right or wrong in its decision, applying the 
standards set forth in HRS § 91-14(g) to the agency’s decision. 
Id. 
Under HRS § 91-14(g)(5) (1993), findings of fact are 
reviewed to determine whether they are “[c]learly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the 
whole record.” A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when the 
record lacks substantial evidence--i.e., credible evidence of a 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of 
reasonable caution to support a conclusion--to support the 
finding. Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai
i 43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 158 
20 The Director and Friends of Labor each filed their respective
answering briefs in which they asserted arguments that were submitted in the
proceedings below or presented by Kyo-ya in its answering brief. 
28 
  
 
 
 
     
 
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(2004); McPherson v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals, 67 Haw. 603, 606, 
699 P.2d 26, 28 (1985). 
A “[conclusion of law] that presents mixed questions 
of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard 
because the conclusion is dependent upon the facts and 
circumstances of the particular case.” Price v. Zoning Bd. of 
Appeals of City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 77 Hawai i 168, 172, 883 
P.2d 629, 633 (1994). 
Because the Director’s conclusions of law 
in this case presented mixed questions of fact and law, they are reviewed “under the clearly erroneous standard to determine if 
the agency decision was clearly erroneous in view of reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record.” Poe 
v. Hawai i Labor Relations Bd., 87 Hawai i 191, 195, 953 P.2d 569, 
573 (1998). 
B. Incompetent Evidence 
“The admission of irrelevant or incompetent matter 
before an administrative agency does not constitute reversible 
error if there is substantial evidence in the record to sustain 
the agency’s determination.” Shorba v. Bd. of Educ.,  59 Haw. 
388, 397, 583 P.2d 313, 319 (1979) (quoting Schyman v. Dep’t of 
Registration & Educ., 133 N.E.2d 551, 525-26 (Ill. App. Ct. 
1956)). However, if a petitioner can show prejudice resulting 
from the admission of irrelevant or incompetent evidence, the 
29 

  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
    

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
admission of such evidence may be grounds for reversal. See 
id.; Price, 77 Hawai i at 176, 883 P.2d at 637. “[P]rejudice 
cannot be alleged to the admission of improper evidence unless 
it be shown that the [agency] relied on it.” Shorba, 59 Haw. at 
397, 583 P.2d at 319 (quoting Schyman, 133 N.E.2d at 561-562). 
C. Interpretation of a Statute, Ordinance, or Charter 
“The interpretation of a statute, ordinance or charter 
is a question of law reviewable de novo.” Korean Buddhist , 87 
Hawaii at 229, 953 P.2d at 1327 (alterations omitted) (quoting 
State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai i 1, 10, 928 P.2d 843, 852 (1996)) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). 
V. Discussion 
The Director may grant a variance from a provision of 
the LUO upon the ground of unnecessary hardship if the three 
requirements set forth in RCCCH § 6-1517 have been satisfied: 
(1) the applicant would be deprived of the reasonable use 
of such land or building if the provisions of the zoning
code were strictly applicable; 
(2) the request of the applicant is due to unique
circumstances and not the general conditions in the
neighborhood, so that the reasonableness of the 
neighborhood zoning is not drawn into question; and 
(3) the request, if approved, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood nor be contrary to the intentand purpose of the zoning ordinance. 
“The burden of establishing the factual foundation for the 
foregoing legal preconditions rests with the applicant,”  Korean 
30 

  
 
 
 
   
 
  
                         
   
   

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Buddhist, 87 Hawai i at 234, 953 P.2d at 1332 (citing McPherson, 
67 Haw. at 607, 699 P.2d at 28); however, it is the Director 
who, prior to granting a variance, must “specify the particular 
evidence which supports the granting of the variance.” RCCCH § 6-1517.
21 In its appeal, Surfrider argues that the circuit court 
erred in affirming the ZBA Order and the Director’s Decision because the Director’s findings and conclusions did not 
demonstrate that Kyo-ya satisfied the three requirements for 
issuance of the variance. 
A. Deprived of the Reasonable Use of Land or Building 
To satisfy the first variance requirement, the record 
must show that “the applicant would be deprived of the reasonable use of such land or building if the provisions of the 
zoning code were strictly applicable.” RCCCH § 6-1517. 
“Reasonable use,” within the meaning of the charter, “is not 
necessarily the use most desired by the property owner”; rather, 
to be deprived of the reasonable use of its property, the property owner must establish an inability to make reasonable 
21 The role of the Director in evaluating an application for a
variance from a provision of the LUO is greater than that of an impartial
arbiter of fact.  “Unlike an ordinary court, the [Director] has the function
of serving as an advocate of the public interest.” Final Report of the
Charter Commission of the City and County of Honolulu 1971- 1972 at 34 
(citation omitted). The Director “should always place this consideration
foremost, rather than looking upon its duties as that of a simple arbitration
of disputes among private parties.” Id. 
31 
  
 
 
 
   

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
use of its land or building without the variance. Korean 
Buddhist , 87 Hawai
i at 234-5, 953 P.2d at 1332-33 (applicant 
failed to show that it could not make reasonable use of the land 
or its hall without the requested variance); McPherson, 67 Haw. at 605-06, 699 P.2d at 28 (finding the applicant had not 
established deprivation of reasonable use because the record was 
“devoid of any evidence that the applicant could not make 
reasonable use of the land or buildings in conformity with the 
[zoning code] or her pre-existing nonconforming use”); see also 
RCCCH § 6-1517 n.30 (“[W]ithin the meaning of the charter,” 
“reasonable use” “is not the use most desired by the property owner; [the] property owner must show inability to make any 
reasonable use of his land without the variance.”). 
In this case, the Director concluded “[t]here is 
evidence that [Kyo-ya] would be deprived of 
a reasonable use of 
the land or building if the [Coastal Height Setback] was strictly applied” for the following reasons: the Project is 
necessary to maintain economic viability; the zoning code would 
reduce the buildable area of the DHT lot; if not allowed the 
variance, Kyo-ya would not be able to develop in accordance with the PD-R permit; the 1965 Beach Agreement would have resulted in 
a significantly different buildable area on the site; and the 
current beach replenishment project will extend the beach width 
32 

  
 
 
 
    
  
  
  
                         
   
 
 
   
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
by a minimum of 40 feet and the certified shoreline will likely 
reflect the beach expansion.22 
Surfrider challenges both the Director’s ultimate 
conclusion that Kyo-ya satisfied this requirement of the 
variance test, as well as several of the underlying findings the 
Director based his conclusion upon. Surfrider specifically 
contends that the Director erroneously found that Kyo-ya would 
be denied reasonable use based on the 1965 Beach Agreement and 
that the Project “is necessary to maintain economic viability.” Each of the Director’s reasons for concluding that “there is 
evidence” that Kyo-ya would be deprived of the reasonable use of 
the land is addressed below. 
i. Economic Viability
23 
The Director based his conclusion that Kyo-ya would be 
deprived of a “reasonable use” if the Coastal Height Setback was strictly applied in part on his finding that the Project “is 
22 The Director additionally mentioned several WSD objectives in his
discussion of the first requirement of the variance test. For example, the
Director stated that maintaining economic viability is consistent with the
WSD objective to “provide opportunities for creative development that
contribute[s] to the rejuvenation and revitalization of the special
district.” The Director’s discussion of the WSD objectives will be discussedin relation to the third requirement of the variance test--the intent and 
purpose of the LUO--as the objectives do not pertain to whether the record 
establishes that Kyo- ya would be denied the reasonable use of its land under 
the first requirement of the variance test. 
23 Because the parties analyze one aspect of reasonable use of the
land or building in terms of economic viability, we apply this measure of
analysis in this case. 
33 
  
 
 
 
   
   
                         
   
  
  
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
necessary to maintain economic viability.” Surfrider argues 
that the Director’s finding as to economic viability is 
erroneous because it is not supported by the record. Kyo-ya, 
the Director, and Friends of Labor argue that the Director 
sufficiently found that the Project was necessary for economic 
viability and that it was Surfrider’s burden to prove otherwise. 
To reiterate, in order to demonstrate deprivation of 
reasonable use within the meaning of the City Charter, the 
property owner must establish an inability to make reasonable use of its land or building without the requested variance. 
Korean Buddhist, 87 Hawai i at 234-35, 953 P.2d at 1332-33; 
McPherson,
 67 Haw. at 605-06, 699 P.2d at 28; see also RCCCH § 
6-1517 n.30; Final Report of the Charter Commission of the City 
and County of Honolulu 1971-1972 at 33 (citation omitted) 
(“[T]he property owner must be able to show, if he complies with 
the provisions of the ordinance, that he cannot make any 
reasonable use of his property.”).24 
24 In Korean Buddhist,  the applicant sought a variance after the 
fact for its newly constructed temple hall that exceeded the maximum height
allowed under the zoning code. 87 Hawai i at 234- 35, 953 P.2d at 1332- 33.  In 
affirming the Director’s denial of the variance, this court held, inter alia,
that “‘reasonable use’ of the land, within the meaning of the City Charter,
is not necessarily the use most desired by the owner.” Id. The court 
reasoned that because the applicant failed “to establish that it could make
no reasonable use of the land or its Hall without” the height variance, the
first requirement of the variance test had not been satisfied. Id. 
(continued . . .)
34   
 
 
 
   
  
                                                                               
 
 
  
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Further, “the fact that [an applicant] might make a 
greater profit by using his property in a manner prohibited by 
the ordinance is considered irrelevant, since almost any 
individual applicant could make that same showing.” Korean 
Buddhist, 87 Hawai i at 234-35, 953 P.2d at 1332-33 (quoting 
Final Report of the Charter Commission of the City and County of 
Honolulu 1971-1972 at 33); see also 3 E.C. Yokley, Zoning Law & 
Practice, § 20-7 (4th ed. 1979) (“Under this prong of the test, 
the fact that another use would be more profitable to the 
property owner is not a sufficient basis for a board to grant a 
variance.”); Dep’t of Planning and Permitting, City and Cnty. of Honolulu, 
Zoning Variance Guidebook (August 3, 2010), 
http://www.honoluludpp.org/Portals/0/pdfs/zoning/zvar2.pdf (“Variances cannot be given to . . . allow the applicant to save 
money or make more money on a proposed project.”). 
As Surfrider argues, although the Director found that 
the variance was necessary to “maintain economic viability,” 
(continued . . .) 
Similarly, in McPherson,  this court found the record to be 
“devoid of any evidence that the applicant could not make reasonable use of
the land or buildings in conformity with the [zoning code] or her pre­
existing nonconforming use,” and thus we concluded that the ZBA’s contrary
finding was clearly erroneous. 67 Haw. at 605- 06, 699 P.2d at 28.  In other 
words, because the applicant had not established that she could not makeother reasonable use of the land or buildings but for the variance, the court
held that the applicant failed to satisfy the first requirement of the
variance test. 
Id. 
35 
  
 
 
 
                          
   
 
 
 
   
 
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
there is no financial data25 in the record to support such a 
finding; rather, it appears the Director merely recited 
statements Kyo-ya made in its variance application: “[t]he 
Applicant indicates” that the “facilities and amenities of the 
existing [DHT] are extremely outdated”; if the DHT “is not 
allowed to be redeveloped that would contribute to the decline 
of the already aging structure”; and “[t]he Applicant suggests” 
that an older hotel “cannot compete with other tourist 
destinations that offer superior accommodations.”26 However, 
these statements are merely assertions of Kyo-ya unsupported by 
the record. See McPherson, 67 Haw. at 606, 699 P.2d at 29 
25 Although the Director did not make any economic findings as to 
the existing DHT or the proposed Project, he did make findings as to the
economics of the Banyan Wing and a theoretical reconstructed Banyan Wing in
his analysis of the second requirement of the variance test. The Director 
found that a reconstructed Banyan Wing may increase in value by 79 percentcompared with the current wing. However, as noted supra, the Banyan Wing is 
a historic structure that cannot be redeveloped for a minimum of 25 years.
Additionally, the Director noted that Kyo- ya indicated “that they have no 
intention of removing the historic Banyan Wing.” Thus, the economic findings pertaining to the Banyan Wing are not relevant to whether Kyo- ya would be 
denied the reasonable use of the land if not allowed a variance from the Coastal Height Setback for the Project. 
26 The entirety of the Director’s analysis pertaining to economic
viability of the DHT tower is as follows: 
The Applicant indicates that the facilities and amenities
of the existing Diamond Head Tower are extremely outdated.
If the DHT is not allowed to be redeveloped, that wouldcontribute to the decline of the already aging structure.
The Applicant suggests that older hotels that offer
substandard visitor accommodations are not attractive to 
the modern visitor and often cannot compete with other
tourist destinations that offer superior accommodations.Thus, the proposal is necessary to maintain economic
viability. 
36 
  
 
 
 
   Moreover, even if the record established that the DHT 
was “extremely outdated” and would continue to decline if not 
allowed to be redeveloped, those “facts” alone would not support 
the finding that the Project is necessary to maintain economic 
viability because the LUO expressly allows existing 
nonconforming buildings within the WSD to be repaired and renovated as long as the level of nonconformity is not 
increased.
27 See ROH § 21-9.80-4(e)(3) (“Nonconforming uses 
shall not be limited to ‘ordinary repairs’ or subject to value limits on repairs or renovation work performed.”).   
  
                         
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(“[T]he Charter limits the power of the [Director] to grant variances to cases where a rather narrow and somewhat technical 
set of facts must be established.”). 
Additionally, ROH § 21-9.80-4(e) allows a 
nonconforming structure to be replaced by an entirely new 
27 Other jurisdictions have held that if “the property has a
nonconforming use, there is an additional burden on the applicant to
establish that maintaining the nonconforming use will not allow the applicant
to realize a reasonable return.” 2 Am. Law. Zoning § 13:15 (5th ed.); see 
also  O’Connor v. Overall Laundry, 183 N.E. 134, 138 (Ind. App. 1932) (“It is 
not a hardship or practical difficulty in the meaning of the statute when acorporation’s business has outgrown its building to refuse to allow them to
add to their present building.”); Crossroads Recreation, Inc. v. Broz, 149
N.E.2d 65, 67- 69 (N.Y. 1958) (upholding the denial of a variance to renovate 
a nonconforming use, because the owner of a nonconforming gas station failed
to show he could not realize a reasonable return by converting the property 
to a use permitted by the zoning ordinances); Goodman v. Zoning Bd. of Review
of Cranston, 254 A.2d 743 (R.I. 1969) (reversing the grant of a variance to
convert a nonconforming nursery into a car dealership because there wasinsufficient proof that continued use of the nursery would deprive the owner
of all beneficial use of the land). 
37 
  
 
 
 
   

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
structure, subject to certain conditions. Accordingly, even 
assuming there was evidence in the record that established that 
the existing DHT is not economically viable due to its aging 
structure and “substandard accommodations,” renovation and or 
replacement of a nonconforming building subject to certain 
conditions is expressly authorized by the LUO. For this reason 
also, there is insufficient evidence in the record to show that 
the Project is necessary to maintain economic viability. See 
ROH § 21-9.80-4(e). 
The Zoning Variance Guidebook (Variance Guidebook) 
provides sample cases to illustrate how each requirement of the 
variance test may be properly applied. Zoning Variance 
Guidebook, supra. The Variance Guidebook’s second sample case provides a particularly relevant example of an applicant who 
requested a variance to build an addition to a dwelling that 
would encroach into the side yard setback. The Guidebook notes in this hypothetical case, “The applicant argue[d] that the 
encroachment is necessary because it is the most practical, 
cost-effective solution.” In evaluating the variance request, 
the Variance Guidebook notes that the applicant could build a 
conforming addition in other locations on the lot. 
Id.
 at 4. 
The Guidebook concludes that the “variance cannot be supported,” 
38 
  
 
 
 
   
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
in part, because “the applicant is not deprived of reasonable 
use, since alternatives are available.” Id. at 5. 
The Variance Guidebook’s example is consistent with 
the Korean Buddhist decision where this court held that an 
applicant who sought a variance to construct a taller building 
than that authorized by the ordinance had not demonstrated 
deprivation of reasonable use because the record showed that the 
applicant could have constructed a shorter, compliant building. 
87 Hawai i at 234-35, 953 P.2d at 1332-33. Thus, the mere fact 
that Kyo-ya cannot build the specific building design it desires 
is not sufficient to support a finding that Kyo-ya would be deprived of the reasonable use of its land or building. See 
Singer v. Phila. Zoning Bd. of Adjustment
, 29 A.3d 144, 150 (Pa. 
Commw. Ct. 2011) (“It is well-settled that in order to establish 
unnecessary hardship for a dimensional variance, an applicant 
must demonstrate something more than a mere desire to develop a 
property as it wishes or that it will be financially burdened if 
the variance is not granted.”); Korean Buddhist, 87 Hawai i at 
234-35, 953 P.2d at 1332-33. 
As noted, the standard to evaluate deprivation of 
reasonable use under the charter is that the property owner must 
establish an inability to make reasonable use of its land or building without the requested variance. 
Korean Buddhist , 87 
39 

  
 
 
 
  
 
                         
   
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Hawaii at 234-35, 953 P.2d at 1332-33 (applicant for variance 
failed to show that it could not make reasonable use of the land 
or its hall); McPherson, 67 Haw. at 605-06, 699 P.2d at 28 
(accord). 
Kyo-ya apparently disputes the applicability of this 
standard, arguing to this court that Surfrider’s interpretation 
of Korean Buddhist is misleading and would eliminate the 
Director’s discretion. However, the standard stated in the 
Charter’s variance test is clear--an applicant has the burden of 
establishing that the applicant would be deprived of the 
reasonable use of land or buildings if the provisions of the 
zoning code were strictly applicable. Korean Buddhist, 87 
Hawai
i at 234, 953 P.2d at 1332 (“The burden of establishing the 
factual foundation for [each prong of the variance test] rests 
with the applicant.”). Here, the reliable, probative, and 
substantial evidence does not support the conclusion that the variance is necessary for Kyo-ya to maintain economic viability 
of its land or building. 
ii. 
PD-R 
Permit Allowances 
The next reason28 stated by the Director to show denial 
of reasonable use was that Kyo-ya would not be able to develop 
28 The second reason given by the Director to show denial of
reasonable use merely stated the effect of the zoning code provisions on the 
Project: the buildable area of the DHT lot would be reduced to less than 35 
(continued . . .)
40   
 
 
 
   
                                                                               
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
in accordance with its PD-R permit if the variance was not 
allowed. Under a PD-R permit, an applicant can apply to the 
City Council and the Director for flexibility from specifically 
enumerated provisions of the LUO within the WSD upon showing 
that “timely, demonstrable contributions benefiting the 
community and the stability, function, and overall ambiance and 
appearance of Waikiki are produced.” ROH § 21-9.80-4(d). While 
a PD-R permit allows an applicant to apply for flexibility from 
requirements relating to density, height, precinct transitional height setbacks, yards, open space, and landscaping, the permit 
notably does 
not allow flexibility with respect to the Coastal 
Height Setback provision. 
Therefore, an applicant who wishes to build a denser, 
taller building with less open space may apply for a PD-R permit upon showing that the project will benefit the community and 
contribute to the stability and overall ambience of Waikiki. 
On 
the other hand, an applicant who wishes to build within the 
Coastal Height Setback must apply for a variance and satisfy the 
three requirements for issuance of a variance. By excluding the 
Coastal Height Setback from the list of provisions that may be 
(continued . . .) 
percent with a density less than the existing DHT and the Coastal Height
Setback would limit the building to approximately 170 feet. 
41   
 
 
 
  
                         
    
 
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
given flexibility under a PD-R permit and requiring an applicant 
to prove unnecessary hardship as a result of the setback 
requirement, the City Council manifestly indicated that the 
Coastal Height Setback is of greater significance and requires 
greater protection than numerous other provisions in the LUO. 
Here, the Director appears to have sidestepped the 
City Council’s intent for an applicant to meet the distinct 
three-part hardship test by defining and evaluating the 
“reasonable use” of Kyo-ya’s property in terms of the PD-R permit’s flexible provisions. Specifically, the Director used 
Kyo-ya’s inability to obtain the full benefit from the PD-R 
permit as a reason to find that Kyo-ya would be denied 
reasonable use of the site if the Coastal Height Setback was 
applied.
29 In other words, by obtaining the PD-R permit prior to 
seeking the variance, Kyo-ya was able to argue that it was deprived of the reasonable use of its land by pointing to the loss of the increased density and height that the PD-R permit 
allowed. Thus, the three requirements that must be satisfied to 
obtain a variance from the Coastal Height Setback were 
29 Kyo-ya’s PD- R permit allowed a 20 percent increase in density, an 
increased building height of 308 feet, and a decrease in required open space
from 50 percent to 45 percent. 
42 
  
 
 
 
  
  
                         
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
subordinated to Kyo-ya achieving the benefits of the PD-R 
permit. 
The effect of coordinating the permits in this manner 
resulted in the ostensible inclusion of the Coastal Height 
Setback as being among the provisions that can be modified under 
the PD-R permit. This is directly contrary to the intention of 
the City Council: the Coastal Height Setback stands apart from 
the PD-R permit, and an applicant seeking a variance from the 
Coastal Height Setback requirements must independently satisfy the unnecessary hardship test. Accordingly, the PD-R permit 
should not have been considered as a basis for determining 
reasonable use in order to satisfy the first requirement of the 
variance test, as it enables circumvention of the Coastal Height 
Setback. 
Additionally, even if the PD-R permit were relevant to 
the determination of “reasonable use,” the Director noted that there was an alternative building design that would achieve the 
increased density authorized by the PD-R permit without 
encroaching into the Coastal Height Setback.
30 Thus, the 
30 The Director found that if Kyo- ya “is not allowed to encroach 
into the coastal height setback, the building design would have to be
drastically changed from a relatively tall, slender design to a shorter,
wider building with a larger footprint in order to achieve the density
permitted by the PD-R .”  (Emphasis added). The Director disregarded the
alternative design after finding that it would obstruct views from Kalākaua 
(continued . . .)
43   
 
 
 
   
  
                                                                               
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Director expressly acknowledged that Kyo-ya could in fact 
achieve the full density permitted by its PD-R permit with an 
alternative design that would not encroach into the Coastal 
Height Setback. 
Additionally, aside from the single “monolithic” 
building design hypothesized in the Director’s Decision, the 
Director did not discuss any other alternative building designs 
that would not require a 74 percent encroachment into the 
Coastal Height Setback apparently because there was no evidence in the record regarding alternatives. Thus, in effect, the 
Director’s Decision presented an artificial “either/or” scenario 
where Kyo-ya could only build either the proposed Project or a 
“shorter, wider building.” This scenario resulted from the 
absence of evidence regarding other available options, including 
the renovation of the existing DHT, the construction of a 
compliant building design, or a building design with a greater degree of compliance with the Coastal Height Setback. 
An applicant for a variance is not deprived of the 
reasonable use of its land or buildings simply because the 
applicant may not be able to utilize the maximum potential 
(continued . . .) 
Avenue and thus be contrary to the WSD objectives. We address this finding
with regard to the third requirement of the variance test. 
44   
 
 
 
  
  
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
density of the site. See Korean Buddhist , 87 Hawai i at 234-35, 
953 P.2d at 1332-33; Singer, 29 A.3d at 150. Accordingly, the 
Director’s discussion of the PD-R permit was not relevant to the 
analysis of reasonable use under the first requirement of the unnecessary hardship test. 
iii.
1965 
Beach Agreement 
Next, the Director found that Kyo-ya would be denied 
reasonable use of its land because if the State had constructed the beach as required by the 1965 Beach Agreement, “the size and 
configuration of the buildable area of the site would be 
significantly different.” 
In 1965, the State and certain shoreline property 
owners, including Kyo-ya’s parent company, entered into a 
private agreement under which the State agreed to use its best 
efforts to extend the beach approximately 180 feet seaward of 
the current certified shoreline. The 1965 Beach Agreement was 
not incorporated into the LUO or referenced in the provisions of the subsequently enacted WSD. While there have been beach 
replenishment projects in the years since the agreement, the 
beach width envisioned by the 1965 Beach Agreement was never 
realized. Therefore, the agreement had no effect on the 
certified shoreline by which the Coastal Height Setback is 
45 
  
 
 
 
   
                         
     
   
 
 
 
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
measured.31 Kyo-ya, the Director, and Friends of Labor 
(collectively, Appellees) cite no authority that would authorize 
the 1965 Agreement to have legal effect on a variance 
application. 
The Appellees contend that the Director did not rely 
on the 1965 Beach Agreement to determine whether Kyo-ya would be 
denied reasonable use; however, the plain language of the 
Director’s Decision indicates otherwise.32 In its variance 
application, Kyo-ya acknowledged that the shoreline was never 
extended pursuant to the terms of the 1965 Beach Agreement yet 
contended that if the beach had been extended, “almost no 
portion of the [Project] would encroach into the Coastal Height 
Setback.” The Director adopted Kyo-ya’s reasoning in his 
decision and concluded the variance, “viewed in [the context of 
the 1965 Beach Agreement], is not excessive.” (Emphasis added). 
Additionally, after the Director had extensively discussed the 
31 See note 3 for the definition of “certified shoreline.”  
32 Kyo-ya argued to the Director, the ZBA, and the circuit court 
that the 1965 Beach Agreement conferred upon it certain rights and
expectations that must be considered in determining what reasonable use Kyo­
ya could expect of its property under the variance test.  Kyo- ya also 
contended that the agreement “altered real property law as it applied to the
Moana Parcel and the ‘bundle of legal sticks’ that [Kyo- ya] held as its 
property.” During the variance application proceeding, Kyo-ya maintained 
that “the Director was required to consider the shoreline that the State of
Hawaii is absolutely legally obligated to maintain for the benefit of Kyo- ya 
and its adjoining landowners (and the general public)” and that if the
Director had done so, “there would have been a more permissive variance 
issued.” 
46 
  
 
 
 
  
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Beach Agreement, the Director found that “ [f]or these and other 
reasons, it can be recognized that [Kyo-ya] would be denied 
reasonable use of the site if not allowed to encroach into the 
[Coastal Height Setback].” (Emphasis added). 
By placing significant reliance on the 1965 Beach 
Agreement as a basis for its conclusion that Kyo-ya would be 
denied reasonable use if encroachment was not allowed, the 
Director effectively evaluated the reasonable use of Kyo-ya’s 
property in terms of the width of the beach intended by the 1965 Beach Agreement. 
Other statements in the Director’s Decision 
further support the conclusion that the Director relied on the 1965 Beach Agreement to determine whether Kyo-ya would be 
deprived of reasonable use of its land. 
For example, after referencing the 1965 Beach 
Agreement, the Director stated, “A closer look at the 1965 
Agreement suggests that if the State had constructed the beach as required, the size and configuration of the buildable area of 
the site would be significantly different,” “the beach fronting 
the [Project site] might be as much as 180 feet wider than it is 
today,” and thus “the building setback and height encroachments 
would be reduced significantly.” While there is no doubt that 
the buildable area of the lot would be different if the beach 
47 
  
 
 
 
   
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
had been extended, the fact is that the beach was not extended 
180 feet, and the shoreline was never certified at that point. 
Despite the Director’s findings relating to the 
intended beach width under the 1965 Beach Agreement, the 
variance must be based on the certified shoreline, and the 
hardship must be established in consideration of the facts and 
circumstances in effect at the time of the application. See ROH 
§ 21-9.80-4(g)(2). Thus, consideration of the 1965 Beach Agreement and its hypothetical effects on Kyo-ya’s land if the shoreline had been extended 180 feet seaward were entirely 
irrelevant to determining whether Kyo-ya would be deprived of 
the reasonable use of its land. 
The Director’s Decision demonstrates that he not only 
considered the 1965 Beach Agreement to determine if Kyo-ya would 
be deprived of the reasonable use its land, but that he also considered the agreement when determining the extent of the variance to grant. In fact, the Director’s partial approval was 
conditioned on, inter alia, “compliance with the 1-to-1 (45­
degree angle) coastal height setback as measured from the face 
of the existing concrete seawall/walkway structure [] 180 feet 
seaward (the approximate beach width intended in the [1965 Beach 
Agreement).” (Emphases added). By relying on “the beach width 
intended in the 1965 Agreement,” the Director shaped the 
48 

  
 
 
 
   
                         
    
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
variance to match the 1965 Beach Agreement. However, the 
governing conditions for the variance approval must be based on 
valid criteria, not a hypothetical shoreline envisioned by an 
unexecuted private contract with no legal effect on the 
certified shoreline or the Coastal Height Setback.33 The 
Director’s conditioning of the variance on the shoreline hypothesised by the 1965 Beach Agreement was therefore invalid. 
Further, by conditioning the variance on a theoretical shoreline 
derived from the 1965 Beach Agreement, the Director essentially disregarded the certified shoreline. 
The Director’s fifth reason for finding that Kyo-ya 
would be deprived of reasonable use of its land or buildings was 
because the Beach Maintenance Project would extend the beach by 
40 feet and thus reduce the extent of the encroachment. As 
discussed, the Coastal Height Setback must be measured from the 
current certified shoreline and the hardship test met by the circumstances in place at the time of the variance application. 
33 The ZBA found that “[a]t no time prior to the closing of the
evidentiary portion of this proceeding did Petitioner’s [sic] offer any
competent, reliable or probative evidence that the 1965 Beach Agreement,
which had been entered into by the State of Hawaii and Applicant’s parent
company, was without legal effect, had terminated by its terms, or had been
terminated by the parties or operation of law.” Despite Kyo- ya’s arguments 
and the ZBA’s findings, there is no legal basis for concluding that the 1965
Beach Agreement could be validly considered by the Director in evaluating the
Zoning Variance Application. 
49 
  
 
 
 
   
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Therefore, the Beach Maintenance Project was also improperly 
considered by the Director. 
Pursuant to ROH § 6-1517, the Director was required to 
“specify the particular evidence which supports the granting of 
a variance” with respect to each requirement of the variance 
test. As to the first requirement, the Director was required to 
conclude that Kyo-ya would not be able to make other reasonable 
use of its land without a variance that allowed it to encroach 
74 percent into the Coastal Height Setback. Korean Buddhist , 87 
Hawaiʻi 217, 953 P.2d 1315.  The Director not only failed to 
apply this standard as stated in the Charter, but apparently applied a different standard, concluding that Kyo-ya would be 
deprived of 
“a” reasonable use. 
Further, the Director’s finding that the variance was 
necessary for economic viability of the land or building was 
without evidentiary support in the record. The Director’s 
remaining findings as to the PD-R permit, the 1965 Beach 
Agreement, and the Beach Maintenance Project are not relevant to 
determining whether Kyo-ya would be deprived of the reasonable 
use of the property. 
Thus, because the reliable, probative, and 
substantial evidence on the whole record does not support the 
Director’s conclusion that the variance was necessary to 
maintain economic viability, his conclusion as to the first 
50 
  
 
 
 
   
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
requirement of the variance test was clearly erroneous. See 
Bremer, 104 Hawai i at 51, 85 P.3d at 158. 
Additionally, “[t]he admission of irrelevant or 
incompetent matter before an administrative agency does not 
constitute reversible error if there is substantial evidence in 
the record to sustain the agency’s determination.” Shorba, 59 
Haw. at 397, 583 P.2d at 319 (quoting
 Schyman, 133 N.E.2d at 
525-26). However, if a petitioner can show prejudice resulting 
from the admission of irrelevant or incompetent evidence, the 
admission of such evidence may be grounds for reversal. See 
id.; Price , 77 Hawai i at 176, 883 P.2d at 637. 
“[P]rejudice 
cannot be alleged to the admission of improper evidence unless 
it be shown that the [agency] relied on it.” Shorba, 59 Haw. at 
397, 583 P.2d at 319 (quoting Schyman, 133 N.E.2d at 561-562). 
Here, Surfrider has clearly demonstrated that the 
Director placed great reliance on the 1965 Beach Agreement and 
the Beach Maintenance Project to find that Kyo-ya would be 
deprived of the reasonable use of its land or building if it was 
required to comply with the Coastal Height Setback as measured 
from the certified shoreline. 
While any reliance on the 1965 
Beach Agreement and Beach Maintenance Project was error, the reliance in this case was crucial to the Director’s finding of deprivation of reasonable use, even to the extent that it 
51 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
provided the basis for the configuration of the variance that 
was actually granted; thus, because the incompetent evidence was 
significant to the Director’s conclusion, the admission of such 
evidence was clearly prejudicial and “grounds for reversal.” 
Id. 
B. Unique Circumstances 
The second requirement of the City Charter’s variance 
test requires a showing that “the request of the applicant is due to unique circumstances and not the general conditions in 
the neighborhood, so that the reasonableness of the neighborhood 
zoning is not drawn into question.” 
RCCCH § 6-1517. The City 
Charter provides the meaning for unique circumstances: unique circumstances “has to do with 
whether specific attributes of the  
parcel are present that justify the request for a variance.” 
RCCCH § 6-1517 n.30 (emphasis added) (citing Korean Buddhist, 87 
Hawaii 217, 953 P.2d 1315). Thus, an owner’s unusual plans for 
a parcel do not, in themselves, constitute “unique 
circumstances.” McPherson,
 67 Haw. at 606, 699 P.2d at 28. 
Surfrider argues that the Project site is not 
particularly unique to justify the variance. In addition, 
Surfrider argues the ZBA and Director’s Decision were clearly 
erroneous because it shows the Director addressed only the 
“unique circumstances” part of the variance test and “failed to 
52 
  
 
 
 
   
                         
   
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
address whether ‘the reasonableness of the neighborhood is [] 
drawn into question’ by the granting of a variance of 
unprecedented magnitude.” The Appellees respond that the 
Director properly found Kyo-ya’s lot contained unique 
circumstances that presented development challenges. The 
Appellees also contend that the phrase “so that the 
reasonableness of the zoning is not drawn into question” merely 
explains the purpose behind “unique circumstances.” 
In his Decision, the Director concluded that Kyo-ya’s 
variance application was based upon unique circumstances and not general neighborhood conditions and that the variance would not 
draw into question the reasonableness of the neighborhood 
zoning. In support of his conclusion, the Director made the 
following relevant findings: (1) the Project site is one of the 
narrowest along the shoreline in the area with an average lot 
depth of about 182 feet; (2) compared with the DHT tower and Surfrider Tower, the Banyan Wing generates the least amount of 
revenue per room;
34 (3) the Project site is subject to the 100­
foot coastal setback and an average 20-foot front yard setback along Kalākaua Avenue, thereby reducing the buildable area by an 
average of 120 feet; (4) the shoreline along the site is subject 
34 We do not address this finding as it is not relevant to whether
the site has specific attributes that justify the request for a variance. 
53 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to drastic change by artificial means compared with natural 
beaches that cannot be altered; and (5) the Beach Maintenance 
Project may extend the beach by roughly 40 feet and thus reduce 
the Project’s encroachments by 40 feet. 
i.Narrow Lot & Banyan Wing 
Surfrider does not directly challenge the Director’s 
finding that the Project site is one of the narrowest along the shoreline, or that because Kyo-ya was prohibited from 
redeveloping the historic Banyan Wing, Kyo-ya was limited to 
developing the narrower DHT portion of the property. 
Nevertheless, as made clear in the Variance Guidebook’s second 
and third example cases, the narrowness of a lot may not be 
sufficient, by itself, to find unique circumstances when alternative building designs are available. 
In the Variance Guidebook’s second example, discussed 
above, because the applicant could build a conforming addition 
in other locations on the lot, the guidebook concluded that the 
“variance cannot be supported,” in part, because “alternatives 
are available.” Zoning Variance Guidebook, supra. 
In the third example of the Variance Guidebook, the 
applicant “has a small, narrow lot, only 35 feet in width,” 
while “[o]ther lots in the area are generally 50 feet wide.” Id.
 at 5-6. “The applicant cannot raise the existing dwelling 
54 
  
 
 
 
   
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and add a new ground floor without a variance because the second 
story would encroach slightly into the required height setback 
along one side.” Id. 
(emphasis added). The Variance Guidebook 
provides that the “variance can be supported,” because, in part, the lot “is the only such narrow lot in the neighborhood, which 
is a unique circumstance,” and because “[t]he structural 
conditions and dimensions of the existing dwelling do not afford 
a reasonable alternative.” Id. (emphasis added). 
Here, Kyo-ya appears to have other alternatives that 
would not require a 74 percent encroachment into the Coastal Height Setback; thus, the relatively narrow lot does not alone 
justify the variance. Additionally, the WSD allows for the 
refurbishment and rebuilding of nonconforming structures so long 
as the extent of its nonconformities does not increase. 
It 
would appear that the Director recognized that the narrowness of the site was not sufficient to support granting the variance, and thus the Director evaluated and relied upon additional 
factors, discussed below, to support the finding of unique 
circumstances. 
ii. 
Coastal 
Height Setback, Front Yard Setback 
A significant reason underlying the Director’s 
conclusion that Kyo-ya’s variance application was based upon unique circumstances was that the Project site was subject to 
55 
  
 
 
 
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“the 100-foot coastal setback . . . and an average 20-foot front 
yard setback along Kalākaua Avenue,” which together “reduce the 
buildable area depth by an average of 120 feet.” However, as 
Surfrider argues, both the Coastal Height Setback and the 
average 20-foot front yard setback apply to all ocean front 
properties in the WSD, and thus, the setbacks do not constitute 
unique circumstances. See ROH § 21-9.80-4; LUO Table 21-9.6(B) 
(front yard setbacks must be “an average of 20 feet for zoning lots fronting Kuhio Avenue, Kalā
kaua Avenue, Ala Moana and Ala 
Wai Boulevard within the resort mixed use precinct”); see also 
Collins v. Carusone, 126 A.D.2d 847, 848 (N.Y. App. Div. 1987) 
(since all properties near the subject property share the same 
hardship, the hardship is not “unique”); accord Greenawalt v. 
Zoning Bd. of Adjustment of Davenport, 345 N.W.2d 537, 544 (Iowa 
1984). 
By combining the footage of both setbacks and 
determining the property’s buildable area would be reduced by 120 feet, the Director used generally applicable requirements to 
find unique circumstances. 
However, since all shoreline 
properties in Waikiki have their buildable area reduced by setback requirements, this is not a unique attribute of Kyo-ya’s 
parcel. See ROH § 21-9.80-4; LUO Table 21-9.6(B). Moreover, as 
defined by the City Charter, “unique circumstances” “ha[ve] to 
56 
  
 
 
 
    
  
  
                         
   
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
do with whether specific attributes of the parcel are present 
that justify the request for a variance.” 
RCCCH § 6-1517 n.30 
(emphasis added) (citing Korean Buddhist, 87 Hawai i 217, 953 
P.2d 1315). The provisions of a zoning ordinance are not 
“specific attributes of [a] parcel,” but rather they are legal 
requirements that prescribe how a parcel may be used and 
developed.35 
The Director further based his finding that the 
Project site was unique on the fact that the shoreline fronting 
the property “is subject to drastic change by artificial means” 
and the lot is subject to the 1965 Beach Agreement and the Beach Maintenance Project. However, like the setback provisions of 
the LUO, these characteristics of the shoreline are not unique 
to the Project site but apply to all properties fronting Waikiki 
Beach, and they are not “attributes” of the parcel. 
Therefore, because the setbacks, shoreline, 1965 Beach 
Agreement, and Beach Maintenance Project are not attributes of 
the parcel, but rather are external conditions present in the 
35 If, for example, a zoning ordinance imposed a maximum area height
of 350 feet above which no building could be constructed, that factor itself
would not constitute a unique circumstance. On the other hand, if a
particular parcel was graded 20 feet higher than other parcels in the
neighborhood, and an applicant sought a variance to construct a building on
that parcel with a maximum ground to ceiling height of 360 feet, the factthat the parcel is 20 feet higher than neighboring parcels may be considered
a unique factor because it is a unique attribute of the parcel itself. 
57 
  
 
 
 
   
  Consequently, the reliable, probative, and substantial 
evidence in the record does not support the Director’s 
conclusion that the variance was necessary due to the unique 
attributes of the property, and thus his conclusion as to the second requirement of the variance test was clearly erroneous. 
See Bremer,  104 Hawai i at 51, 85 P.3d at 158. Additionally, 
because the Director significantly relied on external conditions that are not relevant to the uniqueness of the parcel and are commonly found in the neighborhood, the Director’s Decision was 
based on incompetent evidence that significantly prejudiced 
Surfrider. Shorba, 59 Haw. at 397, 583 P.2d at 319. 
  Finally, 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
neighborhood, the Director’s findings that these conditions are 
“unique” attributes of Kyo-ya’s property are clearly erroneous. 
The only remaining evidence supporting the Director’s 
conclusion that the second requirement was satisfied due to 
unique circumstances were his findings that the individual 
Project site was narrow and that the lot contained the Banyan 
Wing. However, because the record does not show that the unique 
attributes of the lot--the narrowness and Banyan Wing--prevent 
Kyo-ya from renovating the DHT or replacing it with a new building that meets zoning requirements, the narrowness of the 
lot and the Banyan Wing do not sufficiently demonstrate the 
parcel’s “unique circumstances.” 
58 
  
 
 
 
  
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the Director’s reliance on conditions commonly found in the 
neighborhood necessarily draws the neighborhood zoning into 
question as every property along the shoreline would be found to 
have “unique” attributes and be potentially eligible for a 
variance from the provisions of the LUO. Accordingly, the 
Director’s conclusion that Kyo-ya satisfied the second 
requirement of the variance test was clearly erroneous. 
C. Essential Character of the Neighborhood and Intent and Purpose
of Zoning Ordinance 
To satisfy the third requirement for granting a 
variance, the record must show that “the request, if approved, 
will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood nor be contrary to the intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance.” 
RCCCH § 6-1517 (emphasis added). Thus, in this case, the 
pivotal determination is whether the 74.3 percent encroachment 
into the Coastal Height Setback would alter the essential 
character of the neighborhood or be contrary to the intent and 
purpose of the zoning ordinance. See Korean Buddhist, 87 Hawai i 
at 234-35, 953 P.2d at 1332-33 (court considered whether the 
increased height of the temple hall, not the temple hall itself, 
would alter the essential character of the neighborhood). Notably, in contrast to the first two requirements of the 
variance test requiring affirmative findings of deprivation of 
the reasonable use of the property and unique circumstances of 
59 

  
 
 
 
    
 
  
                         
   
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the property, the third requirement necessitates factual 
findings that the variance will not alter the neighborhood’s 
essential character and will 
not be contrary to the intent and 
purpose of the variance test.36 
Surfrider argues that the Director erroneously found 
that the Project, rather than the variance, would not alter the essential character of the neighborhood and would not be 
contrary to the intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance. 
Surfrider additionally argues that the Director did not address whether or not the 74.3 percent encroachment itself “might be 
contrary to the intent and purpose of the WSD.” In response, 
the Appellees argue that the Director properly considered the 
intent of the zoning code, as well as the essential character of 
the neighborhood, and correctly concluded that the variance 
would be consistent with both. 
i. 
Essential 
Character of the Neighborhood 
The Director found, as characterized in the LUO, that 
Waikiki is a “densely populated and highly developed, urbanized area” with a wide mix of land uses, many of which are 
36 Importantly, rather than making findings that the variance is
consistent with certain objectives, the variance test requires the Director
to make findings as to whether the variance request is not contrary to the
intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance. This analysis necessitatesfirst, determining the intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance, and then
evaluating the requested variance in light of such intent and purpose.  
60 
  
 
 
 
   
  
                         
   
 
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“nonconforming and exceed the height limit and maximum density 
[], encroach into required yards and setbacks, and lack the 
minimum open space and landscaping.” Based on these findings, 
the Director concluded that the Project would not alter the 
essential character of the neighborhood. However, the 
Director’s conclusion that the neighborhood’s essential 
character would not be altered is flawed. 
First, determining that the Waikiki neighborhood37 is a 
“densely populated and highly developed urbanized area” with many nonconforming properties does not preclude the City Council 
from enacting an ordinance targeted at altering the 
neighborhood’s character when a sufficient basis exists to do 
so. See Nine A, LLC v. Town of Chesterfield, 950 A.2d 197, 203 
(N.H. 2008). 
In Town of Chesterfield, the town determined that a 
lake, a unique natural resource, needed protection and enacted a 
special district to prevent, among other things, “the 
overcrowding of, and undue concentration of population on and 
37 We note that the Director’s Decision did not discuss the fact 
that the WSD contains multiple neighborhoods. See  ROH § 21- 9.80-1(c) 
(“Support the retention of a residential sector in order to provide stability
to the neighborhoods  of Waikiki.” (emphasis added)) .  Thus, while the
Director’s characterization of the neighborhood may reflect generalattributes of the WSD, those attributes do not necessarily represent the“essential character” of the neighborhood that will be affected by the 74.3
percent encroachment into the Coastal Height Setback. 
61 
  
 
 
 
                          
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
around, the lake.” Id. With the creation of the special 
district, the town prohibited cluster residences around the lake 
and set forth new minimum lot requirements and minimum frontage 
requirements. Id. A developer sought a variance38 to build 
cluster residences within the district on the basis that cluster housing was reflective of the current character of the 
neighborhood. Id. In affirming the zoning board’s denial of 
the applicant’s variance request, the Supreme Court of New Hampshire held that although the town previously permitted cluster residences in the lake district, the town rightfully 
determined that “the need to preserve a unique natural resource 
outweighed having the character of the neighborhood control the 
zoning ordinance.” Id. 
38 In Town of Chesterfield, to obtain a variance the applicant was 
required to prove the following: 
(1) 
the variance will not be contrary to the public
interest; 
(2) special conditions exist such that literal enforcement
of the ordinance results in unnecessary hardship; 
(3) the variance is consistent with the spirit of the
ordinance; 
(4) substantial justice is done; and 
(5) granting the variance will not diminish the value of
surrounding properties. 
Town of Chesterfield, 950 A.2d at 201. 
62 
  
 
 
 
   
  
                         
    
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Here, the City Council enacted the provisions of the 
WSD, including the Coastal Height Setback, in response “to the 
rapid development of the 1960s and 1970s, and the changes 
produced by that development” to protect the unique identity of 
Waikiki. ROH § 21-9.80. Accordingly, as in Town of 
Chesterfield , it is evident that the City Council was greatly 
concerned with the changing character of Waikiki and thus took affirmative steps to preserve Waikiki’s unique Hawaiian 
identity. 
Therefore, the fact that there are nonconforming 
properties in the WSD that were built prior to the enactment of 
the special district in 1976 does not provide a basis for a 
finding that the variance is consistent with the essential 
character of the neighborhood. 
Further, the presence of nonconforming uses and 
structures should not serve as the basis for further non-
conformance. Martin v. City of Alexandria , 743 S.E.2d 139, 146 
(Va. 2013); Packer v. Hornsby, 267 S.E.2d 140-43 (Va. 1980). In 
a factual context with some similarities to this case, the 
Supreme Court of Virginia reviewed the zoning board’s approval 
of an applicant-homeowners’ request for a variance39 to encroach 
39 The requirements to obtain a variance in Packer are similar to 
the City Charter’s variance test in this case. In Packer, the zoning board 
was permitted to authorize a variance only if “a literal enforcement of the 
(continued . . .)
63   
 
 
 
                                                                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
73 percent into an oceanfront setback in order to expand their 
house. Packer, 267 S.E.2d at 141. The applicants’ stated 
reasons for the request were “improvement to existing structure is needed” and “development of adjacent property makes adherence 
to set back a hardship.” 
Id.
 at 141. The court noted that 
“[t]he applicants already have a dwelling, . . . and they can enlarge the house without violating the setback requirement by 
adding to the west side of the structure,” but the applicants 
preferred to expand to the east “in order to have a better floor plan with a better view of the ocean.” Id. at 143. The zoning 
board granted the variance on the basis that the applicant “should be entitled to build as close to the ocean as ‘the 
average of the houses along the block.’” Id. at 143. In 
(continued . . .) 
provisions (of a zoning ordinance) will result in unnecessary hardship” and
it finds: 
(1) That the strict application of the ordinance would produce undue hardship. 
(2) That such hardship is not shared generally by other
properties in the same zoning district and the same
vicinity. 
(3) That the authorization of such variance will not be of 
substantial detriment to adjacent property and that the
character of the district will not be changed by thegranting of the variance. 
Packer, 267 S.E.2d at 142.   
64 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
                         
   
 
 
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
reversing the zoning board’s decision, the court cautioned as 
follows: 
If, as the Board concluded, one owner of the property
complying with a restriction should be allowed to conformhis structure to neighboring nonconforming structures, then
every such owner would be entitled to do so. A board of 
zoning appeals could, by granting variances piecemeal,
ultimately nullify a zoning restriction  throughout the 
zoning district. 
But the statute provides that all
variances shall be in harmony with the intended spirit andpurpose of the ordinance . . . . 
Id. (emphasis added).40 
The principle that existing nonconformity should not 
serve as the basis for additional nonconformity is itself 
reflected in the LUO, which provides while nonconforming uses 
and structures may be repaired and rebuilt, “constraints are 
placed on [the] nonconformities to facilitate eventual conformity with the provisions of the [LUO].” ROH § 21-4.110. 
Thus, although the LUO allows existing nonconforming uses to 
continue, the expressed intent of the LUO is to reduce the 
extent of nonconformity over time. 
The Director’s finding of a “large number of 
nonconforming uses and structures” in the area is not a valid 
basis for granting another nonconforming use. If nonconforming 
40 The Supreme Court of Virginia also noted that “[p]roximity to the
ocean is doubtless a ‘privilege or convenience’ coveted by every homeowner 
along the beach,” “[b]ut a zoning restriction upon that privilege does notconstitute an ‘unnecessary hardship’ within the meaning of the Code.” Id. at 
142. 
65 
  
 
 
 
   
 Not be Contrary to the Intent and Purpose of the Zoning
Ordinance 
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
use is so pervasive that it is shared by the majority of 
properties in a zoning district, the proper remedy is to seek an 
amendment to the zoning ordinance, not a variance. See Levy v. 
Bd. of Standards & Appeals of N.Y.C., 196 N.E. 284 (N.Y. 1935); Appeal of Michener, 115 A.2d 367 (Pa. 1955). 
Thus, the presence 
of existing nonconformities in the neighborhood to justify new noncomformities constitutes incompetent evidence, and the 
Director’s reliance on such evidence undermines the protection 
of Waikiki’s unique identity and dilutes the intended effect of the Coastal Height Setback. 
Consequently, there is not reliable, probative, and 
substantial evidence on the whole record supporting the 
Director’s conclusion that Kyo-ya’s request to encroach 74 
percent into the Coastal Height Setback would not alter the 
essential character of the neighborhood, and thus the third 
requirement of the variance test was not satisfied. 
ii.
Although we hold that the Director’s conclusion that 
the third requirement of the variance test was met is clearly 
erroneous, we also review whether the Director properly 
concluded that the variance would not be contrary to the intent 
and purpose of the zoning ordinance. Thus, we consider the 
intent and purpose of the WSD and Coastal Height Setback and the 
66 

  
 
 
 
  
 Intent and Purpose of the WSD 
  
 
  
  
 
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Director’s conclusion that a 74 percent encroachment would not 
be contrary to such intent and purpose. 
a.
The WSD was enacted by the City Council in 1976 in 
response “to the rapid development of the 1960s and 1970s, and 
the changes produced by that development,” in order “to guide carefully Waikiki’s future and protect its unique Hawaiian 
identity.” ROH § 21-9.80. 
The Council stated, “Waikiki needs to maintain its 
place as one of the world’s premier resorts in an international 
market; yet, the  sense of place that makes Waikiki unique needs 
to be retained and enhanced
.” Id. (emphasis added). The WSD 
provides, “The design of buildings and structures in the [WSD] should always reflect a Hawaiian sense of place, as outlined in 
the [district’s] design controls.” ROH § 21-9.80. 
“Just as there is no universally accepted definition 
of ‘aloha,’ there is no universally accepted definition of a 
Hawaiian sense of place.” 
WSD Design Guidebook  at 3. Although 
there is no universal definition of “Hawaiian sense of place,” the guidebook contains the following discussion of what 
“Hawaiian sense of place” means within the context of 
development in the WSD: 
The concern that Waikiki has lost some of its appeal as a 
tropical beach resort raises many questions about its
future. A common opinion is that Waikiki needs to improve 
67 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
its physical attractiveness and enjoyment for residents, 
employees and visitors, by restoring the images and
experiences which make it unique. A Hawaiian sense of 
place  is not just a particular architectural style which 
echoes our historical past, but is also  a reflection of
attitudes,  experiences, place, spaces and symbols which we 
have embraced as reminders of and contributors to a uniquely Hawaiian experience.  
WSD Design Guidebook  at 5 (emphases added). In particular, 
“[d]esign in Waikiki should compose spaces and elements in a way 
that encourages experiencing the natural environment.” Id. 
(emphasis added). 
To contribute to the goal of establishing and 
preserving a Hawaiian sense of place, “[a]ll projects in Waikiki 
will be expected to make an appropriate contribution,” and 
“[n]ew developments will be required to demonstrate a high degree of compliance with applicable objectives, guidelines and 
standards.
” Id. (emphasis added). Additionally, “[t]he 
renovation of existing buildings will be expected to comply to the extent possible.” 
Id. 
Consequently, the City Council’s intent and purpose in 
establishing the WSD was first and foremost to protect, retain, and enhance a Hawaiian sense of place by restoring the 
experiences, places, and spaces that make Waikiki unique. 
b. 
Intent 
and Purpose of the Coastal Height Setback 
Although each provision of the WSD is designed to 
reflect a Hawaiian sense of place, few can endeavor to achieve this far-reaching goal as effectively as the Coastal Height
68   
 
 
 
   
 
   

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Setback, which was designed to maximize public safety, the sense 
of open space, lateral access along the beach, and public 
enjoyment of Hawaii’s coastal resources. ROH § 21-9.80-4(g)(2); 
WSD Design Guidebook at 4, 25. Additionally, the Coastal Height 
Setback, together with the other provisions of the WSD, is 
intended to reduce the perception of crowding, enhance the 
aesthetics of Waikiki, and generally impart a greater sense of 
Hawaiiana into the built environment. Id. 
For example, although requirements pertaining to 
landscaping and building materials undoubtedly affect the Hawaiian sense of place in Waikiki, they do not directly impact 
lateral access along the beach, the public’s enjoyment of 
coastal resources, or the sense of open space and perception of 
crowding. 
Thus, among the restrictions put in place by the WSD, 
the Coastal Height Setback uniquely affects the preservation of Waikiki’s Hawaiian sense of place. 
c. Director’s Findings on Intent and Purpose of the Ordinance 
The City Charter provides that the third requirement 
is satisfied only if “ the request , if approved, will not alter 
the essential character of the neighborhood nor be contrary to 
the intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance.” RCCCH § 6-1517 
(emphases added). Accordingly, because Kyo-ya’s variance application sought approval to encroach into the Coastal Height 
69 

  
 
 
 
   
                         
   
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Setback, the Director’s evaluation should have focused on 
whether granting the variance application--i.e., a requested 74 
percent encroachment into the Coastal Height Setback--would be 
contrary to the intent and purpose of the Coastal Height Setback 
and the WSD. See N. Bergen Action Grp. v. N. Bergen Twp. 
Planning Bd., 585 A.2d 939, 944 (N.J. 1991) (“Because zoning restrictions are enacted to further municipal planning and 
zoning objectives, it is fundamental that resolutions granting 
variances undertake to reconcile the deviation authorized . . . with the municipality’s objectives in establishing the 
restriction.”). 
However, rather than considering whether the variance 
request
--i.e., a 74 percent encroachment into the Coastal Height 
Setback--was contrary to the intent and purpose of the WSD and the Coastal Height Setback, the Director evaluated whether the 
Project was consistent with three of the fourteen WSD “objectives.”
41 Consequently, the Director made no findings and 
41 Additionally, the three objectives relied upon by the Director do
not show that the Project would not be contrary to the intent and purpose of 
the WSD. First, the Director found that the Project would “[p]rovide for the
ability to renovate and redevelop existing structures which otherwise mightexperience deterioration.” However, this WSD objective, which concerns the
renovation of existing structures, has little bearing on the variance
application in this case because, as discussed, the record does not show that
the existing DHT may not be renovated or replaced without the variance.
Thus, consideration of this WSD objective is not implicated by the varianceapplication. 
See  Ten Stary Dom P’ship v. Mauro,  76 A.3d 1236, 1245 (N.J. 
2013).  
(continued . . .)
70   
 
 
 
                                                                                
 
 
 
  
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
provided no analysis as to whether the 74 percent encroachment 
would be contrary to the intent of the Coastal Height Setback, 
which is to reduce the perception of crowding, and maximize the 
sense of open space, lateral access along the beach, and public 
enjoyment of the coastal resources. Nor did the Director’s 
findings address whether the proposed 74 percent encroachment 
would protect, retain, and enhance a Hawaiian sense of place by 
restoring the experiences, places, and spaces that make Waikiki 
unique. The Director appears to have misapprehended the applicable legal standard set forth in the ordinance, having 
made no findings with respect to the effects of the 74 percent 
encroachment. Thus, the Director’s conclusion that the 
(continued . . .) 
The Director’s second finding that the Project is consistent with
the WSD objective for “creative development” did not reference the full text
of the objective, which requires the Project to be “able to facilitate the
desired character of Waikiki  for areas susceptible to change.”  L UO § 21­
9.80-1(h) (emphasis added).  The enactment of the Coastal Height Setback
indicates that the City Council concluded that development close to the
shoreline was to be strictly limited. Accordingly, a building that
substantially encroaches into the Coastal Height Setback would not appear to
be consistent with the “desired character of Waikiki.” 
The Director’s third finding was that the Project “provides a
better public access to the beach, [and] view channels from Kalakaua Avenueto the ocean.” 
However, the objective relied upon begins as follows:
“Maintain, and improve where possible: mauka views from public viewing areas in Waikiki, especially from public streets.” LUO § 21- 9.80-1(j).  Replacing
an 8-story building with a 26- story tower adjacent to the shoreline would not 
appear to increase the mauka view from the public viewing area of WaikikiBeach. 
71 
  
 
 
 
 
***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
encroachment would not be contrary to the intent and purpose of 
the zoning ordinance is based on an error of law. 
By the same token, the Director’s analysis must be 
focused on “those purposes of zoning that are actually 
implicated or triggered by the requested relief” rather than the 
Project as a whole. See Ten Stary Dom P’ship v. Mauro,  76 A.3d 
1236, 1245 (N.J. 2013) (“[N]ot every deviation from prescribed bulk standards implicates the same concerns.”). Accordingly, as 
stated, the Director’s findings should have evaluated the impacts of a 74 percent encroachment into the Coastal Height 
Setback on a Hawaiian sense of place, the perception of 
crowding, sense of open space, and public enjoyment of the 
coastal resources--purposes that are actually implicated by the 
requested variance. Instead, the Director made findings as to 
the Project’s compliance with selected objectives of the WSD 
rather than on the impacts of the encroachment as related to the intent and purpose of the Coastal Height Setback and WSD. Thus, 
the Director’s findings did not, as required by the City 
Charter, “specify the particular evidence which supports the 
granting of the variance.” RCCCH § 6-1517. 
Finally, even if consideration of the Project, rather 
than the effects of granting the variance application, were the 
correct measure for issuance of a variance, the Director’s 
72 

  
 
 
 
  
  

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
summary findings as to the three WSD objectives were clearly 
insufficient to support a conclusion that a 74 percent 
encroachment is not contrary to the intent and purpose of the 
Coastal Height Setback and the WSD. This is particularly true 
when the magnitude of the variance is significant. “[I]t is 
self-evident that the greater the disparity between the variance 
granted and the ordinance’s restriction, the more compelling and 
specific the proofs must be that the grant of the variance” will 
not be contrary to the intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance. 
N. Bergen Action Grp., 585 A.2d at 944. 
As further explained by the Supreme Court of New 
Jersey, 
an impingement of the zoning restrictions may be of varying
degrees[;] [t]he less of an impact, the more likely the
restriction is not that vital to valid public interests.Conversely,
 where the change sought is substantial, the 
applicant will have to demonstrate more convincingly thatthe variance will not be contrary to the public good  and 
general welfare expressed in the ordinance.  
Chirichello v. Zoning Bd. of Adjustment of Monmouth Beach,  397 
A.2d 646, 654 (N.J. 1979) (emphasis added); cf. McPherson, 67 
Haw. at 606, 699 P.2d at 29 (holding that the requisite evidence 
that must be adduced to satisfy the variance requirements involves proof of a rather narrow and somewhat technical set of 
facts). 
In this case, because of the great disparity of Kyo­
ya’s request from the ordinance’s restriction--an encroachment 
73 

  
 
 
 
                          
  
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of 74.3 percent into the Coastal Height Setback--“the more 
compelling and specific the proofs must be that the grant of the 
variance” will not be contrary to the intent and purpose of the 
zoning ordinance. Thus, the findings set forth in the 
Director’s Decision are markedly inadequate in light of the 
magnitude of the requested encroachment into the Coastal Height 
Setback. Further, the lack of specificity in the Director’s 
findings does not allow this court to conduct a meaningful 
review of the Director’s Decision regarding this aspect of the third requirement of the variance test.
42 See also Gougeon v. 
Bd. of Adjustment of Stone Harbor,  245 A.2d 7, 10 (N.J. 1968) 
(“Supporting and explanatory facts and factual findings for the 
conclusions must be set forth. Unless such facts and findings 
are recited, a reviewing court cannot determine whether the 
Board acted properly and within the limits of its authority.”). 
In summary, in concluding that the Project was 
consistent with the intent and purpose of the ordinance, the Director erred for several reasons. 
First, the Director did not 
make findings demonstrating that the variance request --a 74 
42 The Director’s findings did not expressly take into consideration
the effects of the magnitude of the requested encroachment on the intent and
purpose of the Coastal Height Setback and WSD. Thus, on the face of the
Director’s Decision, it is not clear that the Director appropriately weighedthe extent of the proposed encroachment against the intent and purpose of the
ordinance. 
74 
  
 
 
 
 
***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
percent encroachment into the Coastal Height Setback--was not 
contrary to the intent and purpose of the WSD and the Coastal 
Height Setback, and instead the Director relied entirely on the 
Project’s compliance with portions of three of fourteen WSD 
objectives. Second, the Director did not evaluate the impacts 
implicated by the variance request in relation to the purpose of 
the zoning ordinance. Third, the Director’s analysis did not 
expressly take into consideration the extent of the variance 
requested, and thus his abbreviated findings were insufficient 
to conclude that a 74 percent encroachment into the Coastal 
Height Setback was not contrary to the intent and purpose of the 
zoning ordinance. 
Accordingly, the Director’s finding that the Project 
is consistent with “several important WSD objectives” 
misapprehended applicable law, and the Director’s conclusion 
that a 74 percent encroachment into the Coastal Height Setback was not contrary to the intent and purpose of the zoning 
ordinance was not supported by findings that “specify the 
particular evidence which supports the granting of the 
variance.” 
RCCCH § 6-1517. Consequently, the third requirement 
of the variance test was not satisfied. 
75 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 

***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
VI. Conclusion 
In order for the Director to grant a variance request, 
the applicant must satisfy each requirement of the variance 
test. Here, none of the requirements were met. Accordingly, 
the circuit court’s judgment, the ZBA Order, and the Director’s 
Decision are reversed. See Town v. Land Use Comm’n, 55 Haw. 
538, 550, 524 P.2d 84, 92 (1974). 
Linda M. B. Paul  
for petitioners
Surfrider Foundation et al. /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
/s/ Michael D. WilsonPeter T. Kashiwa, 
Lisa Woods Munger,
Randall C. Whattoff, David J. Hoftiezer and Lisa A. Bail 
for respondent Kyo-ya
Hotels & Resorts, LP  
William Meheula and Natasha Baldauf for respondent 20,000Friends of Labor 
Donna Y. L. Leong,
Don S. Kitaoka and 
Brad T. Saito 
for respondent Departmentof Planning and PermittingCity and County of Honolulu 
 
76 

