 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I  
 
 
 
 
SCAP-16-0000588 
 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT 
OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
  
 
 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., M
cKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., AND 
 
 
CIRCUIT JUDGE KUBO, IN PLACE OF NAKAYAMA, J., RECUSED  
 
 
 
OPINION  OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.
  
 
 
 
  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   ***  
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAP-16-0000588 15-JUN-2017 10:05 AM 
KRISHNA NARAYAN; SHERRIE NARAYAN; VIRENDRA NATH; NANCY MAKOWSKI; 


SIMON YOO; SUMIYO SAKAGUCHI; STEPHEN XIANG PANG; FAYE WU LIU; 
 
MASSY MEHDIPOUR, individually and as Trustee for Massy Mehdipour
 
  
Trust dated June 21, 2006; G. NICHOLAS SMITH; TRISTINE SMITH; 
 
CLIFFORD W. CHAFFEE; BRADLEY CHAFFEE, individually and as 
 
Trustee of the Charles V. Chaffee BRC Stock Trust dated 12/1/99 
 
and The Clifford W. Chaffee BRC Stock Trust dated 1/4/98; GARY 
 
S. ANDERSON; RONALD W. LORENZ and RENEE Y. LORENZ, 
 
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
  
 
 
vs. 
 
 
 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF KAPALUA BAY CONDOMINIUM; 
 
CATHY ROSS; ROBERT PARSONS; and ANDREW MITCHELL, 
 
 
Defendants-Appellees. 
 
 
(CAAP-16-0000588; S.P. NO. 16
-1-0043 RAN)
 
JUNE 15, 2017  
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
                     
   

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
I. Introduction 
This is the third opinion in a series of recent decisions 
addressing an arbitrator’s statutory disclosure requirements and 
vacatur on the basis of evident partiality based on 
Hawaii  
Revised Statutes (“HRS”) §§  658A–12 and  -23 (Supp. 2001); see  
Noel Madamba Contracting LLC v. Romero, 137 Hawai i 1, 364 P.3d 
518 (2015); 
Nordic PCL Const., Inc. v. LPIHGC, LLC, 136 Hawai i 
29, 358 P.3d 1 (2015). Nordic  and Madamba  established standards  
for evaluating claims of evident partiality. Here, we clarify 
the scope of relationships that require disclosure.  
Krishna Narayan, Sherrie Narayan, Virendra Nath, Nancy 
Makowski, Simon Yoo, Sumiyo Sakaguchi, Stephen Xiang Pang, Faye 
Wu Liu, Massy Mehdipour, G. Nicholas Smith, Tristine Smith, 
Clifford W. Chaffee, Bradley Chaffee, Gary S. Anderson, and 
Ronald W. Lorenz (collectively, “
Appellants ”), appeal from an 
August 15, 2016 final judgment of the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (“circuit court”) ,1 based upon its findings of fact, 
conclusions of law, and order confirming an arbitration award in favor of the Respondents, Association of Apartment Owners of 
Kapalua Bay Condominium, Cathy Ross, Robert Parsons, and Andrew 
Mitchell (collectively, the “AOAO”). 
The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
2
 1     
 
  
                     
  
 
 
 
 

 2 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
This case concerns  a dispute over  financial issues that 
arose during construction of the Kapalua Bay Condominium project 
(the “Project”). Appellants  are a group of individual 
condominium owners in the Kapalua Bay Condominium. Previously, Appellants and several other condominium owners sued the 
Project’s developers and management companies re garding 
financial problems that arose during construction (the 
“Developer Action”). See Narayan v. Ritz -Carlton Dev. Co., 
Inc., 135 Hawai i 327
 , 350 P.3d 995 (2015).  2   The present matter 
arose from the Appellants’  challenge of  the AOAO’s vote  to 
convert the residential community into a hotel. The dispute was 
submitted to arbitration. The issues on  appeal relate to the 
adequacy of the neutral arbitrator’s  disclosures in the 
arbitration. The circuit court concluded that the undisclosed relationships did n ot constitute “evident partiality” requiring 
vacatur. We affirm.  
 
At issue before this court in the Developer Action was whether the 
condominium owners had entered into a valid agreement to arbitrate. This 
court concluded that the condominium owners did not unambiguously assent to 
arbitration and, therefore, the purported agreement to arbitrate was 
unenforceable. See Narayan , 135 Hawaii at 335, 350 P.3d at 1003.  On January 
11, 2016, the United States Supreme Court vacated this court’s judgment and 
remanded the case for further consideration in light of DIRECTV, Inc. v. 
Imburgia, 136 S. Ct. 463 (2015). See  Ritz -Carlton Dev. Co. v. Narayan, 136 
S. 
Ct. 800 (2016). The parties have recently filed supplemental briefs and 
the remanded action is pending disposition. 
3
     
 
  
  
  
 
 
                     
  
 
 
   
 

 3 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
II. Background 
A. Arbitration Proceedings 
1. Initial Disclosures and Pre- arbitration Motions 
The matter was originally submitted to the American 
Arbitration Association but, by agreement of the parties, was 
referred to Dispute Prevention & Resolution, Inc. (“DPR”) on 
July 24, 2014. 
The parties selected the Honorable  Victoria 
Marks (ret.) to serve as the neutral arbitrator (the 
3  “Arbitrator”) on August 1, 2014.  After her selection, DPR 
provided the parties with the following disclosures on her 
behalf: 
I am not familiar with any of the parties. 
Both Mr. Cox and Ms. Luke appeared before me when I was on 
the bench.[4]  
I served as an arbitrator in a case where Mr. Cox represented one of the parties.  That case was resolved 
before the arbitration hearing. 
My husband, Robert A. Marks, is a lawyer who is Of Counsel 
at Price Okamoto Himeno & Lum. I do not know the identity of all of my husband’s clients. 
Similarly, I am not aware 
of all the cases  he is working on and what lawyers he may 
be working with or opposing. I do not believe that he 
In some arbitrations with more than one arbitrator, arbitrators are 
appointed by parties without an expectation of neutrality. It is not uncommon in commercial arbitrations with three arbitrators for each party to appoint one non- neutral arbitrator each; the two non -neutral arbitrators then 
appoint a neutral arbitrator by agreement. See  Daiichi Hawai
 i Real Estate 
Corp. v.  Lichter, 103 Hawai i  325, 343 -44, 82 P.3d 411, 429 -30 (2003).  See  
generally, Seth H. Lieberman, Something’s Rotten in the State of Party -
Appointed Arbitration: Healing ADR’s Black Eye That is “Nonneutral Neutrals,” 5 Cardozo J. of Conflict Resol. 215 (2004) for a discussion of the 
differences between neutral arbitrators and non -neutral party
-appointed 
arbitrators. 
Joachim P. Cox, Esq., represents the Appellants and Michele- Lynn Luke, 
Esq., represents the AOAO. 
4
 4     
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
currently has any cases with any of the lawyers in this 
matter. Similarly, I do not believe that he is familiar 
with any of the parties or their principals. 
I  am on the Board of the following organizations:  1) The 
Mediation Center of the Pacific; 2) The Hawaii Women’s 
Legal Foundation; 3) The American Judicature Society -Hawaii 
Chapter; 4) United Cerebral Palsy Association of Hawaii; and 5) The Hawaii Soccer As
sociation.  The first 3 
organizations are law related and lawyers from various firms in Honolulu [ –] large firms to solo practitioners –  
sit on these boards. In addition, the board members change 
from year- to-year.  
I am also a social golf member of MidPacific [sic] Country Club. 
I am not familiar with all of the members of this 
club. 
Counsel and the parties should inform the arbitrator and 
each other of any additional information that a reasonable 
person would consider likely to affect the impartiality of 
the arbitrator. 
I believe that I can be a fair and impartial arbitrator in 
this matter. 
The parties submitted their expert disclosures and reports in 
March and September  2015.   The witness lists were submitted in 
October 2015.    
On September 15, 2015, one  month before the arbitration 
hearing started, Appellants  moved to exclude  the AOAO’s  expert 
on condominium governance , Philip Nerney, Esq. (“Nerney”).    
Appellants argued, inter alia , that Nerney  was providing 
improper and unfounded legal conclusions on liability.   The 
Arbitrator granted this motion in part and denied it in part, 
and precluded Nerney from testifying r egarding any party’s 
intent and damages, but he was allowed to testify on condominium 
governance issues.   
5
     
 
   
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
                     
 
  
 
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2. Arbitration Hearing 
The arbitration hearing was conducted in several sessions 
from October 19, 2015 through November 12, 2015. 
The AOAO’s expert on damages, Richard Stellmacher 
(“Stellmacher”), testified at the hearing. Among other things, 
Stellmacher testified that he originally visited the Project 
when an attorney for the Developer Action briefly retained him. 
He misidentified the attorney during his oral testimony and 
subsequently submitted a declaration5 clarifying tha t he “had 
been retained by [a]ttorney Lex Smith [(“Smith”)], on behalf of his clients, which included certain Marriott entities, involved 
in other litigation.”
6 The declaration also stated that 
Stellmacher “contacted Mr. Smith” to confirm that his work wa s 
terminated shortly after he visited the property and that he was 
not provided any work product related to the matter. Over 
Appellants’ hearsay objection, the Arbitrator admitted the 
declaration into evidence. 
5   Stellmacher orally identified John Sopuch (“Sopuch”) of the Starn 
O’Toole Marcus & Fisher law firm.  Appellants  moved to strike Stellmacher’s  
expert opinions because his involvement with Sopuch in this matter would have 
created a conflict with one of the plaintiffs named in the arbitration.  The 
AOAO  submitted Stellmacher’s declaration in response to this motion.   The 
declaration clarified that  Stellmacher had named Sopuch by mistake, with the 
confusion caused by the fact that Sopuch hired Stellmacher’s firm in 
connection with a separate matter, and that he had not been retained by 
Sopuch or by the Starn O’Toole firm in connection with the Proje ct.  
6 Smith is an attorney with the Kobayashi Sugita & Goda law firm, which 
served as counsel in the Developer Action to the original developers of the 
Project. 
6
     
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
  
  
    

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On January 7, 2016, the Arbitrator issued her final 
arbitration award in favor of the AOAO. 
3. Post-award Disclosure Demands 
On January 13, 2016, Appellants requested that DPR provide 
updated disclosures “pursuant to DPR Arbitration Rule 9A and HRS 
§ 658A-12” relating to the AOAO, counsel for the AOAO, in-house 
counsel for the AOAO, and the AOAO’s witnesses and experts. DPR 
responded that it would not provide a substantive response to Appellants’ request as “neither the applicable DPR Arbitration 
Rules nor the relevant provisions of the Uniform Arbitration 
Statute (HRS Chapter 658A) provide for a post arbitration award 
disclosure process[.]” On February 3, 2016, Appellants sought 
additional disclosures regarding the Arbitrator’s relationship 
with the Kobayashi Sugita & Goda (“ KSG”) law firm. DPR 
responded once again that it would not provide a post-
arbitration disclosure. 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings 
1. Motion to Confirm, Motion to Vacate, and Discovery 
In the meantime, the AOAO filed a special proceeding in the 
circuit court to confirm  the arbitration award.   Before filing 
their memorandum in opposition, Appellants  filed a Notice of 
Taking Deposition upon Written Questions of AOAO  counsel Robert  
C. Kessner, Esq., and his  law firm;  the AOAO’s in -house counsel, 
Peter Horovitz, Esq.; and the AOAO  ’s expert witness, Nerney .  
7
     
 
  
     
 
   
 
  
 
   
                     
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 

 7 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Appellants also filed a Notice of Taking Deposition upon Written 
Questions of KSG, the law firm that briefly retained Stellmacher 
for the Developer Action but did not represent the AOAO and had 
no direct involvement in the arbitration proceedings.7 
Appellants also moved to vacate the award on grounds of 
evident partiality due to the Arbit rator’s refusal to provide 
post-award supplementary disclosures. Appellants alleged that 
the AOAO’s position had no basis in law or the applicable 
bylaws, that the Arbitrator “oddly adopted [the AOAO’s] 
unsupported interpretation of the law,” and that “the 
Arbitrator’s findings fly in the face of the law.” Appellants 
stated that they demanded post-award disclosures because they 
Discovery from an arbitrator or arbitration organization pursuant to 
HRS § 658A- 14 (Supp. 2001) is discussed in the text, infra. With respect to 
court rules governing discovery, according to Hawai i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(“HRCP”) Rule 81(g) (2006), Chapter V of the HRCP relating to depositions and 
discovery (HRCP Rules 26 through 37) is applicable to HRCP Rule 81(a)(5) 
(2006) “[a]pplications to a circuit court under chapter 658 [sic] relating to 
arbitration, and proceedings thereon prior to judgment.” Rule 81(g )(1) also 
provides: 
the court may by order direct that said Chapter V shall not be applicable to the proceeding if the court for good cause 
finds that the application thereof would not be feasible or 
would work an injustice[.] 
Although the propriety of post -award discovery is not raised as an issue on 
appeal, we note that HRCP Rule 81(g)(1)allows a court to prohibit or restrict 
discovery in court proceedings relating to arbitration if allowing discovery 
“would work an injustice.” Cases restricting post -award discovery include 
Midwest Generation EME, LLC v. Continuum Chem. Corp., 768 F. Supp. 2d 939, 
943 (N.D. Ill. 2010) (“Post -award discovery is rare, and courts have been 
extremely reluctant to allow it. It is often a ‘tactic’ employed by disgruntled or suspicious parties who, having lost the arbitration, are 
anxious for another go at it.” ) (footnote omitted); and Provost v. 
Intrafusion Holding Corp., 926 F. Supp. 2d 532, 537 n.4 (D. Del. 2013) 
(“C
ourts have been understandably hesitant to grant extensive discovery in 
cases alleging arbitrator bias where the complaining party has not presented clear evidence of any impropriety .”). 
8
     
 
    
 
 
 
    
   
 
 
  
  
    
 
 
   
                     
    
 
  

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
were “surprised” by the arbitration award, although they 
acknowledged they had no reason to believe that the Arbitrator 
may be partial to the AOAO during the course of the arbitration. 
Yet, Appellants argued, “the Arbitrator’s disregard for the law     
. . . now coupled with the Arbitrator’s refusal to provide 
appropriate disclosures, calls into question whether there are 
undisclosed relationships with [the AOAO], [the AOAO’s] 
counselor or [the AOAO’s] witnesses which arose during the 
course of the arbitration and — to a reasonable person — may 
have compromised the Arbitrator’s neutrality.” Appellants 
requested that the court continue the hearing given the lack of 
evidence and grant Appellants’ Motion to Compel Production of 
Records from DPR (“Motion to Compel” ), which had been filed 
earlier. 
DPR filed a memorandum in opposition to Appellants’ Motion 
to Compel, arguing that it was both procedurally and 
substantively flawed. The AOAO also filed a memorandum in opposition, arguing that further disclosures by the Arbitrator 
should not be compelled because Appellants failed to make a 
prima facie showing that a ground for vacating the arbitration 
award exists, in accord with HRS § 658A-14(d).
8 
HRS § 658A- 14(d)(Supp. 2001) provides: 
In a judicial, administrative, or similar proceeding, an 
arbitrator or representative of an arbitration organization 
(continued. . .) 
9
 8     
 
  
   
   
 
   
  
                                                                  
 
 
 
 
  
  
   

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Appellants filed a reply memorandum, arguing that they had 
made a prima facie showing of evidence to support a motion to 
vacate with regard to the KSG law firm. Appellants argued that 
the relationship rose to the level of evident partiality because 
KSG had an “extensive relationship” with the Arbitrator. 
Appellants argued that despite KSG’s lack of direct connection 
with the parties to the case, KSG was relevant because 
Stellmacher’s declaration allegedly involved “hearsay testimony” 
by Smith of KSG.9 Appellants also argued that a ruling in their 
favor would have “had severe repercussions to KSG’s client” in the Developer Action, and that “a reasonable person could infer 
that a defense verdict in this arbitration would help the 
Arbitrator to garner KSG’s recommendation to serve in the 
Developer Action, should it be orde red to arbitration. . . .” 
Appellants also alleged that Nerney, the AOAO’s expert witness, 
(continued. . .)  
is not competent to testify, and shall not be required to 
produce records as to any statement, conduct, decision, or 
ruling occurring during the arbitration proceeding, to the 
same extent as a judge of a court of this State acting in a judicial capacity. This subsection does not apply: 
....  
(2) [t]o a hearing on a motion to vacate an award under section 658A -23(a)(1) or (2) if the movant establishes 
prima facie that a ground for vacating the award exists.   
(Emphasis added.) 
Stellmacher’s declaration stated that his “firm records” showed that he 
was retained by Smith, and that he then contacted Smith to confirm that his 
work was shortly terminated after his visit to the property. Appellants 
claimed that when this testimony from Mr. Stellmacher and Mr. Smith was 
admitted, “KSG became . . . a witness.” 
10
 9     
 
  
  
 
 
  

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
had evaded service and had not yet responded to written 
deposition questions regarding a potential relationship with the 
Arbitrator, yet because he “is an attorney,  and condominium 
governing documents often contain arbitration clauses, it is reasonably plausible to anticipate that Mr. Nerney had or has a 
professional relationship that should have been disclosed.”   
Nerney was thereafter deposed upon written interrogatories.  
Nerney testified that the Arbitrator served as a mediator or arbitrator on two cases in which he appeared as an attorney.  
First, he testified that in 2013, he represented a party in a 
matter in which the Arbitrator was selected as an arbitrator. 
Second, he testified that on April 9, 2015, he represented an 
association of apartment owners regarding a request for a 
reasonable accommodation in a half-day mediation with the 
Arbitrator, but the matter was ultimately not resolved by 
mediation. 
Appellants then  moved to compel the Arbitrator to respond 
to the deposition upon 
written questions pursuant to a showing 
of prima facie   evidence.    The circuit court granted Appellants’  
motion, and the Arbitrator was deposed upon written questions. 
She testified, among other things, that she found in favor of 
Nerney’s client on a summary judgment motion in a prior 
11
     
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     
  
 
  	 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
arbitration,10 and that Stellmacher had testified as a witness in 
a prior arbitration at some point in time between January 1, 
2011 and July 24, 2014. 
2.	 Supplemental Memorandum in Support of Appellants’ 
Motion to Vacate 
After months of discovery, Appellants submitted a 
supplemental memorandum in support of their Motion to Vacate.  
Appellants asserted that the Arbitrator had failed to comply 
with the disclosure requirements of HRS § 658A-12(b) by failing 
to disclose facts learned by the Arbitrator after accepting 
appointment that a reasonable person would consider likely to 
affect the impartiality of the Arbitrator.  Appellants claimed 
that the following disclosures were not provided: 
(1) the Arbitrator recently presided over an arbitration 
involving [the AOAO’s] damages expert;  
(2) [The AOAO’s] expert on condominium governance, Philip 
Nerney, Esq. —- on whom the Arbitrator primarily relied in 
rendering her award —- had a mediation before the 
Arbitrator while the above -captioned matter was pending and 
a prior arbitration in which the Arbitrator found in Mr. 
Nerney’s client’s favor on a motion fo r summary judgment; 
and  
(3) the law firm of a hearsay witness had an extensive 
relationship with the Arbitrator, including at least two mediations during the pendency of this arbitration and two 
referrals to the Arbitrator.  
Following the completion of briefing, the court held a hearing 
on the motion to confirm the arbitration award and the motion to 
vacate. The circuit court found in favor of the AOAO, denied 
The Arbitrator testified that Nerney was counsel to a party in a matter 
in which she presided as an arbitrator at some point between January 1, 2011 
and July 24, 2014. 
12
 10     
 
  8.   At the outset, the Arbitrator complied with her 
duty to make a “reasonable inquiry” upon being informed of 
the parties’ proposed witnesses (lay and expert) in 
September and October, 2015, prior to commencement of the 
arbitration proceedings. In other words, as it pertains to Stellmacher, the KSG law firm, and Mr. Nerney, none of 
these “relationships” or “facts” are such “that a 
reasonable person would consider likely to affect [the 
Arbitrator’s] impartiality,” necessitati ng their 
disclosure.  
 9. None of these “facts” or “relationships” rise to 
the level of “evident partiality.”  Compare with Madamba, 
where the court held that failure by the arbitrator during 
the pendency of the arbitration proceedings to disclose his prospective relationship with the Cades Schutte law firm 
(counsel for respondent Romero) where there existed a 
“concrete possibility” that the Cades Schutte law firm 
would be handling his personal retirement accounts, 
constituted undisclosed facts showing a “r easonable 
impression of partiality ,” sufficient to support vacatur.  
 
  
 
 
 
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the motion to vacate, and granted the motion to confirm the 
arbitration award.   The court found that the Arbitrator complied 
with her duty to make a “reasonable inquiry” into possible 
conflicts and that none of the relationships challenged by 
Appellants rose to a level that would require disclosure  .  The 
court’s relevant  conclusions were as follows:  
10. The facts are undisputed that as between the 
Arbitrator and Stellmacher, the only association or dealing 
was that of Stellmacher having testified as a witness in a 
prior arbitration, for which [the Arbitrator] served as the 
arbitrator at some point in time between January 1, 2011 
and July 24, 2014. 
Moreover, as noted by the Madamba 
court, in adopting Justice Black’s reasoning in 
Commonwealth Coatings Corp. v. Continental Casualty Co., 
393 U.S. 145, 89 S.Ct. 337, 21 L.Ed.2d. 301 (1968), it 
would be incumbent upon the arbitrator to disclose to the 
parties any dealings that might create an impression of 
possible bias. The association between the Arbitrator and 
Stellmacher was not substantive in nature.  The dealings 
between the Arbitrator and Stellmacher do not create an 
impression of possible bias. 
11. The facts are undisputed that as between the 
Arbitrator and the KSG law firm, their association occurred 
sometime between January 1, 2011 and January 7, 2016, as 
[the Arbitrator] had been selected as an arbitrator on five 
(5) matters in which the KSG law firm represented a party 
13
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and also served as a mediator on three (3) matters in which 
the KSG law firm represented a party. The association 
between the Arbitrator and the KSG law firm was not 
substantive in nature. The dealings between the Arbitrator 
and the KSG law firm do not create an impression of 
possible bias. 
12. The facts are undisputed that 1) as between the 
Arbitrator and Mr. Nerney, their association occurred when 
Mr. Nerney appeared as counsel for a party before the 
Arbitrator sometime prior to July 25, 2014 (more than two years before the subject arbitration) and the arbitration 
was decided on a summary judgment motion in favor of Mr. 
Nerney’s client, and 2) sometime in or around April 9, 
2015, Mr. Nerney represented an apartment association 
(owner requested reasonable accommodation) in a half -day 
mediation before the Arbitrator but was not successful. 
The association between the Arbitrator and Mr. Nerney was 
not substantive in nature. The dealings between the 
Arbitrator and Mr. Nerney do not create an impression of 
possible bias. 
The circuit court then entered final judgment.  
C. The Appeal and Application for Transfer 
Appellants  appealed from the circuit court’s final judgment 
confirming the arbitration award.   Appellants  raised the 
following four points of error on appeal:  
A. The Circuit Court erred in concluding, as a matter of 
law that under HRS section 658A -12(b), the Arbitrator need 
not disclose any ongoing or past instances in which she 
served as a neutral and (1) a non- attorney witness appeared 
before her in another matter, or (2) attorney witnesses, one of whom appeared as an expert witness in the subject 
arbitration and the other of whom was a hearsay lay witness, retained her services on behalf of a client in 
other matters. 
B. The Circuit Court erred in finding that the 
Arbitrator’s service as an arbitrator in 2013 in a matter 
in which Mr. Nerney represented a party occurred “more than 
two years before the subject arbitration, ” given that the 
parties initiated the subject arbitration on July 24, 2014. 
C. The Circuit Court impermissibly raised the standard for 
evident par
tiality for nondisclosures by (1) focusing on 
the “substantive nature” of the relationships in 
determining whether it creates a reasonable impression of 
bias, even though the Hawai i Supreme Court has rejected a 
standard that evaluates the substantiality of a 
relationship or interest as being overly narrow and (2) 
14
     
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
separately finding that the relationships do not “rise[] to 
the level of evident partiality” after determining that the 
relationships at issue need not be disclosed.  
D. The Circuit Court erred in finding that the Arbitrator 
made a “ rea
sonable inquiry” into whether any relationships 
or interactions with the parties’ witnesses needed to be 
disclosed, given that the Arbitrator admitted –  during post 
arbitration discovery –  that until recently, she did not 
maintain a list of the witnesses that appeared before her 
and that, with respect to at least one witness, discovery of his prior appearance before her required “considerable 
research” after -the-fact. 
 
This court accepted a transfer of this case from the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) .   
III. Questions on Appeal 
The points of error raised by 
Appellants  are reframed and 
addressed in this decision as follows:  
1. Whether the “substantive nature” of a relationship is 
relevant to a determination that facts would demonstrate a 
reasonable impression of partiality. 
2. Whether an arbitrator has a duty to disclose: 
A. Prior occasions in which a person appearing on a 
witness list appeared before the arbitrator as a lay 
or expert witness in unrelated matters. 
B. Prior dealings with a law firm not involved in 
the present arbitration, where the law firm 
previously retained an expert witness appearing on a witness list. 
C. Prior dealings with a person appearing on a 
witness list where that person served as party 
counsel before the arbitrator in a prior arbitration 
or mediation. 
3. Whether it was clearly erroneous for the circuit court 
to conclude that such undisclosed relationships did not 
create a reasonable impression of partiality. 
IV. Standards of Review 
Judicial review of an arbitration award  is limited to the 
statutory grounds for confirmation, vacatur, modification, and 
15
     
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
correction. See HRS   § 658A-28(a)(3)-(5) (Supp. 2001).  Review 
of a motion to vacate an arbitration award “does not involve 
review of an arbitrator’s finding s of fact or conclusions of 
law.” Nordic,
 136 Hawai i at 42, 358 P.3d at 14  . “Rather, it 
involves review of a circuit court’s factual findings and 
conclusions of law as to whether the statutorily outlined 
grounds for vacatur exist.” Id.    
We review a ci rcuit court’s findings of fact under the 
clearly erroneous standard. Madamba, 137 Hawai i at 8, 364 P.3d 
at 525
. A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when either “the 
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding,” or, 
evidence exists to support the finding, but we are left with 
“the definite and firm conviction in reviewing the entire 
evidence that a mistake has been committed.” Id.  (quoting 
Nordic, 136 Hawai i at 41, 358 P.3d at 13).  We review a circuit 
court’s conclusions of law de novo  under the right/wrong  
standard. Nordic, 136 Hawai i at 41, 358 P.3d at 13  (quoting 
Daiichi, 103 Hawai i at 336, 82 P.3d at 422).   Where a conclusion 
of law presents a mixed question of law and fact, we review this 
conclusion under the clearly erroneous standard.  Madamba, 137 
Hawaii at 8, 364 P.3d at 525  (citing Estate of Klink ex rel. 
Klink v. State, 113 Hawai i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523  (2007)).  
A mixed question of law and fact is a conclusion “dependent upon 
16
     
 
  
 
 
  
                     
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
         	 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the facts and circumstances of the parti cular case.” Price v. 
Zoning Bd. of Appeals , 77 Hawai i 168, 172, 883 P.2d 629, 633 
(1994). 
We review a circuit court’s rulings on a motion to vacate 
for evident partiality under the “clearly erroneous standard” 
where the court’s challenged conclusion was based on “a mixed 
question of law and fact.” Madamba
, 137 Hawai i at 9, 364 P.3d 
at 526. 
In this case, we review the court’s conclusion that the 
arbitrator’s contacts with the AOAO’s  witnesses and an unrelated 
law firm would not give a reasonable person the impression of 
partiality.  
V. Discussion 
A. Standards for Vacatur under HRS § 658A-23(a)(2) 
Judicial review  of a motion to vacate an arbitration award 
“is confined to the strictest possible limits.” Nordic, 136 
Hawai
i at 41, 358 P.3d at 13 (quoting  Daiichi, 103 Hawai i at 
337, 82 P.3d at 423). An arbitration award may be vacated only 
11 upon the grounds specified in HRS § 658A-23.   Pursuant to HRS  
HRS § 658A- 23(a) outlines the grounds for vacatur of an arbitration 
award as follows: 
Vacating award . (a) Upon motion to the court by a party 
to an arbitration proceeding, the court shall vacate an 
award made in the arbitration proceeding if: 
(1) The award was procured by corruption, fraud, or 
other undue means; 
(2)	 There was: 
(continued. . .)  
17
 11     
 
  
 
 
 
                                                                  
 
                 
 
               
             
 
        
 
          
        
 
        
 
  
   

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
§ 658A-23(a)(2)(A), the court must vacate an arbitration award 
if there was evident partiality by an arbitrator appointed to 
serve as a neutral. Madamba, 137 Hawai i at 3, 364 P.3d at 520.  
Evident partiality may be found in two situations: when an 
arbitrator fails to make necessary disclosures to the parties, 
or when additional facts show actual bias or improper motive, 
even if the arbitrator makes the necessary disclosures. See  
Valrose Maui, Inc. v. Maclyn Morris, Inc. , 105 F. Supp. 2d 1118, 
1124 (D. Haw. 2000); see also
 Schmitz v. Zilveti, 20 F.3d 1043
, 
1045-47 (9th Cir. 1994) (distinguishing the evident partiality standards applied in “nondisclosure” cases and “actual bias” 
cases). This court’s recent decisions in Nordic and Madamba  
(continued. . .) 
(A) Evident partiality by an arbitrator 
appointed as a neutral arbitrator; 
(B) Corruption by an arbitrator; or 
(C) Misconduct by an arbitrator prejudicing 
the rights of a party to the arbitration 
proceeding; 
(3) An arbitrator refused to postpone the hearing upon 
showing of sufficient cause for postponement, refused to 
consider evidence material to the controversy, or otherwise 
conducted the hearing contrary to section 658A -15, so as to 
prejudice substantially the rights of a party to the 
arbitration proceeding; 
(4) An arbitrator exceeded the arbitrator’ s powers; 
(5) There was no agreement to arbitrate, unless the person 
participated in the arbitration proceeding without raising the objection under section 658A -15(c) not later than the 
beginning of the arbitration hearing; or (6) The arbitration was conducted without proper notice of 
the initiation of an arbitration as required in section 658A-9 so as to prejudice substantially the rights of a 
party to the arbitration proceeding. 
. . . . 
18
     
 
                      
    
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
have addressed the evident partiality standard in nondisclosure 
cases. 
In a nondisclosure case, evident partiality is found where  
“
undisclosed facts demonstrate a reasonable impression of 
partiality.” Madamba, 137 Hawai i at 10 , 364 P.3d at 527  
(quoting Nordic, 136 Hawai i at 51, 358 P.3d at 23).  Under this 
standard, a finding of evident part iality “is not dependent on a 
showing that the arbitrator was actually  biased, but instead 
stems from the nondisclosure itself.” Id.  (emphasis added). 
The evident partiality standard for nondisclosure cases thus 
reflects the latter part of the rule that “any tribunal 
permitted by law to try cases and controversies not only must be 
unbiased but also must avoid even the appearance of bias.” 
12 Commonwealth Coatings, 393 U.S. at 150   (emphasis added).  
In Nordic, we analyzed the relationship between “ evident 
partiality
” and  the statutory disclosure requirements found in 
HRS § 658A-12 (Supp. 2001), which codify   an arbitrator’s duty to 
In both actual bias and nondisclosure cases, facts necessarily exist 
that create a “reasonable impression of partiality.” In nondisclosure cases, 
the fact that these facts were not disclosed is enough to find evident 
partiality. In “actual bias” cases, where the fact of nondis closure is not 
present, parties must prove specific facts, beyond those disclosed, indicating bias. Thus, if an arbitrator meets the disclosure requirement, 
the party seeking to establish evident partiality faces a higher burden of proof. See Woods v. Sa turn Distrib. Corp., 78 F.3d 424, 427 (9th Cir. 1996) 
(distinguishing the burden of proof in nondisclosure cases as at a lower threshold than actual bias cases). 
19 12     
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
disclose facts that may create an appearance of bias. In 
relevant part, this standard provides: 
§ 658A-12 Disclosure by arbitrator.  (a) Before accepting 
appointment, an individual who is requested to serve as an 
arbitrator, after making a reasonable inquiry, shall disclose  to all parties to the agreement to arbitrate and 
arbitration proceeding and to any other arbitrators any 
known facts that a reasonable person would consider likely 
to affect the impartiality of the arbitrator in the 
arbitration proceeding
, including:  
(1) A financial or personal interest in the outcome of the 
arbitration proceeding; and 
(2) 
An existing or past relationship with any of the 
parties to the agreement to arbitrate or the arbitration 
proceeding, their counsel or representatives, a witness, or 
another arbitrator .
 
(b) An arbitrator has a continuing obligation to disclose 
to all parties to the agreement to arbitrate and 
arbitration proceeding and to any other arbitrators any 
facts that the arbitrator learns after accepting 
appointment 
which a reasonable person would consider likely 
to affect the impartiality of the arbitrator . 
HRS § 658A-12(a)-(b) (emphases added). 
Pursuant to HRS §§ 658A-12(a) and (b), “arbitrators must at 
the outset disclose, then continually disclose throughout the 
course of an arbitration proceeding, any known facts that a 
reasonable person would consider likely to affect the 
arbitrator’s impartiality.” Nordic, 136 Hawai i at 47, 358 P.3d 
at 19. 
Phrased in other ways, an arbitrator must disclose facts 
that reasonably “create an impression of possible bias,” 
Commonwealth Coatings , 393 U.S. at 149, or that demonstrate a 
“reasonable impression of partiality.” Schmitz, 20 F.3d at 1046 
(citation omitted).  
20
     
 
 Nordic

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In addition to codifying the arbitrator’s disclosure 
obligations, HRS § 658A-12(a) provides that “an arbitrator must 
make a reasonable inquiry before accepting appointment” as to 
any potential conflicts that must be disclosed. Nordic, 136 
Hawai
i at 45, 358 P.3d at 17.  In Nordic , we cited the 
Commentary to the Uniform  Arbitration Act ( “UAA”) (2001) 
(hereinafter “Commentary”) to further explain this standard. 
The Commentary stated that the extent of an  arbitrator’s inquiry 
into potential conflicts “may depend upon the circumstances of 
the situation and the custom in a particular industry.” 136 
Hawaii at 45, 358 P.3d at 17  (quoting Nat’l Conference of 
Comm’rs on Unif. State Laws, Uniform Arbitration Act (Last 
Revisions Completed Year 2000)  48 (Dec. 13, 2000), 
http://www.uniformlaws.org/shared/docs/arbitration/arbitration_f 
inal_00.pdf). 
An  arbitrator’s duty to disclose “known facts” thus relates 
to facts already known or discovered upon reasonable inquiry. 
“[W]hat constitutes a reasonable inquiry varies depending on the 
circumstances, and whether the duty of reasonable inquiry has 
been violated is a question of fact.” , 136 Hawai i at 45 , 
358 P.3d at 17. If an arbitrator violates the duty of 
reasonable inquiry and thus fails to acquire “known” facts that 
would otherwise need to be disclosed, such would result i
n the 
21
     
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
same outcome as when an arbitrator knows such facts but fails to 
disclose them. Thus, an arbitrator’s lack of knowledge of 
specific facts is only a defense for nondisclosure if the 
arbitrator had conducted a reasonable inquiry.  
In Nordic, construing  prior case law, we determined that a 
neutral arbitrator’s violation of statutory disclosure 
requirements under HRS § 658A-12(a) or (b) “constitutes ‘evident 
partiality’ as a matter of law.” 136 Hawai i at 50, 358 P.3d at 
22.  We rejected the notion that after determining that an 
arbitrator failed to meet disclosure obligations, “there must 
also be a separate finding that the arbitrator acted with 
‘evident partiality’ or bias before an award can be vacated.” Id. We do not require a separate finding regarding actual bias 
because our case law recognizes evident partiality not only 
“when there is actual bias on the part of the arbitrator, but 
also when undisclosed facts demonstrate a ‘reasonable impression 
of partiality.’” 136 Hawai i at 51, 358 P.3d at 23  (quoting 
Daiichi, 103 Hawai i at 339-40, 82 P.3d at 425-26).  
Since HRS § 658A-12 “explicitly adopted a requirement to 
disclose facts a reasonable person would find likely to affect 
an arbitrator’s impartiality,” and evident partiality under HRS 
§ 658A-
23 exists “when undisclosed facts demonstrate a 
reasonable impression of partiality,” we found that a failure to 
22
     
 
                      
  
   
 
 
 
 
  

 13 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
meet the disclosure obligations under § 658A-12 constituted 
“evident partiality” as a matter of law under § 658A -23(a)(2). 
Nordic, 136 Hawai i at 51, 358 P.3d at 23.13   
In Madamba, we held that a finding of evident partiality 
based on a violation of HRS § 658A
-12(a) or (b) by a neutral  
arbitrator requires  the court to vacate the arbitration award 
pursuant to HRS § 658A-23(a)(2)(A).  137 Hawai i at 16, 364 P.3d 
at 533. We recognized the permissive language of HRS § 658A-
12(d) but found the following:  
The function of the ‘may’ language . . . is to provide 
reference to the different circumstances that require 
vacatur under HRS § 658A -23(a)(2), i.e., a neutral 
arbitrator’s evident partiality, and any arbitrator’s 
corruption or misconduct. For example, if a non -neutral 
arbitrator fails to make a disclosure required under HRS   
§ 658A-12(a) or (b), although the award would not be 
vacated based on evident partiality  —  as evident partiality 
only applies to neutral arbitrators  —  it could be vacated 
based on the corruption and misconduct provisions in HRS   
§ 658A-23(a)(2).  
Compare HRS § 658A -12(e), which provides that “[a]n arbitrator 
appointed as a neutral arbitrator who does not disclose a known, direct, and material intere st in the outcome of the arbitration proceeding or a known, 
existing, and substantial relationship with a party is presumed to act with 
evident partiality under section 658A -23(b)(2).” In Nordic, we did not hold 
that non- disclosure of facts a reasonable person would find likely to affect 
an arbitrator’s impartiality would require immediate vacatur of the 
arbitration award. We cited HRS § 658A -12(d), which provides that “[i]f the 
arbitrator did not disclose a fact as required by subsection (a) or (b), upon timely objection by a party, the court under section 658A -23(a)(2) may vacate 
an award.” 136 Hawai i at 53, 358 P.3d at 25 (emphasis in original).  This 
standard was viewed as being “permissive in nature” and granting courts 
“wider latitude in deciding whether to vacate an award” for failure to meet 
the disclosure requirements. Id. (citing Commentary, supra, at 50). We thus 
stated that the circuit court “has discretion under HRS § 658A-12(d) to 
decide whether or not to grant the motion to vacate.” Id. Our opinion in 
Madamba
 clarified this on the basis of statutory language in HRS § 658A  -
23(a)(2) as applied to an arbitrator appointed as a neutral arbitrator. 
Madamba, 137 Hawai i at 16,  364 P.3d at 533.  
23
     
 
  
 
  

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Id. (citation and footnote  omitted).  We also noted that the 
Commentary “takes into account the fact that jurisdictions have 
developed different views regarding what constitutes evident 
partiality,” so the standard for evident partiality due to 
nondisclosure will differ among jurisdictions that have adopted 
the UAA. 137 Hawai i at 16 n.20, 364 P.3d at 533 n.20 . “[O]ur 
standard for evident partiality based on a failure to disclose 
is equivalent to the standard laid out in HRS § 658A-12’s 
disclosure provisions. Accordingly, in this  context, once 
evident partiality [as to a neutral arbitrator] is established, the arbitration award must be vacated.” Id.  
Based on the standards outlined in 
Nordic and clarified in  
Madamba, an arbitrator’s compliance with the disclosure 
requirements set forth in §§ 658A-12(a) and (b) is paramount to 
the validity of an arbitration award. See  Kay v. Kaiser Found.  
Health Plan, Inc., 119 Hawai i 219, 229 , 194 P.3d 1181, 1191 
(App. 2008)  (framing the disclosure obligation as “the sin e qua  
non” of our review).   In this case, we clarify the scope of the 
arbitrator’s disclosure requirements as well as contextualize 
the reasonable person standard in light of the undisclosed facts 
revealed through post-award discovery.  
B. Framework for Evaluating Nondisclosure Cla
ims 
As established in Nordic, an arbitrator’s failure to 
disclose facts as required under HRS § 658A-12(a) or (b) 
24
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
   

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
constitutes evident partiality as a matter of law, and pursuant 
to Madamba, the circuit court does not have discretion to 
determine whether to vacate an award once evident partiality is 
established as to a neutral arbitrator. However, the circuit 
court plays an essential fact-finding role in determining 
whether the party challenging the award has met its “burden of 
proving facts which would establish a reasonable impression of 
partiality,” Nordic , 136 Hawai
i at 51, 358 P.3d at 24, which 
constitutes “evident partiality.”   The “fundamental standard” of 
the disclosure obligation “is an objective one: disclosure is 
required of facts that a reasonable person would consider likely 
to affect the arbitrator’ s impartiality in the arbitration 
proceeding.” 136 Hawai i at 47, 358 P.3d at 19  (quoting 
Commentary at 47-48)  .   It is thus the circuit court’s role to 
determine whether the undisclosed facts meet this objective 
standard. 
Although we do not venture to pre
-determine a set of 
relationships that will automatically require disclosure, we 
recognize that patterns have emerged. Such patterns may be 
traced to the United States Supreme Court’s seminal decision in 
Commonwealth Coatings , 393 U.S. 145.  In that case, a party to 
the arbitration was one of the arbitrator’s long -time customers 
in his construction consulting business. 393 U.S. at 146. The 
Court found that this business relationship required disclosure, 
25

     
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and that its nondisclosure constituted evident partiality 
warranting vacatur of the arbitration award. 393 U.S. at 150. 
Justice White and Justice Marshall concurred in the 
judgment but clarified that “arbitrators are not automatically 
disqualified by a business relationship with the parties before 
them if both parties are informed of the relationship in 
advance, or if they are unaware of the facts but the 
relationship is trivial.” 393 U.S. at 150 (White, J., 
concurring). Although other jurisdictions have interpreted it 
otherwise, Justice White’s concurrence did not contradict or 
limit the principle adopted by the Court that a failure to 
fulfill disclosure obligations would result in a finding of 
evident partiality warranting vacatur. See Schmitz 
, 20 F.3d at 
1045. Justice White’s concurrence thus did not reject the 
majority’s evident partiality standard, but clarified its 
parameters — namely, that “more than trivial” relationships 
“must be disclosed.” Commonwealth Coatings , 393 U.S. at 152.  
This standard is aligned with HRS § 
658A-12(a), which does not 
require the disclosure of de minimis interests or relationships, 
see Nordic, 136 Hawai i at 47, 358 P.3d at 19 (quoting Commentary 
at 47-48), and Ninth Circuit case law, which does not require 
the disclosure of “long past, attenuated, or insubstantial 
connections between a party and an arbitrator.” New Regency  
26

     
 
   
 
 
14                     

   We note that there is a split of opinion regarding the meaning and the 
weight of Justice White’s concurrence in Commonwealth Coatings,  where many 
jurisdictions characterize Justice Black’s majority opinion as a “plurality 
opinion” and see a conflict between this opinion and Justice White’s 
concurrence. See, e.g., Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Home Ins. Co. , 429 F.3d 
640, 644 n.5 (6th Cir. 2005) (stating that “a majority of” the Commonwealth 
Coatings  Court “did not endorse the ‘appearance  of bias’ standard set forth 
in the plurality opinion”); Morelite Constr. Corp. v. N.Y. City Dist. Council 
Carpenters Benefit Funds , 748 F.2d 79, 83 n.3 (2d Cir. 1984) (stating that 
the two opinions are “impossible to reconcile”). We disagree with this 
characterization of Justice White’s concurring opinion. Justice White, 
joined by Justice Marshall, specifically stated that he was “glad to join” the Court’s “majority opinion” and sought only to make “additional remarks.” 
Commonwealth Coatings, 393 U.S. at 150, 151 n.* (White, J., concurring).  
“Among these additional remarks, Justice White said that arbitrators are not 
held to the partiality standard applicable to judges and that ‘trivial’ or 
‘remote’ relationships need not be disclosed.” Schmitz, 20 F.3d at 1045. 
Justice White’s concurrence does not mention the “appearance of bias” 
standard or imply that it is inappropriate, and both opinions emphasize the 
need for an arbitrator’s full disclosure. Commonwealth Coatings, 393 U.S. at 
151. Thus, Justice White did not reject the majority’s standard, but more specifically defined the parameters of the disclosure requirement. We stated 
in Madamba  that we follow “Justice Black’s reasoning,” in contrast with 
courts that apply “a more stringent definition of evident partiality” based 
on Justice White’s concurrence. 137 Hawai i at 10 n.15, 364 P.3d at 527 n.15. 
We clarify here that our adoption of “Justice Black’s reasoning” does not 
mean we must reject Justice White’s concurrence, as we interpret the 
concurrence as complementary to, rather than conflicting with, the majority 
opinion.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Prods., Inc. v. Nippon Herald Films, Inc. , 501 F.3d 1101, 1110 
(9th Cir. 2007).14 
Patterns emerging in case law have evolved through court 
efforts to identify undisclosed relationships that are “more 
than trivial” and thus require vacatur due to evident 
partiality, and those that are “ too  insubstantial to warrant 
vacating an award.” Commonwealth Coatings , 393 U.S. at 152 
(White, J., concurring) (emphasis added). Courts will weigh factors in a case-by-case approach to determine how a reasonable 
person would objectively perceive the relationship and its 
potential impact on the arbitration proceeding. In Madamba, for 
27
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
example, this court analyzed the “substantive nature” of the 
relationship at issue to determine whether it would give a 
reasonable impression of partiality. 137 Hawai i at 13, 364 P.3d  
at 530. See also In Re Sussex  , 781 F.3d 1065, 1074-75 (9th Cir. 
2015) (discussing the “substantive” nature of the arbitrator’s 
interest). Determining whether a relationship is “substantive” 
may involve the consideration of several factors, including but 
not limited to the directness of the connection (or the degrees 
of separation) between the arbitrator and either party, as well 
as the type of connection or activity at issue, and its timing 
relative to the arbitration proceedings.  
1. Connection 
between the Arbitrator and a Party 
As a threshold matter, 
any analysis of arbitrator 
disclosure requirements is undergirded by the timing issues 
further expounded in subsection (3) below.  This is a necessary 
corollary consideration of the requirement that the undisclosed 
relationship between the arbitrator and a party be one that a 
reasonable person would consider likely to affect the 
arbitrator’s impartiality . The more direct an undisclosed 
connection between the arbitrator and a party, the more likely 
that it will create a reasonable impression of partiality. As 
such, a current direct relationship between an arbitrator and “a 
party, its counsel, principal, or agent” will almost always 
require disclosure. Valrose, 105 F. Supp. 2d at 1124.  
28

     
 
  

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
For example, in Valrose, the United States District Court 
for the District of Hawai i vacated an arbitration award where 
the arbitrator failed to disclose an ex  parte  discussion with 
one of the party’s counsel about serving as a mediator in an 
unrelated case. 105 F. Supp. 2d at 1120, 1125.  Given the 
arbitrator’s direct interaction with a party attorney about a 
matter that would result in a pecuniary benefit to the 
arbitrator, the court found that the nondisclosure of this 
discussion —  and nondisclosure of the arbitrator’s eventual 
appointment as a mediator in the matter  — “was clearly a serious  
failing” and required vacatur of the award.   105 F. Supp. 2d at 
1124. 
Disclosure is also typically required when the
re is a 
recent or current relationship between an arb itrator’s law firm 
or business and a party, its counsel, principal, or agent. See, 
e.g.
, New Regency,  501 F.3d 1101 (vacating an arbitration award 
where the arbitrator, who was an executive for a film company, did not disclose that her company was in negotiations with an 
executive of one of the parties to finance and co-produce a movie); 
Schmitz
, 20 F.3d 1043 (vacating an arbitration award 
where the arbitrator did not disclose that his law firm represented the parent corporation of a party). Disclosure may 
also be required even when it is the arbitrator’s employer that 
has the relationship. 
 See Olson v. Merrill Lynch, Pierce,  
29

     
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Fenner & Smith, Inc. , 51 F.3d 157 (8th Cir. 1995) (vacating an 
award where an arbitrator disclosed that he was an employee of a 
company, but did not disclose his high
-ranking position or the 
fact that the company had an ongoing business relationship with one of the parties). 
The more “attenuated” and less direct the connections 
between a party and an arbitrator, the less likely it will be 
that the relationship will require disclosure, even if those 
relationships are current. 
 New Regency , 501 F.3d at 1110.  In 
United States Wrestling Fed’n v. Wrestling Div. of AAU, Inc. , a 
party sought vacatur because an arbitrator did not disclose that 
his law firm had a relationship with Northwestern University. 
605 F.2d 313, 315-16 (7th Cir. 1979).  Northwestern was neither 
a party to the arbitration nor directly related to one of the 
parties, but instead was one of the 860 other members of the 
NCAA, a founder of one of the parties to the arbitration. 605 
F.2d at 315. This “tenuous chain” was too “remote, uncertain, 
and speculative to require the arbitration award to be set 
aside.” 605 F.2d at 320. 
2. Type of Connection or A
ctivity 
Certain types of relationships will also weigh more heavily 
toward disclosure than others. In Madamba,  we recognized that 
attorney-client relationships carry “heightened import.” 137 
Hawaii at 14, 364 P.3d at 531.  Such recent, current, or 
30

     
 
  
 
   
 
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prospective relationships will almost always require disclosure. 
See id. 
(requiring disclosure of an arbitrator’s prospective 
attorney-client relationship with one of the party counsel’s law 
firms, despite the fact that the arbitrator did not plan to 
interact with the firm “besides paying legal bills”); Beebe Med. 
Ctr., Inc. v. InSight Health Servs. Corp. , 751 A.2d 426, 431 
(Del. Ch. 1999) (requiring disclosure of an attorney-client 
relationship between the arbitrator and the law firm 
representing a party); Schmitz
, 20 F.3d at 1049 (requiring 
disclosure of an attorney-client relationship between the arbitrator’s law firm and a party’s parent company); 
HSMV Corp 
v. ADI Ltd.,
 72 F. Supp. 2d 1122, 1130 (C.D. Cal. 1999) 
(requiring disclosure of an attorney-client relationship between 
an arbitrator’s law firm and a party’s owner);  Houston Vill. 
Builders, Inc. v. Falbaum , 105 S.W.3d 28, 34 (Tex. App. 2003) 
(requiring disclosure of an attorney-client relationship between 
the arbitrator and a trade association of which parties to the arbitration were members); 
but see
 Peabody v. Rotan Mosle, Inc., 
677 F. Supp. 1135, 1138 (M.D. Fla. 1987) (not requiring disclosure of attorney-client relationship between the 
arbitrator’s former law partner’s brother and an expert witness, 
as this relationship was “thrice removed” from the arbitrator 
and thus too attenuated).  
31

     
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
                     
   

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Business relationships and financial dealings will also 
tend to weigh in favor of disclosure, depending on the weight of 
other considerations, including the regularity and recency of 
the dealings, the length of the relationship, and the extent of 
pecuniary interest involved. The best-known example of the kind 
of business relationship requiring disclosure is in the seminal 
case, Commonwealth Coatings , 393 U.S. 145.  As noted in this 
case, a party to the arbitration was one of the arbitrator’s 
regular customers in his construction consulting business. In 
weighing the import of this relationship, the Court acknowledged 
that it was “in a sense sporadic in that the arbitrator’s 
services were used only from time to time at irregular 
intervals,” and that “there had been no dealings between them 
for about a year immediately preceding the arbitration.” 393 
U.S. 
at 146. “Nevertheless, the [party’s] patronage was 
repeated and significant, involving fees of about $12,00015[] 
over a period of four or five years,” and it involved “the 
rendering of services on the very projects involved in this 
lawsuit.” Id.   The Court found that these dealings “might 
create an impression of possible bias” and  would thus require 
disclosure. 393 U.S. at 149.  
Where the relationship 
involves an exchange of money or 
other consideration, it is likely to require disclosure, 
Adjusted for inflation, this would amount to over $85,000 today. 
32
 15     
 
 Even if the relationship does not involve financial 
benefits flowing to the arbitrator, certain exchanges could 
nonetheless be reasonably perceived as a means for one party to 
gain favor. In  Kay, the arbitrator did not disclose that she  
had directly solicited and received a $450 donation from one of 
the parties on behalf of a non-profit medical association during 
the pendency of the arbitration.  119 Hawai i 219, 194 P.3d 1181.  
The ICA noted that there was no evidence that the arbitrator  
received a direct financial benefit from her work, but that it 
was “a significant professional activity that brought h er public 
recognition and enhanced her reputation in the medical 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
particularly if the exchange was recent or ongoing during the 
arbitration. See, e.g., Britz, Inc. v. Alfa-Laval Food & Dairy 
Co., 40 Cal. Rptr. 2d 700, 707 (Cal. App. 1995). In Britz, the 
arbitrator failed to disclose that he was employed by one of the 
party counsel’s law firms as an expert witness in a separate 
matter. Id.   Nondisclosure of this fact was sufficient to 
warrant vacatur for evident partiality, as it established  “a 
current monetary connection.” Id.   Similar circumstances were 
present in Wheeler v. St. Joseph Hosp., where the court vacated 
an award because an arbitrator failed to disclose that he served 
as an expert witness for a party  attorney ’s law firm during the 
pendency of the arbitration. 133 Cal. Rptr. 775 (Cal. App. 1976). 
33

     
 
  In accord with this principle, a relationship is less 
likely to create a reasonable impression of partiality if it was 
one in which “[t]here was nothing tha t one could do to curry 
favor with the other.” Apusento Garden (Guam) Inc. v. Superior 
Court of Guam, 94 F.3d 1346, 1352  (9th Cir. 1996) (quoting 
Lozano v. Maryland Cas. Co., 850 F.2d 1470 (11th Cir. 1988), 
cert. denied , 489 U.S. 1018 (1989)). In Apusento, for example, 
the arbitrator and a party’s expert witness were limited 
partners in a partnership that owned an apartment complex in 
Hawaii. 94 F.3d at 1348. The court characterized the 
arbitrator and expert witness as “passive investors in a limited 
partnership” which “was unrelated to the subject of the 
arbitration.”   94 F.3d at 1353.   According to the court, this 
type of financial relationship did not require disclosure, 
particularly because it was not the kind where either person 
could “curry favor”  with the other. Id.    
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
profession.” 119 Hawai i at 229-30, 194 P.3d at 1191-92.  The 
ICA thus held that the arbitrator needed to disclose that she solicited and received money from the party during the arbitration, regardless of the charitable purposes of her 
activities. 119 Hawai i at 230, 194 P.3d at 1192.  
This situation was paralleled in Lozano
, where a neutral 
arbitrator and a party-appointed arbitrator were both investors 
34
     
 
   
    
 
 
                     
  
 
 

 16 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in two limited partnerships. 850 F.2d at 1471. Although each 
partnership respectively consisted of seven and nine limited 
partners, neither the neutral arbitrator nor the party-appointed 
arbitrator had control over the partnership activities. The 
court compared this financial relationship with “two individuals 
buying the same issue of corporate stock or investing in the same mutual fund” and did not require disclosure. 
Id.16 
3. Timing of the Connection or Activity 
Finally, as noted in the previous sections, 
relationships 
that are not “distant in time, but rather ongoing during the 
arbitration” will weigh most heavily in favor of disclosure, 
while relationships that are “long past” will not. New Regency,  
501 F.3d at 1110; see  Lagstein v. Certain Underwriters at 
Lloyd’s, London,
 607 F.3d 634, 646 (9th Cir. 2010) (rejecting 
the need for disclosure of a relationship between a neutral and party-appointed arbitrator where the connection “occurred more 
than a decade before the arbitration”).  
In some circumstances, personal and familial relationships may also be 
necessary to disclose. In Morelite
, one of the parties to the arbitration 
was a local union, and the arbitrator failed to disclose that his father was 
the vice- president of the international union to which the local union 
belonged. 748 F.2d at 81. The court found that this relationship required 
disclosure based on its “strong feeling that sons are more often than not 
loyal to their fathers, partial to their fathers, and biased on behalf of 
their fathers.” 748 F.2d at 84. In other cases, however, familial 
relationships have not required disclosure.  See  Ruhe v. Masimo Corp.,
 640 
Fed. App’x 685 (9th Cir. 2016) (reversing a finding that a “reasonable 
impression of bias” existed where an arbitrator’s brother represented a 
competitor to one of the parties and had suffered two contentious litigation 
losses to that party). 
35
     
 
  
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Prospective or future relationships will weigh in favor of 
disclosure where there is a “concrete possibility” of such a 
relationship. Madamba, 137 Hawai i at 12, 13, 364 P.3d at 529, 
530 (citing Sussex, 781 F.3d at 1074).  Concrete possibilities  
of a future relationship have been demonstrated through evidence 
of negotiations, communications, or other facts showing that 
steps were taken to further the potential relationship during 
the course of the arbitration. See Madamba , 137 Hawai i at 15, 
364 P.3d at 532 (noting that the part y’s law firm had received 
the arbitrator’s files during the course of the arbitration); 
New Regency, 501 F.3d at 1110 (acknowledging that the 
negotiations were ongoing throughout the arbitration); Valrose, 
105 F. Supp. 2d at 1124 (concerning discussions between the 
arbitrator and party counsel about mediating in an unrelated 
action).  
Unless a party can show a “concrete possibility” of such a 
relationship occurring through direct evidence, allegations of 
future interests or relationships are often too cont
ingent and 
speculative to require disclosure. See Sussex, 781 F.3d at 
1074-75. In Sussex , the arbitrator did not disclose to the 
parties that he had started an investment firm for litigation financing. 
Id.  One party seeking his removal successfully 
argued to the district court that this suggested that the 
arbitrator had a financial interest in the outcome, “because a 
36

     
 
   
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
victory and large financial award for Sussex would help [the 
arbitrator] promote his company, which was designed to generate 
profits from funding large, potentially profitable litigations.” 
781 F.3d at 1070.   The Ninth Circuit rejected this “theory” 
based on its “speculative nature,” noting that the arbitrator did not have a relationship with either party, and his potential 
ability to profit from the award “can best be described as 
‘attenuated’ and ‘insubstantial.’”  781 F.3d at 1074-75 (quoting 
New Regency, 501 F.3d at 1110).   
C. Application of Disclosure Standards to This Case 
1. The Arbitrator’s Connection with Stellmacher 
We first analyze Appellants’ contention that the circuit 
court erred in concluding that the Arbitrator did not need to 
disclose “ongoing or past instances in which she served as a 
neutral and . . . a non-attorney witness appeared before her in 
another matter.” Under the applicable standards of review, we 
hold that it was not clearly erroneous for the circuit court to 
find that the Arbitrator’s connection with Stellmacher did not 
give a reasonable impression of partiality. 
The mere fact that an arbitrator has observed a witness in 
a prior proceeding and therefore may have “had an opportunity to 
evaluate the person and form an opinion as to the person’s credibility[,]” without more, is not a “relationship” that 
requires disclosure. Thus, it was not clearly erroneous for the 
37
     
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
   
 
 
 
                     
  
  

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circuit court to conclude that the Arbitrator’s undisclosed 
“relationship” with Stellmacher did not constitute evident 
partiality. 
2. The Arbitrator’s Connection with KSG 
We next address Appellants’ contention that the circuit 
court erred in concluding that the Arbitrator did not need to 
disclose “ongoing or past instances in which she served as a 
neutral and . . . attorney witnesses, one of whom appeared as an 
expert witness in the subject arbitration and the other of whom 
was a hearsay lay witness, retained her services on behalf of a 
client in other matters.” At the outset, we note that 
Appellants’ claim of error focuses not on the Arbitrator’s relationship with the alleged “hearsay witness,” Smith, but 
Smith’s law firm, KSG, which had retained the Arbitrator in 
17other unrelated matters. 
Under the applicable standard of review, we hold that it 
was not clearly erroneous for the circuit court to conclude that the Arbitrator’s relationship with KSG did not constitute 
evident partiality. Appellants argued that the Arbitrator 
needed to disclose her relationship with KSG because: 
As noted earlier, Smith’s only connection to the arbitration was 
through Stellmacher’s post -arbitration declaration summarizing his 
conversation with Smith regarding who had retained him in the Developer 
action, which confirmed that Stellmacher’s assignment on behalf of the 
Developer had been terminated shortly after he visited the Property and that 
he had received no work product or other documents from Smith or KSG. Smith 
was not a witness in the arbitration proceeding and it is unclear how 
Appellants’ allegations make him a “hearsay witness.” 
38
 17     
 
  
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(1) KSG is representing certain of the original developer 
entities that are adverse to [Appellants] in the Developer 
Action; (2) the Arbitrator relied on Mr. Smith’s[  —- a KSG 
attorney’s  -- ]hearsay testimony in rejecting [ Appellants’ ] 
request for Mr. Stellmacher’s entire file. . . and (3) 
defendants in the Developer Action have continued to press 
for arbitration, appealing the Hawai i Supreme Court’s 
ruling that the arbitration clause is unenforceable to the 
United States Supreme Court.    
Appellants  claimed that the “most disconcerting” aspect of 
the Arbitrator’s nondisclosures regarding KSG was the status of 
the Developer Action. According to Appellants , “the 
Arbitrator’s decision, had it been appropriately in [Appellants’] favor, may have had reperc ussions to KSG’s client 
in the ‘still ongoing’  Developer Action inasmuch as [Appellants] 
here challenged the settlement agreement between KSG’s clients 
and [the AOAO].”   According to Appellants, the relationship 
between the Arbitrator and KSG would allow a reasonable person 
to “infer that a defense verdict in this arbitration would help 
the Arbitrator to garner KSG’s recommendation to serve in the Developer Action, should it be ordered to arbitration, 
i.e., 
that there is a ‘reasonable impression of partiality.’”   
The 
Arbitrator’s employment by KSG in unrelated matters 
does not have a sufficient nexus to this arbitration to require a holding that the circuit court clearly erred. There is no 
actual direct connection between KSG and the parties, counsel, 
witnesses, and Arbitrator in this arbitration. In addition, KSG represents the Developer in the separate Developer Action, which 
is adverse to Appellants, but the theory that a positive outcome 
39
     
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
    

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for the AOAO would lead to a future appointment for the 
Arbitrator in the Developer Action is “contingent, attenuated, 
and merely potential.” Sussex, 781 F.3d at 1075. The same 
could be said with respect to Appellants if the Arbitrator had ruled in their favor. 
Under the facts presented, we hold that the circuit court 
did not clearly err in ruling that the Arbitrator’s duty of 
disclosure did not include her retention by KSG in other 
matters. Vacatur cannot be requir ed “simply because an 
arbitrator failed to disclose a matter of some interest to a party.” Lagstein, 607 F.3d at 646. 
3. The Arbitrator’s Connection with Nerney 
Finally, we address whether it was clearly erroneous for 
the circuit court to conclude that there was no reasonable 
impression of partiality arising from the Arbitrator’s 
connections with Nerney, an expert witness in this arbitration 
who served as party counsel before the Arbitrator in an unrelated half-day mediation in 2015 and an unrelated 
arbitration in 2013.  Appellants argue that an objective 
observer may reasonably believe that the Arbitrator, seeing a 
potential for future business with Mr. Nerney as both an 
attorney and expert witness, may have been inclined to favor Mr. 
Nerney by ruling in t he AOAO’s favor and adopting Mr. Nerney’s 
legal rationale. 
40
     
 
  
    
 
  
  
 
 
     
Michele-Lynn E. Luke  
for appellees   
  
 
      
 

 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Appellants argue that the Arbitrator’s relationship with a 
witness must be disclosed, in part, because “these types of 
disclosures are no different than those asked of potential 
jurors in voir dire to determine potential biases.” The mere 
fact that Nerney, an expert witness in this case, had been an attorney in two cases where he appeared before the Arbitrator, 
without more, is not a “relationship” that creates a reasonable 
impression of partiality.  It was therefore not clearly 
erroneous for the circuit court to conclude that the 
Arbitrator’s undisclosed contacts with Nerney did not give a 
reasonable impression of partiality. 
VI. Conclusion 
Because the circuit court did not clearly err in holding 
that the Arbitrator’s undisclosed connections with Stellmacher, KSG, and Nerney did not constitute evident partiality, we affirm 
the circuit court’s final judgment.  
Joachim P. Cox,  
Robert K. Fricke, and  
Kamala S. Haake  
for appellants /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
/s/ Edward H. Kubo, Jr.  
41

 