*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, EX REL. HOLLY T. SHIKADA, ATTORNEY GENERAL,
Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB COMPANY; SANOFI-AVENTIS U.S. LLC; 
SANOFI US SERVICES INC., formerly known as 
SANOFI-AVENTIS U.S. INC.; and SANOFI-SYNTHELABO LLC, 
Defendants-Appellants, 
 
and 
 
SANOFI S.A., Defendant-Appellee.  
 
 
SCAP-21-0000363 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-21-0000363; CASE NO. 1CC141000708) 
 
MARCH 15, 2023 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND EDDINS, JJ.; 
AND WILSON, J., DISSENTING  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY EDDINS, J. 1
 
 
1  At the time of this opinion’s publication, Justice Wilson’s dissent is 
forthcoming. Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-21-0000363
15-MAR-2023
08:05 AM
Dkt. 67 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 2 I. INTRODUCTION 
 
This case is about whether two pharmaceutical companies — 
Defendants-Appellants Bristol-Myers Squibb and Sanofi — violated 
Hawai
‘i’s Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices law (UDAP) by 
misleading the public about the safety and efficacy of their 
antiplatelet drug, Plavix. 
The State, in a 2014 complaint, alleged that Plavix was 
less effective in patients who had certain liver-enzyme 
mutations (poor responders).  It said that people with these 
mutations had worse outcomes on Plavix than others, and that 
Defendants knew this fact years before 2009, when the FDA 
updated Plavix’s label with information about the poor responder issue.   
The State alleged Defendants violated Hawaiʻ i law i
 n two 
ways.  First, it asserted that the companies – despite knowing 
about the issues with Plavix – failed to update the drug’s 
warnings to inform the public.  Second, the State claimed the 
defendant companies intentionally kept the poor responder issue 
under wraps and suppressed research into it in order to protect 
their bottom line. 
The Circuit Court of the First Circuit agreed with the 
State on both points.  After a bench trial that spanned more 
than a month, the court held that Bristol-Myers Squibb and *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 3 Sanofi had violated UDAP by engaging in deceptive and unfair 
acts and practices. 
The court said the defendant companies misled 
Hawai‘i 
consumers by failing to warn them that Plavix was less effective 
for poor responders.  It found that this omission injured 
consumers by denying them the drug’s full promised antiplatelet 
effect, hindering their ability to give informed consent, and 
preventing them from taking an alternative drug or undergoing 
genetic testing to determine whether they were poor responders.  
The court also faulted Defendants for both refusing to 
adequately research variability of response and suppressing 
research that might confirm a link between ethnicity or genotype and Plavix responsiveness.   
For these acts, the court imposed an $834 million penalty.   We vacate this penalty.   
The court improperly granted the State’s motion for partial 
summary judgment on a central trial issue: Did the label matter to consumers?  
The summary judgment ruling on materiality circumscribed 
the companies’ ability to present a full defense, marred the court’s deceptive acts holding, and affected the penalty award.  
Bristol-Myers Squibb and Sanofi are entitled to a new trial on 
the deceptive acts or practices claim. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 4 But there will be no second trial on the unfair acts or 
practices claim.  The court’s holding that the companies 
committed unfair acts under UDAP has sufficient, independent 
evidentiary support.   
We also conclude that Defendants’ procedural arguments 
fail.  The court correctly determined that the State’s claims 
were not barred by UDAP’s safe harbor provision or its statute 
of limitations.  Nor were they preempted by federal law.   
We (1) reverse and remand the court’s deceptive acts UDAP 
holding, (2) vacate the court’s grant of partial summary judgment and the penalty award, (3) affirm the court’s unfair 
acts UDAP holding, and (4) remand for a penalty award after the 
deceptive-acts claim is resolved.  
II. BACKGROUND 
 
A.
 Factual Background 
 
Defendants-Appellants Bristol-Myers Squibb and Sanofi2 are 
multinational pharmaceutical companies that developed Plavix, an antiplatelet or “blood thinner” drug.  
Platelets, tiny pieces of cells in the bloodstream, can 
form clots which create serious health problems like heart 
attacks.  Doctors often prescribe Plavix along with aspirin 
(called dual anti-platelet therapy or DAPT) to patients with 
 
2  The defendant companies are Bristol- Myers Squibb Company (BMS) and 
Sanofi-Aventis U.S. LLC, Sanofi US Services Inc., formerly known as Sanofi-
Aventis U.S. Inc., and Sanofi-Synthelabo LLC (Sanofi). 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 5 heart problems or patients who have recently had a procedure
that might put them at risk for platelet clotting, such as 
angioplasty  or cardiac stenting.
 3 
Cardiac stents work by propping and holding open arteries 
to improve blood flow.  Stents can disturb the plaque naturally 
lining our arteries.  Platelets in the blood can then accumulate 
around the disruption, forming a clot.  Patients may take blood 
thinners like Plavix to inhibit this clot formation. 
Plavix’s chemical name is “clopidogrel.”  Clopidogrel is a 
“prodrug,” meaning it is only effective once it is changed by the body.  Plavix achieves its antiplatelet effect when it is 
metabolized by the liver. 
There are a family of enzymes in the liver, called the 
“Cytochromes P450” (CYP) that are commonly involved in 
metabolizing prodrugs. 
Several CYP450 liver enzymes are involved in metabolizing 
Plavix.  The liver enzyme CYP2C19 is one of them.
 
Different factors affect how well someone can metabolize 
Plavix.  “Variability of Response” is “a blanket term that basically reflects that no one person responds the same to any 
pharmaceutical agent.”  There will be variability of response to 
 
3  Angioplasty is a medical procedure for opening clogged or narrow 
arteries.  It involves inserting a small catheter with a balloon tip into a 
blood vessel, and it can also be used to place stents in arteries.  Coronary 
angioplasty and stents.  https://www.mayoclinic.org/tests-
procedures/coronary- angioplasty/about/pac- 20384761 [ https://perma.cc/B6SX-
NM68]. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 6 all drugs.  And it can be caused by intrinsic factors like 
height, weight, sex, and genetics, or by extrinsic factors like 
smoking, diet, exercise, and other drugs a patient is taking. 
If a prodrug is metabolized by CYP2C19, then genetic 
variation in the CYP2C19 liver enzyme can cause “poor 
responsiveness” to that drug.  
Pharmacogeneticists use the star allele system to describe 
genetic variation in liver enzymes. 
The *1 genetic version of CYP2C19 (CYP2C19*1) confers fully 
functional CYP2C19 enzymes.  The other versions of CYP2C19 (CYP2C19*2, *3, *4, *5, *6, *7, or *8) confer a reduced ability 
to metabolize Plavix.  The CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3 genetic types 
are the most commonly linked to poor Plavix responsiveness. 
Each person has two CYP2C19 alleles.  People with two CYP2C19*1 alleles will have a CYP2C19 liver 
enzyme that is very good at metabolizing Plavix; those with one CYP2C19*1 and one CYP2C19*2 or *3 allele will be “intermediate metabolizers” and someone with two CYP2C19*2 or CYP2C19*3 
alleles (or one *2 and one *3) will be a “poor responder.”
 
Scientific understandings of CYP2C19’s role in metabolizing 
Plavix have evolved over time.  
When Plavix launched in the late 1990s, it was known that 
the CYP450 enzymes — of which CYP2C19 is one — were involved in 
metabolizing Plavix.  But the extent of the enzyme’s role in *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 7 metabolizing Plavix and – by extension — the possibility that 
poor responders might get less benefit from the drug — were not 
generally known at that time. 
Terms like “poor responder” or “Plavix resistant” are used 
(sometimes interchangeably) to refer to two distinct things: (1) 
the genetic makeup of a person’s CYP2C19 enzymes; and (2) the 
ability of a person’s liver enzymes (either collectively or 
isolated CYP2C19 enzymes alone) to metabolize Plavix in a test tube (called platelet-function). 
There is consensus that a genetic “poor responder” is 
someone with two *2 or *3 alleles.  But there is less consensus 
about what level of response to Plavix (either in a test tube or 
in the real world) makes someone a “poor responder” from a 
platelet-function perspective.
4   
CYP2C19 is not the only enzyme involved in Plavix’s 
metabolization.  And factors other than CYP2C19 genotype impact 
the likelihood of adverse clinical outcomes, including blood vessel size, family history, and lifestyle factors like diet or 
smoking. 
 
4  The trial court collectively called those patients that had less than 
20% response to the drug or those with zero response to the drug “poor 
responders.”  The court’s classification of “poor responders” matched the 
companies’ rubric, which used a cut off of 20% for their meta- analysis.  But 
a pharmacogenetics team leader for BMS pointed out that the 20% response line 
was “a somewhat arbitrary distinction,” because it was “not based on clinical 
outcomes” of the patients.  She added, “what’s the difference between 20 
percent from the mean or 25 percent from the mean?  It’s an author’s choice.” 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 8 B. Procedural Background 
 
This lawsuit began in March 2014 when the State filed a 
complaint alleging Bristol-Myers Squibb and Sanofi violated 
Hawaiʻi’s
 Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices law. 
 
Under UDAP, “unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the 
conduct of any trade or commerce are unlawful.”  HRS § 480-2(a) 
(2008).  The State’s complaint alleged that between 1998 and 
2010 Defendants had violated this law by: (1) failing to 
disclose that Plavix has diminished or no effect in poor 
metabolizers; and (2) allowing their research decisions to be 
driven by profit-seeking.  The State claimed the Defendants’ 
behavior was both deceptive and unfair. 
1.
 Motion for Summary Judgment 
 
The State moved for partial summary judgment on its 
deceptive acts or practices UDAP allegation.  
The State’s motion focused on one part of its deceptive 
acts claim.  A deceptive act is defined as: “(1) a 
representation, omission, or practice that (2) is likely to 
mislead consumers acting reasonably under the circumstances 
where (3) the representation, omission, or practice is 
material.”  Courbat v. Dahana Ranch, Inc., 111 Hawaiʻ i 254, 262, 
141 P.3d 427, 435 (2006) (cleaned up).  The State argued that the third part – materiality – should not be up for debate. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 9 The State argued that there was no need for a trial to 
determine the materiality of information about Plavix’s lower 
efficacy for poor responders.  There was “no doubt that the 
information contained in Plavix’s federally mandated black box 
warning is material as a matter of law.”  Thus, the State asked 
the court to decide materiality before trial, at summary 
judgment – it would “eliminate any unnecessary time at trial.”
 
The court resolved the materiality element in the State’s 
favor.  It decided that there was no genuine dispute of material 
fact that Defendants’ omission involved “information that is 
important to consumers and, hence, likely to affect their choice 
of, or conduct regarding, a product.”  Courbat, 111 Hawaiʻ i at 
262, 141 P.3d at 435 (cleaned up).   
The court also gave what the companies dubbed an 
“alternative holding.”  Since it would fact-find and apply those facts to the law at a bench trial, the court - calling itself 
the “Ultimate Trier of Fact” - felt it “need not resolve 
inferences in favor of the non-moving party.”  It found the 
defendant companies’ evidence “weak and unpersuasive.”  Materiality, an elemental fact to a deceptive acts UDAP 
violation, would go untested at trial. 
The court’s summary judgment ruling precluded Bristol-Myers 
Squibb and Sanofi from presenting trial evidence about the 
materiality of the warning.  This included evidence showing that 10 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Hawaiʻi doctors and patients hadn’t changed how they prescribed 
or consumed Plavix after information about the poor responder 
issue was added in 2010 to the black box warning.  The court 
forbade the defendant companies from introducing evidence about 
what any person “did or did not do in response to, or as a 
result of, [t]he addition to the Black Box Warning to the Plavix 
label in 2010.” 
The rest of the State’s case proceeded to trial in October 
and November, 2020. 
2. Trial5
The bench trial was a battle royale of testifying
pharmacology experts, regulatory experts, and medical doctors.  
The parties presented evidence on everything from the minutiae 
of FDA regulations to whether St. John’s Wort could enhance 
Plavix’s efficacy. 
Much of the trial’s myriad and diverse evidence, however, 
speaks to three central issues. 
First, did the defendant companies mislead anyone through 
omitting the poor responder information from the Plavix label between 1998 and May 2009?  Or were the companies just doing the 
best they could with incomplete and conflicting scientific 
information about the causes of variability of response to 
Plavix? 
5The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 11 Second, did Defendants suppress research into variability 
of response for financial reasons?  Did greed prevent them from 
confirming CYP2C19’s role in metabolizing Plavix sooner? 
And third, did the omission of the poor responder 
information from Plavix’s label hurt Hawai
ʻi consumers?  Did this 
omission hinder consumers’ ability to give informed consent?  Were patients duped into taking a drug that might harm them - or 
at least not help them - because of Defendants’ omissions? 
a.
 Deception through omission? 
 
Regarding the first question of whether Defendants deceived 
consumers though omission, the parties introduced three major categories of evidence at trial: (1) scientific understanding before Plavix launched in 1998, (2) evidence concerning the 
scientific community’s changing perspectives between 1998 and 
2010 on which liver enzymes were principally responsible for 
metabolizing clopidogrel, and (3) evidence concerning shifts in 
scientific thinking about the link between CYP2C19 genotypes and 
clinical outcomes after 2010. 
i. Pre-approval 
 
Almost four years before the FDA approved Plavix, Dr. Sonia 
de Morais identified the genetic mutation that causes poor 
responsiveness in CYP2C19.  She looked at the metabolization of 
S-mephenytoin - a drug that was known to almost exclusively be 
metabolized by CYP2C19 – not clopidogrel.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 12 Dr. de Morais’ 1994 article also introduced the idea of 
genetic testing for poor response in CYP2C19.6  For her work, she 
developed a “simple PCR-based genetic test for [identifying] the 
defective CYP2C19 allele.”  She later clarified that by 
“simple,” she meant when “compared to the expensive and 
laborious technique of complete gene sequencing.”  Her test “was 
only focused on the simple small fragment of DNA that had the 
mutation”; it was not intended for direct patient use.  
In addition to identifying (for the first time) CYP2C19*2 
and CYP2C19*3, Dr. de Morais’ 1994 study found that “[t]here are large interracial differences in the frequency of the poor 
metabolizer phenotype with [Asian] populations having a five 
fold greater frequency compared to Caucasians.”  
Then in 1996, BMS and Sanofi sponsored CAPRIE (Clopidogrel 
versus Aspirin in Patients at Risk of Ischemic Events): a 
19,000-person clinical trial designed to compare the relative efficacy of clopidogrel and aspirin in “reducing the risk of a composite outcome cluster of ischaemic stroke, myocardial 
infarction, or vascular death.”  CAPRIE showed that, compared to 
aspirin, Plavix conferred a “statistically significant 
 
6  At trial, the State argued that Dr. de Morais’ mid- 90s genetic test 
could have been used to research any correlation between CYP2C19 gene 
mutations and poor response to Plavix early in the drug’s development.  But 
it was also clear that easy access to genetic testing for patients who could 
be poor responders has only become available since the boxed warning was 
added. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 13 reduction” in the risk of death for patients who had recently 
had a heart attack or stroke or who had peripheral artery 
disease. 
 
CAPRIE also found a statistically significant relationship 
between race and treatment outcomes when Whites and non-Whites 
were compared.  The CAPRIE investigators noted, however, that 
these results should be interpreted cautiously since only 5% of 
the study population was non-White.  Also, non-Whites were not well represented in the peripheral artery disease study group 
(the subgroup for which Plavix was most effective). 
In 1997, BMS and Sanofi investigated which liver enzymes 
were involved in Plavix metabolization.  That study showed that 
the liver enzymes “CYP2B6, CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 are involved in 
clopidogrel metabolism in human liver microsomes.”  It also 
“suggest[ed] possible involvement of CYP1A2, CYP2C9 and CYP2E1 
in clopidogrel metabolism.” 
On March 5, 1997 – before Plavix’s approval — the companies 
wrote to the FDA proposing a label that stated in relevant part: “In vitro, the isoenzymes responsible for metabolism of 
clopidogrel and the carboxylic acid derivative are CYP2B6, 
CYP2C19 and CYP3A4; evidence also suggests possible involvement 
of CYP1A2, CYP2C9 and CYP2E1 in clopidogrel metabolism.”  (Emphasis added.) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 14 The FDA prevented Defendants from including that language 
on the label.  
The FDA approved Plavix in November 1997.  
In its approval 
letter, the FDA warned Defendants that Plavix’s final printed 
label “must be identical to the enclosed draft labeling” because 
“[m]arketing the product with [a label] that is not identical to 
this draft labeling may render the product misbranded and an 
unapproved new drug.” 
ii. Post-approval 
 
After Plavix was approved, Defendants conducted a “meta-
analysis” of their internal clinical trial data from Phase I and Phase II clinical studies in March of 1998.  The meta-analysis was a retrospective review of prior studies that examined 
previously available data. 
The meta-analysis showed there was a variability of 
response to Plavix.  From the 469 samples examined, 67.8% of 
patients were considered good responders: the drug was at least 
20% effective at inhibiting clot formation.  Only 3.4% of 
patients had no response.  The extent of that variability 
depended on the test used to measure inhibition: one test showed 
that 32.2% of patients had less than 20% platelet inhibition while other tests showed 8.5% of patients.
7 
 
7  At trial, the companies’ witness explained that the 32.2% value 
encompassed the patients who had tested at least once for less than 20% *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 15 Defendants did not submit the 1998 meta-analysis to the FDA 
until 2005, seven years after Plavix’s launch.8  When they 
eventually submitted the meta-analysis to the FDA, it was 
presented as an appendix to another document. 
Just before Plavix reached the market in December, Sanofi 
released a study in November 1998 which concluded that 57% of 
clopidogrel metabolization was attributable to the liver enzyme 
CYP3A4, while 13% was attributable to CYP2C19.9  
The companies theorized that Plavix might principally be 
metabolized by CYP3A4.  CYP3A4 is “the most abundant” enzyme in the liver, and it has the ability to metabolize a variety of 
structures.  It does not have a loss-of-function allele.  CYP3A4 
variations are caused by non-genetic factors like diet and 
interactions with other drugs. 
Plavix sales began in December 1998. 
(1) 1998-2008 
 
From 1998 to 2008, the defendant companies sponsored 
various studies on Plavix.  Researchers not affiliated with the companies also published on clopidogrel.   
 
inhibition of platelet aggregation.  Of that 32.2%, though, 23% of patients 
still had an overall inhibition of platelet aggregation over 20%. 
 
8  Defendants submitted the meta- analysis to Swiss medical authorities 
shortly after its completion in March 1998; the Swiss required the meta-
analysis before they would approve Plavix. 
 
9  The remaining 30% was attributable to CYP1A2 (18%) and CYP2B6 (12%). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 16  BMS and Sanofi sponsored a large clinical trial, CURE, 
beginning in 1998 and ending in 2000.  CURE found that Plavix 
plus aspirin reduced the risk of cardiovascular death, heart 
attack, or stroke by 20% more than aspirin plus a placebo did.  
Of the 12,562 patients enrolled in the CURE trial, 82.1% 
(10,308) of them were Caucasian and 2% (254) of them were Asian. 
A 2003 study published by researchers outside the companies 
examined CYP liver enzymes and clopidogrel metabolization.  The results showed that CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 did the best job 
metabolizing clopidogrel. 
In June 2003, a BMS research group published an article on 
clopidogrel.  The group was led by Dr. Paul Gurbel - an expert 
on platelet variability of response, then a BMS scientist, and 
now a qui tam relator suing the companies elsewhere as he 
testified for the State at trial.  The article described 
clopidogrel non-responsiveness in 31% of the patient population 
after procedures such as stenting or angioplasty.  The study did not show a correlation between non-responsiveness to Plavix and 
adverse clinical outcomes.
10  But it did show that Plavix didn’t 
work so well for nearly one in three patients that had stents placed or underwent angioplasty. 
 
10  Dr. Gurbel’s paper implied a connection between clots blocking stents 
(stent thrombosis) and clopidogrel resistance.  But because the rate of stent 
thrombosis was much lower than the rate of Plavix resistance, the study noted 
that the two were possibly unrelated. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 17 The defendant companies sponsored the COMMIT study after 
CURE.  COMMIT was a clinical trial in China with more than 
45,000 patients; all enrolled patients were Chinese.  The 
results published in 2005 showed that when patients who’d had a 
heart attack were given Plavix and aspirin, their risk of having 
an adverse cardiac event dropped by 9%.11 
Next, the defendant companies sponsored the CHARISMA trial.  
It was a large scale (15,000-patient) clinical trial comparing Plavix’s effects to those of a placebo.  It found that for high-
risk patients, “clopidogrel plus aspirin was not significantly 
more effective than aspirin alone in reducing the rate of 
myocardial infarction, stroke, or death from cardiovascular 
causes.”  
But, data from the CHARISMA study (published in 2006) 
showed that Asian patients had the lowest occurrence of death, 
heart attack, or stroke while taking Plavix. 
The shift in focus to CYP2C19 and clopidogrel came in 2006.  
An independent pharmacogenetics researcher, Dr. Jean-Sebastien Hulot, published a proof-of-concept study which suggested that 
 
11  After the COMMIT study, the FDA approved a new indication for Plavix: 
it allowed the drug’s prescription to patients who’d had serious heart 
attacks even if they were no t going to have stents put in. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 18 CYP2C19 genetic polymorphism was linked to reduced clopidogrel
responsiveness.12 
 
Then in October 2008, a study came out examining drug 
interactions between Plavix and Omeprazole.  Omeprazole is a 
proton pump inhibitor – a type of drug known to impede CYP2C19’s 
function.  The study showed that patients prescribed both Plavix 
and Omeprazole were more likely to have diagnostic codes for 
things like heart attack and stroke than those who weren’t prescribed Omeprazole.  Defendants submitted this study to the 
FDA “outside of the normal annual cycle of reporting.”  
Defendants met with the FDA.  An undated document titled 
“Response to FDA Discussion Held 05 December 2008” prepared by 
Sanofi summarized the meeting: 
The discussion centered on whether differences in the 
formation of the active metabolite could be a primary 
source of platelet response variability.  It was recognized 
that the relationship between the variability in platelet 
response and clinical outcome, as well as the intrinsic and extrinsic factors which modulate the formation of the 
active metabolite, are not well understood.  A specific 
focus of the discussion was the extrinsic [proton pump 
inhibitor drugs] and intrinsic (genetic polymorphisms) 
factors which impact the formation of the active metabolite through CYP2C19.   
 
At the December 5, 2008 meeting the FDA asked Defendants to 
prepare a written action plan “in response to the issues 
raised.”  Defendants did.  They proposed looking at “drug-drug 
 
12  Dr. Hulot wrote that “The CYP2C19*2 loss- of-function allele is 
associated with a marked decrease in platelet responsiveness to clopidogrel 
in young, healthy male volunteers and may therefore be an important genetic 
contributor to clopidogrel resistance in the clinical setting.” 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 19 interaction with proton pump inhibitors” and “genetic 
polymorphisms and of CYP2C19 and its impact.” 
(2) 2008-2009 
 
Then on December 22, 2008, Dr. Jessica Mega published the 
results of a genetic study she had conducted using data collected as part of the TRITON trial.
  It involved “a head-to-
head-comparison” of Plavix and Effient (prasugrel), another antiplatelet that was then under development by Defendants’ competitor, Eli Lilly.  Dr. Mega’s study (the Mega study) showed 
that clopidogrel-treated patients who carried a loss-of-function 
allele “had a three-fold greater risk of clotting their stent, 
and a 50 percent greater risk of having a heart attack, a stroke 
or death.” 
The Mega study’s results catalyzed discussions between the 
FDA and Defendants about revising Plavix’s label to include 
information about CYP2C19.  The FDA pushed the companies to act.  
It welcomed a counterproposal from the companies, with the understanding it would disregard unsatisfactory suggestions. 
 In discussing these revisions, a BMS employee wrote 
in a March 30, 2009 email to his colleagues:
13 
 
13  The court overruled the defendant companies’ hearsay objection.  The 
email was not offered for the truth of the matter asserted, the court ruled.  
Rather, it was evidence of the companies’ knowledge and how the Defendants 
reacted (or not) to the experts’ comments.  We agree.  The evidence was 
admissible for non- hearsay purposes.  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 20 Problem is that I don’ t really see a counterproposal but 
instead it looks like we are into stalling some more.  I 
have to tell you that I have had in depth 1:1’s with about 
6 senior [key opinion leaders] since I have been at [the 
American College of Cardiology] and the mood is very 
negative towards us (people like Dr. Topol, Gurbel, Eikelboom, Fox are all saying that they have been telling 
us this for years and we chose to ignore them and bury our 
head in the sand and so they feel no sympathy toward our 
current situation!) 
 
In May 2009, the FDA amended the “Precautions” section of 
Plavix’s label to read: 
Based on literature data, patients with genetically reduced CYP2C19 function have lower systemic exposure to the active 
metabolite of clopidogrel and diminished antiplatelet 
responses, and generally exhibit higher cardiovascular 
event rates following myocardial infarction than do 
patients with normal CYP2C19 function (see CLINICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY: Pharmacogenetics).[14] 
 
(First emphasis added.) 
The May 2009 label also stated that “patients with an 
impaired metabolizer status (intermediate and poor combined) had 
a higher rate of cardiovascular events (death, myocardial 
infarction, and stroke) or stent thrombosis compared to 
extensive metabolizers.” 
Regarding genetic testing, the 2009 label explained that 
“[p]harmacogenetic testing can identify genotypes associated 
with variability in CYP2C19 activity.” 
(3) 2009-2010 
 
Following the May 2009 label update, Defendants and the FDA 
discussed whether the information should be put in a black box 
 
14  The May 2009 version of the “Pharmogenetics” section stated: 
“diminished antiplatelet responses to clopidogrel have been described . . . 
in 21 reported studies,” and that “[t]he relative difference in antiplatelet 
response between genotype groups . . . is typically greater than 30%.” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 21 warning — the most prominent type of warning on a drug label. 
The defendant companies told the FDA that Plavix’s 
“labeling adequately describes the safety and efficacy of 
clopidogrel and that a boxed warning [was] not necessary at this 
time.”
 
Ultimately, the FDA decided to put the CYP2C19 information 
in a black box warning in 2010.  Like the May 2009 label, the 
black box included language stating that poor metabolizers taking Plavix are more likely to have adverse cardiac events on 
the drug than non-poor responders.
15 
iii. After the 2010 Black Box Label 
 
In the first half of the 2010s, several research articles 
called into question the link between CYP2C19 genotype and clinical outcomes identified by the December 2008 Mega study.
16,17 
 
15  The 2010 Black Box label: 
 
 
16  In 2010, Paré et al. published a study that used genomic data collected 
in connection with two of Defendants’ big trials.  At trial, the companies’ 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 22 Others appeared to validate the Mega study’s findings. 
One question the research raised was whether CYP2C19 loss-
of-function alleles were related to one particular adverse 
outcome: blood clots blocking stents (stent thrombosis). 
In a 2015 meta-meta-analysis, Osnabrugge et al. looked at 
11 meta-analyses.  They found a statistically significant 
relationship between CYP2C19 loss-of-function alleles and stent 
thrombosis. 
But the Osnabrugge study also concluded that the 11 
studies’ results and conclusions were “discordant.”  It said the primary culprits of this disagreement were between study 
heterogeneity and publication bias.  And it concluded 
“[c]onfidence in the presence of an association is limited, and 
personalized antiplatelet management based on genotyping is not 
 
witness, Dr. Roome, explained that Paré et al.’s article showed that “if you 
have genomic polymorphisms with loss of function on the CYP2C19, you do not 
have a worse outcome when you are treated by clopidogrel.  You have an 
outcome that is comparable to those patients with no genomic polymorphisms on CYP2C19.” 
 
Dr. Gurbel, the State’s witness, faulted Paré et al.’s study for 
excluding people with stents. 
 
17  In 2011, Holmes et al. published a meta- analysis that synthesized the 
results of 32 original research studies looking at whether CYP2C19 genotype 
could predict a person’s response to clopidogrel.  Holmes et al.’s meta-
analysis found that there was “no evidence for a significant association between CYP2C19 genotype and any important cardiovascular outcome.”  
Dr. Gurbel criticized Holmes et al.’s work for relying on studies like 
CURE and CHARISMA, which had heterogeneous study populations.  By casting 
such a wide net, he said, the meta- analysis “dilute[d] the signal of the 
importance of *2 [carriage].”  Dr. Gurbel testified that if you just looked 
at people who’d had stents put in their hearts, then “the totality of the 
evidence [was] overwhelming” that there was a link between CYP2C19 genotype 
and clinical outcomes. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 23 supported by the currently available evidence.”  
Osnabrugge’s analysis suggested a possible correlation 
between CYP2C19 and stent thrombosis that was worth further 
exploration.  Dr. Todd Seto, the medical director of the Center 
for Outcomes Research and Evaluation at Queen’s Medical Center, 
testified that the “difficulties” in the 11 meta-analyses 
prevented Osnabrugge et al. drawing definite conclusions from 
the results. 
Dr. Gurbel thought differently about Osnabrugge et al.’s 
findings.  Concerning the link between CYP2C19 genotype and risk of stent thrombosis, he declared the “totality of the 
evidence . . . for stent thrombosis,” was “irrefutable.”
 
“There’s no argument against it.  I mean, you have 11 meta-analyses reporting the same thing.” 
In September 2016, the FDA removed the statement that 
CYP2C19 poor metabolizers have worse clinical outcomes on Plavix 
from the boxed warning.
18 
 
18  The 2016 B lack Box label: 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 24 b. Suppressed research? 
 
The second question the trial focused on was whether 
defendant companies suppressed research into Plavix’s poor-
responder issue to protect their profit margins.  The State used 
internal documents and emails from the companies to support its 
allegation. 
i. Internal Company Documents  
 
First, the State pointed to the defendant companies’ 
internal committee documents.  They argued these established 
that the companies avoided research that could make Plavix look 
bad. 
BMS and Sanofi have a jointly-staffed Plavix “Life Cycle 
Management” committee (LCM).  The LCM is tasked with “discussing 
all the new data as well as major trials that were ongoing and 
sponsored by the companies” and “considering and approving or 
rejecting local studies from affiliates around the world.” 
 
 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 25 The minutes from LCM meetings in January 2001, June 2001, 
and June 2002 reveal that Defendants declined to fund local 
studies into variability of response to aspirin.
  
The minutes from 2001 reflect that the companies were 
concerned the studies into variability of response to aspirin 
might “lead to a similar trial on clopidogrel resistance.”  The 
June 2002 meeting minutes reflected that Defendants were 
continuing to refuse funding research into this area because it could lead to a “restrictive positioning of clopidogrel and 
could open the door to ‘clopidogrel nonresponders.’” 
Another document summarizing the LCM’s activities in 2002 
indicated that the committee rejected studies about aspirin 
nonresponsiveness because “it could lead to the same questions 
about clopidogrel and because the commercial sensitivity and 
science of studies in this field is being assessed at a 
corporate level first.” 
The June 2003 LCM meeting minutes noted the increase in 
publications concerning “[v]ariability of response with clopidogrel.”  They identified “[t]hreats for clopidogrel,” 
related to variability, including “[p]otential threats for 
future sales.” 
Then the LCM outlined an “action plan” in 2003 concerning 
“clopidogrel response variability.”  The first item on the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 26 action plan was a meta-analysis which would be done exclusively 
with already-collected data.
  
At trial, Dr. Dominique Roome, a Sanofi scientist who 
worked on Plavix-related issues from 1999 to 2011, conceded that 
their action plan did not include plans to conduct a large-scale 
clinical trial on the relationship between CYP2C19 genotype and 
clinical outcomes; but she explained this omission by saying 
that the issue of CYP2C19 poor metabolizers “wasn’t even a question that was being discussed or debated in the scientific 
literature at that point.” 
ii. Internal Emails 
 
The State also presented internal emails from the early and 
mid-2000s to demonstrate the companies’ reluctance to engage in aspirin or clopidogrel-resistance studies. 
In May 2000, a BMS researcher wrote his colleagues to 
propose a small, clinical trial “comparing the response of 
blacks vs. whites on ADP-induced platelet aggregation.”  A colleague recommended holding off on the study to see what 
questions the FDA would ask, noting that the “low number of 
black people” was not an issue for the FDA in the earlier CAPRIE 
study.  He added that “[t]he problem is that, given the 
variability of the test, we always run the risk to show a 
difference in a pharmacology study . . . and then we really are 
in trouble.”  A counterpart at Sanofi agreed the proposed study *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 27 “could bear a significant risk” and suggested waiting to see if 
the FDA would bring it up. 
In response to another proposed study on aspirin resistance 
in August 2002, a BMS scientist recounted that “Sanofi hs [sic] 
generally been ‘down’ on suggestions to study ASA [aspirin] 
resistance, because they are afraid that ‘clopidogrel 
resistance’ is right behind.”
  He later wrote in a separate 
email: 
In my opinion, [Sanofi]’s/our reluctance to go down the 
path toward documentation of clopidogrel resistance is understandable, but it will catch up with us and perhaps be 
an unpleasant and costly surprise when others document it 
without asking our permission to do so.   
 
 In June 2003, BMS employees forwarded and discussed Dr. 
Gurbel’s recently-published article on Plavix non-
responsiveness.  See supra Section II.B.2.a.ii.(1). 
 Three emails about Dr. Gurbel’s article were presented at 
trial. 
In the first, a BMS researcher wrote that he “view[ed] the 
paper with mixed feelings.”  He thought some of the data presented were “very positive and encouraging” but also noted 
that he had “received zero response internally” when he had 
asked for information on Plavix non-responders. 
 In the second email, the Vice President of U.S. Marketing 
for Plavix at the time shared the article and wrote that “BMS U.S. has had difficulty mobilizing the LCM to address the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 28 importance of understanding Plavix resistance through our data 
and proactive research.” 
In the third email, the BMS Vice President for the “Sanofi 
Alliance” at the time wrote: “Sanofi had an in-house meeting on 
aspirin resistance in January and presented their data at the 
January LCM meeting.  However, Sanofi remains adverse [sic] to 
doing any further work on either aspirin or clopidogrel 
resistance because of the potential negative marketing implications.” 
In 2005, the defendant companies determined at a meeting 
that “[a]dditional studies” were needed on the variability of 
platelet response issue and suggested using “small trials to 
help [Defendants] ‘shape the debate.’” 
In 2006, the defendant companies discussed variability 
of platelet response during an advisory board meeting.  
They concluded that while some researchers believed that 
variability corresponded with “clinical events,” others disputed this relationship. 
c.
 Consumer harm? 
 
The last question was whether defendant companies’ acts or 
practices harmed consumers.  The evidence concerned contemporary understandings of (1) whether CYP2C19 genotype is linked to 
adverse clinical outcomes and (2) whether non-White *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 29  (particularly Asian) patients on Plavix are more likely to 
receive little or no benefit from the drug. 
i. Clinical Outcomes 
 
The State sought to support its theory that poor responders 
taking Plavix were at a higher risk of adverse clinical outcomes like heart attacks, strokes, or death.  But this link is 
unclear. 
In 2019, the State’s witness, Dr. Gurbel, wrote that the 
link between poor responders and “major adverse cardiovascular events” on Plavix “remains controversial.”
19  At trial, he 
emphasized that while the link between major adverse cardiovascular events is not clear, he was “100 percent certain” 
that a link between adverse events and poor response exists. 
Dr. Laura Plunkett, the State’s regulatory and pharmacology 
expert, agreed with Dr. Gurbel.  She testified that “people that 
can’t metabolize the drug, poor metabolizers, are at an 
increased risk of experiencing heart attacks and strokes.”  Dr. Plunkett elaborated on why poor responders are at an increased 
risk: 
 
19  In an April 2010 editorial, Dr. Gurbel also wrote that: 
 
no single study has demonstrated a conclusive link between 
the presence of a loss- of function genetic polymorphism, 
suboptimal clopidogrel active metabolite generation (pharmacokinetic measurement), decreased clopidogrel responsiveness (pharmacodynamic measurement), and adverse 
clinical outcomes.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 30 if [poor responders] don’t activate [Plavix], they can’t 
get the benefit.  And don’t forget this is a drug that’s 
being given to reduce the risk of life- threatening events 
-- heart attacks and strokes.  So if you don’t activate it 
and you’re giving the drug to prevent that -- those events, 
then you’re going to be at increased risk, because obviously without the drug there, you can’t get the 
benefit. 
 
 Dr. Gurbel and Dr. Plunkett didn’t think that poor 
responders were more likely to have adverse outcomes on Plavix 
because the drug was actively harming them.  They thought, 
rather, that for those who didn’t activate the drug at all, it 
was effectively a “placebo.” 
In response, the defendant companies focused on the 
difference between patients unable to metabolize the drug at all 
versus those who had a reduced but non-zero response to Plavix.   
Dr. Seto testified that even a patient with two CYP2C19 
loss-of-function alleles would still get some benefit from Plavix: “there are papers that have shown benefit in patients, 
including those who are poor metabolizers.” 
Dr. de Morais, the scientist who in 1994 identified the 
genetic mutation that causes poor responsiveness in CYP2C19, 
testified.  She explained that CYP2C19 poor responders may still 
metabolize Plavix because “CYP2C19 is not the only enzyme.  
There are other enzymes that form the active metabolite.”  These 
other enzymes, she said “will pick up the tab [and metabolize]” Plavix if the CYP2C19 enzyme can’t. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 31 Adding to this, Dr. de Morais expounded on a “very unique” 
active metabolite that’s produced when liver CYPs oxidize 
Plavix.  Even for poor responders, patients can receive clinical 
benefits from Plavix, because the active metabolite forms a 
long-lasting, stable bond with blood platelets.  This bond makes 
the platelets slippery so they cannot easily form a clot and 
stays slippery for a “couple of days or [a] week or so” before 
it’s excreted from the body. 
ii.
 Ethnicity and poor responsiveness 
 
The State also attempted to show that Asian patients faced 
a greater risk of adverse effects on Plavix. 
There was no dispute that Asians are more likely to carry 
the *2 or *3 CYP2C19 alleles than Whites.  Dr. Gurbel elaborated 
that Asians have a 15% chance of carrying two loss-of-function 
alleles and a 50% chance of carrying one. 
 But the parties disagreed about whether Asian patients were 
likely to have worse outcomes on Plavix than White patients.   The defendant companies maintained that the drug worked 
for Asian patients.  Dr. Seto testified that a 2005 study 
conducted at Queen’s Medical Center found that ethnicity did not 
appear to affect the success rate or complication rate of 
procedures like stenting or angioplasty.  Dr. Seto said the 
study confirmed that patients who were getting clopidogrel, 
“including Asians and our Pacific Islander patients,” did fine. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 32 For the State, Dr. Gurbel testified that Plavix was 
demonstrably less-effective for Asian patients.  He compared the 
results of the CURE clinical trial (which had mostly White 
patients) with the COMMIT clinical trial (which had exclusively 
Chinese patients).  He pointed out that Plavix had only a 9% 
risk reduction effect for the Chinese participants in the COMMIT 
trial, less than half of the 20% risk reduction shown in CURE.  
Thus, he reasoned, the COMMIT trial showed that Plavix was less effective for Chinese patients.   
 
In response, Dr. Seto disagreed that the CURE and COMMIT 
studies – which used different methodologies – showed a reduced 
effectiveness in one group versus another.  He testified that it 
was not possible to isolate if race or ethnicity was connected 
to any supposed difference in the results.  He further noted 
that the 2016 American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines recommend Plavix as an 
antiplatelet without any regard to patients’ race or genetics.  And that the guidelines recommend against routine genetic 
testing even for patients of Asian or Pacific Island descent. 
3. FOF-COLs 
 
In its Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, the court 
found that the companies had committed both deceptive and unfairacts.  First, it stated that the companies had misled consumers 
by not informing patients about the poor responder issue from  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 33  the beginning.  Second, the court determined that the companies 
engaged in a pattern and practice of suppressing inquiry into 
variability of response for financial reasons.  Third, the court
decided that the defendant companies’ actions harmed  
consumers.   Hawaiʻi 
a. Deceptive Acts by Omission   
 
First, the court focused on Plavix’s labeling, stating that 
the “facts presented show that Defendants had sufficient 
knowledge, technology, and ability to update the Plavix label 
from launch and continuing for many years.” 
The court listed various facts that Defendants knew at the 
time of Plavix’s launch.  It highlighted these findings: (1) Defendants’ internal reports revealing that the Cytochrome P450 
enzymes, including CYP2C19, were involved in Plavix’s 
metabolization; (2) Defendants’ 1998 meta-analysis finding that 
32.2% of patients had a reduced response to Plavix when one test 
was used;
20 (3) the CAPRIE clinical trial’s showing of a 
statistically significant difference in Plavix’s effectiveness for White patients as compared to non-White patients; (4) Dr. de Morais’ work showing that “CYP2C19 polymorphisms were found to 
be a 100% predictor of poor metabolizers (for S-
 
20  In a footnote, the trial court “ consider[ ed] it significant that 
Defendants did not disclose their 1998 Meta- Analysis to the FDA until after 
[the] Gurbel study was published.”  See supra Section II.B.2.a.ii(1).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 34 mephenytoin[ ])”; (5) East Asians were “five-fold” more likely 
to have a variant of CYP2C19 that made them Plavix poor 
responders; and (6) a genetic test for CYP2C19 variations had 
existed for laboratory use since 1994. 21
The court found that after Dr. Hulot’s 2006 study 
supporting the hypothesis that CYP2C19 polymorphisms contribute 
to Plavix variability of response “Defendants took no action to 
update Plavix’s label to inform prescribing physicians and patients about Plavix resistance” even though “it was already 
established that these CYP2C19 polymorphisms were more prevalent 
among certain Asian populations.” 
The court concluded the companies failed to use the 
information they had about Plavix’s variability of response to 
“try to warn the public or the FDA” about the poor responder 
issue or pursue information about Plavix’s bioactivation. 
b. Suppressed and Avoided Research 
 
Second, the court faulted Defendants for avoiding any 
serious examination into CYPC219’s role in driving variability 
of response to Plavix.  It rejected Defendants’ claim that they 
had supported clinical trials looking into variability of 
response.
22  
 
21  Unlike Plavix, S- mephenytoin is a drug almost exclusively metabolized 
by CYP2C19. 
 
22  In rejecting this argument, the court relied on Dr. Gurbel’s testimony 
that Defendants “didn’t . . . I would say broadly, you know, [do] any *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 35 The court found the companies “evidenced a clear intent not 
to conduct or sponsor any research that might confirm the 
existence of and/or reason for ‘Plavix resistance’ or 
‘Variability of Response’ to a patient’s race or other 
identifiable genetic factors.” 
It further noted that the companies had a duty to 
investigate why some patients had a diminished response to 
Plavix.  The court cited Dr. Plunkett’s testimony that pharmaceutical companies must continue to investigate potential 
issues with the drugs they sell: “under Section 21 CFR [§] 314, 
there are specific requirements for companies to perform this 
type of surveillance of their drugs and the literature . . . in 
order to understand whether or not there are risks out there”
23 
and that this affirmative behavior is “part of good pharmacovigilance practice.” 
The court also rejected Defendants’ claim that they “did 
not investigate the impact of CYP2C19 polymorphisms on Plavix 
 
meaningful research, no.”  The court also cited Dr. Plunkett’s testimony that 
“I haven’t seen a large clinical trial that has been done by the company or 
anyone else of the power to be able to answer definitively those questions, 
and specifically for the individuals that carry two loss- of-function alleles, 
we haven’t completely defined that.  No study has been done.” 
 
23  More specifically, 21 CFR §§ 314.80 ( Postmarketing reporting of adverse 
drug experiences) and 314.81 (Other postmarketing reports) impose a broad 
duty of surveillance.  21 CFR §§ 314.80(b) requires, for example, “prompt[] 
review [of] all adverse drug experience information obtained or otherwise 
received by the applicant from any source, foreign or domestic, including 
information derived from commercial marketing experience, postmarketing 
clinical investigations, postmarketing epidemiological/surveillance studies, 
reports in the scientific literature, and unpublished scientific papers.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 36 Variability of Response because they believed at the time of 
launch and for many years afterward” that CYP3A4 was the 
“primary means by which a patient’s body produced Plavix’s 
active metabolite.”  The court said it found “much more 
persuasive the words and actions reflected in Defendants’ 
corporate records, and testimony consistent with them, which 
evidence a clear intent by Defendants to avoid any studies that 
might unearth negative information about Plavix.” 
The court said Defendants’ records showed that their 
aversion to certain variability of response research was “tied to concerns about the potential impact of adverse clinical trial 
results on sales of the drug.” 
The court made a series of factual findings concerning 
Defendants’ internal records.  For example, it referenced emails 
from 2000 where Defendants shot down a proposed study comparing 
clopidogrel response in Black versus White patients as risky.  
It then quoted a 2001 document showing that the LCM had rejected a proposed study on aspirin resistance because “it could lead to 
a similar trial on [Plavix] resistance.”  The court also cited 
two 2002 LCM documents reflecting the committee’s decision to 
reject aspirin studies “because they ‘could lead to the same 
questions about [Plavix],’ they ‘could open the door to 
“[Plavix] non-responders,”’ and because there was ‘no commercial 
interest’ in such studies.”
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 37 The court also emphasized how the companies’ behavior 
undermined their claim that they believed CYP3A4 primarily 
metabolized Plavix.  It pointed to a November 2005 meeting 
summary (after the COMMIT study was published) where Defendants 
observed that they could support “small trials” on the 
variability of platelet response issue that could help them 
“shape the debate.” 
c.
 Consumer Harm 
 
Lastly, the court found that the companies’ behavior harmed 
consumers. 
The court relied on the label’s materiality to reach its 
conclusion.  It noted that boxed warnings are usually reserved 
“for serious warnings, particularly those that may lead to death 
or serious injury.”  In response to Defendants’ argument at 
trial that “the 2016 boxed warning deleted any reference to a 
causal relationship between CYP2C19 poor metabolizer status and 
clinical outcomes,” the court said that “since the boxed warning remains on the Plavix label, Defendants’ argument is 
unpersuasive.” 
The court found that poor responders to the drug “receive 
only partial benefit or risk reduction, which may be 
insufficient to prevent an adverse event.”  It cited to studies 
from the later 2000s showing “CYP2C19-based poor responsiveness 
to Plavix led to an increased risk of cardiac events . . . when *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 38 compared to patients who were normal or intermediate 
responders.”  It also found that “the evidence presented at 
trial established that Defendants knew . . . at the time of 
[Plavix’s] launch . . . that Plavix patients who are poor 
metabolizers are likely at higher risk of a recurrent heart 
attack or stroke than those who are not poor metabolizers.”
 
The court’s finding about the increased risk for 
cardiovascular events faced by CYP2C19 poor metabolizers underpinned its conclusions that Defendants’ omission was likely 
to mislead consumers.  This finding also partly supported the 
court’s unfair acts or practices ruling, in particular, that the 
defendant companies’ “conduct was substantially injurious to 
consumers.”  That finding, in turn, informed the court’s 
analysis of the “injury to the public” prong of its penalty 
calculation. 
The court did not explicitly find that Asian patients were 
exposed to a high risk of adverse cardiac outcomes while taking Plavix.  But it referenced the notion that Plavix doesn’t work 
as well for non-Whites in its analysis of the injuries inflicted 
on consumers.  For example, the court highlighted Dr. Gurbel’s 
testimony comparing the COMMIT and CURE clinical trials.  It 
detected “a statistically significant disparity in the number of 
adverse events suffered by non-[W]hite racial groups.” 
The court then linked Defendants’ awareness (from the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 39 CAPRIE clinical trial) that Plavix was less effective for non-
Whites to their “intent not to conduct or sponsor any research 
that might confirm the existence of and/or reason for ‘Plavix 
resistance’ or ‘Variability of Response’ to a patient’s race or 
other identifiable genetic factors.”  
From this, the court concluded that the companies “took no 
action to update Plavix’s label to inform prescribing physicians 
and patients about Plavix resistance” in spite of the “established” fact that “CYP2C19 polymorphisms [leading to poor 
response] were more prevalent among certain Asian populations.” 
4. Appeal 
 
Defendants appealed the circuit court’s judgment to the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals.  We granted the State’s petition for transfer to this court. 
On appeal, Defendants challenge nearly all the circuit 
court’s findings of fact and conclusions of law.   
Defendants contend the evidence showed they didn’t know 
about the CYP2C19 metabolization issue until the Mega study came out in December 2008.  So, they argue, there is nothing 
“deceptive” or “unfair” about their failure to update the Plavix 
label with poor responder information before then.   
Defendants stress that they investigated Plavix’s safety 
and efficacy throughout the 2000s, and they claim that they 
decided against funding certain studies into variability of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 40 response because of those studies’ size and design limitations, 
not because they were trying to protect their profits. 
Defendants also emphasize the lack of evidence showing the 
omission of the poor responder information from Plavix’s label 
injured anyone.  Even poor responders, Defendants assert, can 
benefit from Plavix. 
In addition to challenging the substance of the court’s 
holding, Defendants also raise procedural defenses.   
First, they argue that the State’s claims about Plavix’s 
FDA-approved label are barred by UDAP’s “safe harbor” provision, which exempts from UDAP “[c]onduct in compliance with the orders 
or rules of, or a statute administered by, a federal, state, or 
local governmental agency.”  HRS § 481A-5(a)(1) (2008).  
Defendants say that because the FDA approved Plavix’s label they 
are “in compliance” with the FDA’s regulations and exempt from 
liability under UDAP.   
Second, the companies claim that the State’s suit is time-
barred by UDAP’s four-year statute of limitation.   
Third, they claim the State’s UDAP claims are preempted by 
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FDCA) because it would be “impossible” for the companies to comply with both the 
federal law on drug labeling and the duties imposed by Hawai
ʻi 
law. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 41 III. DISCUSSION 
 
A. No Procedural Bars to the State’s Claims 
 
First, we address the defendant companies’ procedural 
arguments.  Neither the UDAP’s safe harbor provision nor its 
statute of limitations bar the State’s claims.  The claims are also not preempted by federal law.
 
1. No Safe harbor 
 
The UDAP’s safe harbor provision does not block the State’s 
action. 
UDAP’s “safe harbor” exempts “[c]onduct in compliance with 
the orders or rules of, or a statute administered by, a federal, state, or local governmental agency.”  HRS § 481A-5(a)(1). 
Courts interpreting safe harbor provisions often do so 
narrowly, holding they bar only conduct which is not specifically allowed or required by another authority.  See 
Showpiece Homes Corp. v. Assurance Co. of Am., 38 P.3d 47, 56 
(Colo. 2001) (explaining that “[c]onduct amounting to deceptive 
or unfair trade practices . . . would not appear to be ‘in 
compliance’ with other laws” where it was not specifically 
authorized by those laws). 
The FDA did not issue the companies a special dispensation 
absolving them of any state-law duties they may have (above and beyond their obligations under federal law) to update the Plavix 
label as the relevant science evolves.  The FDA’s approval of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 42 Plavix’s label does not confer the agency’s imprimatur on the 
companies’ decision not to add information about variability of
response to its warnings before 2009.  And Defendants have not 
pointed to any federal statutes specifically authorizing the 
omissions and conduct the State alleges violates the UDAP.  
This is not an old-fashioned false advertising consumer 
protection case.  The State’s allegations and the circuit 
court’s FOFs and COLs are concerned with Defendants’ conduct, not only the contents of the Plavix label.  The State’s UDAP 
allegations also expressly involve Defendants’ approach to 
publicizing and investigating the variability of response issue.  
Defendants offer no explanation of why UDAP’s safe harbor should 
bar the claims that, for instance, Defendants violated the law 
by failing to disclose the results of their 1998 meta-analysis 
to the public or by avoiding research on variability of response 
to protect their profits. 
Because there is no federal or state law, order, or rule 
expressly authorizing the omissions the State claims violated the UDAP, and because of the conduct-centric nature of the 
State’s allegations, we hold that the UDAP’s safe harbor 
provision does not bar the State’s claims. 
2. No Statute of Limitations 
 
The State’s action is not time-barred.  
Under HRS § 657-1.5 (1993), the State is not subject to any *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 43 limitations periods unless it is “specifically designated in 
such a statute as subject to the limitation period contained 
therein.”  
Defendants maintain that HRS § 480-24(b) (2008) 
“specifically designated” the State as subject to HRS § 480-
24(a)’s four-year limitations period.  But it does not.  
A statute does not “specifically designate” the State as 
subject to its statute of limitations unless it clearly and unambiguously provides that its limitations period applies to 
the State.  HRS § 480-24(b) identifies three situations in which 
the State is exempted from subsection (a)’s statute of 
limitations.
24  But while those exemptions may imply that the 
 
24  HRS § 480- 24(b) (2008) provides: 
 
(b) The following shall toll the time for commencement of 
actions by the State under this chapter if at any time: 
 
(1) Any cause of action arising under this chapter 
accrues against any person, the person is out of the 
State, the action may be commenced within the terms 
respectively limited, after the return of the person 
into the State, and if, after the cause of action has 
accrued, t he person departs from and resides out of the 
State, the time of the person’s absence shall not be 
deemed or taken as any part of the time limited for the 
commencement of the action. 
 
(2) Any cause of action arising under this chapter 
accrues against any person, the person has petitioned 
for relief under the bankruptcy code, the time during 
which the bankruptcy case is pending shall not be deemed 
or taken as any part of the time limited for the 
commencement of the action. 
 
(3) Any cause of action arising under this chapter 
accrues against any person, there is a criminal action 
pending which arises out of the same occurrence, the 
time during which the criminal action is pending shall 
not be deemed or taken as any part of the time limited *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 44 State is subject to HRS § 480-24(a)’s limitations period, they 
do not unambiguously and expressly state that HRS § 480-24(a)’s 
limitations period applies to the State.   
Under HRS § 657-1.5, then, the State is not subject to the 
limitations period contained in HRS § 480-24(a).25 
3. No Preemption 
 
Federal law does not preempt the State’s claims.   
The companies assert this case is one of implied conflict 
  law conflicts with or contradicts preemption, that is, Hawaiʻi
federal law.  See Rodrigues v. United Pub. Workers, AFSCME Local 
646, AFL-CIO, 135 Hawaiʻ i 316, 323, 349 P.3d 1171, 1178 (2015) 
(defining “implied conflict preemption” as “when state law is in 
actual conflict with federal law.”) (citation omitted).  If “it 
is impossible for a private party to comply with both state and 
federal requirements,” then implied conflict preemption occurs.  
 
for the commencement of the action.  As used in this 
paragraph, a criminal action is pending until its final 
adjudication in the trial court. 
 
25  The legislative history to the 2016 amendment repealing HRS § 480- 24(b) 
supports this conclusion.  The House bill that eventually became that 
amendment observed: 
 
In the context of claims brought by the State and its 
agencies pursuant to chapter 480 of the Hawaiʻ i Revised 
Statutes, the Hawaiʻ i legislature has never specifically 
designated the State or its agencies as being subject to 
any limitation period.  Consequently, no limitation period 
can apply to actions brought by the State under chapter 
480, Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes. 
 
House Bill No. 2329, A Bill for an Act Relating to Consumer Protection. 
https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/session2016/bills/HB2329_.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/C3FT- AHDF]. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 45 Hawaii Mgmt. All. Ass’n v. Ins. Comm’r, 106  21, 30, 100 
P.3d 952, 961 (2004) (cleaned up)).  Hawaiʻi
 
The companies argue there was no way they could have 
updated Plavix’s label to provide the warning the State says 
UDAP requires and at the same time comply with federal law. 
The Defendants overstate the differences between state and 
federal law.  The fact that state law imposes a greater duty to 
warn on drug makers than the FDA, does not give rise to implied 
conflict preemption.26  On the other hand, if a drug maker cannot 
comply with both the labeling duties imposed by the FDA and its 
duties under state law, “federal law controls and . . . state-
law tort claims must be dismissed.”  Guilbeau v. Pfizer Inc., 
880 F.3d 304, 310 (7th Cir. 2018). 
Generally, drug manufacturers only update their products’ 
labels once the FDA has approved a supplemental application.  But under the agency’s CBE regulation: 
if a manufacturer is changing a label to “add or strengthen 
a contraindication, warning, precaution, or adverse 
reaction” or to “add or strengthen an instruction about 
dosage and administration that is intended to increase the safe use of the drug product,” it may make the labeling 
 
26  See Motus v. Pfizer Inc., 127 F. Supp. 2d 1085, 1092 (C.D. Cal. 2000) 
(“[M]ost courts have found that FDA regulations as to design and warning 
standards are minimum standards which do not preempt state law . . . failure 
to warn claims.”); Wells v. Ortho Pharm. Corp., 788 F.2d 741, 746 (11th Cir. 
1986) (“An FDA determination that a warning is not necessary may be 
sufficient for federal regulatory purposes but still not be sufficient for 
state tort law purposes.”); Hill v. Searle Lab’ys, a Div. of Searle Parms., 
Inc., 884 F.2d 1064, 1068 (8th Cir. 1989) (“FDA approval is not a shield to 
liability. . . .  FDA regulations are generally minimal standards of conduct 
unless Congress intended to preempt common law, which Congress has not done 
in this area.”). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 46 change upon filing its supplemental application with the 
FDA; it need not wait for FDA approval. 
 
Wyeth v. Levine, 555 U.S. 555, 568 (2009) (quoting 21 CFR 
§§ 314.70(c)(6)(iii)(A), (C)). 
 In Wyeth, the Supreme Court said that the maker of a 
prescription drug could establish that it was impossible for it to comply with both state law and the FDCA with “clear evidence 
that the FDA would not have approved a change to [the brand name 
drug’s] label” required by state law.  Id. at 571.  “Clear 
evidence” that the FDA would not have approved a change requires 
a showing that the drug maker “fully informed the FDA of the 
justifications for the warning required by state law and that 
the FDA, in turn, informed the drug manufacturer that the FDA 
would not approve changing the drug’s label to include that 
warning.”27  Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp. v. Albrecht, 139 S. Ct. 
1668, 1678 (2019).  Here, Defendants have not provided “clear evidence” that 
the FDA would have rejected an earlier label-update proposal.  
In fact, as the State points out, the record shows that the FDA 
eventually put information about the poor responder issue in a 
 
27  The drug maker need not show that the FDA formally rejected the 
proposed label change, just that it would have rejected it had it been 
sought.  See In re Zofran (Ondansetron) Prod. Liab. Litig., 541 F. Supp. 3d 
164, 203 (D. Mass. 2021) (“Multiple courts have found [conflict] preemption 
where the manufacturer had not requested the precise warning sought by the 
plaintiffs when the FDA had nonetheless made it clear that it would not 
accept that label change.”); Seufert v. Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., 187 F. 
Supp. 3d 1163, 1170 (S.D. Cal. 2016) (“[M]anufacturer submission of a 
proposed labeling change is relevant, but not dispositive, in determining 
whether a defendant can establish conflict preemption.”). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 47 black box warning on Plavix’s label.  It’s conceivable that the 
FDA would have rejected any pre-Mega study attempts to update 
Plavix’s label on the grounds that the CYP2C19 poor responder 
information wasn’t necessarily clinically relevant.  But there’s 
no “clear evidence” that would have happened. 
Defendants’ contention that they could not have used the 
CBE regulation to update Plavix’s label before December 2008 
because CBE-updates are only allowed when drug makers have “new information” about a drug is unconvincing.  Wyeth considered - 
and rejected - the drug maker’s similar argument that it could not have used the CBE regulation to update its label with a 
warning required by state law because it did not have “newly 
acquired information” about its product.
28  The FDA’s definition 
of “‘newly acquired information’ is not limited to new data, but 
also encompasses ‘new analyses of previously submitted data.’”  
Wyeth, 555 U.S. at 569 (citation omitted). 
The FDA’s expansive definition of “newly acquired 
information”29 drowns Defendants’ preemption claim.  If, as the 
 
28  The Court explained that this broad definition of newly acquired 
information “accounts for the fact that risk information accumulates over 
time and that the same data may take on a different meaning in light of subsequent developments.”  Wyeth, 555 U.S. at 569. 
 
29  The definition of “newly acquired information” provided in 21 CFR 
§ 314.3(b) is: 
 
Newly acquired information is data, analyses, or other 
information not previously submitted to the Agency, which 
may include (but is not limited to) data derived from new 
clinical studies, reports of adverse events, or new *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 48 State alleges, Defendants knew enough about the poor responder 
issue to trigger a duty under state law to update the Plavix 
label, then they would also have enough “newly acquired 
information” to effectuate that update through the CBE 
regulations. 
 Defendants have not established it would have been 
impossible under federal law for them to add information about 
the poor responder issue to the Plavix label. 
B.
 Summary judgment on materiality 
 
We now turn to the circuit court’s summary judgment ruling 
on materiality.   
The defendant companies argue that the court erred by 
granting partial summary judgment to the State on materiality. They also argue the court made an “alternative” ruling that 
ignored the summary judgment framework.  We agree.  
We review a trial court’s grant of summary judgment de 
novo.  Umberger v. Dep’t of Land & Nat. Res., 140 Hawaiʻ i 500, 
512, 403 P.3d 277, 289 (2017).  Because materiality is “ordinarily for the trier of fact,” summary judgment on this 
element is “often inappropriate.”  Courbat, 111 Hawaiʻ i at 263, 
141 P.3d at 436 (cleaned up).  
 
analyses of previously submitted data (e.g., meta- analyses) 
if the studies, events, or analyses reveal risks of a 
different type or greater severity or frequency than 
previously included in submissions to FDA. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 49 Here, the summary judgment grant was inappropriate for two 
reasons.  First, the circuit court disregarded evidence that 
raised genuine factual disputes about the materiality of the 
information in the 2010 Black Box Warning.  Second, calling 
itself the “Ultimate Trier of Fact,” the court made an 
alternative ruling and weighed evidence before trial, finding 
materiality, and straying from the summary judgment framework. 
We vacate both the court’s “traditional” and “alternative” 
summary judgment rulings. 
1.  Disregarded Evidence  
Under UDAP, a representation or omission is considered 
material if it “involves information that is important to consumers and, hence, likely to affect their choice of, or 
conduct regarding, a product” — in this case, Plavix.  Courbat, 
111 Hawaiʻ i at 262, 141 P.3d at 435 (cleaned up).  The test is 
objective, not subjective.  Id.  It considers the viewpoint of 
the “reasonable consumer, not the particular consumer.”  See 
Yokoyama v. Midland Nat’l Life Ins. Co., 594 F.3d 1087, 1092 
(9th Cir. 2010). 
Urging summary judgment, the State argued that the 
information placed in the 2010 boxed warning was material to 
consumers.  The State stressed that a black box warning is the 
most serious warning the FDA can require.  Both BMS and the FDA 
considered the information on this label “the most important *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 50 information.”  It also presented eight survey findings from the 
defendant companies’ 40-doctor telephone survey on how the boxed 
warning impacted the doctors’ prescribing behavior.
 
The defendant companies did not deny that black box 
warnings are important in the abstract.  Rather, they argued 
that in this case, no speculation was necessary about whether 
the label information relating to poor-responders was “likely” 
to affect doctors’ prescribing decisions.  There was already a 
decade of evidence about what Hawaiʻ i doctors actually did in 
response to the label change: not much. 
Their expert testimony, the companies said, “uniformly 
demonstrates that the boxed warning did not affect [doctors’] 
prescriptions of Plavix.”  The companies stressed that the 
Hawaiʻi doctors s aid that their clinical practices were not 
impacted by the disclosure of information about CYP2C19 poor 
metabolizers.  
Dr. Todd Seto, for example, stated that even though 70 
percent of his patients are of Asian or Pacific Island descent, 
the black box warning hasn’t affected his practice.  
He 
maintained that “nearly all” the angioplasty patients at Queen’s Medical Center in Honolulu take Plavix.  Dr. Seto also said that 
he was “not aware” of any physician at Queen’s who “conducts 
routine genetic testing before prescribing Plavix” to determine if someone is a poor responder. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 51 The companies also pointed to evidence from the State’s 
public health journal: it recommended that Hawai
ʻi doctors not 
change their prescribing practice based on the boxed warning and 
that genetic testing not be done.  Adding to that, State public 
health agencies reimburse for Plavix without regard to race or 
genotype and without requiring genetic testing.  Further, the 
companies said, Hawaiʻ i Medicaid reimbursements of Plavix 
increased after the boxed warning, including for patients of 
most Asian ethnicities.  
Taken in the light most favorable to them, the companies 
argued, the black box warning did not change the medical 
community’s prescribing practices or genetic testing practices.  
They maintained that consumers continued to take Plavix despite 
the warning, raising a strong inference that the warning was not material to consumers.  
The circuit court disagreed.  It rejected the companies’ 
materiality evidence, finding that when information relates to 
safety and health, there’s a presumption that it’s material.  
Since materiality is determined by an objective, patient-
oriented test, evidence about the behavior of doctors could 
never create a genuine issue of material fact.  The court ruled 
that the defendant companies failed to overcome the materiality 
presumption. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 52 The court erred.  First, it overstated the presumption of 
materiality.  Second, in refusing to consider any evidence about 
doctors’ prescribing behavior, the court misinterpreted the 
objective, patient-centered materiality test. 
The presumption of materiality that the court relied on 
comes from the deceptive advertising context.  See Novartis 
Corp. v. F.T.C., 223 F.3d 783 (D.C. Cir. 2000); In re Thompson 
Med. Co., Inc., 104 F.T.C. 648 (1984); In re Simeon Mgmt. Corp., 
87 F.T.C. 1184 (1976).30 
A presumption of materiality does not end things.  It’s not 
“an inflexible rule that eliminates [the] need to look at 
materiality on a case-by-case basis.”  Thompson Med., 104 F.T.C. 
at 648 n.45.  Overcoming the presumption of materiality is “not a high hurdle.”  In re Novartis Corp., 127 F.T.C. 580, 686 
(1999).  Defendants may always counter the presumption with extrinsic evidence, including “expert testimony, consumer 
research, and evidence of how the networks and other expert bodies interpreted the advertisements.”  Thompson Med., 104 
F.T.C. at 24. 
The State’s materiality argument is ultimately one from 
intuition – the intuition that something the FDA considers very 
 
30  The State only cited Novartis C orp. v. F.T.C. for its presumption of 
materiality argument.  And the court cited only one case that concerned an 
omission, rather than affirmative deception.  It involved a company that 
advertised its product as medical but did not tell consumers the product was 
not FDA- approved.  In re Simeon Mgmt., 87 F.T.C. 1184.  This case did not 
mention a presumption of materiality.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 53 important for consumers to see must be material to those 
consumers. 
But materiality is about what consumers do, not what the 
FDA thinks.  See In re ConAgra Foods, Inc., 90 F. Supp. 3d 919, 
1020 (C.D. Cal. 2015) (in misleading marketing case the “relevant question” was not whether the FDA requires that GMO 
food be labeled non-natural, but rather, how a “reasonable 
consumer” would have understood the term “100% Natural” and whether it would have been “material to [their] purchasing 
decision”).  If the companies are able to present evidence that 
the information did not, in fact, change consumer behavior, they 
are entitled to do so. 
Nor are the companies’ statements that they considered the 
label information “important” a slam-dunk for the State.  
Because the standard is whether the information is material to a 
reasonable consumer, not the defendants.  See Courbat, 111 
Hawaiʻi at 262, 141 P.3d at 435; see also In re McCormick & Co., 
Inc., Pepper Products Mktg. & Sales Practices Litig., 422 F. 
Supp. 3d 194, 250 (D.D.C. 2019) (observing that “evidence of a 
defendant’s opinion as to materiality is not an adequate 
substitute for extrinsic evidence.”). 
In short, the circle of what the FDA and the companies 
consider “important” may not wholly overlap with the circle of 
what consumers consider “material” to their decisions. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 54 The same can be said for what doctors consider important. 
But while the prescribing decisions of doctors are not 
synonymous with consumer behavior, they are certainly not 
irrelevant to it.  
The reality is that patients do not operate in a vacuum 
when making decisions about prescription drugs.  Objectively 
reasonable patients may rely on their doctors to help them make 
sense of drug labels.  See In re Reglan Litig., 142 A.3d 725, 
738 n.8 (N.J. 2016) (“While the drug labels are initially 
disseminated to doctors and pharmacists, they, in turn, inform 
their patients, passing the warnings on to consumers.”).  
So, while patients and doctors cannot be conflated, the 
testimony of prescribing doctors also cannot be completely 
written off.  The fact that cardiologists in Hawaiʻ i continued to 
prescribe Plavix to patients of all ethnicities even after the 
introduction of the black box warning bore on whether a 
“reasonable” patient would choose to purchase the drug.  The 
circuit court erred by shutting out this category of evidence 
entirely. 
The substantial evidence and testimony the defendant 
companies mustered that Hawaiʻ i doctors did not change their 
Plavix prescribing practices after the placement of the label and did not recommend genetic testing to patients was enough to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 55 create a genuine dispute of material fact on materiality.  To 
hold otherwise was error. 
2.  
Alternative Ruling 
The circuit court gave a back-up explanation for granting 
the State’s partial summary judgment motion.  This alternative ruling involved the court weighing the evidence as if it were 
trying the case.  The court felt “confident” it “would reach the 
same conclusion” if the materiality issue were presented at trial.  So it ruled on materiality at the summary judgment 
stage, disregarding the summary judgment framework: “When ruling 
on summary judgment prior to a bench trial — as here — the court 
need not resolve inferences in favor of the non-moving party.” 
That is not how summary judgment works.  A court must 
consider the evidence “in the light most favorable to the non-
moving party” at summary judgment.  Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawaiʻ i 
46, 56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1286 (2013) (cleaned up).  The moving party bears the burden of persuasion.  Yoneda v. Tom, 110 Hawaiʻ i 
367, 384, 133 P.3d 796, 813 (2006).  To prevail, the moving 
party must demonstrate that there’s no genuine dispute about the 
material facts and the “undisputed facts” show the court should 
grant summary judgment as a matter of law.  Id. (citing Lee v. 
Puamana Cmty. Ass’n, 109 Hawaiʻ i 5 61, 567, 128 P.3d 874, 880 
(2006)).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 56 Whether a motion for summary judgment is brought in a jury 
trial or a bench trial makes no difference.  A judge deciding a 
summary judgment motion may not fact-find, even if the matter is 
set for a for a bench trial.  See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, 
Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 249 (1986) (“[A]t the summary judgment stage 
the judge’s function is not himself to weigh the evidence and 
determine the truth of the matter but to determine whether there 
is a genuine issue for trial.”)  
Summary judgment is no substitute for trial.  The record is 
thinner.  There’s no cross-examination.  The court has seen only 
a small snapshot of the case.  An improvident grant of summary 
judgment denies a party the chance to fully mount an offense or 
defense.  
That is why the summary judgment process has a safeguard – 
the inference in favor of the non-moving party.  Ralston, 129 
Hawaiʻi at 56, 292 P.3d at 1286; see also Nolan v. Heald College, 
551 F.3d 1148, 1154 (9th Cir. 2009) (trial court that weighed 
evidence at the summary judgment stage “ignor[ed] the 
protections that summary judgment usually affords the non-moving 
party”).  Without this safeguard, summary judgment would end-run 
the trial right. 
The circuit court deviated from the normal summary judgment
framework.  The court found a material fact – materiality - before trial, supporting its “alternative ruling” with a  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
57 citation to TransWorld Airlines, Inc. v. Am. Coupon Exch., Inc., 
913 F.2d 676 (9th Cir. 1990), recommended by the State.  Quoting 
the Ninth Circuit, the court said: “where the ultimate fact in 
dispute is destined for decision by the court rather than by a 
jury, there is no reason why the court and the parties should go 
through the motions of a trial if the court will eventually end up deciding on the same record.”  TransWorld, 913 F.2d at 684.  
TransWorld did not prod trial judges to weigh facts at the 
summary judgment stage.  Rather, in TransWorld the court scolded 
the judge below for skipping to summary judgment on a “wholly 
inadequate” factual record.  Id. at 683 (“[W]e conclude that the 
record is wholly inadequate, and the district court’s own opinion is the most persuasive testimony to that inadequacy.”).  
TransWorld acknowledged that when a question was pure law, 
where trial would not alter the factual record, there is no need 
to “go through the motions of trial.”  Id. at 684.  But, the 
court stressed, “courts must not rush to dispose summarily of 
cases — especially novel, complex, or otherwise difficult cases 
of public importance — unless it is clear that more complete 
factual development could not possibly alter the outcome and 
that the credibility of the witnesses’ statements or testimony 
is not at issue.”  Id. at 684–85.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 58 For a case like this one – novel, complex, and of great 
public importance – a developed factual record is essential to a 
fair trial. 
Here, the court found the defendant companies’ evidence 
“weak and unpersuasive.”  It said that “even” if the Defendants 
presented other evidence, “this Court is convinced that if the 
issue of materiality were litigated at trial the Court would 
ultimately conclude that the information in the Black Box Warning is material.”
 
Trial courts have no business factfinding at the summary 
judgment stage.  We vacate the court’s alternative ruling. 
C. UDAP – Deceptive Acts or Practices 
 
The court’s grant of summary judgment on materiality 
reverberated throughout the trial.  Because the materiality 
ruling formed the basis of the court’s holding that the 
defendant companies committed deceptive acts or practices, we 
vacate this part of the holding. 
Materiality is an essential element of a UDAP deceptive 
acts violation.  See Courbat, 111 Hawaiʻ i at 262, 1 41 P.3d at 435 
(To prove a deceptive act or practice under UDAP, a plaintiff must show “(1) a representation, omission, or practice that (2) 
is likely to mislead consumers acting reasonably under the 
circumstances where (3) the representation, omission, or practice is material.”)  When the court issued its findings of *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 59 fact and conclusions of law, it remarked that it had “already 
determined that the information in the 2016 boxed warning was 
material.”  But we have vacated that determination.  Materiality 
is now an unproven element.  The deceptive acts holding based on 
it cannot stand. 
For deceptive acts liability, the court must also find that 
the omission in question was likely to mislead consumers.  In 
its decision, the court found that “the omission of this material
 information was likely to mislead consumers.”  
(Emphasis added.)  This phrasing suggests that the court found the omission likely to mislead consumers in part or in whole 
because it was an omission of material information.  This throws 
the other main element of deceptive acts liability into doubt as 
well.  
Lack of an essential element (or two) is enough to vacate a 
result.  But the materiality ruling marred the trial outcomes in 
other, more far-reaching ways.  In its summary judgment order, 
the court ruled that evidence of “what’s happening in Hawaiʻ i,” 
such as “prescription practices and genetics testing practices” 
after the 2010 Black Box Warning could not be introduced at 
trial.  The court drew a thick line in the sand: it would not 
hear medical expert testimony on anything that happened after 
2010, when the FDA first placed its boxed warning on Plavix.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 60 Based on its materiality ruling, the court granted a motion 
in limine by the State to substantially limit the testimony of 
Defendants’ main expert witnesses, three Hawai
ʻi cardiologists.  
These doctors were not allowed to testify about “their own 
practices regarding use of Plavix” after 2010.  Nor could they 
provide any opinions based on “medical or scientific literature” 
that drew upon post-2010 data. 
Defendants had wanted to argue that the Plavix story didn’t 
end in 2010.  Hawaiʻ i doctors continued to treat patients of all 
ethnic backgrounds with Plavix, guidelines continued to recommend Plavix treatment, and in 2016, the FDA walked back 
part of its 2010 warning, removing language that warned of worse 
clinical outcomes for CYP2C19 poor-responders.  But Defendants 
could not make this argument; their expert witnesses were not allowed to discuss any of it. 
At the heart of the State’s case is the notion that, for a 
large chunk of Hawaiʻ i’s
 population, Plavix is a bad drug, little 
better than a placebo.  Bristol-Myers Squibb and Sanofi vehemently disagree.  But unlike the State, they did not have 
the chance to make their case fully at trial.  We therefore 
vacate the circuit court’s deceptive acts holding. 
D. UDAP – Unfair Acts or Practices 
 
Unfair act UDAP claims are distinct from deceptive act UDAP
claims.  To violate HRS § 480-2, a plaintiff may show that an  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 61 act or practice is deceptive or unfair.  See Bronster v. U.S. 
Steel Corp., 82 
Hawaiʻi 32, 50-51, 919 P.2d 294, 312-13 (1996)
(jury instructions wrongly conflated deceptive acts and unfair
acts under UDAP).  A practice is unfair if it (1) offended 
public policy, (2) was immoral, unethical, oppressive, or 
unscrupulous, or (3) substantially injured Hawaiʻ i
 consumers. 
See Hungate v. Law Office of David B. Rosen, 139 Hawaiʻ i 394, 
411, 391 P.3d 1, 18 (2017).   
 
 
The circuit court found that the defendant companies 
violated the UDAP in each unfair acts or practices way.  
We conclude that the court’s materiality ruling affected 
its unfair acts finding on “substantial injury.”  The State, 
however, proved separate and independent grounds to find the 
defendant companies’ conduct offended public policy and was 
immoral under UDAP.  These findings support the court’s unfair 
acts holding. 
1. No Substantial Injury 
 
The Defendants argue that the court’s unfair acts holding 
must meet the same fate as its deceptive acts holding.  Because both were impermissibly tainted by the materiality ruling, 
neither can stand.   
The companies acknowledge, as they must, that materiality 
is not an element of unfair act claims.  But they maintain that the court’s premature materiality ruling prevented them from *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 62 mounting a complete defense on their unfair acts or practice 
claim.  And they point to language in the court’s holding that 
assumed the materiality of the black box warning. 
We agree – up to a point.  The circuit court found the companies’ conduct unfair by 
every possible measure: it was against public policy; it was immoral, unethical, and unscrupulous; 
and it was substantially 
injurious to consumers.  
The court’s misplaced materiality ruling played a part in 
some of these findings.  Most significantly, it impacted the 
court’s finding that the companies’ conduct substantially 
injured consumers.  
Substantial injury, more so than the other unfair prongs, 
focuses on consequences for consumers.  Defendants’ most basic 
argument against materiality – that in practice, the information 
in the black box did not matter and patients were not harmed by 
its absence – goes to substantial injury just as much as it goes to materiality.  And the evidence that Defendants wished to but 
could not introduce about what actually happened after 2010 is 
probative to the question of consumer injury.  
The court first found that consumers were injured because 
they were denied “the opportunity to consider whether to undergo 
genetic testing” to determine their response to Plavix.  At 
summary judgment, Defendants mustered evidence that Hawaiʻ i *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 63 hospitals and doctors do not currently perform genetic testing 
before prescribing Plavix.  If patients aren’t given genetic 
testing before taking Plavix now
, Defendants argued, how were 
they harmed by not having genetic testing then?  This evidence and this argument were not tested at trial.  The court prevented 
the companies from introducing any evidence of medical practices 
after 2010, including genetic testing practices.  
Second, the court found that “patients with CYP2C19 loss-
of-function alleles” were injured because they were deprived of “the opportunity to make informed decisions” about taking Plavix 
versus an alternative treatment.  For a lack of information to 
harm consumers, that information must be material to them.  It 
may well have been.  But because the court prematurely decided 
the materiality issue, findings of harm to consumers that hinge 
on that materiality also cannot stand. 
The court similarly found that patients were harmed because 
they could not “give informed consent to their treatment.”  This more broadly-phrased restatement of the court’s second finding 
fails for the same reason. 
Lastly, the court found that the defendant companies harmed 
“an indeterminate number” of patients who were deprived of the 
“intended risk reduction [they] were relying on Plavix to 
provide.”  This holding also rests on a chain of assumptions 
that the materiality ruling prevented the Defendants from *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 64 contesting.  Namely, Defendants were foreclosed from arguing 
that if doctors do not currently test patients for CYP2C19 
alleles before prescribing and still prescribe Plavix regularly 
across ethnic groups, it is reasonable to infer that the medical 
community thinks Plavix provides adequate risk reduction.  
Doctor testimony on their current practice is plainly relevant 
to the question of whether a drug substantially injures patients 
by providing lower risk reduction, but the court’s materiality ruling effectively barred that testimony. 
Materiality mattered for each of the court’s substantial 
injury findings.  So we throw out that portion of the court’s 
unfair act holding. 
2. Hawai
ʻi Unfair Acts or Practices Law 
 
Substantial injury is out.  Under the Federal Trade 
Commission Act – the original inspiration for UDAP - this would be the end of the matter: no substantial injury, no unfair acts 
claim.   
But under 
 law, the State didn’t need to run the 
table on unfair conduct.  Our UDAP caselaw does not require a 
plaintiff to prove all three prongs of unfair acts.  Rather, 
“[a] practice may be unfair because of the degree to which it meets one of the criteria or because to a lesser extent it meets 
all three.”  Hungate, 139 Hawaiʻ i at 411, 391 P.3d at 18 (quotingHawaiʻi
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 65 Kapunakea Partners v. Equilon Enters., LLC, 679 F. Supp. 2d
1203, 1210 (D. Haw. 2009)).  
This conflicts with the federal approach.  Congress amended 
the FTC Act in 1994.  Now, plaintiffs suing under the FTC Act 
must prove substantial injury (and more) for an unfair acts 
claim.31  See LabMD, Inc. v. Fed. Trade Comm’n, 894 F.3d 1221, 
1226 n.10 (11th Cir. 2018) (explaining that “for an act or practice to be unfair, the act or practice [1] causes or is likely to cause substantial injury to consumers [2] which is not 
reasonably avoidable by consumers themselves and [3] not 
outweighed by countervailing benefits to consumers or to 
competition.”) (quoting 15 U.S.C. § 45(n)) (cleaned up)). 
When interpreting the UDAP, we give “due consideration to 
the rules, regulations, and decisions of the Federal Trade 
Commission and the federal courts interpreting section 5(a)(1) 
of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. [§] 45(a)(1)), as 
from time to time amended.”  HRS § 480-2(b).  But no one – not 
 
31  15 U.S.C. § 45(n) (2006) reads:  
 
The Commission shall have no authority under this section 
or section 57a of this title to declare unlawful an act or 
practice on the grounds that such act or practice is unfair 
unless the act or practice causes or is likely to cause 
substantial injury to consumers which is not reasonably 
avoidable by consumers themselves and not outweighed by 
countervailing benefits to consumers or to competition.  In 
determining whether an act or practice is unfair, the Commission may consider established public policies as 
evidence to be considered with all other evidence.  Such 
public policy considerations may not serve as a primary 
basis for such determination. 
 
(Emphases added.) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 66 the State, nor the defendant companies – raised the 1994 FTC Act 
amendment.  (Nor apparently did the parties in our earlier UDAP 
cases.)  Everyone operated under the assumption that the federal 
changes did not matter, and the State could win without proving 
substantial injury.  This assumption must remain. 
We turn to a separate issue that the circuit court 
spotlighted: an incongruity in this court’s treatment of UDAP 
unfair acts or practices suits. 
The circuit court pointed out that despite Hungate’s “meets 
one of the criteria” directive, that case also said “[a] practice is unfair when it [1] offends established public policy 
and [2] when the practice is immoral, unethical, oppressive, 
unscrupulous or [3] substantially injurious to consumers.”  139 
Hawaiʻi at 411, 391 P.3d at 18 (citation omitted) (emphases 
added).  This implied that UDAP plaintiffs must demonstrate public policy plus one of the other elements, while at the same 
time allowing any one element, alone, to suffice. 
We clarify Hawaiʻ i’s unfair acts or practices UDAP test in 
one respect: meeting any one of the three criteria supports an 
unfair acts or practices UDAP claim. 
Our approach to unfair acts or practices traces to F.T.C. 
v. Sperry & Hutchinson Co., 405 U.S. 233 (1972).  In Sperry, the 
Supreme Court ruled that the FTC Act gave the FTC broad powers 
to determine practices as unfair or deceptive, despite their *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 67 effect on competition.  Sperry adopted factors the FTC had 
developed in the cigarette advertising context to determine
whether a practice was unfair:  
(1) [W]hether the practice, without necessarily having been 
previously considered unlawful, offends public policy as it has been established by statutes, the common law, or 
otherwise— whether, in other words, it is within at least 
the penumbra of some common- law, statutory, or other 
established concept of unfairness; (2) whether it is 
immoral, unethical, oppressive, or unscrupulous; (3) 
whether it causes substantial injury to consumers . . . 
 
405 U.S. at 244 n.5.  Sperry left open what combination of these 
factors would be sufficient to show unfair acts liability. 
In Spiegel, Inc. v. F.T.C., 540 F.2d 287 (7th Cir. 1976), 
the Seventh Circuit took a “public policy plus” approach to the 
Sperry factors.  It inserted the disjunctive “or” between 
Sperry’s second and third criteria, holding that “A practice is 
unfair when it offends established public policy and when the 
practice is immoral, unethical, oppressive, unscrupulous or 
substantially injurious to consumers.”  Id. at 293 (emphases 
added). 
Then, in Rosa v. Johnston, 3 Haw. App. 420, 427, 651 P.2d 
1228, 1234 (1982), the Intermediate Court of Appeals adopted Spiegel’s rearrangement of Sperry.  Later, in the context of 
holding that deceptive and unfair are distinct under UDAP, we 
mentioned Rosa in passing and said that the ICA “properly” 
defined unfair acts.  Bronster, 82 Hawaiʻ i at 51, 919 P.2d at 
313. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 68 But Spiegel’s interpretation of Sperry was not the only 
one.  The FTC read Sperry to mean that “[a]ll three criteria do 
not need to be satisfied to support a finding of unfairness.  A 
practice may be unfair because of the degree to which it meets 
one of the criteria or because to a lesser extent it meets all 
three.”  Promulgation of Trade Regulation Rule and Statement of 
Basis and Purpose, Disclosure Requirements and Prohibitions 
Concerning Franchising and Business Opportunity Ventures, 43 
Fed. Reg. 59614, 59635 (1978). 
The FTC’s reading worked for the United States District 
Court for the District of Hawaiʻ i.   Kapunakea, 679 F. 
Supp. 2d at 
1210.  Weighing in on HRS § 480-2, the district court referred 
to Rosa, Bronster, and Spiegel.  Id.  Then it returned to 
Sperry, noting that the Sperry test came straight from the FTC 
and that the FTC in 1978 interpreted the three factors to be 
disjunctive.  The district court followed the FTC’s approach.  
When we took up the unfair acts issue once more in Hungate, 
we approved Kapunakea’s reasoning: any one of the three criteria 
could constitute an unfair practice under HRS § 480-2.  139 
Hawaiʻi at 411, 3 91 P.3d at 18.  But Hungate inharmoniously 
retained the “and-or” language from Spiegel.  Hungate didn’t 
clarify whether the appropriate test was fully disjunctive. 
We interpret Hawaiʻ i’s consumer protection law in a way that 
maximizes consumer protection.  The UDAP “was constructed in *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
69 broad language in order to constitute a flexible tool to stop 
and prevent fraudulent, unfair or deceptive business practices 
for the protection of both consumers and honest 
business[people].”  Zanakis-Pico v. Cutter Dodge, Inc., 98 
Hawai
ʻi 309, 317, 47 P.3d 1222, 1230 (2002) (citation omitted).  
 The Spiegel approach does not reflect this breadth.  We 
conclude that a disjunctive reading of the Sperry factors best 
aligns with UDAP’s primary purpose - to protect consumers.  
Other states have reached the same conclusion.  See 
Cheshire Mortg. Serv., Inc. v. Montes, 612 A.2d 1130, 1143–44 
(Conn. 1992) (holding that under Sperry, “[a] practice may be 
unfair because of the degree to which it meets one of the 
criteria or because to a lesser extent it meets all three.”); 
see also Robinson v. Toyota Motor Credit Corp., 775 N.E.2d 951, 
961 (Ill. 2002) (“[A]ll three of the criteria in Sperry do not 
need to be satisfied to support a finding of unfairness.”).   
3. Separate, Independent Grounds for UDAP Liability
Having clarified UDAP unfair acts law, all that remains is
to apply it to the present case.  
The circuit court determined that the defendant companies’ 
conduct violated each of the three elements for an unfair acts 
or practices claim.  Their conduct: (1) offended public policy; 
(2) was immoral, unethical, oppressive or unscrupulous; and (3)*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 70 substantially injured  consumers.  See Hungate, 139 
 
at 411, 391 P.3d at 18. HawaiʻiHawaiʻi
 The court’s materiality ruling knocked out its 
substantially injurious findings.  See supra.  
That error, however, is not enough for the companies to 
avoid liability.  The court determined that two separate types 
of unfair acts or practices occurred.  The first type focused on the black box label.  These findings rely on – and thus were 
tainted by - the materiality finding.  But the second type of 
conduct – suppressing research and inquiry into the drug for 
financial reasons – had no connection to the court’s materiality 
ruling.  The court’s findings about the companies suppressing 
inquiry into Plavix poor response have nothing to do with the 
black box label.  They have nothing to do with doctors’ prescribing habits after 2010.  Rather, these findings have 
everything to do with defendant companies “burying their heads 
in the sand” over potential issues with a drug on the market. 
The court’s findings spoke to the other two elements of 
UDAP unfair acts claims.  The court found sufficient facts to 
support the State’s allegation that defendant companies’ conduct 
offended public policy
32 and was unethical. 
 
32  Defendant companies argue that materiality impacted the court’s public 
policy findings, pointing out that the court said: “Defendants’ failure to 
update the Plavix drug warning after learning of the safety risks posed to 
poor metabolizers offends this well- established public policy.”  We agree 
with Defendants: this finding is only relevant if the b lack box label matters *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 71 First, we turn to the court’s public policy findings.  
Public policy covers a broad range, from state and federal law, 
to common law, to Hawai
ʻi policy.  See Hungate, 139 Hawaiʻ i at 
411, 391 P.3d at 18 (“[a] practice may be unfair if it offends 
public policy as it has been established by statutes, the common 
law, or otherwise.”)  (Cleaned up.) 
Pharmaceutical companies have a common law duty to warn 
consumers “when the risks of a particular drug become apparent.”  
Albrecht, 139 S. Ct. at 1677.   
The court-as-factfinder concluded that the companies aimed 
to avoid their common law duty by: “suppressing research and 
continuously and repeatedly failing to further investigate the risks of reduced platelet inhibition in poor metabolizers.”  In 
its findings, the court determined that the companies knew - 
from the moment Plavix launched - about the diminished effects 
of Plavix in non-White populations.  It maintained that the 
companies did not volunteer this information to the FDA.  The 
court further found the companies avoided funding studies which 
could draw more attention to the variability of response, for instance, by rejecting a study on aspirin resistance because “it 
could lead to a similar trial on [Plavix] resistance.”  
 
to consumers.  The court’s materiality ruling foreclosed that evidentiary 
inquiry.  
 
But the court’s reference to the label formed only one part of the 
court’s public policy decision.  The other public policy findings had no connection to the black box label or related evidence.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 72 The companies’ actions, the court found, set back the 
research into CYP2C19 by consciously, repeatedly, and actively 
avoiding the poor responder problem.  All this, according to the 
court, was to avoid “negative marketing implications” for 
Plavix.  
Preventing risks from becoming apparent for financial gain 
offends Hawai
ʻi public policy.  Hawaiʻ i law cannot incentivize 
drug companies to ignore safety risks in the hope that everything will turn out all right in the end.  Even if the drug 
proves to be safe, avoiding investigation into known safety 
issues in order to keep profits up offends public policy.  See, 
e.g., 21 CFR §§ 314.80, 314.81 (requiring a continuing duty of 
surveillance and post-marketing reporting to the FDA of adverse drug experiences).  
The court’s findings also animate its determination that 
the companies behaved in an “immoral, unethical, oppressive, 
unscrupulous” manner.
33  The court determined that the companies 
prioritized profits over patients: defendant companies “buried their heads in the sand” about the problems with Plavix to protect the corporate bottom line.  The court found the 
 
33  There is another difference between Hawaiʻ i’s consumer protection law 
and federal law.  The FTC scrapped Sperry ’s second criteria long ago.  In its 
1980 Unfairness Policy Statement, the FTC called the “immoral, unethical, 
oppressive, unscrupulous” features of an unfair act or practice “largely duplicative. ”  “Conduct that is truly unethical or unscrupulous,” the FTC 
continued, “will almost always injure consumers or violate public policy as well.”  FTC Policy Statement on Unfairness.  https://www.ftc.gov/legal-
library/browse/ftc- policy-statement- unfairness [ https://perma.cc/3VA6- JMFK]. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
73 companies “continued to deny” the issues surrounding poor 
response to the drug despite evidence to the contrary, giving 
the impression that no one had any reason to be alarmed.  See 
Hawaii Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. Keka, 94 
Hawaiʻi 213, 229, 11 
P.3d 1, 17 (2000) (describing conduct as unethical and
unscrupulous when defendant attempted to convince a family to
execute loan documents through false assurances about a lower
interest rate).
4. No Clear Error in FOFs
The defendant companies argue the court clearly erred in
most of the elemental unfair acts and practice factual findings.  We disagree. 
The trial court fulfilled its duty as fact-finder.  See In 
re ASK, 152 Hawaiʻ i 123, 127, 522 P.3d 270, 274 (2022) (“Our view 
reflects a central feature of any trial: the fact-finder – judge or jury - finds facts, weighs and values those facts, and finds 
other facts, the facts of consequence.”).  The court weighed the 
trial evidence; it drew inferences; it made credibility determinations; it valued some testimony and evidence over other 
testimony and evidence. 
Clearly erroneous facts are either (1) not supported by 
substantial evidence in the record, Panoke v. Reef Dev. of 
Hawaii, Inc., 136  448, 460, 363 P.3d 296, 308 (2015) or 
(2) ones where “despite evidence to support the finding, theHawaiʻi*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
74 appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction 
that a mistake has been committed.”  Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the 
Emps.’ Ret. Sys. of the State of Hawaiʻ i, 106 Hawai ʻi 416, 430, 
106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) (cleaned up).  The circuit court’s 
findings do not leave us with either conviction. 
The court made sufficient findings of fact that defendant 
companies’ conduct offended public policy and was immoral under 
UDAP.  The substantial injury findings drop because they were 
affected by the materiality ruling.  But the court’s findings as 
to the other two elements are uncoupled from that error.  These 
findings support the court’s unfair acts decision.  Thus, the 
court’s ruling that Defendants committed unfair acts or practices under UDAP stands. 
E. Penalties
Lastly, we turn to the penalties.  The defendant companies
maintain that the court’s materiality ruling impaired its damages calculation.  We agree.   
We vacate the damage award and remand the penalty issue for 
determination after the deceptive acts question has been 
settled.  
The court based the penalty for violating UDAP on both 
deceptive and unfair acts.  But now, only the State’s unfair 
acts UDAP violation remains.  Any penalty for the deceptive acts claim cannot continue to stand pending a new trial. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 75 We find that the court’s heavy reliance on its materiality 
ruling to reach its penalties determination makes it necessary 
to remand the entire question of damages.  The court reasoned 
that the $834 million penalty was justified because Defendants 
had substantially injured the public.  Those injuries, the court 
explained, flowed from the fact that Defendants had denied 
patients material information.  The “injury to the public” 
paragraph in the court’s penalty award discussion uses the word “material” no fewer than three times.  The court relied on its 
materiality findings – and thus the deceptive acts UDAP claim – 
to calculate its penalty award. 
The per-prescription based penalty also shows the circuit 
court’s reliance on the materiality ruling.  This type of 
penalty only makes sense if the missing black box warning was 
material to consumers.  To illustrate this point, the court used 
the example of hanging an unlawful billboard versus sending 
thousands of unlawful mailers.  For the billboard, an appropriate penalty would count every day the billboard hangs; 
for the mailers, an appropriate penalty would count every mailer 
sent.  The circuit court thought this case was more like the 
mailer situation.  But this only fits if the omitted information 
was material to consumers, making it an injury each time they *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 76 received the prescription without that information.  That is
what the new trial will consider.34 
 
The claim that Defendants engaged in unfair practices 
better fits the billboard example.  Here, the State’s claim 
focuses on the idea that Defendants suppressed research or 
failed to sufficiently investigate leads.  In these 
circumstances, an appropriate penalty would correlate more with 
the length of time the Defendants “buried their heads in the sand.” 
That the court landed on a per-prescription penalty reveals 
how crucial materiality was to the damage calculations. 
Because the penalty award relied on the court’s faulty 
materiality ruling, it must be vacated.  Only the claim that 
Defendants committed unfair acts or practices in violation of 
UDAP remains.  At the new trial, it may be that Defendants will 
be found to have committed deceptive acts as well, or found to 
have only committed unfair practices.  The nature of the UDAP violation will determine the proper penalty for that violation. 
Since the final penalty will be partially contingent on the 
result, the penalty determination should take place after the 
new trial, by the judge who conducts that trial. 
 
34  We are unpersuaded by the defendant companies’ arguments regarding 
“coercive” and “biased” treatment by the trial court.  This case, however, is 
remanded to a new trial judge. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 77 IV. CONCLUSION 
 
We vacate the circuit court’s grant of partial summary 
judgment on materiality, the court’s deceptive acts holding, and  
its penalty award.  The court’s unfair acts holding stands.  We 
remand only as to the deceptive acts and penalty issues. 
Neal Kumar Katyal 
(Paul Alston, Claire Wong Black,Anand Agneshwar, Daniel S. 
Pariser, Katherine B. Wellington
on the briefs) for appellants  
 
 
Thomas C. Goldstein (L. Richard Fried, Jr., Patrick F. McTernan, Kimberly T. Guidry,
Nicholas M. Mclean, Daniel 
Alberstone, Peter Klausner, EvanZucker, Elizabeth Smiley, Catherine H. Dorsey on the 
briefs) 
for appellees  
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna /s/ Todd W. Eddins 
 