***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________  
 
TRACY YOSHIMURA, Plaintiff-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
KEITH KANESHIRO, Defendant- Appellee.  
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCAP-19-0000854 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CAAP-19-0000854; S.P. NO. 1SP181000465) 
 
FEBRUARY 1, 2021  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA AND WILSON, JJ., AND EDDINS, J.,   
IN PLACE OF NAKAYAMA, J., RECUSED, WITH CIRCUIT JUDGE ASHFORD, 
ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
 
I.  Introduction 
 This appeal stems from the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit’s1 (“circuit court”) dismissal, for lack of jurisdiction, 
of Tracy Yoshimura ’s (“Yoshimura”) petition to impeach Honolulu 
 
1  The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided.  Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-19-0000854
01-FEB-2021
09:12 AM
Dkt. 47 OP***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
2 
 City Prosecutor Keith Kaneshiro  (“Kaneshiro ”) under section   
12-203 of the Revised Charter of the City and County of Honolulu  
(2017) (“section 12 -203 of the Revised Charter”).  That 
provision is titled “Impeachment of the Prosecuting Attorney,” 
and it states as follows: 
The prosecuting attorney may be impeached for malfeasance, 
misfeasance or non -feasance in office.  The courts of the 
State of Hawaii shall have jurisdiction as provided by 
applicable law over any proceeding for the removal of the 
prosecuting attorney who may be charged on any of the 
foregoing grounds.  The charges shall be set forth in 
writing in a petition for impeachme nt signed by not less 
than five hundred duly registered voters of the city, and 
said signatures shall be necessary only for the purpose of 
filing the petition.   The petition having once been filed, 
hearings shall be held on all such charges.  
 
 In December 2018, Yoshimura created an online  petition to 
impeach Kaneshiro after  Kaneshiro received a target letter from 
the United States Department of Justice.   Yoshimura asserted his 
petition was supported by 800+ electronic signatures collected 
from an online platform called Change.org.   In April 2019, 
Yoshimura filed a first amended petition purported to be 
electronically signed by 500+ signatories on a different online 
platform, DocuSign.  
 Between February and April 2019, Yoshimura sought the legal 
opinion of the City Clerk as to what information was necessary 
to certify that the signatories of his online petition(s) were 
duly registered voters of the City and County of Honolulu.  In 
April 2019, Deputy Corporation Counsel Moana Yost (“Yost”) set 
forth the City’s position in a letter stating that impeachment ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
3 
 petition(s) must contain the full legible names, handwritten 
(not electronic) signatures, and residence addresses of at least 
500 signatories.  
 Kaneshiro then moved to dismiss the petition, arguing t hat 
electronic signatures did not satisfy the requirements for a 
petition to impeach the city prosecutor under section 12 -203 of 
the Revised Charter.  Yoshimura then moved for leave to amend 
his petition to file a second amended impeachment petition, 
adding the City Clerk as a defendant, and seeking a declaratory 
order that the City must accept electronic signatures under 
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”) Chapter 489E  (2008), Hawaiʻi’s 
Uniform Electronic Transactions Act (“UETA”).  Relevant to this 
appeal, H RS § 489E -7(d) (2008) states, “If a law requires a 
signature, an electronic signature satisfies the law.”  HRS     
§ 489E-18(c) (2008), however, provides  the UETA “does not 
require a governmental agency of this State to use or permit the 
use of electronic records or electronic signatures.”  HRS § 
489E-18(a) (2008) also states “each governmental agency of this 
State shall determine whether, and the extent t o which, it will 
send and accept electronic records and signatures to and from 
other persons  . . . .”  
  Kaneshiro filed an opposition to Yoshimura’s motion for 
leave to amend, which he combined with a cross -motion to strike 
the motion for leave to amend.  The circuit court denied ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
4 
 Kaneshiro’s motion to dismiss, because Yoshimura’s motion for 
leave to amend was pending at that time .  At a later hearing on 
the motion for leave to amend (as well as Kaneshiro’s cross -
motion to strike the motion for leave to ame nd), however, the 
circuit court agreed with  the City that signatories to an 
impeachment petition under section 12 -203 of the Revised Charter 
must provide their full legible names, handwritten signatures, 
and residence addresses to enable the City Clerk to certify them 
as duly registered voters in the City and County of Honolulu and 
to protect the City’s interest against fraud.  The circuit court 
denied Yoshimura’s motion for leave to amend, concluding it 
would be futile, as Yoshimura insisted on providing only 
electronic signatures without residence addresses, to protect 
the priv acy interest of signatories.  The circuit court also 
denied Kaneshiro’s cross -motion to strike Yoshimura’s motion for 
leave to amend.  The circuit court ultimately dismissed 
Yoshimura’s first amended petition for lack of jurisdiction, 
because it did not me et the requirements of section 12 -203 of 
the Revised Charter.  
 Yoshimura filed a motion for reconsideration, arguing that 
the City could not require handwritten signatures and residence 
addresses under section 12 -203 of the Revised Charter without 
first engaging in rulemaking under HRS Chapter 91  (2008) (the 
Hawaiʻi Administrative Procedures Act, or “HAPA”) or otherwise ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
5 
 setting forth its position in a written policy.  The circuit 
court denied the motion for reconsideration, concluding 
Yoshimura raised evid ence and arguments that could have been 
raised earlier in the litigation, and that the motion lacked 
merit in any event.  The circuit court then entered its final 
judgment.  
 On appeal, Yoshimura argues that electronic signatures are 
valid under the law  pursuant to HRS § 489E-7 (2008).  He also 
argues that, to the extent HRS § 489E-18 (2008) provides a 
government agency discretion to reject electronic signatures, 
the government agency must first promulgate rules under HAPA, or 
otherwise set forth a written policy, detailing the 
circumstances under which electronic signatures may be 
rejected.   Yoshimura argues the circuit court erred  in 
concluding HRS § 489E -18 “trumped” HRS § 489E -7’s general 
validation of electronic signatures.  He asserts the circuit 
court erred in dismissing his petition for lack of jurisdiction, 
denying his motion for leave to file a second amended petition, 
and denying his motion for reconsideration of those rulings.  
 Two months after oral argument in this case, Steven Alm was 
elected as City Prosecutor.  He was sworn into office in January 
2021.  Kaneshiro thereafter moved to dismiss this appeal as 
moot.  As this case falls under the “public interest” exception 
to the mootness doctrine, we denied the motion to dismiss and ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
6 
 now proceed to address the merits of this appeal.  We hold that 
Hawaiʻi’s UETA does not apply to the petitions for impeachment in 
this case, principally because application of the UETA requires 
the consent of the parties to transact governmental business 
electronically.  In this case, the City did not consent to be a 
party to a “transaction ” between it and Yoshimura for the 
purpose of certi fying whether petition signatories were duly 
registered voters of the City and County of Honolulu.  
Therefore, the City was not required, under the UETA , to have 
developed s ome form of written policy regarding the use and 
acceptance of electronic signature s.  We further hold that the 
City was not required, under HAPA, to have promulgated a rule 
concerning electronic signatures.  We therefore affirm th e 
circuit court’s final judgment.   
II.  Background  
A.   Petition for i mpeachment , Yoshimura’s c orrespondence with 
 Corporation Counsel and the Office of Elections,  and first 
 amended p etition 
 
 1.  Petition for i mpeachment  
 
 On December 18, 20182, the circuit court received 
Yoshimura’s “Petition for Impeachment of Prosecuting Attorney 
Keith M. Kane shiro Pursuant to Sec. 12 -203 of the Honolulu City 
Charter etc [.]” (“petition for impeachment”).   Yoshimura had 
 
2  The petition for impeachment was filed December 20, 2018 .   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
7 
 circulated an online petition on the platform Change.org 
alleging that Kaneshiro had committed malfeasance, misfeasance, 
or nonfeasance in office by failing to take appropriate action 
with respect to his deputy prosecutors, including Katherine 
Kealoha.3  At the time Yoshimura circulated his initial online 
petition, Kealoha had been indicted in federal court,4 and 
Yoshimura believed two other deputy prosecutors  had received 
subject letters.5  Yoshimura’s online petition went on to state 
that Kaneshiro him self had received a target letter but failed 
to inform officials of the City and County of Honolulu and State 
of Hawaiʻi, choosing instead to remain on the job.   Yoshimura 
asserted that Kaneshiro’s continued presence on the job would 
jeopardize the integrity of past and present criminal 
prosecutions.    
 Yoshimura attached an Excel spreadsheet listing the names, 
cities, states, and zip codes of 861 people represent ed to have 
electronically signed the Change.org online petition.   In a 
declaration appended to the petition for impeachment, Yoshimura 
“acknowledge[d] that some of the individuals that have signed 
the petition may NOT be duly registered voters in the City and 
 
3  Yoshimura also named two additional deputy prosecutors he believed had 
received target letters.  One had not.   
 
4  Kealoha has since been convicted and sentenced on federal charges.  
 
5  See supra note 3.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
8 
 County of Honolulu.”   There were alleged signatories identified 
as being from other counties in the State of Hawaiʻi, as well as 
from other states and countries.   Additionally, while some 
signatories listed their city as somewhere within the City and 
County of Honolulu, they were identified only by their initials  
or by incomplete or false name s (e.g., “J S,” “Donald Duck ,” 
“1L”).    
 2.   Yoshimura’s c orrespondence with Corporation Counsel  
  and the Office of Elections  
 
 Sometime after filing the petition for impeachment, it 
appears Yoshimura became concerned about whether the City Clerk 
would certify the signatories as duly registered voters of the 
City and County of Honolulu.  In February 2019, Yoshimura’s 
counsel wrote to the City and County of Honolulu’s  Corporation 
Counsel Paul S. Aoki, acknowledging that the City Clerk’s office 
“certif[ies] that individuals signing the petition are voters,” 
and that “certification of the individuals who signed the 
petition . . . may be an issue.”   Although the Change.org 
petition collected only name, city, and zip code information, 
Yoshimura’s counsel “propos[ed] to collect the following 
information from signatories:  full name, last 4 digits of 
Social Security Number, and zip code of the person’s res idence 
address.”   Counsel explained that Yoshimura preferred to keep 
residence addresses of signatories private.   Deputy Corporation ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
9 
 Counsel Yost responded that the City Clerk w ould await 
instructions, if any, from the circuit court from an upcoming 
status conference.    
 In March 2019,  Yost wrote to Yoshimura’s counsel to inform 
him that “[p]etitions that the City Clerk reviewed in the past 
to confirm voter registration have generally included the 
following information:  (1) date of signature; (2) signature; 
(3) printed name; and (4) residence address.”   She also pointed 
out, “As you know, the City Clerk has not received or been 
instructed to certify or review any petition” in this case.   She 
repeated her intention to await instructions, if any, fro m the 
circuit court.    
 In April 2019,  the parties and their attorneys, as well as 
Yost, met in person to discuss the City Clerk’s certification 
process.   That meeting was memorialized in separate letters from 
Yoshimura’s counsel and Yost, wherein the City ’s position was 
clear:  the City Clerk required signatories’ residence addresses 
and would not accept electronic signatures.   In a memorandum in 
support of an April 2019 status conference, Kaneshiro informed 
the court that he supported and joined the City’ s position , as 
set forth in an April 18, 2019 letter from Yost .  The City 
formalized its opinion in an April 23, 2019 letter authored by 
Yost.  The City explained that the City Clerk checks residence 
addresses against the Statewide Voter Registration System to ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
10 
 confirm that the signatory is a duly registered voter of the 
city.  The City explained that it also required handwritten 
signatures to “detect[] fraudulent or questionable signatures.”   
The City cited to HRS § 489E-18(a) and (c) for t he proposition 
that it is not required to permit the use of electronic 
signatures and can “determine whether, and the extent to which, 
it [would] accept . . .  electronic signatures . . . and rely 
upon . . . electronic signatures.”   The City also stated in its 
letter that Yoshimura’s petition had not been presented to the 
City Clerk for certification of voter registration status of the 
signatories to the online petition.       
 3.  First amended p etition  
 On April 12, 2019, Yoshimura filed his “First Amended 
Petition for Impeachment of Prosecuting Attorney Keith M. 
Kaneshiro Pursuant to Sec. 12 -203 etc.” (“first amended 
petition”).   In the first amended petition, Yoshimura again 
acknowled ged that not all signatories to his online petition 
were register ed voters of the City and County of Honolulu.   He 
stated that when he was “unable to obtain a formal legal opinion 
from the City Clerk or Corporation Counsel’s office regarding 
the validity of electronic signatures, nor the information 
needed to verify tho se signatures as duly registered voters of 
the City and County of Honolulu ,” he sought the assistance of 
State Senator Maile M. Shimabukuro and Nedielyn Bueno, a “Voter ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
11 
 Services” employee of the State Office of Elections, to 
determine what information was necessary to verify the identity 
of a voter during the voter registration process.   He attached 
an email string between Shimabukuro and Bueno as an exhibit.   In 
the email string, Senator Shimabukuro wrote to Scott Nago, the 
director of the Office of Electi ons, on March 25, 2019, to ask 
“whether a voter’s registration status can be verified via their 
first and last name, signature, last 4 digits of [ their Social 
Security number], and zip code.”   She also asked whether a 
driver’s license number could be used in lieu of the last four 
digits of a Social Security number.       
 Bueno responded the following day, stating that the 
registration status of a voter is verified using a Hawaiʻi 
driver’s license number or Hawaiʻi state identification number 
(or, if none, the last four digits of an individual’s Social 
Security number), along with name, date of birth, and residence 
address.  She stated that a signature “is not used to verify 
voter registration status,” but it is us ed to validate a voter’s 
returned absentee ballot.      
 Senator Shimabukuro sent a follow -up email two days later 
relaying “a constituent’s” question asking whether residence 
addresses were necessary to verify voter registration, given 
“issues such as iden tity theft and other personal ‘safety’ 
issues.”   Four days later, on April 1, 2019, Bueno responded by ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
12 
 stating that the information required to register  to vote online 
is full name, date of birth, last four digits of a Social 
Security number, and driver’s license or state identification 
number.  She clarified a day later that a paper voter 
registration must include the last four digits of a Social 
Security number only if the registrant does not have a driver’s 
license or state identification number.   Thus, Bueno did not 
answer the voter registration verification  question, instead 
listing what information was necessary for voter registration .6 
Yoshimura represented in his first amended petition that, 
after receiving this information from Senator Shimabukuro and 
Bueno, he started “re -collecting” electronic signatures on 
DocuSign, a different online platform, asking signatories for 
their (1) full names; (2) birthdates; (3) last four digits of 
their Social Security number, driver’s license number, or state 
identification number; and (4) zip code.     
 The content of the re -circulated petition was attached as 
another exhibit  to the first amended petit ion.  The re-
circulated petition clarified that one of the deputy prosecuting 
attorneys Yoshimura had named had not receive d a subject letter, 
 
6  Yoshimura repeatedly represent ed throughout these proceedings and on 
appeal that Bueno told him verifying  voter registration status required a 
signatory’s full name, date of birth, last four digits of a Social Security 
number, and driver’s license or state identification number.  As Kane shiro 
and the City repeatedly counter -argued throughout these proceedings, Bueno 
was referring to the requirements for voter registration  in the first 
instance.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
13 
 contrary to Yoshimura’s belief at the time he circulated his 
initial online petition.   The petition asked signatories to sign 
the following acknowledgement:  “I have read the attached 
Impeachment Petition, and hereby acknowledge by providing my 
signature and other pertinent information below, that I support 
the effort to Impeach Prosecutor Keith Kaneshiro, and  do 
solemnly swear that I am a registered voter in the City and 
County of Honolulu.”   Signatories were then instructed to enter 
the following information:  (1) full name, (2) Hawaiʻi driver’s 
license number, or Hawaiʻi state identification card number, or 
last four digits of their Social Security number, (3) date of 
birth, (4) zip code, (5) date, and (6) signature.   The last page 
of the re -circulated online petition contained Yoshimura’s full 
name, the last four digits of his Social Security number, his 
date of birth, his zip code, and his electronic signature 
(denoted by a frame around his name labeled “DocuSigned by: ).”  
Unlike the initial impeachment petition filed on December 20, 
2018, which attached as an exhibit the Excel spreadsheet of the 
861 signato ries to the Change.org petition, the first amended 
petition did not attach as an exhibit any signatory information 
(other than Yoshimura’s) from the re -circulated impeachment 
petition.      
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
14 
 B.  Motion to dismiss, opposition, and r eply 
 1.  Kaneshiro’s motion to d ismiss 
 In May 2019 , Kaneshiro filed a “Motion to Dismiss First 
Amended Petition for Impeachment of Prosecuting Attorney etc.” 
(“motion to dismiss”).   He argued that no authority permitted 
the filing of the first amended petition whe re the initial 
petition was defective ab initio.   He contended  Yoshimura’s 
initial petition for impeachment was defective because the City 
Clerk had not certified that his petition contained 500 
signatures of registered voters of the City and County of 
Honolulu prior to the filing of his impeachment petition, as 
required by section 12 -203 of the Revised Charter.   Kaneshiro 
argued that Yoshimura should have dismissed the defective 
initial petition then re -filed an impeachment petition complying 
with section 12-203 of the Revised Charter.   For the same 
reason, Kaneshiro argued  that the first amended petition must be 
dismissed for lack of subject matter jurisdiction or for failure 
to state a claim.   Kaneshiro included as an exhibit Yost’s April 
23, 2019 letter from the City to counsel and the court, advising 
that the City requires a handwritten signature and residence 
address to determine whether a signatory is a duly registered 
voter of the city, as required under section 12 -203 of the 
Revised Charter .  Kaneshiro next pointed out that Yoshimura’s ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
15 
 first amended petition was supported by just Yoshimura’s 
signature.      
2.   Yoshimura’s memorandum in opposition to Kaneshiro’s 
motion to dismiss  
 
 In his memorandum in opposition to Kaneshiro’s motion to 
dismiss, Yoshimura newly argued that section 12 -203 of the 
Revised Charter contains no requirement that the re -circulated 
impeachment petition’s signatures “need to be certified by the 
[City] Clerk a t any[]time during this Impeachment process,” 
including before the petition is filed in circuit court.   
 As to whether amendment of an impeachment petition is 
permissible, Yoshimura argued that HRCP Rule 15(a)(1) (2012) 
permitted him to amend his impeachm ent petition once as a matter 
of course at any time before a responsive pleading is served, 
and the first amended petition was filed prior to any filings 
from Kaneshiro.  
 Lastly, Yoshimura argued the City must accept electronic 
signatures and cannot requir e residence addresses.   He stated 
that his initial Change.org petition was supported by at least 
500 electronic signatures of duly registered Honolulu voters.   
He pointed to HRS § 489E-7(d), which states, “If a law requires 
a signature, an electronic signa ture satisfies the law.”  As to 
the City’s reliance on HRS § 489E-18 as authority to refuse to 
accept electronic signatures, Yoshimura argued th e statute ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
16 
 required the City to have a pre -existing ordinance, charter 
provision, or written policy on acceptance or rejection of 
electronic signatures.   To Yoshimura, the City’s April 23, 201 9 
letter setting forth its position that his impeachment petition 
must contain handwritten signatures “‘electively’ pick[ed] an 
unwritten policy out of the sky.”      
 Yoshimura asked the circuit court to deny Kaneshiro’s 
motion to dismiss.   He also requested that, if the circuit court 
found the form of his impeachment petition to be incorrect, he 
should be granted time to conform the petition.    
 3.  Kaneshiro’s reply  
 In his reply memorandum , Kaneshiro argued that section    
12-203 of the Revised Charter requires 500 signatures of “duly 
registered voters” of the City and County of Honolulu, which 
requires verification by the City Clerk, as a prerequisite to 
filing.  Kaneshiro also pointed out that Yoshimura sent numerous 
inquiries to the City asking what information the City Clerk 
would need to certify his petition, undercutting Yoshimura’s 
belated argument that certification by the City Clerk is not 
necessary.   
 Kaneshiro next argued that the court and parties had always 
contemplated certification of the impeachment petition(s), 
consistent with Hawaiʻi law, specifically, based on this court’s 
order in In the Matter of Impeachment of Honolulu City ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
17 
 Councilmember Rene Mansho , No. 24858 (2002).   In the Mansho 
case, th is court  was presented with a petition to impeach a 
councilmember, pursuant to section 12 -202 of the Revised Charter 
(1993).  At that time, this court served as “a board of 
impeachment in any proceeding for the removal of a 
councilmember,” upon presentation of a “char ge . . . set forth 
in writing in a petition for impeachment signed by not less than 
one thousand duly registered voters of the council district for 
the removal of a council member, and said signatures shall be 
necessary only for the purpose of filing the p etition.”  Upon 
receipt of the petition, this court filed an order stat ing that 
one “preliminary issue” was “whether the signatures in support 
of the petition are the signatures of registered voters in the 
Council District 1 of the City and County of Honol ulu.”  This 
court ordered the petitioners to “submit a copy of the petition 
with its signature pages to the Clerk of the City and County of 
Honolulu.  The Clerk of the City and County of Honolulu shall, 
within 90 days thereafter, review the signatures and submit a 
declaration concerning whether the petition contains at least 
one thousand signatures of duly registered voters from Council 
District 1 of the City and County of Honolulu.”    
Kaneshiro ended his reply memorandum urging the circuit 
court to dismis s Yoshimura’s first amended petition for lack of 
jurisdiction, or for failure to state a claim, because the City ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
18 
 Clerk had not certified the petition(s), and the petition(s) on 
the record would not have been certified because they did not 
contain handwritt en signatures and residence addresses, as the 
City stated the City Clerk would require under section 12 -203 of 
the Revised Charter.   
 The circuit court held a hearing on the motion to dismiss 
on June 10, 2019 and denied the motion because Yoshimura had 
filed a motion for leave to amend (described in greater detail 
in the next section) that was still pending at that time.    
C.   Yoshimura’s motion for leave to amend petition and 
Kaneshiro’s opposition and cross -motion to s trike 
 
 Four days after Kaneshiro had filed his motion to dismiss,  
Yoshimura filed a “Motion for Leave to Amend Petition and to 
Name City Clerk as Respondent in a Declaratory Judgment 
Complaint” (“motion for leave to amend”).   Yoshimura’s counsel 
stated that he sought to name the City Clerk as a respondent to 
a declaratory judgment action, because the City had taken a 
position that the City Clerk would require signatories’ 
residence addresses and not accept electronic signatures, when 
there was no pre -existing City policy stating  the same.   
Yoshimura appended a proposed Second Amended Petition as an 
exhibit.   He sought a declaration from the court requiring the 
City Clerk to accept an impeachment petition with electronic 
signatures and without residence addresses of signatories.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
19 
 Kaneshiro filed an “Opposition and Cross -Motion to Strike 
Petitioner’s Motion for Leave to Amend Petition and to Name City 
Clerk as a Respondent in a Declaratory Judgment Complaint, Filed 
on May 6, 2019” (“opposition and cross -motion to strike”).   In 
addition to reiterating the argument that the circuit court 
lacked jurisdiction ( over the petition for impeachment , the 
first amended petition , and any motion for leave to amend to 
file a second amended petition for impeachment), Kaneshiro 
argued there was no authority for amending a petition for 
impeachment , adding a defendant, or combining a petition for 
impeachment with a complaint for declaratory judgment .     
 Yoshimura filed a “Memorandum in Opposition to Keith M. 
Kaneshiro’s Cross -Motion to Strike Petitio ner’s Motion for Leave 
to Amend and to Name City Clerk as a Respondent in a Declaratory 
Judgment Complaint.”   In it, he asserted that his re -circulated 
DocuSign petition did have over 500 signatures  (but none were 
attached to the opposition or included in this record ).   
 Kaneshiro filed a “Reply in Support of Cross -Motion to 
Strike Petitioner’s Motion for Leave to Amend Petition and to 
Name City Clerk as a Respondent in a Declaratory Judgment 
Complaint, Filed on May 6, 2019 ,” arguing that leave to amend 
should be denied based on futility, because the proposed second 
amended petition did not cure the jurisdictional defect of the 
prior amendment ( because the petition (s) did not contain 500 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
20 
 signatures of duly registered Honolulu voters), and becaus e 
Yoshimura’s theory of declaratory relief (that HRS § 489E-7 
requires the City Clerk to accept electronic signatures) is 
meritless, because HRS § 489E-18(a) and (c) provide the City 
with discretion to refuse to accept electronic signatures.  
 The circuit c ourt held a hearing on the motion for leave to 
amend and the cross -motion to strike the motion for leave to 
amend on June 24, 2019.   At that hearing, Yoshimura acknowledged 
“that the proposed second amended petition relies 100 percent on 
the validity of electronic signatures,” with respect to both the 
Change.org and DocuSign petitions.   He also acknowledged that 
there was no dispute “that the City is requiring wet signatures 
for this petition [.]”  He also conceded, “The second amended 
[petitio n] does not include residence addresses.”      
Yoshimura nevertheless went on to argue t hat the “City 
Council must determine” in writing, and ahead of time (not in 
response to an inquiry), whether to accept electronic 
signatures.”   Without a written “across -the-board” policy, 
Yoshimura argued the City ’s position was ad hoc and “pull[ed] 
out of the sky.”   By minute order, the circuit court denied 
Yoshimura’s motion for leave to amend.   Its reasoning was set 
forth in its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order, 
summarized next.       ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
21 
 D.   Circuit court’s findings of f act, conclusions of law, and 
order  
   
 On August 19, 2019, the circuit court filed its “ Findings 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order (1) Denying Petitioner’s 
Motion for Leave to Amend Petition and to Name City Clerk as a 
Respondent in a Declaratory Judgment Complaint, Filed May 6, 
2019; (2) Denying Respondent Keith M. Kaneshiro’s Cross -Motion 
to Strike Petitioner’s Motion for Leave to Amend Petition and to 
Name City Clerk as a Res pondent in a Declaratory Judgment 
Complaint, Filed on May 17, 2019; and (3) Dismissing Case for 
Lack of Jurisdiction .”  Among the findings of fact (“FOFs”) and 
conclusions of law (“COLs”) relevant to this appeal, the circuit 
court stated the following:  
[FOF]4.  Regardless of the exact form of the actual or 
proposed petition(s), the court finds at no point in this 
case did Petitioner submit 500 “wet” hand -written 
signatures along with reasonably verifiable information on 
whether the “signers” w ere currently duly registered voters 
in the City & County of Honolulu.  
 
[FOF]5.  The court finds there is no way to tell based on 
the record in this case whether the actual or proposed 
“digital signers” of the petitioner(s), were all different 
people, and whether they were all duly registered voters of 
the city of Honolulu at the time they “signed” 
electronically.  
 
[FOF]6.  The parties agreed on the record that on behalf of 
the City, the Department of the Corporation Counsel issued 
its written position in a  letter dated April 23, 2019, 
signed by Deputy Corporation Counsel Moana Yost.  The 
letter is an exhibit in the record.  The City’s position is 
that digital signatures are not acceptable for the actual 
or proposed petition(s) to impeach Mr. Kaneshiro.  Mor e 
specifically, the City’s reason (as stated in its 4/23/19 
letter) for not allowing digital signatures is the City’s 
interest in detecting fraudulent or questionable 
signatures.  In order to determine the (required) voter 
registration status, the City is requiring a) the signer’s ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
22 
 full legible name; b) a hand -written signature; and c) 
residence address (presumably to determine if the signer is 
currently a resident of the City of Honolulu, as opposed to 
when they last registered to vote or last updated their  
address in the voter rol[l]s).  
 
[COL]7.  The court concludes the language of Section 12 -203 
means the petition to impeach Mr. Kaneshiro must have the 
required 500 signatures of duly registered voters of 
Honolulu County when the petition is filed.  Because no 
actual or proposed petition for impeachment in this case 
was or would be signed by 500 duly []registered voters in 
the City, the actual and proposed petition(s) did not 
satisfy the requirements of City Charter section 12 -203.  
 
[COL]8.  The court finds and concludes it is not 
unreasonable or discriminatory for the City to take the 
position that fraudulent or questionable signatures are a 
valid concern for online petitions to impeach duly elected 
public officials. See Perotka v [.] Cron[i]n, 117 Haw[aiʻi] 
323 (2008).  
 
[COL]9.  Petitioner argues the City must accept digital 
signatures pursuant to HRS [§] 489E-7, which among other 
things provides that if a law requires a signature, an 
electronic signature satisfies the law.  Per the same 
4/23/l9 letter from Corporation Counsel, the City ’s 
position is that it is not required to accept digital 
signatures for impeachment petitions, because HRS        
[§] 489E-l8(c) gives it the discretion to allow or not 
allow digital signatures.   The court concludes this 
discretionary “carve out ” in 489E-18(c) expressly applies 
to government entities, so in essence HRS [§] 489E-18(c) 
can trump HRS [§] 489E-7 when a government entity is 
involved.  
 
[COL]10.  In view of HRS [§] 489E-18(c), and given the 
City’s concern with both a) handwritten versus electronic 
signatures, and b) ability to verify a signature is from a 
duly registered voter, the court respectfully rejects 
Petitioner ’s argument that the City must accept digital 
signatures without residentia l addresses for impeachment 
petitions pursuant to HRS [§] 489E-7.  
 
[COL]11.   Petitioner also argued that the City must 
formally adopt its position, by rule or other official 
enactment, that it will not accept digital signatures for 
impeachment petitions.   The parties agreed on record that 
the City ’s position is as expressly stated in Corporation 
Counsel’s 4/23/19 letter which is part of the record.  The 
court is not aware of any legal requirement that the City ’s 
position on this finite issue must be formal ly enacted in 
order to be effective, and therefore declines to adopt 
Petitioner ’s position.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
23 
 [COL]12.  Respondent argued in his motion to strike that 
since the original petition was defective, the court never 
had jurisdiction to even consider the first am ended 
petition or the second (proposed) amended petition.  The 
court respectfully disagrees.  As with the court ’s ruling 
on Respondent ’s motion to dismiss, the court concludes it 
has jurisdiction to rule on the First Amended Petition and 
the Proposed Secon d Amended Petition.  The court ’s 
reasoning is that applying a policy of “once defective, 
always defective, and petitioner must file a new petition 
with a new lawsuit ” does not comport with modern rules of 
civil procedure which permit amendment of even 
jurisdictionally defective pleadings if the proposed 
amendment is not futile.  This issue was not discussed in 
the pre-statehood cases cited by Respondent, and so those 
cases are non -binding on the particular issue presented 
here.  
 
[COL]13.  Here, the proposed Second Amended Petition has 
the same defects as the two earlier petitions as described 
above.  Since the court concludes the City has the 
discretion to reject the electronic signatures in this 
case, and since the proposed Second Amended Petition 
suffers from the same defects as the prior petitions, the 
court therefore concludes the proposed petition is futile, 
and the motion to amend is therefore denied.  
 
[COL]14.  Since there is no valid petition for impeachment 
before the court that co mplies with Section 12 -203 of the 
city charter, as determined by the City ’s discretionary and 
valid requirements regarding actual signatures from 
demonstrably duly registered voters, the cou rt hereby 
dismisses this case for lack of  jurisdiction.  
 
The circu it court then denied Yoshimura’s motion for leave to 
amend his petition to name the City Clerk as a respondent in a 
declaratory judgment complaint, denied Kaneshiro’s cross -motion 
to strike Yoshimura’s motion for leave to amend, and dismissed 
this case for  lack of jurisdiction.  
E.   Yoshimura’s m otion for reconsideration and the circuit 
court’s order of denial  
 
 Yoshimura then filed a motion for reconsideration.   He 
argued that the federal Electronic Signatures in Global and 
National Commerce Act (the “ESIGN Act,” 15 U.S.C. § 7001 et ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
24 
 seq.) was an additional authority requiring the City to 
determine the extent to which it will accept electronic 
signatures on impeachmen t petitions.7   
 Yoshimura next argued that the City was required to 
promulgate a rule under HAPA (HRS chapter 91) as to when it 
would accept or  reject electronic signatures on impeachment 
petitions.   He noted that HRS § 91-1 (2008) defines “rule” as an 
“agency statement of general or particular applicability and 
future effect that implements, interprets, or prescribes law or 
policy, or describe s the organization, procedure, or practice 
requirements of any agency,” but excludes the “internal 
management” o f an agency.   He went on to cite Application of 
Terminal Transp ortation , Inc., 54 Haw. 134, 504 P.2d 1214 
(1972), for the proposition that, “in the absence of clear 
legislative direction to the contrary, the court will not 
interpret HAPA so as to give gove rnment even the appearance of 
being arbitrary or capricious.”   He stated that the City’s ad 
hoc decision not to accept electronic signatures on his 
impeachment petition was arbitrary.    
 
7  The Federal ESIGN Act does not apply in this case.  15 U.S.C.          
§ 7001(a)(1) states, “Notwithstanding any statute, regulation, or other rule 
of law (other than this subchapter and subchapter II), with respect to any 
transaction in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce  -- (1) a 
signature, contract, or other record relating to such tra nsaction may not be 
denied legal effect, validity, or enforceability solely because it is in 
electronic form  . . . .”  ( Emphasis added) .  The impeachment of a City 
prosecutor does not affect interstate or foreign commerce.  The refore, this 
opinion does not  further discuss the ESIGN Act.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
25 
  Yoshimura next argued that leave to amend a petition should 
have been “freely given,” citing Keawe v. Hawaiian Elec tric 
Company, 65 Haw. 232, 649 P.2d 1149 (1982), absent any apparent 
or declared reason, such as undue delay, bad faith , or dilatory 
motive o n the part of the movant , or a repeated failure to cure 
deficiencies in the complaint.  
 Lastly, Yoshimura cited Anderson v. Bell , 234 P.3d 1147 
(Utah 2010), as a case in which electronic signatures were 
accepted on a petition to qualify a candidate for an election.   
He concluded by asking the circuit court to grant his motion for 
reconsideration, vacate its dismissal order, require the City to 
accept electronic signatures and to certify his petition, and 
allow him to file his second amended petition.  
 In his memorandum in opposition to Yoshimura’s motion for 
reconsideration, Kaneshiro argued that three independent reasons 
supported denying Yoshimura’s motion for reconsideration.   
First, the circuit court ’s jurisdiction was never triggered 
because Yoshimura n ever presented it with a petition signed by 
over 500 duly registered Honolulu voters.   Second, Yoshimura’s 
motion for reconsideration did not meet the requirements of  HRCP 
Rule 59(e)  (2000), which permits reconsideration of a court’s 
order where the parties “present new evidence or arguments that 
could not have been presented earlier.”   For example, Kaneshiro 
argued that Yoshimura’s HAPA argument was impermissibly raised ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
26 
 for the first time in his m otion for reconsideration.   Third, 
Kaneshiro stated Yoshimura’s arguments were meritless in any 
event.     
 Lastly, Kaneshiro distinguished the Anderson  case as 
involving a state statute that required acceptance of electronic 
signatures.   He also pointed o ut that Anderson  was an election 
nomination proceeding, and Utah liberally construes its election 
statutes.     
 In Yoshimura’s reply, he asserted  he did have 500 
signatures on his petition (referring to the initial Change.org 
petition, which he represented he “never abandoned”), and that 
the issue was whether the City Clerk would accept electronic 
signatures.   Yoshimura asked the court to reconside r its order 
and allow him to “submit a Second Amended Petition which will be 
supported by at least 500 electronic signatures.”     
 On October 2, 2019, the circuit court denied Yoshimura’s 
motion for reconsideration.   The court’s order stated it “still 
does not have jurisdiction” over the petition and that 
“everything argued in the Motion [for reconsideration] was or 
could have been raised earlier.”   Nevertheless, the court 
concluded that, on the merits, it remained unpersuaded.  
 
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
27 
 F.  Notice of a ppeal 
 On November 15, 2019, the circuit court entered its final 
judgment.   Yoshimura timely appealed.   This court granted 
transfer of the appeal on April 6, 2020.  
III.  Standards of Review  
A.   Interpretation of the Revised Charter of the City and 
County of Honolul u and the Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes  
 
 Statutory interpretation is a question of law reviewable de 
novo.  This court’s statutory construction is guided by 
established rules:  
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory 
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.  
Second, where the statutory language is plain and 
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain 
and obvious meaning.  Third, implicit in the task of 
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to 
ascertain  and give effect to the intention of the 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the 
language contained in the statute itself.  Fourth, when 
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness 
or uncertainty of an expression used in a s tatute, an 
ambiguity exists.  
When interpreting a municipal ordinance, this court  
applies the same rules of construction applied to statutes.  
 
Rees v. Carlisle , 113 Hawaiʻi 446, 452, 153 P.3d 1131, 1137 
(2007) (citations omitted).    
B.  Conclusions of l aw 
 “[T]he standard  of review applicable to the circuit court’s 
conclusions  of law is the right/wrong standard .”  Mehau v. Reed , 
76 Hawaiʻi 101, 107, 869 P.2d 1320, 1326 (1994).   
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
28 
 C.  Motio n for leave to a mend 
 “The grant or denial or leave to amend under Rule 15(a) is 
within the discretion of the trial court and is subject to 
reversal on appeal only for an abuse of discretion.”  Bishop 
Trust Co. v. Kamokila Dev. Corp. , 57 Haw. 330, 337, 555 P.2d 
1193, 1198 (1976 ). 
D.  Motion for r econsideration  
 “HRCP Rule 59(e) motions for reconsideration are reviewed 
under the abuse of discretion standard.  The trial court abuses 
its discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or 
disregards rules o r principles of la w or practice to the 
substantial detriment of a party litigant.”  Kaneohe Bay 
Cruises, Inc. v. Hirata , 75 Hawaiʻi 250, 258, 861 P.2d 1, 6 
(1993) (citation omitted).  
IV.  Discussion  
 We first address Kaneshiro ’s motion to dismiss filed after 
his successor was sworn in on January 2, 2021.   Kaneshiro 
asserts this case must be dismissed on the basis of mootness.   
As we preliminarily explain, b ased on the public interest 
exception  to the mootness doctrine, we address the merits of the 
issues raised on  appeal.   
 In his opening brief, Yoshimura argues broadly that 
electronic signatures are “an important component of direct 
democracy” in the digital age.   He notes there are only three ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
29 
 other cases nationwide analyzing the use of electronic 
signatures to e ffect direct democracy:  Anderson , 234 P.3d 1147; 
Benjamin v. Walker , No. 16 -0228 (W.Va. Apr. 19, 2020); and Ni v. 
Slocum, 196 Cal. App. 4th 1636 (Cal. App. 1st Dist. 2011).   This 
case would be the fourth.  
Yoshimura raises the following points of error on appeal: 
A.  [The circuit court]  erred when [it] found, in 
Conclusion of Law #9, that:  “489E -18(c) expressly applies 
to government entities, and can trump HRS [§] 489E-7 when a 
government entity is involved,” because HRS § 489E -18(a) 
requires that each governmental agency determine whether, 
and the ext ent to which, it will send and accept electronic 
records and electronic signatures, and the City failed to 
make such a determination pursuant to and/or in compliance 
with the requirements mandated by Chapter 91, the Hawaii 
Administrative Procedures Act.  
 
. . . . 
 
B.  [The circuit court]  erred when [it] found, in 
Conclusion of Law #10, that:  “In view of HRS            
[§] 489E-18(c), and given the City’s concern with both a) 
handwritten versus electronic signatures, and b) ability to 
verify a signature is f rom a duly registered voter, the 
court respectfully rejects Petitioner’s argument that the 
City must accept digital signatures without residential 
addresses for impeachment petitions pursuant to HRS      
[§] 489E-7.” 
 
. . . . 
 
C.  [The circuit court]  erred when [it] found, in 
Conclusion of Law #11, that:  “Petitioner also argued that 
the City must formally adopt its position, by rule or other 
official enactment, that it will not accept digital 
signatures for impeachment petitions. . . .  The court is 
not aware of any legal requirement that the City’s position 
on this finite issue must be formally enacted in order to 
be effective, and therefore declines to adopt Petitioner’s 
petition.”  
 
. . . . 
 
D.  [The circuit court]  erred when [it] found, in 
Conclusion of Law #13, that:  “Since the court concludes 
the City has the discretion to reject the electronic 
signatures in this case, and since the proposed Second 
Amended Petition suffers from the same defects as the prior ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
30 
 petitions, the court therefore concludes the proposed 
petition is futile, and the motion to amend is therefore 
denied.”  
 
. . . . 
 
E.  [The circuit court]  erred when [it] denied Mr. 
Yoshimura’s motion for reconsideration which asserted:  (A) 
that the Court erred in focusing on HRS § 489E -18(c), which 
should have been read together with the entirety of Chapter 
489E, because § 489E -18(a) requires each governmental 
agency of this State to determine whether, and . . . the 
extent to which, it will send and accept electronic records 
and signatures; (B) the federal ESIGN Act mandates that a 
state make a determination under what circumstances it 
would accept electronic signatures a nd thus any such 
exception to the acceptance of electronic signatures must 
be set forth in writing, (C) the City is required, by 
Chapter 91 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes (the Hawaii 
Administrative Procedures Act, “HAPA”), to make this 
determination in a m anner consistent with the rulemaking 
provisions of the HAPA; and (D) as the City has failed to 
adopt rules in a manner that is in compliance with 
guidelines and requirements set forth in HAPA and          
§ 489E-18(a) to determine whether, and the extent t o which, 
it will send and accept electronic records and electronic 
signatures, the City is prohibited from asserting that it 
is not required to use or permit the use of electronic 
records or signatures.  
 
 Yoshimura’s first three points of error can be comb ined as 
challenging the circuit court’s conclusion that, under HRS      
§ 489E-18, the City has the discretion to refuse to accept 
electronic signatures unaccompanied by residence addresses, 
without first promulgating a written policy, by rulemaking under 
HAPA or otherwise.  Yoshimura’s next point of error is that the 
circuit court abused its discretion by denying his motion for 
leave to amend.  Yoshimura’s last point of error is that the 
circuit court abused its discretion in denying his motion for 
reconsideration.  Each issue will be discussed in turn below.  
  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
31 
 A. The public interest exception to the mootness doctrine 
 applies 
 
 After his successor was sworn in, Kaneshiro filed a motion 
to dismiss this case on the basis of mootness.   Kaneshiro points 
out that Yoshimura seeks impeachment or removal of Kaneshiro 
from office and that as he no longer holds office, the matter is 
moot.  
 As explained in In re Application of Maui Elec tric Company, 
Ltd., 141 Hawaiʻi 249, 408 P.3d 1 (2017),  however, there is a 
“public interest ” exception to the mootness doctrine .  “This 
court reviews three factors in analyzing the public interest 
exception:  (1) the public or private nature of the question 
presented, (2) the desirability of an authoritative 
determination for future guidance of public officers, and (3) 
the likelihood of future recurrence of the question. ”  141 
Hawaiʻi at 256-57, 408 P.3d at 8 -9 (internal quotation marks and 
citations omitted .8 
 This situation triggers the public  interest exception, as 
(1) there is a public interest in addressing procedures 
 
8   This court has rejected the notion that the “public interest” 
exception is part of, or indistinguishable from, the “capable of repetition 
yet evading review” exception to the mootness doctrine.  See, e.g. , Moana v. 
Wong, 141 Hawaiʻi 100, 107 n.9, 405 P.3d  536, 543 n. 9 (2017) (“Although the 
‘capable of repetition, yet evading review’ exception has ‘merged at times’ 
with the similar public interest exception to the mootness doctrine, ‘they 
are, in fact, “separate and distinct.”’”); Doe v. Doe , 116 Hawaiʻi 323, 327 
n.4, 172 P.3d 1067, 1071 n.4 (2007) (same);  Kahoʻohanohano  v. State , 114 
Hawaiʻi 302, 333 n.23, 162 P.3d 696, 727 n.23 (2007) (same).   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
32 
 applicable to impeachment of public officials; (2) determination 
of issues raised in this case would assist public officers in 
the future; and (3) the issues raised in this cas e are likely to 
recur.  
 Thus, although the matter of Kaneshiro ’s impeachment is now 
moot, the public interest exception to the mootness doctrine 
applies, and we address the merits of the issues on appeal.   
B.  The City can require handwritten signatures and residence 
addresses in order to certify signatories on an impeachment 
petition under section 12 -203 of the Revised Charter  
 
 1.  Arguments on appeal 
  
  a.  Yoshimura’s opening brief  
 
 Yoshimura argues that the circuit court erred in finding 
that HRS § 489E -18(c), which “does not require a governmental 
agency of this State to use or permit the use of electronic 
records or electronic signatures,”  can “trump” HRS § 489E -7, 
which states tha t electronic signatures generally satisfy the 
law.  He maintains  the circuit court failed to read HRS chapter 
489E in its entirety.   Specifically, he points to HRS           
§ 489E-18(a) to argue that the City was required to determine 
whether and to what extent it will accept electronic records and 
signatures.   HRS § 489E -18 is titled “Acceptance and 
distribution of electronic records by governmental agencies.”  
Subsection (a) provides the following:  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
33 
 Except as otherwise provided in section 489E -12(f), each 
governmental agency of this State shall determine whether, 
and the extent to which, it will send and accept electronic 
records and electronic signatures to and from other persons 
and otherwise create, generate, communicate, store, 
process, use, and r ely upon electronic records and 
electronic signatures.     
 
Yoshimura contends the circuit court failed to consider the 
Anderson  case, in which the Utah Supreme Court held that the 
Lieutenant Governor was required to accept electronic signatures 
on a certif icate of nomination, under Utah’s UETA, which is 
similar to Hawaiʻi’s.  He urges this court to follow the Anderson  
court’s reasoning.  
   Yoshimura next asserts the City could have fulfilled HRS   
§ 489E-18(a)’s requirements by promulgating a written policy to 
avoid an arbitrary or capricious decision on accepting or 
rejecting electronic signatures.   Yoshimura argues this could 
have been accomplished through rulemaking under HAPA.   
 Yoshimura next argues the circuit court erred in accepting 
the City’s  fraud-prevention rationale to require an impeachment 
petition to contain signatories’ handwritten signatures and 
residence addresses.   He states the City’s “‘concern’ of ‘fraud’ 
is absurd given the existence of the ESIGN Act, and the 
acceptance of electro nic signatures throughout the United 
States.”   He again cites to the Anderson  case, this time for the 
proposition that electronic signatures “may be a better 
deterrent to candidate fraud because an electronic signature ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
34 
 incorporates readily identifiable per sonal, but not -public, 
information.”  Anderson , 234 P.3d at 1155 n.7.   In this case, 
Yoshimura posits, a signatory could be confirmed to be a duly 
registered Honolulu voter using the information provided on the 
DocuSign petition (full name, date of birth, last four digits of 
Social Security number or driver’s license number o r state ID 
number, and zip code).  
  b.  Kaneshiro’s answering brief  
 Kaneshiro argues the circuit court did not err in 
dismissing Yoshimura’s first amended petition, because “(1) the 
City Clerk never certified any of [Yoshimura’s] petitions for 
impeachmen t; (2) the City Clerk has the discretion to reject 
electronic signatures in support of impeachment petitions; and 
(3) the City Clerk may require residence addresses to certify a 
signatory’s eligibility to vote on City matters.”   
  Kaneshiro first argues that the requirements of section  
12-203 of the Revised Charter (that an impeachment petition is 
supported by 500 signatories) are jurisdictional and subject to 
strict construction, again citing the Mansho order.  He argues 
the City Clerk is responsible under section 3 -301 (2017) of the 
Revised Charter and HRS § 11-14 (2008 & Supp. 2012 ) for 
reviewing and certifying impeachment petitions.   Kaneshiro 
points out Yoshimura never presented any petition to the City 
Clerk for certification of signatures.   This omission, he says, ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
35 
 is fatal, and the circuit court did not err in dismissing his 
petition.   
Kaneshiro goes on to argue that, even if the petition(s) 
had been presented to the City Clerk for certification, the 
petition(s) would not have been certified, because neither 
contained the information necessary to confirm data store d in 
the State Voter Registration System: (1) full legible names; (2) 
handwritten signatures; or (3) residence addresses.   In fact, 
Kaneshiro argues, only Yoshimura’s signature supported the 
DocuSign petition.   
 Kaneshiro next argues that the City is not required to 
accept electronic signatures in support of a petition for 
impeachment under the plain language and legislativ e history of 
Hawaiʻi’s UETA.  He quotes HRS § 489E -18(c), which provides  that 
Hawaiʻi’s UETA “does not require a governmental agency of this 
State to use or permit the use of electronic records or 
electronic signatures.”   He states the legislative history of 
Hawaiʻi’s UETA, as well as the National Conference of 
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws (“ NCCUSL”) commentary to the 
model UETA, both state that “the UETA is permissive and does not 
mandate governmental use of electronic signatures.”   This is 
especially so where the parties (here, the City) have not agreed 
to be part of an electronic transaction.      ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
36 
 Further, Kaneshiro argues the City Clerk’s determination 
does not require rulemaking under HAPA, because the decision to 
reject electronic signatu res is “merely a reiteration or 
clarification of existing law, both state election law and 
county impeachment law.”   He also notes that the legislature 
knows how to mandate further rulemaking in its statutes by 
expressly cross -referencing HAPA.   He argues that the 
legislature would have similarly cross-referenced HAPA in HRS   
§ 489E-18 if governmental agencies were required to create rules 
as to when they would accept or not accept electronic 
signatures.   The fact that the legislature did not, Kaneshiro 
states, distinguishes this case from Anderson , the case upon 
which Yoshimura heavily relies.  According to Kaneshiro, the 
Utah UETA interpreted in Anderson  required state governmental 
agencies to promulgate rules to identify which transactions 
could be conducted by electronic means, and which transactions 
would never be conducted by electronic means.   For that reason, 
the Lieutenant Governor in Anderson  was not authorized to reject 
electronic signatures on a nomination petition in the absence of 
rules.  Kaneshiro footnotes that the Utah legislature promptly 
overrode the Anderson  opinion by amending the Utah UETA to 
require handwritten signatures on petitions.   See Utah Code Ann. 
§ 20A-9-502.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
37 
 Kaneshiro points out that, as a matter of logic, 
Yoshimura’s rulemaking argument fails, because the City would 
have been in violation of HAPA had it informally decided in this 
case that it would accept electronic signatu res on impeachment 
petitions.  
As to whether signatories’ residence addresses are required 
on the impeachment petition, Kaneshiro quoted Nader v. Cronin , 
Civ. No. 04 -00611 ACK -LEK, 2008 WL 1932284 , at *27-29 (D. Haw. 
May 1, 2008), for the proposition that “providing one’s 
residence address is the linchpin of being properly registered.”   
 c.  Yoshimura’s reply brief  
In his reply brief, Yoshimura  maintains the UETA applies to 
his impeachment petition because the transaction at issue is not 
between him and the City Clerk; rather it “is between Mr. 
Yoshimura, as the circulator of the petition, and the voter 
desiring to impeach Mr. Kaneshiro.”   Applying the UETA to his 
petition, he argues the plain language of HRS § 489E-7(d) (“If a 
law requires a signature, an electronic signature satisfies the 
law”) reflects the legislature’s “intent . . . to accept, NOT 
reject, electronic signatures.”   He also argues Kaneshiro and 
the circuit court “ignored” the plain, mandatory language of HRS 
§ 489E-18(a), that “each governmental agency of this State shall 
determine whether, and the extent to which, it will send and 
accept electronic records and electronic signatures  . . . .”   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
38 
   Yoshimura also states that the “underlying issue here, is 
that there is ver y little guidance in the City Charter provision 
on what is required for an impeachment petition.”   For example,  
he reads the Mansho order as permitting an impeachment petition 
to be filed with a court, with that court further ordering the 
petition to be su bmitted to the City Clerk for certification.   
  d.  City’s b rief of amicus c uriae 
 Before this case was transferred from the ICA, the ICA 
granted the City’s motion for leave to file a brief of amicus 
curiae.  The City’s amicus brief focuses solely on the issue of 
whether the City Clerk can require handwritten signatures, 
accompanied by residence addresses, on a petition for 
impeachment under section 12 -203 of the Revised Charter without 
first promulgating a rul e or other prior written policy.  The 
City argued that the UETA does not apply to Yoshimura’s 
petition, because the City did not consent to be a party to this 
electronic transaction, and HRS § 489E-5(b) (2008) states that 
Hawaiʻi’s UETA “appl[ies] only to transactions between parties 
each of which has agreed to conduct transactions by electronic 
means.”  The City points to the state legislative history and 
the NCCUSL commentary to the model UETA for the proposition that 
governmental agenc ies’ acceptance of electronic signatures is 
“permissive and not obligatory.”   For support, the City cites to 
WCT&D, LLC v. City of Kansas City , 476 S.W.3d 336, 341 (Mo. App. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
39 (continued . . .)  
 2015) (holding  that a neighbor’s email did not constitute a 
signature that an appl icant for a liquor license could use, and 
the city had not consented to accept electronic communications 
in any event; therefore, the UETA did not apply); and Ni, 196 
Cal. App. 4 th at 1653 (disallowing submission of thumb drive 
with electronic signature s to put initiative on California 
ballot).   In any event, even if the UETA did apply to 
Yoshimura’s petition, the City argued that HRS § 489E-18 
provided it with discretion to accept electronic signatures, and 
that the ICA has previously viewed that statuto ry language as 
plain and unambiguous, citing Stone v. Admin istrative  Director 
of the Courts , CAAP-16-0000405, 2019 WL 474116  (Haw. App. Sept. 
27, 2019).   
Because the UETA does not apply, the City argues it was 
free to determine in this case that it w ould reject electronic 
signatures  and require residence addresses on impeachment 
petitions under section 12 -203 of the Revised Charter.  
 The City argues that the City Clerk performs voter 
registration functions pursuant to section 3 -301 of the Revised 
Charter9 and HRS § 11-14.10  When an applicant registers to vote 
 
9 Section 3 -301 of the Revised Charter states, “The city clerk shall     
. . . conduct all voter registration f unctions pursuant to this charter or 
the laws of the state.”  
 
10  HRS § 11 -14 is titled “General county register; restrictions in use.”  
It provides that the clerk of each county “shall register all voters in the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
40 
 using a paper application, under HRS § 11-15 (2008, Supp. 2012, 
& Supp. 2016 )11 and HAR § 3-172-20 (2010)12, the applicant must 
provide a signature.   An applicant registering to vote online 
must have  a valid government -issued identification card with the 
applicant’s signature on it, pursuant to HRS § 11-15.3 (Supp. 
2012).13  The City states that proof of signature allows the City 
to protect its interest in de tecting fraudulent or questionable 
signatures, citing Peroutka  v. Cronin , 117 Hawaiʻi 323, 179 P.3d 
1050 (2008).       
 Similarly, the City states that a signatory’s residence 
address is “the cornerstone of becoming a registered voter,” as 
“[a] person’s res idence dictates where the person can vote and 
for what office,” citing Nader, 2008 WL 1932284 , at *27-29.  The 
 
(continued . . . ) 
clerk’s county in the general county registe r,” which “shall contain the name 
and address of each voter  . . . .”  
 
11  HRS § 11 -15 is titled “Application to register” and requires a person 
registering to vote to submit an affidavit attesting to that person’s name; 
Hawaiʻi driver’s license number or Hawaiʻi state identification number, or, if 
none, the last four digits of the person’s Social Security number, or, if 
none, a unique number assigned to the applicant for voter registration 
purposes; date of birth, residence, including mailing address, intent  to make 
Hawaiʻi the applicant’s legal residence, and citizenship.  
 
12  HAR § 3-172-20 similarly requires a voter registration form to contain, 
among other items, a residence address and a signature.  
 
13  HRS § 11 -15.3 is titled “Application to register electronically.”  It 
provides that a person seeking to register to vote electronically 
“consent[s]” to having election officials confirm information, including the 
applicant’s signature, “from government dat abases associated with government -
issued identification.”  The statute goes on to state, “The applicant’s 
signature obtained from the government database may be utilized by election 
officials to validate and confirm a voter’s identity in any election -related 
matter in which a signature is necessary.”   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
41 
 Nader opinion went on to state, “The law is clear that providing 
one’s residence is the linchpin of being properly registered,” 
and that the Hawaiʻi State Office of Election’s “practice and 
procedure of requiring residential addresses for confirmatory 
purposes is also reasonable and nondiscriminatory.”  Id. 
  e.  Yoshimura’s response to the City’s amicus brief  
 The ICA permitted both Yoshimura and Kaneshiro to submit 
responses  to the City’s amicus brief, but only Yoshimura 
responded .  In his response, Yoshimura asserts that DocuSign 
“uses a tamper proof audit trail to document each electronic 
signature and its[] accompanying documents, and th is audit trail 
has been cited by courts to show reliability in tracking the 
party that signed the document,” citing 10 Moonwalkers, Inc. v. 
Banc of Am erica Merchant Services, LLC, 814 S.E.2d 583 (N.C. Ct. 
App. 2018) , and In re Henrique , 559 B.R. 900 (Bankr. C.D. Cal. 
2016).  He also argues there is nothing in section 12 -203 of the 
Revised Charter calling for the use of full legible names, 
handwritten signatures, and residence addresses of signatories.   
As for the discretion of governmental agencies under HRS        
§ 489E-18 to accept or not accept electronic signatures, 
Yoshimura note s that certain governmental agencies  of the City 
and County of Honolulu, like the Honolulu Police Department, the 
Division of Purchasing, and the Department of Planning and 
Permitting, have written policies on when they will accept ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
42 
 electronic records, referencing HRS chapter 489E.   Thus, he 
argues, the City “should not be allowed to selectively deny the 
acceptance of electronic signatures for petitions while three 
different City agencies accept electronic signatures.”  
 2.  Analysis  
  a.   The UETA does not apply  in this case.  
 
 Although this appeal is framed in terms of reconciling HRS 
§ 489E-7(d)’s general validation of electronic signatures and 
HRS § 489E -18’s grant of discretion to governmental agencies to 
reject electronic signatures, there is a preliminary question of 
whether HRS chapter 489E applies at all.  HRS § 489E -3 (2008), 
titled “Scope,” states that Hawaiʻi’s UETA “shall apply to 
electronic records and electronic signatures relating to a 
transaction.”  HRS § 489E -2 (2008) defines “[t]ransaction ” as 
“an action or set of actions occurring between two or more 
persons relating to the conduct of business, commer cial, or 
governmental affairs.”    
 As the City points out, HRS § 489E -5(b) states, “This 
chapter shall apply only to transactions between parties each of 
which has agreed to conduct transactions by electronic means.  
Whether the parties agree to conduct a  transaction by electronic 
means is determined from the context and surrounding 
circumstances, including the parties’ conduct.”  The legislative 
history to the UETA also emphasizes parties’ consent.  See Sen. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
43 
 Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3265, 2000 Legislative Se ssion (“The Act  
. . . only applies when parties have agreed to an electronic 
transaction.”) .  The NCCUSL commentary to the model UETA 
explains, “[T]he paradigm for the [UETA] involves two willing 
parties conducting a transaction electronically, mak[ing] it 
necessary to expressly provide that some form of acquiescence or 
intent on the part of a pe rson to conduct transactions 
electronically is necessary before the [UETA] can be invoked.”  
NCCUSL Commentary at 2.    
 In this case, the “context and surrounding circumstances, 
including the parties’ conduct” display that the City never 
agreed to conduct  the certification of an impeachment petition 
through electronic means.  As explained in the City ’s amicus 
brief, governmental agencies’ acceptance of electronic 
signatures is “permissive and not obligatory. ”  As further  
reflected in the City’s amicus brie f as well as its April 23, 
2019 letter , it is clear the City did not agree to the use of 
electronic signatures as part of its process of certifying duly 
registered voters on impeachment petitions under section 12 -203 
of the Revised Charter.  The City is no t one of “two willing 
parties conducting a transaction electronically, ” and there is 
no express “acquiescence or intent on the part of [the City]. ”    
 Thus, the City Clerk’s review of Yoshimura’s electronic 
petition(s) falls outside the scope of the UETA,  and beyond the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
44 
 reach of HRS § 489E -18(a), the statute which Yoshimura argues 
requires the City to “determine whether, and the extent to 
which, it will send and accept electronic records and electronic 
signatures” through rulemaking under HAPA or otherwise . 
 Although the UETA does not apply, we proceed to address the 
remaining issues, also based on the public interest except ion to 
the mootness doctrine.   
  b.   Even if the UETA did apply, the City was not  
   required to promulgate a rule or written policy,  
   under HAPA or otherwise, concerning when it would 
   accept or reject electronic signatures on   
   impeachment petitions under section 12 -203 of the 
   Revised Charter  
  
 Even if Hawaiʻi’s UETA applied,  the plain language and 
legislative history of its statutory provisions, as well as the 
NCCUSL’s commentary to the model UETA, support the circuit 
court’s COL 9 that HRS § 489E -18’s discretionary provisions 
“trump” HRS § 489E -7’s general validation of elec tronic 
signatures.  The UETA applies to electronic transactions in 
business, commerce, and governmental affairs.  HRS § 489E -2.  
HRS § 489E -7 states generally that “[i]f a law requires a 
signature, an electronic signature satisfies the law.”  When it 
comes to a specific subset of electronic transactions, however  
-- those involving governmental agencies -- there exists 
discretion to reject electronic signatures.  See HRS            
§ 489E-18(c) (“[T]his chapter does not require a governmental ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
45 
 agency of this State to use or permit the use of electronic 
records or electronic signatures.”) .  Under ordinary canons of 
construction, a more specific statute controls over a more 
general stat ute.  See, e.g. , Richardson v. City & County of 
Honolulu , 76 Hawaiʻi 46, 54-55, 868 P.2d 1193, 1201 -02 (1994) 
(“[W]here there is a ‘plainly irreconcilable’ conflict between a 
general and a specific statute concerning the same subject 
matter, the specific w ill be favored.”).  
 The legislative history of Hawaiʻi’s UETA also reflects a 
permissive, rather than mandatory, approach to the use of 
electronic signatures.  See Sen. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3265, 
2000 Legislative Session (“The Act does not mandate the use  of 
electronic signatures or records, but establishes procedural 
guidelines for their use  . . . .”).  The NCCUSL Commentary to 
the model UETA is in accord.  See Commentary at 52 (“Section 18 
broadly authorizes state agencies to send and receive electronic 
records and signatures in dealing with non -governmental persons.  
Again, the provision is permissive and not obligatory  . . . .”).    
 In this case, the City pr operly exercised its discretion 
under HRS § 489E -18(c) to prohibit the use of electronic 
signatures on impeachment petitions in response to Yoshimura’s 
inquiry.  Yoshimura argues that the City was required to have 
already had a written policy in place or t o have promulgated a 
rule under HAPA setting forth when electronic signatures will ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
46 
 not be accepted on impeachment petitions, pursuant to HRS        
§ 489E-18(a), which states, in relevant part, “[E]ach 
governmental agency of this State shall determine wheth er, and 
the extent to which, it will send and accept electronic records 
and electronic signatures to and from other persons  . . . .”  
Under the plain language of this statute, there is no 
requirement that the City undergo rulemaking for section 12 -203 
of the Revised Charter or issue written policy statements in 
anticipation of the advent of electronic impeachment petitions.  
Therefore, the circuit court’s COL 11 was correct.   
 To support his view of HRS chapter 489E, Yoshimura relies 
heavily on  three out -of-state cases.  The first is  Anderson , 234 
P.3d 1147, a Utah case.  In that case, the issue was whether 
electronic signatures counted towards a “signed” nomination 
certificate for a candidate for office.  234 P.3d at 1148.  
Anderson, a gubernatorial candid ate not affiliated with any 
political party, was tasked with collecting the signatures of 
1000 registered voters in order to have his name placed on the 
ballot.  Id.  He collected both handwritten signatures and 
electronic signatures through a computer web site.  Id.  Seven 
county clerks certified that the signatures he collected were 
valid.  Id.  The signatures were then submitted to the Utah 
Lieutenant Governor, who excised the electronic signatures as 
not constituting “ signatures ” under the Utah Election Code.  Id.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
47 
 Without the electronic signatures, Anderson did not have enough 
signatures to be placed on the gubernatorial ballot.  Id.   
 Anderson filed an extraordinary writ with the Utah Supreme 
Court challenging the Lieutenant Go vernor’s action.  Id.  The 
Utah Supreme Court first noted that the Utah Election Code was 
to be liberally construed to give unaffiliated candidates every 
reasonable opportunity to have access to the ballot.  234 P.3d 
at 1150-51.  The court then noted its s tatutory rules of 
construction, as well as the UETA, defined signature to include 
an electronic signature.  234 P.3d at 1152.  The Utah Supreme 
Court sided with Anderson, who pointed to the Utah UETA 
provision stating, “If a law requires a signature, an el ectronic 
signature satisfies the law.”  234 P.3d at 1153.  In so doing, 
it rejected the Utah Lieutenant Governor’s arguments that he did 
not consent to the electronic transaction, and that other 
provisions of the Utah UETA gave him the discretion to reject  
electronic signatures.  Id.  The Utah Supreme Court concluded 
that the electronic transaction was not between Anderson and the 
Lieutenant Governor, but between Anderson and his supporters.  
234 P.3d at 1155.   
 Turning to the Utah UETA, the court noted th at one of its 
provisions allowed government agencies the discretion to decide 
when they will accept or reject electronic signatures, but only 
after following Utah’s rulemaking procedures.  234 P.3d at 1154. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
48 
 The court concluded the Lieutenant Governor could  not “make 
informal decisions on what type of transactions cannot be 
supported by electronic signatures outside of the rulemaking 
process . . . .”  Id.  The Utah Supreme Court also rejected the 
Lieutenant Governor’s argument that he did not have to accept 
electronic signatures under another provision of Utah’s UETA 
that states, “[N]othing in this chapter requires any state 
governmental agency to: (a) conduct transactions by electronic 
means; or (b) use or permit the use of electronic records or 
electronic s ignatures.”  Id.  The court’s reasoning was that the 
provision “loses its persuasive effect” when harmonized with the 
rest of Utah’s UETA provisions and the Utah Election Code.  Id.   
The Utah Supreme Court thus granted Anderson extraordinary 
relief and or dered the Lieutenant Governor to recount the 
signatures submitted.  234 P.3d at 1156.  The following year, 
the Utah state legislature overrode the Anderson  case by 
amending the Utah Election Code to prohibit electronic 
signatures on petitions from unaffiliated candidates.  Benjamin , 
786 S.E.2d at 211.  The Anderson  case is distinguishable from 
the instant case in one key respect, and that is the Utah UETA 
required governmental agencies to promulgate rules before 
exercising discretion to accept or not accept electronic 
signatures.  No such requirement exists in HRS § 489E -18, which ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
49 
 grants governmental agencies the discretion to accept or not 
accept electronic signatures.   
 Another UETA case Yoshimura relies on is Benjamin , 786 
S.E.2d at 212, in which the West Virginia Supreme Court held 
that the electronic monetary contribution receipts submitted by 
a candidate for judicial office contained unique transaction 
codes that allowed individual contributors to be identified; 
thus, these receipts constituted electronic signatures under 
West Virginia’s UETA and Public Campaign Finance Program.  The 
Benjamin  case is factually very different from Yoshimura’s case 
and therefore not instructive.  In this case, without residence 
addresses, individual signatories to Yoshimura’s petition(s) 
could not be identified and verified as duly registered voters 
by the City Clerk.  
 The last electronic signature case Yoshimura cites is Ni, 
196 Cal. App. 4th 1636, in which proponents seeking to place an 
initiative on the ballot submitted a thumb drive containing an 
electronic image of an individual’s signature.  196 Cal. App. 
4th at 1641.  The County rejected the electronic signature as 
not having been “personally affixed,” which the California 
Elections Code required, along with “personally affixing” a 
printed name and address.  Id.   The California Court of Appeal 
agreed, applying the California Elections Code, and not the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
50 
 UETA.  196 Cal.  App. 4th at 1647.  Ni is, therefore, 
distinguishable.             
 None of the cases Yoshimura cites ( Anderson , Benjamin , Ni) 
are persuasive on the issue of whether the City Clerk must 
accept electronic signatures, or, if the City Clerk chooses to 
reject electronic signatures, whether such a determination must 
first be promulgated via written policy or rule.  Therefore, the 
City was free to determine,  in this case , that it would require 
full legible names, handwritten signatures, and residence 
addresses in order to certify the signatories as duly registered 
voters of the City and County of Honolulu.  Thus, the circuit 
court’s COL 10 was correct.  
 To the extent the C ity’s letter decision to reject 
electronic signatures itself constituted a rule that should have 
gone through HAPA’s rulemaking procedure, our recent case, Green 
Party v. Nago , speaks directly to that issue.  138 Hawaiʻi 228, 
378 P.3d 944 (2016).  That cas e concerned irregularities that 
occurred during the 2012 election  (i.e., the methodology by 
which the number of ballots ordered was calculated and the 
procedure by which votes cast on improper ballots would be 
counted) .  Id.  This court held that the metho dology and 
procedure in place to respond to those irregularities were rules 
that should have been promulgated by rulemaking under HAPA.  138 
Hawaiʻi at 230-31, 378 P.3d at 946 -47.     ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
51 
  In that case, during the 2012 General Election, a number of 
irregularities occurred.  First, insufficient ballots were 
ordered for various polling places.  138 Hawaiʻi at 231, 378 P.3d 
at 947.  This happened  because t he Office of Elections had 
departed fro m its prior practice of ordering General Election 
ballots equal to 85% of the total number of registered voters.  
138 Hawaiʻi at 233, 378 P.3d at 949.  Instead, in 2012, it 
decided to order General Election ballots equal to 125% of the 
actual number of vot es cast in that year’s Primary Election.  
Id.  The Office of Elections did not adopt its new methodology 
as an administrative rule.  Id.     
 Next, on election day itself, poll workers delivered the 
wrong reserve ballots to two polling places that had run out of 
ballots; each polling place received the other’s reserved 
ballots.  138 Hawaiʻi at 231, 378 P.3d at 947.   Voters at each 
location had the others’ ballots for voting on state house of 
representatives, state senate, and city council races.  Id.  The 
Office of Elections had not adopted an administrative rule 
setting forth the procedure that would apply when votes are cast 
on ballots for an incorrect precinct , but the practice in place 
was to not count the votes cast in races for which the voter was 
not eligible to vote .  138 Hawaiʻi at 234, 378 P.3d at 950.  
 After the election, the Green Party filed a complaint 
asserting that the Office of Elections had violat ed HAPA by, ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
52 
 inter alia, failing to adopt administrative rules concerning (1) 
the methodology used to determine the number of ballots ordered 
and (2) the procedure used to count votes cast on wrong 
ballots.14  Id.  The circuit court granted the Office of 
Elections’ motion for summary judgment and held that the 
challenged methodolog y and procedure concerned only the internal 
management of the agency and were thus not subject to HAPA’s 
rulemaking requirement.  138 Hawaiʻi at 235, 378 P.3d at 951.  
The ICA af firmed the circuit court’s judgment, holding that the 
methodology for determining the number of ballots to order in 
2012 was a “one -time calculation/miscalculation” not subject to 
HAPA’s rulemaking requirement.  Id.  It also held that the 
situation in whic h votes were cast on the wrong ballots was not 
foreseeable, and any procedure addressing that situation would 
be a matter of internal management; therefore, the procedure was 
not subject to HAPA’s rulemaking requirement.  138 Hawaiʻi at 
236, 378 P.3d at 95 2.  We vacated the ICA’s judgment to the 
extent that it affirmed the circuit court’s judgment on the 
basis that HAPA’s rulemaking requirement did not apply to the 
methodology for ordering ballots and the procedure for counting 
 
14  The Green Party also alleged that the Office of Elections was required 
to adopt a rule regarding the procedures by which a precinct requests 
additional paper ballots.  138 Hawaiʻi at 234, 378 P.3d at 950.  We concluded, 
however, that there was no evidence of any established procedure addressing 
this situation; therefore, there was no “rule” in place subject to HAPA’s 
rulemaking requirement in this instance.  138 Hawaiʻi at 242, 378 P.3d at 958.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
53 
 votes cast on the wrong ballo ts.  138 Hawaiʻi at 243, 378 P.3d at 
959.  We remanded the case to the circuit court for it to order 
that the methodology and procedure challenged by the Green Party 
were indeed invalid.  138 Hawaiʻi at 235, 378 P.3d at 951.   
 In so doing, we first noted that the relevant question was 
whether the Office of Elections ’ (1) methodology for ordering 
ballots and (2) procedure for counting votes on the wrong 
ballots amounted to the “adopt[ion of]  rule[s], and if so,  . . . 
whether the rule [s were]  valid.”  138 Hawaiʻi at 237, 378 P.3d at 
954.  We first noted the distinction between an agency statement  
that is “legislative,” and thus requires rulemaking, and an 
agency statement  that is “adjudicatory,” which does not.  138 
Hawaiʻi at 238, 378 P.3d at 954.  A “legislative” agency 
statement “operates in the future” and has a “general effect,” 
while an “adjudicative” agency statement  is “backward looking” 
and “concerned with the det ermination of past and present rights 
and liabilities of individuals where ‘issues of fact often are 
sharply controverted.’”  138 Hawaiʻi at 238, 240, 378 P.3d at 
954, 956. (citations omitted).  
 In Green Party , we noted that , if the Office of Elections’ 
(1) methodology for ordering ballots or (2) procedure for 
counting votes on the wrong ballots “qualif[ied] as ‘rules’ as 
defined in HAPA, then they [were] invalid for not complying with ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
54 
 HAPA’s statutory rulemaking requirements.”  138 Hawaiʻi at 238, 
378 P.3d at 954.   As to the Office of Elections’ 2012 
methodology for ordering ballots, we held it was a rule because 
it was of “general applicability and . . . future effect.”  138 
Hawaiʻi at 240, 378 P.3d at 956.   We noted the ballot order 
determination was no t a “backward -looking”  “one-time 
calculation/miscalculation,” as it was intended to have a  future 
effect upon the ballots ordered for the upcoming election.  Id.  
We concluded that the Office of Elections was required to have 
adopted the methodology pursua nt to the rulemaking requirement 
under HAPA.  138 Hawaiʻi at 242, 378 P.3d at 958.   
 As to the procedure for votes cast on the wrong ballots, we 
held that the Office of Elections appeared to have a procedure 
in place for counting votes on the wrong ballot:  votes were 
counted for only those races for which the voter was eligible to 
vote and not counted for those races for which the voter was 
ineligible to vote .  Id.  Such a procedure thus demonstrated the 
“general applicability and future effect” characteristic s of a 
rule and should have been promulgated as a rule pursuant to 
HAPA.  138 Hawaiʻi at 242-43, 378 P.3d at 958 -59.   
 In the instant case, the City’s determination to reject 
electronic signatures resembles neither the Office of Elections’ 
(1) methodology for ordering ballots for an upcoming election, 
nor (2) its procedure for countin g votes cast on the wrong ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
55 
 ballots.  First, unlike the  Office of Elections’  methodology for 
ordering ballots for an upcoming election, which was of general 
applicability and future effect, the City’s determination to 
reject electronic signatures was an ad hoc, backward -looking 
decision made in the specific context of Yoshimura’s inquiries 
with regard to these impeachment petitions.  Second, unlike the 
Office of Elections’ pre -existing procedure for counting votes 
cast on the wrong ballots, the City had no pre -existing policy 
for accepting or rejecting electronic signatures on an 
impeachment petition under section 12 -203 of the Revised 
Charter.  In  fact, the City had deferred to the circuit court 
for months to adjudicate whether electronic signatures should be 
accepted before ultimately deciding to reject them.  Thus, the 
City’s det ermination to reject electronic signatures was not a 
“rule” subject to HAPA’s rulemaking requirements.  The circuit 
court’s COL 1 1 was therefore correct.        
  c.   Requiring handwritten signatures and residence  
   addresses is rationally r elated to pr eventing  
   fraud in impeachment petitions under section     
   12-203 of the Revised Charter  
 
 Hawaiʻi courts have already weighed in on the propriety of 
requiring handwritten signature s and residence address es to 
verify signatories to a petition.  In Nader, 2008 WL 1932284, 
the United States District Court for the District of Hawaiʻi 
addressed the requirements for placing two presidential ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
56 
 candidates on the Hawaiʻi ballot.  In that case, two presidential 
candidates (Michael A. Peroutka and Ralph Nader) were required 
to collect the number of signatures equal to 1% of the votes 
cast in the last presidential election in order to be placed on 
the ballot , pursuant to HRS § 11 -113.  2008 WL 1932284 , at *4.  
A form petition for that purpose required, among other things, a 
signature and residence address.  Id.  Both candidates fell 
short of the number of signatories necessary, and each brought 
suit in federal court challenging the information necessary  to 
confirm signatories.  Id.  The federal court stated the 
following:  
18.  [A] residence address is required in order to 
determine if a signatory is in fact who he or she claims to 
be and in ascertaining whether the individual is a 
“currently registered v oter” in terms of being qualified to 
sign the petition.  
 
19.  The residence address is the cornerstone of becoming a 
registered voter.  A person’s residence dictates where the 
person can vote and for what office. . . .  
 
20.  . . . The law is clear that pro viding one’s residence 
is the linchpin of being properly registered.  Therefore, 
the Court finds that the Office of Elections’ practice and 
procedure of requiring residential addresses for 
confirmatory purposes is also reasonable and non -
discriminatory.  
 
2008 WL 1932284 , at *10.   
 Addressing the same challengers (Peroutka and Nader) in a 
related proceeding, this court held, with respect to the Office 
of Elections’ procedures for verifying handwritten signatures, 
“In light of the state’s interest in detecti ng fraudulent or 
questionable signatures, we cannot say that it was clearly ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
57 
 erroneous for the Chief Elections Officer to reject a signature 
because the signatory provided a different address on the 
petition form than was provided in the SVRS.”  Peroutka , 117 
Hawaiʻi at 330.  Thus, both cases support the circuit court’s 
COLS 8 and 10 that the City could require full legible names, 
handwritten signatures, and residence addresses in order to 
certify Yoshimura’s petition(s) and in order to prevent fraud.  
C.   The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying 
Yoshimura’s motion for leave to amend his petition  
 
 Yoshimura also argues the circuit court should have granted 
him leave to amend his petition , because amendment was not 
futile.  Again, he cit ed Keawe, 65 Haw. 232, 649 P.2d 1149, for 
the proposition that leave to amend a complaint should be freely 
given, absent any apparent or declared reason, such as undue 
delay, bad faith , or dilatory motive on the part of the movant, 
or a repeated failure to cure deficiencies in the complaint.   To 
support his position, he argues that the circuit court erred in 
concluding that the City had the discretion to reject electronic 
signatures.   
 In his answering brief, Kaneshiro counter -argues that 
Yoshimura’s second amended petition was futile; therefore, the 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying 
Yoshimura’s leave to amend.   Specifically, Kaneshiro states that 
the proposed second amended petition did not attach a new or ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
58 
 separate petition; instead, it relied on the same DocuSign 
petition that did not meet the filing requirements of section 
12-203 of the Revised Charter (500 handwritten signatures of 
duly registered Honolulu voters).  
 In this case, amendment was futile.  Yoshimura made it 
clear in his proposed second amended petition that he would not 
support his impeachment petition with handwritten signatures or 
residence addresses, despite the City’s position on the 
information it wo uld need to certify his petition.  Thus, the 
second amended petition would have been dismissed, for the same 
reasons the first amended petition was dismissed.  Therefore, 
the proposed second amended petition was futile.  See Adams v. 
Dole Food Co. , 132 Hawaiʻi 478, 488, 323 P.3d 122, 132 (App. 
2014) (citing Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. State , 110 Hawaiʻi 
338, 365, 133 P.3d 767, 794 (2006) (“Where proposed amendments 
to a complaint would not survive a motion to dismiss, this court 
should affirm the denial of leave to amend on futility 
grounds.”).  The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in 
denying Yoshimura’s motion for leave to amend.  
D. The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying 
Yoshimura’s motion for reconsideration.  
 
 Lastly, Yoshimura argues that the circuit court erred in 
denying his motion for reconsideration, because he provided 
legal authority the circuit court overlooked in concluding HRS  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
59 
 § 489E-18 did not require it to have a pre -existing written 
policy or rule concer ning whether it would accept electronic 
signatures on impeachment petitions.  
 In his answering brief, Kaneshiro counter -argues that 
Yoshimura could have brought his arguments previously in 
opposition to his motion to dismiss; therefore, the circuit 
court did not abuse its discretion in denying Yoshimura’s motion 
for reconsideration.  
 In this case, the circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion in denying Yoshimura’s motion for reconsideration, 
because all of the legal authority Yoshimura marshaled to  
support his motion for reconsideration (the federal ESIGN Act, 
HAPA, and the Anderson  case) could have been raised earlier in 
the litigation, in opposition to Kaneshiro’s motion to dismiss 
or cross -motion to strike.  Yoshimura’s motion for 
reconsideration  merely sought to relitigate old matters.  
Consequently, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in 
denying his motion for reconsideration.  See, e.g., Chen v. Mah , 
146 Hawaiʻi 157, 172, 457 P.3d 796, 811 (2020) (“‘[T]he purpose 
of a motion for reco nsideration is to allow the parties to 
present new evidence and/or arguments that could not have been 
presented during the earlier adjudicated motion.’    
Reconsideration is not a device to relitigate old matters or to ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
60 
 raise arguments or evidence that could  and should have been 
brought during the earlier proceeding.”) (citation omitted).  
E.   The circuit court properly dismissed the case for lack of  
 jurisdiction   
 
 Yoshimura  asserts “there is very little guidance in the 
City Charter provision on what is required for an impeachment 
petition.”   The Mansho order, No. 24858 , interpret ed Section  
12-202 of the Revised Charter, which governs impeachment of a 
City Councilmember.  When that order was issued, Section 12 -202 
designated this court to serve as “a board of impeachment in any 
proceeding for the removal of a councilmember,” upon 
presentation of a “charge . . . set forth in writing in a 
petition for impeachment signed by not less than one thousand 
duly registered voters of the council distr ict for the removal 
of a council member, and said signatures shall be necessary only 
for the purpose of filing the petition.”  In Mansho, upon 
receipt of the petition, this court filed an order stating that 
one “preliminary issue” was “whether the signatur es in support 
of the petition [we]re the signatures of registered voters in 
the Council District 1 of the City and County of Honolulu.”  
Mansho, No. 24858.  This court ordered the petitioners to submit 
a copy of the petition with its signature pages to the  Clerk of 
the City and County of Honolulu , who would then review the 
signatures and submit a declaration as to whether the petition ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
61 
 was signed by at least one thousand duly registered voters from 
the councilmember’s district.   Mansho, No. 24858.  The 
councilmember who was the subject of that impeachment petition 
resigned before further proceedings could be had in this court.   
 As indicated by t he Mansho order, the requisite number of 
signatures are necessary for the purpose of filing an 
impeachment petition .  In this case, there was no showing of the  
signatures necessary to support Yoshimura’s impeachment 
petition(s).  Therefore, the circuit court properly dismissed 
the case for lack of jurisdiction .    
V.  Conclusion  
 For the foregoing reasons,  we affirm the circuit court’s 
(A) November 15, 2019 Final Judgment ; (B) Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law, and Order: (1) Denying Petitioner’s Motion 
for Leave to Amend Petition and to Name City Clerk as a 
Respondent in a Declaratory Judgment Complaint, (2) Denying 
Respondent Keith M. Kaneshiro’s Cross -Motion to Strik e 
Petitioner’s Motion for Leave to Amend Petition and to Name City 
Clerk as a Respondent in a Declaratory Judgment Complaint, and 
(3) Dismissing Case for Lack of Jurisdiction Filed on August 19,  
 
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
62 2019; and (C) Order Denying Petitioner’s Motion for 
Reconsideration Filed on October 2, 2019.  
Keith M. Kiuchi 
for plaintiff-appellant /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins  
/s/ James H. Ashford 
William C. McCorriston 
(David J. Minkin, 
Nadine Y. Ando, 
and Jordan K. Inafuku 
with him on the briefs)
for defendant-appellee  