                                                                 
                                                                     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCAP-14-0000843 27-MAY-2015 
08:32 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o— 
REPRESENTATIVE BOB McDERMOTT, GARRET HASHIMOTO,
WILLIAM E.K. KUMIA, and DAVID LANGDON,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
 
vs.
 
GOVERNOR DAVID IGE and VIRGINIA PRESSLER,
DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, STATE OF HAWAI' I,
Defendants-Appellees.
 
SCAP-14-0000843
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CAAP-14-0000843; CIV. NO. 13-1-2899)
 
MAY 27, 2015
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., AND
CIRCUIT JUDGE CASTAGNETTI, IN PLACE OF McKENNA, J., RECUSED
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
This case requires us to determine whether Appellants 
have standing to challenge the Hawai
'i Marriage Equality Act of 
2013. The 2013 Act changed Hawaii’s definition of marriage so        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that same-sex couples could marry. Appellants--State
 
Representative Bob McDermott, Garret Hashimoto, William E.K.
 Kumia, and David Langdon--filed suit in the Circuit Court of the
 
1
First Circuit  to invalidate the 2013 Act.  The circuit court
 
upheld the Act’s validity. 
On appeal, Appellants claim that the 2013 Act is 
unconstitutional under article I, section 23 of the Hawai
'i 
Constitution (also referred to as the “1998 marriage amendment”), which provides: “The legislature shall have the power to reserve marriage to opposite-sex couples.” Haw. Const. art. I, § 23. Specifically, Appellants argue that the 1998 marriage amendment was adopted by the voters to constitutionally require the legislature to reserve marriage to opposite-sex couples. 
Before we consider the merits of Appellants’ claims, we 
must first determine whether they have standing to bring this lawsuit. Legal standing requirements promote the separation of powers between the three branches of government by limiting the availability of judicial review to cases involving an “injury in fact.” Sierra Club v. Dep’t of Transp., 115 Hawai' i 299, 319, 
321, 167 P.3d 292, 312, 314 (2007); Sierra Club v. Hawai' i 
Tourism Auth. Ex rel. Bd. of Dirs., 100 Hawai' i 242, 250-51, 59 
P.3d 877, 885-86 (2002) (plurality opinion). To have standing, a 
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 
2
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
plaintiff must show that he or she has suffered an actual or 
threatened injury that is fairly traceable to the defendant’s actions, and that a favorable decision would likely provide relief for that injury. See, e.g., Sierra Club v. Dep’t of 
Transp., 115 Hawai' i at 314, 167 P.3d at 321. 
We hold that Appellants have failed to establish
 
standing to bring this lawsuit. The legislature’s decision to
 extend the right to marry to same-sex couples does not, in any
 way, diminish the right to marry that Appellants remain free to
 exercise. Although it appears Appellants have deeply-held
 objections to same-sex marriage, such moral or ideological
 disapproval does not constitute a legally cognizable injury
 sufficient to establish standing. 
Because Appellants do not have standing to challenge
 
the constitutionality of the Marriage Equality Act, we vacate the
 circuit court’s order granting summary judgment and remand the
 case to the circuit court with instructions to dismiss the case
 for lack of jurisdiction.
 
I. Background
 
A.	 Background to article I, section 23 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution and the Marriage Equality Act 
In 1991, three same-sex couples filed a lawsuit in the 
circuit court against John C. Lewin, then-Director of the Hawai' i 
Department of Health (DOH), challenging the DOH’s practice of 
3
    
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
restricting marriage licenses to opposite-sex couples. Baehr v. 
Lewin, 74 Haw. 530, 535-37, 852 P.2d 44, 48-49 (1993) (Baehr I). 
The plaintiffs in Baehr I alleged that Hawai' i Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 572-1 was unconstitutional as construed by the DOH.2 Id. 
On appeal, this court held that both on its face and as applied by the DOH, HRS § 572-1 established a sex-based classification, which would violate the equal protection clause of the Hawai' i 
Constitution unless the strict scrutiny test was met, and remanded the case to the circuit court to determine whether the State could meet its burden of showing that the statute “furthers compelling state interests and is narrowly drawn to avoid unnecessary abridgments of constitutional rights.” Id. at 580, 
582, 852 P.2d at 67, 68. 
2 At the time this court decided Baehr I, HRS § 572-1 provided, in
 
relevant part:
 
In order to make valid the marriage contract, it shall
be necessary that:
 
. . .
 
(3) The man does not at the time have any lawful
wife living and that the woman does not at the
time have any lawful husband living;
 
. . .
 
(7) The marriage ceremony be performed in the
State by a person or society with a valid
license to solemnize marriages and the man and
woman to be married and the person performing
the marriage ceremony be all physically present
at the same place and time for the marriage
ceremony.
 
HRS § 572-1 (1985) (emphases added).
 
4
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In 1994, while the remanded Baehr case was again before
 
the circuit court, the legislature amended Hawaii’s definition of
 
marriage in HRS § 572-1 to specify that Hawaii’s marriage
 licensing laws only allowed marriage between opposite-sex
 couples. 1994 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 217 at 526. The amended HRS
 § 572-1 stated that the marriage contract “shall be only between
 a man and a woman . . . .” HRS § 572-1 (2006). 
Meanwhile, on remand, the circuit court held that the
 
State’s traditional definition of marriage did not meet strict
 scrutiny, and the State appealed. Baehr v. Miike, No. 91-1394,
 
1996 WL 694235, at *21-22 (Dec. 3, 1996).
 
In 1997, while the appeal was pending, the legislature 
proposed an amendment to the Hawai' i Constitution. See 1997 Haw. 
Sess. Laws HB 117 at 1246-47. Representative McDermott voted in support of the amendment when it came before the House. The proposed amendment was submitted to the general public as a ballot question in the November 3, 1998 general election. The question on the ballot asked: “Shall the Constitution of the State of Hawaii be amended to specify that the legislature shall have the power to reserve marriage to opposite-sex couples?” 
Before the election, the State of Hawai' i Office of 
Elections released a fact sheet, which included explanations of the consequences of a “yes” vote and a “no” vote. The fact sheet stated that “[t]he proposed amendment is intended to make it 
5
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
absolutely clear that the State Constitution gives the 
Legislature the power and authority to reserve marriage to opposite-sex couples.” The fact sheet went on to explain that a “yes” vote would “add a new provision to the Constitution that would give the Legislature the power to reserve marriage to opposite-sex couples only. The legislature could then pass a law that would limit marriage to a man and a woman, overruling the recent Supreme Court decision regarding same-sex couples.” The fact sheet also explained that a “no” vote “will make no change to the Constitution of the State of Hawai' i, and allow the court 
to resolve the lawsuit that has been brought against the State.” 
Over two-thirds of the voters voted in favor of the
 
amendment, and article I, section 23 of the constitution was
 added to read: “The legislature shall have the power to reserve
 marriage to opposite-sex couples.” Haw. Const. art. I, § 23. 
After the 1998 marriage amendment was ratified, the legislature
 did not re-enact legislation defining marriage as between a man
 and a woman, presumably because the then-existing version of HRS
 § 572-1 already limited marriage to opposite-sex couples. See
 
HRS § 572-1 (1993) (amended 1994, 1997, 2012, 2013).
3
 
3
 The 1997 and 2012 amendments to HRS § 572-1 are not relevant to
 
the present appeal.  In 1997, the legislature amended the statute by replacing
the phrase “legitimate or illegitimate” with “the result of the issue of
parents married or not married to each other.”  1997 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 52,
 § 5 at 97.  In 2012, the legislature added language to HRS § 572-1 to ensure
consistency with Hawaii’s 2011 law recognizing civil unions.  2012 Haw. Sess.
 Laws Act 267, § 4 at 945-46. 
6
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On December 9, 1999, this court issued a summary 
disposition order stating that the 1998 marriage amendment had 
“tak[en] the [marriage] statute out of the ambit of the equal protection clause of the Hawai' i Constitution,” and therefore 
“HRS § 572-1 must be given full force and effect.” Baehr v. 
Miike, No. 20371, 1999 WL 35643448, at *1 (Haw. Dec. 9, 1999) (SDO) (Baehr II). 
The 1994 statutory definition of marriage in HRS § 572­
1 remained unchanged in pertinent part until November 2013. On October 28, 2013, the legislature began a special session to consider Senate Bill 1 (SB 1). SB 1 was signed into law on November 13, 2013, as the Hawai' i Marriage Equality Act of 2013. 
The Marriage Equality Act changed the definition of marriage so that “the marriage contract . . . shall be permitted between two individuals without regard to gender,” thereby permitting same-sex marriage. HRS § 572-1 (Supp. 2014). 
B. Prior Proceedings in the Present Case
 
On October 30, 2013, while the legislature was
 
considering SB 1, Representative McDermott filed a complaint in
 
the circuit court. On November 1, 2013, a first amended
 complaint joined as plaintiffs Hashimoto, Kumia, and Langdon. 
Appellants originally named as defendants the Governor and four
 legislators. After the Marriage Equality Act was signed into
 law, the legislators were removed as parties and the Director of
 
7
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the DOH was added, and the case proceeded against the Governor
 
and the Director of the DOH (Appellees). 
On November 4, 2013, Appellants moved for a Temporary
 
Restraining Order (TRO) to enjoin the State from issuing any
 marriage licenses to same-sex couples. Appellants first argued
 that they were likely to succeed on the merits. Appellants
 acknowledged that based on the 1998 marriage amendment, the
 legislature only possessed the authority to limit marriage to
 opposite-sex couples by statute if it chose to do so, but argued
 that at the time the public voted, the legislature had already
 chosen to do so in HRS § 572-1. According to Appellants, this
 indicates that the intent of the voters in 1998 was to validate
 the existing statute, and reserve marriage to opposite-sex
 couples only. Thus, according to Appellants, before amending the
 statute to allow same-sex marriage, the legislature would have to
 again ask the public to amend the constitution. 
Appellants next argued that, based on experiences in
 
other states, they would suffer irreparable injury if SB 1 became
 law: 
Once same-sex marriages were approved in
Massachusetts, parents there were faced with rulings
that the schools had a duty to portray homosexual
relationships as normal, and the complaints of parents
were ignored.  Further, businesses in Massachusetts
were faced with equally serious situations involving,
for example, disruptions and expenses caused by
“testing for tolerance” by homosexual activists.
 
Finally, Appellants argued that the public interest
 
8
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
favored granting the injunction because: 
[t]he public has a strong vested interest in knowing
that the very basis of Hawaii’s cultural norms, the
family, which consists of a mother, father and
children (and perhaps includes several generations),
will be forever changed.  To see the depth of that
vested interest, one needs to go no further than to
consider the thousands and thousands of citizens that
 met and rallied at the Capitol Building on October 28,
2013 to oppose any change to Section 572-1 that would
validate same-sex marriages.  These citizens were from
 every walk of life.  They were Hawaiians, Polynesians,
Asians, African Americans and Caucasians. They were
young and old, and all they wanted was to tell the
legislators:  “Let the people vote.”  There is a
 cultural norm involved, and a change in that historic
cultural norm should not be changed and mandated by a
law that is opposed by the vast majority of Hawaii’s
citizens.  The adverse societal impacts and the great
public interest should be obvious to the Court.
 
On November 5, 2013, Appellees responded by arguing
 
that the court lacked the authority to grant Appellants’ motion
 
because enjoining the legislature from enacting a bill or the
 governor from signing it would violate the separation of powers
 doctrine and the political question doctrine, and that
 Appellants’ action against a bill rather than a law was not ripe. 
Appellees also argued that Appellants lacked standing. 
According to Appellees, Representative McDermott lacked standing
 as a legislator suing in his official capacity because an
 individual legislator does not have standing based solely on his
 or her status as a legislator, and is required to show a personal
 stake and a concrete injury to establish standing. Appellees
 argued that the only exception to this rule--where legislators
 whose votes would have been sufficient to pass or defeat a
 
9
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
specific bill sue because their votes were “nullified”--does not
 
apply here because Representative McDermott has not shown that
 there were enough votes to defeat the bill or that his vote had
 been nullified. Appellees also argued that Hashimoto, Kumia, and
 Langdon (the “Individual Plaintiffs”) lacked standing because
 they were attempting to assert a “value preference” which was
 insufficient to show a concrete injury-in-fact. 
Appellees also argued that even if the case was
 
properly before the court, Appellants could not show a likelihood
 of success on the merits. Appellees argued that the language of
 article I, section 23 clearly and unambiguously permits, but does
 not require, the legislature to limit marriage to opposite-sex
 couples. Thus, according to Appellees, article I, section 23 did
 not limit the legislature’s authority to enact the Marriage
 Equality Act. 
Appellees also contended that even if the language of
 
article I, section 23 is ambiguous, the legislative history and
 the factual circumstances surrounding the 1998 marriage amendment
 supported Appellees’ interpretation of the provision. 
Specifically, Appellees argued that a reasonable voter would have
 understood that the 1998 marriage amendment did not require the
 legislature to limit marriage to opposite-sex couples, but merely
 gave the legislature the authority to act if it chose to do so. 
In response to Appellees’ claim that Appellants lacked
 
10
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
standing, Appellants argued that because they were bringing a
 
declaratory action in a matter of great public importance, the
 traditional standing requirements were not applicable. 
Appellants also argued that Representative McDermott had standing
 as a legislator because prior to the 1998 marriage amendment, he
 had represented publicly that “a ‘Yes’ vote would allow the
 Constitution to be amended, so that the prior law . . . (that
 reserved marriage to heterosexual couples only) would be
 Constitutionally established and would be valid.” Therefore,
 according to Appellants, absent an injunction, Representative
 McDermott would “suffer irreparable damages to his reputation and
 to his electability as a legislator, which is his livelihood,
 because his actions and speeches prior to the 1998 vote will have
 been and will be deemed by the electorate to be misleading and
 untruthful.” 
On November 7, 2013, the circuit court denied
 
Appellants’ motion on the grounds that enjoining the signing of
 the bill would be a violation of the separation of powers
 doctrine, was a political question, and was not ripe, but also
 stated that it would hear further arguments on the impact of SB 1
 if the Governor signed the bill into law. 
In a supplemental memorandum, Appellants argued that
 
Appellees should be estopped from arguing that article I, section
 23 merely gave the legislature the power to limit marriage to
 
11
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
opposite-sex couples if it chose to do so because according to
 
Appellants, Appellees’ interpretation is contrary to the
 information the State had given in its Ballot Information Flyer
 before the general election vote on the 1998 marriage amendment. 
The Ballot Information Flyer stated, in relevant parts:
 
The proposed amendment is intended to make it
absolutely clear that the State Constitution gives the
Legislature the power and authority to reserve
marriage to opposite-sex couples.
 
. . . .
 
A “Yes” vote would add a new provision to the
Constitution that would give the legislature the power
to reserve marriage to opposite-sex couples only. The
 legislature could then pass a law that would limit
marriage to a man and a woman, overruling the recent
Supreme Court decision regarding same-sex couples.
 
. . . .
 
A “No” vote will make no change to the Constitution of
the State of Hawai 'i and allow the court resolve the 
lawsuit that has been brought against the State. 
On November 14, 2013, the day after the Marriage
 
Equality Act was signed into law, the circuit court held another 
hearing on Appellants’ motion for a TRO and preliminary
 injunction.
4
 
Appellants clarified that their argument was not that
 
article I, section 23 required the legislature to define marriage
 as between opposite-sex couples, but that once the legislature
 exercised its power conferred by article I, section 23, the
 
4
 Although Appellants’ motion was entitled a motion for TRO, the
 
circuit court held a hearing on “Plaintiffs’ Motion for Temporary Restraining
Order & Preliminary Injunction.” 
12
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
legislature no longer had other powers to define marriage without
 
amending the constitution. 
Appellees argued that regardless of article I, section
 
23, the legislature has the power under article 3, section 15 to
 
enact the Marriage Equality Act. 
The circuit court found that Appellants had standing,
 
and concluded verbally as follows:
 
The court believes that the plaintiffs, both as
citizens and voters in matters of great public
importance, have a personal stake in the outcome of
this controversy and thereby have standing arising
from what the court believed was an attempt to expand
Article I, section 23 to include same sex marriage. 
The circuit court then went on to conclude that article 
I, section 23 empowered the legislature to limit marriage to 
opposite-sex couples, but that the legislature could choose not to exercise that power, and that, separate from article I, section 23, the legislature had the power to define marriage pursuant to article III, section 1. Thus, the circuit court concluded that the Marriage Equality Act did not violate article I, section 23, and that “same sex marriage in Hawai' i is legal.” 
On December 20, 2013, the circuit court entered an
 
order granting in part and denying in part Appellants’ motion for
 
5
 Article 3, section 1 of the Hawai 'i Constitution provides that 
“[t]he legislative power of the State shall be vested in a legislature, which
shall consist of two houses, a senate and a house of representatives. Such power shall extend to all rightful subjects of legislation not inconsistentwith this constitution or the Constitution of the United States.” 
13
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a TRO and preliminary injunction.6
 
On December 23, 2013, Appellees filed a motion for
 
summary judgment (MSJ). Appellees again argued that
 
Representative McDermott lacked standing in his official capacity
 as a legislator, and the Individual Plaintiffs all lacked
 standing because they had suffered no injury-in-fact as a result
 of the passage of the law. 
In response, Appellants argued that Representative
 
McDermott has standing in his official capacity as a legislator,
 and that summary judgment should be denied because “[a]s a
 minimum, there is a serious issue of material fact whether the
 individual Plaintiffs’ constitutional due process voting rights
 have been abridged by the State’s ‘bait and switch’ tactic.” 
This “bait and switch” referred to Appellants’ argument that the
 State’s interpretation of the 1998 marriage amendment in the
 present case is contrary to the position it presented in the
 Ballot Information Flyer for the 1998 ballot question. 
Appellants argued that the “bait and switch” should estop
 Appellees from asserting their arguments and that it conferred
 
6
 Appellants’ motion was
 
GRANTED to the extent of Plaintiffs’ declaratory
relief, as Article I, Section 23 empowers the
legislature to reserve marriage to opposite-sex
couples, but does not give the legislature the power
to constitutionally recognize marriage to same-sex
couples under Article I, Section 23; and DENIED to the
extent Plaintiffs sought injunctive relief.  
14
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
standing on the Individual Plaintiffs. Appellants also argued
 
that they have standing as private citizens because the lawsuit
 they brought was a matter of great public importance. 
On January 29, 2014, the circuit court ruled that the
 
Marriage Equality Act was constitutional, and on April 21, 2014,
 entered an order granting Appellees’ MSJ. The circuit court
 concluded that the language of article I, section 23 is clear and
 unambiguous, and gives the legislature the power to reserve
 marriage to opposite-sex couples, but does not demand it. The
 circuit court also concluded that the legislative history and
 factual circumstances surrounding the 1998 marriage amendment
 supported its interpretation of the amendment’s plain language. 
On May 21, 2014, Appellants appealed, and on July 16,
 
2014, this court granted Appellees’ transfer application. On
 appeal, Appellants challenge the circuit court’s denial of
 Appellants’ motion for a TRO and preliminary injunction, and
 granting of Appellees’ MSJ. 
II. Standard of Review
 
Whether the plaintiff had standing to bring his or her 
claim presents a question of law, reviewable de novo. Haw. Med. 
Ass’n v. Haw. Med. Serv. Ass’n, Inc., 113 Hawai' i 77, 90, 148 
P.3d 1179, 1192 (2006); see also Keahole Def. Coal., Inc. v. Bd. of Land & Natural Res., 110 Hawai' i 419, 427-28, 134 P.3d 585, 
593-94 (2006). Further, standing must be addressed before we 
15
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reach the merits, and “may be addressed at any stage of a case.” 
Keahole Def. Coal., Inc., 110 Hawai' i at 427, 134 P.3d at 593. 
III. Discussion
 
A. Legal Standing is a Requirement that Cannot be Waived
 
At every stage of the proceedings before the circuit
 
court, Appellees argued that Appellants lacked standing. The
 circuit court concluded that Appellants did have standing upon
 finding that this case presents a matter of great public
 importance and that by passing the Marriage Equality Act of 2013,
 the legislature was attempting to expand the scope of article I,
 section 23. Appellees have not cross-appealed the circuit
 court’s finding that Appellants had standing, because Appellees
 prevailed on the merits and, according to Appellees, “‘only a
 party aggrieved by a judgment can appeal from it.’” (Citing In
 re Campbell’s Estate, 46 Haw. 475, 498, 382 P.2d 920, 941
 
(1963)).
 
Appellants argue that because Appellees did not cross-
appeal the circuit court’s ruling on standing, Appellees have 
waived any argument on this issue. However, this court has the independent obligation to address whether Appellants have standing to bring these claims. See Keahole Def. Coal., Inc., 
110 Hawai' i at 427, 134 P.3d at 593 (“The issue of standing 
implicates this court’s jurisdiction, and, therefore, must be addressed first.”). If this court concludes that Appellants 
16
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
lacked standing, this court must dismiss the appeal without 
reaching the merits of the case. See, e.g., Sierra Club v. 
Hawai'i Tourism Auth. ex rel. Bd. of Dirs., 100 Hawai' i 242, 265 & 
n.35, 59 P.3d 877, 900 & n.35 (2002) (plurality opinion) (holding that “[i]n light of the fact that we have decided that Petitioner lacks standing, we do not reach the merits of the case” and that “having held that Petitioner lacks standing to bring its suit, we dismiss Petitioner’s . . . Petition”). 
Indeed, we must address standing as a threshold matter, 
even if it is not raised by the parties. See Akinaka v. 
Disciplinary Bd. of Hawai' i Supreme Court, 91 Hawai' i 51, 55, 979 
P.2d 1077, 1081 (1999) (“Although neither the parties nor the trial court considered the question of standing, this court has a duty, sua sponte, to determine whether [the plaintiff] had standing to prosecute his complaint against appellees.”). 
The requirements that a party must have legal standing
 
to litigate a claim, and that a lack of standing is a defect that
 must be addressed by the court at any point in the case, serve
 several purposes that are fundamental in ensuring the effective
 role of the courts in our society. Legal standing requirements
 promote the separation of powers between the three branches of
 government by limiting the availability of judicial review to
 cases in which there is an actual dispute between adverse
 parties, which “focuses attention directly on the question of
 
17
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
what is the proper place of the judiciary in the American system
 
of government.” Erwin Chemerinsky, Federal Jurisdiction 57-58
 (4th ed. 2003). 
This is particularly important where, as in this case,
 
one party claims that action taken by another branch of
 
government was unconstitutional. Raines v. Byrd, 521 U.S. 811,
 
819-20 (1997). For example, this court noted in Life of the Land
 
v. Land Use Comm’n of State of Haw., that “even in the absence of
 constitutional restrictions [on justiciability],
[7] courts still
 
carefully weigh the wisdom, efficacy, and timeliness of an
 exercise of their power before acting, especially where there may
 be an intrusion into areas committed to other branches of
 government.” 63 Haw. 166, 172, 623 P.2d 431, 438 (1981). In
 Trustees of Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. Yamasaki, this court
 further explained that we must be wary of the “inappropriateness
 of judicial intrusion into matters which concern the political
 branch of government,” and that “too often, courts in their zeal
 to safeguard their prerogatives overlook the pitfalls of their
 
7 Unlike the federal courts, the courts of Hawai 'i are not subject 
to the “cases or controversies” limitation imposed by Article III, Section 2
of the U.S. Constitution.  Nevertheless, because the Hawai 'i government, like
the federal government, is “divided and allocated among three co-equalbranches,”  Trustees of Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. Yamasaki 69 Haw. 154,
170-71, 737 P.2d 446, 456 (1987), this court has established a set of“‘prudential rules’ of judicial self governance” to properly limit the role of
the courts in our society, and has looked to decisions of the U.S. Supreme
Court for guidance on these rules, Life of the Land, 63 Haw. at 171-73, 623P.2d at 438-39;  see also Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd. v. Cole, 59 Haw.
503, 510-11, 584 P.2d 107, 111 (1978). 
18
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
own trespass on legislative functions.” 69 Haw. 154, 172, 737
 
P.2d 446, 456-57 (1987) (citations, quotation marks, and brackets
 omitted). Thus, a judicial determination of the
 constitutionality of a statute without an actual dispute between
 genuinely adverse parties could constitute an unwarranted
 encroachment into the authority of the legislative branch of
 government.
 
In addition, legal standing requirements improve
 
judicial decision-making by ensuring that the parties before the
 court have a sufficient personal stake in the outcome to
 
effectively and zealously argue the merits. See Baker v. Carr,
 
369 U.S. 186, 204 (1962) (stating that the “gist of the question
 
of standing” is whether “the appellants [have] alleged such a
 personal stake in the outcome of the controversy as to assure
 that concrete adverseness which sharpens the presentation of
 issues upon which the court so largely depends for illumination
 of difficult constitutional questions”).
 
We note that, although standing requirements are
 
important to serve the policies described above, this court has
 also indicated that the standing doctrine should not create a
 barrier to justice where one’s legitimate interests have, in
 fact, been injured. See East Diamond Head Ass’n v. Zoning Bd. of
 
Appeals of City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 52 Haw. 518, 523 n.5, 479
 P.2d 796, 799 n.5 (1971) (quoting Kenneth Davis, The Liberalized
 
19
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Law of Standing, 37 U. Chi. L. Rev. 450, 473 (1970)) 
(“Complexities about standing are barriers to justice; in
 removing the barriers the emphasis should be on the needs of
 justice. One whose legitimate interest is in fact injured by
 illegal action of an agency or officer should have standing
 because justice requires that such a party should have a chance
 to show that the action that hurts his interest is illegal.”).
 
However, the application of our standing doctrine in
 
this case does not create a barrier to justice. Appellants have
 not been deprived of any right and have not, as discussed below,
 pointed to any legally-recognized interest that has been injured. 
Indeed, Appellants are seeking standing to challenge the
 legislature’s extension of the right to marriage to people who,
 previously, could not exercise that right. Therefore, this is
 not a case in which justice requires us to relax our standing
 requirements. 
Accordingly, this court must, and will, address the
 
issue of Appellants’ standing before considering the merits of
 Appellants’ constitutional argument.
 
B.	 Appellants Lack Standing to Challenge the Constitutionality
of the Marriage Equality Act 
The critical inquiry in determining standing is
 
“‘whether the plaintiff has ‘alleged such a personal stake in the
 
outcome of the controversy’ as to warrant his [or her] invocation
 
20
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of . . . [the court’s] jurisdiction and to justify exercise of 
the court’s remedial powers on his [or her] behalf.’” Life of 
the Land, 63 Haw. at 172, 623 P.2d at 438 (quoting Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490, 498-99 (1975)). Generally, whether a plaintiff has the requisite “personal stake” is evaluated using the three-part injury-in-fact test. Sierra Club v. Hawai' i 
Tourism Auth., 100 Hawai' i at 250-51, 59 P.3d at 885-86. Under 
this test, a plaintiff must allege that: (1) he or she has suffered an actual or threatened injury as a result of the defendant’s wrongful conduct; (2) the injury is fairly traceable to the defendant’s actions; and (3) a favorable decision would likely provide relief for the plaintiff’s injury. Id. 
Once the standing of one plaintiff is established, the
 
court can proceed to a decision on the merits of the case and
 need not determine whether the other Appellants also have
 standing. See Planned Parenthood of Idaho, Inc. v. Wasden, 376
 
F.3d 908, 918 (9th Cir. 2004) (“Where the legal issues on appeal
 are fairly raised by one plaintiff who had standing to bring the
 suit, the court need not consider the standing of the other
 plaintiffs.”) (internal brackets and quotation marks omitted).
 
Thus, we look to see if any of the Appellants have
 
established standing. We will first address the Appellants’
 argument that they have standing based on the fact that this is a
 matter of great public importance, and will then examine whether
 
21
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the Appellants have otherwise satisfied the requirements of the
 
injury-in-fact test.
 
1.	 Appellants Cannot Establish Standing Solely on the
Grounds That This is a Matter of Great Public
 Importance
 
Appellants argued before the circuit court that
 
standing requirements should be relaxed or completely eliminated
 
in this case because it is a matter of great public importance. 
Specifically, Appellants argued that:
 
The complexities of standing and ripeness standards
are considered to be barriers to justice, and when a
court considers removing those barriers, the emphasis
is placed on the needs of justice.  More specifically,
those justiciability standards are simply not
applicable in declaratory judgment actions involving
matters of great importance.  Thus, those standards
are not applicable and are not barriers in this case.
 
(Internal citations omitted).
 
The circuit court generally agreed with Appellants and
 
concluded that:
 
The court believes that the Plaintiffs, both as
citizens and voters in matters of great public
importance , have a personal stake in the outcome of
this controversy and thereby have standing arising
from what the court believed was an attempt to expand
Article I, section 23 to include same sex marriage. 
(Emphasis added).
 
Before this court, Appellants do not elaborate further
 
on their argument that they have standing because this is a
 
matter of great public importance. However, because this was at
 least a partial basis for the circuit court’s conclusion, we
 address it as a possible basis for Appellants’ standing.
 
22
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
This court has never based standing solely on the
 
grounds that a matter was of great public importance. Instead,
 
in two narrow types of cases--those involving native Hawaiian
 rights and environmental concerns--this court has expanded the
 requisite “injury” to include harms to aesthetic and
 environmental well-being and where a plaintiff’s harm is shared
 by a large portion of the population generally. Critically
 though, this court has always required the plaintiff to show some
 injury-in-fact.
 
This court’s expansion of standing in certain cases can
 
be traced back to East Diamond Head Ass’n, 52 Haw. at 518, 479
 P.2d at 796. In East Diamond Head Ass’n, this court held that
 the plaintiffs, landowners of a lot adjacent to which a variance
 for industrial use had been granted in a residentially-zoned
 area, had standing as “aggrieved persons” under HRS § 91-14(a)
8
 
to challenge the variance. Id. at 522, 479 P.2d at 798. In so
 
holding, this court stated that:
 
In this case we subscribe to Professor Davis’ common
 
sense position on standing requirements:
 
“Complexities about standing are barriers to justice;
in removing the barriers the emphasis should be on the
needs of justice.  One whose legitimate interest is in
fact injured by illegal action of an agency or officer
should have standing because justice requires that
such a party should have a chance to show that the
 
8
 HRS § 91-14(a) (Supp. 2014) provides, in relevant part:  “Any
 
person aggrieved by a final decision and order in a contested case or by a
preliminary ruling of the nature that deferral of review pending entry of a
subsequent final decision would deprive appellant of adequate relief is
entitled to judicial review thereof under this chapter . . . .”  
23
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
action that hurts his interest is illegal.”
 
Id. at 523 n.5, 479 P.2d at 799 n.5 (quoting Kenneth Davis, The
 
Liberalized Law of Standing, 37 U. Chi. L. Rev. 450, 473 (1970))
 (emphasis added).
 
Even at the genesis of this expansion of standing, it
 
was thus clear from the language quoted by this court that we
 would still require the plaintiff to show an injury-in-fact to a
 legitimate interest to establish standing, while also not
 allowing procedural standing complexities to create a barrier to
 justice.
 
Since East Diamond Head Ass’n, this court has expanded 
what constitutes an injury-in-fact to include not just economic harms, but also harm to “aesthetic and environmental well being” and cases where the plaintiff’s injury “is not different in kind from the public’s generally, if he or she can show that he or she has suffered an injury-in-fact.” Sierra Club v. Hawai' i Tourism 
Auth. ex rel. Bd. of Dirs., 100 Hawai' i 242, 251, 59 P.3d 877, 
886 (2002) (internal brackets omitted); see also Sierra Club v. Dep’t of Transp., 115 Hawai' i 299, 313, 167 P.3d 292, 320 (2007) 
(“environmental plaintiffs must meet the three-part standing test . . . although there will be no requirement that their asserted injury be particular to the plaintiffs, and the court will recognize harms to plaintiffs [sic] environmental interests as 
24
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
injuries that may provide the basis for standing”).9 This
 
court’s expansion of standing in such cases is based, at least in
 
part, on article XI, section 9 of the Hawai' i Constitution, which 
creates a right in “each person” to a “clean and healthful
 environment.”
10 Sierra Club v. Dep’t of Transp., 115 Hawai' i at 
320, 167 P.3d at 313 (“The less rigorous standing requirement
 this court applies in environmental cases draws support from the
 Hawai'i Constitution, article XI, section 9.”). However, as this 
court noted in Sierra Club v. Hawai' i Tourism Auth., “while the 
basis for standing has expanded in cases implicating
 environmental concerns and native Hawai[]ian rights, plaintiffs
 
9 See also Ka Pa 'akai O Ka 'aina v. Land Use Comm’n, State of Hawai 'i,
94 Hawai 'i 31, 42–44, 7 P.3d, 1068, 1079–81 (2000) (plaintiff organization
which sued to prevent development of a parcel of land had standing to
challenge the Land Use Commission’s decision because members of theorganization alleged the development would impair their use and enjoyment ofpristine nature, scenic views, and open coastline of the area); Citizens forProtection of North Kohala Coastline v. Cnty. of Hawai 'i, 91 Hawai 'i 94,
100–02, 979 P.2d 1120, 1126–28 (1999) (plaintiff group established standing tochallenge the construction of a coastline resort by contending that they usedthe area for picnics, swimming, boating, fishing, and spiritual activities,and that the proposed resort threatened the plaintiffs’ quality of lifethrough irreversible degradation of the coastline and marine environment);Pele Defense Fund v. Puna Geothermal Venture, 77 Hawai 'i 64, 70, 881 P.2d
1210, 1216 (1994) (organizations and individuals that sued challenging anagency’s decision to grant a permit for geothermal wells established standingby alleging the permits would diminish their property values, cause an odornuisance, and reduce air quality). 
10 Article XI, section 9 of the Hawai 'i Constitution provides in 
full: 
Each person has the right to a clean and healthful
environment, as defined by laws relating to
environmental quality, including control of pollution
and conservation, protection and enhancement of
natural resources.  Any person may enforce this right
against any party, public or private, through
appropriate legal proceedings, subject to reasonable
limitations and regulation as provided by law.
 
25
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
must still satisfy the injury-in-fact test.” 100 Hawai' i at 251, 
59 P.3d at 886 (emphasis added). 
Therefore, even acknowledging that marriage equality is
 
a matter of great public importance, Appellants cannot establish
 
standing based solely on this basis. Rather, they must establish
 that they otherwise satisfy the injury-in-fact test, and in
 particular, whether they have suffered an actual or threatened
 injury. 
2.	 Representative McDermott’s Status as a State Legislator
Who Voted for HB 117 in 1997 Does Not Establish an
 Injury-in-Fact
 
Appellees argue that an individual’s status as a
 
legislator does not, on its own, confer standing to challenge a
 
law, and that a legislator establishes standing only by showing: 
(1) a sufficient “personal stake” and “concrete injury” in the
 outcome of the litigation (just like any other plaintiff); or (2)
 a deprivation of his or her right to vote in the legislature, or
 that his or her legislative vote has been “nullified” by the
 defendants. According to Appellees, for Representative McDermott
 to demonstrate legislative standing on this second basis, he
 would have to demonstrate that he voted against SB 1, there were
 sufficient votes to defeat SB 1, and that due to some
 nullification of his vote, SB 1 nonetheless was deemed passed. 
In response, Appellants argue that it is not
 
Representative McDermott’s vote against SB 1 that is at issue,
 
26
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
but instead his vote in 1997 for HB 117, which was the bill that 
proposed the ballot question for the 1998 marriage amendment. Appellants argue that Representative McDermott voted for HB 117 with the “firm conviction that the [1998] Marriage Amendment . . . would allow only opposite sex couples to marry in the State of Hawai' i.” According to Appellants, the legislature’s 
enactment of the Marriage Equality Act abrogated the 1998 marriage amendment, and in doing so the legislature nullified Representative McDermott’s legislative vote in favor of HB 117. 
Cases decided by the U.S. Supreme Court and this court
 
do not support Appellants’ argument that Representative McDermott
 has established legislative standing. Instead, these cases show
 that, although a legislator may indeed have standing to challenge
 a law if his or her vote was nullified or if he or she was
 unlawfully deprived of the right to vote, Representative
 McDermott simply has not shown the requisite deprivation or
 nullification that is required to establish such standing. 
In Coleman v. Miller, twenty Kansas state legislators
 
voted to ratify a constitutional amendment, and twenty voted
 against ratification. 307 U.S. 433, 435-36 (1939). The Kansas
 Lieutenant Governor cast the deciding twenty-first vote in favor
 of ratification and the legislators who lost the vote then sued
 to compel state officials to recognize that the amendment had not
 been properly ratified. Id. at 436. The U.S. Supreme Court held
 
27
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that the legislators had standing because
 
[h]ere, the plaintiffs include twenty senators, whose
votes against ratification have been overridden and
virtually held for naught although if they are right
in their contentions their votes would have been
 sufficient to defeat ratification.  We think that
 these senators have a plain, direct and adequate
interest in maintaining the effectiveness of their
votes.
 
Id. at 438.
 
In Raines v. Byrd, the U.S. Supreme Court addressed the
 
issue of whether four Senators and two Congressmen who all voted
 
“nay” in 1996 on the Line Item Veto Act had standing to file a
 lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the act after it was
 passed. 521 U.S. 811, 813-14 (1997). The Line Item Veto Act
 gave the President the authority to cancel certain spending and
 tax measures after signing them into law. Id. at 814. The
 
Senate passed the bill for the act by 69 votes to 31, and the
 House passed the identical bill by a vote of 232 to 177. Id. 
The Court first reiterated that a plaintiff must suffer a
 “particularized” injury which affects the plaintiff in a personal
 and individual way. Id. at 819 (citing Lujan v. Defenders of
 
Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560-61 (1992)). The Court then held that
 the legislator-plaintiffs did not have a sufficient “personal
 stake” in the dispute and had not alleged a sufficiently
 “concrete injury” to establish standing. Id. at 830. In so
 
holding, the Court examined its previous decision in Coleman. 
The Raines Court explained:
 
28
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[O]ur holding in Coleman stands . . . for the
proposition that legislators whose votes would have
been sufficient to defeat (or enact) a specific
legislative Act have standing to sue if that
legislative action goes into effect (or does not go
into effect), on the ground that their votes have been
completely nullified.
 
It should be equally obvious that appellees’ claim [in
Raines] does not fall within our holding in Coleman,
as thus understood.  They have not alleged that they
voted for a specific bill, that there were sufficient
votes to pass the bill, and that the bill was
nonetheless deemed defeated.
 
Id. at 823-24.
 
The Raines Court also addressed the legislator-
plaintiffs’ argument that, under Coleman, they had standing
 
because their future votes on appropriations bills would be less
 effective because the President now had the power to veto certain
 measures. Id. at 825. The Court refused to expand Coleman this
 
far because
 
[a]ppellees’ use of the word “effectiveness” to link
their argument to Coleman  stretches the word far
beyond the sense in which the Coleman opinion used it.
There is a vast difference between the level of vote
 nullification at issue in Coleman and the abstract
 dilution of institutional legislative power that is
alleged here.
 
Id. at 825-26.
 
Appellees in the case at bar contend that the
 
principles set forth by the U.S. Supreme Court in Raines and
 
Coleman are also followed in Hawai' i. 
In 
Mottl v. Miyahira, two of the plaintiffs challenging
 
a reduction in the University of Hawaii’s allotted funds were
 
legislators who argued that they had standing because they “have
 
29
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
not only the interest of a general member of the public in seeing 
that the laws of the state are complied with, but the interest of persons who have spent their own official time on behalf of their constituents, reviewing, voting on, and enacting budgets that become law.” 95 Hawai' i 381, 392, 23 P.3d 716, 727 (2001). This 
court held that the legislator-plaintiffs did not have standing because “[t]hey have not alleged any ‘personal stake in the outcome of the controversy,’ inasmuch as they have not alleged that they had personally suffered any ‘distinct and palpable injury.’” Id. 
In Hanabusa v. Lingle, two state senators who had voted 
in favor of an act that modified the appointment process for members of the University of Hawai' i Board of Regents (BOR) 
brought an action to compel the governor to nominate six candidates to replace holdover members of the BOR. 119 Hawai' i 
341, 346, 198 P.3d 604, 609 (2008). The senators contended that by refusing to nominate six new names, the governor was denying the senators their constitutional power and duty to advise and consent regarding the nominees. Id. The governor argued that, 
under Mottl, the senators lacked standing. Id. at 348, 198 P.3d 
at 611. However, this court distinguished Mottl and held that the senators had standing on the grounds that the “allegation that [the senators’] right to advise and consent on BOR appointments has been usurped by [the governor] . . . is 
30
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
sufficiently personal to constitute an injury in fact.” Id. 
Several principles can be drawn from these cases of the
 
U.S. Supreme Court and Hawai' i Supreme Court. First, a 
legislator does not, merely by virtue of voting on an act, have 
standing to challenge the constitutionality of the act. Second, to have standing, a legislator must establish that he or she has suffered a distinct and palpable injury resulting from the passing of (or failure to pass) the law being challenged. Third, this requisite injury for legislators may arise if the legislator’s right to vote on a bill has somehow been nullified, usurped, or the legislator’s vote has subsequently been rendered ineffective. These cases do not, however, support standing for a legislator who simply does not prevail in the vote count. 
In the present case, Appellants argue that
 
Representative McDermott’s vote in 1997 in favor of HB 117 was
 nullified by the legislature enacting the Marriage Equality Act
 in 2013. In essence, Appellants’ argument is that Representative
 McDermott voted for HB 117 under the belief that the proposed
 constitutional amendment would limit marriage to opposite-sex
 couples in a way that could not be undone by the legislature
 through its customary and ordinary powers, but that the
 legislature’s determination in 2013 that the 1998 marriage
 amendment did 
not inhibit its customary and ordinary power to
 
enact the Marriage Equality Act nullified Representative
 
31
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
McDermott’s 1997 vote in favor of HB 117. This is unpersuasive.
 
Representative McDermott voted in favor of HB 117,
 
which provided, in relevant part:
 
SECTION 1.  The purpose of this Act is to propose an
amendment to article I of the Constitution of the
 State of Hawaii, to clarify that the legislature has
the power to reserve marriage to opposite-sex couples.
 
The legislature finds that the unique social
institution of marriage involving the legal
relationship of matrimony between a man and a woman is
a protected relationship of fundamental and unequaled
importance to the State, the nation, and society. The
 legislature further finds that the question of whether
or not the state should issue marriage licenses to
couples of the same sex is a fundamental policy issue
to be decided by the elected representatives of the
people. This constitutional measure is thus designed
to confirm that the legislature has the power to
reserve marriage to opposite-sex couples and to ensure
that the legislature will remain open to the petitions
of those who seek a change in the marriage laws, and
that such petitioners can be considered on an equal
basis with those who oppose a change in our current
marriage statutes.
 
SECTI
ON 2.  Article I of the Constitution of the State
 
of Hawaii is amended by adding a new section to be
designated and to read as follows:
 
. . . .
 
[“]Section 23. The legislature shall have the power
to reserve marriage to opposite-sex couples.”
 
SECTION 3.  The question to be printed on the ballot
shall be as follows:
 
“Shall the Constitution of the State of Hawaii be
 
amended to specify that the legislature shall have the
power to reserve marriage to opposite-sex couples?”
 
1997 Haw. Sess. Laws H.B. No. 117 at 1246 (emphases added).
 
The question that appeared on the ballot at the 1998
 
election pursuant to HB 117 was identical to that proposed in the
 
bill: “Shall the Constitution of the State of Hawai' i be amended 
to specify that the legislature shall have the power to reserve
 
32
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
marriage to opposite-sex couples?” The language that was added 
to the Hawai' i Constitution as article I, section 23 was also 
identical to that proposed in the bill: “The legislature shall have the power to reserve marriage to opposite-sex couples.” Haw. Const. art. I, § 23. Therefore, Representative McDermott’s vote was not nullified: HB 117 was passed, the Hawai' i public 
voted in favor of the amendment, the constitution was amended as HB 117 provided, and the definition of marriage excluding same-sex couples in HRS § 572-1 was given full force and effect by this court in Baehr II. 
Because Representative McDermott was able to exercise
 
his right to vote for HB 117, his vote was counted in full, and
 he was on the winning side of the vote, Appellants cannot rely on
 any of the cases discussed above to support Representative
 McDermott’s legislative standing. 
Appellants’ argument essentially boils down to the view
 
that because the legislature in 2013 interpreted the language of
 HB 117 to allow it to enact the Marriage Equality Act–-although
 Representative McDermott did not interpret it the same way when
 he cast his legislative vote for HB 117--Representative McDermott
 now has standing to challenge the Marriage Equality Act. 
Even if we assume as true Appellants’ allegation that
 
in 1997 Representative McDermott believed he was voting for a
 measure that would prevent the legislature from redefining
 
33
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
marriage to include same-sex couples, Appellants’ argument is
 
misplaced. A legislator’s challenge to the subsequent
 interpretation of a law he or she voted for, as Representative
 McDermott does here, is a far cry from a legislator’s vote being
 “nullified” as explained by the cases discussed above. 
Representative McDermott’s challenge to the Marriage Equality Act
 is even more attenuated than the “abstract dilution” of
 legislative power that was deemed an inadequate injury in Raines,
 and is clearly distinguishable from the direct nullification of
 votes that were deemed adequate injuries in Coleman, or the
 denial of the constitutionally recognized power of advise and
 consent that was at issue in Hanabusa. 
Representative McDermott also contends that a New York
 
case, Silver v. Pataki, 755 N.E.2d 842 (N.Y. 2001), supports his
 standing argument. Silver states that a legislator’s
 
“responsibility necessarily includes continuing concern for
 protecting the integrity of one’s votes and implies the power to
 challenge in court the effectiveness of a vote that has allegedly
 been unconstitutionally nullified.” Id. at 846. In Silver, the
 
plaintiff, a member and speaker of the New York State Assembly,
 brought an action against the Governor of New York alleging that
 the governor had unconstitutionally vetoed line items in a non-
appropriations bill that the plaintiff had voted on. Id. at 844­
45. The court held that the situation was analogous to that in
 
34
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Coleman, and that “[a]s a Member of the Assembly who voted with
 
the majority in favor of the budget legislation, [the] plaintiff
 undoubtedly has suffered an injury in fact with respect to the
 alleged unconstitutional nullification of his vote sufficient to
 confer standing.” Id. at 847-48. 
In contrast to cases like Raines and Mottl, where the
 
plaintiffs had no standing, the plaintiff in Silver “won the
 legislative battle and . . . [sought] to uphold that legislative
 victory against a claimed unconditional use of the veto power
 nullifying his vote.” Id. at 848. In other words, absent the
 
allegedly unconstitutional veto in Silver, the bill the plaintiff
 voted for would have become law, whereas in Raines and Mottl, the
 plaintiffs were simply attempting to challenge bills on the basis
 that they had voted no, but had lost in the vote count. Silver
 
is thus distinguishable from the present case. Like the
 plaintiff in Silver, Representative McDermott was on the winning
 side of the legislative vote for HB 117 in 1997, but unlike the
 plaintiff in Silver, Representative McDermott’s vote was never
 vetoed or nullified in any way because the proposed question in
 HB 117 appeared on the 1998 ballot in the exact form
 Representative McDermott had voted for.
11
 
11
 In addition, if we were to hold that Representative McDermott has
 
standing to challenge the interpretation of a law that he voted for sixteen
years ago, solely on the basis that he voted for it and without any other
individualized injury, we would open the door to legislator suits against both
judicial and agency interpretations of any laws that a legislator has voted
(continued...)
 
35
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Appellants also rely on the recent U.S. Supreme Court
 
decision in United States v. Windsor, 133 S.Ct. 2675 (2013). 
Appellants argue that Windsor is supportive because in Windsor
 the U.S. Supreme Court allowed the Bipartisan Legal Advisory
 Group (BLAG), a group consisting solely of members of Congress,
 to intervene to defend the federal Defense of Marriage Act
 (DOMA), but did not require BLAG’s members to show that they had
 voted for DOMA or that their votes were “nullified.” Contrary to
 Appellants’ assertion, Windsor does not support their standing
 arguments.
 
In Windsor, the plaintiff, a private individual,
 
challenged DOMA, claiming that DOMA’s definition of marriage
 unconstitutionally denied tax benefits to same-sex couples. Id.
 
at 2682-83. The executive branch agreed with Windsor that DOMA
 was unconstitutional and thus refused to defend the
 constitutionality of the law. Id. at 2683. BLAG then intervened
 
in the lawsuit to defend DOMA. Id. at 2684. On appeal to the
 
Supreme Court, amicus curiae challenged BLAG’s standing to appeal
 the case. Id. at 2685. Although the Supreme Court recognized
 
that the arguments raised against BLAG’s standing raised a
 substantial question, the court found that BLAG had standing
 
11(...continued)
 
on. Under such a precedent, a legislator would be able to establish standing
no matter how long ago the vote occurred, simply by alleging that he or she
“believed” he or she had voted for a different interpretation. 
36
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
based on the “unusual and urgent” circumstances of the case. Id.
 
at 2688. In particular, the Court noted that if it were to
 
dismiss the case, extensive litigation would ensue, district
 courts in ninety-four districts would be without guidance, and
 the “[r]ights and privileges of hundreds of thousands of persons
 would be adversely affected, pending a case in which all
 prudential concerns about justiciability are absent.” Id. 
Appellants’ reliance on Windsor is misplaced. The
 
standing issue in Windsor did not involve whether a legislator
 who voted for a bill had standing to challenge (or defend) a law
 because the legislator’s vote was allegedly nullified, as
 Representative McDermott is arguing here. BLAG was not seeking
 standing on the basis that its members voted for DOMA and were
 defending the law to preserve the validity of their votes. 
Instead, the standing issue in Windsor was whether the parties
 were still adverse given the executive branch’s agreement with
 Windsor’s legal position and decision not to defend DOMA, and
 BLAG’s intervention on behalf of the executive branch. Id. at
 
2685. According to the amicus curiae, the case should have ended
 once the district court found DOMA to be unconstitutional and
 ordered the United States to pay the tax refund to Windsor,
 because the parties were no longer adverse and were both, in
 effect, prevailing parties. Id. The amicus curiae thus asserted
 
that BLAG did not have standing to intervene and appeal from the
 
37
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
district court’s judgment because there was no party aggrieved by 
the judgment. Id. Windsor is thus inapposite to the case at bar. 
Representative McDermott is not seeking to intervene to defend a law because the State of Hawai' i is refusing to do so, or appeal 
from a judgment where there are no aggrieved parties, but is simply challenging the validity of a law on his own behalf. Appellants’ reliance on Windsor to establish Representative McDermott’s standing is therefore unpersuasive. 
Thus, Representative McDermott has alleged no injury-
in-fact based on his status as a legislator who voted for HB 117. Appellants’ argument for legislative standing fails at part one of the three-part test because Representative McDermott has not suffered any actual or threatened individual injury as a result of Appellees’ wrongful conduct. See Sierra Club v. Dep’t of 
Transp., 115 Hawai' i at 319, 167 P.3d 292 at 312. 
3.	 Appellants Have not Shown an Injury-in-Fact Based on
Their Allegation That They Were Misled as to the
Meaning of the 1998 Marriage Amendment
 
The Individual Plaintiffs argue that the Marriage
 
Equality Act nullified their votes on the 1998 ballot, so they
 
suffered an “actual and personal injury” that supports standing. 
Appellants contend that the State engaged in a “bait and switch”
 tactic, and that this is the basis upon which the circuit court
 found standing. 
Appellants’ argument is that the voters were misled
 
38
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
into believing that they were voting for a constitutional 
amendment that would prevent the legislature from later enacting a law to recognize same-sex marriage without another constitutional amendment, because one part of the Ballot Information Flyer and the fact sheet was different from the actual ballot question. The Ballot Information Flyer and the fact sheet that the State circulated prior to the 1998 election stated: “A ‘Yes’ vote would add a new provision to the Constitution that would give the legislature the power to reserve marriage to opposite-sex couples only,” (emphasis added), while the question on the actual ballot was: “Shall the Constitution of the State of Hawai' i be amended to specify that the 
legislature shall have the power to reserve marriage to opposite-sex couples?” Notably, however, both the fact sheet and the flyer also included the actual verbatim text of the ballot question, which did not include the word “only.” 
To recap, the first part of the three-part standing 
test requires the plaintiff to show that he or she has suffered an actual or threatened injury as a result of the defendant’s wrongful conduct. Sierra Club v. Dep’t of Transp., 115 Hawai' i 
at 319, 167 P.3d 292 at 312. Appellants have not satisfied this requirement. Appellants’ bare factual allegations may allege an “injury,” but Appellants have not provided sufficient evidence to support their allegations. Moreover, even if we were to assume 
39
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that Appellants’ allegations are true, any such injury is not a
 
result of the Appellees’ conduct.
 
Hawai'i voters have a legitimate interest in protecting 
the validity of their votes on constitutional amendment ballot questions. While this court has not specifically addressed the standing of voters to challenge defects in constitutional amendment ballots, it has decided such cases on the merits. For example, in Watland v. Lingle, this court exercised jurisdiction and ruled on the merits of a challenge to the validity of a constitutional amendment where registered voters alleged that the State had not complied with requirements regarding publication and disclosure of the amendment text and had provided voters with misinformation regarding the amendment. 104 Hawai' i 128, 130, 
135-36, 85 P.3d 1079, 1081, 1086-87 (2004). 
Similarly, in Kahalekai v. Doi, this court decided on
 
the merits a case in which voters challenged constitutional
 amendments on two grounds. First, the plaintiffs alleged that
 the ballot questions were in a form that “contained an inherent
 bias towards a ‘yes’ vote.” 60 Haw. 324, 332, 590 P.2d 543, 549,
 (1979). Second, the plaintiffs alleged that, although the
 Constitutional Convention’s informational supplement stated that
 “the complete text of the constitutional amendments is contained
 in this supplement,” the supplement did not in fact contain the
 exact text of the amendments because the Constitutional
 
40
    
 
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Convention altered the language of the amendments before they
 
appeared on the ballots. Id. at 340-41, 590 P.2d at 554.
 
Here, although part of the explanations on the fact
 
sheet and the Ballot Information Flyer did include the word
 “only,” the fact sheet and the flyer both also included the
 verbatim text that appeared on the ballot sheet (without the word
 “only”), and this was the same language that was ultimately added
 as article I, section 23. Further, the addition of the word
 “only” in the explanations does not appear to change the meaning
 of the text in the amendment.
 
Moreover, even if Appellants’ allegations could, under
 
Watland and Kahalekai, amount to a legally cognizable injury
 based on their interest in their votes on the 1998 ballot,
 Appellants’ bare factual allegations are insufficient. This case
 was decided at the summary judgment stage, so Appellants were
 required to set forth facts demonstrating their standing.
12
 
12 Although, at the pleading stage, general factual allegations may 
be sufficient to establish standing, Appellants bear the burden of proof for
each of the injury-in-fact elements, commensurate with the degree of evidencerequired at each successive stage of litigation.  Sierra Club v. Hawai 'i 
Tourism Auth., 100 Hawai 'i at 250-51, 59 P.3d at 885-86 (citing Lujan v.
Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 561 (1992).  This case proceeded to thesummary judgment stage, so Appellants, as the party responding, were requiredto demonstrate “specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue fortrial.”  HRCP Rule 56(e).  At the summary judgment stage, we may consideraffidavits submitted opposing the motion for summary judgment.  Sierra Club v. Hawai'i Tourism Auth. , 100 Hawai 'i at 251, 59 P.3d at 886. 
Attached to Appellants’ response to the MSJ in this case were
declarations by Hashimoto, which stated:  “I voted in 1998 to amend the Hawai'i Constitution which gave the Legislature only power to reserve marriage
for opposite-sex couples,” Langdon, which stated:  “In 1998, I voted for our Hawai'i Constitution being amended with the understanding that this would make
(continued...)
 
41
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
However, Appellants have not provided evidence that the 
Individual Plaintiffs were misled. Although the declarations of the Individual Plaintiffs show that Hashimoto, Langdon, and Kumia all voted on the 1998 ballot under the belief that a “yes” vote would only allow marriage in Hawai' i to be between opposite-sex 
couples, none of the declarations state that any of the three Individual Plaintiffs relied upon or even read the Ballot Information Flyer or the Office of Elections’ fact sheet that Appellants claim misled the voters. Thus, Appellants presented no evidence at the summary judgment stage of the proceedings to show that any of the Individual Plaintiffs were actually misled. 
Furthermore, even if Appellants had provided enough
 
evidence to establish an injury under the first prong, they could
 not rely on this alleged injury to challenge the Marriage
 Equality Act because such injury is not a result of Appellees’
 conduct. There is a disconnect between the allegedly wrongful
 conduct--the alleged “bait and switch” in 1998--and the identity
 and conduct of Appellees in this case. The parties that
 Appellants have sued as defendants in this case--the Governor and
 Director of Health--are responsible for signing the Marriage
 Equality Act into law in 2013 and issuing marriage licenses,
 
12(...continued)
same-
sex marriages illegal under our Constitution,” and Kumia, which stated: 
“I voted in 1998 to amend the Hawai 'i Constitution by adding in new section to 
only allow marriage in Hawai 'i to be between one man and one woman.” 
42
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
respectively, but they are not the parties responsible for the 
alleged misleading of voters on the 1998 ballot. To seek a remedy for this injury that occurred in 1998, Appellants would have needed to sue the State of Hawai' i Office of Elections. 
This flaw in Appellants’ allegation also causes the
 
alleged injury to fail at the second part of the three-part test.
 Appellants have not demonstrated sufficient causation because the
 Individual Plaintiffs’ alleged injury is not “fairly traceable”
 to Appellees’ actions. 
As noted above, the Appellees in this case are not the 
parties responsible for the alleged “bait and switch” upon which Appellants’ “injury” is based. If Appellants had sued the parties responsible for allegedly misleading Appellants on the 1998 ballot, we would be required to determine whether there was a sufficient “logical nexus” between the Appellees’ conduct (misleading voters in 1998) and Appellants’ alleged injury (the enactment of the Marriage Equality Act). See Sierra Club v. 
Hawai'i Tourism Auth., 100 Hawai' i at 253, 59 P.3d at 888 
(requiring members of the Sierra Club to show a “logical nexus” between the defendant’s expenditure of funds and the injuries the members alleged). Although the link between the alleged “bait and switch” and the enactment of the Marriage Equality Act seems somewhat speculative, we need not determine whether there is sufficient causation to be “fairly traceable” because here, it is 
43
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
clear that Appellees are not the parties responsible for
 
allegedly misleading Appellants on the 1998 ballot. 
Moreover, even if Appellants had met the first two 
prongs of the test, in regard to the third prong, Appellants have not established that “‘a favorable decision would likely provide relief for the [their] injur[ies].’” Sierra Club v. Dep’t of 
Transp., 115 Hawai' i at 319, 167 P.3d 292 at 312 (quoting Mottl, 
95 Hawai' i at 389, 23 P.3d at 724). The Individual Plaintiffs, 
as voters on the 1998 ballot, are seeking a remedy that is not available to them. Appellants allege that “because the State engaged in a ‘bait and switch’ tactic, to the detriment of the Individual Plaintiffs, they have certainly demonstrated an injury in fact.” Even if Appellants suffered an injury, this is only true as to the 1998 ballot question. Accordingly, as in Watland and Kahalekai, Appellants would arguably have standing to challenge the validity of the amendment they voted on, i.e. the 1998 marriage amendment. However, that is not the law that they are challenging here. Rather, they are challenging the Marriage Equality Act, which was adopted sixteen years later. 
Accordingly, Appellants have not shown an injury that a
 
favorable decision in this case would address, and therefore fail
 the third part of the standing test.
 
44
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
4.	 Appellants Do Not Have Standing Based on Their
Allegation That the Marriage Equality Act
Unconstitutionally Expanded the Meaning of Article I,
Section 23
 
Appellants argue that the Marriage Equality Act
 
unconstitutionally expands the meaning of article I, section 23
 
in a way contrary to what they voted for, thereby nullifying
 their votes and injuring them, and that this was the grounds on
 which the circuit court found that Appellants had standing. 
Effectively, Appellants allege that the Marriage Equality Act is
 facially unconstitutional because it violates their understanding
 of article I, section 23. 
To have standing to challenge the constitutionality of 
a statute, “[t]he general rule is that ‘[w]here restraints imposed act directly on an individual or entity and a claim of specific present objective harm is presented, standing to challenge the constitutionality of an ordinance or statute exists.’” State v. Armitage, 132 Hawai' i 36, 55, 319 P.3d 1044, 
1063 (2014) (quoting State v. Bloss, 64 Haw. 148, 151, 637 P.2d 
1117, 1121 (1981)). Further, to have standing, “[o]ne must show that as applied to him [or her] the statute is constitutionality invalid.” Id.; City & Cnty. of Honolulu v. Ariyoshi, 67 Haw. 
412, 419, 689 P.2d 757, 763 (1984). 
Appellants’ argument for standing on this basis is
 
without merit. In the same way that Representative McDermott’s
 
45
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
vote for HB 117 was not nullified by the enactment of the
 
Marriage Equality Act, neither have the Individual Plaintiffs’
 votes in 1998 been nullified. There is no allegation that
 Appellants’ votes were not given full effect, or that the 1998
 marriage amendment that the Individual Plaintiffs voted for was
 not enacted into law. The legislature’s enactment of a statute
 cannot constitute an injury-in-fact to grant standing to general
 election voters who voted on a related proposed constitutional
 amendment years earlier.
 
Thus, Appellants do not have standing based on their
 
contention that the Marriage Equality Act unconstitutionally
 expanded the meaning of article I, section 23.
 
Finally, we note that, in addition to their argument
 
for standing based on their status as voters on the 1998 marriage
 amendment, before the circuit court, Appellants argued that the
 Individual Plaintiffs had standing based on alleged injuries
 resulting directly from the enactment of the Marriage Equality
 Act, as articulated in their declarations. Appellants have not
 pursued this argument in their submissions to this court, and
 counsel for Appellants explicitly stated at oral argument that
 Appellants were not relying on these alleged injuries to
 establish standing. See Oral Argument at 21:28-22:25; 23:00­
23:33, McDermott v. Ige, No. SCWC–14-0000843, available at
 http://state.hi.us/jud/oa/14/SCOA_121814_14_843.mp3. We
 
46
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
therefore do not address this argument here.13
 
Because the Marriage Equality Act has not nullified
 
Appellants’ votes, and Appellants have not alleged any way in
 
which the Marriage Equality Act is constitutionally invalid as
 applied to them, we hold that the circuit court erred in finding
 that Appellants had standing to pursue this claim. 
IV. Conclusion
 
Because Appellants lacked standing to pursue the
 
present action, we vacate the circuit court’s order granting
 summary judgment in favor of Appellees and against Appellants,
 and remand the case to the circuit court with instructions to
 enter an order dismissing the first amended complaint for lack of
 jurisdiction.
 Robert K. Matsumoto 
and Shawn A. Luiz
 for appellants /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
/s/ Michael D. Wilson
 /s/ Jeannette H. Castagnetti
 Deirdre Marie-Iha 
and Donna H. Kalama
 for appellees 
13 We note, however, that courts in other jurisdictions, when
 
addressing the merits of challenges to bans on same-sex marriage, have
rejected the notion that allowing same-sex couples to marry might harm other
members of the public.  For example, the Seventh Circuit held that “while many
heterosexuals . . . disapprove of same-sex marriage, there is no way they are
going to be hurt by it in a way that the law would take cognizance of.” 
Baskin v. Bogan , 766 F.3d 648, 669 (7th Cir. 2014).  Further, the District
Court for the Northern District of Florida held that “[t]hose who enter
opposite-sex marriages are harmed not at all when others . . . are given the
liberty to choose their own life partners and are shown the respect that comes
with formal marriage.”  Brenner v. Scott , 999 F.Supp.2d 1278, 1291 (N.D. Fl.
 
2014).
 
47
 