***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
CLARENCE CHING and MARY MAXINE KAHAULELIO, 
Plaintiff s-Appellees,  
 
vs. 
 
SUZANNE CASE, in her official capacity as Chairperson  
of the Board of Land and Natural Resources and  
State Historic Preservation Officer, BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL 
RESOURCES, and DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES,  
Defendants -Appellants . 
 
 
SCAP-18-0000432 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-18-0000432; CIV. NO. 14-1-1085-04 ) 
 
AUGUST 23, 2019 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
  Under t he Hawai‘i Constitution, all public natural 
resources are held in trust by the State for the common benefit 
of Hawai‘ i’s people and the generations to come.  Additionally, Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-18-0000432
23-AUG-2019
09:05 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
2 the constitution specifies that 
the public lands ceded to the 
United States following the overthrow of the Hawaiian Monarchy 
and returned to Hawai ‘i upon its admission to the Union hold a 
special status under our law.  These lands are held by the State 
in trust for the benefit of Native Hawaiians and the general 
public.  Accordingly, our constitution places upon the State 
duties with respect to these trusts much like those of a common 
law trustee, including an obligation to protect and preserve the 
resources however they are utilized. 
  Several parcels of ceded land on the island of Hawai‘i 
that are indisputably held in public trust by the State have 
been leased to the federal government of the United States of 
America for military training purposes, subject to a number of 
lease conditions designed to protect the land from long- term 
damage or contamination.  This case concerns the degree to which 
the State must monitor the leased trust land and the United 
States’ compliance with th e lease terms to ensure the trust 
property is ultimately safeguarded for the benefit of Hawai‘i’s 
people.   
  We hold that an essential component of the State’s 
duty to protect and preserve trust land is an obligation to 
reasonably monitor a third part y’s use of the property, and that 
this duty exists independent of whether the third party has in 
fact violated the terms of any agreement governing its use of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
3 the land.  To hold otherwise would permit the State to 
ignore 
the risk of impending damage to the land, leaving trust 
beneficiaries powerless to prevent irreparable harm before it 
occurs.  We therefore affirm the trial court’s determination 
that the State breached its constitutional trust duties by 
failing to reasonably monitor or inspect the trust land at 
issue. 
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Lease  No. S-3849 
  On A ugust 17, 1964, the State of Hawai i Department of 
Land and Natural Resources (DLNR) entered into a written 
agreement to lease three tracts of ceded land situated at Ka ohe, 
Hāmākua and Pu uanahulu , North Kona, Hawaii to the United States 
for military purposes.1  The 22,900 acre tract of land, which is 
contained within the P ōhakuloa Training Area (PTA),2 was leased 
to the United States for a term of sixty- five years , to expire 
                     
 1 Hawaii’s ceded lands are lands which were classified as 
government or crown lands prior to the overthrow of the 
Hawaiian monarchy in 1893.  Upon annexation in 1898, the 
Republic of Hawaii ceded these lands to the United States.  
In 1959, when Hawaii was admitted into the Union, the ceded 
lands were transferred to the newly created state, subject 
to the trust provisions set forth in § 5(f) of the 
Admission Act.  
Pele Def. Fund v. Paty, 73 Haw. 578, 585, 837 P.2d 1247, 1254 (1992).  
 2 The PTA as a whole is approximately 134,000 acres and includes 
land ceded to the United States military by Presidential and Governor’s 
Executive Orders, land purchased by the United States in fee simple from a 
private owner, and land that is leased from the State.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
4 on August 16, 2029.  In exchange, the United States paid the 
DLNR one dollar. 
  
The lease gives the United States the right to “have 
unrestricted control and use of the demised premises. ”  The 
lease also establishes several duties that the United States  is 
obligated to fulfill during the course of the lease.  Most 
notably for purposes of this appeal, Paragraph 9 of the lease 
requires that the United States “make every reasonable effort to 
. . . remove and deactivate all live or blank ammunition upon 
completion of a training exercise or prior to entry by the [] 
public, whichever is sooner.”3  In Paragraph 14 of the lease,  the 
United States agrees to “take reasonable action during its use 
of the premises herein demised to prevent unnecessary damage to 
or destruction of vegetation, wildlife and forest cover, 
geological features and related natural resources” and to “avoid 
pollution or contamination of all ground and surface waters and 
remove or bury all trash, garbage and other waste materials 
                     
 3 Paragraph 9 of the lease states the following:  
In recognition of public use of the demised premises, the 
Government shall make every reasonable effort to stockpile 
supplies and equipment in an orderly fashion and away from 
established road and trails and to remove or deactivate all 
live or blank ammunition upon completion of a training 
exercise or prior to entry by the said public, whichever is 
sooner. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
5 resulting from [th e United States’] use of the said premises.”4  
And, in Paragraph 29 of the lease, the United States agrees  
that, if required by the State upon the surrender of the 
property at the termination of the lease, it will  “remove 
weapons and shells used in connection with its training 
activities to the extent that a technical and economic 
capability exists and provided that expenditures for removal of 
shells will not exceed the fair market value of the land.”5 
                     
 4 Paragraph 14 provides the following:  
In recognition of the limited amount of land available for 
public use, of the importance of forest reserves and 
watersheds in Hawaii, and of the necessity for preventing 
or controlling erosion, the Government hereby agrees that, 
commensurate with training activities, it will take 
reasonable action during its use of the premises herein 
demised to prevent unnecessary damage to or destruction of 
vegetation, wildlife and forest cover, geological features 
and related natural resources and improvements constructed 
by the Lessor, help preserve the natural beauty of the 
premises, avoid pollution or contamination of all ground 
and surface waters and remove or bury all trash, garbage 
and other waste materials resulting from Government use of 
the said premises.  
 5 Paragraph 29 provides the following : 
The Government shall surrender possession of the premises 
upon the expiration or sooner termination of this lease 
and, if required by the Lessor, shall within sixty (60) 
days thereafter, or within such additional time as may be 
mutually agreed upon, remove its signs and other 
structures; provided that in lieu of removal of structures 
the Government abandon them in place.  The Government shall 
also remove weapons and shells used in connection with its 
training activities to the extent that a technical and 
economic capability exists and provided that expenditures 
for removal of shells will not exceed the fair market value 
of the land.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
6   The lease also places a number of corresponding rights 
and duties on the DLNR.  The most relevant to the present case 
is established in Paragraph 18, in which the DLNR agrees to 
“take reasonable action during the use of the said premises by 
the general public, to remove or bury trash, garbage and other 
waste materials resulting from use of the said premises by the 
general public.”6  In Paragraph 19, t
he lease also grants the 
DLNR the “right to enter upon the demised premises at all 
reasonable times to conduct any operations that will not unduly 
interfere with activities of the [United States] under the terms 
of the lease,” subject to “obtaining advance clearance” from the 
United States.7   
  
Additionally, the lease provides  in Paragraph 30 that 
any dispute over a question of fact regarding the lease must be 
                     
 6 Paragraph 18 provides the following:  
The Lessor hereby agrees that, commensurate with the public 
use of the premises herein demised, it will take reasonable 
action during the use of said premises by the general 
public, to remove or bury trash, garbage and other waste 
materials resulting from use of the said premises by the 
general public.  
 7 Paragraph 19 provides the following: 
Subject to obtaining advance clearance from the plans and 
training office of the Government’s controlling agency, or 
any other designated Government agency, officials and 
employees of the Lessor shall have the right to enter upon 
the demised premises at  all reasonable times to conduct any 
operations that will not unduly interfere with activities of 
the Government under the terms of this lease; provided 
however, that such advance clearance shall not be 
unreasonably held.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
7 decided by the “Division Engineer, U.S. Army Engineer Division, ” 
with a right of appeal to the Secretary of the Army.8  Paragraph 
30 further provides that the decision of the Secretary or a duly 
authorized representative “shall be final and conclusive u nless 
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have been 
fraudulent, or capricious, or arbitrary, or so grossly erroneous 
as necessarily to imply bad faith, or not supported by 
substantial evidence.”  The paragraph clarifies that questions 
                     
 8 Paragraph 30 provides the following: 
(a) That, except as otherwise provided in this lease, any 
dispute concerning a question of fact arising under this 
lease which is not disposed of by agreement shall be 
decided by the Division Engineer, U.S. Army Engineer 
Division, Pacific Ocean, Honolulu, Hawaii, hereinafter 
referred to as said officer, who shall within a reasonable 
time reduce his decision and the reasons therefor to 
writing and mail or otherwise furnish a copy thereof to the 
Lessor.  The decision of the said officer shall be final 
and conclusive unless, within thirty (30) days from the 
date of receipt of such copy, the Lessor mails or otherwise 
furnishes to the said officer a written appeal addressed to 
the Secretary of the Army.  The decision of the Secretary 
or his duly authorized representative for the determination 
of such appeals shall be final and conclusive unless 
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have 
been fraudulent, or capricious, or arbitrary, or so grossly 
erroneous as necessarily to imply bad faith, or not 
supported by substantial evidence.  In connection with any 
appeal proceeding under this condition, the Lessor shall be 
afforded an opportunity to be heard and to offer evidence 
in support of its appeal.  
(b) This Condition does not preclude consideration of law 
questions in connection with decisions provided for in 
paragraph (a) above: Provided, that nothing in this 
Condition shall be construed as making final the decision 
of any administrative official, representative, or board on 
a question of law.  
(c) That all appeals under this provision shall be 
processed expeditiously.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
8 of law may also be considered in connection with a dispute ’s 
resolution, but the decision of any administrative party on a 
question of law shall not  be final.  It further guarantees the 
State’s right to be heard and to offer  evidence in support of 
the appeal. 
B. The Plaintiffs’ Request to Access Government Records  
  In January 2014, Clarence Ching filed a request with 
the Chairperson of the Board of Land and Natural Resources 
(BLNR) to access government records.  Ching requested the 
following government records: 
1. Paragraph 9 of State General Lease No. S -3849 (with the 
U.S. Army relating to Pohakuloa) requires the United States 
Government to “make every reasonable effort to  
. 
. . remove 
or deactivate all live or blank ammunition upon completion 
of a training exercise or prior to entry by the said 
public, whichever is sooner.”  Please provide all 
government records that show (a) the U.S. Government’s 
compliance or non -compliance with this lease term and (b) 
the Department of Land and Natural Resources or Board of 
Land and Natural Resources efforts at ensuring compliance 
with this term of the 1964 lease.  This would include, but 
[is] not limited to, correspondence, inspection and 
monitoring reports, and meeting notes.  
2. Paragraph 14 of the same lease requires the U. S. 
Government to “remove or bury all trash, garbage or other 
waste materials.”  Please provide all government records 
that show (a) the U.S. Government’s compliance or non -
compliance with this lease term and (b) the Department of 
Land and Natural Resources  or Board of Land and Natural 
Resources efforts at ensuring compliance with this term of 
the 1964 lease.  This would include, but 
[is] not limited 
to, correspondence, inspection and monitoring reports, and 
meeting notes.  
The DLNR responded 
that the request would be granted in its 
entirety.  The response stat ed that the DLNR was providing its ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
9 entire file on the lease (the lease file), which, b ased on its 
review, contained no records responsive to Ching’s request.  
C. The Circuit Court Action 
1. Complaint 
  
Three months later, Ching and Mary Maxine Kahaulelio 
(collectively, “the Plaintiffs ”) filed a complaint in the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) against the 
BLNR, DLNR, and William J. Aila, Jr.,  in his official capacity 
as Chairperson of the BLNR and State Historic Preservation 
Officer (collectively, “ the State”).9  In their complaint, the 
Plaintiffs alleged that the State , as trustee of the s tate’s 
ceded lands, breached its  trust dut y “to protect and maintain 
the[] public trust lands”  in the PTA.  The complaint specified 
that it was not alleging  that the United States had  violated the 
terms of its lease, but rather that the State  has reason to 
believe that the lease terms may have been violated and has  a 
trust duty to investigate and take all necessary st eps to ensure 
compliance with the terms of the lease. 
  According to the complaint, Ching is a descendant of 
the aboriginal people of 
Hawaii and engages in native Hawaiian 
                     
 9 Under Hawai i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 43(c), a public 
officer named in a case is automatically substituted by his or her successor 
when the holder of the office ceases to hold office on appeal.  Accordingly, 
Suzanne Case has been substituted for William J. Aila, Jr., whom she 
succeeded as Chairperson.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
10 cultural practices, which inc ludes walking in the footsteps of 
his ancestors on hiking trails located within the PTA.  He also 
participates in other “traditional and customary services” 
within the PTA, the complaint explained.  Kahaulelio is also a 
descendant of the aboriginal people 
of Hawai i, the complaint 
stated.  She is at least 50% native Hawaiian and a beneficiary 
of the Hawaiian Home Lands Trust, the complaint continued, as 
well as a Hawaiian Home Lands lessee.  The complaint further 
stated that both Ching and Kahaulelio are beneficiaries of the 
ceded trust lands.
 
  Citing a March 2013 letter by a DLNR staff member, t he 
complaint alleged that the State was aware of the possibility 
that the land leased to the United States was littered with 
unexploded ordnance (UXO) and “munitions and explosives of 
concern.”10  The Plaintiffs asserted that the State did not know 
whether the United States had complied with the lease because 
they had taken “no concrete steps to investigate, monitor or 
ensure compliance” with the lease .  Because the State was 
obligated to protect, care for, and maintain trust property by 
investigating the United States ’ compliance with the lease and 
                     
 10 The Plaintiffs’ First Amended Complaint added four paragraphs 
citing a state- run website and several federal cases that allegedly 
demonstrated that the State was aware that the United States’ military had 
failed to clean up ordnance on other land leased to the United States.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
11 failed to do so, the Plaintiffs contended that the State “failed 
to fulfill [its] trust duties with respect to the ceded land 
leased” to the United States.    
  The Plaintiffs requested a declaration that the State 
breached its trust obligations, an order to require the 
State to 
fulfill its trust duties with respect to the leased land, and an 
injunction to bar the State  from negotiating an extension of the 
lease or from entering into a new lease of the PTA until the 
State ensures that the terms of the existing lease have been 
fulfilled.11 
2. Motion s for Summary Judgment 
a. The Motions 
  A fter the State filed its answer, the Plaintiffs filed 
a Motion for Summary Judgment.  In their motion, the Plaintiffs 
asserted that under article XII , section 4 and article XI, 
section 1 of the Hawai i Constitution, the State is  the trustee 
of the public ceded lands trust and of public natural resources, 
and it therefore has a trust duty to “monitor, inspect and 
investigate to ensure that public trust lands are not being 
                     
 11 Approximately one month after the Plaintiffs filed their 
complaint, the State filed a notice of removal from the circuit court to the 
United States District Court for the District of Hawai ‘i.  The Plaintiffs 
subsequently filed a motion to remand the case back to circuit court.  The 
federal district court granted the Plaintiffs’ motion, concluding that “ at 
issue is a purely state -law breach of trust claim raising numerous questions 
of fact and substantial questions of Hawaii law regarding the State’s 
obligations as to ceded lands.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
12 damaged--particularly if [it] has reason to believe that trust 
property is at risk.”  Despite the State’s awareness of the 
possibility that the terms of the lease may have been violated, 
the Plaintiffs argued, the State  took no steps to ensure 
compliance with the lease terms.   Its failure to investigate the 
condition of the land, the Plaintiffs contended, fell well below 
its standard of care and constituted a breach of its trust 
duties.  The Plaintiffs concluded that the equitable relief 
requested was warranted because  they were ent itled to prevail on 
the merits, there was a grave risk  posed to the ceded land,  and 
the public interest weighed  in their favor. 
  In its Memorandum in Opposition, the State argued that 
the Plaintiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment should be denied 
because the Plaintiffs did not allege that any provision of the 
lease had been violated,  and it asserted that the United States’ 
obligation to clean the leased property will not arise until 
2029.  In the absence of an alleged breach, the State maintained 
that the Plaintiffs ’ claims amounted to “speculation or 
predictions about future harm”  that did not present an “actual 
controversy” suitable for judicial resolution.  
  
The State also contended that the Plaintiffs were 
seeking relief that was unavailable under Hawai i Revised 
Statutes (HRS)  § 632-1 (1993), as the relief requested would not 
bring an end to the controversy or resolve the dispute with ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
13 finality.12  The State posited that “even if the injunctive 
relief sought by Plaintiffs is ordered by the Court, Plaintiffs 
will still dispute the extent of any cleanup efforts by the 
United States” because the requested relief would require “the 
State to engage in some undefined form of oversigh
t of the 
United States military. ”  Therefore, the State  concluded, the 
Plaintiffs’ concerns and the underlying controversy did not meet 
the statutory requirements for declaratory relief.  
  
Additionally, the State argued that the Plaintiffs  
were not entitled to declaratory relief because the declaratory 
judgment statute limits declaratory actions to claims for which 
no alternative statutory relief is available.  Here, the State  
concluded, HRS § 673-1 (1993) provides a cause of action for 
native Hawaiians’ to bring a claim for breaches of relevant 
                     
 12 HRS § 632-1 provides the following in relevant part:  
Relief by declaratory judgment may be granted in civil 
cases where an actual controversy exists between contending 
parties, or where the court is satisfied that antagonistic 
claims are present between the parties involved which 
indicate imminent and inevitable litigation, or where in 
any such case the court is satisfied that a party asserts a 
legal relation, status, right, or privilege in which the 
party has a concrete interest and that there is a challenge 
or denial of the asserted relation, status, right, or 
privilege by an adversary party who also has or asserts a 
concrete interest therein, and the court is satisfied also 
that a declaratory judgment will serve to terminate the 
uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the proceeding. 
Where, however, a statute provides a special form of remedy 
for a specific type of case, that statutory remedy shall be 
followed[.]  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
14 constitutional trusts, and the Plaintiffs were thus obligated to 
proceed under that statutory framework.13  
  
In reply, the Plaintiffs contended that the State was 
incorrect in asserting that the duty of the United States to 
clean the property did not arise until the lease expired because 
Paragraph 9 of the lease r equired the United S tates to clean the 
land during the lease--specifically, when it completed a 
training exercise.  T he Plaintiffs also argued that injunctive 
relief is appropriate “in a case involving a traditional 
equitable claim when a trustee breaches its fiduciary 
obligations,” noting that HRS §  632-3 (1993)  empowers courts to 
grant ancillary equitable relief. (Citing Food Pantry , Ltd. v. 
Waikiki Bus. Plaza, Inc., 58 Haw. 606, 613- 14, 575 P.2d 869, 
875-76 (1978); Natatorium Pres. Comm. v. Edelstein, 55 Haw. 55, 14
                     
 13 HRS § 673 -1 provides in relevant part as follows:  
(a) The State waives its immunity for any breach of trust 
or fiduciary duty resulting from the acts or omissions of 
its agents, officers and employees in the management and 
disposition of trust funds and resources of:  
. . . . 
(2) The native Hawaiian public trust under article 
XII, sections 4, 5, and 6 of the Constitution of the 
State of Hawaii implementing section 5(f) of the 
Admission Act[.]  
 14 HRS § 632-3 provides that “[f]urther relief based on a 
declaratory judgment may be granted whenever necessary or proper, after 
reasonable notice and hearing, against any adverse party whose rights have 
been adjudicated by the judgment.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
15 515 P.2d 621 (1973); King v. Oahu R y. & Land Co., 11 Haw. 717, 
738 (Haw. Rep. 1899).) 
  The State filed its own  Motion for Summary Judgment 
that restated the arguments from the State’s  Memorandum in 
Opposition to the Plaintiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment 
verbatim.15  
b. Supplemental Briefing 
  After a hearing,16 the Plaintiffs submitted a 
Supplemental Memorandum in Support of their Motion for Summary 
Judgment, which argued that further discovered evidence 
demonstrated that the DLNR had not conducted an inspection of 
the PTA since 1984.  For example, b etween 1984 and the start of 
the current litigation, there had been no communication between 
the State and the United States regarding compliance with the 
lease, the Plaintiffs asserted.17  This demonstrated that the 
                     
 15 At a hearing regarding the motions, the State also argued that it 
should prevail on the merits because an internal memorandum attached to its 
Memorandum in Opposition showed that there were internal discussions at the 
DLNR regarding the monitoring of the United States’ compliance with the 
lease.  This memorandum was sent from the Acting Hawai ‘i Branch Manager of the 
Division of Forestry and Wildlife (DOFAW) to the DLNR regarding DOFAW’s 
comments on cancellation and issuance of a new lease with the United States 
for the PTA.  One concern noted by DOFAW was that the United States “should 
sweep the lands . . . for UXO and remove any UXO found at their expense to 
make the area safe for the public.”  
 16 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. 
 17 On November 14, 2014, approximately one month after the hearing 
and one week before the Plaintiffs filed their supplemental memorandum, the 
DLNR sent a letter to a United States Army officer requesting the following:  
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
16 State had not made a sufficient effort to protect the trust 
land, the Plaintiffs contend ed.   
  In the State’s Supplemental Memorandum, it  asserted 
that several records from the lease file showed that it had 
actively engaged in monitoring since the execution of the lease
, 
including records of one formal inspection of the PTA, maps 
indicating locations where UXO may be located, reviews of the 
United States’ compliance done in conne ction with amendments to 
the lease, and “informal communications” relating to the lease.   
The State also pointed to a written request it had sent to the 
United States for a description of its procedures to comply with 
the lease provisions at issue.  The 
State asserted that the 
United States responded to the letter “with detailed information 
about their clean-up and post-training procedures.”  Because the 
letter demonstrated that the State had undertaken monitoring of 
the PTA, it concluded, there was no longer a justiciable 
controversy.   
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
[A] description of the procedures  utilized to comply with 
the[] provisions of Lease No. S -3849, including detailed 
information about any action taken by the United States 
following training exercises to remove or deactivate 
ordnance, as well as actions taken to remove trash or 
garbage resulting from Government use of the lease 
premises.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
17   In the Plaintiffs’ Reply, they contended that even if 
the 1984 inspection was “complete and thorough,” it is not 
sufficient to show that the State is
 currently fulfilling its  
trust duties because there was no evidence of an inspection 
since 1984.  Thus, the State  failed to demonstrate that it  had 
fulfilled its trust duties, the Plaintiffs concluded.   
c. Orders Denying Summary Judgment 
  The circuit court denied the Plaintiffs’ Motion for 
Summary Judgment, stating that there were genuine issues of 
material fact as to whether the State
 had discharged its trust 
duties.  The court also denied the State’s Motion for Summary 
Judgment because the court found, inter alia,  that there was an 
“actual controversy regarding whether or  not the State ha[d] 
discharged its responsibilities as a trustee of public lands.”  
3. Motions  to Join the United States as a Party 
  After its Motion for Summary Judgment was denied, the 
State filed a Motion to Add the United States as a Party or,  in 
the Alternative, for Dismissal in which it argued that under 
Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP)  Rule 21 (1980), adding 
the United States was appropriate because, as the lessee of the 
leased land within the PTA, the United States had a legal and 
beneficial interest in the subject matter of the Plaintiffs’ 
complaint.  The State also contended that the United States was 
a necessary party under HRCP Rule 19(a) (2000) because complete ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
18 relief could not be accorded in its absence .  Resolution of the 
action would necessarily include an interpretation of the lease 
provisions, the State contended, and the United States would not 
be able to defend its interests under the lease if it were not 
added as a party.  And, asserted the State, in the context of 
leases, 
Hawaii courts have held that all parties to a lease are 
necessary parties in any equitable action that interprets or 
touches upon the lease
.  (Citing Foster v. Kaneohe Ranch Co., 12 
Haw. 363, 365 (Haw. Rep. 1900).) 
  Finally, the St ate argued that the United States is an 
indispensable party under HRCP Rule 19(b) and therefore the suit 
should be dismissed if it cannot be joined.18  Under the first  
factor of HRCP Rule 19(b), a judgment rendered in the absence of 
the United States would be prejudicial to it because it “would 
be forced to accept factual findings that directly bear on 
whether the United States has breached the Lease,” the State 
asserted.  Under the rule’s s econd factor, a court could not 
                     
 18 HRCP Rule 19(b) provides that courts should weigh the following 
factors when determining whether a party is indispensable:  
[F]irst, to what extent a judgment rendered in the person’s 
absence might be prejudicial to the person or those already 
parties; second, the extent to which, by protective 
provisions in the judgment, by the shaping of relief, or 
other measures, the prejudice can be lessened or avoided; 
third, whether a judgment rendered in the person’ s absence 
will be adequate; fourth, whether the plaintiff will have 
an adequate remedy if the action is dismissed for 
nonjoinder.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
19 shape the relief to ameliorate the prejudicial effect of the 
judgment because “[n]ew or different monitoring” or limitations 
on the United States’ current use of the land were fundamental 
to the relief sought by the Plaintiffs, the State  argued.  
Applying the third factor, the State asserted  that a judgment 
rendered in the absence of the United States would be inadequate 
because the United States was ultimately the party that the 
Plaintiffs sought to hold responsible for causing the waste of 
the trust property.  And fourth, the State  contended that the 
Plaintiffs had an alternate remedy for their breach of trust 
claims: an action in federal court that also names the United 
States or an action 
brought in state court pursuant to HRS 
§ 673-1. 
  The Plaintiffs responded  that the circuit court should 
deny the State’s motion because,  contrary to the State’s 
argument that the Plaintiffs’ complaint was based on a violation 
of the lease, they were asserting “a basic state -law breach of 
trust claim.”  The United States was not a necessary nor 
indispensable party to the case under HRCP Rule 19(a), the 
Plaintiffs argued, because any effect on federal interests was 
“purely speculative,” and any relief that would require the 
State to increase its monitoring would not impinge on the United 
States’ rights under the lease because the State already has  a 
right of entry under the lease.  And, even assuming  the State ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
20 were to eventually take actions that affect the United States’ 
interests as a result of a judicial ruling in this case, the 
United States was 
well protected because any dispute between it 
and the State would be decided by an agent of the United States 
under the lease, the Plaintiffs 
contended. 
  
Next, the Plaintiffs contended that even if the United 
States was a party that should be joined if possible under HRCP 
Rule 19(a), it was not an indispensable party under HRCP Rule 
19(b).  The rule’s first factor weighed  against the State, the 
Plaintiffs argued, because a “judgment [would] not prejudice the 
interests of the U.S. whatsoever ” as it would “not [be] bound by 
any findings made to a case in which it is not a party.”  
Second, the Plaintiffs asserted that the court could fashion its 
relief to ensure that the United States does not suffer any 
prejudice by, for example, ordering the State  to provide a 
report to the court thirty days prior to an annual evidentiary 
hearing to ensure the State’s compliance with the lease.  Third, 
the Plaintiffs stated that it would be able to obtain adequate 
relief in the absence of the United States.  Fourth, the 
Plaintiffs asserted that they would be “deprived of their day in 
court if th[e] action were dismissed,” which would be 
inconsistent with Hawai i Supreme Court decisions holding that 
beneficiaries must be able to keep government trustees 
accountable.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
21 (continued . . .)    T he United States then filed a statement of interest 
in which it assert ed that it “unquestionably has an interest” in 
the subject matter of the 
litigation that was “clearly 
sufficient” for joinder, if it were feasible.19  But joinder was 
not feasible, it explained, because “such a state action against 
the United States is barred by its sovereign immunity”  and 
neither party had identified a congressional waiver of sovereign 
immunity.20  The United States asserted that disposition of the 
action in its absence may impair its ability to protect its 
interest, making it a necessary party under HRCP Rule 19(a).21  
                     
 19 Prior to this filing, the court denied without prejudice the 
State’s Motion to Add the United States as a Party, or in the Alternative, 
for Dismissal “because of the possibility that the United States will make a 
determination that it has a sufficient interest to appear in this case.”  
After the United States filed its Statement of Interest, the State filed a 
Motion to Dismiss for Failure to Join an Indispensable Party, or in the 
Alternative, for Summary Judgment in which it made substantially similar 
arguments to those made in its first motion as to why the United States was a 
necessary and indispensable party under HRCP Rule 19.  The latter motion also 
argued that the action was nonjusticiable because, inter alia, it presented a 
political question falling within the discretion of the executive branch and 
the court could not resolve an “actual controversy” due to the vagueness of 
the requested relief.  For the sake of clarity, this opinion addresses the 
two motions together with respect to the necessity and indispensability of 
the United States as a party.  
 20 The United States noted that filing a statement of interest 
neither constitutes a formal intervention nor makes the United States a party 
to the proceedings and thus does not amount to a waiver of sovereign 
immunity.  (Citing M.R. v. Dreyfus, 697 F.3d 706, 735 (9th Cir. 2012) .) 
 21 The United States used the PTA, it stated, f or “combined live -
fire and maneuver training,” which “is critical because military operations 
require significant coordination.”  Additionally, the United States explained 
that the PTA cannot operate as an effective training area without the land 
leased from the State, because, for safety purposes, the artillery firing 
ranges contained within the PTA must be situated so that the artillery lands 
in areas in which soldiers and the general public do not travel.  The leased 
land provides such safety, the United  States noted.  The leased land was also 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
22 The United States contended that the court could not assess the 
Plaintiffs’ breach of trust claim without “directly or 
indirectly interpreting the lease and determining factual issues 
regarding whether the United States has complied with the 
lease.”  The Plaintiffs were therefore improperly asking a state 
court to interpret the United States’ obligations under the 
lease, the U nited States argued. 
  The United States also maintained that when a non-
party cannot be joined due to sovereign immunity, the first 
factor-- the “extent a judgment rendered in the [party’s] absence 
might be prejudicial to the [party] or those already parties” --
takes primary importance and “should weigh heavily in the Rule 
19(b) analysis.”  The Plaintiffs’ relief would cause “serious 
harm” to it, the United States contended, for several reasons.  
An injunction barring the State  from renegotiating the lease 
would seriously harm the United States because the PTA “is 
essential for readiness of all the forces” in the Pacific region  
and there is no other location in the Pacific at which the 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
crucial to the United States training operations, it explained, because the 
land contains (1) a “Battle Area Complex,” which “allows soldiers to train 
and test their ability to detect, identify, engage and defeat stationary and 
moving targets in both open and urban terrain environments,” (2) a “Modular 
Military Operations in Urban Terrain,” which “is designed to look like 
villages/towns and contains different types of buildings to practice military 
operations,” and (3) the Cooper Airstrip, which “is used to practice launches 
and recovery of Shadow Unmanned Aircraft.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
23 training done at the PTA could be accomplished, the U
nited 
States asserted.  Additionally, i f the court instead ordered the 
State to conduct inspections of the leased land, such 
inspections could burden the United States, it contended, 
because it could disrupt critical training and raise safety 
issues.   
  
As to the second factor in the HRCP Rule 19(b) 
analysis, the extent that prejudice can be avoided through the 
shaping of relief, the United States contended that the 
Plaintiffs’ proffered shaping of relief would put the extension 
of the lease in doubt or disrupt the military’s tra ining.22  And 
as to the fourth factor in the HRCP Rule 19(b) analysis, the 
adequacy of available remedies should the suit be dismissed, the 
United States argued that “[c]ourts have recognized  . . . that 
the lack of an alternative forum does not automatically prevent 
dismissal of a suit where the inability results from the non-
party’s sovereign immunity.”23   
                     
 22 As stated, the Plaintiffs asserted that injunctive relief 
regarding the lease could be shaped by “enjoin[ing] the defendants from 
executing an agreement extending the lease or entering into a new lease until 
the defendants ensure that the terms of the existing lease have been 
fulfilled.”  They also contended that the court could shape relief in regards 
to monitoring by ordering that “the defendants pro vide a report to [the 
circuit] court thirty days prior to annual evidentiary hearings on 
defendants’ efforts to ensure compliance with the lease.”  
 23 The United States did not address the third factor of HRCP Rule 
19(b), the adequacy of a judgment rendered  in the party’s absence.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
24   The United States further stated that, in the event 
the case were permitted to go forward and “ relief were entered 
that impacted the interests of the United States, ” the United 
States “would at that time consider what action to take, 
including whether to file a motion to intervene as a party for 
the purpose of removing the case to United States District Court 
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1442(a).”  
 
 The court denied the State’s motion without prejudice, 
determining that “things may unfold as a matter of proof during 
the trial that may implicate some of the arguments being 
raised.”  Based on the pre -trial record,  “the Court believe[d] 
it would be improvident to dismiss any of the claims.”  
4. Trial 
  A bench trial commenced, during which the Plaintiffs 
presented a series of witnesses who testified regarding the 
DLNR’s management of the leased PTA lands.   
  The  Plaintiffs first called Kevin Moore, the DLNR ’s 
custodian of records who responded to the request for government 
records that Ching filed before the start of litigation.   Moore 
testified that although DLNR’s normal practice is to attempt to 
inspect leased lands at least once every two years, the leased 
PTA land is more difficult to inspect and therefore inspections 
are conducted less frequently.  Moore stated  that the DLNR’s 
lease file contained records of only three inspections of the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
25 leased PTA land: one from 1984  that indicated the inspection 
lasted “no more than one day,” which Moore acknowledged was not 
enough time for an inspector to inspect the 22,900- acre property 
on foot;24 one from 1994 that was not signed and did not have 
anything written in the spaces denoted for the  condition of the 
land or the findings of the inspection;  and one from December 
2014 that indicated that the premises were in unsatisfactory 
condition but did not contain any determination as to whether 
the United States was in compliance with the le
ase.  Moore also 
testified that a 2013 memorandum circulated within the DLNR 
suggested the leased PTA land should be swept for UXO to  be 
removed at the United States’ expense , but DLNR did not ask the 
United States Army (Army) to clean up any ammunition as a result 
of the memorandum.   
  
Moore related that  the State had coordinated with the 
federal government and its various agencies to undertake a 
number of projects concerning the condition of the leased PTA 
land.  A rcheological surveys were done in 2001 as part of a  
Natural Resource Management Plan created by the United States, 
for instance, and a Programmatic Agreement between s tate and 
federal agencies permitted “cultural monitors” to be involved 
                     
 24 Moore stated that it would be difficult for an inspector to 
inspect the leased land in a motor vehicle due to the rugged terrain.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
26 with inspections.  According to Moore, these plans and programs 
ultimately demonstrated that the Army was the agency primarily 
responsible for environmental cleanup of the PTA leased land, 
but they also established that the Hawai i Department of Health 
shared responsibility by providing support and regulatory 
oversight.   
  
The Plaintiffs also  called Kealoha Pisciotta, a former 
cultural monitor for the battle area complex (BAX) within the 
PTA.  Pisciotta testified that during her inspections she 
observed and noted in her reports a range of debris left over 
from military exercises, including munitions and UXO,  stationary 
targets, junk cars, an old tank, crudely built rock shelters, 
and other miscellaneous military rubbish.  S he testified that 
some of her reports recommended that the debris be cleaned up, 
but not all of the UXO that she observed was removed.  
  Next, the Plaintiffs called Suzanne Case, Chair of the 
BLNR and the Director of the DLNR.  Plaintiffs ’ counsel show ed 
Case a 2014 action memorandum from the Army addressed to the 
DLNR stating that  a bazooka range within the PTA was heavily 
contaminated with explosive hazards, ammunitions, and debris 
that posed a significant danger to public health and welfare.  
Case testified that she did not remember receiving or having 
been shown the memorandum 
by DLNR staff and  that she was not 
aware of any lease compliance issues that had been raised to the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
27 BLNR regarding the PTA lease during her tenure as Chair.  S he 
also testified that the DLNR did not have a written policy 
regarding when inspections of leased premises w
ere to be 
conducted and instead chose which leases to inspect based on 
available resources, the risks involved, and whether the public 
had drawn attention to a specific property.   
  The Plaintiffs then called Deputy Attorney General 
William Wynhoff,  who had previously testified in a pretrial 
deposition on behalf of the DLNR.  Wynhoff testified that to the 
best of his knowledge, the DLNR did not have a written procedure 
to ensure compliance with all terms of the PTA lease.  DLNR's 
practice, Wynhoff 
stated, is to keep all records related to 
leases in the lease file.  
Wynhoff acknowledged that prior to 
the filing of this suit, there were no documents in the PTA 
lease file indicating that the DLNR had asked for or received  
assurances from the United States that it was in compliance with 
the lease.   
  
Ching testified next.  Ching, who is part Hawaiian, 
stated he was a member of the Pōhakuloa Cultural Advisory 
Committee, which advised the Army of cultural concerns related 
to its activities 
within the PTA.  Ching testified that, d uring 
his bimonthly trips to the PTA as a member of the committee, he 
witnessed blank ammunition and other trash and military 
debris ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
28 “strewn around” that negatively affected his spiritual and 
traditional practices.   
  After Ching’s testim ony, the Plaintiffs called 
Kahaulelio.  Kahaulelio testified that she was at least fifty 
percent Hawaiian and
 that, to her, caring for the land at 
Pōhakuloa was a cultural practice.  She explained that she 
and 
other Hawaiian practitioners participate in cultural ceremonies 
at Pōhakuloa, which she compared to going to church.  Kahaulelio 
testified that, during one such cultural trip to 
Pōhakuloa in 
November 2014, she observed debris and blank ammunition on the 
ground and that this  destructio n of the land made her feel 
“angry” and “ hurt.”   
  The Plaintiffs’ final witness was Russell Tsuji, a 
former Deputy Attorney General
, State Land Administrator at the 
DLNR, and Deputy Director of the DLNR.  Tsuji stated that,  while 
he was employed  at the DLNR , he was in charge of managing state-
owned lands and was a  custodian of records contained in the PTA 
lease file.  None of the files in the PTA lease file, Tsuji 
testified, mentioned paragraphs 9 and 14 of the lease.
  He was 
also unaware of any conversations that occurred during his 
employment at the DLNR regarding compliance with 
these lease 
provisions.  Tsuji explained that his goal was to have land 
agents inspect leases at least once every two years
 while he was 
employed at the DLNR, but he stated that this target was ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
29 “aspirational” rather than a mandatory rule.  Tsuji acknowledged 
that prior to the initiation of the lawsuit, the leased PTA  land 
had not been inspected during his tenure at the DLNR, which 
spanned ten years.   
  Tsuji testified that the DLNR’s PTA lease file 
contained a series of letters and reports from the United States 
Army that documented a need to clean
 up the leased PTA land, 
including a 2006 report indicat ing that there was debris in the 
BAX within the PTA; a 2008 report stating that there may have 
been munitions on PTA land;  a 2013 final environmental impact 
statement (EIS) stating  that UXO was “known to exist in impact 
area” and that “there [was] also a medium risk of finding [UXO] 
outside [the construction] area”; and a 2014 report stating  that 
“[t]he military need [ed] to implement some kind of clean- up 
process as part of their training in PTA ” because  “[r]emnants of 
military trash [was] everywhere  . . . . including unexploded 
ordnance that [was] carelessly discarded .”  When asked about the 
DLNR’s response to one of the reports, Tsuji testified that he 
did not know if anyone at the DLNR “actually read” the report  
and noted that there was no record on file that the DLNR ever 
responded to the report.    
  Tsuji testified that,  after the lawsuit was filed,  he 
sent a letter to the Army requesting its procedures for cleaning 
munitions after training exercises.  Tsuji indicated that the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
30 Army responded by sending a letter setting forth its cleanup 
procedures.  Tsuji also testified that he conducted an 
inspection of the 
leased PTA  land in December 2014, 
approximately one year after receiving the Army’s response .  One 
of the reasons for the inspection was the lawsuit, Tsuji 
acknowledged.  During this inspection, he observed trash, 
“[s]pent shells,” “shell debris ,” and “derelict vehicles” used 
as target practice at the bazooka range.   According to Tsuji, a 
draft inspection report was created after the inspection, which 
was revised after he  conducted another inspection in January 
2015.  Tsuji  indicated that the final report stated that the 
land condition was “unsatisfactory ,” but he testified that the 
DLNR did not issue a default notice to the Army.25   
  At the conclusion of Tsuji’s testimony, the Plaintiffs 
rested.  The State did not call any witnesses. 
5. The Circuit Court Decision  
  On April 3, 2018, the circuit court issued its 
Findings of Fact,  Conclusions of Law and Order .   
a. Findings of Fact 
  The circuit court made the following relevant findings 
of fact.   
                     
 25 Tsuji testified that the report was written by a land agent and 
that he had no input in the report’s conclusion that the land was 
“unsatisfactory.” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
31 (continued . . .)    I n 1964, the State entered into a sixty- five year 
lease of three parcels of land in the Pōhakuloa area with the 
United States for military training purposes.  These land 
parcels are ceded lands owned by the State that are part of the 
public lands trust.   The publi c trust lands are state-owned 
lands held for the use and benefit of the people of the State of 
Hawaii, and the State is the trustee of such lands.  
Accordingly, the State has “the highest duty to preserve and 
maintain the trust lands.”26   
  The Plaintiffs had in the past and continued to be 
actively engaged in cultural practices upon the leased PTA land.  
These cultural practices included song, dance, and chant about 
the PTA area, walking upon and celebrating the land and the 
flora and fauna that grow upon it, and honoring the current and 
historic cultural significance of the area. 
  The State was aware of the United States’ failure to 
clean up other sites in the state27 and of the possibility that 
                     
 26 Throughout its findings of fact and conclusions of law, the 
circuit court referred to this obligation as the duty to “malama ‘aina,” which 
the court translated as “to care for the land.”  
 27 Specifically, the court found that the previous Chair of the 
DLNR, William Aila, Jr., was aware of the United States’ failure to clean up 
other sites in the state such as Kaho ‘olawe, Mākua , and the Waikāne Valley, 
and the court imputed this knowledge to the State  in this case.  The court 
noted that a website maintained by the State contained a history of the 
island of Kaho olawe that explained that the United States Navy did not clear 
all UXO from 25 percent of the surface of the island.  Additionally the court 
found that the United States’ failure to properly clean the Mākua
 area was 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
32 UXO and munitions were present on the leased PTA land.  
Cultural 
monitors spent “ex tensive time” at the leased PTA land and 
observed military debris on the ground,  including UXO and “spent 
shell casings, scatt ered across” the land.  The concerns of the 
cultural monitors were  documented in a number of federal 
reports.  For example, the United States prepared a November 
2010 report entitled “Final Archaeological and Cultural 
Monitoring of Construction of Battle Area Complex (BAX) for 
Stryker Brigade Combat Team (SBCT), Pohakuloa Training Area, 
Hawaii
 Island, Hawaii” that included a recommendation from 
cultural monitors that “[t]he Military needs to implement some 
kind of cleanup process as part of their training in PTA.  
Remnants of military trash are everywhere.”  (Emphasis omitted.)  
The report also stated that the cultural monitors voiced the 
following: “Another major concern is the military debris that is 
left behind after training including [UXO]  that is carelessly 
discarded.  There is a need to have some type of cleanup plan 
implemented in the military tra ining process.”    
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
documented in the federal court decisions in Makua v. Rumsfeld, 163 F. Supp. 
2d 1202 (D. Haw. 2001), Mâkua v. Gates, Civ. No. 08 -00327 SOM/LEK, 2009 WL 
196206 (D. Haw. Jan. 23, 2009),  and Mâkua v. Gates, Civ. No. 00- 00813 SOM, 
2008 WL 696093 (D. Haw. Mar. 11, 2008).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
33   These concerns were reiterated four years later in a 
second, similarly titled report.  This report contained 
observations from cultural monitors who stated that “ [r]emnants 
of live fire training are present within the BAX, including 
stationary targets, junk cars, an old tank, crudely built rock 
shelters, and miscellaneous military rubbish.  Spent ammunition 
is scattered across the landscape.”   The report noted the 
cultural monitors fear ed that if the litter continued to remain 
on the land, “the land will be rendered unusable forever --one 
eighth of our island will become unavailable for use by any of 
our future generations.”   The cultural monitors therefore 
“strongly recommend[ed] the Army begin now to seek funding to 
initiate a serious cleanup effort throughout the leased  training 
areas.”  (Emphasis in report .) 
  Additionally, a March 2015 draft report stated that,  
based on a 2014 inspection by the DLNR and the Army,  a bazooka 
range contained on the leased PTA land was “heavily contaminated 
on the surface with material potentially presenting an explosive 
hazard []  and munition debris [] .”  A subsequent inspection of 
the bazooka range by military explosive ordnance disposal units 
found mortars, bazooka rounds, and white phosphorous on the 
land.  The Army determined that the debris found at the bazooka 
range “coupled with the accessibility to the public make for the 
potential for significant danger to public health and welfare.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
34   The State’s awareness of the  potential contamination 
of the leased PTA land was also demonstrated by a March 2013 
letter from the Acting Hawai i Branch Manager for the DLNR to the 
State Lands Assistant Administrator.  The Branch Manager 
recommended that “PTA should sweep the lands No rth of the saddle 
road for UXO and remove any UXO found at their expense to make 
the area safe for the public.”28  Additionally, a March 2013 
Final EIS stated that “ [d]ecades of using PTA as a training area 
have introduced a significant risk of encountering  
[munitions]/UXO.  [Muni tions]/UXO [are] known to exist in the 
impact area and [are] expected to be encountered during range 
construction activities; but there is also a medium risk of 
finding [munitions]/UXO outside the impact area.”   The EIS also 
stated that “[p]ast and current activities at PTA have resulted 
in contamination of soil by explosives and other chemicals
.”  
Therefore, the State was aware that military training activities 
on the leased PTA land “pose[d] a significant and substantial 
risk of harm or damage to [the PTA], and persons who may come 
upon” the land, and “ to public health, safety, and welfare, as 
well as to the Plaintiffs’ cultural interests in the [land] .”   
                     
 28 Although the letter stated, “PTA should sweep,” it appears that 
the Branch Manager was referring to the United States.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
35   P roper stewardship of the leased land  includes  
“periodic and meaningful inspection and monitoring of the 
military training activities and their aftermath upon the 
Subject Lands and reasonably accurate documentation of such 
activities and the effects of such activities to achieve 
transparency of [the S tate’s] inspection and monitoring 
actions.”  Inspections must occur with “a reasonable frequency” 
for the State  to satisfy its duty.  The DLNR did not meet its 
informal goal of inspecting the leased PTA land once every two 
years, nor did it adequately document its  inspection efforts “so 
as to provide rudimentary transparency into the DLNR’s efforts.”   
An inspection of the PTA occurred on December 19, 1984, for 
which a “sparse” report was generated that stated only the 
following: “Property being used for Mil itary training purposes 
per lease terms. ”  Another inspection “appear[ed] to have been 
conducted” in 1994, although the “findings” and “inspected by” 
sections of the inspection form were blank.   
  A  third inspection occurred on December 23, 2014, 
after the litigation in this case had begun, and this inspection 
resulted in a report that “contained much more information” than 
those created from the two previous inspections .  The 2014 
Inspection Report stat ed that the condition of the land was “not ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
36 satisfactory.”29  The report indicated  that debris was 
“extensive” at the bazooka range , that there were “derelict 
vehicles” at one of the target ranges , and that an area was used 
for dumping spent artillery shells. 
  “The lack of regular, meaningful inspection and 
monitoring of the” leased PTA land contributed to the breach of  
the State’s trust duties, which in turn “harmed, impaired, 
diminished, or otherwise adversely affected Plain tiffs’ cultural 
interest in the” leased land. 
b. Conclusions of Law 
  The circuit court rendered the following relevant 
conclusions of law.   
  T he Plaintiffs had standing to enforce a breach of 
trust claim against the State , and the United States was not an 
indispensable party to the case becaus e the Plaintiffs’ claim 
concerned only the State’s trust obligations .  The State, as 
trustee of the ceded land, owed a “high standard of care when 
managing public trust ceded lands.”  The State’s trust duties 
include but are not limited to us ing “reasonabl e efforts” to (1) 
preserve and protect trust property, and (2) take a proactive 
                     
 29 The court found that the Army’s assertion re corded in the report 
that it “regularly inspected and cleaned up after [an] exercise was complete” 
was contradicted by evidence that there was a significant amount of debris 
and ammunition on the land.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
37 role in management and protection of the trust property.  The 
State had a duty to consider the cumulative effects of the 
United States’ use of the land upon the condition of th e land 
and upon “the indigenous plants, animals, and insects, as well 
as the invasion to Plaintiffs’ cultural interests in the Subject 
Land.”  Additionally, the State  had a duty to determine whether 
the lessee was in compliance with the terms of the lease.  And 
the Chair of the BLNR specifically had a duty to “[e]nforce 
contracts respecting . . . leases  . . . or other disposition of 
public lands.”  ( Quoting HRS §  171-7(5).30) 
  As part of its trust duties, the State was required, 
to enforce paragraphs 9, 14, 18, and 19 of the PTA lease.  The 
State’s records regarding its efforts to inspect the leased land 
and report its findings “were spotty at best” and in some cases 
“grossly inadequate .”31  Although  there were studies and 
inspections completed regarding “other business” on the leased 
land, such as the EIS, these were not conducted to fulfill the 
State’s trust duties.   
                     
 30 HRS § 171-7(5) (2011) provides, in relevant part,  “Except as 
provided by law the board of land and natural resources through the 
chairperson shall: . . . (5) Enforce contracts respecting sales, leases, 
licenses, permits, or other disposition of public lands[.]”  
 31 The court found that, given “the virtual  nonexistent nature of 
the 1994 inspection report” and “the sparse and incomplete nature of the 1984 
inspection report,” there was an unrebutted presumption that the State had 
failed to conduct any inspections prior to December 2014 to monitor or 
confirm the United States’ compliance with paragraphs 9, 14, 18, and 19.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
38   The State therefore breached its duties by failing to 
(1) conduct reasonable (in terms of frequency and scope) 
inspections of the condition of the 
leased PTA land or 
observations of the military training exercises, (2) ensure that 
the terms of the lease were being followed, (3) take prompt and 
appropriate follow- up steps with the United States when the 
State became aware of potential violations of the lease, (4) 
create detailed reports of the State’s efforts to ensure 
compliance with the lease, and (5)  initiate or assist with the 
appropriation of necessary funding to conduct cleanup or 
maintenance activities on the land.  The court stated that the 
State would further breach its trust duties “if they were to 
execute an extension, renewal, or any other change to the State 
General Lease No. S
-3849, or enter into a new lease of the PTA, 
without first determining (in writing) that the terms of the 
existing lease have been satisfactorily fulfilled.”  
c. Order 
 
 The court explained that because the Plaintiffs 
prevailed on the merits, the appropriate remedy was for the 
court to issue an order directing the State  to perform its trust 
duties with respect to the leased PTA land.  The court concluded 
that the balance of harm favored  the issuance of a mandatory 
injunction and that protection of the public trust lands was in 
the public interest.  The court therefore ordered that the S tate ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
39 promptly initiate affirmative activity at the PTA in accordance 
with its trust duties by developing a written plan to fulfill 
such duties.  The plan was required to include provisions for 
(1) on-site monitoring and inspections, (2) the creation of 
written inspection reports with recommendations, (3) a written 
protocol of appropriate action to be taken if the United States 
is to be found to be in breach of the lease,  (4) a procedure to 
provide for “reasonable transparency” to the Plaintiffs and the 
general public with respect to compliance with the injunction, 
and (5) all steps that the State  takes to “secur[e] adequate 
funding, from any and all appropriate funding sources, to plan, 
initiate, and conduct all appropriate comprehensive cleanup. ”  
The plan was required to be submitted to the court for approval.  
Additionally, the court ordered the State  to create contested 
case procedures pursuant to HRS Chapter 91, if not already in 
existence, “for Plaintiffs or any member of the general public 
with standing to initiate such process in the event that 
Plaintiffs or other interested party may contest the decisions 
made by the [State] in the course of discharging” their trust 
duties.   
 
 The circuit court entered F inal Judgment on April 24, 
2018.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
40 D. The Appeal and Motions to Dismiss  
  The Department of the Attorney General (AG) filed a 
timely Notice of Appeal.  The Plaintiffs filed a Motion to 
Dismiss the Appeal and argued that the AG did not have the 
authority to file an appeal “on behalf of BLNR or DLNR  without 
BLNR’s consent.”   (Citing Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the Emps .’ 
Ret. Sys., 87 Hawai i 152, 952 P.2d 1215 (1998).)  The State 
replied that the AG 
was authorized to appeal the decision 
because the AG “has authority to manage and control all phases 
of litigation” in suits against state officials.  (Citing 
Island-Gentry Joint Venture v. State, 57 Haw. 259, 554 P.2d 761 
(1976).)  32
  The Plaintiffs filed an application for transfer to 
this court, which the State did not oppose.  This court granted 
the application on December 20, 2018. 
IV. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
  Certain decisions regarding the orderly administration 
of trial and the selection of an appropriate remedy to redress 
an injury “rest[] with the sound discretion of the trial 
court[,] and the trial court’s decision will be sustained absent 
                     
 32 The Plaintiffs later filed a second motion to dismiss to 
“follow[] up” on the first, making substantially similar arguments with 
respect to the AG’s authority to appeal on behalf of the C hair of BLNR 
without her express consent.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
a showing of manifest abuse of discretion.”  Hawaii Pub. Emp ’t 
Relations Bd. v. United Pub. Workers, Local 646, 66 Haw. 461, 
467, 667 P.2d 783, 788 (1983).  For instance, t his court applies 
an abuse of discretion standard when it reviews  a trial court’ s 
determination as to whether to dismiss a case pursuant to HRCP 
Rule 19(b) for a party’s failure to join an indispensable party.  
UFJ Bank Ltd. v. Ieda, 109 Hawai ‘i 137, 142, 123 P.3d 1232, 1237 
(2005) (citing Takabuki v. Ching, 67 Haw. 515, 529, 695 P.2d 
319, 328 (1985)).  Similarly, a trial court’s grant of equitable 
relief, including a declaratory judgment or a mandatory 
injunction, will be upheld 
unless an abuse of discretion is 
demonstrated.  Kau v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 104 Hawai ‘i 468, 
473, 92 P.3d 477, 482 (2004) (citing Shanghai Inv. Co. v. Alteka 
Co., 92 Hawai‘ i 482, 492, 993 P.2d 516, 526 (2000)); United Pub. 
Workers, 66 Haw. at 467, 667 P.2d at 788. 
41   By contrast, we review a trial court’s conclusions of 
law de novo.  Narayan v. Ass’n of Apartment Owners of Kapalua 
Bay Condo., 140 Hawai ‘i 75, 83, 398 P.3d 664, 672 (2017) (citing  
Nordic PCL Constr., Inc. v. LPIHGC, LLC, 136 Hawai i 29, 41, 358 
P.3d 1, 13 (2015)).  Thus, a trial court ’s grant or denial of 
summary judgment is reviewable using our independent judgment 
under the right/wrong standard, as are the  statutory and 
constitutional interpretations underlying  the court’s ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
42 determinations.  Id.; State v. March, 94 Hawai ‘i 250, 253, 11 
P.3d 1094, 1097 (2000).  But this court will uphold the findings 
of fact to which the trial court applies these interpretations 
unless they are clearly erroneous.  Noel Madamba Contracting LLC 
v. Romero, 137 Hawai‘i 1, 8, 364 P.3d 518, 525 (2015). 
V. DISCUSSION 
A. The Motions to Dismiss 
  Before addressing the merits of the State’s appeal in 
this case, we must first consider the Plaintiffs ’ motions  to 
dismiss asserting that the AG lacked authority to bring the 
appeal without the express authorization of the BLNR and, 
derivatively, the authorization of the Board’s Chairperson and 
the DLNR, which the Board heads.  This court first addressed the 
allocation of litigation authority between the AG and other 
government agencies in Island-Gentry Joint Venture v. State, 57 
Haw. 259, 264, 554 P.2d 761, 765 (1976).  In Island -Gentry, the 
BLNR agreed to a financial settlement with a landowner after it 
breached a purchase agreement to acquire the owner’s property in 
order to build a school.  Id. at 261, 554 P.2d at 763.  Upon 
discovering that the landowner had thereafter sold the land to a 
third party for over twice the BLNR’s agreed -upon purchase 
price, the AG declined to pay the agreed- upon settlement, 
reasoning that the landowne r had “suffered no damage resulting 
from [the] State’s failure to honor its agreement to purchase ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
43 the land.”  Id. at 262, 554 P.2d at 764.  The landowner brought 
suit to enforce the settlement. 
  This court held that under the general grant of 
authority contained in HRS § 26-7 (Supp. 1975),33 the AG “has 
exclusive authority to control and manage for the State all 
phases of civil litigation in which the State has an interest, 
unless authority to do so in specific matters has been expressly 
or impliedly grante d to another department or agency.”  Id. at 
264-65, 554 P.2d at 765-66.  We held that this authority 
necessarily includes the authority to control the settlement of 
actions against the State.  Id.  at 265, 554 P.2d at 766.  The 
same section also grants the AG “exclusive authority to approve 
as to the legality and form of all documents relating to the 
                     
 33 The portions of HRS § 26 -7 cited in Island -Gentry have not been 
amended since this court’s decision in the case.  The statute provides in 
relevant part as follows:  
The department of the attorney general shall be  headed by a 
single executive to be known as the attorney general.  
The department shall administer and render state legal 
services, including furnishing of written legal opinions to 
the governor, legislature, and such state departments and 
officers as the governor may direct; represent the State in 
all civil actions in which the State is a party; approve as 
to legality and form all documents relating to the 
acquisition of any land or interest in lands by the State; 
and, unless otherwise provided by law, prosecute cases 
involving violations of state laws and cases involving 
agreements, uniform laws, or other matters which are 
enforceable in the courts of the State.  The attorney 
general shall be charged with such other duties and have 
such authority as heretofore provided by common law or 
statute. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
44 acquisition of any land or interest in land by the State ,” we 
noted.  Id.  This court held that implicit in these express 
grants of authority was the “ sole power to approve or to refuse 
to approve as to the legality and form of any compromise 
settlement effectuated by the [BLNR] in regards to the [BLNR]’s 
breach of a contract to purchase land for the State .”  Id.  
Because the record identified that “no other department or 
agency ha[d] been expressly or impliedly granted the authority 
to approve or to disapprove as to the legality and form of the 
settlement in question ,” we held that the BLNR was without 
authority to bind the State to the settlement.  Id.  
  Chun v. Board of Trustees of the Employees’ Retirement 
System, 87 Hawai‘ i 152, 952 P.2d 1215 (1998), on which the 
Plaintiffs rely, stands in tension with Island -Gentry.  In Chun , 
the circuit court vacated a decision of the Board of Trustees of 
the Employees Retirement System concerning the retirement 
benefits of a group of teachers and school administrators, 
finding that the Board had miscalculated the benefits as a 
result of its misinterpretation of the applicable statute.  Id. 
at 158, 952 P.2d at 1221.  During the pendency of the case, the 
composition of the Board had changed, and the newly constituted 
Board deadlocked in a four-to -four vote on a motion to authorize 
an appeal of the circuit court’s decision.  Id. at 160, 952 P.2d 
at 1223.  The Chairperson of the Board thus sent a letter ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
45 informing the AG that the “ motion failed because it did not 
receive the necessary majority vote. ”  Id. at 161, 952 P.2d at 
1224.  When the AG nevertheless filed a notice of appeal, the 
retirees filed a motion to dismiss the appeal, arguing that the 
AG had no independent authority to pursue it without the Board’s 
consent.  Id. 
  This court held that a distinction exists between, on 
the one hand, the AG’s duty under HRS § 28 -1 (1993)34 and the 
common law to represent the State in furtherance of the public 
interest as the AG deems it to be, and on the other hand, the 
AG’s duty under HRS § 26 -7 to serve as legal counsel to the 
public officials and instrumentalities of the State, inter alia, 
when they are sued in their professional capacity.  Id. at 170, 
952 P.2d at 1233.  Extensively quoting the Supreme Court of West 
Virginia, we stated, 
When the Attorney General appears in a proceeding on behalf 
of the state in her name, she exercises her discretion as 
to the course and conduct of the litigation.  She assumes 
the role of a litigant and she is entitled to represent 
what she perceives to be  the interest of the state and the 
public at large.   
. . . . 
The Attorney General performs quite a different function 
when she appears to defend a state officer or 
                     
 34 HRS § 28- 1, which has not been amended since this court’s 
decision in Chun, provides as follows: “The attorney general shall appear for 
the State personally or by deputy, in all the courts of record, in all cases 
criminal or civil in which the State may be a party, or be interested, and 
may in like manner appear in the district courts in such cases.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
46 instrumentality sued in their official capacity.  In this 
circumstance the Attorney General  does not appear as a 
party to the action.  That role is filled by the state 
officer or instrumentality against whom the suit is 
brought.  Rather, the Attorney General’s function is to act 
as legal advisor and agent of the litigant and to prosecute 
or defend, within the bounds of the law, the decision or 
policy of such officer or instrumentality which is called 
into question by such lawsuit.  
. . . . 
The Legislature has designated the Attorney General as the 
legal representative of state officers and 
instrumentalities sued in their official capacities. In the 
absence of other statutory or constitutional provision to 
the contrary, she is their sole legal representative in the 
courts and they are her clients. When the Attorney General 
appears in litigation in this capacity, she does so as a 
lawyer and an officer of the court.  Her primary 
responsibility is to provide proper representation and 
competent counsel to the officer or instrumentality on 
whose behalf she appears.  The Attorney General ’s role in 
this capacity is not to make public policy in her own right 
on behalf of the state.  It is presumed, in the absence of 
a contrary showing, that the officer made a party to the 
suit has, in the performance of his or her official duties, 
acted in contemplation of the relevant laws and in the best 
interests of the state.  The Attorney General ’s role and 
duty is to exercise her skill as the state chief lawyer to 
zealously advocate and defend the policy position of the 
officer or agency in the litigation.  
The Legislature has thus created a traditional attorney -
client relationship between the Attorney General and the 
state officers or instrumentalities she is required to 
represent.  It is well settled that in the control of 
litigation, the Attorney General has the duty to  conform 
her conduct to that prescribed by the rules of professional 
ethics.  As a lawyer and an officer of the courts of this 
State, the Attorney General is subject to the rules of this 
Court governing the practice of law and the conduct of 
lawyers, which  have the force and effect of law.  
Id. at 171-7 3, 952 P.2d at 1234- 36 (quoting Manchin v. Browning, 
296 S.E.2d 909, 918-20 (W. Va. 1982)) (alterations omitted) 
(emphases added).  This court thus held that when the AG 
represents a state official or instrume
ntality in its official 
capacity, the official or instrumentality is the AG’s client and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
47 the allocation of authority in that relationship is governed by 
at least some provisions of the Hawai‘i Rules of Professional 
Conduct (HRPC).  Id. at 173-74, 952 P.2d at 1236 -37.   
  Applying HRPC Rule 1.7, which governs conflicts, this 
court held that, once the AG has informed  the state official or 
instrumentality of the different legal strategies and defenses 
available and provided a professional opinion as to their 
advisability, the AG “should then stand aside and allow [the]  
client to exercise []  independent judgment on which course to 
pursue.”  Id. at 174, 952 P.2d at 1237 (emphasis and alterations 
omitted) (quoting Manchin, 296 S.E.2d
 at 920).  Because the AG’s 
position in pursuing the appeal was at odds with the Board’s 
wishes, this court held that the AG “was ethically obligated to 
recommend the retention of other counsel to represent the Board 
and to take such other action as, in her opinion, the 
circumstances required.”  Id. at 176, 952 P.2d at 1239.  The AG 
lacked authority, however, to pursue the appeal without the 
Board’s consent.  Id. at 177, 952 P.2d at 1240. 
  In a footnote in Chun , the court asserted that its 
holding was consistent with Island-Gentry, focusing on the 
Island-Gentry court ’s statement that the AG has ultimate 
authority to make litigation decisions “unless authority to do 
so in specific matters has been expressly or impliedly granted 
to another department or agenc y.”  87 Hawai ‘i at 171 n.21, 952 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
48 P.2d at 1234 n.21 (emphasis omitted) (quoting Island-Gentry, 57 
Haw. at 264–65, 554 P.2d at 765 –66).  The court stated that, 
unlike with the BLNR in Island -Gentry, the legislature had 
enacted a series of laws that conferred  upon the Board of 
Trustees of the Employees Retirement System “ the powers and 
privileges of a corporation,” including the  powers to “sue or be 
sued and transact all of its business. ”  Id. (citing HRS §§ 88 –
22, 88–23, 88-110).  These statutes acted to divest the AG of 
the authority to control litigation with respect to the Board, 
the court reasoned.  Id.  
  This distinction is problematic, however.  Analogous 
statutes existed conferring substantially the same authority on 
the BLNR at the time Island -Gentry was decided.  See, e.g., HRS 
§ 171-7(8) (1968) (“Except as provided by law the board of land 
and natural resources through the 
chairman  shall: . . . (8) 
Bring such actions and proceedings as may be necessary to carry 
out the powers and duties of the board in the name of the State 
and to defend such actions brought against the State as may be 
authorized[.]”).  Moreover, the Chun court based its analysis 
not on the withdrawal of the general authority of the AG under 
HRS §§ 28-1 and 26- 7 by another statute, but rather on the 
distinction between the different aspects of that authority.  
See 87 Hawai‘ i
 at 169-70, 952 P.2d at 1232-33 (“Thus, by [its] 
terms, HRS § 26 –7 . . . designate[s] the attorney general as ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
49 legal counsel for ‘public officers’ and instrumentalit ies of the 
state[.] . . .  At the same time, however, HRS § 28 –1 mandates 
that the attorney general ‘represent the State in all . . . 
civil matters where the State . . . may be an interested 
party.’” (some alterations original )).   
  The cases can be more logically reconciled in two 
ways.  First, because Island-Gentry  concerned the settlement of 
litigation arising directly from a breach of a contract to 
acquire public lands, approval of the settlement agreement fell 
within the AG’s “exclusive authority” under HRS §  26-7 “to 
approve as to the legality and form of all documents relating to 
the acquisition of any land or interest in land by the State. ”  
And second, the settlement agreement essentially “commit[ed] the 
State to an obligation to pay a sum of money out of State 
funds”--which was authority that had not been granted to BLNR.  
Island-Gentry, 57 Haw. at 264, 554 P.2d at 765.   
  Thus, Chun should be read as limiting Island-Gentry  to 
situations when the AG appears on behalf of the State generally 
(as opposed to on behalf of a specific State public official or 
instrumentality), when the action falls within the AG’s 
exclusive statutory authority, or when the result of the action  
would commit the State to pay public funds that have not been 
appropriated to the represented State official or 
instrumentality.  By contrast, when the AG appears on behalf of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
50 a specific State official or instrumentality and the above 
exceptions do not apply, the AG has a duty to comply with the 
wishes of the represented party that is loosely analogous to the 
duty a private attorney owes a client under the HRPC and other 
professional standards.35  Chun, 87 Hawai i at 173, 952 P.2d at  
1236. 
  The Plaintiffs argue that, in the absence of an 
affirmative vote by the BLNR, the AG was not authorized to bring 
an appeal in the present case.  Yet our precedent and legal 
professional standards more generally permit-- and in some cases 
require--an attorney to take the procedural steps necessary to 
protect a client’s right to appeal.  See Maddox v. State, 141 
Hawai‘i 196, 204, 407 P.3d 152, 160 (2017) (“Defense counsel 
should take ‘whatever steps are necessary’ to protect the 
client’s right to appeal . . . .” (quoting ABA Standards for 
Criminal Justice: Prosecution and Defense Function , Standards 4 –
8.2(b), 4
–8.3(c) (3d ed. 1993))).  Unlike in Chun, in which the 
Chairperson of the Board sent a letter “informing [the AG] of 
                     
 35 By so holding, the autonomy of the various agencies that are 
headed by boards instead of a single executive is preserved, as the framers 
intended such boards to maintain a level of independence from the governor 
and officials like the AG who are directly answerable to the governor.  See 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 67 in I Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of 
Hawaii of 1950, at 217 (1960) (“Your committee has followed the principle 
that the Governor should be strong in his branch of the government but that 
he should be precluded from infringing upon the other branches, for example, 
the power to remove members of t he boards and commissions.”).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
the Board’s refusal to authorize an appeal of [the circuit 
court’s] decisions,” there is no indication in the record that 
the BLNR communicated to the AG a desire not to pursue the 
present appeal--nor is there any evidence that the appeal is at 
odds with the BLNR’s wishes.  87 Hawai ‘i at 161, 952 P.2d at 1224 
(second alteration original) .  “[W]here no conflict plainly 
appears . . . it is generally presumed ‘that the actions and 
determinations of the Attorney General in . . . a lawsuit are 
made both as a representative of the public interest and as 
counsel for the state agency or officer.’”  Id. at 170, 952 P.2d 
at 1233 (some alterations in original) (quoting D’Amico v. Bd . 
of Med. Exam’rs , 11 Cal.3d 1, 112 (1974)).  Accordingly, we deny 
the Plaintiffs’ two m otions to dismiss the appeal. 
51 B. The State’s Appeal  
The State argues that the circuit court erred by 
failing to dismiss the case or grant summary judgment to the 
State on the grounds that 1 ) the United States was a necessary 
and indispensable party under HRCP Rule 19 whose joinder was not 
feasible due to its sovereign immunity; 2) the case presented a 
nonjusticiable political question regarding how the State should 
manage the leased PTA land; and 3) the case did not present an 
“actual controversy” in which  a declaration could “terminate the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
52 uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the proceeding”  as is 
required for declaratory relief under HRS § 632- 1.36  The State 
additionally challenges the circuit court’s findings and 
conclusions insofar as the court  found that the State breached 
its trust duties by failing to perform adequate inspections of 
the leased PTA land and declined to consider the State’s 
cooperative activities with entities other than the State in 
determining whether the State had violated its trust 
obligations.  Lastly, the State argues that the injunctive 
relief granted by the circuit court was improper because it was 
tantamount to an award of damages barred by the State’s 
sovereign immunity and the order granting relief was vague,  
overbroad, and improperly intruded on legislative prerogatives.   
 
 This opinion will address the State’s contentions  
alleging related errors together.  
 
1. The United States Is Not a “Necessary” Party and Therefore Is 
Not “Indispensable ” 
  The State contends that the U nited States is a 
necessary and indispensable party to the present case under HRCP 
Rule 19 and that the circuit court reversibly erred by failing 
                     
 36 Under Hawai ‘i law, the denial of a summary judgment motion can be 
appealed following a trial on the merits only if the appeal centers on a 
question of law rather than the existence of a disputed material fact.  See 
Larsen v. Pacesetter Sys., Inc., 74 Haw. 1, 17 -18, 837 P.2d 1273, 1282 -83 
(1992).  Here, the State’s contentions are rooted in questions of law, and we 
accordingly conclude that it is entitled to review of the circuit court’s 
denial of its summary judgment motion on the challenged grounds.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
to either join the U nited States or dismiss the case due to its 
absence.  Under our precedents, an analysis under HRCP Rule 19 
follows two steps.  Kellberg v. Yuen, 135 Hawai ‘i 236, 250
-51, 
349 P.3d 343, 357-58 (2015).  First, courts must determine if 
the party is a “necessary” party under part (a) of the rule, and 
if so, whether joinder of the party is feasible.  Id.   If the 
court finds that a party is necessary and joinder is not 
feasible, it then proceeds to part (b) of the rule, under which 
it analyzes whether “in equity and good conscience” the case can 
continue in the party’s absence.  Id. at 252, 349 P.3d at 359 
(quoting HRCP Rule 19(b)).  “ If, under this second step, the 
court dismisses the action rather than moving forward without 
the absent party, the nonparty is described as ‘ indispensable. ’”  
Id. (quoting Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai ‘i 490, 499, 280 P.3d 
88, 97 (2012)). 
53   HRCP Rule 19(a) sets forth a number of factors for 
courts to consider in evaluating whether an entity is a 
necessary party who should be joined if feasible.  The rule 
provides, in relevant part, as follows: 
(a) Persons to be joined if feasible.  A person who is 
subject to service of process shall be joined as a party in 
the action if (1) in the person’s absence complete relief 
cannot be accorded among those already parties, or (2) the 
person claims an interest relating to the subject of the 
action and is so situated that the disposition of the 
action in the person’s absence may (A) as a pr actical 
matter impair or impede the person’s ability to protect 
that interest or (B) leave any of the persons already 
parties subject to a substantial risk of incurring double, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
54 multiple, or otherwise inconsistent obligations by reason 
of the claimed interest. 
  With respect to HRCP Rule 19(a)(2),37 this court does 
not need to speculate as to the interest claimed by the United 
States in the subject matter of this case because the United 
States filed a statement of interest in the circuit court.  
Before this court, the State repeats the United States’ 
assertion that “[t]he action here relates to the public land 
leased by the State to the United States for military purposes 
and puts directly at issue the United States’ compliance with 
the terms of the lease.”  T he State contends that the United 
States clearly has an interest in an action “forcing the State 
to initiate rigorous enforcement action against” the United 
States. 
  
But determining whether the State fulfilled its duties 
as trustee in this case does not require determining whether the 
United States in fact complied with the lease, however, and if a 
breach of the State’s trustee duties is found, the appropriate 
remedy would not be an order requiring the State to initiate an 
enforcement action.  Article XI, section 1 of the Hawai ‘i 
Constitution places upon the State a fiduciary duty analogous to 
                     
 37 Neither the State nor the United States make any arguments with 
respect to HRCP Rule 19(a)(1), under which the court would consider whether 
the United States’ absence would prevent complete relief from being afforded 
in this case.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
the common law duty of a trustee with respect to lands held in 
public trust.  See In re Conservation Dist. Use Application HA-
3568 (In re TMT), 143 Hawai ‘i 379, 400, 431 P.3d 752, 773 (2018); 
State ex rel. Kobayashi v. Zimring, 58 Haw. 106, 121, 566 P.2d 
725, 735 (1977).  Article XII, section 4 imposes a similar duty 
regarding lands ceded to the State under Section 5(b) of the 
Admission Act.  It is undisputed that the leased PTA land at 
issue in this case is trust land within the meaning of these 
constitutional provisions. 
55   The most basic aspect of the State’s trust duties is 
the obligation “to protect and maintain the trust property and 
regulate its use.”  Zimring, 58 Haw. at 121, 566 P.2d at 735; 
accord Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 176 (1959) (“The trustee 
is under a duty to the beneficiary to use reasonable care and 
skill to preserve the trust property.”) .  Under the common law, 
this obligation includes an obligation to reasonably monitor the 
trust property.  See
 Restatement (Third) of Trusts § 90 cmt. b 
(2007); Tibble v. Edison Int’ l, 135 S.Ct. 1823, 1828 (2015).  
This duty exists regardless of whether the property is being 
used by a third party pursuant to a lease.  
  Reasonable monitoring ensures that a trustee fulfills 
the mandate of “elementary trust law” that trust property not be 
permitted to “fall into ruin on [the trustee’s] watch.”  United 
States v. White Mt. Apache Tribe, 537 U.S. 465, 475 (2003).  To ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
hold that the State does not have an independent trust 
obligation to reasonably monitor the trust property would be 
counter to our precedents and would allow the State to turn a 
blind eye to imminent damage, leaving beneficiaries powerless to 
prevent damage before it occurs.  Cf. Kelly v. 1250 Oceanside 
Partners, 111 Hawai ‘i 205, 231, 140 P.3d 985, 1011 (2006) 
(holding that the Department of Health’s article XI, section 1 
public trust duty to protect coastal waters required it to “not 
only issue permits after prescribed measures appear to be in 
compliance with state regulation, but also to ensure that the 
prescribed measures are actually being implemented .” (emphasis 
added)). 
56   Thus, the State might  breach its fiduciary duty by 
failing to reasonably monitor public ceded lands, including the 
public ceded lands within the PTA that the United States 
utilizes pursuant to its lease with the State.  Such a breach 
would be complete upon the State’s failure to reasonably monitor 
the ceded land--irrespective of whether the United States 
actually violated the lease.  A determination of whether the 
State breached its duty by failing to monitor the United States’ 
compliance with the lease therefore will not require a 
subsidiary determination that the United States breached the 
terms of the lease, and thus it will not impair the United 
States’ ability to defend itself against any such speculative ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
57 future claim.  And because the court would not be determining 
whether the United States violated the terms of the lease, the 
appropriate remedy for the alleged breach of the State’s trust 
duties would be an order requiring the State to initiate 
appropriate monitoring
--and not an order requiring the State to 
initiate an enforcement action. 
  The United States further asserted in its statement of 
interest that an order requiring the State to inspect or monitor 
the United States’ use of the PTA “at specified times”  has the 
potential to disrupt critical training exercises.  In a similar 
vein, the State argues that the disposition of the case could 
put the State at risk of incurring inconsistent obligations 
because the United States may deem the required monitoring to be 
“[un]reasonable” or determine that  it “unduly interfere[s]” with 
training operations, ultimately leading to a separate 
determination under the lease’s dispute resolution mechanism.  
However, the se concerns  were speculative.  Under paragraph 19 of 
the lease, the State “ shall have the right to enter upon the 
demised premises at all reasonable times to conduct any 
operations that will not unduly interfere with activities of the 
[United States].”  And while this right of entry is subject to 
advance clearance from the United States, the lease specifies 
“that such advance clearance shall not be unreasonably held .”  
There was no indication at the time the State’s motions were ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
58 determined that the extent of the monitoring the court might 
order would necessarily be inconsistent with the St ate’s rights  
under the lease so as to prejudice the United States’ interests 
or subject the State to conflicting obligations.38   
  The United States also asserted in its statement of 
interest that courts have recognized that all parties to a 
contract are necessary parties in any equitable action that 
requires interpretation of the contract.  As an initial matter, 
a reading of the unambiguous text on the face of the lease does 
not require “interpretation” of the contract.  See Airgo, Inc. 
v. Horizon Cargo Transp., Inc.
, 66 Haw. 590, 594, 670 P.2d 1277, 
1280 (1983) (stating that a contract is ambiguous “when the 
terms of the contract are reasonably susceptible to more than 
one meaning”).  Further, the cases cited by the United States 
are inapposite and do not support its position.  Each case 
involved an action that sought to invalidate, enforce, or 
                     
 38 Even if concerns that the State would be subject to inconsistent 
obligations resulting from the dispute resolution mechanism were sufficient 
to make the United States a necessary party, the United States correctly 
asserts that it is not feasible to join it as a party because Congress has 
not waived sovereign immunity to allow the United States to be involuntarily 
made a party to the case in Hawai ‘i state courts.  See Minnesota v. United 
States, 305 U.S. 382, 388 (1939).  In determining whether a  case should be 
dismissed for failure to join an indispensable party under HRCP Rule 19(b), 
courts must consider “the extent to which, by protective provisions in the 
judgment, by the shaping of relief, or other measures, the prejudice can be 
lessened or avoided.”  In this case, the remedy could be tailored to avoid 
subjecting the State to inconsistent obligations by simply ordering the State 
to engage in monitoring consistent with its rights under the lease.  Thus, 
dismissal would not be warranted even if the United States were to be 
considered a necessary party.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
59 establish a breach of the terms of the contract at issue.39  
These cases did not hold that parties to a contract must be 
joined in any action regarding a trustee’s duty to reasonably 
monitor the property that is the subject of the contract.  
Unlike the cited cases, this action seeks neither to invalidate 
the lease nor to directly enforce its terms but rather to 
require the State to monitor the leased PTA land and the United 
States’ compliance with the lease .  The cited cases thus do not 
apply.40 
  The United States contended and the State similarly
 
argues that an injunction barring the State from renegotiating 
the lease until any breach of its terms is cured would adversely 
impact the United States’ interests directly by inhibiting its 
right to renew the lease and indirectly by undermining its 
ability to make future plans for the PTA.  This presumes, 
                     
 39 See Dawavendewa v. Salt River Project Agr. Imp. & Power Dist., 
276 F.3d 1150, 1157 (9th Cir. 2002) (holding that a Native American tribe was 
necessary and indispensable in a suit alleging that hiring preference for 
Native Americans in contract between the tribe and public power company 
violated civil rights laws); McClendon v. United States, 885 F.2d 627, 633 
(9th Cir. 1989) (holding a Native American tribe indispensable in an action 
to enforce the terms of a rental lease to which the tribe was a party); 
Queen’s Med. Ctr. v. Kaiser Found. Health Plan, Inc. , 948 F.Supp.2d 1131, 
1165 (D. Haw. 2013) (holding that a health management network was a necessary 
party in a suit that required demonstrating it had breached the contract to 
which it was a party).   
 40 To be clear, this opinion does not find or conclude that the 
United States has breached the lease, nor does it enforce or invalidate any 
provision of the lease.  To the extent any portion of the c ircuit court’s 
judgment can be interpreted as rendering such a finding, conclusion, or 
order, we hold that this interpretation is incorrect, and the circuit court’s 
judgment shall be construed consistent with this opinion.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
however, that the court was required to provide all of the 
precise remedies that the Plaintiffs requested.  It is well 
settled that in an equitable action, a court has “broad 
discretionary power to . . . craft remedies to preserve equity.”  
Ito v. Inv’rs Equity Life Holding Co., 135 Hawai‘ i 49, 62, 346 
P.3d 118, 131 (2015).  Courts may use this discretion to de
vise 
remedies that avoid prejudicing the rights of an absent party, 
and this latitude should be considered in determining whether a 
party is necessary and should be joined if feasible.  See Salt 
Lake Tribune Pub. Co. v. AT&T Corp., 320 F.3d 1081, 1097 (10th 
Cir. 2003) (“Tribune Publishing mistakenly assumes that the only 
remedy that will give it complete relief is an order compelling 
KTLLC to specifically perform under the Option Agreement with 
respect to every Tribune Asset it owns.  An order of complete 
specific performance is one way in which Tribune Publishing can 
receive complete relief, but it i s not the only way.”) .  Thus, 
the fact that the Plaintiffs requested a remedy barring the 
renegotiation of the lease 
does not alter our determination that 
the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in concluding 
that the United States is not a necessary party to the action.  
(Indeed, the circuit court did not ultimately issue an 
injunction barring the State from renegotiating the lease until 
it determines that the United States has complied with its 
terms, notwithstanding the Plaintiffs’ request for such relief.)  
60 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
  Lastly, it is noted that the United States stated in 
its filing that “if relief were entered that impacted the 
interests of the United States, the Government would at that 
time consider what action to take, including whether to file a 
motion to intervene as a party for the purpose of removing the 
case to United States District Court pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1442(a).”  
And, in denying the State’s motion to add the 
United States as a party without prejudice, t he circuit court 
stated that the United States would ha ve an “automatic right to 
intervene” if it chose to.  Nevertheless, the United States has 
not filed a motion to intervene in the present case, nor even 
requested permission to participate as amicus curiae
--which 
would avoid any waiver of sovereign immunity.  See Sch. Dist. of 
Pontiac v. Sec'y of U.S. Dept. of Educ., 584 F.3d 253, 266 (6th 
Cir. 2009).  In determining whether the circuit court erred in 
permitting the case to proceed in the United States’ absence, it 
is appropriate for this court to consider that, “even if the 
[United] States ha[d] a particular interest in this dispute, 
[it] had the opportunity to intervene to protect that interest 
but declined to participate.”  Id.  “[I]t would turn Rule 19 
analysis on its head to argue that the [United] States’  
interests are now impaired because [it] declined to participate 
in this much-publicized case. ”  Id. 
61 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
62   Based on the f oregoing, we affirm the circuit court’s 
denial of the State’s motions to join the United States as a 
necessary party and to dismiss the case for failure to join an 
indispensable party. 
2. The Case Presents a Justiciable Controversy 
a. The Alleged Breach of Trust Is an Actual Controversy for 
Purposes of HRS § 632- 1 
  The State argues that, because the Plaintiffs have not 
alleged that the United States actually violated the terms of 
the lease, there is no controversy between the parties of 
sufficient immediac
y and reality to warrant declaratory 
judgment.   The State relies on Asato v. Procurement Policy 41
                     
 41 In response, the Plaintiffs ar gue that the court’s jurisdiction 
over their claims is not dependent on HRS § 632 -1.  This court has recognized 
that the beneficiaries of the article XII, section 4 ceded land trust possess 
a constitutional cause of action against state officials to prospectively 
enjoin violations of their trust duties.  Pele Def. Fund v. Paty, 73 Haw. 
578, 601- 06, 837 P.2d 1247, 1261 –64 (1992).  Thus, the Plaintiffs’ request 
for an order requiring the State to prospectively fulfill its trust duties 
and enjoining future trust violations is not dependent on HRS § 632 -1.   
  We have clarified, however, that the implied constitutional right 
of action does not permit a court to “turn back the clock” to grant 
retrospective relief for “actions already taken by the State.”  Id. at 601, 
837 P.2d at 1262.  And we have indicated that suits seeking retrospective 
declaratory relief based on an alleged constitutional violation that has 
already occurred are governed by HRS § 632 -1.  See Nelson v. Hawaiian Homes 
Comm’n, 127 Hawai‘ i 185, 205, 277 P.3d 279, 299 (2012) (applying HRS § 632 -1 
in a suit seeking a declaration that the State had violated its duty to 
afford “sufficient sums” to the Office of Hawaiian Affairs under article XII, 
section 1 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution); Kaho‘ohanohano v. State , 114 Hawai ‘i 
302, 332, 162 P.3d 696, 726 (2007) (applying HRS § 632 -1 in a suit seeking a 
declaration that the State had violated the article XVI, section 2 
prohibition on the impairment of accrued retirement system benefits).  
Therefore, to the extent the Plaintiffs are seeking a declaration that the 
State has already violated its trust duties, this relief is dependent on 
satisfying the requirements of HRS § 632 -1. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
Board, 132 Hawai ‘i 333, 322 P.3d 228 (2014) and Kau v. City and 
County of Hawai‘i, 104 Hawai ‘i 468
, 92 P.3d 477 (2004) , which it 
contends demonstrate that the Plaintiffs ’ claim is too 
speculative to qualify for declaratory relief under HRS § 632- 1. 
63   Recently, this court considered the requirements that 
must be met to demonstrate a controversy  that is subject to a 
request for declaratory relief under HRS § 632-1(b).  We held 
that 
a party has standing to seek declaratory relief in a civil 
case brought pursuant to HRS § 632 -1 (1) where antagonistic 
claims exist between the parties (a) that indicate imminent 
and inevitable litigation, or (b) where the party seeking 
declaratory relief has a concrete interest in a legal 
relation, status, right, or privilege that is challenged or 
denied by the other party, who has or asserts a concrete 
interest in the same legal relation, statu s, right, or 
privilege; and (2) a declaratory judgment will serve to 
terminate the uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the 
proceeding.  
Tax Found. of Hawai ‘i v. State , 144 Hawai‘i 175, 202, 439 P.3d 
127, 154 (2019).42  It is clear that the Plaintiffs’ assertion 
that the State breached the trust duty that it owes to them as 
beneficiaries meets these requirements , and additionally, the 
cases relied upon by the State  are inapposite.   
                     
 42 Hawai‘i state courts are not subject to a constitutional “case or 
controversy” jurisdictional limitation.  See Haw. Const. art. VI, § 1 (“The 
several courts shall have original and appellate jurisdiction as provided by 
law . . . .”); Trs. of Office of  Hawaiian Affairs v. Yamasaki , 69 Haw. 154, 
170 n.17, 737 P.2d 446, 456 n.17 (1987);  Tax Found. , 144 Hawai‘ i at 190, 439 
P.3d at 142. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
64   In Asato, the plaintiff brought suit seeking to 
invalidate an administrative rule relating to the State’s 
contracting policies and to void every contract that the State 
had entered into under the regulation.  132 Hawai‘ i at 337, 322 
P.3d at 232.  Notably, the claim in Asato  was brought under HRS 
§ 91-7(a ), which allo ws “any interested person” to challenge an 
agency rule.43  Asato did not concern HRS § 632- 1, and it thus 
does not provide guidance herein.  See Tax Found. , 144 Hawai‘i at 
194–95, 439 P.3d at 146– 47 (discussing the requirements of HRS § 
91-7 and HRS § 632-1  separately ).   
  Further, even if Asato had been brought under HRS § 
632-1, its holding is not helpful to the State.   Although t he 
Asato court invalidated the challenged  administrative rule , it 
declined to declare that the contracts entered into under  the 
regulation were void , noting that no connection had been alleged 
between the plaintiff and any of the individual contracts .  Id. 
at 355, 322 P.3d at 250 .  The court determined that, without 
                     
 43 HRS § 91- 7(a) provides as follows:  
(a) Any interested person may obtain a judicial declaration 
as to the validity of an agency rule as provided in 
subsection (b) by bringing an action against the agency in 
the circuit court or, if applicable, the environmental 
court, of the county in which the petitioner resides or has 
its principal place of business. The action may be 
maintained whether or not the petitioner has first 
requested the agency to pass upon the validity of the rule 
in question.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
65 knowing the plaintiff’s relation to each contract, it could not 
identify any controversy that could be ended by a declaration 
that the contracts were void.  Id. (“Absent any rendition of the 
circumstances surrounding each contract, it cannot be determined 
from the allegations whether there is a substantial controversy 
as to a particular contract that is of sufficient immediacy and 
reality to warrant a declaratory judgment.” (internal quotations 
omitted)).   
  By contrast, the Plaintiffs here are connected to the 
PTA and the manner in which the State manages it because the PTA 
is held in trust by the State for the Plaintiffs’ benefit.  This 
is to say that the trust duty that the Plaintiffs allege the 
State has breached is a duty the State owes to the Plaintiffs, 
and a declaration regarding whether the State has  breached that 
duty would terminate the controversy by clarifying the contours 
of that duty.   
  The State also relies on Kau,  in which this court 
considered a Honolulu ordinance that permitted the lessees of 
condominium units to purchase fee simple interests through a 
condemnation proceeding.  104 Hawai ‘i at 472, 92 P.3d at 481 .  
The case began when the fee simple owners of a condominium 
project brought an action seeking a declaration that the 
subdivision of the property into individual units would end upon 
the expiration of the developer’s master lease in 2014, and thus ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
66 (continued . . .)  the sublessees of the individual units would not acquire fee 
simple interests in their individual units if they were 
condemned under the ordinance.  Id.   The Kau court held that, 
because the fee simple owners were “ requesting a judgment based 
on the expiration of the Master Lease, an event that [would] 
occur at some time in the future; there [wa]s no actual 
controversy in existence at th[at] time. ”  Id. at 475, 92 P.3d  
at 484.  Specifically, the court noted that the declaration 
would require speculation as to the conditions that would exist 
when the master lease expired.  Id.   During the inter im, the 
court reasoned, the city could condemn the fee owner’s interest 
or the fee owners could make the appropriate filings to make the 
subdivision permanent, thereby avoiding the situation that the 
fee simple owners wished the court to rule on.  Id. 
  U nlike in Kau , the Plaintiffs ’ breach of trust claim 
based on a failure to reasonably monitor the United States’ 
compliance with the lease does not require the court to 
speculate about future conditions-- nor even the present 
likelihood that the United States is currently in breach of the 
lease.44  Rather, the Plaintiffs alleged that the State has 
                     
 44 The circuit court additionally determined that the State would  
further breach [its] trust duties if [it] were to execute 
an extension, renewal, or any other change to the State 
General Lease No. S -3849, or enter into  a new lease of the 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
67 already breached its duty as a trustee by failing to monitor 
compliance with the provisions of the lease, irrespective of 
whether the United States actually complied with the lease 
terms.  This case thus presents the type of controversy that  is 
necessary to qualify for relief under HRS § 632-1 (b).   
b. The Alleged Breach of Trust Does Not Present a Political 
Question 
  Under the political question doctrine, courts refrain 
from deciding certain matters that are committed to the 
discretion of the other branches of government, reasoning that 
government action in these areas is properly addressed through 
democratic processes.  See  Trs. of Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. 
Yamasaki, 69 Haw. 154, 171, 737 P.2d 446, 456 (1987).  This 
court has adopted the test for identifying a political question 
articulated by the United States Supreme Court in Baker v. Carr, 
369 U.S. 186, 217 (1962).  Under the Carr  formulation, a 
political question may be found when “on the surface of [a] 
case” there is 1) “a textually demonstrable constitutional 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
PTA, without first determining (in writing) that the terms 
of the existing lease have been satisfactorily fulfilled, 
particularly with respect to any lease provision that has 
an impact upon the condition of the [PTA] leased lands.  
As discussed in more detail infra, Part V.B.4, any breach of trust claim 
regarding the State’s renewal of the lease is speculative and not ripe for 
review, and thus this aspect of the Plaintiffs’ claim does not present a 
controversy susceptible to declaratory relief under HRS § 632 -1. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
68 commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department;” 
2) “a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards 
for resolving it;” 3) “th e impossibility of deciding without an 
initial policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial 
discretion;” 4) “an unusual need for unquestioning adherence to 
a political decision already made;” or 5) “the potentiality of 
embarrassment from multifarious pronouncements by various 
departments on one question.”  Yamasaki, 69 Haw. at 169- 70, 737 
P.2d at 455 (quoting Carr , 369 U.S. at 217).  
  The State contends that Plaintiffs ’ claim that it 
violated its constitutional public trust duties is a 
nonjusticiable political question under Yamasaki and Nelson v. 
Hawaiian Homes Commission.  In Yamasaki, the Trustees of the 
Office of Hawaiian Affairs brought suit seeking 20% of the 
proceeds derived by the State as damages from an illegal sand 
mining operation taking place on ceded lands.  69 Haw. at 165-
67, 737 P.2d at 452- 54.  Although HRS § 10- 13.5 provided that 
“[t]wenty per cent of all funds derived from the public land 
trust . . . shall be expended by the [O]ffice of Hawaiian 
Affairs,” the court held that the case presented a political 
question because no judicially discoverable and manageable 
standards existed for determining whether the damages amounted 
to “funds derived from the public land trust.”  Id. at 174, 737 
P.2d at 458.  Resolving the case would require an initial policy ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
determination that was typically reserved for nonjudicial 
discretion, the court held.  Id. at 174-75, 737 P.2d at 458.  In 
Nelson, the court held that determining what constitutes 
“sufficient funds” for three of the four purposes set forth in 
article XII, section 1 of the Hawai i
 Constitution  was a 
political question not suited for judicial resolution.  127 
Hawai‘i at 188, 277 P.3d at 282.  The court held that, even were 
it to declare that the amount of funds currently dedicated to 
three of the four purposes was insufficient, there were no 
discoverable standards in the text or constitutional history of 
the provision for a court to affirmatively determine the amount 
that would be sufficient.  Id.  at 206, 277 P.3d at 300. 45
69   These cited cases are plainly distinguishable.  Unlike 
in Yamasaki and Nelson , this court’s precedents in terpreting the 
State’s constitutional trust obligations and the widely 
developed common law of trusts provide many judicially 
                     
 45 Article XII, section 1 of the Hawai i Constitution provides in 
relevant part as follows:  
The legislature shall make sufficient sums available for 
the following purposes: (1) development of home, 
agriculture, farm and ranch lots; (2) home, agriculture, 
aquaculture, farm and ranch loans; (3) rehabilitation 
projects to include, but not limited to, educational, 
economic, political, social and cultural processes by which 
the general welfare and conditions of native Hawaiians are 
thereby improved; (4) the administration and operating 
budget of the department of Hawaiian home lands; in 
furtherance of (1), (2), (3) and (4) herein, by 
appropriating the same in the manner provided by law.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
discoverable and manageable standards for determining whether 
the State breached its trust duties.  “It is well settled that 
the determination of whether or not a particular proposed 
action, by the trustee of a charitable trust, would constitute a 
breach of that trust, is a matter to be determined by the 
courts, as a part of their inherent jurisdiction.”  Kapiolani 
Park Pres. Soc. v. City & Cty.  of Honolulu, 69 Haw. 569, 571, 
751 P.2d 1022, 1024 (1988) (citing 15 Am.Jur.2d Charities § 135 
(1976); 14 C.J.S. Charities § 49 (1939)).   
70   The State points to the Ninth Circuit decision in 
Price v. Hawaii, in which the court held that as a matter of 
federal law, section 5(f) of the Admission Act  did not 
incorporate “all provisions of the common law of trusts ” because 
to do so “would manacle the State as it attempted to deal with 
the vast quantity of land conveyed to it .”  921 F.2d 950, 954- 56 
(9th Cir. 1990).  While this court has approvingly quoted this 
passage when examining the State’s obligations when 
administering a different, statutorily created trust, see  46
                     
 46 “Article XII, § 4 was added to the Hawaii Consti tution to 
expressly recognize the trust purposes and trust beneficiaries of the § 5(f) 
trust, clarifying that the State’s trust obligations extend beyond the 
Hawaiian Homes Land Trust.”  Pele Def. Fund, 73 Haw. at 603, 837 P.2d at 1263 
(citing Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 59 in I Proceedings of the Constitutional 
Convention of Hawai i of 1978, 643 -44 (1980)).  “In article XVI, [section] 7, 
referred to by article XII, [section] 4, the State affirmatively assumes the 
[section] 5(f) trust responsibilities.”  Id. at 586 n.2, 837 P.2d at 1254 
n.2. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
71 Awakuni v. Awana, 115 Hawai ‘i 126, 133, 165 P.3d 1027, 1034 
(2007), this does not establish that the common law of trusts is 
wholly inapplicable.  This is to say that a ruling that not all  
provisions of the common law apply does not equate to a ruling 
that none of the provisions of the common law apply.  Indeed, 
the same year that the Ninth Circuit decided Price v. Hawaii
, it 
relied in part on the common law of trusts when it held in a 
related case that the same plaintiff stated a claim against the 
Office of Hawaiian Affairs based on an alleged breach of its 
section 5(f) trust duties.  See  Price v. Akaka, 928 F.2d 824, 
826–27 (9th Cir. 1990) (“In addition, allowing Price to enforce 
§ 5(f) is consistent with the common law of trusts, in which one 
whose status as a beneficiary depends upon the discretion of the 
trustee nevertheless may sue to compel the trustee to abide by 
the terms of the trust.” (citing Restatement (Second) of Trusts 
§§ 214(1) cmt. a, 391)). 
  Further, this court may draw upon its own case law 
interpreting the State’s constitutional trust obligations for 
administrable standards, including instances in which we have 
explicitly stated that beneficiaries of the ceded land trust may 
bring actions to determine whether executive branch agencies 
have breached their constitutional trust duties.  See , e.g., 
Pele Def. Fund, 73 Haw. 578, 605, 837 P.2d 1247, 1264 (1992) 
(“We find that the actions of state officials, acting in their ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
72 official capacities, should not be invulnerable to 
constitutional scrutiny.  Article XII, § 4 imposes a fiduciary 
duty on Hawai‘ i’s officials to hold ceded lands in accordance 
with the § 5(f) trust provisions, and the citizens of the state 
must have a means to mandate compliance.”) .  The State’s 
contention that this case presents a nonjusticiable political 
question is thus without merit. 
3. The Circuit Court Did Not Err in Concluding the State 
Breached Its Trust Duties 
a. The Circuit Court Correctly Determined that the State has a 
Trust Duty To Reasonably Monitor the Trust Property, Including 
the United States’ Compliance with the Terms of the Lease that 
Protect the Trust Property 
  In its conclusions of law, the circuit court 
determined that the State’s trust duties include using 
“reasonable efforts” to preserve trust property and to take a 
proactive role in 
the management and protection of the leased 
PTA land.  The court ruled that one aspect of this duty is an 
obligation “ to use reasonable efforts to ensure that Said Lease 
provisions that affect or impact the condition of ceded lands 
and all living things thereon are being followed and 
discharged.”  Further, the court concluded that the State has a 
duty to consider the cumulative effects of the United S tates’ 
use of the land upon the condition of the land and upon “the 
indigenous plants, animals, and insects, as well as the invasion 
to Plaintiffs’ cultural interests in the Subject Land.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
73 Although the State blends its arguments regarding the nature of 
its legal trustee duties with those regarding the underlying 
justiciability of the case, the State appears to dispute these 
rulings and to argue that its trustee duties do not include an 
obligation to reasonably monitor the leased PTA land.   
  The State’s duties with respect to the leased PTA land 
are derived in part from the propert ies’ status as “ceded land ”-
-which are lands that were held by the civil government or the 
monarchy of the Hawaiian Kingdom at the time of the 1893 
overthrow of the Hawaiian monarchy.  See  Pele Def. Fund, 73 Haw. 
at 585, 837 P.2d at 1254.  When the United States annexed Hawai‘i 
by a joint resolution of Congress in 1898, r
eal property that 
had been classified as government lands or crown lands was ceded 
to the federal government.  Id.  Recognizing their special 
character, the Joint Resolution of Annexation exempted these 
lands from the general laws of the United States that govern ed 
federal land.  State ex rel. Kobayashi v. Zimring, 58 Haw. 106, 
124, 566 P.2d 725, 736 (1977)  (citing Joint Resolution of July 
7, 1898, 30 Stat. 750).  Instead, the resolution specified that 
these lands should be held in a “special trust” for the benefit 
of the people of Hawai‘i.  Id.  When Hawai‘i was admitted into 
the Union as a state in 1959, these ceded lands were transferred 
back to the newly established state, subject to the trust 
provisions set forth in 
section 5(f) of the Admission Act.  Pele ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
Def. Fund, 73 Haw. at 585, 837 P.2d at 1254 (citing Hawaii 
Admission Act, Pub. L. No. 86 –3, 73 Stat. 4, 6 (1959)).  Article 
XII, section 4 was later added to the Hawai‘i Constitution to 
formally recognize these responsibilities, specifying that the 
land “shall be held by the State as a public trust for native 
Hawaiians and the general public. ”  Id. at 586, 837 P.2d at 
1254 (quoting Haw. Const. art. XII, § 4).  At that same time, 
the framers and the people of Hawai‘i adopted article XI, section 
1, which created a public trust consisting of “all public 
natural resources” to be administered by the State for the 
benefit of the people.
  Haw. Const. art. XI, § 1. 4847
74                      
 47 Article XII, section 4 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution provides in 
full as follows:  
The lands granted to the State of Hawaii by Section 5(b) of 
the Admission Act and pursuant to Article XVI, Section 7, 
of the State Constitution, excluding therefrom lands 
defined as “available lands” by Section 203 of the Hawaiian 
Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, shall be held by 
the State as a public trust for native Hawaiians and the 
general public.  
 48 Article XI, section 1 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution provides in full 
as follows: 
For the benefit of present and future generations, the 
State and its political subdivisions shall conserve and 
protect Hawaii’s natural beauty and all natural resources, 
including land, water, air, minerals and energy sources, 
and shall promote the development and utilization of these 
resources in a manner consistent with their conservation 
and in furtherance of the self -sufficiency of the State.  
All public natural resources are held in trust by the State 
for the benefit of the people.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
75 (continued . . .)    As the State concedes, our case law and the common law 
of trusts make the State “subject to certain general trust 
duties, such as a general duty to preserve trust property.”  
See, e.g., Zimring, 58 Haw. at 121, 566 P.2d at 735 (“Under 
public trust principles, the State as trustee has the duty to 
protect and maintain the trust property and regulate its use.”); 
Kaho‘ohanohano v. State, 114 Hawai‘i 302, 325, 162 P.3d 696, 719 
(2007) (“ [It] is always the duty of a trustee to protect the 
trust property . . . .” (quoting Brenizer v. Supreme Council, 
Royal Arcanum, 53 S.E. 835, 838 (N.C. 1906))); In re Estate of 
Dwight, 67 Haw. 139, 146, 681 P.2d 563, 568 (1984) (“A trustee 
is under a duty to use the care and skill of a [person] of 
ordinary prudence to preserve the trust property.” (citing 
Bishop v. Pittman, 33 Haw. 647, 654 (Haw. Terr. 1935)); 
Restatement (Second ) of Trusts § 176 (“The trustee is under a 
duty to the beneficiary to use reasonable care and skill to 
preserve the trust property.”) .   As trustee, the State must 49
                     
 49 The State’s duty of care is especially heightened in the context 
of ceded land held in trust for the benefit of native Hawaiians and the 
general public under article XII, section 4.  This court has approvingly 
quoted the following in considering the ceded land trust:  
The native Hawaiian people continue to be a unique and 
distinct people with their own language, social system, 
ancestral and national lands, customs, practices and 
institutions.  The health and well -being of the native 
Hawaiian people is intrinsically tied to their deep 
feelings and attachment to the land.  ‘Aina, or land, is of 
crucial importance to the native Hawaiian people--to their 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
76 take an active role in preserving trust property and may not 
passively allow it to fall into ruin.  United States v. White 
Mt. Apache Tribe, 537 U.S. 465, 475 (2003) (“ [E]lementary trust 
law, after all, confirms the commonsense assumption that a 
fiduciary actually administering trust property may not allow it 
to fall into ruin on [the fiduciary’s ] watch.”).  It is self-
evident that an obligation to reasonably monitor trust property 
to ensure it is not harmed is a necessary component of this 
general duty, as is a duty to investigate upon being made aware 
of evidence of possible damage.  This obligation inherently 
includes a duty to make reasonable efforts to monitor third-
parties’ compliance with the  terms of agreements designed to 
protect trust property. 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
culture, their religion, their economic self -sufficiency 
and their sense of personal and community well -being.  ‘ Aina 
is a living and vital part of the native Hawaiian 
cosmology, and is irreplaceable.  The natural elements —
land, air, water, ocean —are interconnected and 
interdependent.  To native Hawaiians, land is not a 
commodity; it is the foundation of their cultural and 
spiritual identity as Hawaiians.  The ‘aina is part of their 
‘ohana, and they care for it as they do for other members of 
their families.  For them, the land and the natural 
environment is alive, respected, treasured, praised, and 
even worshiped . 
Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. Hous. & Cmty. Dev. Corp. of 
Hawai‘i, 121 Hawai ‘i
 
324, 333, 219 P.3d 1111, 1120 (2009) (alterations omitted) (quoting Office of 
Hawaiian Affairs v. Hous. & Cmty. Dev. Corp. of Hawai i, 117 Hawai ‘i  174, 214, 
177 P.3d 884, 924 (2008)).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
  This court held as much in Kelly v. 1250 Oceanside 
Partners, in which it considered the article XI, section 1 
public trust duties of the Hawai‘i Department of Health (DOH) 
with respect to a private development abutting coastal waters 
that the State had classified as “
AA,” meaning the waters were 
legally required to be kept as nearly as possible in their 
natural, pristine condition.  111 Hawai ‘i 205, 227 -29, 140 P.3d 
985, 1007-09 (2006).  Although DOH had issued a permit to the 
developer that included provisions requiring the developer to 
abide by State regulations prohibiting the pollution of AA 
waters, this court held that including the provisions in the 
permit was not the end of DOH’s duties as trustee.  Id.  Under 
public trust principles, we held, DOH was required to “not only 
issue permits after prescribed measures appear to be in 
compliance with state regulation, but also to ensure that the 
prescribed measures are actually being implemented after a 
thorough assessment of the possible adverse impacts the 
development would have on the State’s natural resources.”  Id. 
at 231, 140 P.3d at 1011 (emphasis added).  We thus effectively 
held that the State had a continuing public trust duty to 
reasonably monitor the developer to ensure it was complying with 
the permit.  See id. 
77   The present case presents close parallels to Oceanside 
Partners.  As in Oceanside Partners, the State entered into an ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
78 agreement to allow a third party to use land for a particular 
purpose provided the third party complied with certain 
conditions intended to protect trust property.  And as in 
Oceanside Partners, the State has a continuing trust duty to 
make reasonable efforts to ensure that the third party actually 
complies with those conditions.  Thus, the State has a 
constitutional trust obligation to reasonably monitor the 
United States’ compliance with the lease. 
 
  The State’s attempts to distinguish Oceanside Partners 
are unavailing.  As a threshold matter, the State is incorrect 
that no statute exists setting forth the State’s obligations 
with respect to ensuring the United States’ compliance with the 
lease; HRS § 171- 7(5) provides that, “[e] xcept as provided by 
law the board of land and natural resources through the 
chairperson shall: . . . [e] nforce contracts respecting sales, 
leases, licenses, permits, or other disposition of public 
lands[.]”  Moreover, this court has made clear that while 
overlap may occur, the State’s constitutional public trust 
obligations exist independent of any statutory mandate and must 
be fulfilled regardless of whether they coincide with any other 
legal duty.  Kauai Springs, Inc. v. Planning Comm’ n of Kaua ‘i, 
133 Hawai‘i 141, 172, 324 P.3d 951, 982 (2014) (“As the public 
trust arises out of a constitutional mandate, the duty and 
authority of the state and its subdivisions to weigh competing ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
79 public and private uses on a case- by-case basis is independent 
of statutory duties and authorities created by the 
legislature.”); see also In re TMT, 143 Hawai i 379, 416, 431 
P.3d 752, 789 (2018) (Pollack, J., concurring) (“Thus, although 
some congruence exists, BLNR’s and the University of Hawai ‘i
 at 
Hilo’s public trust obligations are distinct from their 
obligations under [Hawai i Administrative Rules] § 13- 5-
30(c).”). 
  Additionally, the fact that Paragraph 9 of the lease 
only requires the United States to “ make every reasonable 
effort to . . . remove or deactivate all live or blank 
ammunition upon completion of a training exercis
e or prior to 
entry by the said public, whichever is sooner ” does not render 
the State powerless to respond to a breach of this provision as 
the State contends.  It is well settled that an agreement by 
one party to use “reasonable” or “best efforts” generally 
creates an enforceable obligation as a matter of contract law.  
See, e.g., Soroof Trading Dev. Co. v. GE Fuel Cell Sys., LLC, 
842 F.Supp.2d 502, 511 (S.D.N.Y. 2012) (“New York courts use 
the term ‘reasonable efforts’ interchangeably with ‘best 
efforts’ 
. . . [and] a ‘best efforts’ clause imposes an 
obligation to act with good faith in light of one’s own 
capabilities.” (quoting Monex Fin. Serv. Ltd. v. Nova Info. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
Sys., Inc., 657 F.Supp.2d 447, 454 (S.D.N.Y. 2009))); Allview 
Acres, Inc. v. Howard Inv. Corp., 182 A.2d 793, 796 (Md. 1962) 
(“What will constitute reasonable efforts under a contract 
expressly or impliedly calling for them is largely a question 
of fact in each particular case and entails a showing by the 
party required to make them of ‘activity reasonably calculated 
to obtain the approval by action or expenditure not 
disproportionate in the circumstances.’” (quoting Stabile v. 
McCarthy, 145 N.E.2d 821, 824 (Mass. 1957))).  And, while the 
lease may not contain a provision expressly allowing the State 
to terminate the lease, it does contain a dispute resolution 
mechanism in Paragraph 30.  This mechanism appears to 
specifically contemplate the possibility of judicial 
enforcement, setting forth the conditions under which “a court 
of competent jurisdic tion” may set aside the administrative 
factual findings and specifying that administrative decisions 
on questions of law shall not be final.   
80   Moreover, the State errs by presuming that initiating 
a formal action to enforce the lease is the only possible 
response it could undertake to preserve and protect the PTA 
land if it discovers the United States is in noncompliance with 
the relevant provisions of the lease.  A range of other options 
may be available that could satisfy its public trust 
obligations under the circumstances, including seeking to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
81 obtain the United States’ voluntary cooperation .  As the 
Plaintiffs argued during the summary judgment hearing, how the 
State responds if reasonable monitoring and investigation lead 
to a discovery that the United States is not in compliance with 
the lease could potentially be a separate breach of the State’s 
public trust duties, and this court need not speculate about 
what hypothetical future actions are reasonable in order to 
resolve this case.  
  The State is therefore wrong to suggest that 
reasonably monitoring the United States ’ compliance with the 
lease is a futile or pointless endeavor, and Oceanside 
Partners’ holding that the State has an ongoing trust 
obligation to ensure third- party compliance with provisions 
designed to protect trust property is dispositive as to the 
existence of this obligation.  
b. The Circuit Court Did Not Err in Determining that the State 
Did Not Reasonably Monitor the Trust Property, Including the 
United States’ Compliance with the Lease Terms that Protect 
Trust Property 
  The State appears to argue next that, even if it does 
have a trust duty to reasonably monitor the United States’ 
compliance with the lease, the circuit court erred in finding 
that it breached that duty by failing to conduct regular 
inspections of the PTA and by failing to investigate when it was 
made aware of evidence that the United States may have violated ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
provisions of the lease designed to protect the leased PTA  land.  
“Typically, whether a fiduciary acted p rudently --or in other 
words, as a reasonably prudent fiduciary-- is a question of 
fact.”  Harley v. Minn. Mining & Mfg. Co., 42 F.Supp.2d 898, 907 
(D. Minn. 1999); see also Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel
, Inc., 
69 Haw. 376, 385, 742 P.2d 377, 383 (1987) (“ Whether there was a 
breach of duty or not, i.e. whether there was a failure on the 
defendant’s part to exercise reasonable care, is a question for 
the trier of fact.”).  Accordingly, the circuit court’s 
determination that the State did not reasonably monitor the 
United States’ compliance with the lease terms must be upheld if 
it is not clearly erroneous.   
82  
(continued . . .)    The circuit court specifically found that the State 
had breached its trust duties by failing to, inter alia:  
(a) conduct regular reasonable (in terms of frequency and 
scope), periodic monitoring and inspection of the condition 
of subject public trust lands . . . ;  
(b) ensure that the terms of the lease that impact the 
condition of the leased lands or preserving Plaintiffs’ 
cultural interests are being followed;  
(c) take prompt and appropriate follow up steps with 
military or other federal government officials when [the 
State] obtain[s] or [is] made aware of evidence or 
information that the lease may have been violated with 
respect to protecting the condition of the [PTA] leased 
lands[.50] 
                     
 50 The circuit court additionally found that the State had breached 
its trust duties by failing to consistently make reasonably detailed and 
complete records of its actions to ensure compliance with the lease and by 
failing to initiate or assist  with the appropriation of necessary funding to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
83 (Line breaks added.)  In making this determination, the court 
relied on the fact that “[o]nly three [inspection] reports of 
any significance, for 1984, 1994, and 2014, were introduced into 
evidence.”  Of these, “[t]he 1 984 and 1994 reports were grossly 
inadequate and, in the case of the 1994 report, virtually 
nonexistent because of its lack of information pertaining to the 
1994 inspection.”  The court stated that it was not considering 
“other studies or site visits in co nnection with other business 
regarding the [PTA], such as environmental impact statements, 
[because] the court did not view these events as being 
undertaken as part of [the State’s] effort to discharge” its 
trust duties. 
  The State argues that the circuit court’s 
determination was clearly erroneous because it explicitly 
disregarded the State’s reliance on cooperative agreements, 
environmental reports, and archeological surveys to supervise 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
undertake cleanup of the PTA.  And the court held that the State would breach 
its trust duties if it were to extend or renew the lease “without first 
determining (in writing) that the terms of the existing lease have been 
satisfactorily fulfilled, particularly with respect to any lease provision 
that has an impact upon the condition of the” PTA.  The State does not appear 
to challenge these conclusions on appeal, raising in their point of error 
regarding the breach only that “[t]he circuit court erred in finding that the 
State breached its trust duties by failing to perform adequate inspections of 
the Subject Land.”  Nevertheless, as discussed below, the circuit court’s 
order regarding the securing of funding for cleanup was not suited to remedy 
the breach alleged by the Plaintiffs, and any holding regarding a future 
breach of the State’s trust duties is speculative.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
84 the United States’ use of the PTA.51  Under the circumstances, 
the State contends, it was reasonable for the State to delegate 
its duties52 and rely on its review of ancillary documents to 
monitor the PTA. 
                     
 51 These documents included a copy of the United States training 
regulations and procedures from 1970, an environmental assessment for a 
training exercise in 1982, a 1984 archeological survey report, a 2002 
Integrated Natural Resources Management Plan, a 2004 environmental impact 
statement, and a 2004 -2010 “Programmatic Agreement” to provide additi onal 
protection to cultural sites.  
 52 The State cites Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 171 for the 
proposition that a trustee has authority to cooperate, consult, and delegate 
to others tasks relating to trust administration when it is reasonable to do 
so.  However, this is not an accurate description of Restatement (Second) of 
Trusts § 171, which is entitled “Duty Not to Delegate.”  (Emphasis added.)  
Under the approach taken by the First and Second Restatement, “[t]he trustee 
is under a duty to the beneficiary not to delegate to others the doing of 
acts which the trustee can reasonably be required personally to perform.”  
Id.; Restatement (First) of Trusts § 171.  However, “[t]he position of The 
American Law Institute was fundamentally changed in 1992,” an d Restatement 
(Third) of Trusts § 80, “Duty with Respect to Delegation,” provides as 
follows: 
(1) A trustee has a duty to perform the responsibilities of 
the trusteeship personally, except as a prudent person of 
comparable skill might delegate those responsibilities to 
others. 
(2) In deciding whether, to whom, and in what manner to 
delegate fiduciary authority in the administration of a 
trust, and thereafter in supervising or monitoring agents, 
the trustee has a duty to exercise fiduciary discretion and 
to act as a prudent person of comparable skill would act in 
similar circumstances.  
Restatement (Third) of Trusts § 80 and Reporter’s Notes on § 80.  Hawai ‘i 
courts have not explicitly adopted either the Restatement’s original position 
or the new position set forth in the Third Restatement, though many older 
cases make clear that at least some of a trustee’s duties are non -delegable.  
See Hartmann v. Bertelmann , 39 Haw. 619, 627 (Haw. Terr. 1952) (“[T]he 
primary responsibility of administering the trust is the trustee’s, which he 
cannot delegate . . . .”); In re Banning’s Estate , 9 Haw. 453, 463 (Haw. Rep. 
1894) (“The duties and powers of trustees cannot be delegated.”).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
85   To the extent the State argues that it can delegate 
its public trust duty to reasonably monitor the PTA to protect 
and preserve trust property, this contention is squarely counter 
to our precedent indicating that the State may not delegate its 
constitutional duties to third -parties.  See Ka Pa‘akai O 
Ka‘Aina 
v. Land Use Comm’n , 94 Hawai i 31, 50 -51, 7 P.3d 1068, 108 7-88 
(2000) (holding that the Land Use Commission improperly 
delegated its article XII, section 7 “ responsibility for the 
preservation and protection of native Hawaiian rights ” by 
authorizing a land reclassification on the promise that the 
developer would late r create a program to accommodate native 
practitioners, as the “balancing of the developer’ s interests 
with the needs of native Hawaiians should have been performed, 
in the first instance, by the” State agency).  The Ka Pa‘akai 
court held that the Hawai‘i Constitution  places “an affirmative  
duty on the State and its agencies to preserve and protect 
traditional and cus tomary native Hawaiian rights.”  Id. at 45, 7 
P.3d at 1082 (empha sis added).  At the core of this affirmative  
duty, as explained by the  Ka Pa‘akai court, is the responsibility 
of the State and its constituent agencies to act only after 
“independently considering the effect of their actions on 
Hawaiian traditions and practices. ”  Id. at 46, 7 P.3d at 1083.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
86 An affirmative duty of the State to pro tect and preserve 
constitutional rig hts is by its very nature non -delegable.  
  Even if such a delegation were not inherently invalid 
under the Hawai‘ i 
Constitution and permitted under our common law
of trusts, that delegation would itself have to be reasonable 
under the prudent person standard, and the State would maintain 
a trust duty to reasonably supervise the agent in its 
performance of the monitoring.  See  supra note 52.  It is self-
evident that, as a general matter, it is not reasonable for a 
trustee to delegate the supervision of a lessee’s compliance 
with the terms of a lease of trust property to the lessee.  Cf. 
Halderman v. Pennhurst State Sch. & Hosp., 526 F. Supp. 428, 433 
(E.D. Pa. 1981) (“The Commonwealth defendants appear to take the 
position that they should be able to monitor their own 
compliance wit h the Court’s Orders.  This would be somewhat akin 
to requesting the fox to guard the henhouse.”) .  This is 
especially true given the circuit court’s findings that the 
State was aware of the United States’ history of failing to 
prevent environmental damage and clean up the remnants of 
military exercises on other State- owned land that it leases, 
including Mākua and the Waikāne Valley.    
  Nevertheless, it is generally not considered a breach 
of duty for a fiduciary to rely in part on reports prepared by a 
person as to matters that the fiduciary reasonably believes to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
87 be within that person’s expertise.  Cf. HRS § 414D -155(b)(2)  
(Supp. 2018);53 HRS § 414D- 149(b)(2) (Supp. 2018 ).54  Democratic 
principles and the checks and balances of government may 
arguably serve to make a governmental entity like the United 
States more accountable than the average lessee, and some of the 
documents authored on behalf of the United States included 
observations by independent third parties.  If the State took 
appropriate action to verify the content, it may have reasonably 
concluded that the reports were reliable, and it could have 
validly considered them in the course of fulfilling its non -
delegable trust duties.  The circuit court therefore appears to 
have erred in disregarding the State’s review of these ancillary 
documents in assessing whether the State had fulfilled its trust 
duty to reasonably monitor the PTA solely on the basis
 that 
these other reports were not “undertaken as part of [the 
State’s] effort to discharge” its trust duties.   
  But the State’s efforts were clearly inadequate in any 
event.  T he ancillary reports occurred very infrequently and in 
                     
 53 HRS § 414D -155(b)(2) provides that, in the course of discharging 
the officer’s duties, an officer of a nonprofit corporation may “rely on 
information, opinions, reports, or statements, including financial statements 
and other financial data,  if prepared or presented by . . . [l]egal counsel, 
public accountants, or other persons as to matters the officer reasonably 
believes are within the person’s professional or expert competence.”  
 54 HRS § 414D -149(b)(2) provides the same right to rely on 
information from professionals regarding matters within their expertise to 
directors of a non- profit corporation.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
88 some cases cited evidence of damage and suggested  that the 
United States may not have been in compliance with the lease .  
Indeed, the circuit court made specific findings regarding 
adverse environmental information included in two of the United 
States’ reports.  It noted that a 2010 archaeologic al and 
cultural monitoring report stated,  
The Military needs to implement some kind of cleanup 
process as part of their training in PTA.  Remnants of 
military trash is everywhere.  
. . . . 
Another major concern is the military debris that is left 
behind after training including 
[UXO] that is carelessly 
discarded.  There is a need to have some type of cleanup 
plan implemented in the military training process.   
(Emphasis omitted.)  The court also found that a second 
archaeological and cultural monitoring report made four years 
later expressed many of the same concerns with specific regard 
to the United States’ obligations under the lease:  
Remnants of live fire training are present within the BAX, 
including stationary targets, junk cars, an old tank, 
crudely built rock shelters, and miscellaneous military 
rubbish.  Spent ammunition is scattered across the 
landscape.  
. . . . 
This lease . . . requires the land to be restored to its 
original state  when returned.  This cannot occur if the 
land remains so littered with UXO that it is unsafe for 
anyone to go on the land.  If this is the case, the land 
will be rendered unusable forever--one eighth of our island 
will become unavailable for use by any of  our future 
generations.  This is not acceptable nor could it be 
construed in any way to be in compliance with the Statehood 
compact. 
Therefore, in order for the Army to meet the lease 
termination deadline, we strongly recommend  the Army begin 
now to seek funding to initiate a serious cleanup effort ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
89 throughout the leased training areas bounding the impact 
areas: that major impact/UXO areas be subjected to thorough 
cleanup[.]  
(Emphasis and some alterations in original.)55  There was no 
indication the State ever followed up on these reports.  
  The circuit court found that the State breached its 
trust duties: by failing to conduct regular monitoring and 
inspections that were reasonable in frequency and scope to 
examine the condition of the leased 
PTA land; by failing to 
ensure that the terms of the lease that impact the condition 
of the leased PTA 
land were being followed; and by failing to 
take prompt and appropriate follow- up steps when it was made 
aware of evidence that the lease may have been violated with 
respect to protecting the condition of the leased PTA land.  
In light of the foregoing, the circuit court did not err in 
these findings. 
4. The Injunctive Relief Ordered by the Circuit Court W as Not 
Entirely Suited T o Remedy the Demonstrated Breach 
  The circuit court ordered the State to rectify its 
breach of its constitutional public trust duties by “promptly 
initiat[ing] and undertak[ing] affirmative activity to malama 
                     
 55 Although the court did not make any specific findings regarding 
the other reports on which the State claims it relied, several of these also 
documented substantial environmental problems with the leased PTA land.  For 
example, the 2002 Integrated Natural Resources Management Plan noted in a 
section setting forth the “Adverse Effects” of the “Military Mission on 
Natural Resources” that 22.9% of the ground cover in the surveyed area 
consisted of litter and “[t]here was virtually no evidence of maintenance 
activity.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
90 ‘aina the” PTA.  According to the court, this includ es but is not 
limited to developing a written plan to care for the land.  The 
court stated that the plan must include the following: 
 regular, periodic on- site monitoring and inspection;  
 the making of inspection reports that at minimum 
include a set of specified information, 
recommendations for appropriate action, and a 
nonbinding estimated timeline for when such action 
should be undertaken;  
 a protocol of appropriate action that will be 
undertaken if the State discovers an “actual, 
apparent, or probable br each of any provision” of the 
lease by the United States, [UXO]  or debris deposited 
during training exercises, any other foreign or non-
natural item or contaminate connected with the lease, 
or any other condition adversely affecting the PTA;  
 a protocol or other assurance to bring any 
nonconforming condition found that is likely caused by 
the United States under the lease into pre- lease 
condition on a reasonable timetable;  
 a set of steps the State will take to obtain or assist 
in securing adequate funding for a comprehensive 
cleanup of the PTA; and  
 a procedure to provide reasonable transparency to the 
Plaintiffs and the general public with regard to the 
State’s progress in fulfilling the court’s order.   
The court also ordered the State to initiate HRS Chapter 91 
rulemaking to establish a contested case procedure, if not 
already in existence, through which the Plaintiffs or any member 
of the general public with standing could challenge the State’s 
decisions in the course of discharging its trust duty to care ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
91 for the leased PTA lands .  Lastly, the court ordered that the 
State submit its plan to care for the land to the court for 
approval prior to executing it. 
  The form and scope of injunctions issued by Hawai ‘i 
courts are governed by HRCP Rule 65(d), which provides as 
follows: 
Every order granting an injunction and every restraining 
order shall set forth the reasons for its issuance; shall 
be specific in terms; shall describe in reasonable detail, 
and not by reference to the complaint or other document, 
the act or acts sought to be restrained; and is binding 
only upon the parties to the action, their officers, 
agents, servants, employees, and attorneys, and upon those 
persons in active concert or participation with them who 
receive actual notice of the order by personal service or 
otherwise.  
(Emphases added).  We have stated that, when granting an 
injunction, a court should adopt relief and “mold[] its decree 
to satisfy the requirement[s] of th[e] particular case and 
thereby conserve the equities of all of the parties.”  Fleming 
v. Napili Kai, Ltd., 50 Haw. 66, 70, 430 P.2d 316, 319 (1967); 
see also Moffat v. Speidel, 2 Haw. App. 334, 335, 631 P.2d 1205, 
1206 (1981) (holding that a court ’s failure to “ mold its decree 
and the relief granted to satisfy the requirements of the case ” 
violates HRCP Rule 65(d)).  In interpreting the substantively 
identical federal rule, federal courts have consistently held 
that injunctions must “remedy only the specif ic harms shown by 
the plaintiffs.”  Price v. City of Stockton, 390 F.3d 1105, 1117 
(9th Cir. 2004) (internal quotes and citations omitted).  
An ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
92  
(continued . . .)  overbroad injunction is an abuse of discretion.  Kohl v. 
Legoullan, 936 P.2d 514, 519 (Alaska 1997). 
  As discussed supra, the circuit court correctly 
determined that the State breached its constitutional trust 
duties by failing to reasonably monitor the PTA, including by 
failing to inspect the land to ensure the United States’ 
compliance with the lease terms intended to protect and preserve 
trust property.  Much of the circuit court’s order was 
appropriately tailored to address this breach.  By requiring  the 
State to develop and execute a plan to conduct regular, periodic 
monitoring and inspection , the court’s order  ensured that the 
State would fulfill its trust duty to inform itself of the 
present condition of the leased PTA land and whether the United 
States was in compliance with the relevant terms of the lease so 
that it might take further action if needed to protect and 
preserve trust property.56  By requiring these inspections to be 
                     
 56 The circuit court’s order included several specific details as to 
how the inspections should be carried out, including that  
the monitoring should involve direct (in person) or 
indirect (via videographic or live remote viewing) 
observation of actual military training exercises 
(including live fire exercises of all types using live 
and/or explosive munitions, as well as the use of heavy 
vehicles or equipment above and upon the land) so that the 
monitors and/or inspectors can observe and appreciate the 
destructive effects, if any, of all such training and use 
of equipment[.]  
While these measures may represent the quality of monitoring that the State 
should aspire to, we hold that the circuit court’s order should be ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
93 documented in detailed inspection reports, the order assures 
that the inspections are meaningful and allows trust 
beneficiaries to evaluate the State’s response to what it 
discovers, enabling the bringing of a future action to enforce 
the State’s trust duties if it fails to fulfill them.  And by 
requiring the State to establish a procedure to ensure 
reasonable transparency to the Plaintiffs and general public 
regarding the State’s progress with complying with the court’s 
order, the order ensures its own effectiveness through public 
oversight. 
  The State contends that because the circuit court’s 
order does not specify how often the periodic inspections must 
take place, it is impermissibly vague.57  But it is not uncommon 
for courts to issue generally -stated orders requiring government 
agencies to submit plans to remedy constitutional violations and 
then evaluate the adequacy of the plans prior to their 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
interpreted to require monitoring to the fullest extent consistent with the 
State’s right of reasonable entry under the lease and no more.  
 57 The State argues that this requirement ensures further litigation 
and indicates the relief does not “terminate the uncertainty or controversy 
giving rise to the proceeding” as required by HRS § 632 -1.  As stated, 
however, the Plaintiffs have a constitutional cause of action for prospective 
injunctive relief that exists independently of HRS § 632 -1.  See supra note 
41.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
implementation.   And this court has prescribed substantially 
more intensive monitoring to ensure specific compliance with 
terms of a broadly phrased order.  See Konno v. Cty . of Hawai ‘i, 
85 
Hawai‘i 61, 79, 937 P.2d 397, 415 (1997) (“We further instruct 
the circuit court to fashion injunctive relief requiring the 
landfill to be transferred from private operation to County 
operation as rapidly as possible but consistent with practical 
and public interest concerns.  The circuit court shall also 
monitor the transition and may impose sanctions for non –
compliance.”); see also Tugaeff v. Tugaeff, 42 Haw. 455, 459 
(Haw. Terr. 1958) (“A court of equity, having once assumed 
jurisdiction of a case, will retain the case to afford complete 
relief.”)  The State’s objections are thus without merit.  Under 
the circumstances of this case, the court did not abuse its 
discretion in ordering these remedies. 58
94   Many other portions of the circuit court’s order, 
however, appear designed to remedy breaches of the State’s trust 
duties that the Plaintiffs did not allege, including some that 
have not and may not occur.  Foremost among these is the circuit 
                     
 58 See, e.g., Sanchez v. McDaniel, 615 F.2d 1023, 1024 (5th Cir. 
1980) (“The district court determined that the 1968 Kleberg County, Texas, 
apportionment plan violated the constitutional principle of one man, one 
vote.  It directed the appellees to submit a proposed reapportionment plan by 
November 13, 1979.”); Bd. of Pub. Instruction of Duval Cty. v. Braxton, 326 
F.2d 616, 619- 21 (5th Cir. 1964) (affirming court order requiring school 
board “to submit to the Court for its consideration a detailed and 
comprehensive plan” for ending school segregation).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
court’s statement that its order to care for the land “ includes, 
but is not necessarily limited to ” the measures specifically 
described therein.  Courts have generally held that injunctions 
cannot be “so vague that they have no reasonably specific 
meaning.”  E. & J. Gallo Winery v. Gallo Cattle Co., 967 F.2d 
1280, 1297 (9th Cir. 1992).  “The aims of Rule 65(d) are to 
minimize the occasion for follow-on proceedings to the issuance 
of an injunction and to protect defendants from being held in 
contempt for failure to follow a directive that was a trap 
because of its ambiguity .”  United States v. Apex Oil Co., 579 
F.3d 734, 739 (7th Cir. 2009).  The circuit court’s order did 
not give the State any notice of what other, unstated measures 
the State was required to comply with, and the order thus must 
be limited to those remedies it expressly described. 
95   Additionally, a number of the remedies ordered by the 
circuit court were unconnected with the State’s breach of its 
duty to monitor and inspect the leased PTA  land.  The court 
ordered the State to develop a nd potentially execute a protocol 
to obtain, or assist in securing,  adequate funding for a 
comprehensive cleanup of the leased PTA  land.  And the circuit 
court ordered the State to initiate rulemaking to establish a 
contested case procedure through which the public could 
challenge the State’s decisions in generally caring for the 
leased PTA land , if such a procedure did not already exist.   Yet ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
96 the Plaintiffs in this case did not allege that the State had 
violated its trust duties by allowing or failing to rectify 
damage to the leased PTA land .  Nor did the Plaintiffs contend 
that the State was constitutionally required to allow the public 
a voice in its general decisions regarding its care for the 
leased PTA land .  Rather, the Plaintiffs argued only that the 
State breached its duty to inspect and monitor the leased PTA  
land.  The State may very well have a public trust obligation to 
rectify damage to the leased PTA land, and the public may have 
some right to be heard on decisions that implicate the State’s 
trust obligations with respect to the leased PTA land.  But 
these are not the claims that were brought in this case, and the 
remedies ordered by the circuit court are thus not “tailored to 
eliminate only the specific harm alleged.”59  Quiksilver, Inc. v. 
Kymsta Corp., 360 F. App ’x 886, 889  (9th Cir. 2009) (quoting E. 
& J. Gallo, 967 F.2d at 1297). 
  The circuit court also ordered a range of injunctive 
relief concerning the State’s duties upon discovering damage or 
noncompliance during its inspections.  The court required the 
State to set forth a binding plan of action that it would 
                     
 59 Because these remedies are not tailored to address the specific 
breaches identified by the circuit court, we need not address the State’s 
contention that the circuit court’s cleanup orders violated sovereign 
immunity or that the order to initiate rulemaking impinged on the 
legislatures exclusive authority.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
97 undertake if it were to discover unexploded ordnance, debris, or 
any other foreign or non- natural item or contaminate connected 
with the lease, as well as a plan to bring any “nonconforming” 
condition likely caused by the United States into pre-lease 
condition.  And the circuit court ordered the State to set forth 
in a binding plan the actions that it would take upon 
specifically discovering a breach of the lease terms by the 
United States.  However, as stated, the  Plaintiffs have not 
alleged any breach of trustee duties related to the State’s 
allowance or failure to rectify actual damage, and the 
Plaintiffs have adamantly maintained throughout these 
proceedings that they are not alleging that the United States 
has actually breached the lease.  Rather, the Plaintiffs argued 
only that the State had a trust duty to “determine for itself 
whether the terms of the lease are being fulfilled.”   
  As the Plaintiffs acknowledged during the hearing on 
their motion for summary judgment, how the State responds if it 
does later determine that the United States is not in compliance 
with the lease may result in a separate breach of the State’s 
trust duties.  The same holds true for any other damage to the 
leased PTA land the State may discover during its monitoring and 
inspections.  Evaluating this hypothetical separate breach would 
require the circuit court to speculate about various questions 
that it cannot currently resolve, including whether the State’s ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
98 monitoring will lead to the discovery of damage or noncompliance 
of lease terms by the United States, whether the United States 
will cure the damage or noncompliance on its own accord, and 
whether any further action by the State will be reasonable given 
the circumstances at that time.  As this court has held, courts 
are not at liberty to grant relief based on “an event that [may] 
occur at some time in the future” because “there is no actual 
controversy in existence at this time.”  Kau v. City & Cty. of 
Honolulu, 104  Hawaii 468, 472, 92 P.3d 477, 481 (2004).  For the 
same reason, the circuit court’s conclusion that the State would 
breach its trust duties if it were to renew the lease without 
first determining that the United States was in compliance with 
the existing lease was impermissibly speculative. 
  Thus, to the extent the circuit court made the 
provisions of its order that were not tailored to address the 
established breach binding upon the State, it strayed beyond its 
valid discretion in fashioning the injunction.  Nevertheless, 
given the circumstances, including the length of time during 
which the State has failed to fulfill its trust duties and the 
State’s claim to having near total discretion in its management 
of the public ceded land at issue in this case, it was not 
inappropriate for the circuit court to provide guidance as to 
how the State may fulfil its trust obligations in the future.  
See Beneficial Hawaii, Inc. v. Kida, 96 Hawai ‘i 289, 3
12, 30 P.3d ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
99 895, 918 (2001) (“Equity jurisprudence is not bound by strict 
rules of law, but can mold its decree ‘to do justice[.] ’” 
(quoting Bank of Hawaii v. Davis Radio Sales & Serv., Inc., 6 
Haw. App. 469, 481, 727 P.2d 419, 427 (1986))).  We therefore 
hold that the portions of the court’s order directing the State 
to undertake specific actions that were not tailored to remedy  
the established breach of the State’s trust duties are 
nonbinding recommendations to be considered by the State going 
forward in its management of the leased PTA lands . 
VI. CONCLUSION 
  Based on the foregoing, the Plaintiffs ’ motions to 
dismiss the appeal respectively filed on July 27, 2018, and 
August 10, 2018, are denied.  The circuit court’s January 14, 
2015 Order Denying Defenda nts’ Motion for Judgment on the 
Pleadings, or in the Alternative, for Summary Judgment, Filed 
October 7, 2014 is affirmed.  The circuit court’s April 24, 2015 
Order Denying Defendants’ Motion to Add United States as a 
Party, or in the Alternative, for Dismissal Filed February 26, 
2015 is also affirmed.  
This court rules as follows regarding 
the circuit court’s April 3, 2018 Findings of Fact, Conclusion 
of Law and Order and the circuit court’s April 24, 2018 Final 
Judgment:  
 Denial of the State’s motion to add the United 
States as a party: Affirmed ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
100  Denial of the State ’s motion to dismiss the case 
for failing to join an indispensable party: Affirmed 
 Denial of the State’s motion for summary 
judgment: Affirmed 
 Finding that the State had breached its trust 
duties: Affirmed 
 Order requiring the State to undertake any 
activities not expressly stated therein: Vacated 
 Order requiring the State to submit a plan that 
must include the following: 
o Regular, periodic on- site monitoring and 
inspection of the leased PTA  land and the United 
States’ compliance with relevant lease 
provisions: Affirmed 
o The making of detailed reports for each such 
monitoring or inspection event: Affirmed 
o A protocol of appropriate action in the 
event the State discovers an actual or apparent 
breach of lease terms, any condition or situation 
adversely affecting the PTA, unexploded ordnance 
or debris, or any other foreign or non-natural 
item or contaminant: Vacated with Instructions to  
Render as a  Non-binding Recommendation  
o A plan or other assurance that any 
nonconforming condition likely caused by the 
United States be reasonably brought to pre- lease 
condition: Vacated with Instructions to Render as 
a Non-binding Recommendation  
o A procedure to provide reasonable 
transparency to the Plaintiffs and the general 
public with respect to the requirements of the 
order: Affirmed 
o If not already in existence, the institution 
of a contested case procedure adopted pursuant to 
HRS Chapter 91 for Plaintiffs or other members of 
the public to contest the State’s decisions in ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
101 managing the PTA: Vacate
d with Instructions to 
Render as a Non-binding Recommendation  
o The steps the State shall take to explore, 
evaluate, make application for, or secure 
adequate funding to conduct a comprehensive 
cleanup of the PTA: Vacated with Instructions to 
Render as a Non-binding Recommendation  
 Order requiring the State to execute the plan 
once it is approved by the circuit court: Affirmed  
This case is accordingly remanded to the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
Ewan C. Rayner 
(Daniel A. Morris, Clyde J. 
Wadsworth, and William J. 
Wynhoff with him on the briefs) 
for appellants  
 
David Kimo Frankel 
(Summer L.H. Sylva with him on
the briefs) 
for appellees  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 