***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________
 
 
KIAʻI WAI O WAI
ʻALEʻALE, an unincorporated community association,
Plaintiff- Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF WATER, COUNTY OF KAUA ʻI, applicant and accepting 
agency of the subject environmental a ssessment, 
Defendant -Appellee.  
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCAP-20-0000487 
 
APPEAL FROM THE ENVIRONMENTAL COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CAAP-20-0000487;  CIV. NO. 5CC181000063) 
 
SEPTEMBER 23, 2022 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, WILSON, AND EDDINS, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
This transfer case addresses the required scope of 
environmental review under the Hawai ‘i Environmenta
l Policy Act Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCAP-20-0000487
23-SEP-2022
09:28 AM
Dkt. 48 OP***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 2 (“HEPA”) and its administrative rules.  The Department of Water, 
County of Kaua‘ i 
(“KDOW”) proposes to install an 18-inch-diameter 
water transmission line in the Līhu ‘e area.  The proposed line 
(“relief line”) will run approximately 9,000 feet in length and 
connect on each end to existing KDOW water lines.  Pursuant to 
HEPA, KDOW prepared 
a draft environmental assessment (“ DEA”) for 
the relief line and made an anticipated finding of no 
significant impact (“ AFONSI”).  After receiving comments on the 
DEA, KDOW published its final environmental assessment (“FEA”)  
and made a finding of no significant impact (“FONSI”) . 
Kia‘i Wai o Wai‘ale‘ale (“Kia‘i Wai”) challenged the FEA in 
the Environmental Court of the Fifth Circuit (“environmental 
court”).1  In part, Kia‘i Wai argued KDOW did not comply with 
HEPA and its administrative rules because the FEA d oes not 
analyze how the relief line would facilitate greater water 
withdrawals and impact streams in Kaua‘i’s southeast ern 
watersheds.  Kia‘ i Wai also argued the relief line was improperly 
“segmented” from certain Līhu‘e development projects and a water 
treatment plant project, and those projects therefore should 
have been analyzed as part of the same “action .”  The 
environmental court granted summary judgment in favor of KDOW as 
to all of Kia‘i Wai’s claims.    
                     
1  The Honorable Kathleen N.  A. Watanabe  presided. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 3   We hold KDOW did not properly  analyze the impact of water 
withdrawals facilitated by the relief line.  The FEA does not 
analyze possible increased water withdrawals, concluding  the 
relief line “will not increase withdrawal of water. ”  However, 
the record--including the FEA itself-- indicates  the relief line 
will carry more water from an upgraded water treatment plant to 
meet the needs of new developments.  
HEPA and its administrative 
rules require analysis of “secondary impacts,” which can occur 
outside the physical footprint of a project.   
Additionally, KDOW may have improperly “segmented ” the 
relief line from planned  development projects and a water 
treatment facility project.  We clarify the “independent 
utility” test and hold that a project may be improperly 
segmented from other projects even if it has some i ndependent 
utility.  We adopt the “double” or “multiple” independent 
utility test and hold the independent utility test requires 
courts to consider whether each of the projects-- not just one of 
the projects--would occur independently.  
Hence, w e conclude KD OW must prepare a new environmental 
assessment (“EA”)  that complies with HEPA and its administrative 
rules.  We also address Kia
‘i Wai’s other claims.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 4 II. Background  
A. Factual background  
 
1. The Līhu ‘e Development Plan and the proposed relief 
line 
 
According to the FEA, in 1994, the Hawai ‘i Land Use
 
Commission approved the Līhu ‘e-Hanamā‘ulu Master Planned 
Community proposal ( “Līhu‘e Development Plan ”).  The Līhu ‘e 
Development Plan covers approximately 515 acres, nearly all the 
acreage available for development in the Līhu ‘e area, and 
includes residential units, commercial and industrial 
properties, and public facilities.  The Līhu‘e Development Plan 
was submitted by Amfac/JMB Hawaii, Inc.  Grove Farm Company, 
Inc. (“Grove Farm”) is the successor in interest to Amfac/JMB 
Hawaii, Inc. and is required to participate in the funding and 
development of water source, storage, and transmission 
facilities for the Līhu ‘e Development Plan. 
In 2009, Kodani & Associates Engineers, LLC prepared a 
“Water Master Plan” to address the water requirements of the 
Līhu‘e
 Development Plan.  The developments in the Līhu‘e 
Development Plan (“Līhu‘e developments”)  will be2 served by 
                     
2  The relief line FEA states the Līhu‘ e developments “will be” served by 
the Līhu‘ e system , suggesting the developments had not been completed as of 
2018.  The record does not indicate the  current status of the Līhu ‘e 
Development Plan.   At oral argument  before this court , counsel was unaware of 
the current status of the Līhu‘e developments or the related Waiahi Surface 
Water Treatment Plant  
described below. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 5 KDOW’s Puhi-Līhu‘ e-Hanamā‘ulu-Kapa‘a Water System (“Līhu ‘e 
system”).  The Līhu ‘e system is a public water system operated by 
KDOW that serves residential, commercial, industrial, public, 
and resort uses.  
The relief line FEA describes how the relief line is 
necessary to meet the water transmission needs of the Līhu‘e 
Development Plan:  
 
The Water Master Plan identified a decrease in system 
pressures and flows as a result of the [Līhu‘e] Development 
Plan unless transmission and distribution improvements were 
provided.  Hydraulic modeling showed that the pressure at 
the Mā‘alo Road and Kūhiō  Highway intersection, 102’ 
elevation, exceeded the 125 [pounds per square inch]  
maximum under average day demands.  
 As a result of the 
excess pressure, elevation, and velocity restrictions, the 
current transmission  line capacity is deemed inadequate .  
The proposed Relief Line is necessary to address this 
capacity limitation . 
 
(Emphasis added and endnote omitted.)  
The FEA explains that the relief line will create more 
capacity to transmit water from the Waiahi Surfa ce Water 
Treatment Plant (“Waiahi SWTP”)3 and certain wells.  The Waiahi 
SWTP is of particular importance to this case.  As the FEA 
explains, “[t]he Waiahi SWTP is a major source of potable water 
for the Līhu
‘e system.  The current  capacity of the Waiahi SWTP 
is 3.0 million gallons per day (MGD) in accordance with various 
governmental regulations and approvals. ”  
 
                     
3  The relief line FEA also refers to the Waiahi SWTP as the “ Grove Farm 
Surface Water Treatment Plant .”  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 6 (continued . . . )  The FEA explains: 
KDOW determined that the [existing water main] is not 
adequate to transmit the current source water without 
exceeding the 6 [feet per second (“ FPS”)] max flow rate 
allowed by Hawai
‘i Water System Standards (“WSS”).  The 
proposed Relief Line is necessary to meet WSS standards (6 
FPS max flow criteria) with current sources on Mā‘alo Road. 
 
. . . .  
 
The proposed Relief Line will improve the overall 
water system transmission capability  by transmitting water 
from Waiahi SWTP, Pukaki well, and Hanamā ‘ulu Wells 3 and 4  
sources, which are the existing sources on Mā‘alo Road, 
directly to the central Līhu‘ e area.  It  will also improve 
the system’s reliability because it creates transmission 
redundancy from the existing sources on Mā‘alo Road to 
central Līhu ‘e which has the greatest demand in the system. 
 
(Emphasis added.)    
 Thus, the FEA indicates the relief line is necessary to 
address a “capacity limitation,” which is “a result of the 
[Līhu‘e] Development Plan,” and also to improve reliability and 
transmission of “current source  water.” 
 Grove Farm will pay one -third of the estimated $3 million  
project cost, and KDOW will pay two-thirds.    
2. Water sources 
   
 As indicated by its name, 
the Waiahi SWTP treats surface 
water rather than groundwater.  The Waiahi SWTP draws water from 
at least two surface water hydrologic u nits: #2040, Wailua, and 
#2042, Hanamā‘ ulu.4     
                     
4  A “hydrologic u nit” is a surface drainage area , a ground water basin , 
or a combination of the two.  Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (“ HRS”) § 174C-3 
(2011).  The Com mission on Water Resource Management (“the CWRM”) manages the ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 7 Water for the Waiahi SWTP  is stored in the Kapaia Reservoir 
before treatment for use in KDOW ’s water system .5  Water reaches 
the Kapaia Reservoir by way of the Hanamā‘ulu Ditch, which 
diverts water from the South Fork Wailua River.  The South Fork 
Wailua River is, in turn, fed by numerous streams.  Some of 
those streams, including Wai‘ale‘ale Stream and Waikoko Stream,  
are diverted by the ‘Ili‘ili‘ula North Wailua Ditch and their 
waters pass through hydropower plants before reaching the Sou th 
Fork Wailua River.  The diversion points of Wai‘ale‘ale Stream 
and Waikoko Stream are located on state Department of Land and 
Natural Resources (“ DLNR”) forest reserve land.   
 A Commission on Water Resource Management (“ CWRM”) document 
explains the importance of Wai‘ale‘ale Stream
, Waikoko Stream, 
and other nearby water resources  to traditional and customary 
Hawaiian practices:  
The region has tremendous historic and cultural importance  
and features prominently in Hawaiian spiritual practices.  
The waters carry the literal and  spiritual nourishment from 
the mountain to the ocean that Hawaiian communities have 
relied upon for generations.  As such, the physical 
presence of stream diversions has a negative effect on 
these practices and  restoration of mauka to makai 
streamflow is critical to protecting  Hawaiian culture.   
                                                                  
( . . . continued)  
State’s water resources based on designated h ydrologic u nits.  See  HRS § 
174C-31(h), (i) (2011).  
 
5  One way to understand the relevant water sources  and diversions is  by 
reference to a schemati c of the water system.  A schematic of diversions in 
the Wailua h ydrologic unit is contained in the record as part of an August 
21, 2018 CWRM staff submittal recommending amended interim instream flow 
standards for Wai‘ ale‘ale Stream and Waikoko Stream (“2 018 CWRM staff 
submittal”).   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 8 3. Draft environmental assessment and comments 
 
KDOW is the “proposing agency”  for the relief line and is 
therefore responsible for preparing an  EA and determining 
whether an environmental impa ct statement (“EIS”) is required.   
See Hawai‘i Admin istrative Rules (“HAR”) § 11-200-9 (replaced 
2019).  The EA for the relief line was prepared by Kodani & 
Associates Engineers, LLC
, the same firm that prepared the Water 
Master Plan for the Līhu‘e Development Plan.6   
KDOW made an A FONSI and published the  DEA for the relief 
line in the Office of Environmental Quality Control ’s (“OEQC’s”) 
Environmental Notice on February 8, 2018.7   
  Kia‘i Wai and its members submitted comments on the DEA 
until March 12, 2018, the day comments were due.  Kia‘i Wai 
submitted two comments as described below.8 
 
                     
6  References to “KDOW” in this opinion may refer to Kodani & Associates 
Engineers, LLC acting on behalf of KDOW.   
 
7  In 2021, the OEQC was renamed the “Environmental Review Program” and 
transferred from the Department of He alth to the Office of Planning and 
Sustainable Development.  See 2021 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 152 , at 567-78.   
 
8  Additionally, on June 30, 2017, before the publication of the February 
8, 2018 DEA, the State of Hawaiʻi Department o f Hawaiian Home Lands (“DHH L”) 
submitted comments in response to KDOW’s early consultation request.  DHHL 
expressed concern about how the relief line project would impact DHHL’ s 
future planned developments in Wailua  and 
potential lo ʻi kalo uses of DHHL 
lands.  DHHL also stated that the relief line 
DEA should discuss impacts to 
surface water resources and cultural uses of those resources.  Thus, DHHL 
recommended an EIS be prepared for the relief line.   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 9 a. Comments by Sustainable Resources Group Int’l, 
Inc. on behalf of Kia‘i Wai 
 
Sustainable Resources Group Int’l, Inc. (“SRGII”) prepared 
comments on behalf of Kia‘i Wai.  
The comments alleged numerous 
shortcomings with the DEA, including a lack of hydraulic 
analysis demonstrating the existing line was inadequate.  SRGII 
also noted: 
[T]here are several statements that mention the relief line 
is sized to provide future transmission needs, without any 
discussion and/or reference to future needs.  This raises 
the question as to whether this proposed relief line is 
part of plans to increase conveyance capacity in the 
pipeline network to meet future water demands.  If in fact 
this proposed project is part of future actions that affect 
water use and increase consumptive uses, then it is logical 
to surmise there will be increased withdraws from source 
surface and/or groundwaters in the future to meet demand.   
As such, pursuant to Chapter 343, the DEA should consider 
cumulative impacts of all actions proposed as part of 
future water uses, and not just assessment of the Relief 
Line.  
 
 KDOW responded by stating , “[T]he proposed Relief Line will 
increase water transmis sion capacity within the existing KDOW 
water system; however, it will not result in any increase of the 
withdrawal of any of the groundwater or surface water sources.”   
b. Comments by Bridget Hammerquist on behalf of Kia
‘i 
Wai and minutes from KDOW board meetings  
 
 
Bridget Hammerquist (“Hammerquist ”), a co-founder of Kia‘i 
Wai, submitted comments on behalf of Kia‘i Wai and attached  
minutes from KDOW’s December 2009 and January 2010 board 
meetings.  According to Hammerquist, the KDOW meeting minutes 
“conf
irm the [relief line] was proposed as part of Grove Farm ’s ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 10 application to KDOW for approval of [a]  Plan to increase 
capacity at the [Waiahi] SWTP.”     
 The December 17, 2009 KDOW board meeting included KDOW 
board members, KDOW staff members, and representa tives from 
Grove Farm.  One agenda item for the meeting was “ Manager’s 
Report No. 10-30 -  Request Board Approval of Grove Farm ’s 
Request to Add Capacity to the Waiahi Treatment Facility .”9  As 
documented in the meeting minutes, the KDOW staff recommended 
the board allow Grove Farm to increase the capacity of the 
Waiahi SWTP.  However, the KDOW staff had “reservations” about 
“available water” and “ transmission capacity needed for the new 
flow rate.
”     
Regarding water availability, the staff noted that the 
Kapaia Reservoir is large but “ it is not known at this time ” 
whether increasing the capacity of the treatment plant would 
affect water availability in the reservoir.  The staff requested 
                     
9  At a March 13, 2019 hearing on one of KDOW’s motions for partial 
summary judgmen t, counsel for KDOW stated, “T he minutes from the 2009  excerpt 
that [Kia‘i Wai’s attorney] attached, again, relates to a  wastewater treatment 
facility that was proposed back  in 2009.”   This was incorrect.  The attached 
minutes referred to “potable water p roduction” from a reservoir.  The FEA 
states that the Waiahi SWTP “is a major source of potable water for the Līhu ‘e  
system.”  
 
At oral argument  before this court, counsel for KDOW stated that the 
meeting minutes were “not proper
ly brought up” before the e nvironmental 
court.  However, if the environmental court did not recognize the relevance 
of the meeting minutes, this  could have been due to KDOW’s representation 
that the minutes referred to a wastewater treatment plant.   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 11 a flow-duration study to measure the water flowing through the 
reservoir, the water taken out, and the reservoir level.  
 Next, the KDOW staff had concerns about transmitting the 
increased quantity of water from the facility once the treatment 
capacity increased
.  Apparently, at the time of the board 
meeting, there was an e xisting agreement between KDOW and Grove 
Farm, which acknowledged  additional transmission capacity could 
be necessary and allocated the costs of transmission upgrades.10  
One of the solutions to the transmission problem discussed at 
the board meeting was t
he “Ehiku bypass line,” another name for 
the proposed relief line.11  The Grove F arm representatives at 
the meeting made clear that the bypass line was necessary for 
the expansion of the Waiahi SWTP:  “[ Mr. Nishimura , a KDOW board 
member] asked the applicant if they do the expansion would it 
                     
10  The agreement stated:  
 
[T]he parties acknowledge that a portion of the BWS water transmission 
system located in the Hanamaulu area in Kuhio Highway (from Kapaia 
Bridge to Wilcox Hospital and running toward Kapaa), which is intended 
to transport portions of the delivered water, may req uire upsizing or 
replacement, due to a physical size constraint, in order to accept the 
quantity of delivered water contemplated by this agreement.  The 
parties have agreed that any mutually approved cost required to upsize 
or replace the described portio n of the transmission system or to 
install an additional transmission line along the cane haul road/Ehiku 
Street route, as each are shown on the map attached as Exhibit 3 (the 
“Pipeline Improvement Map”) shall be borne 66.67% by BWS and 33.33% by 
Grove Farm. 
 
(Emphasis added.)   
 
11  The FEA describes  how the proposed relief line  connects from Mā‘alo Road 
to ‘Ehiku Road via the privately owned Kapaia  Cane Haul Road.  S imilarly, the 
“Ehiku bypass line” described in the board meeting  would travel “along [Grove 
Farm’s
] cane haul road connecting to  Ehiku and Isenberg Roads. ”   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 12 require this line to go in; Mr. Tresler [a Grove Farm 
representative] replied, ‘yes.’”  Mr. Tresler also stated that 
“they need to install this line now ,” and “the bottom line is 
the Ehiku line needs to go in if we expand the plant .”   
 The meeting minutes also indicate
 the Waiahi SWTP expansion 
was essential to the Līhu‘e Development Plan
.  The Water Master 
Plan identified the Waiahi SWTP as the water source for the 
Līhu‘e developments , and KDOW’s approval of the Waiahi SWTP 
expansion would help Grove Farm secure funds from lenders.12   
 Minutes from the 
January 28, 2010 KDOW board meeting 
indicate the KDOW board approved Grove Farm’s request to expand 
                     
12  The minutes include the following exchange:  
 
Mr. D. Fujimoto [a KDOW board member] felt that the applicant did 
have urgency and wondered if they needed a  decision today.  
 
Mr. Costa [a KDO W board member] wondered if they were trying to 
get their Water Master Plan.  Mr. Tresler  replied that it was approved 
and their source was sited as Waiahi.  He said they won’ t shut down if 
they don’ t get approval today; but at the same time, he couldn ’t 
understand why they couldn ’t get an approval today because it is an 
important aspect when you go  to lenders and they ask if you have water, 
but they don’ t have the papers from the  Department of Water approving 
this. 
 
Mr. Costa wondered if this has a bearing on Wailani project.  Mr. 
Tresler replied that it  does and includes Ahukini Makai and Kohealoa, 
and they have to move quickly once it  is closed. 
 
The projects referenced  in this exchange are some of the projects in 
the Līhu‘ e Developme
nt Plan.  The FEA states:  “The Līhu‘ e Development Plan 
described the planned development plans of  the Wailani project (Molokoa, 
Ahukini Mauka, and Ahukini Makai) and the Hanamā‘ulu Triangle project .”  
(Endnote omitted.)  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 13 the Waiahi SWTP.  At the meeting, the parties noted the 
expansion project might not take place until many years later.13   
In light of  these meeting minutes, Kia‘i Wai posed the 
following question in its comments on the relief line DEA:  “Is 
the proposed change part of a larger water capacity delivery 
plan and if so how does the current KDOW DEA comply with [Hawai‘ i 
Revised Statutes (“ HRS”) chapter 343]  and its requirement  that 
environmental assessments not be perform ed on segments of a 
larger development plan? ”   
In response to Kia‘i Wai’s comments and the attached meeting 
minutes, KDOW wrote:  
 The scope of this project is limited to addressing an 
existing hydraulic deficiency in [KDOW’s] existing water 
distribution system.  There is no proposed increase in 
source capacity with this project.  Additionally, . . . 
“The Proposed Relief Line addresses existing inadequate 
transmission facilities and is not a commitment to larger 
actions.”  The proposed project is independent of other 
actions.  The existing capacity of the Waiahi  [SWTP] is not 
being changed [within] the scope of this project, nor will 
this Project modify the capacity of the Waiahi [S WTP].  
 
4. Final environmental assessment 
 
By letter dated March 12, 2018, KDOW transmitted the FEA 
and FONSI to the OEQC for publication in the Environmental 
Notice.   
The FEA includes a section on water resources.  In that 
section, the FEA reviews the water sources that supply the Līhu‘ e 
                     
13  The KDOW board imposed the condition that the expansion was to be 
completed by September 30, 2018.  The record does not reflect whether Grove 
Farm later received an extension.   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 14 system and discusses the interim instream flow standards14 for 
those sources.  The FEA ’s section regarding “potential impacts” 
on water resources states in its entirety:  
The proposed Relief Line will increase water 
transmission capacity within the ex
isting KDOW water 
system; however, it will not result in any increase of the 
withdrawal of any of the groundwater or surface water 
sources.  The maximum rate of flow from the existing 
groundwater wells and Waiahi SWTP will not increase  as a 
result of the installation of the proposed Relief Line.  As 
such, the proposed Relief Line is in compliance with both 
the [Water Resource Protection Plan] and the Interim 
Instream Flow Standard as contained in  HAR § 13-169-45.   
 
The proposed Relief Line has no significant adverse 
impact on the hydrologic resources or characteristics of 
the area and therefore, no mitigation measures are 
proposed.  
 
 The FEA also includes a section on “secondary and 
cumulative impacts”  of the project, which states:  
The Līhu
‘e Development Plan described the planned 
development plans of the Wailani project (Molokoa, Ahukini 
Mauka, and Ahukini Makai) and the Hanamā‘ulu Triangle 
project.  These planned developments account for 
approximately 515 acres of land, or nearly all the acreage 
available  for development in the Līhu‘e area, and include 
single and multifamily residential units, commercial, 
industrial properties, and public facilities (YWCA, parks).  
  
The proposed Relief Line does not increase source and 
storage in the Līhu‘e area; the proposed Relief Line will 
not increase withdrawal of water.   It is necessary to 
address the current system limitations.  [A]ddressing the 
current system limitation, through increasing the size of 
the pipe, may result in the availability of additional 
transmission capacity.  Such additional capacity would be 
available to future development, subject to the Water 
System Standards . . . . The proposed Relief Line addresses 
existing inadequate transmission facilities and does not 
induce, change, or  intensify unplanned  growth or 
development.  
 
(Emphasis added and endnote  omitted. )  
                     
14  See infra note 33. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 15 B. Procedural background 
 
1. Environmental court proceedings  
 
a. Complaints 
 
 On October 17, 2018, Kia‘i
 Wai filed an amended complaint 
against KDOW.15  The amended complaint challenged KDOW’s failure 
to analyze the relief line’s impact on water resources, 
alleging: (1) because the FEA did not analyze increased water 
use facilitated by the relief line, KDOW violated HEPA and its 
administrative rules,  HRS § 195D -4 (2011),16 KDOW’s public trust 
obligations, and article XII, section 7 of the Hawai ‘i 
Constitution;17 and (2) KDOW improperly “segmented” its 
environmental review  by failing to consider impacts of the Līhu‘ e 
Development Plan despite acknowledging the relief line is a 
necessary precedent to the Līhu‘ e development projects.  The 
amended complaint also alleged the following procedural 
violations: (1) KDOW 
could not have adequately considered public 
                     
15  On April 23 , 2018, Kia ‘i Wai filed a “Co mplaint for Declaratory, 
Injunctive, and Other Relief” against KDOW , Grove Farm, the Department of 
Public Works (“DPW”) of the County of Kaua ‘i,  and the State of Hawai ʻi 
Department of Transportation (“DOT”) in the environmental court.  In the 
amended complaint, 
Kia‘i Wai removed Grove Farm, DPW, and the DOT as 
defendants, so that only KDOW remained as a defendant.     
 
16 HRS § 195D-4 is part of the Hawai‘i endangered sp ecies statute . 
 
17  Article XII, section 7 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution states: “ The State 
reaffirms and shall protect all rights, customarily and traditionally 
exercised for subsistence, cultural and religious purposes and possessed by 
ahupua‘a tenants who are descendants of native Hawaiians who inhabited the 
Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778, subject to the right of the State to regulate 
such rights.”  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 16 comments on the DEA because KDOW transmitted its FEA to the OEQC 
the same day comments were due; and (2) KDOW relied on input 
from the CWRM yet did not include the substance of the CWRM’s 
input in the FEA.  Additionally , the amended complaint alleged 
neither KDOW nor Grove Farm holds a water lease or permit from 
the state Board of Land and Natural Resou rces (“BLNR”), and KDOW 
violated HRS § 171- 58 (2011)18 by failing to obtain a lease or 
permit prior to granting rights to use s tate land and water 
resources.  Kia‘ i Wai also sought injunctive relief.19   
b. Motions for summary judgment  
 
KDOW filed motions for  partial summary judgment , which 
together addressed all of Kia‘ i Wa
i’s claims .   
In its motions, KDOW maintained “the Relief Line ’s purpose 
is limited to addressing an existing hydraulic deficiency in the 
County’s existing water distribution system and [] there is no 
proposed increase in source capacity with this project .”  KDOW 
argued that if Kia ‘i Wai’s view
 were adopted , environmental 
review of the water source would be required  “for every repair 
                     
18  HRS chapter 171 addresses the management and disposition of public 
lands.  HRS § 171- 58 states in part, ”Except as provided in this section, the 
right to any mineral or surface or ground water shall not be included in any 
lease, agreement, or sale, this right being reserved to the State ,” and, 
“Disposition of water rights may be made by lease at public auction as 
provided in this chapter or by permit for temporary use on a month -to-month 
basis . . . .” 
 
19  Although not addressed on appeal, KDOW also alleged: (1) the FEA d oes 
not analyze reasonable alternatives to the relief line; and (2) the FEA fails 
to discuss how the proposed relief line will be used  and why the existing 
transmission line is inadequate.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 17 project that the County does .  . . whether it’s a repair or 
. . . just a replacement line . . . .”    
KDOW also contended the relief line was not improperly 
segmented from the Līhu‘e Development Plan
:  
It is undisputed that the Grove Farm Final EA[20] was 
completed, accepted, and approved in 1994.  It is also 
undisputed that the purpose of the Relief Line is to 
provide redundancy and reliability to KDOW ’s water system.  
Given this, the Relief Line has utility separate and 
independent from that Development Plan, and is neither a 
condition precedent to nor dependent  on the Development 
Plan. 
 
Additionally, KDOW asserted it was not required to obtain a 
lease or permit for water pursuant to HRS § 171-58 because HRS § 
54-15 (2012) empowers the KDOW board to “manage, control, and 
operate the waterworks of the county and all property thereof, 
for the purpose of supplying water to the public in the 
county . . . .”   
 In opposition, Kia‘i
 Wai argued that the FEA itself states 
that the relief line is needed because of the Līhu‘e 
developments.  Kia‘i Wai also provided a declara tion from 
hydrologist and water resource engineer Matt Rosener  
(“Rosener”) .  The declaration stated that, in light of plans to 
expand the capacity of the Waiahi SWTP, “it seems highly likely 
that increased water transmission capacity through the proposed 
Relief Line will trigger subsequent development of water 
                     
20  This document is not in the record.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 18 processing capacity. ”  In addition to referencing the KDOW board 
meeting minutes, Rosener cited  a Department of Health inspection 
report for the Waiahi SWTP dated March 16, 2018, which stated 
that the facility “is slated for an upgrade that will increase 
production capacity from 3.00 [ MGD] to 4.77 MGD. ”     
 Rosener also quantified  how the relief line would increase 
transmission capacity:   
If the proposed Relief Line is constructed, the new 
limiting m ain segments will be the 16” pipelines that the 
Relief Line would connect to at either end.  The 
transmission capacity in this scenario would be 5.41 MGD 
which is 178% of the existing capacity of 3.05 MGD. 
  This 
is [] not insignificant.  Future water demand estimates for 
Līhu‘e-Puhi presented in KDOW’s Water Plan 2020 are 4.07 MGD 
and 5.50 MGD for 2020 and 2050, respectively.  
 
Rosener concluded: 
Given the potential for this project to 1.) trigger 
other water system development and 2.) result in  continued 
inter
-basin water transfer from several stream sources, 
including those under current  water appropriation contested 
case status, it seems that potential impacts to the stream 
water sources should have been evaluated by KDOW and their 
consultant in the  environmental review  process. 
 
 Additionally, Kia
‘i Wai argued KDOW was required to obtain a 
lease or permit from the BLNR for its use of water from state 
lands.  Kia‘ i Wai asserted an EIS has never been done for the 
Līhu‘e system, and KDOW would be required to prepare an EIS once 
it applies for a lease or permit from the BLNR.   
By orders entered April 2, 2019, October 3, 2019, and June 
30, 2020, t he environmental court granted summary judgment in 
favor of KDOW as to all the counts in Kia‘i Wai
’s amended ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 19 complaint.  The environmental court entered  final judgment in 
favor of KDOW on June 30, 2020.     
2. Appeal  
 
 Kia‘i Wai filed a notice of appeal to the  Intermediate Court 
of Appeals (“ICA”)  on July 29, 2020.  Kia ‘i Wai asked the ICA to:  
(1) reverse the environmental court’s orders granting summary 
judgment to KDOW;21 (2) declare that KDOW violated HEPA and KDOW 
is required to prepare an EIS and obtain a “lease, license[ ,] or 
revocable permit”  to use state water pur suant to HRS § 171-58; 
and (3) issue a temporary injunction against “extraction and 
transport of water ” from Kauai’s eastern and southeastern  
watersheds until KDOW completes an EIS for its “water transport 
system” and obtains a “lease, license[ ,] or revoc able permit 
. . . .”   
We granted Kia ‘i Wai’s application to transfer the case to 
this court.22  After completion of briefing, oral argument took 
place on April 5, 2022. 
III.  Standards of Review 
A. Summary judgment  
 
Hawai‘i appellate courts review an award of s ummary 
judgment de novo under the same standard applied by the 
                     
21  Kia‘i Wai does not challenge the environmental court’s disposition of 
Counts V (failure to consid
er alternatives) and  VI (failure to include 
certain required information)  in the amended complaint.   
 
22 Hui Ho‘opulapula Nā  Wai o Puna and the Sierra Club (collectively, 
“amici”) were also granted 
leave to appear and file an amicus brief.   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 20   circuit court. . . . Summary judgment is appropriate if the 
pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and 
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, 
show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact 
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a 
matter of law. . . . The moving party bears the burden of 
demonstrating that there is no genuine issue as to any 
material fact with respect to the essential ele ments of the 
claim or defense and must prove that the moving party is 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  This court must 
review the evidence and inferences in the light most 
favorable to the non -moving party.  
 
In cases of public importance, a circu it court should 
grant a motion for summary judgment sparingly, and never on 
limited and indefinite factual foundations.  
 
Kilakila 
‘O Haleakala v. University of Hawai‘i (“Kilakila ”), 138 
Hawai‘i 364, 375, 382 P.3d 176, 187 (2016) (cleaned up). 
B. Agency determinations under HEPA 
 
For agency determinations under HEPA, the appropriate 
standard of review depends on the specific question under 
consideration.  Generally, a court reviews agency 
determinations that involve factual questions under a 
clearly erroneou s standard.  An agency’s conclusion of law 
that presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed 
under the clearly erroneous standard because the conclusion 
is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the 
particular case.  However, whether or not an agency has 
followed proper procedures or considered the appropriate 
factors in making its determination is a question of law, 
and will be reviewed de novo.  
 
Kilakila, 138 Hawai ‘i at 375
–76, 382 P.3d at 187 –88 (cleaned up). 
A finding of fact or a mixed de termination of law and fact 
is clearly erroneous when  
(1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support the 
finding or determination, or (2) despite substantial 
evidence to support the finding or determination, the 
appellate court is left with the def inite and firm 
conviction that a mistake has been made.  We have defined 
“substantial evidence” as credible evidence which is of 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person 
of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 21 In re Water Use Permi t Applications (“Waiāhole I”), 94 Hawai‘i 
97, 119, 9 P.3d 409, 431 (2000) (cleaned up). 
 This court “must take a ‘close look’ at agency decisions 
that involve the public trust.”  Kauai Springs, Inc. v. Plan. 
Comm’n of Kaua‘ i, 133 Hawai‘i 141, 165, 324 P.3d 951, 975 (2014) 
(citation omitted) .  “As in other cases, agency decisions 
affecting public trust resources carry a presumption of 
validity.”  133 Hawai ‘i at 164, 324 P.3d at 974 (citation and 
emphasis omitted). 
IV. Discussion 
A. Secondary impacts  
 
The purpose of HEPA is to “ ensure that environmental 
concerns are given appropriate consideration in decision making” 
and to “alert decision makers to significant environmental 
effects which may result from the implementation of certain 
actions.”  HRS § 343
-1 (2010).  To facilitate informed decision -
making, an EA must be prepared “at the earliest practicable time 
to determine whether an environmental impact statement shall be 
required . . . .”  HRS § 343 -5(b) (2010 & Supp. 20 12).  “Upon 
completion of the final environmental assessment, if the 
reviewing agency determines that the proposed action is likely 
to cause a significant impact on the environment, an 
environmental impact statement must be prepared.  Alternatively, 
if the reviewing agency determines that the proposed action will ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 22 not result in a significant environmental impact, then the 
agency must issue and publish a finding of no significant impact 
. . . .”  Kilakila, 138 Hawai ‘i at 370
-71, 382 P.3d at 182-83  
(citation omitted). 
“In determining whether an action may have a signi ficant 
effect on the environment, the agency shall consider every phase  
of a proposed action, the expected consequences, both primary 
and secondary, and the cumulative as well as the short-term and 
long-term effects of the action.”  HAR § 11–200–12(b) (rep laced 
2019)23 (emphasis added).  “Secondary impacts ” or “secondary 
effects” are “effects which are caused by the action and are 
later in time or farther removed in distance, but are still 
reasonably foreseeable ,” including “ growth inducing effects and 
other effects related to induced changes in the pattern of land 
use, population density or growth rate, and related effects on 
air and water and other natural systems, including ecosystems .”  
HAR § 11-200- 2 (replaced 2019).  
 Thus, if increased water withdrawals  are a “reasonably 
foreseeable” result of the proposed relief line , then they  
should be analyzed as secondary impacts.   But, in this case, 
                     
23  HEPA’s administrative rules, HAR title 11, chapter 200, were repealed 
and replaced by HAR title 11 , chapter 200.1, effective August 9, 2019.  See 
2019 HI REG TEXT 490491 (Aug. 31, 2019).   
 
The changes to HEPA’s administrative rules  do not substantially alter 
the provisions at issue in this case, so the court’s holdings here should 
also apply to title 11 chapter 200.1. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 23 KDOW determined the relief line “will not increase withdrawal of 
water.”   
We conclude KDOW failed  to properly consid er increased 
water withdrawals as a secondary impact, for two reasons.  
First, to the extent the FEA  finds that water withdrawals will 
not increase, this finding is clearly erroneous.  Second, KDO W 
misapplied HEPA by limiting its review to the physical foo tprint 
of the project and failing to consider secondary impacts beyond 
the project site.      
1. KDOW clearly erred in finding water withdrawals will 
not increase 
 
KDOW contends it properly  analyzed  impacts on water sources 
because the relief line will not result in increased water 
withdrawals.  In the sections  on “secondary impacts ” and 
“potential impacts ,” the FEA states that “ the proposed Relief 
Line will not increase withdrawal of water ” and “will not result 
in any increase of the withdrawal of any of the groundwater or 
surface water sources. ”  KDOW told the environmental court that 
“the Relief Line’ s purpose is limited to addressing an existing 
hydraulic deficiency in the County ’s existing water  distribution 
system .  . . .”  At oral argument, KDOW’s cou nsel told this 
court: “[T]he [] amount of water that [is] going through now and 
the [] amount of water that will be going through in the future 
will be the same; it’s just that you now have a different pipe ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 24 system to deliver that water more efficiently;  so it’s the speed 
of the water going through the pipes, not necessarily the amount 
of water going through the pipes. ”24   
However, to the extent the FEA makes a factual finding that 
no additional water will be transported by the relief line, this 
finding is clearly erroneous.   
Although the FEA does indicate the relief line will help 
achieve compliance with water “velocity” requirements, the FEA 
provides no evidence that the relief line will not increase 
water withdrawals.  For instance, the FEA does not include any 
water demand projections indicating Līhu ‘e water use 
will remain 
static even though the relief line increases the transmission 
system capacity.  Nor does the FEA indicate the water supply to 
the Līhu‘e system is somehow constrained (perhaps due to t he 
capacity of the Kapaia Reservoir or the water  sources).  Nor 
does the FEA provide any other explanation for why water 
withdrawals will not increase (for instance, even if the relief 
line facilitated greater water use, perhaps the water would be 
reallocated from other areas so water withdrawals would not 
increase overall). 
To the contrary, the FEA on its face indicates the relief 
line will facilitate increased water use
.  According to the FEA, 
                     
24  KDOW’s counsel also stated: “We’re not going to draw more water or less 
water through the pipe; all this basically does is improve the hydraulic 
efficiency-- . . . .”  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 25 the relief line will not only affect water “velocity ” but will  
also “increase water transmission capacity within the existing 
KDOW water system . . . .”25  (Emphasis added.)  The FEA also 
explicitly states that the relief line is “ sized to provide for 
future transmission needs. ”  
Further, the FEA indicates the additio nal capacity will be 
put to use: the FEA explains that “[t]he Water Master Plan 
identified a decrease in system pressures and flows as a result 
of the [Līhu‘ e] Development Plan unless transmission and 
distribution improvements were provided. . . . The proposed 
Relief Line is necessary to address this capacity limitation. ”  
(Emphasis added.)  In plain terms, the FEA says  a bigger pipe is 
needed to transmit more water and meet the needs of over 500 
acres of planned 
development.   
                     
25  The “velocity” of the water is likely  directly related to the amount of 
water transm itted by the pipe.  Although the record does not include  details 
about what “velocity” means in th is context, in general the velocity of water 
in a pipe (feet per second) is a function of the flow rate  (gallons per 
minute, or million gallons per day) and t he inverse of the pipe diameter 
squared.  See Washington State University, Pipe Water Velocity and Minimum 
Pipe Diameter, http://irrigation.wsu.edu/Content/Calculators/General/Pipe -
Velocity.php, also available at https://perma.cc/AZ95 -9RGQ. 
 
Thus, by “incr easing the size of the pipe ,” the relief line coul d 
seemingly transmit more gallons per minute, or million gallons per day,  
without exceeding a given velocity, such as the 6 FPS maximum velocity under 
the Water System Standards.   
 ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 26 Apart from the FEA, Kia‘i Wai provides additional evidence 
that the relief line will lead to increased water use.26  KDOW 
board minutes show the KDOW board approved an expansion of the 
Waiahi SWTP, and a Department of Health report from 2018  
confirmed the Waiahi SWTP “is slated for an upgrade that will 
increase production capacity from 3.00 [ MGD] to 4.77 MGD 
. . . .”  Additionally, hydrologist and water resource engineer 
Rosener explained the relief line would increase the 
transmission capacity of the water system by 78 percent.  
Rosener also noted that, according to KDOW ’s own planning 
documents, 
Līhu‘e water demand will increase from an estimated 
4.07 MGD in 2020 to 5.50 MGD in 2050.   
In sum, the record demonstrates the relief line will 
facilitate increased water use and increased  withdrawals from 
surface or groundwater sources, or both.  There is increasing 
demand (over 500 acres of planned development).  There is 
increasing supply to meet th at demand (capacity upgrades to the 
Waiahi SWTP).  And the purpose of the relief line is to connect  
a greater supply of water to meet the greater demand. 
Contrary to KDOW ’s arguments, the possibility of increased 
water use is not too speculative.  “Secondary impact s” are 
“effects which are caused by the action and are later in time or 
                     
26  As discussed below, to demonstrate issues with the environmental review 
process, plaintiffs may introduce evidence that was not part of the 
environmental review process . ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 27 farther removed in distance, but are still reasonably 
foreseeable.”  HAR § 11- 200-2.  The record before us 
sufficiently demonstrates that increased water withdrawals are a 
“reasonably foreseeable” result of the relief line .27   
2. KDOW misapplied HEPA’S requirement to  analyze 
secondary impacts  
 
As discussed above, the FEA does not provide  a candid 
assessment of how the relief line could facilitate increased 
water use by transporting water from the upgraded Waiahi SWTP to 
planned developments
.  Thus, KDOW’s conclusion that the relief 
line “will not result in any increase of the withdrawal of any 
of the groundwater or surface water sources ” is not a factual 
statement about the likely impact of the relief line.  Rather, 
                     
27  Although Kia‘ i Wai  focuses on Wai‘ale‘al e Stream and Waikoko Stream, the 
record suggests increased water use facilitated by the relief line may not 
necessitate increased  diversion of Wai‘a le‘ale Stream and will not necessitate 
increased diversion
 of Waikoko Stream.  As discussed above, t he water for the 
Kapaia Reservoir and Waiahi SWTP 
is diverted from the  South Fork Wailua River 
and reaches the reservoir through the Hanamā‘ulu Ditch.  Water diverted from 
Wai‘ale‘ale Stream and Waikoko Stream contributes to the flow of the South 
Fork Wailua River after passing through hydroelectric plants.  However, 
according to the 2018 CWRM staff submittal,  the diversion of Wai‘ale‘ale 
Stream only represents a small portion of 
the South Fork Wailua River flow.  
Thus, even if more water is diverted from the South Fork Wailua River through 
the Hanamā ‘ulu Ditch, this may not necessitate greater or continued  diversion 
of Wai‘ale‘ale Stream.  Additionally, increased water use from the Waiahi SWTP 
would appear to not require greater or continued  diversion of Waikoko Stream  
because the waters of Waikoko Stream would reach the South Fork Wailua River 
regardless of whether they are diverted for use in the hydroelectric plants.   
In sum, although not completely clear, the record suggests that the portion 
of the South Fork Wailua River below the Hanamā‘ulu Ditch is the area that 
would be impacted by increased water use  from the Waiahi SWTP.  The record 
does not indicate how or whether greater diversion of the South Fork Wailua 
River would impact tributary streams.  In any case, the FEA does not describe 
the impacts to the water resources that would be affected .   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 28 this conclusion is merely a statement that the relief line 
project itself does not entail any changes to water sources.28 
KDOW’s narrow scope of environmental review does not 
comport with HEPA’s requirement to consider secondary impacts.  
Critically, KDOW fails to differentiate between “the scope of 
the proposed action and scope of the [H]EPA review .”  Cf. Border 
Power Plant Working Grp. v. Dep’t of Energy , 260 F. Supp. 2d 
997, 1014 (S.D. Cal. 2003).  KDOW is correct t hat “[t]he 
existing capacity of the Waiahi [SWTP] is not being changed 
[within] the scope of this project  . . . .”  (Emphasis added.)  
However, for the purpose of HEPA r eview, “in addition to the 
direct site of impact the agency must also consider other 
impacts that are incident to and a consequence of the primary 
impact.”  Sierra Club v. State Dep’t of Transp.  (“Superferry 
I”), 115 Hawai‘ i
 299, 341, 167 P.3d 292,  334 (2007) (cleaned up).   
Indeed, the definition of “secondary impacts” explicitly 
includes “e ffects which are caused by the action and are later 
in time or farther removed in distance .  . . .”  HAR § 11- 200-2 
(emphasis added). 
We previously addressed secondary impacts in Superferry I.  
See 115 Hawai‘ i at 338, 167 P.3d at 331.  That case concerned 
                     
28  The FEA contains several carefully worded sentences to this effect.  
For instance, the FEA states , “The maximum rate of flow from the existing 
groundwater wells and Waiahi SWTP will not inc rease as a result of the 
installation of the proposed Relief Line ,” and, “The proposed Relief Line 
does not increase source and storage in the Līhu‘e area . . . .”   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 29 certain harbor improvements that were necessary for a proposed 
inter-island ferry service.29  115 Hawai‘i at 305, 167 P.3d at 
298.  We determined the state Department of Transportation 
(“DOT”) failed to properly consider secondary impac ts when it 
“studiously restrict[ed] its consideration of environmental 
impact to the physical harbor improvements themselves”  and 
ignored the impacts from the actual operation of the ferry 
service.  115 Hawai‘i at 342, 167 P.3d at 335.  W e concluded DOT 
should have considered the harbor improvements ’ “facilitation” 
of the ferry project as a secondary impact.30  Id. 
Superferry  I is analogous to this case.  The relief line 
could similarly “ facilitate ” additional water use, and the FEA 
should have analyzed impacts to water resources  as secondary 
impacts.  See id.  Just as the operation of the ferry service 
was a reasonably foreseeable result of the harbor upgrades in 
Superferry I, increased withdrawal and use of water is a 
                     
29  Superferry I concerned an “exemption determination”: “ DOT’s 
determination that the improvements to Kahului Harbor to accommodate the 
Superferry project [were]  exempt from the requirements of HEPA, thus 
obviating the need for an EA .”  115 Hawai‘ i at 306, 167 P.3d  at 299.  However, 
Superferry I is applicable to the FEA in this case even though it concerned a 
different aspect of HEPA analysis.  The court in Superferry I cited to the 
same HAR provisions at issue in this case and relied on a case about an FEA.  
115 Hawai‘ i at 339 n.49, 341, 167 P.3d at 332 n.49, 334. 
 
30  Along the same lines, in Kilakila, we held that a particular telescope 
project was not a secondary impact of the University of Hawai ‘i’s Observato ry 
Site Management Plan.  
See 138 Hawai‘ i at 380- 81, 382 P.3d at 192 -93.  We 
noted that the management plan  imposed restrictions that would apply to the 
telescope project; because the management plan did not “facilitate, or make 
easier,” the telescope proj ect, the telescope project was not a secondary 
impact of the management plan.  Id. (footnote omitted).   
 ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 30 reasonably foreseeable result of the tr ansmission upgrade here.  
See id.  And, l ike in Superferry  I, KDOW cannot limit the scope 
of its environmental analysis to the physical footprint of the 
project.  See id. 
In fact, one of our earliest HEPA cases supports the 
sensible proposition that water transmission infrastructure 
implicates water resources.  Molokai Homesteaders concerned a 
private corporation’s request to “rent space” in a public water 
system to transport water from its well in central Moloka ‘i to a 
resort complex it planned to develop at the  island’s west end.  
Molokai Homesteaders Co-op. Ass ’n v. Cobb, 63 Haw. 453, 456 –57, 
629 P.2d 1134, 1138  (1981).  The court determined the relevant 
agency approval occurred before HEPA ’s effective date but noted 
an EIS would likely have been required had HEPA b een in effect:  
We entertain no doubt that the pertinent statutory 
provisions would mandate the preparation of an EIS if 
Kaluakoi’ s application for “rental of space” in the 
[Moloka‘ i Irrigation] System’ s facilities were presented to 
the Board now  [that HEPA is effective].  A proposal whose 
approval would facilitate the development of a large resort 
complex in a previously unpopulated area through the use of 
the Molokai Irrigation System’s pipeline , allow water to be 
transported  from its source to another area, and cause a 
rise in the salinity of the system ’s irrigation water would 
be within the purview of activities covered by Chapter 343.  
The use of a government pipeline, the implicit commitment 
of prime natural resources  to a particular purpose,  perhaps 
irrevocably, and the substantial social and economic 
consequences of the governmental approval of the proposal 
would dictate the preparation of an EIS.  
 
63 Haw. at 466 –67, 629 P.2d at  1144 (emphasis added  and footnote 
omitted).  Like in Molokai Homesteaders, “the use of the ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 31 transmission facilities ” in this case clearly implicates water 
resources.  See 63 Haw. at  455, 629 P.2d at  1137.     
3. Independent utility 
 
The fact that the relief line addresses existing capacity 
constraints and provides reliability benefits does not excuse 
KDOW from considering the impacts associated with increased 
water withdrawals. 
Barnes v. U.S. Depar tment of Transportation  is instructive.  
See 655 F.3d 1124 (9th Cir. 2011).  In Barnes , the Ninth Circuit 
invalidated the FEA for a new runway at an airport because the 
FEA did not consider the impacts of increased airplane traffic 
as an indirect effect of the proposed runway.31  655 F.3d at 
1136-39.  The court rejected the defendant s’ argument that “an 
EA need not account for the growth -inducing effects of a project 
designed to alleviate current congestion.”  655 F.3d at 1138.  
The court concluded: “ [E]ven if the stated purpose of the 
project is to increase safety and efficiency, the agencies must 
analyze the impacts of the increased demand attributable to the 
                     
31  Hawai‘i courts consider case law on HEPA’s federal counterpart, the 
National Environmental Policy Act (“NEPA”).  See Superferry I , 115 Hawai‘i at 
306, 167 P.3d at 299.  NEPA law has historically referred to “indirect” 
effects, which are equivalent to secondary  impacts under HEPA.  See 40 C.F.R. 
§ 1508.8(b) ( effective 1978 to 2020 and reinstated 2022 as 40 C.F.R. § 
1508.1(g)(2)) (“[Effects include:] Indirect effects, which are caused by the 
action and are later in time or farther removed in distance, but are still 
reasonably foreseeable.  Indirect effects may include growth inducing effects 
and other effects related to induced changes in the pattern of land use, 
population density or growth rate, and related effects on air and water and 
other natural systems, including ecosystems. ”).  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 32 additional runway as growth- inducing effects . . . .”  655 F.3d 
at 1139. 
Here, KDOW argues the relief line is needed to address 
existing transmission issues.  However, the FEA states the 
relief line is also “sized to provide for futur e transmission 
needs.”  Even if a “stated purpose ” of the relief line is to 
address existing needs, KDOW tacked on additional transmission 
capacity that  goes beyond existing  needs.  See id.  The relief 
line upgrade here is akin to replacing a two -lane road with a 
four-lane highway:  even if the old road needed to be fixed 
anyway, that does not change the fact that the new highway adds 
additional capacity
, nor does it alleviate the environmental 
impacts of the upgrade.   
Additionally, this case is distinguishable  from Kilakila , 
in which we determined a particular telescope project was not a 
secondary impact of 
the University of Hawai ‘i’s Obs
ervatory Site 
Management Plan.  See 138 Hawai‘i at 380-81, 382  P.3d at 192-93.  
In that case, we noted the management plan had “independent 
utility by providing guidelines and monitoring strategies that 
universally apply to all ongoing and future actions within the 
Observatory Site . . . .”  Id.  The management plan was not 
specifically designed to facilitate the telescope project, so it 
was useful “regardless of whether the Telescope Project [was ] 
built.”  Id.   In contrast, the relief line here is specifically ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 33 “sized to provide for future transmission needs. ”  The relief 
line adds additional capacity,  a purpose of which is to transmit 
greater quantities of water.  Thus, although the relief line has 
some utility independent of increased water use, part of its 
purpose and function is dependent on increased water use. 
   
4. Past or future environmental analysis   
 
The existence of past environmental review or the 
possibility of future analysis  also does not excuse KDOW’s 
obligation to consider water withdrawals as a secondary impact.    
First, the FEA does not prop erly incorporate any previous 
environmental review documents.  HEPA’s administrative rules 
provided for “consideration of previous determinations and 
accepted statements” in HAR § 11-200-13 (replaced 2019).  A 
previous determination may be incorporated by reference if it 
“has logical relevancy and bearing to the action be ing 
considered” and only after “considerable pre -examination and 
comparison . . . .”  HAR § 11-200-13.  In this case, the FEA for 
the relief line merely mentions the existence of the Līhu‘e 
Development Plan and the related Water Master Plan.  Even if an 
FEA was completed for the Līhu‘e Development Plan32 the relief 
line FEA does not incorporate any previous assessment of water 
withdrawal impacts.  Thus, if past planning documents analyzed 
                     
32  KDOW asserts that a “ Grove Farm FEA” was completed for the “Grove Farm 
Development.”  However, no such document is in the record. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 34 water withdrawals resulting from the relief line or a similar 
project, KDOW might have met its HEPA obligations by relying in 
part on those documents, provided their analysis was still 
pertinent to current circumstances; however, it did not do so 
here. 
Second, the fact that increased surface water withdrawals 
would be subject to regulatory approval does not excuse KDOW’s  
failure to consider water use as a secondary impact .  The FEA 
discusses the interim instream flow standards33 for the streams 
that supply the Līhu ‘e water system, stating: “The maximum rate 
of flow from the existing groundwater wells and Waiahi SWTP will 
not increase as a result of the installation of the proposed 
Relief Line.  As such, the proposed Relief Line is in compliance 
with both the [Water Resource Protection Plan] and the Interim 
Instream Flow Standard as contained in HAR § 13 -169-45.”   
                     
33  “Instream flow standard”  refers to “a quantity or flow of water or 
depth of water which is required to be present at a specific location in a 
stream system at certain specified times of the year to protect aquatic life, 
wildlife, recreationa l, aesthetic, scenic, and other beneficial instream 
uses.”  HAR § 13- 169-2.  An “interim instream flow standard” is “a temporary 
instream flow standard of immediate applicability, adopted by the [CWRM] 
without the necessity of a public hearing, and termin ating upon the 
establishment of an instream flow standard. ”  HAR § 13- 169-2.  “Instream flow 
standards are an integral part of the regulatory scheme established by the 
[State Water] Code . . . [and] serve as the primary mechanism by which the 
[CWRM] is to d ischarge its duty to protect and promote the entire range of 
public trust purposes dependent upon instream flows.”  Waiāhole I , 94 Hawai‘ i 
at 147–48, 9 P.3d at 459–60 (cleaned up).   
 
 The interim instream flow standards for Kaua‘i essentially authorized 
all then- existing diversions around the time the State Water Code was 
adopted.  See HAR § 13 -169-45.  Following the initial registration of stream 
diversions, any new or expanded stream diversion has  required an a mendment to 
the interim instream flow stand ard.  See HAR §§ 13-169-45, 13-168-31.   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 35 Even if increased surface water withdrawals would be 
subject to the interim instream flow standards set by the CWRM, 
KDOW still had to analyz e water wi thdrawals as a secondary 
impact.  This court has explained : “If the fact that other laws 
and rules that facially appear to bear upon the environmental 
effects of an activity would exclude the activity from HEPA ’s 
purview, then this would frustrate HEPA’s p urpose of requiring 
agencies to appropriately consider environmental concerns in 
their decision-making process.”  Umberger v. DLNR, 140 Hawai‘i 
500, 518, 403 P.3d 277, 295 (2017).  We have previously 
emphasized the “importance of early environmental assessment” 
and HEPA’s
 “express mandate that environmental review be 
undertaken at the ‘earliest practicable time. ’”  See Sierra Club 
v. Off. of Plan., 109 Hawai‘i 411, 418, 126 P.3d 1098, 1105 
(2006) (cleaned up).    
Hence, even if increas ed water withdrawals w ould be subject 
to future regulatory approval, KDOW still had  to consider 
secondary impacts or properly incorporate previous analysis of 
those impacts.  
5. Procedure  on remand  
 
Finally, we clarify the procedure to be followed on remand.   
KDOW may demonstrate in a new EA that increased water 
withdrawals are not a reasonably foreseeable result of the 
relief line.  From the record currently before us , there can be ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 36 no dispute that KDOW failed to take the required “hard look” at 
the possibility of increased water usage.  Superferry I, 115 
Hawai‘i at 342, 167 P.3d at  335 (quoting Price v. Obayashi Hawaii 
Corp., 81 Hawai‘ i 171, 182  n.12, 914 P.2d 1364, 1375 n.12 
(1996)).  However, KDOW may be able to explain in a revised EA 
why the relief line will likely not facilitate increased water 
withdrawals. 
If KDOW can demonstrate the relief line will likely not 
increase water withdrawals, it  must do so in a revised EA.  That 
is, KDOW cannot merely present additional evidence to the 
environmental court on remand. 
We have explained that “in a declaratory action brought to 
challenge an agency’s determination that an environmental impact 
statement is not required, a reviewing court may consider other 
evidence in addition to the agency record to determine whether 
the agency decision -maker adequately considered the potential 
environmental effects and alternatives for a particular project 
or action.”  Kilakila, 138 Hawai‘ i at 378, 382 P.3d at 190.
    
The reason for this rule is that    
[t]o limit the judicial inquiry regarding the completeness 
of the agency record to that record would, in some 
circumstances, make judicial review meaningless and 
eviscerate the very purposes of NEPA [or HEPA].  The 
omission of technical scientific information is often not 
obvious from the record itself, and a court may therefore 
need a plaintiff’s  aid in calling such omissions to its 
attention.  
 ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 37 138 Hawai ʻi at 378, 382 P.3d at 190 (emphasis added) (quoting 
Sierra Club v. Peterson, 185 F.3d 349, 370 (5th Cir. 1999)). 
However, while plaintiffs  may present extra- record evidence 
to identify issues with the environmental review process, an 
agency cannot rely on extra-record evidence as a substitute for 
analysis the  agency should have included in an environmental 
review document.  The rule allowing extra- record evidence in 
HEPA cases “is not a two-way street .”  See Citizen Advocs. for 
Responsible Expansion, Inc. (I -Care) v. Dole, 770 F.2d 423, 438 
n.18 (5th Cir. 1985) (discussing NEPA).  “[I] f the agency knew 
that it could always ‘supplement ’ or ‘create’ the administrative 
record in the reviewing court, ” then the agency “ would have 
little incentive to prepare an adequate and reviewable 
administrative record, despite the clear mandate of NEPA [ and 
HEPA] that the agency prepare the required record before 
deciding upon a particular course of conduct. ”  Id.  Further, 
HEPA, like NEPA, “ expressly places the burden of compiling 
information on the agency so that the public and interested 
government departments can conveniently monitor and criticize 
the agency’s action. ”  Grazing Fields Farm v. Goldschmidt, 626 
F.2d 1068, 1073 (1st Cir. 1980).  
Additionally, it would frustrate public pa rticipation in 
the HEPA process if agencies could remedy deficient HEPA 
analysis with evidence submitted to a court after- the-fact.  See  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 38 Dubois v. U.S. Dep’t of Agric. , 102 F.3d 1273, 1289 (1st Cir. 
1996) (“[P]ost hoc rationalizations are inherently suspect, and 
in any event are no substitute for the agency’s following 
statutorily mandated [NEPA] procedures.”).34  While it may 
sometimes be appropriate for agencies to submit extra- record 
evidence--for example, to provide context, explain their 
procedures, or rebut the plaintiffs ’ evidence --courts must not 
allow that evidence to pass as explanations or justifications 
that should have been in the environmental review documents in 
the first place.   
B. Cumulative impacts 
 
 The FEA also does not  properly analyze cumulative impacts.  
The FEA only considers cumulative impacts at the project site, 
not cumulative impacts on water resources.     
“‘Cumulative impact ’ means the impact on the environment 
which results from the incremental impact of the action when 
added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future 
actions regardless of what agency or person undertakes such 
                     
34  See also Grazing Fields Farm, 626 F.2d at  1072 (holding that 
information “contained in the administrative record, but not incorporated in 
any way into an EIS, [cannot] bring into compliance with NEPA an EIS that by 
itself is inadequate”); I-291 Why? Ass’ n v. Burns, 517 F.2d 1077, 1081 (2d 
Cir. 1975) (holding subsequent studies could not cure deficient EIS “ because 
they were not circulated for review and comment in accordance with procedures 
established to comply w ith NEPA”); Nat. Res. Def. Council, Inc. v. Morton, 
458 F.2d 827, 836 (D.C. Cir. 1972)  (“The subject of environmental impact is 
too important to relegate either to implication or to subsequent  
justification by counsel.  The [EIS] must set forth the materia l contemplated 
by Congress in form suitable for the enlightenment of the others concerned. ” 
(footnote omitted)). ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 39 other actions.  Cumulative impacts can result from individually 
minor but collectively significant actions taking place over a 
period of time.”  H AR § 11-200-2.  
We have previously provided the following illustration  of 
cumulative impacts:  “ [T]he addition of a small amount of 
sediment to a creek may have only a limited impact on salmon 
survival, or perhaps no impact at all.  But the addition of a 
small amount here, a small amount there, and still more at 
another point could add up to something with a much greater 
impact, until there comes a point where even a marginal increase 
will mean that no salmon survive.”  Kilakila , 138 Hawai ‘i at 381 
n.35, 382 P.3d at 193  n.35 (quoting Klamath–Siskiyou Wildlands 
Ctr. v. Bureau of Land Mgmt., 387 F.3d 989, 994 (9th Cir. 
2004)). 
A Ninth Circuit case provides an example of  how to analyze 
cumulative impacts in a water diversion case.35  See Ctr. for 
Env’t L. & Pol ’y v. U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, 655 F.3d 1000, 
1008 (9th Cir. 2011).  That case concerned water withdrawals 
from Lake Roosevelt, an impoundment of the Columbia River, which 
was already subject to numerous 
withdrawals at the time.  655 
F.3d at 1003 .  The court held the EA for the additional water 
                     
35  “NEPA provides a nearly identical definition of ‘cumulative impacts’ as 
HEPA does.”  Kilakila, 138 Hawai‘ i at 381 n.34, 382 P.3d at 193 n.34 (citing 
40 C.F.R. § 1508.7 (effective 1978 to 2020 and substantially reincorporated 
into 40 C.F.R. § 1508.1(g) effective 2022)) . ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 40 withdrawals properly analyzed cumulative impacts because it 
examined “both the existing condition of the area and what the 
effects of the project would be. ”  655 F.3d at 1008 (cleaned 
up).  For instance, the discussion of landslide impacts noted 
how “
concern for landslides [was]  minor for lake levels above 
1,260 feet, moderate for lake levels between 1,240 and 1,260 
feet, and major for lake levels below 1,240 feet. ”  Id.  The EA 
then concluded “landslide potential would not change as a result 
of the proposed action, in large part because the additional 
drawdown during the period when the lake is less than 1,240 feet 
would be minimal (less than 1 inch).”   Id. (cleaned up).  In 
other words, the impact of the wit hdrawals depended on the level 
of the lake, which was affected by other  withdrawals.36  
 Under  HEPA’s cumulative impact rules , the relief line FEA 
should discuss additional water withdrawals facilitated by the 
relief line in relation to existing and anticip ated withdrawals.  
For instance, diverting 1 MGD from a 10  MGD stream flow with no 
existing or anticipated diversions is different than diverting 
that same amount if the stream already had diversions 
of 7 MGD 
and additional diversions of  2 MGD were planned for a separate 
                     
36  See also Thomas v. Peterson, 753 F.2d 754, 760 (9th Cir. 1985)  (holding 
environmental analysis of logging road must consider cumulative impacts of 
timber sales); Delaware Riverkeeper Network v. FERC, 753 F.3d 1304, 1319 -20 
(D.C. Cir. 2014) (holding upgrade to segment of natural gas pipeline must 
consider cumulative impacts of upgrades to other parts of the pipeline) .  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 41 future project; the same incremental withdrawal leads to a dry 
streambed in the latter scenario. 
C. Segmentation  
 
KDOW may also have improperly segmented the relief line 
from other projects.   
Segmentation was addressed in HAR § 11-200-7 (replaced 
2019), which provided :37 
A group of actions proposed by an agency or an 
applicant shall be treated as a single action when:  
 
(1) The component actions are phases or increments of 
a larger total undertaking;  
 
(2) An individual project is a  necessary precedent 
for a larger project;  
 
(3) An individual project represents a commitment to 
a larger project; or  
 
(4) The actions in question are essentially identical 
and a single statement will adequately address the 
impacts of each individual action and those
 of the 
group of actions as a whole.  
 
This court has applied  an “independent utility”  test to 
determine whether actions are segmented  under HAR § 11- 200-7. 
                     
37  The revised rule, HA R § 11-200.1-10, provides: 
 
A group of actions shall be treated as a single action when:  
 
(1) The component actions are phases or increments of a larger total 
program;
 
 
(2) An individual action is a necessary precedent to a larger action;  
 
(3) An individual action represents a commitment to a larger action; or  
 
(4) The actions in question are essentially identical and a single EA 
or EIS will adequately address the impacts of each individual action 
and those of the group of actions as a whole. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 42 In Kahana Sunset, we held the EA for the drainage system of 
a development had to include the development itself .  See Kahana 
Sunset Owners Ass ’n v. Cnty. of Maui, 86 Hawai ‘i 66
, 74, 947 P.2d 
378, 386 (1997).  In that case,  the plans for a development of  
over 300 residences included  a new drainage line connecting to 
an existing culvert.  86 Hawai‘i at 71-7 2, 947 P.2d at 383- 84.  
The drainage line would be installed beneath “state or county 
lands” and did not fall within a HEPA exem ption, thus triggering 
the requirement for an EA.  Id.   The court held the EA had to  
encompass the entire development, not just the drainage line, 
stating:  
HAR § 11– 200–7 provides that “[a] group of actions proposed 
by an agency or an applicant shall be treated as a single 
action when: (1) The component actions are phases or 
increments of a larger total undertaking; [or] (2) An 
individual project is a necessary precedent for a larger 
project.”  . . . The proposed drainage system is part of the 
larger project and is a “necessary precedent” for the 
development.  The drainage system has no independent 
utility.  It would not  be constructed except as part of the 
larger development.  Isolating only that particular 
component of the development for environmental assessment 
would be improper segmentation of the project.  
 
86 Hawai‘ i at 74, 947 P.2d at 386.  Thus, even though only the 
drainage line triggered HEPA, the EA had to consider  the entire 
development as part of the same action.  Id. ; see also  
Sierra Club v. Off. of Plan., 109 Hawai ‘i at 413, 416, 126 P.3d 
at 1100, 1103 (holding development project triggered HEPA review 
because drinking water and sewage lines for the development 
would eventually be installed under state land
; the EA had to ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 43 address “the environmental effects of the entire Project 
. . . .”).  
 In Kilakila , we held that, under HAR § 11 –200–7(1), the EA 
for the University of Hawai ‘i Observatory Site Management Plan 
did not have to include a particular proposed telescope project .  
138 Hawai‘ i at 379–80, 382 P.3d at 191–92.  We observed that the 
guidelines in the management plan applied to the entire 
observatory site , which included numerous existing astronomical 
facilities.  Id.  We concluded: “ Because the Management Plan ’s 
strategies and guidelines apply to the entire Observatory Site 
and may be implemented regardless of whether the Telescope 
Project is constructed, the Manag ement Plan has independent 
utility from the Telescope Project, and, consequently, the 
Telescope Project and Management Plan do not constitute a 
‘single action’ under HAR § 11 –200–7(1).”  138 Hawai‘i at 380, 
382 P.3d at 192. 
   Neither Kahana Sunset  nor Kilakila resolves this case.  
Whereas the drainage pipe in Kahana Sunset had no independent 
utility, the relief line has  some utility independent of the 
Līhu
‘e Development Plan and the Waiahi SWTP expansion because it 
provides system redundancy and addresses existing needs.  At the 
same time, this case differs from Kilakila because the relief 
line goes beyond existing needs and includes “additional 
capacity” which appears to have no purpose except serving ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 44 “future development.”  This is a novel case because the relief 
line has some independent utility and some “dependent” utility.   
 We conclude KDOW is not automatically insulated from Kia‘i 
Wai’s segmentation  claim merely because the relief line has 
some 
independent utility or because some project wa s necessary to 
address existing transmission issues. 
 For instance, the Ninth Circuit38 held the EIS for a forest 
road must also analyze impacts of the timber sales the road was 
“designed to facilitate”  because the road did not have 
“sufficient [independent] utility.”   Thomas v. Peterson, 753 
F.2d 754, 755, 760 (9th Cir. 1985) (emphasis added) .  The court 
stated: “ It is clear that the timber sales cannot proceed 
without the road, and the road would not be built but for the 
contemplated timber sales. . . . while the [Forest] Service has 
stated that the road will yield other benefits, it does not 
claim that such other benefits would justify the road in the 
                     
38  The NEPA regulations for “c onnected actions, ” are analogous to HEPA’s 
segmentation regulations.  See, e.g., Great Basin Mine Watch v. Hankins, 456 
F.3d 955, 968– 69 (9th Cir. 2006) . 
 
Actions are connected if they:  
 
(i) Automatically trigger other actions which may require environmental  
impact statements.  
 
(ii) Cannot or will not proceed unless other actions are taken 
previously or simultaneously.  
 
(iii) Are interdependent parts of a larger action and depend on the 
larger action for their justification . 
 
Id. (citing 40 C.F.R. § 1508.25  (effective 1978 and substantially 
incorporated into 40 C.F.R. § 1501.9  effective 2020)).  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 45 absence of the timber sales. ”  753 F.2d at  758–59 (emphasis 
added).  
 We hold that, because the relief line has so me independent 
utility but also goes beyond existing needs, the question is not 
whether KDOW would have undertaken some project  to address the 
existing transmission issues and increase system reliability 
even absent the Līhu ‘e Development Plan and the Waiahi SWTP 
expansion; rather, the question is whether KDOW would have 
undertaken the relief line project as proposed  absent the Līhu‘e 
Development Plan and the Waiahi SWTP expansion.39  From the 
record, it appears that, alth ough KDOW might have taken some 
action to address existing transmission issues, the relief line 
as proposed is specifically designed to accommodate future 
transmission needs.  Without the Līhu‘e developments and the 
Waiahi SWTP expansion, the additional capacity provided by the 
relief line would be extraneous.  However, the record does not 
                     
39  We find this approach sensible in light of Kahana Sunset, 86 Hawai‘ i 66, 
947 P.2d 378.  Suppose in Kahana Sunset the developer had wanted to replace 
and significantly upgrade an existing drainage line to accommodate the new 
development, rather than install a new line.  And suppose the existing line 
was nearing the end of its lifespan and needed to be replaced anyway.  We see 
no reason why the development should evade environmental review in this 
situation.  The existing need for a replacement line would not mitigate the 
environmental impacts of the new development, nor would it change the fact 
that the purpose of the additional drainage  capacity is to facilitate the new 
development.      
 
We see many similarities between this case and Kahana Sunset, as both 
cases concern transmission lines (a potable  water line and drainage line, 
respectively) needed for new developments.  The difference  is that, in this 
case, the development may have attempted to hitch a free ride past HEPA 
review by tacking additional capacity on to a project that was needed  anyway. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 46 conclusively resolve this issue , so the environmental court is 
to address it on remand after considering additional evidence 
from Kia‘ i Wai.40      
 We note, however, that
 our inquiry is not limited to the 
independent utility of the relief line.  The Ninth Circuit has 
explained that the “independent utility ” test can be either a 
“single” independent utility test or what might be termed a 
“double” or “multiple”  independent utility test:  
[“]The crux of the [independent utility] test is whether 
‘each of two projects  would have taken place with or 
without the other  and thus had independent utility.’”  We 
have occasionally stated this same test alternatively as 
“when one of the p rojects might reasonably have been 
completed without the existence of the other, the two 
projects have independent utility  and are not ‘connected’ 
for NEPA’ s purposes.”  Rather than adopting a single 
independent utility test, we have focused on whether “ each 
of two projects  would have taken place with or without the 
other,” and have extended our analysis to each project.  
 
Sierra Club v. Bureau of Land Mgmt., 786 F.3d 1219, 1226 (9th 
Cir. 2015) (citations omitted). 
 We now adopt the “double” or “multiple”  independent utility 
test.41  To determine whether projects are improperly segmented 
under HAR § 11-200- 7, courts should consider whether each of the 
projects would take place independently.  We cited the single 
                     
40  As discussed above, KDOW cannot supplement the record with information 
that should have been included in the FEA.  This is especially true when 
public comments on the DEA  raised segmentation as a concern.  However, the 
record before us is insufficient to establish whether the relief line FEA was 
improperly segmented.  Kia‘i Wai must provid e additional evidence.     
 
41  Although Sierra Club v. Bureau of Land Mgmt., 786 F.3d at 1226, helps 
describe the difference between a “single” and “double” independent utility 
test, we do not necessarily adopt  the manner in which the Ninth Circuit 
applied the double independent utility test in that case.   ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 47 independent utility test in Kilakila,  138 Hawai ‘i a
t 379 n.32, 
382 P.3d at 191 n.32.  However, in Kilakila  we only considered 
HAR § 11-200 -7(1), not any of the other three provisions in HAR 
§ 11-200 -7.  See 138 Hawai‘i at 379 n.31, 382 P.3d at 191 n.31.  
Taking HAR § 11- 200-7(2) into account, we conclude t he double 
independent utility test is necessary to effectuate HAR § 11-
200-7(2), w hich applied where “[a]n individual project is a 
necessary precedent for a larger project . . . .”   
Thus, in  this case, we must also examine the independent 
utility of the Waiahi SWTP expansion and the Līhu
‘e developments.  
If the Waiahi SWTP expansion or the Līhu‘e developments would not 
occur without the relief line, then the relief line is a 
“necessary precedent” to those projects under HAR § 11- 200-7(2).  
 The record suggests the relief line is a necessary 
precedent for the Waiahi SWTP expansion and the Līhu ‘e 
developments.  For instance, at the 
December 17, 2009 KDOW board 
meeting, a Grove Farm representative stated that “ they need to 
install this line now ” and “the bottom line is the Ehiku line 
needs to go in if we expand the plant .”  Also, the FEA states 
the relief line is “necessary” for the water transmission needs 
of the Līhu‘ e developments.  However, given the lack of 
information in the record about the Waiahi SWT P expansion and ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 48 (continued . . . )  the Līhu‘ e developments, we leave this determination for the 
environmental court on remand.42   
 Finally , for actions to have been improperly segmented, the 
actions must fall within the formal definition of an “action” 
under HEPA.43  See Superferry I, 115 Hawai‘i at 338, 167 P.3d at 
                     
42  We note the relief line may still be a “necessary precedent” for  the 
Waiahi SWTP expansion and the Līhu ‘e developments even if the transmission 
line project could have taken an alternate route.  The FEA cannot just 
conclude the relief line was not strictly “necessary” because some other 
transmission project hypothetically could have met the needs of the 
Waiahi 
SWTP expansion and the Līhu ‘e Developmen t Plan.  The point is that a major 
transmission upgrade was needed, even if  KDOW and Grove Farm had several 
options available.  Additionally, the Līhu‘e
 Development Pla n cannot avoid 
review even if Grove Farm hypothetically could have initiated a different 
transmission project for the Līhu‘ e developmen ts without the use of public 
lands or funds. 
 Contra Sierra Club v. Bureau of Land Mgmt., 786 F.3d at 1226 
(holding wind project had independent utility from road on federal land 
because developers could have used a private road instead).  Perhaps Grove 
Farm and its consultant could have designed a Water Master Plan for the Līhu‘e 
Development Plan that would have avoided triggering HEPA review , but it 
appears they did not.  T he question is whether the relief line is a necessary 
precedent for the Līhu ‘e developments as proposed , not whether some 
alternative Līhu‘ e Development Plan could have avoided HEPA review.  Cf. Port 
of Astoria, Or. v. Hodel, 595 F.2d 467, 477 (9th Cir. 1979)  (“By entering 
into a contract to supply the power to the project and to construct the 
transmission line to the plant, the agency has so federalized the entire 
project that it has become ‘major Federal action ’ requiring a federally 
responsible environmental impact statement. ” (citations omitted)). 
        
43  As defined in HAR § 11-200-2: 
 
“Action” means any program or project to be initiated by an agenc y or 
applicant. 
 
. . . . 
 
 “Agency” means any department, office, board, or commission of the 
state or county government which is part of the executive branch of 
that government.  
“Applicant” means any person who, pursuant to statute, ordinance, or 
rule, off icially requests approval from an agency for a proposed 
action. 
 
“Approval” means a discretionary consent required from an agency prior 
to actual implementation of an action.  Discretionary consent means a 
consent, sanction, or recommendation from an agen cy for which judgment ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 49 (continued . . . )  331.  The Waiahi SWTP expansion and the Līhu ‘e  developments would 
appear to be projects initiated by an agency or by a legal 
entity who, pursuant to statute, ordinance, or rule, officially 
requested discretionary a
pproval from an agency.44  However, the 
environmental court should make this determination on remand.45 
 In conclusion, we also observe that too broad a reading of 
the segmentation rules w ould require boundless HEPA review.  The 
segmentation rules should be applied using common sense to 
further informed decision-making.   See HRS § 343 -1.  However, 
this case appears to fall squarely within the segmentation 
rules.46  Although further information is required, the record 
                                                                  
( . . . continued)  
and free will may be exercised by the issuing agency, as distinguished 
from a ministerial consent.  Ministerial consent means a consent, 
sanction, or recommendation from an agency upon a given set of facts, 
as prescribed by law or rul e without the use of judgment or discretion.  
 
44  The FEA explains, “In 1994, [the Līhu‘e Development Plan] received State 
Land Use Commission approval .”  On January 28, 2010, the KDOW board approved 
Grove Farm’s request to expand the Waiahi SWTP.     
 
45  Additionally, KDOW argues that  KDOW and Grove Farm are separate 
entities.  We note that HAR § 11- 200-7 stated: “A group of actions proposed 
by an agency or an applicant shall be treated as a single action when [any of 
four criteria are met.]”  (Emphasis added.)  The 2019 amendments to the HEPA 
regulations removed the reference to “ an agency or an applicant” and instead 
provide that “[a] group of actions shall be treated as a single action when  
[any of four criteria are met.]”   See HAR § 11- 200.1-10.  In this case , we do 
not think KDOW can defeat a  segmentation claim  merely because Grove Farm and 
KDOW are separate entities.  The relief line is intended in large part to 
benefit Grove Farm, and  Grove Farm will pay one -third of the relief line’s 
cost.     
 
46  Cf. Morgan v. Walter, 728 F. Supp. 1483, 1493 (D. Idaho 1989)  (holding, 
at the preliminary injunction stage, that the EA for a water diversion system 
should include the fish propagation facility that was the recipient of the 
water because the fish propagation facility “ could not exist absent a 
diversion”); Port of Astoria, Or. v. Hodel, 595 F.2d at 477 (holding a 
federal agency’s contract to supply power to a private aluminum plant could ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 50 before us suggests a “clear nexus ” between the relief line, the 
Waiahi SWTP expansion,  and the Līhu ‘e Development Plan
.47  See 
Save the Yaak Comm. v. Block, 840 F.2d 714, 720 (9th Cir. 1988).  
Based on the KDOW meeting minutes and the FEA itself, it appears 
the relief line “ had always been conceptualized as part of the 
integrated entire project.”  See Baykeeper v. U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers, No. CIV. S- 06-1908, 2006 WL 2711547, at *11 (E.D. 
Cal. Sept. 20, 2006).48  
                                                                  
( . . . continued)  
not be separated from the environmental impacts of the plant itself: “[The 
agency] shares responsibility for the environmental effects [of the aluminum 
plant] because its contractual obligation to supply [the corporation]  with 
power enables [the corporation]  to build the plant and requires [the agency] 
to erect transmission lines. ”).   
 
47  Although not in the record, the Water Master Plan  prepared in 2009  by 
Kodani & Associates Engineers, LLC  would likely help clarify the relationship 
between the relief line, the Waiahi SWTP, and the Līhu‘e Development Plan. 
 
48  To comply with HEPA, KDOW must analyze the relief line’s impact on 
water resources, including cultural practices  associated with water 
resources.  See HAR §§ 11-200-10 (replaced 2019), 11-200-12 (replaced 2019), 
11-200.1-13, 11-200.1-21.  We therefore do not reach Kia‘i Wai’s 
constitutional arguments concerning the public trust and article XII, section  
7 of the Hawai‘ i Constitution .  See State v. Lo , 66 Haw. 653, 657, 675 P.2d 
754, 757 (1983) (“If a case can be decided on either of two grounds, one 
involving a constitutional question, the other a question of statutory 
construction or general law, this c ourt will decide only the latter.”  
(cleaned up)). 
 
 Kia‘i Wai also alleges a violation of HRS § 195D- 4, part of the Hawai‘ i 
endangered species statute.  Kia‘ i Wai  does not explain, however,  how KDOW 
violated the statute; Kia‘i Wai merely cites, without explanation, to a 
portion of the statute that defines what a threatened species is and 
authorizes the DLNR to designate threatened species.  Thus, the environmental 
court properly granted summary judgment in favor of KDOW as to Kia‘i Wai’s 
claim under
 HRS § 195D -4. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 51 D. Public  comment process  
  
 Kia‘i Wai argues KDOW did not properly consider public 
comments on the DEA because KDOW filed the  FEA too quickly.  
KDOW transmitted the  FEA to the OEQC by letter  dated March 12, 
2018, the day comments were due (the document was stamped as 
received by the OEQC March 13, 2018).   
 Under HAR § 11- 200-9.1(c) (replaced 2019) : “[T]he proposing 
agency shall respond in writing to all comments received or 
postmarked during the thirty- day review period, incorporate 
comments as appropriate, and append the comments and responses 
in the final environmental assessment.”   (Emphasis added.)  
Because agencies must  respond to comments postmarked  within the 
public comment period, agencies  should leave time for comments 
to arrive by mail before finalizing an  EA.   
 The record does not indicate whether KDOW received any 
mailed comments after the submission deadline.  However, KDOW’s 
finalization of the EA without waiting to receive mailed 
comments “does  not satisfy the appearance of justice, since it 
suggests that the [consideration of comments] is an afterthought 
and that proceedin gs were merely moving in predestined grooves. ”  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 52 See Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. BLNR, 136 Hawai‘i 376, 391, 363 P.3d 
224, 239 (2015) (cleaned up).49    
V. Conclusion 
In enacting HEPA, the legislature found that “ public 
participation during the review process benefits all parties 
involved and society as a whole. ”  See HRS § 343 -1.  From the 
record before us, it appears public participation in this case 
was hindered because the FEA did not provide a candid assessment  
of the relief line’s purpose  and function.   
KDOW erred by limiting the scope of its environmental 
analysis to the physical footprint of the proposed project.  
KDOW must issue a new EA50 that either analyzes the effects of 
                     
49  In Count III of its amended complaint, Kia‘i Wai alleged KDOW failed to 
disclose the substance of input from the CWRM, which KDOW relied on in the 
FEA.  Additionally, amici argue 
the FEA includes  citations to documents that 
were not rea sonably available to the public.  Although Kia‘ i Wai asserts the 
environmental court erred in granting summary judgment  in favor of KDOW  on 
Count III, Kia‘ i Wai does not argue this point in its opening brief.  We 
therefore decline to address whether KDOW should have made certain underlying 
information available.  
See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) ( 2000); Ass’n of Apartment 
Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai‘ i 97, 110, 58 P.3d 608, 
621 (2002) (“Where an appellant raises a point of error but fails to  present 
any accompanying argument, the point is deemed waived. ” (citation omitted)).  
 
Kia‘i Wai also argues in a conclusory fashion that KDOW’s failure to 
properly consider public comments amounted to a due process violation.  
Because KDOW’s compliance w ith HEPA’s rules will remedy Kia‘i Wai’s procedural 
concerns, we do not address Kia‘i Wai’s due process claim s.  See Lo, 66 Haw. 
at 657, 675 P.2d at 757 (explaining constitutional avoidance doctrine ). 
 
50  Alternatively, KDOW may opt to prepare an EIS inste ad of an EA.  See  
HRS § 343- 5(b); HAR § 11 -200.1-14(d).  ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 53 increased water use or explains how the relief line will not 
facilitate increased water withdrawals.51     
Hence, f or the reasons explained above, we vacate the 
environmental court’s  April 2, 2019 order granting partial 
summary judgment; the October 3, 2019 order granting partial 
summary judgment, except as to Counts V and VI and as to Kia‘i
 
Wai’s claim under HRS § 195D -4; the June 30, 2020  order granting 
                     
51  We do not address Kia‘i Wai’s argument that KDOW or Grove Farm require a 
lease or permit pursuant to HRS § 171- 58, which concerns disposition of water 
from state lands.  Because of Grove Farm’s i nterest in this issue, Grove Farm  
must be made a party to address this issue.  See Hawai‘i Rules of Civil 
Procedure Rules 19 (2000) and 21 (1980).  For the same reason, we do not 
decide whether the environmental court lacked jurisdiction over this claim.  
We also do not address Kia‘i Wai’s argument about the need for an EIS 
addressing KDOW’s entire water system, as this claim is derived from Kia‘i 
Wai’s argument about H RS § 171 -58.       
 
 As to the question of whether KDOW requires a lease or permit, 
the 
briefing is also inadequate.  As described in the 2018 CWRM staff submittal, 
the diversions of Wai ‘ale‘ale Stream and Waikoko Stream , the ‘Ili‘ili‘ula North 
Wailua Ditch, which carries the diverted water to hydroelectric plants, and 
the Upper and Lower
 Waiahi Hydropower plants are operated by Kaua ‘i Island 
Utility Cooperative (“KIUC”).  KIUC does not control the use of the  water 
once it leaves the tailrace of the Lower Waiahi Hydropower plant.   
Additionally, the diversion of the South Fork Wailua River that supplies the 
Kapaia Reservoir appears to be located on Grove Farm land rather than state 
land.  In sum, it appears the diversions on state land are operated by KIUC, 
and Grove Farm and KDOW receive the diverted water later after it passes 
through KIUC’s hydropower plants.  
 
 
 KIUC may have a permit or lease pursuant to HRS § 171- 58, and the 
parties do not discuss what bearing this may have on how HRS § 171 -58 applies 
to KDOW or Grove Farm.  The parties also do not discuss whether county 
departments of water would be required to bid against private entities under 
Kia‘i Wai’s interpretation of  HRS § 171- 58.  The parties also do not discuss 
HRS § 171-95 (2011 & Supp. 2016), concerning disposition of public lands to 
counties and other governmental agencies;  HRS § 171
-11 (2011), concerning 
set-asides of public lands to counties and agencies for public use or 
purpose; or HRS § 46- 1.5(23)(f) (Supp. 2018), concerning the power of 
counties to take over waterworks systems from the State.  We do not determine 
whether these and other statutes are relevant.  Finally, the parties do not 
discuss “
the express constitutional and statutory designation of the [CWRM] 
as the final authority over matters of water use planning and regulation ,” 
which limits the powers of the cou
nties.  See Waiāhole I , 94 Hawai ‘i at 188, 9 
P.3d at 500. ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 54  partial summary judgment, except as to Count III; and the June 
30, 2020 order entering final judgment in favor of KDOW.  We 
remand this case to the environmental court for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion, including a 
determination of whether injunctive relief is warranted. 
 
Lance D. Collins and 
Bianca Isaki 
for Plaintiff-Appellant /s/ Mark E. Recktenwal
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
   d  
    
Naomi U. Kuwaye  
Rosemary T. Fazio and  
Nicholas G. Altuzarra 
for Defendant-Appellee 
   
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson  
       
      /s/ Todd W. Eddins 
Leinā‘ala L. Ley  and
Isaac H. Moriwake 
for amici curiae   
  
     
